oxygen thus formed with the constituents of the acid which remained
when part of its oxygen was taken away. The removal of oxygen from
nitric acid by the mercury produced _nitrous air_; when the product of
the union of the oxide of mercury and the nitric acid deprived of part
of its oxygen was heated, more nitrous air was given off, and oxide of
mercury remained, and was decomposed, at a higher temperature, into
mercury and oxygen.

Lavoisier thought of these reactions as the tearing asunder, by
mercury, of nitric acid into definite quantities of its three
components, themselves distinct substances, nitrous air, water, and
oxygen; and the combination of the mercury with a certain measurable
quantity of one of these components, namely, oxygen, followed by the
union of this compound of mercury and oxygen with what remained of the
components of nitric acid.

Lavoisier had formed a clear, consistent, and suggestive mental
picture of chemical changes. He thought of a chemical reaction as
always the same under the same conditions, as an action between a
fixed and measurable quantity of one substance, having definite and
definable properties, with fixed and measurable quantities of other
substances, the properties of each of which were definite and
definable.

Lavoisier also recognised that certain definite substances could be
divided into things simpler than themselves, but that other substances
refused to undergo simplification by division into two or more unlike
portions. He spoke of the object of chemistry as follows:--[8] "In
submitting to experiments the different substances found in nature,
chemistry seeks to decompose these substances, and to get them into
such conditions that their various components may be examined
separately. Chemistry advances to its end by dividing, sub-dividing,
and again sub-dividing, and we do not know what will be the limits of
such operations. We cannot be certain that what we regard as simple
to-day is indeed simple; all we can say is, that such a substance is
the actual term whereat chemical analysis has arrived, and that with
our present knowledge we cannot sub-divide it."

   [8] I have given a free rendering of Lavoisier's words.

In these words Lavoisier defines the chemical conception of
_elements_; since his time an element is "the actual term whereat
chemical analysis has arrived," it is that which "with our present
knowledge we cannot sub-divide"; and, as a working hypothesis, the
notion of _element_ has no wider meaning than this. I have already
quoted Boyle's statement that by _elements_ he meant "certain
primitive and simple bodies ... not made of any other bodies, or of
one another." Boyle was still slightly restrained by the alchemical
atmosphere around him; he was still inclined to say, "this _must_ be
the way nature works, she _must_ begin with certain substances which
are absolutely simple." Lavoisier had thrown off all the trammels
which hindered the alchemists from making rigorous experimental
investigations. If one may judge from his writings, he had not
struggled to free himself from these trammels, he had not slowly
emerged from the quagmires of alchemy, and painfully gained firmer
ground; the extraordinary clearness and directness of his mental
vision had led him straight to the very heart of the problems of
chemistry, and enabled him not only calmly to ignore all the machinery
of Elements, Principles, Essences, and the like, which the alchemists
had constructed so laboriously, but also to construct, in place of
that mechanism which hindered inquiry, genuine scientific hypotheses
which directed inquiry, and were themselves altered by the results of
the experiments they had suggested.

Lavoisier made these great advances by applying himself to the minute
and exhaustive examination of a few cases of chemical change, and
endeavouring to account for everything which took part in the
processes he studied, by weighing or measuring each distinct substance
which was present when the change began, and each which was present
when the change was finished. He did not make haphazard experiments;
he had a method, a system; he used hypotheses, and he used them
rightly. "Systems in physics," Lavoisier writes, "are but the proper
instruments for helping the feebleness of our senses. Properly
speaking, they are methods of approximation which put us on the track
of solving problems; they are the hypotheses which, successively
modified, corrected, and changed, by experience, ought to conduct us,
some day, by the method of exclusions and eliminations, to the
knowledge of the true laws of nature."

In a memoir wherein he is considering the production of carbonic acid
and alcohol by the fermentation of fruit-juice, Lavoisier says, "It is
evident that we must know the nature and composition of the
substances which can be fermented and the products of fermentation;
for nothing is created, either in the operations of art or in those of
nature; and it may be laid down that the quantity of material present
at the beginning of every operation is the same as the quantity
present at the end, that the quality and quantity of the principles[9]
are the same, and that nothing happens save certain changes, certain
modifications. On this principle is based the whole art of
experimenting in chemistry; in all chemical experiments we must
suppose that there is a true equality between the principles[10] of
the substances which are examined and those which are obtained from
them by analysis."

   [9, 10] Lavoisier uses the word _principle_, here and
   elsewhere, to mean a definite homogeneous substance; he uses it
   as synonymous with the more modern terms element and compound.

If Lavoisier's memoirs are examined closely, it is seen that at the
very beginning of his chemical inquiries he assumed the accuracy, and
the universal application, of the generalisation "nothing is created,
either in the operations of art or in those of nature." Naturalists
had been feeling their way for centuries towards such a generalisation
as this; it had been in the air for many generations; sometimes it was
almost realised by this or that investigator, then it escaped for long
periods. Lavoisier seems to have realised, by what we call intuition,
that however great and astonishing may be the changes in the
properties of the substances which mutually react, there is no change
in the total quantity of material.

Not only did Lavoisier realise and act on this principle, he also
measured quantities of substances by the one practical method, namely,
by weighing; and by doing this he showed chemists the only road along
which they could advance towards a genuine knowledge of material
changes.

The generalisation expressed by Lavoisier in the words I have quoted
is now known as the _law of the conservation of mass_; it is generally
stated in some such form as this:--the sum of the masses of all the
homogeneous substances which take part in a chemical (or physical)
change does not itself change. The science of chemistry rests on this
law; every quantitative analysis assumes the accuracy, and is a proof
of the validity, of it.[11]

 [11] I have considered the law of the conservation of mass in some
 detail in Chapter IV. of _The Story of the Chemical Elements_.

By accepting the accuracy of this generalisation, and using it in
every experiment, Lavoisier was able to form a clear mental picture of
a chemical change as the separation and combination of homogeneous
substances; for, by using the balance, he was able to follow each
substance through the maze of changes, to determine when it united
with other substances, and when it separated into substances simpler
than itself.




CHAPTER XIII.

THE CHEMICAL ELEMENTS CONTRASTED WITH THE ALCHEMICAL PRINCIPLES.


It was known to many observers in the later years of the 17th century
that the product of the calcination of a metal weighs more than the
metal; but it was still possible, at that time, to assert that this
fact is of no importance to one who is seeking to give an accurate
description of the process of calcination. Weight, which measures mass
or quantity of substance, was thought of, in these days, as a property
like colour, taste, or smell, a property which was sometimes
decreased, and sometimes increased, by adding one substance to
another. Students of natural occurrences were, however, feeling their
way towards the recognition of some property of substances which did
not change in the haphazard way wherein most properties seemed to
alter. Lavoisier reached this property at one bound. By his
experimental investigations, he taught that, however greatly the
properties of one substance may be masked, or altered, by adding
another substance to it, yet the property we call mass, and measure by
weight, is not affected by these changes; for Lavoisier showed, that
the mass of the product of the union of two substances is always
exactly the sum of the masses of these two substances, and the sum of
the masses of the substances whereinto one substance is divided is
always exactly equal to that mass of the substance which is divided.

For the undefined, ever-changing, protean essence, or soul, of a thing
which the alchemists thought of as hidden by wrappings of properties,
the exact investigations of Lavoisier, and those of others who worked
on the same lines as he, substituted this definite, fixed,
unmodifiable property of mass. Lavoisier, and those who followed in
his footsteps, also did away with the alchemical notion of the
existence of an essential substratum, independent of changes in those
properties of a substance which can be observed by the senses. For the
experimental researches of these men obliged naturalists to recognise,
that a change in the properties of a definite, homogeneous substance,
such as pure water, pure chalk, or pure sulphur, is accompanied (or,
as we generally say, is caused) by the formation of a new substance or
substances; and this formation, this apparent creation, of new
material, is effected, either by the addition of something to the
original substance, or by the separation of it into portions which are
unlike it, and unlike one another. If the change is a combination, or
coalescence, of two things into one, then the mass, and hence the
weight, of the product is equal to the sum of those masses, and hence
those weights, of the things which have united to form it; if the
change is a separation of one distinct substance into several
substances, then the sum of the masses, and hence the weights, of the
products is equal to that mass, and hence that weight, of the
substance which has been separated.

Consider the word _water_, and the substance represented by this word.
In Chapter IV., I gave illustrations of the different meanings which
have been given to this word; it is sometimes used to represent a
material substance, sometimes a quality more or less characteristic of
that substance, and sometimes a process to which that substance, and
many others like it, may be subjected. But when the word _water_ is
used with a definite and exact meaning, it is a succinct expression
for a certain group, or collocation, of measurable properties which
are always found together, and is, therefore, thought of as a distinct
substance. This substance can be separated into two other substances
very unlike it, and can be formed by causing these to unite. One
hundred parts, by weight, of pure water are always formed by the union
of 11.11 parts of hydrogen, and 88.89 parts of oxygen, and can be
separated into these quantities of those substances. When water is
formed by the union of hydrogen and oxygen, in the ratio of 11.11
parts by weight of the former to 88.89 of the latter, the properties
of the two substances which coalesce to form it disappear, except
their masses. It is customary to say that water _contains_ hydrogen
and oxygen; but this expression is scarcely an accurate description of
the facts. What we call _substances_ are known to us only by their
properties, that is, the ways wherein they act on our senses. Hydrogen
has certain definite properties, oxygen has other definite properties,
and the properties of water are perfectly distinct from those of
either of the substances which it is said to contain. It is,
therefore, somewhat misleading to say that water _contains_
substances the properties whereof, except their masses, disappeared at
the moment when they united and water was produced. Nevertheless we
are forced to think of water as, in a sense, containing hydrogen and
oxygen. For, one of the properties of hydrogen is its power to
coalesce, or combine, with oxygen to form water, and one of the
properties of oxygen is its ability to unite with hydrogen to form
water; and these properties of those substances cannot be recognised,
or even suspected, unless certain definite quantities of the two
substances are brought together under certain definite conditions. The
properties which characterise hydrogen, and those which characterise
oxygen, when these things are separated from all other substances, can
be determined and measured in terms of the similar properties of some
other substance taken as a standard. These two distinct substances
disappear when they are brought into contact, under the proper
conditions, and something (water) is obtained whose properties are
very unlike those of hydrogen or oxygen; this new thing can be caused
to disappear, and hydrogen and oxygen are again produced. This cycle
of changes can be repeated as often as we please; the quantities of
hydrogen and oxygen which are obtained when we choose to stop the
process are exactly the same as the quantities of those substances
which disappeared in the first operation whereby water was produced.
Hence, water is an intimate union of hydrogen and oxygen; and, in this
sense, water may be said to contain hydrogen and oxygen.

The alchemist would have said, the properties of hydrogen and oxygen
are destroyed when these things unite to form water, but the essence,
or substratum, of each remains. The chemist says, you cannot discover
all the properties of hydrogen and oxygen by examining these
substances apart from one another, for one of the most important
properties of either is manifested only when the two mutually react:
the formation of water is not the destruction of the properties of
hydrogen and oxygen and the revelation of their essential substrata,
it is rather the manifestation of a property of each which cannot be
discovered except by causing the union of both.

There was, then, a certain degree of accuracy in the alchemical
description of the processes we now call chemical changes, as being
the removal of the outer properties of the things which react, and the
manifestation of their essential substance. But there is a vast
difference between this description and the chemical presentment of
these processes as reactions between definite and measurable
quantities of elements, or compounds, or both, resulting in the
re-distribution, of the elements, or the separation of the compounds
into their elements, and the formation of new compounds by the
re-combination of these elements.

Let us contrast the two descriptions somewhat more fully.

The alchemist wished to effect the transmutation of one substance into
another; he despaired of the possibility of separating the Elements
whereof the substance might be formed, but he thought he could
manipulate what he called the _virtues_ of the Elements by a judicious
use of some or all of the three Principles, which he named Sulphur,
Salt, and Mercury. He could not state in definite language what he
meant by these Principles; they were states, conditions, or qualities,
of classes of substances, which could not be defined. The directions
the alchemist was able to give to those who sought to effect the
change of one thing into another were these. Firstly, to remove those
properties which characterised the thing to be changed, and leave only
the properties which it shared with other things like it; secondly, to
destroy the properties which the thing to be changed possessed in
common with certain other things; thirdly, to commingle the Essence of
the thing with the Essence of something else, in due proportion and
under proper conditions; and, finally, to hope for the best, keep a
clear head, and maintain a sense of virtue.

If he who was about to attempt the transmutation inquired how he was
to destroy the specific properties, and the class properties, of the
thing he proposed to change, and by what methods he was to obtain its
Essence, and cause that Essence to produce the new thing, he would be
told to travel along "the road which was followed by the Great
Architect of the Universe in the creation of the world." And if he
demanded more detailed directions, he would be informed that the
substance wherewith his experiments began must first be mortified,
then dissolved, then conjoined, then putrefied, then congealed, then
cibated, then sublimed, and fermented, and, finally, exalted. He
would, moreover, be warned that in all these operations he must use,
not things which he could touch, handle, and weigh, but the _virtues_,
the _lives_, the _souls_, of such things.

When the student of chemistry desires to effect the transformation of
one definite substance into another, he is told to determine, by
quantitative experiments, what are the elements, and what the
quantities of these elements, which compose the compound which he
proposes to change, and the compound into which he proposes to change
it; and he is given working definitions of the words _element_ and
_compound_. If the compound he desires to produce is found to be
composed of elements different from those which form the compound
wherewith his operations begin, he is directed to bring about a
reaction, or a series of reactions, between the compound which is to
be changed, and some other collocation of elements the composition of
which is known to be such that it can supply the new elements which
are needed for the production of the new compound.

Since Lavoisier realised, for himself, and those who were to come
after him, the meaning of the terms _element_ and _compound_, we may
say that chemists have been able to form a mental picture of the
change from one definite substance to another, which is clear,
suggestive, and consistent, because it is an approximately accurate
description of the facts discovered by careful and penetrative
investigations. This presentment of the change has been substituted
for the alchemical conception, which was an attempt to express what
introspection and reasoning on the results of superficial
investigations, guided by specious analogies, suggested ought to be
the facts.

Lavoisier was the man who made possible the more accurate, and more
far-reaching, description of the changes which result in the
production of substances very unlike those which are changed; and he
did this by experimentally analysing the conceptions of the element
and the compound, giving definite and workable meanings to these
conceptions, and establishing, on an experimental foundation, the
generalisation that the sum of the quantities of the substances which
take part in any change is itself unchanged.

A chemical element was thought of by Lavoisier as "the actual term
whereat analysis has arrived," a definite substance "which we cannot
subdivide with our present knowledge," but not necessarily a substance
which will never be divided. A compound was thought of by him as a
definite substance which is always produced by the union of the same
quantities of the same elements, and can be separated into the same
quantities of the same elements.

These conceptions were amplified and made more full of meaning by the
work of many who came after Lavoisier, notably by John Dalton, who was
born in 1766 and died in 1844.

In Chapter I., I gave a sketch of the atomic theory of the Greek
thinkers. The founder of that theory, who flourished about 500 B.C.,
said that every substance is a collocation of a vast number of minute
particles, which are unchangeable, indestructible, and impenetrable,
and are therefore properly called _atoms_; that the differences which
are observed between the qualities of things are due to differences in
the numbers, sizes, shapes, positions, and movements of atoms, and
that the process which occurs when one substance is apparently
destroyed and another is produced in its place, is nothing more than a
rearrangement of atoms.

The supposition that changes in the properties of substances are
connected with changes in the numbers, movements, and arrangements of
different kinds of minute particles, was used in a general way by many
naturalists of the 17th and 18th centuries; but Dalton was the first
to show that the data obtained by the analyses of compounds make it
possible to determine the relative weights of the atoms of the
elements.

Dalton used the word _atom_ to denote the smallest particle of an
element, or a compound, which exhibits the properties characteristic
of that element or compound. He supposed that the atoms of an element
are never divided in any of the reactions of that element, but the
atoms of a compound are often separated into the atoms of the elements
whereof the compound is composed. Apparently without knowing that the
supposition had been made more than two thousand years before his
time, Dalton was led by his study of the composition and properties of
the atmosphere to assume that the atoms of different substances,
whether elements or compounds, are of different sizes and have
different weights. He assumed that when two elements unite to form
only one compound, the atom of that compound has the simplest
possible composition, is formed by the union of a single atom of each
element. Dalton knew only one compound of hydrogen and nitrogen,
namely, ammonia. Analyses of this compound show that it is composed of
one part by weight of hydrogen and 4.66 parts by weight of nitrogen.
Dalton said one atom of hydrogen combines with one atom of nitrogen to
form an atom of ammonia; hence an atom of nitrogen is 4.66 times
heavier than an atom of hydrogen; in other words, if the _atomic
weight_ of hydrogen is taken as unity, the _atomic weight_ of nitrogen
is expressed by the number 4.66. Dalton referred the atomic weights of
the elements to the atomic weight of hydrogen as unity, because
hydrogen is lighter than any other substance; hence the numbers which
tell how much heavier the atoms of the elements are than an atom of
hydrogen are always greater than one, are always positive numbers.

When two elements unite in different proportions, by weight, to form
more than one compound, Dalton supposed that (in most cases at any
rate) one of the compounds is formed by the union of a single atom of
each element; the next compound is formed by the union of one atom of
the element which is present in smaller quantity with two, three, or
more, atoms of the other element, and the next compound is formed by
the union of one atom of the first element with a larger number
(always, necessarily, a whole number) of atoms of the other element
than is contained in the second compound; and so on. From this
assumption, and the Daltonian conception of the atom, it follows that
the quantities by weight of one element which are found to unite with
one and the same weight of another element must always be expressible
as whole multiples of one number. For if two elements, A and B, form a
compound, that compound is formed, by supposition, of one atom of A
and one atom of B; if more of B is added, at least one atom of B must
be added; however much of B is added the quantity must be a whole
number of atoms; and as every atom of B is the same in all respects as
every other atom of B, the weights of B added to a constant weight of
A must be whole multiples of the atomic weight of B.

The facts which were available in Dalton's time confirmed this
deduction from the atomic theory within the limits of experimental
errors; and the facts which have been established since Dalton's time
are completely in keeping with the deduction. Take, for instance,
three compounds of the elements nitrogen and oxygen. That one of the
three which contains least oxygen is composed of 63.64 _per cent._ of
nitrogen, and 36.36 _per cent._ of oxygen; if the atomic weight of
nitrogen is taken to be 4.66, which is the weight of nitrogen that
combines with one part by weight of hydrogen, then the weight of
oxygen combined with 4.66 of nitrogen is 2.66 (63.64:36.36 =
4.66:2.66). The weights of oxygen which combine with 4.66 parts by
weight of nitrogen to form the second and third compounds,
respectively, must be whole multiples of 2.66; these weights are 5.32
and 10.64. Now 5.32 = 2.66 x 2, and 10.64 = 2.66 x 4. Hence, the
quantities by weight of oxygen which combine with one and the same
weight of nitrogen are such that two of these quantities are whole
multiples of the third quantity.

Dalton's application of the Greek atomic theory to the facts
established by the analyses of compounds enabled him to attach to each
element a number which he called the atomic weight of the element, and
to summarise all the facts concerning the compositions of compounds in
the statement, that the elements combine in the ratios of their atomic
weights, or in the ratios of whole multiples of their atomic weights.
All the investigations which have been made into the compositions of
compounds, since Dalton's time, have confirmed the generalisation
which followed from Dalton's application of the atomic theory.

Even if the theory of atoms were abandoned, the generalisation would
remain, as an accurate and exact statement of facts which hold good in
every chemical change, that a number can be attached to each element,
and the weights of the elements which combine are in the ratios of
these numbers, or whole multiples of these numbers.

Since chemists realised the meaning of Dalton's book, published in
1808, and entitled, _A New System of Chemical Philosophy_, elements
have been regarded as distinct and definite substances, which have not
been divided into parts different from themselves, and unite with each
other in definite quantities by weight which can be accurately
expressed as whole multiples of certain fixed quantities; and
compounds have been regarded as distinct and definite substances
which are formed by the union of, and can be separated into,
quantities of various elements which are expressible by certain fixed
numbers or whole multiples thereof. These descriptions of elements and
compounds are expressions of actual facts. They enable chemists to
state the compositions of all the compounds which are, or can be,
formed by the union of any elements. For example, let A, B, C, and D
represent four elements, and also certain definite weights of these
elements, then the compositions of all the compounds which can be
formed by the union of these elements are expressed by the scheme
A_{_n_} B_{_m_} C_{_p_} D_{_q_}, where _m_ _n_ _p_ and _q_ are whole
numbers.

These descriptions of elements and compounds also enable chemists to
form a clear picture to themselves of any chemical change. They think
of a chemical change as being; (1) a union of those weights of two, or
more, elements which are expressed by the numbers attached to these
elements, or by whole multiples of these numbers; or (2) a union of
such weights of two, or more, compounds as can be expressed by certain
numbers or by whole multiples of these numbers; or (3) a reaction
between elements and compounds, or between compounds and compounds,
resulting in the redistribution of the elements concerned, in such a
way that the complete change of composition can be expressed by using
the numbers, or whole multiples of the numbers, attached to the
elements.

How different is this conception of a change wherein substances are
formed, entirely unlike those things which react to form them, from
the alchemical presentment of such a process! The alchemist spoke of
stripping off the outer properties of the thing to be changed, and, by
operating spiritually on the soul which was thus laid bare, inducing
the essential virtue of the substance to exhibit its powers of
transmutation. But he was unable to give definite meanings to the
expressions which he used, he was unable to think clearly about the
transformations which he tried to accomplish. The chemist discards the
machinery of virtues, souls, and powers. It is true that he
substitutes a machinery of minute particles; but this machinery is
merely a means of thinking clearly and consistently about the changes
which he studies. The alchemist thought, vaguely, of substance as
something underlying, and independent of, properties; the chemist uses
the expression, this or that substance, as a convenient way of
presenting and reasoning about certain groups of properties. It seems
to me that if we think of _matter_ as something more than properties
recognised by the senses, we are going back on the road which leads to
the confusion of the alchemical times.

The alchemists expressed their conceptions in what seems to us a
crude, inconsistent, and very undescriptive language. Chemists use a
language which is certainly symbolical, but also intelligible, and on
the whole fairly descriptive of the facts.

A name is given to each elementary substance, that is, each substance
which has not been decomposed; the name generally expresses some
characteristic property of the substance, or tells something about
its origin or the place of its discovery. The names of compounds are
formed by putting together the names of the elements which combine to
produce them; and the relative quantities of these elements are
indicated either by the use of Latin or Greek prefixes, or by
variations in the terminal syllables of the names of the elements.




CHAPTER XIV.

THE MODERN FORM OF THE ALCHEMICAL QUEST OF THE ONE THING.


The study of the properties of the elements shows that these
substances fall into groups, the members of each of which are like one
another, and form compounds which are similar. The examination of the
properties and compositions of compounds has shown that similarity of
properties is always accompanied by similarity of composition. Hence,
the fact that certain elements are very closely allied in their
properties suggests that these elements may also be allied in their
composition. Now, to speak of the composition of an element is to
think of the element as formed by the union of at least two different
substances; it implies the supposition that some elements at any rate
are really compounds.

The fact that there is a very definite connexion between the values of
the atomic weights, and the properties, of the elements, lends some
support to the hypothesis that the substances we call, and are obliged
at present to call, elements, may have been formed from one, or a few,
distinct substances, by some process of progressive change. If the
elements are considered in the order of increasing atomic weights,
from hydrogen, whose atomic weight is taken as unity because it is the
lightest substance known, to uranium, an atom of which is 240 times
heavier than an atom of hydrogen, it is found that the elements fall
into periods, and the properties of those in one period vary from
element to element, in a way which is, broadly and on the whole, like
the variation of the properties of those in other periods. This fact
suggests the supposition--it might be more accurate to say the
speculation--that the elements mark the stable points in a process of
change, which has not proceeded continuously from a very simple
substance to a very complex one, but has repeated itself, with certain
variations, again and again. If such a process has occurred, we might
reasonably expect to find substances exhibiting only minute
differences in their properties, differences so slight as to make it
impossible to assign the substances, definitely and certainly, either
to the class of elements or to that of compounds. We find exactly such
substances among what are called the _rare earths_. There are
earth-like substances which exhibit no differences of chemical
properties, and yet show minute differences in the characters of the
light which they emit when they are raised to a very high
temperature.

The results of analysis by the spectroscope of the light emitted by
certain elements at different temperatures may be reasonably
interpreted by supposing that these elements are separated into simpler
substances by the action on them of very large quantities of thermal
energy. The spectrum of the light emitted by glowing iron heated by a
Bunsen flame (say, at 1200 deg. C. = about 2200 deg. F.) shows a few
lines and flutings; when iron is heated in an electric arc (say, to
3500 deg. C. = about 6300 deg. F.) the spectrum shows some two
thousand lines; at the higher temperature produced by the electric
spark-discharge, the spectrum shows only a few lines. As a guide to
further investigation, we may provisionally infer from these facts
that iron is changed at very high temperatures into substances simpler
than itself.

Sir Norman Lockyer's study of the spectra of the light from stars has
shown that the light from those stars which are presumably the
hottest, judging by the general character of their spectra, reveals
the presence of a very small number of chemical elements; and that the
number of spectral lines, and, therefore, the number of elements,
increases as we pass from the hottest to cooler stars. At each stage
of the change from the hottest to cooler stars certain substances
disappear and certain other substances take their places. It may be
supposed, as a suggestive hypothesis, that the lowering of stellar
temperature is accompanied by the formation, from simpler forms of
matter, of such elements as iron, calcium, manganese, and other
metals.

In the year 1896, the French chemist Becquerel discovered the fact
that salts of the metal uranium, the atomic weight of which is 240,
and is greater than that of any other element, emit rays which cause
electrified bodies to lose their electric charges, and act on
photographic plates that are wrapped in sheets of black paper, or in
thin sheets of other substances which stop rays of light. The
_radio-activity_ of salts of uranium was proved not to be increased or
diminished when these salts had been shielded for five years from the
action of light by keeping them in leaden boxes. Shortly after
Becquerel's discovery, experiments proved that salts of the rare metal
thorium are radio-active. This discovery was followed by Madame
Curie's demonstration of the fact that certain specimens of
_pitchblende_, a mineral which contains compounds of uranium and of
