are liable to occur. When the liquid methyl chloride is being
introduced into the cylinder, the whole apparatus becomes surrounded
with an atmosphere of its vapor, and as the platinum U-tube is at the
same instant suddenly cooled the vapor is liable to enter by the
abducting tubes. Consequently, as soon as the current is allowed to
pass and fluorine is liberated within the U-tube, an explosion occurs.
Fluorine instantly decomposes methyl chloride, with production of
flame and formation of fluorides of hydrogen and carbon, liberation of
chlorine, and occasionally deposition of carbon. In order to avoid
this unpleasant occurrence, when the methyl chloride is being
introduced the ends of the lateral delivery tubes are attached to long
lengths of caoutchoue tubing, supplied at their ends with calcium
chloride drying tubes, so as to convey dry air from outside the
atmosphere of methyl chloride vapor. If great care is taken to obtain
the minimum temperature, this difficulty may be even more simply
overcome by employing a mixture of well pounded ice and salt instead
of methyl chloride; but there is the counterbalancing disadvantage to
be considered, that such a cooling bath requires much more frequent
renewal.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]


CHEMICAL REACTIONS OCCURRING DURING THE ELECTROLYSIS.

In the paper of 1887, M. Moissan adopted the view that the first
action of the electric current was to effect the decomposition of the
potassium fluoride contained in solution in the hydrofluoric acid,
fluorine being liberated at the positive pole and potassium at the
negative terminal. This liberated potassium would at once regenerate
potassium fluoride in presence of hydrofluoric acid, and liberate its
equivalent of hydrogen:

      KF = K + F.
  K + HF = KF + H.

But when the progress of the electrolysis is carefully followed, by
consulting the indications of the amperemeter placed in circuit, it is
found to be by no means as regular as the preceding formulae would
indicate. With the new apparatus, the decomposition is quite irregular
at first, and does not attain regularity until it has been proceeding
for upward of two hours. Upon stopping the current and unmounting the
apparatus, the platinum rod upon which the fluorine was liberated is
found to be largely corroded, and at the bottom of the U-tube a
quantity of a black, finely divided substance is observed. This black
substance, which was taken at first to be metallic platinum, is a
complex compound containing one equivalent of potassium to one
equivalent of platinum, together with a considerable proportion of
fluorine.

Moreover, the hydrofluoric acid is found to contain a small quantity
of platinum fluoride in solution. The electrolytic reaction is
probably therefore much more complicated than was at first considered
to be the case. The mixture of acid and alkaline fluoride furnishes
fluorine at the positive terminal rod, but this intensely active gas,
in its nascent state, attacks the platinum and produces platinum
tetrafluoride, PtF_{4}; this probably unites with the potassium
fluoride to form a double salt, possibly 2Kl.PtF_{4}, analogous to the
well known platinochloride 2KCl.PtCl_{4}; and it is only when the
liquid contains this double salt that the electrolysis proceeds in a
regular manner, yielding free fluorine at the positive pole, and
hydrogen and the complex black compound at the negative pole.


PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUORINE.

Fluorine possesses an odor which M. Moissan compares to a mixture of
hypochlorous acid and nitrogen peroxide, but this odor is usually
masked by that of the ozone which it always produces in moist air,
owing to its decomposition of the water vapor. It produces most
serious irritation of the bronchial tubes and mucous membrane of the
nasal cavities, the effects of which are persistent for quite a
fortnight.

When examined in a thickness of one meter, it is seen to possess a
greenish yellow color, but paler, and containing more of yellow, than
that of chlorine. In such a layer, fluorine does not present any
absorption bands. Its spectrum exhibits thirteen bright, lines in the
red, between wave lengths 744 and 623. Their positions and relative
intensities are as follows:

[lambda] = 744 very feeble.    |     [lambda] = 685.5  feeble
           740      "          |                683.5    "
           734      "          |                677    strong
           714 feeble.         |                640.5    "
           704      "          |                634      "
           691      "          |                623      "
           687.5    "          |

At a temperature of -95 deg. at ordinary atmospheric pressure, fluorine
remains gaseous, no sign of liquefaction having been observed.


METHODS OF EXPERIMENTING WITH FLUORINE.

When it is desired to determine the action of fluorine upon a solid
substance, the following method of procedure is adopted. A preliminary
experiment is first made, in order to obtain some idea as to the
degree of energy of the reaction, by bringing a little of the solid,
placed upon the lid of a platinum crucible held in a pair of tongs,
near the mouth of the delivery tube of the preparation apparatus. If a
gaseous or liquid product results, and it is desirable to collect it
for examination, small fragments of the solid are placed in a platinum
tube connected to the delivery tube by flexible platinum tubing or by
a screw joint, and the resulting gas may be collected over water or
mercury, or the liquid condensed in a cooled cylinder of platinum. In
this manner the action of fluorine upon sulphur and iodine has been
studied. If the solid, phosphorus for instance, attacks platinum, or
the temperature of the reaction is sufficiently high to determine the
combination of platinum and fluorine (toward 500 deg.), a tube of
fluorspar is substituted for the platinum tube. The fluorspar tubes
employed by M. Moissan for the study of the action of phosphorus were
about twelve to fourteen centimeters long, and were terminated by
platinum ends furnished with flanges and screw threads in order to be
able to connect them with the preparation apparatus. If it is required
to heat the fluorspar tubes, they are surrounded by a closely wound
copper spiral, which may be heated by a Bunsen flame.

In experimenting upon liquids, great care is necessary, as the
reaction frequently occurs with explosive violence. A preliminary
experiment is therefore always made, by allowing the fluorine delivery
tube to dip just beneath the surface of the liquid contained in a
small glass cylinder. When the liquid contains water, or when
hydrofluoric acid is a product of the reaction, cylinders of platinum
or of fluorspar are employed. If it is required to collect and examine
the product, the liquid is placed along the bottom of a horizontal
tube of platinum or fluorspar, as in case of solids, connected
directly with the preparation apparatus, and the product is collected
over water or mercury if a gas, or in a cooled platinum receiver if a
liquid.

During the examination of liquids a means has accidentally been
discovered by which a glass tube may be filled with fluorine gas. A
few liquids, one of which is carbon tetrachloride, react only very
slowly with fluorine at the ordinary temperature. By filling a glass
tube with such a liquid, and inverting it over a platinum capsule also
containing the liquid, it is possible to displace the liquid by
fluorine, which, as the walls are wet, does not attack the glass. Or
the glass tube may be filled with the liquid, and then the latter
poured out, leaving the walls wet; the tube may then be filled with
fluorine gas, which being slightly heavier than air, remains in the
tube for some time. In one experiment, in which a glass test tube had
been filled with fluorine over carbon tetrachloride, it was attempted
to transfer it to a graduated tube over mercury, but in inclining the
test tube for this purpose the mercury suddenly came in contact with
the fluorine, and absorbed it so instantaneously and with such a
violent detonation that both the test tube and the graduated tube were
shattered into fragments. Indeed, owing to the powerful affinity of
mercury for fluorine, it is a most dangerous experiment to transfer a
tube containing fluorine gas, filled according to either the first or
second method, to the mercury trough; the tube is always shattered if
the mercury comes in contact with the gas, and generally with a loud
detonation. Fluorine may, however, be preserved for some time in tubes
over mercury, provided a few drops of the non-reacting liquid are kept
above the mercury meniscus.

For studying the action of fluorine on gases, a special piece of
apparatus, shown in Fig. 3, has been constructed. It is composed of a
tube of platinum, fifteen centimeters long, closed by two plates of
clear, transparent, and colorless fluorspar, and carrying three
lateral narrower tubes also of platinum. Two of these tubes face each
other in the center of the apparatus, and serve one for the conveyance
of the fluorine and the other of the gas to be experimented upon. The
third, which is of somewhat greater diameter than the other two,
serves as exit tube for the product or products of the reaction, and
may be placed in connection with a trough containing either water or
mercury.

The apparatus is first filled with the gas to be experimented upon,
then the fluorine is allowed to enter, and an observation of what
occurs may be made through the fluorspar windows. One most important
precaution to take in collecting the gaseous products over mercury is
not to permit the platinum delivery tube to dip more than two or at
most three millimeters under the mercury, as otherwise the levels of
the liquid in the two limbs of the electrolysis U-tube become so
different, owing to the pressure, that the fluorine from one side
mixes with the hydrogen evolved upon the other, and there is a violent
explosion.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]


ACTION OF FLUORINE UPON THE NON-METALLIC ELEMENTS.

_Hydrogen._--As just described, hydrogen combines with fluorine, even
at -23 deg. and in the dark, with explosive force. This is the only case
in which two elementary gases unite directly without the intervention
of extraneous energy. If the end of the tube delivering fluorine is
placed in an atmosphere of hydrogen, a very hot blue flame, bordered
with red, at once appears at the mouth of the tube, and vapor of
hydrofluoric acid is produced.

_Oxygen._--Fluorine has not been found capable of uniting with oxygen
up to a temperature of 500 deg.. On ozone, however, it appears to exert
some action, as will be evident from the following experiment. It was
shown in 1887 that fluorine decomposes water, forming hydrofluoric
acid, and liberating oxygen in the form of ozone. When a few drops of
water are placed in the apparatus shown in Fig. 3, and fluorine
allowed to enter, the water is instantly decomposed, and on looking
through the fluorspar ends a thick dark cloud is seen over the spot
where each drop of water had previously been. This cloud soon
diminishes in intensity, and is eventually replaced by a beautiful
blue gas--ozone in a state of considerable density. If the product is
chased out by a stream of nitrogen as soon as the dense cloud is
formed, a very strong odor is perceived, different from that of either
fluorine or ozone, but which soon gives place to the unmistakable odor
of ozone. It appears as if there is at first produced an unstable
oxide of fluorine, which rapidly decomposes into fluorine and ozone.

_Nitrogen_ and _chlorine_ appear not to react with fluorine.

_Sulphur._--In contact with fluorine gas, sulphur rapidly melts and
inflames. A gaseous fluoride of sulphur is formed, which possesses a
most penetrating odor, somewhat resembling that of chloride of
sulphur. The gas is incombustible, even in oxygen. When warmed in a
glass vessel, the latter becomes etched, owing to the formation of
silicon tetrafluoride, SiF_{4}. Selenium and tellurium behave
similarly, but form crystalline solid fluorides.

_Bromine_ vapor combines with fluorine in the cold with production of
a very bright but low temperature dame. If the fluorine is evolved in
the midst of pure dry liquid bromine, the combination is immediate,
and occurs without flame.

_Iodine._--When fluorine is passed over a fragment of iodine contained
in the horizontal tube, combination occurs, with production of a pale
flame. A very heavy liquid, colorless when free from dissolved iodine,
and fuming strongly in the air, condenses in the cooled receiver. This
liquid fluoride of iodine attacks glass with great energy and
decomposes water when dropped into that liquid with a noise like that
produced by red-hot iron. Its properties agree with those of the
fluoride of iodine prepared by Gore by the action of iodine on silver
fluoride.

_Phosphorus._--Immediately phosphorus, either the ordinary yellow
variety or red phosphorus, comes in contact with fluorine, a most
lively action occurs, accompanied by vivid incandescence. If the
fluorine is in excess, a fuming gas is evolved, which gives up its
excess of fluorine on collecting over mercury, and is soluble in
water. This gas is phosphorus pentafluoride, PF_{5}, prepared some
years ago by Prof. Thorpe. If, on the contrary, the phosphorus is in
excess, a gaseous mixture of this pentafluoride with a new fluoride,
the trifluoride, PF_{3}, a gas insoluble in water, but which may be
absorbed by caustic potash, is obtained. The trifluoride, in turn,
combines with more fluorine to form the pentafluoride, the reaction
being accompanied by the appearance of a flame of comparatively low
temperature.

_Arsenic_ combines with fluorine at the ordinary temperature with
incandescence. If the current of fluorine is fairly rapid, a colorless
fuming liquid condenses in the receiver, which is mainly arsenic
trifluoride, AsF_{3}, but which appears also to contain a new
fluoride, the pentafluoride, AsF_{5}, inasmuch as the solution in
water yields the reactions of both arsenious and arsenic acids.

_Carbon._--Chlorine does not unite with carbon even at the high
temperature of the electric arc, but fluorine reacts even at the
ordinary temperature with finely divided carbon. Purified lampblack
inflames instantly with great brilliancy, as do also the lighter
varieties of wood charcoal. A curious phenomenon is noticed with wood
charcoal; it appears at first to absorb and condense the fluorine,
then quite suddenly it bursts into flame with bright scintillations.
The denser varieties of charcoal require warming to 50 deg. or 60 deg. before
they inflame, but it once the combustion is started at any point it
rapidly propagates itself throughout the entire piece. Graphite must
be heated to just below dull redness in order to effect combination;
while the diamond has not yet been attacked by fluorine, even at the
temperature of the Bunsen flame. A mixture of gaseous fluorides of
carbon are produced whenever carbon of any variety is acted upon by
fluorine, the predominating constituent being the tetrafluoride,
CF_{4}.

_Boron._--The amorphous variety of boron inflames instantly in
fluorine, with projection of brilliant sparks and liberation of dense
fumes of boron trifluoride, BF_{3}. The adamantine modification
behaves similarly if powdered. When the experiment is performed in the
fluorspar tube, the gaseous fluoride may be collected over mercury.
The gas fumes strongly in the air, and is instantly decomposed by
water.

_Silicon._--The reaction between fluorine and silicon is one of the
most beautiful of all these extraordinary manifestations of chemical
activity. The cold crystals become immediately white-hot, and the
silicon burns with a very hot flame, scattering showers of star-like,
white-hot particles in all directions. If the action is stopped before
all the silicon is consumed, the residue is found to be fused. As
crystalline silicon only melts at a temperature superior to 1,200 deg.,
the heat evolved must be very great. If the reaction is performed in
the fluorspar tube, the resulting gaseous silicon tetrafluoride,
SiF_{4}, may be collected over mercury.

Amorphous silicon likewise burns with great energy in fluorine.


ACTION OF FLUORINE UPON METALS.

_Sodium_ and _potassium_ combine with fluorine with great vigor at
ordinary temperatures, becoming incandescent, and forming their
respective fluorides, which may be obtained crystallized from water in
cubes. Metallic _calcium_ also burns in fluorine gas, forming the
fused fluoride, and occasionally minute crystals of fluorspar.
_Thallium_ is rapidly converted to fluoride at ordinary temperatures,
the temperature rising until the metal melts and finally becomes red
hot. Powdered _magnesium_ burns with great brilliancy. _Iron_, reduced
by hydrogen, combines in the cold with immediate incandescence, and
formation of an anhydrous, readily soluble, white fluoride.
_Aluminum_, on heating to low redness, gives a very beautiful
luminosity, as do also _chromium_ and _manganese_. The combustion of
slightly warmed zinc in fluorine is particularly pretty as an
experiment, the flame being of a most dazzling whiteness. _Antimony_
takes fire at the ordinary temperature, and forms a solid white
fluoride. _Lead_ and _mercury_ are attacked in the cold, as previously
described, the latter with great rapidity. _Copper_ reacts at low
redness, but in a strangely feeble manner, and the white fumes formed
appear to combine with a further quantity of fluorine to form a
perfluoride. The main product is a volatile white fluoride. _Silver_
is only slowly attacked in the cold. When heated, however, to 100 deg.,
the metal commences to be covered with a yellow coat of anhydrous
fluoride, and on heating to low redness combination occurs, with
incandescence, and the resulting fluoride becomes fused, and afterward
presents a satin-like aspect. _Gold_ becomes converted into a yellow
deliquescent volatile fluoride when heated to low redness, and at a
slightly higher temperature the fluoride is dissociated into metallic
gold and fluorine gas.

The action of fluorine on _platinum_ has been studied with special
care. It is evident, in view of the corrosion of the positive platinum
terminal of the electrolysis apparatus, that nascent fluorine rapidly
attacks platinum at a temperature of -23 deg.. At 100 deg., however, fluorine
gas appears to be without action on platinum. At 500 deg.-600 deg. it is
attacked strongly, with formation of the tetrafluoride. PtF_{4}, and a
small quantity of the protofluoride, PtF_{2}. If the fluorine is
admixed with vapor of hydrofluoric acid, the reaction is much more
vigorous, as if a fluorhydrate of the tetrafluoride, perhaps
2HF.PtF_{4}, were formed. The tetrafluoride is generally found in the
form of deep-red fused masses, or small yellow crystals resembling
those of anhydrous platinum chloride. The salt is volatile and very
hygroscopic. Its behavior with water is peculiar. With a small
quantity of water a brownish yellow solution is formed, which,
however, in a very short time becomes warm and the fluoride
decomposes; platinic hydrate is precipitated, and free hydrofluoric
acid remains in solution. If the quantity of water is greater, the
solution may be preserved for some minutes without decomposition. If
the liquid is boiled, it decomposes instantly. At a red heat platinic
fluoride decomposes into metallic platinum and fluorine, which is
evolved in the free state. This reaction can therefore be employed as
a ready means of preparing fluorine, the fluoride only requiring to be
heated rapidly to redness in a platinum tube closed at one end, when
crystallized silicon held at the open end will be found to immediately
take fire in the escaping fluorine. The best mode of obtaining the
fluoride of platinum for this purpose is to heat a bundle of platinum
wires to low redness in the fluorspar reaction tube in a rapid stream
of fluorine. As soon as sufficient fluoride is formed on the wires,
they are transferred to a well stoppered dry glass tube, until
required for the preparation of fluorine.


ACTION OF FLUORINE UPON NON-METALLIC COMPOUNDS.

_Sulphureted Hydrogen._--When the horizontal tube shown in Fig. 3 is
filled with sulphureted hydrogen gas and fluorine is allowed to enter,
a blue flame is observed on looking through the fluorspar windows
playing around the spot where the fluorine is being admitted. The
decomposition continues until the whole of the hydrogen sulphide is
converted into gaseous fluorides of hydrogen and sulphur.

_Sulphur dioxide_ is likewise decomposed in the cold, with production
of a yellow flame and formation of fluoride of sulphur.

_Hydrochloric acid_ gas is also decomposed at ordinary temperatures
with flame, and, if there is not a large excess of hydrochloric acid
present, with detonation. Hydrofluoric acid and free chlorine are the
products.

Gaseous _hydrobromic_ and _hydriodic acids_ react with fluorine in a
similar manner, with production of flame and formation of hydrofluoric
acid. Inasmuch, however, as bromine and iodine combine with fluorine,
as previously described, these halogens do not escape, but burn up to
their respective fluorides. When fluorine is delivered into an aqueous
solution of hydriodic acid, each bubble as it enters produces a flash
of flame, and if the fluorine is being evolved fairly rapidly there is
a series of very violent detonations. A curious reaction also occurs
when fluorine is similarly passed into a 50 per cent. aqueous solution
of hydrofluoric acid itself, a flame being produced in the middle of
the liquid, accompanied by a series of detonations.

_Nitric acid_ vapor reacts with great violence with fluorine, a loud
explosion resulting. If fluorine is passed into the ordinary liquid
acid, each bubble as it enters produces a flame in the liquid.

_Ammonia gas_ is decomposed by fluorine with formation of a yellow
flame, forming hydrofluoric acid and liberating nitrogen. With a
solution of the gas in water, each bubble of fluorine produces an
explosion and flame, as in case of hydriodic acid.

_Phosphoric anhydride_, when heated to low redness, burns with a pale
flame in fluorine, forming a gaseous mixture of fluorides and
oxyfluoride of phosphorus. _Pentachloride and trichloride of
phosphorus_ both react most energetically with fluorine, instantly
producing a brilliant flame, and evolving a mixture of phosphorus
pentafluoride and free chlorine.

_Arsenious anhydride_ also affords a brilliant combustion, forming the
liquid trifluoride of arsenic, AsF_{3}. This liquid in turn appears to
react with more fluorine with considerable evolution of heat, probably
forming the pentafluoride, AsF_{5}. _Chloride of arsenic_, AsCl_{3},
is converted with considerable energy to the trifluoride, free
chlorine being liberated.

_Carbon bisulphide_ inflames in the cold in contact with fluorine, and
if the fluorine is led into the midst of the liquid a similar
production of flame occurs under the surface of the liquid, as in case
of nitric acid. No carbon is deposited, both the carbon and sulphur
being entirely converted into gaseous fluorides.

_Carbon tetrachloride_, as previously mentioned, reacts only very
slowly with fluorine. The liquid may be saturated with gaseous
fluorine at 15 deg., but on boiling this liquid a gaseous mixture is
evolved, one constituent of which is carbon tetrafluoride, CF_{4}, a
gas readily capable of absorption by alcoholic potash. The remainder
consists of another fluoride of carbon, incapable of absorption by
potash and chlorine. A mixture of the vapors of carbon tetrachloride
and fluorine inflames spontaneously with detonation, and chlorine is
liberated without deposition of carbon.

_Boric anhydride_ is raised to a most vivid incandescence by fluorine,
the experiment being rendered very beautiful by the abundant white
fumes of the trifluoride which are liberated.

_Silicon dioxide_, one of the most inert of substances at the ordinary
temperature, takes fire in the cold in contact with fluorine, becoming
instantly white-hot, and rapidly disappearing in the form of silicon
tetrafluoride. The _chlorides_ of both _boron_ and _silicon_ are
decomposed by fluorine, with formation of fluorides and liberation of
chlorine, the reaction being accompanied by the production of flame.


ACTION OF FLUORINE UPON METALLIC COMPOUNDS.

_Chlorides_ of the metals are instantly decomposed by fluorine,
generally at the ordinary temperature, and in certain cases, antimony
trichloride for instance, with the appearance of flame. Chlorine is in
each case liberated, and a fluoride of the metal formed. A few require
heating, when a similar decomposition occurs, often accompanied by
incandescence, as in case of chromium sesquichloride.

_Bromides_ and _iodides_ are decomposed with even greater energy, and
the liberated bromine and iodine burn in the fluorine with formation
of their respective fluorides.

_Cyanides_ react in a most beautiful manner with fluorine, the
displaced cyanogen burning with a purple flame. Potassium ferrocyanide
in particular affords a very pretty experiment, and reacts in the
cold. Ordinary potassium cyanide requires slightly warming in order to
start the combustion.

Fused _potash_ yields potassium fluoride and ozone. Aqueous potash
does not form potassium hypofluorite when fluorine is bubbled into it,
but only potassium fluoride. _Lime_ becomes most brilliantly
incandescent, owing partly to the excess being raised to a very high
temperature by the heat developed during the decomposition, and partly
to the phosphorescence of the calcium fluoride formed.

_Sulphides_ of the alkalies and alkaline earths are also immediately
rendered incandescent, fluorides of the metal and sulphur being
respectively formed.

_Boron nitride_ behaves in an exceedingly beautiful manner, being
attacked in the cold, and emitting a brilliant blue light which is
surrounded by a halo of the fumes of boron fluoride.

_Sulphates_, _nitrates_ and _phosphates_ generally require the
application of more or less heat, when they too are rapidly and
energetically decomposed. Calcium phosphate is attacked in the cold
like lime, giving out a brilliant white light, and producing calcium
fluoride and gaseous oxyfluoride of phosphorus, POF_{3}. _Calcium
carbonate_ also becomes raised to brilliant incandescence when exposed
to fluorine gas, as does also normal _sodium carbonate_; but curiously
enough the bicarbonates of the alkalies do not react with fluorine
even at red heat. Perhaps this may be explained by the fact that
fluorine has no action at available temperatures upon carbon dioxide.

