delivery is by tank cars from the terminus of the pipe line at South
Chicago, to which point it is pumped from Lima, O. The Chicago price
is 1-2/3c. per gallon, or 70c. per barrel of 42 gallons, f.o.b. cars
at Chicago.

A great many of the brick manufacturers here and throughout the
Northwest are beginning to use crude petroleum as a substitute for
soft coal. It is smokeless, for the fine spray of oil which comes from
the injector consists of such minute drops of the liquid and is so
thoroughly mixed with oxygen that when it burns the combustion is
complete, and only steam and carbonic acid gas go out of the top of
the kiln. Not a speck of soot comes from the kiln or the smokestack or
soils the whitewashed purity of the boiler room. Oil fuel is
absolutely clean. It is labor saving, too. No fireman has to keep
shoveling coal, there are no ashes to be dragged out from under the
furnace grates, and there are no clinkers to clog up the bars. One
man, by turning a valve, may regulate the heat of a kiln containing
one million brick.

Not only is it cleaner than coal and calls for less labor, but it is
actually cheaper as a fuel. A barrel and a half of crude oil is equal
for furnace fuel to a ton of the best Illinois bituminous coal, and at
70c. a barrel any one can easily calculate the advantages petroleum
has over its smoky rival. Theoretically, two barrels of oil equal in
heating power one ton of best Pittsburg coal.

An examination into the relative cost of the Pittsburg and Chicago
coal to the oil consumed shows that the price of oil at Pittsburg is
59c. per barrel of 42 gallons, and slack coal can be purchased at from
70c. to 80c. per ton, and the best quality of lump coal at from $1.10
to $1.25 per ton, while the same quality of fuel can be bought in
Chicago at about 70c. a barrel, as against coal at from $2 to $3.50
per ton. It would, therefore, look as though there could be no
question whatever as to the economy and advantages to be derived from
the use of oil as a fuel in this vicinity.

The weight of oil required is less than half that of average coal to
produce the same amount of steam.

A great advantage in using oil as fuel in brick burning is that the
fires are always under the absolute and direct control of the man in
charge of the burning, who can regulate the volume of flame to the
nicest degree and throw the heat to any part of the arches that he may
desire.

From present indications, oil will be the fuel adopted generally for
generating power and for brick burning in Chicago, as it saves the
boilers, avoids grate bars, saves dirt and cinders, and reduces
running expenses, etc.

Much skepticism was at first exhibited in Chicago only a few years ago
when one of the leading brick manufacturers attempted to burn a kiln
of brick with coal for fuel. Nearly all the brickmakers then in
business put on wise looks and predicted the failure of the experiment
with coal. But coal proved to be a better and cheaper fuel than wood,
and in five or six years wood was used only for the kindling of the
coal fires.

Then came the attempt to burn brick with crude oil, and the experiment
having proved a success, coal has been banished from the leading brick
yards in Chicago and vicinity.

The Purington-Kimball Brick Co., Adams J. Weckler, Weber & La Bond,
the May-Purington Brick Co., the Union Brick Co., and the Pullman
Brick Co., all having headquarters in Chicago, as well as the Peerless
Brick Co. and the Pioneer Fireproof Construction Co., both of Ottawa,
Ill., are using crude oil fuel for brick burning.

Lima crude oil is used, and it is atomized by means of steam in small
furnaces extending about two feet from the face of the brick kilns,
and in which furnaces combustion occurs, and the conversion of the oil
and steam into a gaseous fuel is secured. There is little doubt that
the fuel employed in the future by the successful brick manufacturer
must be in the gaseous form. Owing to the enormous cost of handling
coal, wood, and other crude fuel, and of removing the ash resulting
from such fuel, it has been demonstrated in practice by the use of
crude oil that the expense connected with the burning of brick can be
reduced fully 60 per cent. This large saving is made by converting
crude petroleum into gas and utilizing this fuel, either directly in
the arches of the kiln or by converting the crude oil into gas in a
gas producer, and drawing this fuel gas from the producer and burning
the same as required in kilns of suitable construction.

Crude oil fuel must in the future play an important part in all
branches of manufacture requiring high, constant heats, and in which
the cost of wood, coal, and other solid fuels, together with the labor
cost of handling them, forms a considerable part of the cost of
production. Where coal is required to be hauled in carts from the
wharves, or from a line of railway to the brick yard, located a mile,
more or less, from the places where the coal is received, the cost of
handling, haulage, and waste is an important item. Added to these
costs, the deterioration of soft coal under atmospheric influences and
the waste from imperfect combustion and from the particles which fall
from the grate bars into the ash pits, all eat a large hole in the
brickmakers' profit.

Mr. D.V. Purington, of Chicago, Ill., in speaking on this subject,
says:

    "I will say that my fuel bill for oil is cheaper than it would
    cost me for coal. There is a very wide difference in the cost
    of unloading, hauling away ashes and cinders, and getting my
    coal around to the kiln, or boilers, or drier, or wherever I
    use it, and I get very much better results by being able to
    put the heat from oil fuel just where I want it."

In order to secure the best results with any fuel it is not only
necessary that a cheap fuel should be used, but that it should be
always obtainable, and that all of it should be burned and turned to
commercial account in the operations of brick manufacture.

Owing to the losses which we have previously mentioned, and resulting
from the use of coal, this fuel is destined to be superseded by some
form of fuel which will avoid such losses, and which will dispense
with all of the inconveniences now encountered in the handling of coal
and of the ashes resulting from combustion. Wood is rapidly becoming
too scarce and high near the great centers of man's habitation to be
regarded in the present discussion.

Fully two hundred million of brick a year are being burned in the city
of Chicago with crude oil fuel, and a clamp kiln containing one
million brick can be burned with crude oil in Chicago at a labor cost
of less than $100, and at a total cost for labor and oil of about 40c.
per thousand brick.

There are not, however, many places in the world where brick can be
burned with oil at such a low cost as in the city of Chicago; the
reason being that oil is not everywhere obtainable so cheaply as in
this city, and because few clays in the world are so easily burned
into brick as are the clays of Chicago. In Milwaukee, Wis., and in
other places within a distance of 100 miles from Chicago, the time
required to burn building brick with crude oil fuel averages from
sixteen to twenty-one days, whereas the time of burning the Chicago
clays averages only about five days, and splendid "burns" have been
secured there with crude oil in three and one-half days. It is
evident, therefore, that the advantages of using crude oil fuel for
the burning of brick will vary in different parts of the United
States.

Where circumstances and the nature of the clay permit of its use,
crude oil is, next to fuel gas, the brickmakers' ideal fuel.--_The
Brickmaker_.

       *       *       *       *       *




INVESTIGATION OF A MOUND NEAR JEFFERSON CITY, MO.

By A.S. LOGAN.


Recently, a party consisting of engineers and employes of the Missouri
River Improvement Commission began an exploration of one of the
mounds, a work of a prehistoric race, situated on the bluff, which
overlooks the Missouri River from an elevation of one hundred and
fifty feet, located about six miles below Jefferson City.

This mound is one of about twenty embraced in a circle one quarter of
a mile in diameter.

The above party selected the mound in question apparently at
haphazard; all the mounds presenting nearly a uniform outline,
differing only in size and mostly circular in form, and from twenty to
twenty-four feet at the base, rising to a height of eight feet and
under. A trench was cut on a level with the natural soil, penetrating
the mound about eight feet. A stone wall was encountered which was
built very substantially, making access in that direction difficult,
in consequence of which the earth was removed from the top for the
purpose of entering from that direction. The earth was removed for a
depth of four feet, when the top of the wall was exposed. Further
excavation brought to light human bones, some of them fairly well
preserved, especially the bones of the legs. On the removal of these
and a layer of clay, another layer of bones was exposed, but
presenting a different appearance than the first, having evidently
been burned or charred, a considerable quantity of charcoal being
mixed with the bones. In this tier were found portions of several
skulls, lying close together, as if they had been interred without
regard to order. They were, in all probability, detached from the body
when buried.

The portions of the skulls found were those of the back of the head,
no frontal bones being discovered. Some jaw bones with the teeth
attached were among the remains, but only that portion of the jaw
containing the molar teeth.

A few pieces of flint weapons were found in the upper layers, and
nothing else of any significance.

At this juncture the diggers abandoned the search, and some days later
the writer, desirous of seeing all that was to be seen, resumed the
work and removed the earth and remains until the bottom of the vault
was reached; several layers being thus removed. All of these had
evidently been burned, as charcoal and ashes were mixed with the bones
of each succeeding layer. The layers were about an inch in thickness,
with from two to four inches of earth between, and small flat stones,
about the size of a man's hand, spread on each different layer, as if
to mark its division from the next above.

Between the bottom layers, mixed with charcoal, ashes and small
portions of burned bones were found what gives value to the search,
numbering about fifty tools and a smoking pipe.

The material of the tools is the same as the rock forming the vault,
locally known as "cotton rock." I would consider it a species of
sandstone.

Overlying the edge of "cotton rock" in the bluff is flint in great
quantities, and in every conceivable shape, that these people could
have resorted to had they been so disposed, and why they used the
softer material I will leave to some archaeologist to determine. The
tools themselves are made after no pattern, but selected for their
cutting qualities, as they all have a more or less keen edge which
could be used for cutting purposes, and were no doubt highly prized,
as they were found all in a pile in one corner of the vault and on top
of which was found a stone pipe. The pipe is made bowl and stem
together, and it is curious that people of such crude ideas of tools
and weapons should manufacture such a perfect specimen of a pipe. It
is composed of a very heavy stone, the nature of which would be
difficult to determine, as it is considerably burned.

A description of the vault will be found interesting to many. The wall
of the vault rests upon the natural surface of the ground, about three
feet high and eight and a half feet square, the inside corners being
slightly rounded; it is built in layers about four inches in thickness
and varying in length upward to three feet, neither cement nor mortar
being used in the joints; the corners formed a sort of recess as they
were drawn inward to the top, in which many of the stones were found.
The stone for constructing the vault was brought from a distance of
about a quarter of a mile, as there is none in sight nearer.

I assume from all these circumstances that these people lived in this
neighborhood anterior to the age of flint tools, as the more recent
interments indicate that they were then entering upon the flint
industry, and it may be that the "cotton rock" had become obsolete.

These people buried their dead on the highest ground, covering and
protecting them with these great mounds, when it would seem much
easier to bury as at the present day; but instead, they, with great
labor, carried the rock from a great distance, and it is reasonable to
suppose, also, that the earth was brought from a distance with which
they are surrounded, and piled high above, as there is no trace of an
immediate or local excavation.

In my view from the mounds and their surroundings I would
unhesitatingly say the water, the foot hills of the glacier and the
swamps left in its wake were but a short distance to the north of
them, and during the summer months the melting ice would send a volume
of water down this valley that the Missouri River of to-day is but a
miniature of, and therefore the highest hills were the only land that
could be used by that ancient race.

In this connection I would make the following suggestions that may
lead to more important disclosures: My object is the hope of a more
thorough investigation at some future time. Nearer to the top of the
mound was found, certainly, the remains of a people of more recent
date than those found in the vault, as their bones were larger, which
would indicate a more stalwart tribe, and also their mode of burial
was different, as there was no indication of fire being used, as was
the case with the lower burials. I would pronounce the upper
interments those of Indians of the present day; the tools found with
these were weapons of the chase. On the other hand, those found in the
vault were of a peaceful character, and their surroundings would
readily comport, in my opinion, to the glacial period. The entire
absence of flint in the bottom of the mound would show one of two
things, either they were unacquainted with the use of flint or at that
time there was no flint to be had. It is there now in great abundance,
in such forms for cutting purposes that would render the "cotton rock"
almost useless. The flint is found in a hill close to the river bank,
about half a mile from the mound, and the upper portion of the ledge
has the appearance, to me, of glacial action and probably forms a
moraine, as it has, evidently, been pushed over the underlying ledge,
and been ground and splintered in a manner that could not have been
without great crushing force. It would be reasonable enough to suppose
that the action of the river may have uncovered this flint by washing
away the softer material since the occupation of the older race.

In relation to the Indian interment in the examined mound, I could not
say distinctly whether the Indian burials had been such as to make
them aware of former burials or not, but I think from the thickness of
the clay between the two that they were ignorant of former burials.
The mounds of the modern Indian, so far as my investigations are
concerned, would indicate a more rudely formed structure which would
appear to be an imitation of the older mounds, as they are not
finished with like care nor have they the ulterior structures.--_The
Scientist_.

       *       *       *       *       *




ACTION OF CAUSTIC SODA ON WOOD.

By M.H. TAUSS.


The researches of the author upon the action which water exerts upon
wood at a high temperature have shown how much of the incrusting
material can be removed without the aid of any reagent.

In connection with the manufacture of cellulose, it is also
interesting to prosecute at the same time experiments with solutions
of the caustic alkalies, in order to study the mode of action upon
both wood and pure cellulose. The manufacture of cellulose has for
many years been an industry, and yet little or nothing from a chemical
point of view is known of the action of caustic soda upon vegetable
fibers.

Braconnot, in 1820, obtained alumina by treating wood with an alkali,
but the first application of wood to the manufacture of paper was due
to Chauchard. By boiling vegetable fibers with caustic lyes, Collier
and Piette obtained cellulose. Again, in 1862, Barne and Blondel
proposed to make cellulose in a similar way, but employed nitric acid
in the place of soda.

The first cellulose made exclusively from wood and caustic soda was
produced at the Manayunk Wood Pulp Works, in 1854, in the neighborhood
of Philadelphia, by Burgess & Watt. The operation consisted in
treating the wood for six hours at a pressure of from six to eight
atmospheres, with a solution of caustic soda of 12 deg. B.

Ungerer noticed that it was sufficient to limit the pressure from
three to six atmospheres, according to the quality of the wood, and
advised the use of solutions containing four to five per cent. of
caustic soda. He employed a series of cylinders, arranged vertically,
in which the wood was subjected to a methodical system of lixiviation.
The same lye passed through many cylinders, so that when it made its
exit at the end it was thoroughly exhausted, and the wood thus kept
coming in contact with fresh alkaline solutions.

According to the account of Kiclaner, the disintegration of wood may
be effected in the following four ways:

    1. By heating direct in boilers at a pressure of 10
    atmospheres. (See Dresel and Rosehain.)

    2. In vertical boilers heated direct or by steam, and kept at
    a pressure of from 10 to 14 atmospheres. (Sinclair, Nicol, and
    Behrend.)

    3. In revolving boilers, maintained at a pressure of 12
    atmospheres by direct steam.

    4. By means of a series of small vessels communicating with
    each other, and through which a lye circulates at a pressure
    of six atmospheres. (Ungerer.)

This latter process is preferable to the others.

Researches have also been made by the author in order to ascertain the
loss which wood and cellulose suffer at different temperatures or in
contact with varying quantities of alkali (NaHO).

The following is a _resume_ of the experiments, giving the loss in per
cent. resulting from a "cooking" of three hours duration:

  I. Ordinary pressure:
       10 grms. cellulose, with 580 c.c. of caustic
          soda solution, sp. gr. 1.09                 21.99
       10 grms. of soft wood, treated as above        49.19
       10   "      hard   "     "          "          53.68

  II. Pressure of five atmospheres:
       10 grms. cellulose, with 500 c.c. caustic soda
           solution of sp. gr. 1.099                  58.02
       10 grms. of soft wood, treated as above        75.85
       10   "      hard   "     "          "          69.80

  III. Pressure of ten atmospheres:
       10 grms. of cellulose                          58.99
       10   "      soft wood                          81.80
       10   "      hard  "                            70.39

  IV. Ordinary pressure:
       10 grms. of cellulose, with 500 c.c. caustic
         soda solution of sp. gr. 1.162               21.88
       10 grms. of soft wood                          35.45
       10   "      hard  "                            46.43

  V. Pressure of five atmospheres:
       10 grms. of cellulose, with 500 c.c. caustic
         soda solution of sp. gr. 1.162               77.33
       10 grms. of soft wood                          97.13
       10   "      hard  "                            91.48

  VI. Ordinary pressure:
       10 grms. of cellulose, with 500 c.c. caustic
         soda solution of sp. gr. 1.043               12.07
       10 grms. of soft wood                          28.37
       10   "      hard  "                            30.25

  VII. Pressure of five atmospheres:
       10 grms. of cellulose, with 500 c.c. of caustic
         soda solution of sp. gr. 1.043               15.36
       10 grms. of soft wood                          50.96
       10   "      hard  "                            55.66

  VIII. Pressure of ten atmospheres:
       10 grms. of cellulose, with 200 c.c. caustic
         soda solution of sp. gr. 1.043               20.28
       10 grms. of soft wood                          70.31
       10   "      hard  "                            65.59

From this it is evident that by increasing the temperature and
pressure the solvent action of the alkali is increased, but the
strength of the lye exercises an influence which is even more marked.
Thus, at a pressure of five atmospheres, the loss of cellulose was
0.75 with a caustic lye containing 14 per cent. of NaHO, while it was
only 0.05 with a lye of 8 per cent. NaHO.

To further elucidate the action of the alkali under the conditions
given above, the author has estimated the amount of precipitate which
alcohol gives with the soda solutions, after boiling with the wood:

                                                1.      2.     3.
  Specific gravity of NaHO solutions          1.043   1.09  1.162
  Soft wood, ordinary pressure                1.043  traces  4.8
       "     pressure of five atmospheres     1.043   2.0   26.8
       "        "        ten      "           1.043   1.7    --
  Hard wood, ordinary pressure               11.10   27.40  30.80
       "     pressure of five atmospheres     1.10   25.70  15.8
       "        "        ten      "           traces  5.20  15.8

The estimation of the precipitate, produced in the soda solutions
employed in the experiments cited above, gives:

  Soft wood, ordinary pressure                1.31 traces   2.0
       "     pressure of five atmospheres    15.94  16.0   24.80
       "         "       ten      "          17.00  25.4    --
  Hard wood, ordinary pressure                5.40   6      5.60
       "     pressure of five atmospheres     9.40  15.40  33.60
       "         "       ten      "           14.00 18.40  33.60

As a general rule manufacturers employ a greater pressure than that
which was found necessary by the author. As a result, it appears from
these experiments that the wood not only loses incrusting matter, but
that part of the cellulose enters into solution. As a matter of fact,
the yield obtained in practical working from 100 parts of wood does
not exceed 30 to 35 per cent.--_Le Bull. Fab. Pap.; Chemical Trade
Journal._

       *       *       *       *       *




NEW BORON COMPOUNDS.


An important paper is contributed by M. Moissan to the current number
of the _Comptes Rendus_, describing two interesting new compounds
containing boron, phosphorus, and iodine. A few months ago M. Moissan
succeeded in preparing the iodide of boron, a beautiful substance of
the composition BI_{3}, crystallizing from solution in carbon bisulphide
in pearly tables, which melt at 43 deg. to a liquid which boils
undecomposed at 210 deg.. When this substance is brought in contact with
fused phosphorus an intense action occurs, the whole mass inflames
with evolution of violet vapor of iodine. Red phosphorus also reacts
with incandescence when heated in the vapor of boron iodide. The
reaction may, however, be moderated by employing solutions of
phosphorus and boron iodide in dry carbon bisulphide. The two
solutions are mixed in a tube closed at one end, a little phosphorus
being in excess, and the tube is then sealed. No external application
of heat is necessary. At first the liquid is quite clear, but in a few
minutes a brown solid substance commences to separate, and in three
hours the reaction is complete. The substance is freed from carbon
bisulphide in a current of carbon dioxide, the last traces being
removed by means of the Sprengel pump. The compound thus obtained is a
deep red amorphous powder, readily capable of volatilization. It melts
between 190 deg. and 200 deg.. When heated _in vacuo_ it commences to
volatilize about 170 deg., and the vapor condenses in the cooler portion
of the tube in beautiful red crystals. Analyses of these crystals
agree perfectly with the formula BPI_{2}. Boron phospho-di-iodide is a
very hygroscopic substance, moisture rapidly decomposing it. In
contact with a large excess of water, yellow phosphorus is deposited,
and hydriodic, boric, and phosphorus acids formed in the solution. A
small quantity of phosphureted hydrogen also escapes. If a small
quantity of water is used, a larger deposit of yellow phosphorus is
formed, together with a considerable quantity of phosphonium iodide.
Strong nitric acid oxidizes boron phospho-di-iodide with
incandescence. Dilute nitric acid oxidizes it to phosphoric and boric
acids. It burns spontaneously in chlorine, forming boron chloride,
chloride of iodine, and pentachloride of phosphorus. When slightly
warmed in oxygen it inflames, the combustion being rendered very
beautiful by the fumes of boric and phosphoric anhydrides and the
violet vapors of iodine. Heated in contact with sulphureted hydrogen,
it forms sulphides of boron and phosphorus and hydriodic acid, without
liberation of iodine. Metallic magnesium when slightly warmed reacts
with it with incandescence. When thrown into vapor of mercury, boron
phospho-di-iodide instantly takes fire.

The second phospho-iodide of boron obtained by M. Moissan is
represented by the formula BPI. It is formed when sodium or magnesium
in a fine state of division is allowed to act upon a solution of the
di-iodide just described in carbon bisulphide; or when boron
phospho-di-iodide is heated to 160 deg. in a current of hydrogen. It is
obtained in the form of a bright red powder, somewhat hygroscopic. It
volatilizes _in vacuo_ without fusion at a temperature about 210 deg., and
the vapor condenses in the cooler portion of the tube in beautiful
orange colored crystals. When heated to low redness it decomposes into
free iodine and phosphide of boron, BP. Nitric acid reacts
energetically with it, but without incandescence, and a certain amount
of iodine is liberated. Sulphuric acid decomposes it upon warming,
without formation of sulphurous and boric acids and free iodine. By
the continued action of dry hydrogen upon the heated compound the
iodine and a portion of the phosphorus are removed, and a new phosphide
of boron, of the composition B_{5}P_{3}, is obtained.--_Nature_.

       *       *       *       *       *




BORON SALTS.


A paper upon the sulphides of boron is communicated by M. Paul
Sabatier to the September number of the _Bulletin de la Societe
Chimique. Nature_ gives the following: Hitherto only one compound of
boron with sulphur has been known to us, the trisulphide, B_{2}S_{3},
and concerning even that our information has been of the most
incomplete description. Berzelius obtained this substance in an impure
form by heating boron in sulphur vapor, but the first practical mode
