most important fact. In short, it is _the cardinal_ fact on which
ventilation practically turns. But what is the nature of it? There are
three factors in the phenomenon. In the first place, the mechanical
peculiarity of flame, or gas in the moment of combustion, as compared
with a gas like air merely heated, is _an almost explosive velocity of
ascent._ The physical peculiarity from which this results is the
intensity of its heat--commonly stated at 2,000 degrees, as to our
common illuminating gas--acting instantaneously throughout its mass,
just as in gunpowder. The gas goes up the flue in its own flash, like
the ignited charge in the barrel of a gun: the burning coals can only
_send_, and by a leisurely messenger, namely, the moderately heated
gases, and contiguous air, that rise only by the gravitation or
pressure of the surrounding atmosphere.

And yet it is not the small flame itself that roars in the chimney but
the rush of air induced by it. The semi-explosion of flame is but for
an instant, though constantly renewed, and its explosive impulse
cannot carry its light products of combustion very far through
stationary and resistant air. It is _the induction of air_ carried
with it by such semi-explosive impulse (under proper mechanical
conditions) that is strange to our observation and understanding, and
is the second factor in the phenomenon we are accounting for and
preparing to utilize.

The process, as it actually is, may be clearly exhibited by a very
simple means. Let anyone take a tube, say an inch in diameter--a roll
of paper will do as well as anything--and, applying it closely to his
mouth, try the whole force of his lungs through it upon any light
object. The amount of effect will be found surprisingly small; and
unless the tube is a short one, it will be so far absorbed by friction
and atmospheric resistance as to be almost imperceptible. Then let him
hold the same tube near to the mouth, but not in contact, and repeat
the experiment. With the best adjustment, the effect may be described
as tenfold or fifty-fold, or almost any fold--the effect of the simple
blowing being merely nominal as compared with the induced current
added by blowing _into_ the tube instead of _in_ it. The blast enters
the free and open orifice with all the contiguous air which its
surface friction and the vacuum of its movement can involve in its
rolling vortex. While the entrance is thus crowded with pressure, the
exit is free; and the result at the exit is a blast of well sustained
velocity and _magnified volume;_ ready itself to repeat the miracle on
a still larger scale if provided with the apparatus for doing so. To
test this, now place a second and larger tube in such position as to
prolong the first in a straight line, but with a slight interval
between the meeting ends; so that the blast, as magnified in volume in
entering the first tube, may enter in like manner the second tube and
be magnified again. With correct adjustments this experiment will
prove more surprising than the first. Put on a third and still larger
tube in the same way, and still larger surprise will meet a still
larger volume and force of blast, like a stiff breeze set in motion by
the puny effort of a single expiration. Of course, the prime impulse
must bear a certain proportion to the result; and the inductive or
tractional friction of the initial blast, of flame or breath, will be
used up at length unless re-enforced. In ventilating practice, there
_is_ such re-enforcement, from an excess of gravity in the cooler
atmosphere outside the flue in which the flame is operating with its
heat as well as its ascensional traction; so that there has been found
no limit to the extensions and fresh inductions that may be added to
the first or trunk flue, with increase rather than diminution of power
at every point. But the terms on which such extensions must be made
have been referred to in our illustration, and must be accurately
ascertained and observed. They constitute what is, in effect, the
third factor in the phenomenon of a roaring draught, and also,
therefore, ineffective ventilation. That is, the entering or induced
current of air must always find its channel of progress and exit
certain correct degrees larger than the opening by which it entered.
Every one knows that a stove or chimney wide open admits of but little
suction in connection with even the blaze of paper or shavings.

The mobility of air seems almost preternatural, when the proper
conditions for setting a current in motion are supplied. But without a
current established, it is surprising in turn to find how obstinately
and elusively immovable it can be. It is like tossing a feather; or
trying to drive a swarm of flies; dodging and evading every impulse
applied. But, given a flue, to define and conduct a stream; an upright
flue, to take advantage of the slighter gravity of the warmed air
within it; and a flue contracted at the inlet and expanded as it
rises, so as to free, diffuse, and lighten the column of air, toward
the exit; _then_, initiate an induced current of air at the inlet, by
the injection of a jet of gas in the state of semi-explosive action
called flame; the pressure pushing upward from the crowded entrance
finds easier way and less resistance the farther it goes in the
expanding flue; the warmth and reduced gravity of the stream comes in
as an auxiliary in overcoming friction and any exceptional obstruction
in the state of the atmosphere; and now, as the ball is once set
rolling, with a little _aid_ instead of resistance from gravitation,
its initial impulse all the while sustained by the gas jet, and
friction reduced to a very small incident--there is nothing to prevent
the current rolling on with accelerated velocity (within the
limitations imposed by increasing friction) and rolling on forever. I
might, if I had time, add a curious consideration of the law of
_vortex motion_ in elastic fluids, demonstrated by Helmholtz, which
relieves the motion of such fluids from friction, as wheels facilitate
the movement of a solid; and which also sucks into the rolling vortex
the contiguous air, thus entraining it, as we have seen, so much more
effectively than could be done by a direct and rigid current, like a
jet of water, for instance. A wheel set in motion on an almost
frictionless bearing of metalline, runs without perceptible abatement
of velocity, until one begins to involuntarily question whether it
will ever stop. In the all but free winds that roll with minimized
friction in the higher atmosphere, there seems to be a self-moving
force; so persistent is simple momentum in a mass so infinitesimally
obstructed and so infinitely wheeled. An active current of air in a
ventilating flue is only less perfect in the same conditions; and so
it is quite conceivable, and not incredible, that such a current may
be gradually established and thenceforward permanently maintained by a
small motor flame barely more than enough to overbalance the minimized
friction. This is not a supposed or theoretically inferred fact, like
the facts of ventilation sometimes alleged by theorists. On the
contrary, the theory I have offered is merely an attempt to explain
facts that I have witnessed and that anyone can verify with the
anemometer. But the _theory_ by no means covers the art and mystery of
ventilation; for ventilation is truly an _art_ as well as a mystery.
The art lies in a consummate experience of the sizes, proportions, and
forms of flues, their inlets, expansions, and exits, with many other
incidental adaptations necessary, in order to insure under _all_
circumstances the regular exhaustion of any specific volume of air
required, per minute. And this art has by one man been achieved. It
would be a double injustice if I should neglect from any motive to
inform my audience to whom I am indebted for what I know about
ventilation practically, and even for the knowledge that there is any
such fact as a practicable ventilation of houses; one who is no
theorist, but who has felt his way experimentally with his own hands,
for a lifetime, to a practical mastery of the art to which I have
attempted to fit a theory; every one present who is well informed on
this subject must have anticipated already in mind the name of Henry
A. Gouge.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE RECENT ERUPTION OF ETNA.


On the morning of the 20th of March, a long series of earthquakes
spread alarm throughout all the cities and numerous villages that are
scattered over the sides of Mt. Etna. The shocks followed each other
at intervals of a few minutes; dull subterranean rumblings were heard;
and a catastrophe was seen to be impending. Toward evening the ground
cracked at the lower part of the south side of the mountain, at the
limit of the cultivated zone, and at four kilometers to the north of
the village of Nicolosi. There formed on the earth a large number of
very wide fissures, through which escaped great volumes of steam and
gases which enveloped the mountain in a thick haze; and toward night,
a very bright red light, which, seen from Catania, seemed to come out
in great waves from the foot of the mountain, announced the coming of
the lava.

[Illustration: ERUPTION OF MOUNT ETNA, MARCH 22, 1883.]

Eleven eruptions occurred during the night, and shot into the air
fiery scoriae which, in a short time, formed three hillocks from forty
to fifty meters in height. The jet of scoriae was accompanied with
strong detonations, and the oscillations of the ground were of such
violence that the bells in the villages of Nicolosi and Pedara rang of
themselves. The general consternation was the greater in that the
locality in which the eruptive phenomena were manifesting themselves
was nearly the same as that which formed the theater of the celebrated
eruption of 1669. This locality overlooks an inclined plane which is
given up to cultivation, and in which are scattered, at a short
distance from the place of the eruption, twelve villages having a
total population of 20,000 inhabitants. On the second day the
character, of the eruption had become of a very alarming character.
New fissures showed themselves up to the vicinity of Nicolosi, and the
lava flowed in great waves over the circumjacent lands. This seemed to
indicate a lengthy eruption; but, to the surprise of those interested
in volcanic phenomena, on the third day the eruptive movement began to
decrease, and, during the night, stopped entirely. This was a very
fortunate circumstance, for this eruption would have caused immense
damages. It cannot be disguised, however, that the eruptive attendants
of this conflagration remain under conditions such as to constitute a
permanent danger for the neighboring villages. It has happened, in
fact, that in consequence of the quick cessation of the eruption,
those secondary phenomena through which nature usually provides a
solid closing of the parasitic craters have not occurred. So it is
probable that when a new eruption takes place it will be at the same
point at which manifested itself the one that has just abated.--_La
Nature_.

       *       *       *       *       *




PHYSICS WITHOUT APPARATUS.


Take an ordinary wine bottle and place it in front of and within a few
inches of a lighted candle. Blow against the bottle with your mouth at
about four or six inches distant from it and in a line with the flame.
Very curiously, notwithstanding the presence of the bottle and its
interception of the current of air, the candle will be immediately
extinguished as if there were no obstacle in the way. This phenomenon
is readily understood when we reflect that the bottle receives the
current of air on its polished surface and divides it into two, one of
which is guided to the right and the other to the left. These two
currents, after separating and driving back the surrounding air, meet
again at the very spot at which the flame is situated, and extinguish
the candle.

[Illustration: MODE OF EXTINGUISHING A CANDLE PLACED BEHIND A
BOTTLE.]

It is evident that the experiment can be reproduced by putting the
candle behind a stove pipe, a cylinder of glass or metal, a
cylindrical tin box, or any other object of the same form with a
diameter greater than that of a bottle, but not having a rough or
angular surface, since the latter would cause the current to be lost
in the surrounding air.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE TRAVELS OF THE SUN.


Some recent discussions of the constitution of the sun have turned in
part upon what is known as the sun's proper motion in space. This is
one of the most surprising and interesting things that science has
ever brought to light, and yet it is something of which comparatively
few persons have any knowledge. It is customary to look upon the sun
as if it were the center of the universe, an immovable fiery globe
around which the earth and other planets revolve while it remains
fixed in one place. Nothing could be further from the truth. The sun
is, in fact, the most wonderful of travelers. He is flying through
space at the rate of not less than a hundred and sixty millions of
miles in a year, and the earth and her sister planets are his fellow
voyagers, which, obeying his overpowering attraction, circle about him
as he advances. In other words, if we could take up a position in open
space in advance of the sun, we should see him rushing toward us at
the rate of some 450,000 miles a day, chased by his whole family of
shining worlds and the vast swarms of meteoric bodies which obey his
attraction.

The general direction of this motion of the solar system has been
known since the time of Sir William Herschel. It is toward the
constellation Hercules, which, at this season, may be seen in the
northeastern sky at 9 o'clock in the evening. As the line of this
motion makes an angle of fifty odd degrees with the plane of the
earth's orbit, it follows that the earth is not like a horse at a
windlass, circling around the sun forever in one beaten path, but like
a ship belonging to a fleet whose leader is continually pushing its
prow into unexplored waters.

The path of the earth through space is spiral, so that it is all the
time advancing into new regions along with the sun. She is on a
boundless voyage of discovery, and her human crew are born and die in
widely separated tracts of space. Think of the distance over which the
travels of the sun have borne the earth only since the beginning of
human history! Six thousand years ago the earth and sun were about a
million millions of miles further from the stars in Hercules than they
are to-day. Columbus and his contemporaries lived when the earth was
in a region of the universe more than sixty thousand millions of miles
from the place where it is now, so that since his time the whole human
race has been making a voyage through space, in comparison with which
his longest voyage was as the footstep of a fly.

Thus the great events in the history of the world may be said to have
occurred in different parts of the universe. An almost inconceivable
distance separates the spot which the earth occupied in the time of
Alexander from that which it occupied when Caesar invaded Gaul. The sun
and the earth have wandered so far from their birthplace that the mind
staggers in the attempt to guess at the stupendous distance which now
probably separates them from it. It may be that the motion of the
solar system is orbital and that our sun and many of the stars, his
fellow suns, are revolving around some common center, but if so, no
means has yet been devised of detecting the form or dimensions of his
orbit. So far as we can see, the sun is moving in a straight line.

Since space is believed to be filled with some sort of ethereal
medium, curious consequences are seen to follow from the motions that
have been described. A solid globe like the earth rushing at great
speed through such a medium will encounter some resistance. If the
medium be exceedingly rare, as it must be in fact, the resistance will
be correspondingly small, but still there will be resistance. If the
sun stood still, the earth, owing to the inclination of its axis to
the plane of its orbit, around the sun, would encounter the resistance
of the ether principally on its northern hemisphere from summer to
winter, and on its southern hemisphere from winter to summer. But in
consequence of the motion of the sun shared by the earth, this law of
distribution is changed, and from summer to winter the earth plows
through the ether with its north pole foremost, while from winter to
summer, although the resistance of the ether is encountered more
evenly by the two hemispheres, yet it is still felt principally in the
northern hemisphere, and the south pole remains practically protected.
It follows that the southern hemisphere, and particularly the south
polar regions are more or less completely sheltered the whole year
around. It might then be supposed that the impact of the particles of
the ether shouldered aside by the earth in its swift flight and the
compression produced in front of the advancing globe would tend to
raise the temperature of the northern hemisphere as compared with the
southern hemisphere, while the south pole, being more or less directly
in the wake of the earth, and in a region of rarefaction of the ether,
would constantly possess a remarkably low temperature.

Now, it is known that the south polar regions are more covered with
ice and snow than those of the north, and that the temperature there
the year around is lower. Whether this difference is owing to the
effects of the earth's journey through the ether, is a question.

The sun, too, moves with his northern hemisphere foremost, and it is
worthy of remark that it has been suspected that the northern
hemisphere of the sun radiates more heat than the southern.

But whatever effect it may or may not have upon the meteorological
condition of the earth, the fact that the solar system is thus
voyaging through space is in itself exceedingly interesting. Not the
wildest traveler's dream presents to the imagination such a voyage as
this on which every inhabitant of the earth is bound. A glance at a
star map shows that the direction in which we are going is carrying us
toward a region of the heavens exceedingly rich in stars, many, and
perhaps most, of which are greater suns than ours. There can be little
doubt that when the sun arrives in the neighborhood of those stars, he
will be surrounded by celestial scenery very different from and much
more brilliant than that of the region of space in which he now is.
The inhabitants of the globe at that distant period will certainly
behold new and far more glorious heavens, though the earth may be
unchanged.--_N.Y. Sun._

       *       *       *       *       *




PROPAGATION OF MAPLE TREES.


I do not presume that all people over three score years of age are so
entirely ignorant as I am, but probably there are some. I have lived
more than sixty years almost in the woods, and I never observed, and
never heard any other person speak of, the blooming, seeding, and
maturing of the water maple. I have a beautiful low of water maple
shade trees along the street in front of my house. In March, 1882, I
observed that they were in bloom, and many bees were swarming about
them. After the bees left them I noticed the seed (specimens inclosed
of this spring's growth) in millions. As the leaves put out in April
the little knife blade seeds fell off, so thick as to almost cover the
ground. My grandson picked up three or four hatfuls, and I sent the
seed to my farm and had them drilled in like wheat, when I planted
corn. The result is I have from 300 to 500 beautiful maples from 6
inches to three feet high. I noticed the blooms again this spring, but
a cold snap killed the blooms, and only now and then can I find a
seed. I had a sugar tree in my yard, which bloomed and bore seed which
did not fall off through the summer. My yard now has as many little
sugar trees as it has leaves of blue grass.

It strikes me that the gathering and planting of maple seed is the
best way to wood the prairies of the West and the worn-out lands of
the Eastern and Middle States. The tree is valuable for shade and for
timber, and is as rapid in growth as any tree within my knowledge. I
noticed some trees of this sort yesterday which are from 21/2 to 31/2 feet
in diameter. The lumber from such timber makes beautiful furniture.
This is intended only for those who have been as non-observant as
myself, and not the wise, who are always posted.

                                       Franklin, Tenn.    J.B.M.

The seeds inclosed were the samaras of _Acer rubrum_, called the
"soft" maple in many localities, and "red" maple in others. We have
seen trees only three or four inches in diameter full of blossoms.
This is one of the earliest trees to bloom in spring, and the pretty
winged samaras soon mature and fall. The sugar maple, _Acer
saccharinum_, blossoms later, and the seeds are persistent till
autumn, and lie on the ground all winter before germinating. The
lumber from this latter is more valuable than soft maple, being
harder, heavier, and taking a better polish. Soft maple makes an
ox-yoke which is durable and not heavy. In early times a decoction of
the bark was frequently used for making a black ink.--_Country
Gentleman._

       *       *       *       *       *




DIOSCOREA RETUSA.


[Illustration: FLOWERING SPRAY OF DIOSCOREA RETUSA.]

One of the most elegant plants one can have in a greenhouse is this
twiner, a native of South Africa. It has slender stems clothed with
distinctly veined leaves, and produces a profusion of creamy white
fragrant flowers in pendulous clusters, as shown in the annexed
engraving, for which we are indebted to Messrs Veitch of Chelsea, who
distributed the plant a few years ago. On several occasions Messrs
Veitch have exhibited it trained parasol fashion and covered
abundantly with elegant drooping clusters of flowers, and as such it
has been much admired. When planted out in a warmish greenhouse and
allowed to twine at will around an upright pillar, it is seen to the
best advantage, and, though not showy, makes a pleasing contrast with
other gayly tinted flowers. It is so unlike any other ornamental plant
in cultivation, that it ought to become more widely known than it
appears to be at present.--_The Garden._

       *       *       *       *       *




RAVAGES OF A RARE SCOLYTID BEETLE IN THE SUGAR MAPLES OF
NORTHEASTERN NEW YORK.


About the first of last August (1882) I noticed that a large
percentage of the undergrowth of the sugar maple (_Acer saccharinum_)
in Lewis County, Northeastern New York, seemed to be dying The leaves
drooped and withered, and finally shriveled and dried, but still clung
to the branches.

The majority of the plants affected were bushes a centimeter or two in
thickness, and averaging from one to two meters in height, though a
few exceeded these dimensions. On attempting to pull them up they
uniformly, and almost without exception, broke off at the level of the
ground, leaving the root undisturbed. A glance at the broken end
sufficed to reveal the mystery, for it was perforated, both vertically
and horizontally, by the tubular excavations of a little Scolytid
beetle which, in most instances, was found still engaged in his work
of destruction.

At this time the wood immediately above the part actually invaded by
the insect was still sound, but a couple of months later it was
generally found to be rotten. During September and October I dug up
and examined a large number of apparently healthy young maples of
about the size of those already mentioned, and was somewhat surprised
to discover that fully ten per cent. of them were infested with the
same beetles, though the excavations had not as yet been sufficiently
extensive to affect the outward appearance of the bush. They must all
die during the coming winter, and next spring will show that, in Lewis
County alone, hundreds of thousands of young sugar maples perished
from the ravages of this Scolytid during the summer of 1882.

Dr. George H Horn, of Philadelphia, to whom I sent specimens for
identification, writes me that the beetle is _Corthylus
punctatissimus_, Zim, and that nothing is known of its habits. I take
pleasure, therefore, in contributing the present account, meager as it
is, of its operations, and have illustrated it with a few rough
sketches that are all of the natural size, excepting those of the
insects themselves, which are magnified about nine diameters.

The hole which constitutes the entrance to the excavation is, without
exception, at or very near the surface of the ground, and is
invariably beneath the layer of dead and decaying leaves that
everywhere covers the soil in our Northern deciduous forests. Each
burrow consists of a primary, more or less horizontal, circular canal,
that passes completely around the bush, but does not perforate into
the entrance hole, for it generally takes a slightly spiral course, so
that when back to the starting point it falls either a little above,
or a little below it--commonly the latter (see Figs. 1 and 2).

[Illustration: FIGS. 1 and 2--Mines of Corthylus
punctatissimus.]

It follows the periphery so closely that the outer layer of growing
wood, separating it from the bark, does not average 0.25 mm. in
thickness, and yet I have never known it to cut entirely through this,
so as to lie in contact with the bark.

From this primary circular excavation issue, at right angles, and
generally in both directions (up and down), a varying number of
straight tubes, parallel to the axis of the plant (see Figs. 1, 2, and
3). They average five or six millimeters in length, and commonly
terminate blindly, a mature beetle being usually found in the end of
each. Sometimes, but rarely, one or more of those vertical excavations
is found to extend farther, and, bending at a right angle, to take a
turn around the circumference of the bush, thus constituting a second
horizontal circular canal from which, as from the primary one, a
varying number of short vertical tubes branch off. And in very
exceptional cases these excavations extend still deeper, and there may
be three, or even four, more or less complete circular canals. Such an
unusual state of things exists in the specimen from which Fig 3 is
taken.

[Illustration: FIGS. 3 and 4--Mines of Corthylus
punctatissimus.]

It will be seen that with few exceptions, the most important of which
is shown in Fig 4, all the excavations (including both the horizontal
canals and their vertical off shoots) are made in the sap-wood
immediately under the bark, and not in the hard and comparatively dry
central portion. This is, doubtless, because the outer layers of the
wood are softer and more juicy, and therefore more easily cut, besides
containing more nutriment and being, doubt less, better relished than
the drier interior.

This beetle does not bore, like some insects, but devours bodily all
the wood that is removed in making its burrows. The depth of each
vertical tube may be taken as an index to the length of time the
animal has been at work, and the number of these tubes generally tells
how many inhabit each bush, for as a general rule each individual
makes but one hole, and is commonly found at the bottom of it. All of
the excavations are black inside.

The beetle is sub-cylindric in outline, and very small, measuring but
3.5 mm in length. Its color is a dark chestnut brown, some specimens
being almost black. Its head is bent down under the thorax, and cannot
be seen from above (see Fig. 5).

[Illustration: FIG 5.--Corthylus punctatissimus.]

Should this species become abundant and widely dispersed, it could but
exercise a disastrous influence upon the maple forests of the
future--_G. Hart Merriam, M D, in American Naturalist._

