    grubs of this insect burrow in the sapwood and kill the tree or make
    it unfit for commercial use. The _locust miner_ is a beetle which is
    now annually defoliating trees of this species in large numbers.

Value for planting: It has little value for ornamental planting.

Commercial value: Though short-lived, the locust grows very rapidly. It
    is extremely durable in contact with the soil and possesses great
    strength. It is therefore extensively grown for fence-posts and
    railroad ties. Locust posts will last from fifteen to twenty years.
    The wood is valuable for fuel.

[Illustration: FIG. 82.--Black Locust Trees.]

Other characters: The _flowers_ are showy pea-shaped panicles appearing
    in May and June. The _fruit_ is a small pod.

Other common names: _Yellow locust_; _common locust_; _locust_.

Comparisons: The _honey locust_ (_Gleditsia triacanthos_) can be told
    from the black locust by the differences in their bark. In the honey
    locust the bark is not ridged, has a sort of dark iron-gray color
    and is often covered with clusters of stout, sharp-pointed thorns as
    in Fig. 83. The fruit is a large pod often remaining on the tree
    through the winter. This tree has an ornamental, but no commercial
    value.

[Illustration: FIG. 83.--Bark of the Honey Locust.]


HARDY CATALPA (_Catalpa speciosa_)

Distinguishing characters: The tree may be told by its *fruit*, which
    hang in long slender pods all winter. The leaf-scars appear on the
    stem in whorls of three and rarely opposite each other.

Form and size: The catalpa has a short, thick and twisted trunk with an
    irregular head.

Range: Central and eastern United States.

[Illustration: FIG. 84.--Hardy Catalpa Trees.]

[Illustration: FIG. 85.--Bark of the Flowering Dogwood.]

Soil and location: It grows naturally on low bottom-lands but will also
    do well in poor, dry soils.

Enemies: Practically free from disease and insects.

Value for planting: The catalpa grows very rapidly and is cultivated in
    parks for ornament and in groves for commercial purposes. The _hardy
    catalpa_ is preferable to the _common catalpa_ for planting.

Commercial value: The wood is extremely durable in contact with the soil
    and is consequently used for posts and railroad ties.

Other characters: The _flowers_, which appear in late June and early
    July, are large, white and very showy.

Other common names: _Indian bean_; _western catalpa_.

Comparisons: The _white flowering dogwood_ (_Cornus florida_) is a small
    tree which also has its leaves in whorls of three or sometimes
    opposite. It can be readily told from other trees, however, by the
    small square plates into which the outer bark on the trunk divides
    itself, see Fig. 85, and by the characteristic drooping character of
    its branches. It is one of the most common plants in our eastern
    deciduous forests. It is extremely beautiful both in the spring and
    in the fall and is frequently planted for ornament. There are many
    varieties of dogwood in common use.


WHITE MULBERRY (_Morus alba_)

A small tree recognized by its _small round reddish brown buds_ and
_light brown, finely furrowed_ (wavy looking) _bark_.

The tree, probably a native of China, is grown under cultivation in
eastern Canada and United States. It grows rapidly in moist soil and is
not fastidious in its light requirements. Its chief value is for
screening and for underplanting in woodlands.

The _red mulberry_ (_Morus rubra_) is apt to be confused with the white
mulberry, but differs in the following characters: The leaves of the red
mulberry are rough on the upper side and downy on the under side,
whereas the leaves of the white mulberry are smooth and shiny. The buds
in the red are larger and more shiny than those of the white.

The _Osage orange_ (_Toxylon pomiferum_) is similar to the mulberry in
the light, golden color of its bark, but differs from it in possessing
conspicuous spines along the twigs and branches and a more ridged bark.




CHAPTER IV


THE STRUCTURE AND REQUIREMENTS OF TREES

To be able fully to appreciate trees, their mode of life,
their enemies and their care, one must know something of
their structure and life requirements.

Structure of trees: Among the lower forms of plants there is very little
    distinction between the various parts--no differentiation into root,
    stem, or crown. Often the lower forms of animal and vegetable life
    are so similar that one cannot discriminate between them. But as we
    ascend in the scale, the various plant forms become more and more
    complex until we reach the tree, which is the largest and highest
    form of all plants. The tree is a living organism composed of cells
    like any other living organism. It has many parts, every one of
    which has a definite purpose. The three principal parts are: the
    stem, the crown, and the root.

  The stem: If we examine the cross-section of a tree, Fig. 86, we will
    notice that it is made up of numerous rings arranged in sections of
    different color and structure. The central part is known as the
    _pith_. Around the pith comes a dark, close-grained series of rings
    known as the _heartwood_, and outside the heartwood comes a lighter
    layer, the _sapwood_. The _cambium layer_ surrounds the sapwood and
    the _bark_ covers all. The cambium layer is the most important
    tissue of the tree and, together with part of the sapwood,
    transports the water and food of the tree. It is for this reason
    that a tree may be hollow, without heart and sapwood, and still
    produce foliage and fruit.

[Illustration: FIG. 86.--The Cross-Section of a Tree.]

  The crown: The crown varies in form in different species and is
    developed by the growth of new shoots from buds. The bud grows out
    to a certain length and forms the branch. Afterwards it thickens
    only and does not increase in length. New branches will then form
    from other buds on the same branch. This explains in part the
    characteristic branching of trees, Fig. 87.

[Illustration: FIG. 87.--Characteristic Form and Branching of Trees.
The trees in the photograph are pin oaks.]

    The leaves are the stomach and lungs of the tree. Their broad
    blades are a device to catch the sunlight which is needed in the
    process of digesting the food of the tree. The leaves are arranged
    on the twigs in such a way as to catch the most sunlight. The leaves
    take up the carbonic acid gas from the air, decompose it under the
    influence of light and combine it with the minerals and water
    brought up by the roots from the soil. The resulting chemical
    combinations are the sugars and starches used by the cambium layer
    in building up the body of the tree. A green pigment, _chlorophyll_,
    in the leaf is the medium by which, with the aid of sunlight, the
    sugars are manufactured.

[Illustration: FIG. 88.--Roots of a Hemlock Tree in their Search for
Water.]

    The chlorophyll gives the leaf its green color, and this explains
    why a tree pales when it is in a dying condition or when its life
    processes are interfered with. The other colors of the leaf--the
    reds, browns and yellows of the fall or spring--are due to other
    pigments. These are angular crystals of different hues, which at
    certain times of the year become more conspicuous than at others, a
    phenomenon which explains the variation in the colors of the leaves
    during the different seasons.

    It is evident that a tree is greatly dependent upon its leaves for
    the manufacture of food and one can, therefore, readily see why it
    is important to prevent destruction of the leaves by insects or
    through over-trimming.

  The root: The root develops in much the same manner as the crown. Its
    depth and spread will vary with the species but will also depend
    somewhat upon the condition of the soil around it. A deep or a dry
    soil will tend to develop a deep root, while a shallow or moist soil
    will produce a shallow root, Fig. 88.

    The numerous fine hairs which cover the roots serve the purpose of
    taking up food and water from the soil, while the heavy roots help
    to support the tree. The root-hairs are extremely tender, are easily
    dried out when exposed to the sun and wind, and are apt to become
    overheated when permitted to remain tightly packed for any length of
    time. These considerations are of practical importance in the
    planting of trees and in the application of fertilizers. It is these
    fine rootlets far away from the trunk of the tree that have to be
    fed, and all fertilizers must, therefore, be applied at points some
    distance from the trunk and not close to it, where merely the large,
    supporting roots are located. In the cultivation of trees the same
    principle holds true.

Requirements of trees: Trees are dependent upon certain soil and
    atmospheric conditions which influence their growth and development.

  (1) Influence of moisture: The form of the tree and its growth and
    structure depend greatly upon the supply of moisture. Botanists
    have taken the moisture factor as the basis of classification and
    have subdivided trees into those that grow in moist places
    (_hydrophytes_), those that grow in medium soils (_mesophytes_), and
    those that grow in dry places (_xerophytes_). Water is taken up by
    the roots of the tree from the soil. The liquid absorbed by the
    roots carries in solution the mineral salts--the food of the
    tree--and no food can be taken up unless it is in solution. Much of
    the water is used by the tree and an enormous amount is given off in
    the process of evaporation.

[Illustration: FIG. 89.--Dead Branches at the Top Caused by Insufficient
Water.]

    These facts will explain some of the fundamental principles in the
    care of trees. To a tree growing on a city street or on a lawn where
    nature fails to supply the requisite amount of water, the latter
    must be supplied artificially, especially during the hot summer
    months, or else dead branches may result as seen in Fig. 89. Too
    much thinning out of the crown causes excessive evaporation, and too
    much cutting out in woodlands causes the soil to dry and the trees
    to suffer for the want of moisture. This also explains why it is
    essential, in wooded areas, to retain on the ground the fallen
    leaves. In decomposing and mixing with the soil, the fallen leaves
    not only supply the trees with food material, but also tend to
    conserve moisture in the ground and to prevent the drying out of the
    soil. Raking off the leaves from wooded areas, a practice common in
    parks and on private estates--hurts the trees seriously. Some soils
    may have plenty of moisture, but may also be so heavily saturated
    with acids or salts that the tree cannot utilize the moisture, and
    it suffers from drought just the same as if there had been no
    moisture at all in the soil. Such soils are said to be
    "physiologically dry" and need treatment.

    In the development of disease, moisture is a contributing factor
    and, therefore, in cavities or underneath bandages where there is
    likely to be an accumulation of moisture, decay will do more damage
    than in places that are dry and exposed to the sun.

  (2) Influence of soil: Soil is made up of fine particles of sand and
    rock and of vegetable matter called _humus_. A tree will require a
    certain soil, and unsuitable soils can be very often modified to
    suit the needs of the tree. A deep, moderately loose, sandy loam,
    however, which is sufficiently aerated and well supplied with
    water, will support almost any tree. Too much of any one constituent
    will make a soil unfit for the production of trees. If too much clay
    is present the soil becomes "stiff." If too much vegetable matter is
    present, the soil becomes "sour." The physical character of the soil
    is also important. By physical character is meant the porosity which
    results from breaking up the soil. This is accomplished by ploughing
    or cultivation. In nature, worms help to do this for the soil, but
    on streets an occasional digging up of the soil about the base of
    the tree is essential.

    Humus or the organic matter in the soil is composed of litter,
    leaves and animal ingredients that have decayed under the influence
    of bacteria. The more vegetable matter in the humus, the darker the
    soil; and therefore a good soil such as one finds on the upper
    surface of a well-tilled farm has quite a dark color. When, however,
    a soil contains an unusual quantity of humus, it is known as "muck,"
    and when there is still more humus present we find _peat_. Neither
    of these two soils is suitable for proper tree growth.

[Illustration: FIG. 90.--A Tree in the Open. Note the full development
of the wide crown with branches starting near the ground. The tree is
the European larch.]

  (3) Influence of light: Light is required by the leaves in the process
    of assimilation. Cutting off some of the light from a tree affects
    its form. This is why trees grown in the open have wide-spreading
    crowns with branches starting near the ground as in Fig. 90, while
    the same species growing in the forest produces tall, lanky trees,
    free from branches to but a few feet from the top as in Fig. 91.
    Some trees can endure more shade than others, but all will grow in
    full light. This explains why trees like the beech, hemlock, sugar
    maple, spruce, holly and dogwood can grow in the shade, while the
    poplar, birch and willow require light. It also explains why, in
    the forest, the lower branches die and fall off--a process known in
    Forestry as "natural pruning," The influence of light on the form of
    trees should be well understood by all those who plant trees and by
    those designing landscape effects.

[Illustration: FIG. 91.--A Tree in The Forest. Note the tall stem free
from branches and the small, narrow crown.]

  (4) Influence of heat: Trees require a certain amount of heat. They
    receive it partly from the sun and partly from the soil. Evaporation
    prevents the overheating of the crown. The main stem of the tree is
    heated by water from the soil; therefore trees in the open begin
    growth in the spring earlier than trees in the forest because the
    soil in the open is warmer. Shrubs begin their growth earlier than
    trees because of the nearness of their crowns to their root systems.
    This also explains why a warm rain will start vegetation quickly.
    Too much heat will naturally cause excessive drying of the roots or
    excessive evaporation from the leaves and therefore more water is
    needed by the tree in summer than in winter.

  (5) Influence of season and frost: The life processes of a tree are
    checked when the temperature sinks below a certain point. The tree
    is thus, during the winter, in a period of rest and only a few
    chemical changes take place which lead up to the starting of
    vegetation. In eastern United States, growth starts in April and
    ceases during the latter part of August or in early September. The
    different parts of a tree may freeze solid during the winter without
    injury, provided the tree is a native one. Exotic trees may suffer
    greatly from extreme cold. This is one of the main reasons why it is
    always advisable to plant native trees rather than those that are
    imported and have not yet been acclimatized. Frosts during
    mid-winter are not quite as injurious as early and late frosts and,
    therefore, if one is going to protect plants from the winter's cold,
    it is well to apply the covering early enough and to keep it on
    late enough to overcome this difficulty.

    The mechanical injuries from frost are also important. Snow and
    sleet will weigh down branches but rarely break them, while frost
    will cause them to become brittle and to break easily. Those who
    climb and prune trees should be especially cautious on frosty days.

  (6) Influence of air: On the under side of leaves and on other
    surfaces of a tree little pores known as _stomata_ may be found. In
    the bark of birch and cherry trees these openings are very
    conspicuous and are there known as _lenticels_. These pores are
    necessary for the breathing of the tree (respiration), whereby
    carbonic acid gas is taken in from the air and oxygen given out. The
    process of assimilation depends upon this breathing process and it
    is therefore evident that when the stomata are clogged as may occur
    where a tree is subjected to smoke or dust, the life processes of
    the tree will be interfered with. The same injurious effect results
    when the stomata of the roots are interfered with. Such interference
    may occur in cases where a heavy layer of soil is piled around the
    base of a tree, where the soil about the base of a tree is allowed
