
It is in this direction, therefore, that we must look for the
production of a safe and reliable antiseptic soap.

There is not much exact knowledge as to the usefulness of such
additions to soap as borax and glycerin. They are frequently added,
and highly spoken of in advertisements. Borax is a mild alkaline body,
and as a detergent is probably equivalent to a slight excess of
caustic soda. Glycerin, although originally considered an emollient,
probably on account of its source and physical properties, is in
reality, to some skins at least, a slight irritant. It is, in fact, an
alcohol, not a fat. It does not pre-exist in fats, but is formed when
the fat is decomposed by alkali or steam.

In ordinary cases, soap owes its detergent effect to a decomposition
which occurs when it is put in water.

A perfectly neutral soap, that is, one which contains the exact
proportion of alkali and fat acid, will, when placed in cold water,
decompose into two portions, one containing an excess of the acid, the
other an excess of alkali. The latter dissolves, and gives a slightly
alkaline solution; the former precipitates, and gives the peculiar
turbidity constituting "suds." These reactions must be kept in mind in
determining the effect of the addition of any special substance to the
soap.--_The Polyclinic._

       *       *       *       *       *




OPTICAL ERRORS AND HUMAN MISTAKES.[1]

  [Footnote 1: Read before the American Association, Buffalo,
  August, 1886.]

By ERNST GUNDLACH.


I wish to call attention to a few mistakes that are quite commonly
made by microscopists and writers in stating the result of their
optical tests of microscope objectives.

If the image of an object as seen in the microscope appears to be
unusually distorted and indistinct toward the edge of the field, and
satisfactory definition is limited to a small portion of the center,
the cause is often attributed to the spherical aberration of the
objective, while really this phenomenon has nothing to do with that
optical defect of the objective, if any exists, but is caused by a
lack of optical symmetry. If a perfectly symmetrical microscope
objective could be constructed, then, with any good eye-piece, it
would make no difference to the definition of the object were it
placed either in the center or at the edge of the field, even if the
objective had considerable spherical aberration. But, unfortunately,
our most symmetrical objectives, the low powers, leave much to be
desired in this respect, while our wide angle, high powers are very
far from symmetrical perfection.

There are two causes of this defect in the latter objectives, one
being the extreme wideness of their angular apertures, and the other
the great difference in the distances of the object and the image from
the optical center of the objectives.

Another mistake is often made in regard to the cause of certain
prismatic colors that are sometimes, in a striking degree, produced by
otherwise good objectives. According to the nature of these colors,
whether yellow or blue, green or indigo, they are generally regarded
as evidences of either chromatic over or under correction of the
objective. Of course the presence of either of these defects is
certainly and correctly indicated by the appearance of one or the
other of the colors, under certain circumstances; but the simple
visibility of prismatic color is by no means a reliable indication of
over or under correction of color, and, indeed, to the honor of our
opticians, it may be stated that very few objectives are made that
cannot justly be called achromatic in the general sense of the term.
By far the most common causes of prismatic color, in otherwise
carefully constructed objectives, are the so-called chromatic
aberrations of second or higher order. Every achromatic lens which is,
as it should be, at its best at about two-thirds of its aperture, is
inside of this ring or zone, toward the center slightly under and
outside, toward the edge, slightly over corrected. This defect is the
greater, the less the difference of the dispersive powers of the two
glasses used in the construction of the lens, for a given proportion
of their refractive indexes, and therefore the degree of visibility of
the colors of the aberrations of the second order depends greatly on
the nature of the glass employed in the construction of the lens.

This defect may be corrected by a suitable combination of two or more
lenses, though not without again having similarly, as in the
correction of the first color, some faint remnants of color, the
aberrations of third or still higher order. But even the correction of
the third or still higher order may, if the angular aperture is very
wide, leave quite visible and disturbing remnants of color.

Another and not uncommon explanation of the cause of this unwelcome
color, though not so serious and damaging a charge to the maker of the
objectives, is its attribution to the so-called "secondary spectrum."
This error, like that previously mentioned, is certainly indicated by
the appearance of certain colors under certain conditions, but being,
as a rule, one of the least defects of even our best objectives in
most cases, it is probably not the true source of the disturbance.

The secondary spectrum is very commonly confounded with the chromatic
aberration of higher order. While the latter is produced by
imperfections in the form of the lens, the former is due to an
imperfection of the optical qualities of the material from which the
lens is constructed, the crown and flint glass.

A glass prism of any angle will project upon a white surface a
spectrum of any length, according to the arrangement of the light
source, the screen, and the prism. So with two prisms of the same kind
of glass, but of different angles, two spectra can be produced of
exactly equal length, so that if one is brought over the other, with
the corresponding colors in line, they will appear as one spectrum.
But if one of the prisms is made of crown and the other of flint
glass, then their spectra cannot be arranged so that all their
corresponding colors would be in line, for the proportional distances
of the different colors differ in the two spectra. If two colors of
the spectra are, by suitable arrangement, brought exactly in line,
then the others will be out. The two spectra do not coincide, and the
result, if an achromatic lens be made of these glasses, must be a
remnant of color which cannot be neutralized. This remnant is the
secondary spectrum.

Although this peculiar disharmony in the dispersive powers of the two
glasses, crown and flint, was discovered almost immediately after
achromatism was invented, it was only recently that the first
successful attempts were made to produce different glasses, which,
possessing the other requirements for achromatic objectives, would
produce coincident spectra, or nearer so than the ordinary crown and
flint glass do. It was about twelve years ago, if my memory serves me,
when I learned that a well-known English firm, engaged in the
manufacture of optical glass, had brought out some new glass possessed
of the desired qualities, and a little later I received a circular
describing the glass. But at the same time I learned that the new
glass was very soft and difficult to polish, and also that it had to
be protected from the atmosphere, and further, that an English
optician had failed to construct an improved telescope objective from
it. I had ordered some samples of the glass, but never received any.

A few months ago, news from Europe reached this country that another
and seemingly more successful attempt had been made to produce glass
that would leave no secondary spectrum, and that Dr. Zeiss, the famous
Jena optician, had constructed some new improved objectives from it.
But the somewhat meager description of these objectives, as given by
an English microscopist, did not seem fit to excite much enthusiasm
here as to their superiority over what had already been done in this
country. Besides this, the report said that the new objectives were
five system, and also that extra eye-pieces had to be used with them.
I confess I am much inclined to attribute the optical improvement,
which, according to Dr. Abbe's own remark, is very little, more to the
fact that the objectives are five system than to the new glass used in
their construction.

After a close study of a descriptive list of the new glass, received a
week or two ago from the manufacturers, I find, to my great regret,
that this new glass seems to suffer from a similar weakness to that
made by the English firm twelve years ago; as all the numbers of the
list pointed out by the makers as having a greatly reduced secondary
spectrum are accompanied with the special remark "to be protected."
Furthermore, from a comparison of the dispersive and refractive powers
of these glasses, as given in the list, I find that objectives
constructed from them will leave so great aberrations of higher order,
both spherical and chromatic, that the gain by the reduction of the
secondary spectrum would be greatly overbalanced.

In conclusion, I wish to say that while I would beware of
underestimating the great scientific and practical value of the
endeavor of the new German glass makers to produce improved optical
glass, and the great benefit accruing to opticians and all others
interested in the use of optical instruments, I think it wise not to
overestimate the real value of the defects of the common crown and
flint glass, which I have sought to explain in this paper. And, for
myself, I prefer to fight the more serious defects first, and when its
time has come I will see what can be done with the secondary spectrum.

       *       *       *       *       *




PROBABLE ISOLATION OF FLUORINE. DECOMPOSITION OF HYDROFLUORIC ACID
BY AN ELECTRIC CURRENT.

By M.H. MOISSAN.


In a former memoir[1] we showed that it was possible to decompose
anhydrous hydrofluoric acid by the action of an electric current. At
the negative pole hydrogen collects; at the positive pole a gaseous
body is disengaged, having novel properties. The experiment was
performed in a platinum U tube, closed by stoppers of fluorite, and
having at the upper part of each branch a small delivery tube, also of
platinum. Through the stopper passes a platinum rod, which acts as
electrode. The metal employed for the positive pole is an alloy
containing 10 per cent. of iridium.

  [Footnote 1: _Comptes Rendus_, vol. cii., p. 1543, and _Chemical
  News_, vol. liv., p. 36.]

To obtain pure anhydrous hydrofluoric acid, we begin by preparing
fluorhydrate of fluoride of potassium, taking all the precautions
pointed out by M. Fremy. When the salt is obtained pure, it is dried
on a water bath at 100 deg., and the platinum capsule containing it is
then placed in a vacuum in the presence of concentrated sulphuric
acid, and two or three sticks of potash fused in a silver crucible.
The acid and potash are renewed every morning for a fortnight, and the
vacuum is kept at 2 cm. of mercury. Care must be taken during this
desiccation to pulverize the salt every day in an iron mortar, so as
to renew the surface. When the fluorhydrate contains no more water it
falls to powder, and is then fit to serve for the preparation of
fluoric acid; the fluorhydrate of fluoride of potassium, if well
prepared, is much less deliquescent than the fluoride.

When the fluoride is quite dry, it is quickly introduced into a
platinum alembic, which has just been dried by heating it to redness.
The whole is kept at a gentle temperature for an hour or an hour and a
half, so as to allow the decomposition to commence very slowly; the
first portions of acid which come over are rejected as they carry with
them traces of water remaining in the salt. The platinum receiver is
then attached, and the heat increased, allowing the decomposition to
proceed with a certain degree of slowness. The receiver is then
surrounded with a mixture of ice and salt, and from this moment all
the hydrofluoric acid is condensed as a limpid liquid, boiling at
19.5 deg., very hygroscopic, and, as is well known, giving abundant fumes
in presence of the atmospheric moisture.

During this operation the platinum U tube, dried with the greatest
care, has been fixed with a cork in a cylindrical glass vessel
surrounded with chloride of methyl. Up to the moment of introducing
the hydrofluoric acid, the leading tubes are attached to drying tubes
containing fused caustic potash. To introduce the hydrochloric acid
into the apparatus, it may be absorbed through one of the lateral
tubes in the receiver in which it is condensed.

In some experiments we have directly condensed the hydrofluoric acid
in the U tube surrounded with chloride of methyl; but in this case
care must be taken that the tubes are not clogged up by small
quantities of fluoride carried over, which would infallibly lead to an
explosion and projections, which are always dangerous with so
corrosive a liquid.

When we have introduced in advance in the small platinum apparatus a
determined amount of hydrofluoric acid cooled with chloride of methyl,
in tranquil ebullition at a temperature of -23 deg., the current of 20
cells of Bunsen large size, arranged in series, is passed through by
means of the electrodes. An amperemeter in the circuit admits of the
intensity of the current being observed.

If the hydrofluoric acid contains a small quantity of water, either by
accident or design, there is always disengaged at the positive pole
ozone, which has no action on crystallized silicium. In proportion as
the water contained in the acid is thus decomposed, it is seen by the
amperemeter that the conductivity of the liquid rapidly decreases.
With absolutely anhydrous hydrofluoric acid the current will no longer
pass. In many of our experiments we have succeeded in obtaining an
acid so anhydrous that a current of 25 amperes was entirely arrested.

To render the liquid conducting, we have added before each experiment
a small quantity of dried and fused fluorhydrate of fluoride of
potassium. In this case, decomposition proceeds in a continuous
manner; we obtain at the negative pole hydrogen, and at the positive
pole a regular disengagement of a colorless gas in which crystallized
silicium in the cold burns with great brilliancy, becoming fluoride of
silicium. This latter gas has been collected over mercury, and
accurately characterized.

Deville's adamantine boron burns in the same manner, but with more
difficulty, becoming fluoride or boron. The small quantity of carbon
and aluminum which it contains impedes the combination. Arsenic and
antimony in powder combine with this gaseous body with incandescence.
Sulphur takes fire in it, and iodine combines with a pale flame,
losing its color. We have already remarked that it decomposes cold
water, producing ozone and hydrofluoric acid.

The metals are attacked with much less energy. This is due, we think,
to the small quantity of metallic fluoride formed preventing the
action being very deep. Iron and manganese in powder, slightly heated,
burn with sparks. Organic bodies are violently attacked. A piece of
cork placed near the end of the platinum tube, where the gas is
evolved, immediately carbonizes and inflames. Alcohol, ether, benzol,
spirit of turpentine, and petroleum take fire on contact.

The gas evolved at the negative pole is hydrogen, burning with a pale
flame, and producing none of these reactions.

When the experiment has lasted several hours, and there is not enough
hydrofluoric acid left at the bottom of the tube to separate the two
gases, they recombine in the apparatus in the cold, with violent
detonation.

We have satisfied ourselves, by direct experiment, that a mixture of
ozone and hydrofluoric acid produces none of the reactions described
above.

It is the same with gaseous hydrofluoric acid. Finally we may add that
the hydrofluoric acid employed, as well as the hydrofluorate of
fluoride, were absolutely free from chlorine.

The gas obtained in our experiments is therefore either fluorine or a
perfluoride of hydrogen.

New experiments are necessary to settle this last point. We hope soon
to lay the results before the Academy.--_Comptes Mendus_, vol. ciii.,
p. 202, July 19, 1886; _Chem. News._

       *       *       *       *       *




COHESION AND COHESION FIGURES.[1]

  [Footnote 1: Notes from a lecture given to the Halifax Scientific
  Society, July 19, 1886.]

By WILLIAM ACKROYD, F.I.C.


_1. A Law of Solubility._

It is customary to regard cohesion as the force which binds together
molecules of the same substance, and in virtue of which the particles
of solids and liquids are kept together, and also to speak of the
attraction exerted between particles of two different bodies as
adhesion. The distinction between cohesion and adhesion is a
conventional one. The similarity, if not identity, of the two forces
is demonstrated by the fact that while cohesion is exerted between
particles of the _same_ body, adhesion is exerted with most force
between particles of _allied_ bodies. Generally speaking, organic
bodies require organic solvents; inorganic bodies, inorganic solvents.
For example, common salt is highly soluble in water, but not in ether,
and many fats are soluble in ether, but not in water. So many cases
like these will suggest themselves to the chemist that I am justified
in making the following generalization: _A body will dissolve in a
solvent to which it is allied more readily than in one to which it in
highly dissimilar._ Exceptions to the law undoubtedly exist, but none
so striking as the following in support of it, viz., that the metal
mercury is the only known true solvent for many metals at the normal
temperature.


_2. Its Connection with Mendeleeff's Periodic Law._

From this standpoint the whole subject of solution is deserving of
fresh attention, as it appears highly probable that, just as Prof.
Carnelley has shown by the use of my meta-chromatic scale, the colors
of chemical compounds come under definite laws, which he has
discovered and formulated in connection with Mendeleeff and Newlaud's
periodic law,[2] so, likewise, may the solubility of an allied group
of compounds, in regard to any given solvent under constant conditions
of temperature, conform to similar laws; that, e.g., the chlorides
of H, Na, Cu, and Ag, in Mendeleeff's Group I., may vary in their
solubility in water from an extreme of high solubility in the case of
hydrogen chloride to the opposite extreme of comparative insolubility
in the case of silver chloride. In this natural series of compounds,
hydrogen chloride is the body nearest akin to water, and silver
chloride the most remote in kinship.

  [Footnote 2: _Philosophical Magazine_, August, 1884.]


_3. A Solidified Vortex Ring._

It is in virtue of cohesion that a freely suspended drop of liquid
assumes the spherical form. If such a sphere be dropped on to the
surface of a liquid of higher specific gravity at rest, one obtains
what is called the cohesion figure of the substance of the drop. A
drop of oil, e.g., spreads out on the surface of water until it is a
circular thin film of concentric rings of different degrees of
thickness, each displaying the characteristic colors of thin plates.
The tenuity of the film increases; its cohesion is overcome; lakelets
are formed, and they merge into each other. The disintegrated portions
of the film now thicken, the colors vanish, and only islets of oil
remain. Some liquid drops of the same or higher sp. gr. than water do
not spread out in this fashion, but descend below the surface of the
liquid, and, in descending, assume a ring shape, which gradually
spreads out and breaks up into lesser rings. Such figures have been
termed submergence cohesion figures; they are vortex rings. I have
solidified such vortex rings in their first stage of formation. If
drops of melted sulphur, at a temperature above that of the viscous
state, be let fall into water, the drops will be solidified in the
effort to form the ring, and the circular button, thick in the rim and
thin in the center, may be regarded as a solidified vortex ring of
plastic sulphur.


_4. That a Submergence Cohesion Figure is a Vortex Ring._

It may be shown that the conditions of the formation of a submergence
cohesion figure are those which exist in the formation of an aerial
vortex. Those conditions in their greatest perfection are (1) a
spherical envelope of a different nature from the medium in which the
rings are produced; (2) a circular orifice opening into the medium;
and (3) a percussive impact on the part of the sphere opposite the
orifice. In the production of vortex rings of phosphorus pentoxide in
the making of phosphoreted hydrogen, the spherical envelope is water,
the orifice the portion of the bubble which opens into the air
immediately it rises to the surface, and the impact is furnished by
gravity. So, also, in the case of a submergence cohesion figure, the
spherical envelope is the air surrounding the drop, the orifice the
portion of it which first comes in contact with the liquid at rest;
and here again the impact is due to gravity more directly than in the
former case. These conditions are somewhat imperfectly copied in the
ordinary vortex box, which is usually cubical in form, with a circular
orifice in one side, and a covering of canvas on the opposite one,
which is hit with the fist.

       *       *       *       *       *

[AMERICAN CHEMICAL JOURNAL.]




THE DETERMINATION OF NITRIC ACID BY THE ABSORPTION OF NITRIC OXIDE
IN A STANDARD SOLUTION OF PERMANGANATE OF POTASSIUM.

By H.N. MORSE and A.F. LINN.


The method which we propose consists in the conversion of the nitric
acid into nitric oxide; the absorption of the latter in a measured,
but excessive, quantity of a standard solution of permanganate of
potassium; and the subsequent determination of the excess of the
permanganate by means of a standard solution of oxalic acid or
sulphate of manganese.


THE APPARATUS.

A is an apparatus for the generation of carbon dioxide free from air,
which will be explained hereafter.

B is a flask, having a capacity of 125 or 150 c.c., in which the
nitrate is decomposed in the usual manner by means of ferrous chloride
and hydrochloric acid.

C is a small tube for the condensation of the aqueous hydrochloric
acid which distills over from B.

D is a Geissler bulb, containing a concentrated solution of potassium
carbonate, to arrest any acid vapors coming from C.

E, E are two pieces of ordinary combustion tubing, having a length of
about 650 or 700 mm., in which is placed the permanganate solution
employed for the absorption of the nitric oxide. Their open ends are
provided with lips in order to facilitate the pouring of liquids from
them, care being taken not to so distort the ends that rubber stoppers
cannot be made to fit them tightly. They are placed in a nearly
horizontal position in order to diminish the pressure required to
force the gases through the apparatus and thus lessen the danger of
leakage through the rubber joints.

_a_ is a tube through which the ferrous chloride and hydrochloric acid
are introduced into B, as in the method of Tiemann-Schulze.

_b_ serves for the introduction of carbon dioxide to expel the air
before the decomposition of the nitrate, and the nitric oxide
afterward.

_c_ is an unbroken tube ending at the lower surface of the stopper in
B, and at the bottom of C.

The rubber joint, _d_, is furnished with a Mohr and also a screw pinch
cock. The joints, _e_ and _f_, are furnished with Mohr pinch cocks.
The rubber tubing upon these should be of the best quality, and must
be carefully tied.

[Illustration: DETERMINATION OF NITRIC ACID.]


THE SOLUTIONS.

In consequence of the large volume of the permanganate solution
required for the complete absorption of the nitric oxide, we have
found it advantageous to use three solutions instead of two.

1. A solution of permanganate such that one c.c. is equivalent to
about fifteen milligrammes of nitrate of potassium, according to the
reaction:

  KMnO_{4} + NO = KNO_{3} + MnO_{2}.

This solution is employed for the absorption of the nitric oxide. Its
strength need not be exactly known. There is no objection to a more
concentrated solution, except that which pertains to all strong
standard solutions, namely, that a small error in measurement would
then give a larger error in the results. 100 c.c. of this solution are
required for each determination, and the measurement is always made in
one and the same 100 c.c. measuring flask, which, if necessary, should
be labeled to distinguish it from that used for solution No. 2.

2. A solution of oxalic acid which is very slightly stronger than that
of the permanganate just described--that is, a solution such that one
c.c. of it will somewhat more than decompose one c.c. of the
permanganate, according to the reaction:

  2KMnO_{4} + 3H_{2}SO_{4} + 5C_{2}H_{2}O_{4}.2H_{2}O =
  K_{2}SO_{4} + 2MnSO_{4} + 18H_{2}O + 10CO_{2}.

The exact strength of this solution need not be known, since we only
require the difference in value between it and solution No. 1, which
is determined by means of solution No. 3. 100 c.c. of this solution
are also required for each determination, and the measurement, as in
the preceding case, is always made in the same 100 c.c. measuring
flask.

3. A dilute, carefully standardized solution of permanganate of
potassium.

The method of using these solutions is as follows: 100 c.c. of No. 1
and No. 2 are measured off (each solution in its own measuring flask),
brought together in a covered beaker glass, and acidified with dilute
sulphuric acid. The excess of oxalic acid is then determined by means
of solution No. 3.

When it is desired to make a determination of nitric acid, 100 c.c. of
solution No. 1 are measured off, and as much of it as may be
convenient is poured into the tubes, E, E, together with about a
gramme of zinc sulphate for each tube, which substance appears to
considerably facilitate the absorption of the nitric oxide by the
permanganate. When the operation is over, the contents of E, E are
poured into a beaker glass. 100 c.c. of solution No. 2 are then
measured off, and a portion, together with a little sulphuric acid,
poured into E, E, to dissolve the oxide of manganese which has
separated during the absorption of the nitric oxide. The oxide having
been dissolved, the liquid in E, E, and the rinsings of the tubes,
