worked by worm and worm-wheels in the positions shown; thus these two
platforms form the end bulwarks to the boat when crossing the bay. On
arriving at the opposite shore the operation is repeated, the other
platform is lowered, and the hauling engine runs the trucks, etc., on
to the shore. With a load of 25 tons the draught is 4 ft.

The seats shown on the deck are for the convenience of foot
passengers, and the whole of the deck is protected from the sun of
that tropical climate by a canvas awning. The steering of the vessel
is effected from the bridge at the center, which extends from side to
side of the vessel, and there are two steering wheels with independent
steering gear for each end, with locking gear for the forward rudder
when in motion. The man at the wheel communicates with the engineer by
means of a speaking tube at the wheel. There is a small deck house for
the use of deck stores, on one side of which is the entrance to the
engine room. The cross battens, shown between the rails, are for the
purpose of horse traffic, when horses are used for hauling the trucks,
or for ordinary carts or wagons. The plan below deck shows the
arrangement of the bulkheads, with a small windlass at each end for
lifting the anchors, and a small hatch at each side for entrance to
these compartments. The central compartment contains the machinery,
which consists of a pair of compound surface condensing engines, with
cylinders 11 in. and 20 in. in diameter; the shafting running the
whole length of the vessel, with a propeller at each end. Steam is
generated in a steel boiler of locomotive form, so arranged that the
funnel passes through the deck at the side of the vessel; and it is
designed for a working pressure of 100 lb. per square inch. This
boiler also supplies steam for the small hauling engine fixed on the
bulkhead. Light to this compartment is obtained by means of large side
scuttles along each side of the boat and glass deck lights, and the
iron grating at the entrance near the deck house. This boat was
constructed in six pieces for shipment, and the whole put together in
the builders' yard. The machinery was fixed, and the engine driven by
steam from its own boiler, then the whole was marked and taken
asunder, and shipped to the West Indies, where it was put together and
found to answer the purpose intended.--_Engineering._

       *       *       *       *       *

[For THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN.]




THE PROBLEM OF FLIGHT, AND THE FLYING MACHINE.


As a result of reading the various communications to the SCIENTIFIC
AMERICAN and SUPPLEMENT, and _Van Nostrand's Engineering Magazine_,
including descriptions of proposed and tested machines, and the
reports of the British Aeronautical Society, the writer of the
following concludes:

That, as precedents for the construction of a successful flying
machine, the investigation of some species of birds as a base of the
principles of all is correct only in connection with the species and
habits of the bird; that the _general mechanical principles_ of flight
applicable to the _operation_ of the _same unit_ of wing in _all_
species are alone applicable to the flying machine.

That these principles of _operation_ do not demand the principles of
_construction_ of the bird.

That as the wing is in its stroke an arc of a screw propeller's
operation, and in its angle a screw propeller blade, its animal
operation compels its reciprocation instead of rotation.

That the swifter the wing beat, the more efficient its effect per unit
of surface, the greater the load carried, and the swifter the flight.

That the screw action being, in full flight, that of a screw propeller
whose axis of rotation forms a slight angle with the vertical, the
distance of flight per virtual "revolution" of "screw" wing far
exceeds the pitch distance of said "screw."

That consequently a bird's flight answers to an iceboat close hauled;
the wing _force_ answering to the _wind_, the wing _angle_ to the
_sail_, the bird's _weight_ to the leeway fulcrum of the _ice_, and
the passage across direction of the _wing_ flop to the fresh _moving_
"inertia" of the wind, both yielding a maximum of force to bird or
iceboat.

That the speed of _reciprocation_ of a fly's _wing_ being equivalent
to a _screw rotation_ of 9,000 per minute, proves that a _screw_ may
be run at this speed without losing efficiency by centrifugal vacuum.

That as the _object_ of wing or screw is to mount upon the inertia of
the particles of a mobile fluid, and as the rotation of steamship
propellers in water--a fluid of many times the inertia of air--is
_already_ in _excess_ of the highest speed heretofore tried in the
propellers of moderately successful flying machines, it is plain that
the speed employed in _water_ must be many times exceeded in _air_.

That with a _sufficient_ speed of rotation, the supporting power of
the inertia of air must _equal_ that of _water_.

That as mere speed of rotation of propeller _shaft_, minus blades,
must absorb but a small proportion of power of engine, the addition of
blades will not cause more resistance than that actually encountered
from inertia of air.

That this must be the measure of load lifted.

That without _slip_ of screw, the actual _power_ expended, will be
little in _excess_ of that required to support the machine in _water_,
with a slower rotation of screw.

That in case the same _power_ is expended in water or air, the only
difference will lie in the sizes and speed of engines or screws.

That the _greater_ the speed, the _less_ weight of engine, boiler, and
screw must be, and the stronger their construction.

That, in consequence, solid metal worked down, instead of bolts and
truss work, must be used.

That as the bird wing is a screw in action, and acts _directly_
between the inertias of the load and the air, the position and
operation of the screw, to the load, must imitate it.

That, in consequence, machines having wing planes, driven _against_
one inertia of air by screws acting in the line, of flight against
another inertia of air, lose fifty per cent. of useful effect, besides
exposing to a head wind the cross section of the stationary screw wing
planes and the rotating screw discs; and supporting the dead weight of
the wing planes, and having all the screw slip in the line of flight,
and carrying slow and heavy engines.

That as a result of these conclusions, the supporting and propelling
power should be expressed in the rotation of screws combining both
functions, the position of whose planes of rotation to a fixed
horizontal line of direction determines the progress and speed of
machine upon other lines.

That the whole weight carried by the screws should be at all times
exactly below the center of gravity of the plane of support, whether
it be horizontal or inclined.

That while the _permanently_ positioned weight, such as the engines,
frame, holding screws, etc., may be rigidly connected to or around the
screw plane of support, the variable positioned weight, such as the
passenger and the car, should be connected by a _flexible joint_ to
the said plane of support.

Consequently, the car may oscillate without altering its weight
position under center of supporting plane, thus avoiding an
involuntary alteration of speed or direction of flight.

That to steer a machine so constructed, it is merely necessary to move
the point of attachment of car to _machine_ proper, out of the center
of plane of support in the desired direction, and thus cause the plane
of support or rotation of propellers to incline in that direction.

That the reservoir of power, the boiler, etc., should be placed in the
_car_, and steam carried to engines through joint connecting car with
machine.

That at present material exists, and power also, of sufficient
lightness and strength to admit of a machine construction capable of a
limited successful flight in any fair wind and direction.

That such _machine_ once built, the finding of a _power_ for long
flights will be easy, if not already close at hand in _electricity_.

That the _easiest_ design for such _actual machine_ should be adopted,
leaving the adaptation of the principles involved to the making of
more perfect machines, to a time after the success of the _first_.

That such design may be a propeller, and its engine at each end of a
steel frame tube, supporting tube horizontally, a car to be supported
by a universal joint from center of said tube, and the joint apparatus
movable along the tube or a short distance transverse to it, to alter
position of center of gravity.

That the machine so built might traverse the water as well as air.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE LONGHAIRED POINTER MYLORD.


Pointers are trained to search for game, and to indicate that they
have found the same by standing motionless in front of it, and, when
it has been shot, to carry the game to the huntsman. Several kinds of
pointers are known, such as smooth, longhaired, and bushyhaired
pointers. The smoothhaired pointers are better for hunting on high
land, whereas the longhaired or bushyhaired dogs are better for low,
marshy countries, crossed by numerous streams, etc. Mylord, the dog
represented in the annexed cut taken from the _Illustrirte Zeitung_,
is an excellent specimen of the longhaired pointer, and is owned by
Mr. G. Borcher, of Braunschweig, Germany.

[Illustration: THE LONGHAIRED POINTER, "MYLORD."]

The longhaired pointer is generally above the medium size, powerful,
somewhat longer than the normal dog, the body is narrower and not
quite as round as that of the smoothhaired dog, and the muscles of the
shoulders and hind legs are not as well developed and not as
prominent. The head and neck are erect, the head being specially long,
and the tail is almost horizontal to the middle, and then curves
upward slightly. The long hair hangs in wavy lines on both sides of
his body. The expression of his face is intelligent, bright, and
good-natured, and his step is light and almost noiseless.

The pointer is specially valuable, as it can be employed for many
different purposes; he is an excellent dog for the woods, for the
woodsman and hunter who uses only one dog for different kinds of game.
The intelligence of the German pointer is very great, but he does not
develop as rapidly as the English dog, which has been raised for
generations for one purpose only. The German pointer hunts very
slowly, but surely. It is not difficult to train this dog, but he
cannot be trained until he has reached a certain age.

       *       *       *       *       *




LUNAR HEAT.

By Professor C.A. YOUNG.


One of the most interesting inquiries relating to the moon is that
which deals with the heat she sends us, and the probable temperature
of her surface. The problem seems to have been first attacked by
Tschirnhausen and La Hire, about 1700; and they both found, that even
when the moon's rays were concentrated by the most powerful
burning-lenses and mirrors they could obtain, its heat was too small
to produce the slightest perceptible effect on the most delicate
thermometers then known. For more than a hundred years, this was all
that could be made out, though the experiment was often repeated.

It was not until 1831 that Melloni, with his newly-invented
"thermopile," [1] succeeded in making the lunar heat sensible; and in
1835, taking his apparatus to the top of Vesuvius, he obtained not
only perceptible, but measurable, results, getting a deviation of four
or five divisions of his galvanometer.

   [Footnote 1: Probably most of our readers know that the
   thermopile consists of a number of little bars of two different
   metals, connected in pairs, and having the ends joined in a
   conducting circuit with a galvanometer. If, now, one set of the
   junctures is heated more than the other set, a current of
   electricity will be generated, which will affect the
   galvanometer. The bars are usually made of bismuth and antimony
   though iron and German silver answer pretty well. They are
   commonly about half or three-quarters of an inch long, and about
   half as large as an ordinary match. The "pile" is made of from
   fifty to a hundred such bars packed closely, but insulated by
   thin strips of mica, except just at the soldered junctions. With
   an instrument of this kind and a very delicate galvanometer,
   Professor Henry found that the heat from a person's face could be
   perceived at a distance of several hundred feet. There is
   however, some doubt whether he was not mistaken in respect to
   this extreme sensitiveness.]

Others repeated the experiment several times between this time and
1856, with more or less success; but, so far as I know, the first
quantitative result was that obtained in 1856 by Piazzi Smyth during
his Teneriffe expedition. On the top of the mountain, at an elevation
of ten thousand feet, he found that the moon's rays affected his
thermopile to the same extent as a standard candle ten feet away.
Marie Davy has since shown that this corresponds to a heating effect
of about 1/1300 of a Centigrade degree.

The subject was resumed in 1868 by Lord Rosse in Ireland; and a long
series of observations, running through several years, was made by the
aid of his three-foot reflector (not the great _six_-foot instrument,
which is too unwieldy for such work). The results of his work have,
until very recently, been accepted as authoritative. It should be
mentioned that, at about the same time, observations were also made at
Paris by Marie Davy and Martin; but they are generally looked upon
merely as corroborative of Rosse's work, which was more elaborate and
extensive. Rosse considered that his results show that the heat from
the moon is mainly _obscure, radiated_ heat; the _reflected_ heat,
according to him, being much less in amount.

A moment's thought will show that the moon's heat must consist of two
portions. First, there will be _reflected solar heat_. The amount and
character of this will depend in no way upon the temperature of the
moon's surface, but solely upon its reflecting power. And it is to be
noted that moon-_light_ is only a part of this reflected radiant
energy, differing from the invisible portion of the same merely in
having such a wave-length and vibration period as to bring it within
the range of perception of the human eye.

The second portion of the heat sent us by the moon is that which she
emits on her own account as a warm body--warmed, of course, mainly, if
not entirely, by the action of the sun. The amount of _this_ heat will
depend upon the temperature of the moon's surface and its radiating
power; and the temperature will depend upon a number of things
(chiefly heat-absorbing power of the surface, and the nature and
density of the lunar atmosphere, as well as the supply of heat
received from the sun), being determined by a balance between give and
take. So long as more heat is received in a second than is thrown off
in the same time, the temperature will rise, and _vice versa_.

It is to be noted, further, that this second component of the moon's
thermal radiance must be mainly what is called "obscure" or dark heat,
like that from a stove or teakettle, and characterized by the same
want of penetrative power. No one knows why at present; but it is a fact
that the heat-radiations from bodies at a low temperature--radiations
of which the vibrations are relatively slow, and the wave-length
great--have no such power of penetrating transparent media as the
higher-pitched vibrations which come from incandescent bodies. A great
part, therefore, of this contingent of the lunar heat is probably
stopped in the upper air, and never reaches the surface of the earth
at all.

Now, the thermopile cannot, of course, discriminate directly between
the two portions of the lunar heat; but to some extent it does enable
us to do so indirectly, since they vary in quite a different way with
the moon's age. The simple _reflected_ heat must follow the same law
as moonlight, and come to its maximum at full moon. The _radiated_
heat, on the other hand, will reach its maximum when the average
temperature of that part of the moon's surface turned toward the earth
is highest; and this must be some time after full moon, for the same
sort of reasons that make the hottest part of a summer's day come two
or three hours after noon.

The conclusion early reached by Lord Rosse was that nearly all the
lunar heat belonged to the second category--dark heat _radiated_ from
the moon's warmed surface, the _reflected_ portion being comparatively
small--and he estimated that the temperature of the hottest parts of
the moon's surface must run as high as 500 deg. F.; well up toward the
boiling-point of mercury. Since the lunar day is a whole month long,
and there are never any clouds in the lunar sky, it is easy to imagine
that along toward two or three o'clock in the lunar afternoon (if I
may use the expression), the weather gets pretty hot; for when the sun
stands in the lunar sky as it does at Boston at two P.M., it has been
shining continuously for more than two hundred hours. On the other
hand, the coldest parts of the moon's surface, when the sun has only
just risen after a night of three hundred and forty hours, must have a
temperature more than a hundred degrees below zero.

Lord Rosse's later observations modified his conclusions, to some
extent, showing that he had at first underestimated the percentage of
simple reflected heat, but without causing him to make any radical
change in his ideas as to the maximum heat of the moon's surface.

For some time, however, there has been a growing skepticism among
astronomers, relating not so much to the correctness of his measures
as to the computations by which he inferred the high percentage of
obscure radiated beat compared with the reflected heat, and so deduced
the high temperature of lunar noon.

Professor Langley, who is now engaged in investigating the subject,
finds himself compelled to believe that the lunar surface never gets
even comfortably warm--because it has no blanket. It receives heat, it
is true, from the sun, and probably some twenty-five or thirty per
cent. more than the earth, since there are no clouds and no air to
absorb a large proportion of the incident rays; but, at the same time,
there is nothing to retain the heat, and prevent the radiation into
space as soon as the surface begins to warm. We have not yet the data
to determine exactly how much the temperature of the lunar rocks would
