can be mistaken for it when seen as a morning or evening star. Sometimes
both are seen together on the twilight sky, and then Venus is generally
the brighter. Seen, however, at her brightest and at her greatest
elongation from the sun, her splendour scarcely exceeds that with which
Jupiter shines when high above the southern horizon at midnight.

Jupiter's satellites may be seen with very low powers; indeed the outer
ones have been seen with the naked eye, and all are visible in a good
opera-glass. Their dimensions relatively to the disc are shown in Plate
7. Their greatest elongations are compared with the disc in the
low-power view.

Jupiter's belts may also be well seen with moderate telescopic power.
The outer parts of his disc are perceptibly less bright than the centre.

More difficult of observation are the transits of the satellites and of
their shadows. Still the attentive observer can see the shadows with an
aperture of two inches, and the satellites themselves with an aperture
of three inches.

The minute at which the satellites enter on the disc, or pass off, is
given in 'Dietrichsen's Almanac.' The 'Nautical Almanac' also gives the
corresponding data for the shadows.

The eclipses of the satellites in Jupiter's shadow, and their
occultations by his disc, are also given in 'Dietrichsen's Almanac.'

In the inverting telescope the satellites move from right to left in the
nearer parts of their orbit, and therefore transit Jupiter's disc in
that direction, and from left to right in the farther parts. Also note
that _before_ opposition, (i.) the shadows travel in front of the
satellites in transiting the disc; (ii.) the satellites are eclipsed in
Jupiter's _shadow_; (iii.) they reappear from behind his _disc_. On the
other hand, _after_ opposition, (i.) the shadows travel _behind_ the
satellites in transiting the disc; (ii.) the satellites are occulted by
the _disc_; (iii.) they reappear from eclipse in Jupiter's _shadow_.

Conjunctions of the satellites are common phenomena, and may be waited
for by the observer who sees the chance. An eclipse of one satellite by
the shadow of another is not a common phenomenon; in fact, I have never
heard of such an eclipse being seen. That a satellite should be quite
extinguished by another's shadow is a phenomenon not absolutely
impossible, but which cannot happen save at long intervals.

The shadows are not _black spots_ as is erroneously stated in nearly all
popular works on astronomy. The shadow of the fourth, for instance, is
nearly all penumbra, the really black part being quite minute by
comparison. The shadow of the third has a considerable penumbra, and
even that of the first is not wholly black. These penumbras may not be
perceptible, but they affect the appearance of the shadows. For
instance, the shadow of the fourth is perceptibly larger but less black
than that of the third, though the third is the larger satellite.

In transit the first satellite moves fastest, the fourth slowest, the
others in their order. The shadow moves just as fast (appreciably) as
the satellite it belongs to. Sometimes the shadow of the satellite may
be seen to overtake (apparently) the disc of another. In such a case the
shadow does not pass over the disc, but the disc conceals the shadow.
This is explained by the fact that the shadow, if visible throughout its
length, would be a line reaching slantwise from the satellite it belongs
to, and the end of the shadow (that is, the point where it meets the
disc) is _not_ the point where the shadow crosses the orbit of any inner
satellite. Thus the latter may be interposed between the end of the
shadow--the only part of the shadow really visible--and the eye; but the
end of the shadow _cannot_ be interposed between the satellite and the
eye. If a satellite _on the disc_ were eclipsed by another satellite,
the black spot thus formed would be in another place from the black spot
on the planet's body. I mention all this because, simple as the question
may seem, I have known careful observers to make mistakes on this
subject. A shadow is seen crossing the disc and overtaking, apparently,
a satellite in transit. It seems therefore, on a first view, that the
shadow will hide the satellite, and observers have even said that they
have _seen_ this happen. But they are deceived. It is obvious that _if
one satellite eclipse another, the shadows of both must occupy the same
point on Jupiter's body_. Thus it is the overtaking of one _shadow_ by
another on the disc, and not the overtaking of a _satellite_ by a
shadow, which determines the occurrence of that as yet unrecorded
phenomenon, the eclipse of one satellite by another.[13]

The satellites when far from Jupiter seem to lie in a straight line
through his centre. But as a matter of fact they do not in general lie
in an exact straight line. If their orbits could be seen as lines of
light, they would appear, in general, as very long ellipses. The orbit
of the fourth would frequently be seen to be _quite clear_ of Jupiter's
disc, and the orbit of the third might in some very exceptional
instances pass _just_ clear of the disc. The satellites move most nearly
in a straight line (apparently) when Jupiter comes to opposition in the
beginning of February or August, and they appear to depart most from
rectilinear motion when opposition occurs in the beginning of May and
November. At these epochs the fourth satellite may be seen to pass above
and below Jupiter's disc at a distance equal to about one-sixth of the
disc's radius.

The shadows do not travel in the same apparent paths as the satellites
themselves across the disc, but (in an inverting telescope) _below_ from
August to January, and _above_ from February to July.

We come now to the most charming telescopic object in the heavens--the
planet Saturn. Inferior only to Jupiter in mass and volume, this planet
surpasses him in the magnificence of his system. Seen in a telescope of
adequate power, Saturn is an object of surpassing loveliness. He must be
an unimaginative man who can see Saturn for the first time in such a
telescope, without a feeling of awe and amazement. If there is any
object in the heavens--I except not even the Sun--calculated to impress
one with a sense of the wisdom and omnipotence of the Creator it is
this. "His fashioning hand" is indeed visible throughout space, but in
Saturn's system it is most impressively manifest.

Saturn, to be satisfactorily seen, requires a much more powerful
telescope than Jupiter. A good 2-inch telescope will do much, however,
in exhibiting his rings and belts. I have never seen him satisfactorily
myself with such an aperture, but Mr. Grover has not only seen the
above-named features, but even a penumbra to the shadow on the rings
with a 2-inch telescope.

Saturn revolving round the sun in a long period--nearly thirty
years--presents slowly varying changes of appearance (see Plate 7). At
one time the edge of his ring is turned nearly towards the earth; seven
or eight years later his rings are as much open as they can ever be;
then they gradually close up during a corresponding interval; open out
again, exhibiting a different face; and finally close up as first seen.
The last epoch of greatest opening occurred in 1856, the next occurs in
1870: the last epoch of disappearance occurred in 1862-63, the next
occurs in 1879. The successive views obtained are as in Plate 7 in order
from right to left, then back to the right-hand figure (but sloped the
other way); inverting the page we have this figure thus sloped, and the
following changes are now indicated by the other figures in order back
to the first (but sloped the other way and still inverted), thus
returning to the right-hand figure as seen without inversion.

The division in the ring can be seen in a good 2-inch aperture in
favourable weather. The dark ring requires a good 4-inch and good
weather.

Saturn's satellites do not, like Jupiter's, form a system of nearly
equal bodies. Titan, the sixth, is probably larger than any of
Jupiter's satellites. The eighth also (Japetus) is a large body,
probably at least equal to Jupiter's third satellite. But Rhea, Dione,
and Tethys are much less conspicuous, and the other three cannot be seen
without more powerful telescopes than those we are here dealing with.

So far as my own experience goes, I consider that the five larger
satellites may be seen distinctly in good weather with a good 3-1/2-inch
aperture. I have never seen them with such an aperture, but I judge from
the distinctness with which these satellites may be seen with a 4-inch
aperture. Titan is generally to be looked for at a considerable distance
from Saturn--_always_ when the ring is widely open. Japetus is to be
looked for yet farther from the disc. In fact, when Saturn comes to
opposition in perihelion (in winter only this can happen) Japetus may be
as far from Saturn as one-third of the apparent diameter of the moon. I
believe that under these circumstances, or even under less favourable
circumstances, Japetus could be seen with a good opera-glass. So also
might Titan.

Transits, eclipses, and occulations of Saturn's satellites can only be
seen when the ring is turned nearly edgewise towards the earth. For the
orbits of the seven inner satellites lying nearly in the plane of the
rings would (if visible throughout their extent) then only appear as
straight lines, or as long ellipses cutting the planet's disc.

The belts on Saturn are not very conspicuous. A good 3-1/2-inch is
required (so far as my experience extends) to show them satisfactorily.

The rings when turned edgewise either towards the earth or sun, are not
visible in ordinary telescopes, neither can they be seen when the earth
and sun are on opposite sides of the rings. In powerful telescopes the
rings seem never entirely to disappear.

The shadow of the planet on the rings may be well seen with a good
2-inch telescope, which will also show Ball's division in the rings. The
shadow of the rings on the planet is a somewhat more difficult feature.
The shadow of the planet on the rings is best seen when the rings are
well open and the planet is in or near quadrature. It is to be looked
for to the left of the ball (in an inverting telescope) at quadrature
preceding opposition, and to the right at quadrature following
opposition. Saturn is more likely to be studied at the latter than at
the former quadrature, as in quadrature preceding opposition he is a
morning star. The shadow of the rings on the planet is best seen when
the rings are but moderately open, and Saturn is in or near quadrature.
When the shadow lies outside the rings it is best seen, as the dark ring
takes off from the sharpness of the contrast when the shadow lies within
the ring. It would take more space than I can spare here to show how it
is to be determined (independently) whether the shadow lies within or
without the ring. But the 'Nautical Almanac' gives the means of
determining this point. When, in the table for assigning the appearance
of the rings, _l_ is less than _l'_ the shadow lies outside the ring,
when _l_ is greater than _l'_ the shadow lies within the ring.

Uranus is just visible to the naked eye when he is in opposition, and
his place accurately known. But he presents no phenomena of interest. I
have seen him under powers which made his disc nearly equal to that of
the moon, yet could see nothing but a faint bluish disc.

Neptune also is easily found if his place be accurately noted on a map,
and a good finder used. We have only to turn the telescope to a few
stars seen in the finder nearly in the place marked in our map, and
presently we shall recognise the one we want by the peculiarity of its
light. What is the lowest power which will exhibit Neptune as a disc I
do not know, but I am certain no observer can mistake him for a fixed
star with a 2-inch aperture and a few minutes' patient scrutiny in
favourable weather.

[Illustration: PLATE VII.]




CHAPTER VII.

HALF-HOURS WITH THE SUN AND MOON.


The moon perhaps is the easiest of all objects of telescopic
observation. A very moderate telescope will show her most striking
features, while each increase of power is repaid by a view of new
details. Yet in one sense the moon is a disappointing object even to the
possessor of a first-class instrument. For the most careful and
persistent scrutiny, carried on for a long series of years, too often
fails to reward the observer by any new discoveries of interest. Our
observer must therefore rather be prepared to enjoy the observation of
recognised features than expect to add by his labours to our knowledge
of the earth's nearest neighbour.

Although the moon is a pleasing and surprising telescopic object when
full, the most interesting views of her features are obtained at other
seasons. If we follow the moon as she waxes or wanes, we see the true
nature of that rough and bleak mountain scenery, which when the moon is
full is partially softened through the want of sharp contrasts of light
and shadow. If we watch, even for half an hour only, the changing form
of the ragged line separating light from darkness on the moon's disc, we
cannot fail to be interested. "The outlying and isolated peak of some
great mountain-chain becomes gradually larger, and is finally merged in
the general luminous surface; great circular spaces, enclosed with rough
and rocky walls many miles in diameter, become apparent; some with flat
and perfectly smooth floors, variegated with streaks; others in which
the flat floor is dotted with numerous pits or covered with broken
fragments of rock. Occasionally a regularly-formed and unusually
symmetrical circular formation makes its appearance; the exterior
surface of the wall bristling with terraces rising gradually from the
plain, the interior one much more steep, and instead of a flat floor,
the inner space is concave or cup-shaped, with a solitary peak rising in
the centre. Solitary peaks rise from the level plains and cast their
long narrow shadows athwart the smooth surface. Vast plains of a dusky
tint become visible, not perfectly level, but covered with ripples,
pits, and projections. Circular wells, which have no surrounding wall
dip below the plain, and are met with even in the interior of the
circular mountains and on the tops of their walls. From some of the
mountains great streams of a brilliant white radiate in all directions
and can be traced for hundreds of miles. We see, again, great fissures,
almost perfectly straight and of great length, although very narrow,
which appear like the cracks in moist clayey soil when dried by the
sun."[14]

But interesting as these views may be, it was not for such discoveries
as these that astronomers examined the surface of the moon. The
examination of mere peculiarities of physical condition is, after all,
but barren labour, if it lead to no discovery of physical variation. The
principal charm of astronomy, as indeed of all observational science,
lies in the study of change--of progress, development, and decay, and
specially of systematic variations taking place in regularly-recurring
cycles. And it is in this relation that the moon has been so
disappointing an object of astronomical observation. For two centuries
and a half her face has been scanned with the closest possible scrutiny;
her features have been portrayed in elaborate maps; many an astronomer
has given a large portion of his life to the work of examining craters,
plains, mountains, and valleys, for the signs of change; but until
lately no certain evidence--or rather, no evidence save of the most
doubtful character--has been afforded that the moon is other than "a
dead and useless waste of extinct volcanoes." Whether the examination of
the remarkable spot called Linne--where lately signs were supposed to
have been seen of a process of volcanic eruption--will prove an
exception to this rule, remains to be seen. The evidence seems to me
strongly to favour the supposition of a change of some sort having taken
place in this neighbourhood.

The sort of scrutiny required for the discovery of changes, or for the
determination of their extent, is far too close and laborious to be
attractive to the general observer. Yet the kind of observation which
avails best for the purpose is perhaps also the most interesting which he
can apply to the lunar details. The peculiarities presented by a spot upon
the moon are to be observed from hour to hour (or from day to day,
according to the size of the spot) as the sun's light gradually sweeps
across it, until the spot is fully lighted; then as the moon wanes and the
sun's light gradually passes from the spot, the series of observations is
to be renewed. A comparison of them is likely--especially if the observer
is a good artist and has executed several faithful delineations of the
region under observation, to throw much light upon the real contour of the
moon's surface at this point.

In the two lunar views in Plate 7 some of the peculiarities I have
described are illustrated. But the patient observer will easily be able
to construct for himself a set of interesting views of different
regions.

It may be noticed that for observation of the waning moon there is no
occasion to wait for those hours in which only the waning moon is
visible _during the night_. Of course for the observation of a
particular region under a particular illumination, the observer has no
choice as to hour. But for generally interesting observations of the
waning moon he can wait till morning and observe by daylight. The moon
is, of course, very easily found by the unaided eye (in the day time)
when not very near to the sun; and the methods described in Chapter V.
will enable the observer to find the moon when she is so near to the sun
as to present the narrowest possible sickle of light.

One of the most interesting features of the moon, when she is observed
with a good telescope, is the variety of colour presented by different
parts of her surface. We see regions of the purest white--regions which
one would be apt to speak of as _snow-covered_, if one could conceive
the possibility that snow should have fallen where (now, at least) there
is neither air nor water. Then there are the so-called seas, large grey
or neutral-tinted regions, differing from the former not merely in
colour and in tone, but in the photographic quality of the light they
reflect towards the earth. Some of the seas exhibit a greenish tint, as
the Sea of Serenity and the Sea of Humours. Where there is a central
mountain within a circular depression, the surrounding plain is
generally of a bluish steel-grey colour. There is a region called the
Marsh of Sleep, which exhibits a pale red tint, a colour seen also near
the Hyrcinian mountains, within a circumvallation called Lichtenburg.
The brightest portion of the whole lunar disc is Aristarchus, the peaks
of which shine often like stars, when the mountain is within the
unillumined portion of the moon. The darkest regions are Grimaldi and
Endymion and the great plain called Plato by modern astronomers--but, by
Hevelius, the Greater Black Lake.

The Sun.--Observation of the sun is perhaps on the whole the most
interesting work to which the possessor of a moderately good telescope
can apply his instrument. Those wonderful varieties in the appearance of
the solar surface which have so long perplexed astronomers, not only
supply in themselves interesting subjects of observation and
examination, but gain an enhanced meaning from the consideration that
they speak meaningly to us of the structure of an orb which is the
source of light and heat enjoyed by a series of dependent worlds whereof
our earth is--in size at least--a comparatively insignificant member.
Swayed by the attraction of this giant globe, Jupiter and Saturn, Uranus
and Neptune, as well as the four minor planets, and the host of
asteroids, sweep continuously in their appointed orbits, in ever new but
ever safe and orderly relations amongst each other. If the sun's light
and heat were lost, all life and work among the denizens of these orbs
would at once cease; if his attractive energy were destroyed, these orbs
would cease to form a _system_.

The sun may be observed conveniently in many ways, some more suited to
the general observer who has not time or opportunity for systematic
observation; others more instructive, though involving more of
preparation and arrangement.

The simplest method of observing the sun is to use the telescope in the
ordinary manner, protecting the eye by means of dark-green or
neutral-tinted glasses. Some of the most interesting views I have ever
obtained of the sun, have resulted from the use of the ordinary
terrestrial or erecting eye-piece, capped with a dark glass. The
magnifying power of such an eye-piece is, in general, much lower than
that available with astronomical eye-pieces. But vision is very pleasant
and distinct when the sun is thus observed, and a patient scrutiny
reveals almost every feature which the highest astronomical power
applicable could exhibit. Then, owing to the greater number of
intervening lenses, there is not the same necessity for great darkness
or thickness in the coloured glass, so that the colours of the solar
features are seen much more satisfactorily than when astronomical
eye-pieces are employed.

In using astronomical eye-pieces it is convenient to have a rotating
wheel attached, by which darkening glasses of different power may be
brought into use as the varying illumination may require.

Those who wish to observe carefully and closely a minute portion of the
solar disc, should employ Dawes' eye-piece: in this a metallic screen
placed in the focus keeps away all light but such as passes through a
minute hole in the diaphragm.

Another convenient method of diminishing the light is to use a glass
prism, light being partially reflected from one of the exterior
surfaces, while the refracted portion is thrown out at another.

Very beautiful and interesting views may be obtained by using such a
pyramidal box as is depicted in fig. 11.

[Illustration: _Fig. 11._]

This box should be made of black cloth or calico fastened over a light
framework of wire or cane. The base of the pyramid should be covered on
the inside with a sheet of white glazed paper, or with some other
