in pigeons by armfuls, and other men were skinning them. There was
no time to pluck them, though a great many of the women were busily
engaged in that occupation.

As fast as the birds could be cooked they were served out to the
impatient but much cheered castaways, and in a little while nearly
every person in the place was walking casually about the halls
with a roasted, broiled, or fried pigeon in his hands. The ovens
were roasting pigeons, the frying-pans were frying them, and the
broilers were loaded down with the small but tender birds.

The unexpected solution of the most pressing question cheered
every one amazingly. Many people were still frightened, but less
frightened than before. Worry for their families still oppressed
a great many, but the removal of the fear of immediate hunger led
them to believe that the other problems before them would be solved,
too, and in as satisfactory a manner.

Arthur had returned to his office with four broiled pigeons in
a sheet of wrapping-paper. As he somehow expected, Estelle was
waiting there.

"Thought I'd bring lunch up," he announced. "Are you hungry?"

"Starving!" Estelle replied, and laughed.

The whole catastrophe began to become an adventure. She bit eagerly
into a bird. Arthur began as hungrily on another. For some time
neither spoke a word. At last, however, Arthur waved the leg of
his second pigeon toward his desk.

"Look what we've got here!" he said.

Estelle nodded. The stunned pigeon Arthur had first picked up was
tied by one foot to a paper-weight.

"I thought we might keep him for a souvenir," she suggested.

"You seem pretty confident we'll get back, all right," Arthur
observed. "It was surely lucky those blessed birds came along.
They've heartened up the people wonderfully!"

"Oh, I knew you'd manage somehow!" said Estelle confidently.

"I manage?" Arthur repeated, smiling. "What have I done?"

"Why, you've done everything," affirmed Estelle stoutly. "You've
told the people what to do from the very first, and you're going
to get us back."

Arthur grinned, then suddenly his face grew a little more serious.

"I wish I were as sure as you are," he said. "I think we'll be all
right, though, sooner or later."

"I'm sure of it," Estelle declared with conviction. "Why, you--"

"Why I?" asked Arthur again. He bent forward in his chair and fixed
his eyes on Estelle's. She looked up, met his gaze, and stammered.

"You--you do things," she finished lamely.

"I'm tempted to do something now," Arthur said. "Look here, Miss
Woodward, you've been in my employ for three or four months. In all
that time I've never had anything but the most impersonal comments
from you. Why the sudden change?"

The twinkle in his eyes robbed his words of any impertinence.

"Why, I really--I really suppose I never noticed you before,"
said Estelle.

"Please notice me hereafter," said Arthur. "I have been noticing
you. I've been doing practically nothing else."

Estelle flushed again. She tried to meet Arthur's eyes and
failed. She bit desperately into her pigeon drumstick, trying to
think of something to say.

"When we get back," went on Arthur meditatively, "I'll have nothing
to do--no work or anything. I'll be broke and out of a job."

Estelle shook her head emphatically. Arthur paid no attention.

"Estelle," he said, smiling, "would you like to be out of a job
with me?"

Estelle turned crimson.

"I'm not very successful," Arthur went on soberly. "I'm afraid I
wouldn't make a very good husband, I'm rather worthless and lazy!"

"You aren't," broke in Estelle; "you're--you're--"

Arthur reached over and took her by the shoulders.

"What?" he demanded.

She would not look at him, but she did not draw away. He held her
from him for a moment.

"What am I?" he demanded again. Somehow he found himself kissing
the tips of her ears. Her face was buried against his shoulder.

"What am I?" he repeated sternly.

Her voice was muffled by his coat.

"You're--you're dear!" she said.

There was an interlude of about a minute and a half, then she pushed
him away from her.

"Don't!" she said breathlessly. "Please don't!"

"Aren't you going to marry me?" he demanded.

Still crimson, she nodded shyly. He kissed her again.

"Please don't!" she protested.

She fondled the lapels of his coat, quite content to have his arms
about her.

"Why mayn't I kiss you if you're going to marry me?" Arthur demanded.

She looked up at him with an air of demure primness.

"You--you've been eating pigeon," she told him in mock gravity,
"and--and your mouth is greasy!"




XII.


It was two weeks later. Estelle looked out over the now familiar
wild landscape. It was much the same when she looked far away,
but near by there were great changes.

A cleared trail led through the woods to the waterfront, and a
raft of logs extended out into the river for hundreds of feet.
Both sides of the raft were lined with busy fishermen--men and
women, too. A little to the north of the base of the building a
huge mound of earth smoked sullenly. The coal in the cellar had
given out and charcoal had been found to be the best substitute
they could improvise. The mound was where the charcoal was made.

It was heart-breaking work to keep the fires going with charcoal,
because it burned so rapidly in the powerful draft of the furnaces,
but the original fire-room gang had been recruited to several
times its original number from among the towerites, and the work
was divided until it did not seem hard.

As Estelle looked down two tiny figures sauntered across the clearing
from the woods with a heavy animal slung between them. One of them
was using a gun as a walking-stick. Estelle saw the flash of the
sun on its polished metal barrel.

There were a number of Indians in the clearing, watching with
wide-open eyes the activities of the whites. Dozens of birch-bark
canoes dotted the Hudson, each with its load of fishermen,
industriously working for the white people. It had been hard to
overcome the fear in the Indians, and they still paid superstitious
reverence to the whites, but fair dealings, coupled with a constant
readiness to defend themselves, had enabled Arthur to institute a
system of trading for food that had so far proved satisfactory.

The whites had found spare electric-light bulbs valuable currency in
dealing with the redmen. Picture-wire, too, was highly prized. There
was not a picture left hanging in any of the offices. Metal
paper-knives bought huge quantities of provisions from the eager
Indian traders, and the story was current in the tower that Arthur
had received eight canoe-loads of corn and vegetables in exchange
for a broken-down typewriter. No one could guess what the savages
wanted with the typewriter, but they had carted it away triumphantly.

Estelle smiled tenderly to herself as she remembered how Arthur had
been the leading spirit in all the numberless enterprises in which
the castaways had been forced to engage. He would come to her in a
spare ten minutes, and tell her how everything was going. He seemed
curiously boylike in those moments.

Sometimes he would come straight from the fire-room--he insisted on
taking part in all the more arduous duties--having hastily cleaned
himself for her inspection, snatch a hurried kiss, and then go
off, laughing, to help chop down trees for the long fishing-raft.
He had told them how to make charcoal, had taken a leading part in
establishing and maintaining friendly relations with the Indians,
and was now down in the deepest sub-basement, working with a gang
of volunteers to try to put the building back where it belonged.

Estelle had said, after the collapse of the flooring in
the board-room, that she heard a sound like the rushing of
waters. Arthur, on examining the floor where the safe-deposit vault
stood, found it had risen an inch. On these facts he had built up
his theory. The building, like all modern sky-scrapers, rested on
concrete piles extending down to bedrock. In the center of one of
those piles there was a hollow tube originally intended to serve
as an artesian well. The flow had been insufficient and the well
had been stopped up.

Arthur, of course, as an engineer, had studied the construction of
the building with great care, and happened to remember that this
partly hollow pile was the one nearest the safe-deposit vault. The
collapse of the board-room floor had suggested that some change
had happened in the building itself, and that was found when he
saw that the deposit-vault had actually risen an inch.

He at once connected the rise in the flooring above the hollow
pile with the pipe in the pile. Estelle had heard liquid sounds.
Evidently water had been forced into the hollow artesian pipe under
an unthinkable pressure when the catastrophe occurred.

From the rumbling and the suddenness of the whole catastrophe
a volcanic or seismic disturbance was evident. The connection of
volcanic or seismic action with a flow of water suggested a geyser or
a hot spring of some sort, probably a spring which had broken through
its normal confines some time before, but whose pressure had been
sufficient to prevent the accident until the failure of its flow.

When the flow ceased the building sank rapidly. For the fact
that this "sinking" was in the fourth direction--the Fourth
Dimension--Arthur had no explanation. He simply knew that in some
mysterious way an outlet for the pressure had developed in that
fashion, and that the tower had followed the spring in its fall
through time.

The sole apparent change in the building had occurred above the
one hollow concrete pile, which seemed to indicate that if access
were to be had to the mysterious, and so far only assumed spring,
it must be through that pile. While the vault retained its abnormal
elevation, Arthur believed that there was still water at an immense
and incalculable pressure in the pipe. He dared not attempt to tap
the pipe until the pressure had abated.

At the end of a week he found the vault slowly settling back into
place. When its return to the normal was complete he dared begin
boring a hole to reach the hollow tube in the concrete pile.

As he suspected, he found water in the pile--water whose sulfurous
and mineral nature confirmed his belief that a geyser reaching deep
into the bosom of the earth, as well as far back in the realms of
time, was at the bottom of the extraordinary jaunt of the tower.

Geysers were still far from satisfactory things to explain. There
are many of their vagaries which we cannot understand at all.
We do know a few things which affect them, and one thing is that
"soaping" them will stimulate their flow in an extraordinary manner.

Arthur proposed to "soap" this mysterious geyser when the renewal
of its flow should lift the runaway sky-scraper back to the epoch
from which the failure of the flow had caused it to fall.

He made his preparations with great care. He confidently expected
his plan to work, and to see the sky-scraper once more towering
over mid-town New York as was its wont, but he did not allow the
