with growing violence. Drummer, unable to maintain
balance, slipped to his knees. Scarf jerked upward,
raising Drummer on unsteady feet. Ramming his
face close, he cursed in a loud, coarse monotone,
swinging Drummer in one direction, then another.
Unable to disengage, Drummer was confused. His
cloak tore, his hair fluttered about his face, and
specks of spittle flew from his lips.

Brad and Hodak watched the action from where
they sat. Scarf's sudden outburst was of more
than passing interest. He had called his victim
"Drummer," a name familiar to Brad through the
many intelligence briefings he had been given during
indoctrination; also, "Scarf" was a name used in
the immigration clerk's call from the landing site.

Other than military, who and what was Scarf, and
why was he tormenting Drummer? More important,
could this bar-room brawl be exploited to the
Sentinels' advantage? They desperately needed
contacts within Narval's regime. Their mission did
not allow the luxury of time. An opportunity had
just fallen into his lap. Brad leaned toward Hodak.

"The bruiser," he said. "Take him down, but easy."

Hodak shot a quick glance at Brad, rose and
shambled between the tables until he was behind
the sledgehammer.

Tapping Scarf on the shoulder, he said quietly,
"Hey, c'mon, let the old geezer alone. He was just
minding his..."

Scarf reacted with incredible speed for his size.
Shoving Drummer away, he whirled, arm extended.
Powered by the force of his pivot, the edge of his
rigid hand aimed directly at Hodak's throat.

Hodak stepped back and to the side, gripped Scarf's
thick wrist in his muscle-corded hands. Using his
attacker's momentum, Hodak twisted and bent.
The Major's huge body catapulted through the air
and crashed on to a table and its several chairs,
sending the occupants spinning.

A hand appeared from nowhere and pulled Scarf's
pistol from its holster. In seconds, Brad was back
at his table. The bar-room went deathly silent.

Scarf bounded up, spitting saliva, floor dust and
curses. He reached for his weapon and gaped when
he felt emptiness.

Recovering, hunched forward, he charged Hodak,
murder in his eyes.

Freed, Drummer stepped back to the wall, shaken,
not understanding what was happening. He searched
for a safe place.

Focusing on the struggle he recognized Hodak as one
of the escaped prisoners he had been speculating
about. Taking a chance, he moved toward the table
from where Brad watched the action and the crowd.

Hodak, waiting for Scarf's charge, stood balanced
until the last fraction of a second, then stepped
aside. Scarf passed like a juggernaut and smashed
into the bar.

Leaning heavily over the bar, breathing in
convulsive gasps, Scarf turned his head to glare at
Hodak. Running his hand down his thigh he felt again
for his weapon. Eyes narrowed to slits, he searched
along the filth-strewn floor. Scanning, his eyes
passed the table where Brad sat, stopped, and
snapped back.

The weapon, distinctive by its red and black grip,
lay there. He saw Brad watching, and Drummer
nearby, back to the wall.

Scarf lunged at Hodak, arms grappling. Hodak danced
back and away. As Scarf passed, Hodak grasped his
wrist and elbow, twisted, and curved Scarf's arm
back and up between his shoulder blades.

Hodak was gentle. With his free hand he probed
and manipulated nerve centers in Scarf's neck and
shoulders. Scarf dropped to his knees, then slipped
back on to his rump, legs spread, arms slack, face
perplexed. It was enough.

He sat there, shaking his head to clear it. Looking
up, he saw Hodak standing a short distance away,
and beyond, a ring of faces, several grinning, others
frightened and wary. Shifting his eyes to where his
weapon lay, Scarf glared at Brad and Drummer.

The silence was broken by the shuffle of Scarf
groping upright, using a nearby table for support.
He lurched to the bar and leaned over it for
several seconds. Straightening, he grasped his
helmet with one hand, wrapped the other around
the flagon of Firehouse Red, and stalked out of
the Charnel Pit.





 Chapter ELEVEN


The bar-room's heavy vapors seemed to cease
their dreary ballet. An uneasy cackle, strident and
jarring, erupted from a corner, accompanied by
the flat slap of a hard hand against the bar's rough
counter. The tension dissolved into a ripple of
raucous laughter. The hubbub resumed, and quickly
returned to its former level.

Myra, followed by Zolan, Adari and Kumiko, entered
the bar-room, spotted Brad and Hodak, and moved
toward them, snatching empty stools along the way.
Placing the stools, they encircled the table.

Their eyes took in Scarf's heavy-duty red-black
weapon, and then Brad and Hodak, elbows on table,
scanning the crowd. They saw Drummer nearby
and noted his disheveled appearance.

They rose silently, rearranged their seats, and
sat again, backs against the wall. Kumiko fixed her
eyes on the entryway; Adari scanned in the opposite
direction, taking in the bar. Zolan and Myra joined
Brad and Hodak to observe the roisterers resume
their bar-room habits.

Drummer still showed his embarrassment,
apprehension and rage. His eyes darted from
the doorway to Hodak to Brad. Brad turned his
head slightly to take him in, then pointed to an
overturned stool nearby.

"Pull up and sit a while."

"You in charge?" Drummer asked.

"No," Brad said, "we're each on our own. Just
socializing."

He motioned at the stool again.

"C'mon, join us."

Drummer looked closely at Brad, then at the others
who ignored him. Brad's expression was bland,
neutral.

Drummer felt certain that Scarf would return soon
with reinforcements. He had to get out, fast, and
he needed an escort to safety. Beyond that, he
wanted to know why the squat powerhouse, now
sitting calmly at the table, had intervened. He
must have realized that his interference had been
made at great personal risk.

Drummer righted the stool and stared intently at
Hodak as he sat. Hodak, sensing Drummer's scrutiny,
glanced sideways at him, winked straight-faced, and
returned to observe the crowd.

Drummer finally turned to Brad, convinced he was
the leader of this pack.

"We'd better get out of here, now," he said,
his tone urgent. "Scarf'll be back as soon as he
collects a few of his goons."

"What was it about?" Brad asked.

"No time for talk," Drummer replied, gesturing
his impatience. "We've got to get away from here,
and I mean right now."

"Sure, but who is that guy?"

"Major Scarf, Chief of Internal Security for
President Narval. He has his own troops, and I
don't doubt that he's lining them up right now."
Drummer's fingertips tapped the table in nervous
staccato. "Let's get out of here. Now."

Brad stood, and the others rose with him. "Lead
the way," he motioned Drummer toward the
doorway. "We're not familiar with the territory."

"Leave that to me," said Drummer.

Brad hefted Scarf's weapon, slipped it into 'safe'
and, passing the bar, handed it to the bartender
with a nod that was returned with a respectful wave.





 Chapter TWELVE


Mixing with the street people, Drummer in sight up
ahead, they moved swiftly. Adari trailed Drummer;
Brad next followed by Myra and Kumiko. Zolan and
Hodak brought up the rear. Drummer successfully
resisted the temptation to look back.

Zolan tensed, activating the mind-mike in his
armpit. Brad acknowledged by stepping up his pace.
He passed Adari and drew alongside Drummer.

"Your buddy, Scarf, must have had a friend in the
bar," he said. "We're being tailed."

"Another hundred meters. Cut into the alley on the
left."

Drummer responded. "It'll take us through a
maze that still confounds the street people. We'll
have a better chance in there to lose whoever is
following."

A corner loomed. They squeezed into a narrow,
rubble-strewn passageway between high, rough
walls. Stumbling along the barely lighted shaft
they entered an alley, equally shabby, crowded with
street people, refuse, and abandoned machinery.

They sped along the alley, noting its darkened,
fuser-formed doorways, some empty, others
clogged with trash. Inside, they saw the shadowy
outlines of men, huddled women and children.

Drummer twisted from one alley into the next,
and then another.

He ducked through a gap in one wall, squeezed along
a narrow hallway and exited into an open space. They
packed up close, running and stumbling.

Drummer slowed next to a wall of composite blocks.
Several were missing, leaving a space through
which they squirmed. It was tighter than they had
experienced. In near darkness, they had reached
a dead end.

Ahead was loose rubble forming a heap about two
meters high. Drummer clawed his way around the
side. He motioned the others forward and slipped
out of sight.

Following one behind the other, they saw an opening
in the surface. Responding to Drummer's beckoning,
they dropped into its darkness. The fall was less
than a couple of meters. A light glowed from a wall
to just enough to illuminate Drummer.

They were in a small, roughly rounded chamber.
The walls were fused rubble, irregular and jagged.
The floor was a mixture of Plutonian detritus.

Drummer knelt beside a rock that protruded from
the wall. He twisted the rock, pulled, and pushed
it sideways. Reaching into the vacated space, he
placed his palm on a flat, smooth disk.

A low hum from the wall. A fissure formed where
the wall met the trash-laden floor. The breach
lengthened and curved, its ends meeting the wall.
The section dropped away into darkness.

"Move, move," Drummer snarled his impatience.
"Scarf has this entire sector blocked out by now.
He'll throw his gangs into the alleys and cover
every square meter. These subsurface crawl spaces
and links are our only way. Feel for the ladder."

He lowered himself through the opening and vanished.

Brad was committed. His glance ordered the others
to follow Drummer. Hodak passed his light to Brad
and dropped through first, then Zolan followed
Myra, Adari and Kumiko. Brad dropped through
and pushed the cover up until it snapped. Closed.
He felt vibrations above him, then, after several
seconds, silence.

"Must be spreading the dust of our tracks and the
outline of the cover," Zolan murmured, looking up
from immediately below.

The ladder was rickety, and the shaft narrow and
long. When Brad reached bottom, he was in a low
gallery, about two meters square, hacked out of the
rock. They were in the hub of a dozen passageways
that led off in as many directions from low entries.

Drummer bent and disappeared through one of
the entries. One after the other, they followed.

The entry led into a utility service tunnel, the
walls lined with scores of braided cables and banks
of wall switches and junctions. Neutro-lighted
sconces glowed at intervals, providing dim
direction to their flight.

Scuttling in single file and dodging cables slung
between supporting columns, they covered distance
swiftly. Brad moved up behind Drummer, replacing
Hodak who dropped back to rear guard immediately
behind Zolan.

"Scarf knows about these utility passages, and that
we would head for them," Drummer gasped over his
shoulder. "What he doesn't know is which access and
branches we took and where we'll surface. A slight
advantage, if we act quickly."

They scampered and slithered for more than half
an hour. "Looks like we're the only ones down here,"
said Brad.

Drummer halted to recover breath. The line closed
up.

"Normal," Drummer gasped. "These passages were
abandoned years ago, after we switched to local
transmission from control modules suspended
beneath the dome. Too much trouble to collapse
the subsurface tunnels, I suppose. Also, we had
to consider the surface effects of a collapse.
Couldn't afford the chance. As you see, the
network is still useful."

He shot a quick glance at Brad, then ahead along
their route.

"Don't get the impression I've got to run from
Scarf," Drummer said, heaving another deep breath,
"or even to avoid him under ordinary circumstances.
Obviously, he was drunk. My presence in the bar-room
gave him an opportunity to enhance his image.
Your companion's intervention, I admit, relieved
the pressure, but the method he chose may prove
unfortunate."

"Why this melodramatic escape?"

"To avoid a confrontation in which Scarf, backed
up by his troops, would be in complete control; a
confrontation in which you couldn't possibly hold
your own. The encounter has already caused
me embarrassment. I don't relish a repetition."
Drummer paused. "And there's another reason."

"Oh?"

"I know who you are, and the circumstances that
brought you and your associates to Planet Pluto.
I want to know more."

"Why?"

"My answer to that depends on what I learn about
you and your companions."

Drummer slowed to a fast walk, searching spaces
between the bundles of the thick cables.

"So that you know," he said, "we're heading for my
villa-dome about five kay from the city."

Drummer grunted that he'd found what he had
searched for. Clawing under a flap, he uncovered
a depression in the wall alongside a cable junction.
He pressed himself in behind the junction and
into a cranny, motioning to Brad. One by one, they
squeezed through, and found themselves at the foot
of a flex-ladder. Drummer climbed; they followed.

They emerged through a manhole into a kiosk next
to a transit strip. Darting from the kiosk Drummer
boarded the strip and nodded back to Brad to join
him. Within moments they were all gliding toward
an air lock leading to the outside.

Entering the air lock, they hurried into space
suits from the public service rack, checked each
other's seals and oxygen reserves, tested the
communications and pressurization systems and
crowded into the pressure-equalization chamber. Air
lock and suit pressures up, balanced and checked,
Drummer jerked a lever and, a moment later, they
ducked under the rising panel to the outside.

Running along the ramp Drummer flashed his suit
lamps at a parked robo-taxi. The signal activated
the craft and it was in ready status when they
reached it. Boarding first, Drummer keyed in
coordinates. As the last Sentinel scrambled through
the hatch he hit the lift button. The taxi rose and
curved away.





 Chapter THIRTEEN


The black skies and drab mounds of Planet Pluto
were spotted with color. From where he stood on
Drummer's enclosed patio, Brad looked through
the transparent shields at ice-gray Charon low
over scarred ridges to the west. Shifting his
eyes slightly brought into focus the panorama of
Coldfield's dome and its multi-colored lights. The
orange-green cylinder of the Slingshot Logistics
Depot gleamed in the black sky.

The Fandango force field around the depot
shimmered. A wide gap separated the transports
loading and unloading at the portals inside the
force field from those outside waiting in line
or in clustered formations until moorings inside
became available.

The short taxi ride from Coldfield had been
uneventful. The formalities of introductions behind
them, the host and his guests had refreshed
themselves, dined and rested.

Drummer joined Brad and followed his gaze to the
orange-green cylinder and its gaggle of transports
and tugs. The silence was brief.

Drummer said, "I've had your ship searched."

Brad shrugged, eyes scanning the scene outside, and
replied dryly, "Hope it was worth your while. To us,
it was transportation. Any old tub would have done.
As it turned out, we were lucky."

"I'll accept that it's an 'old tub'. I gathered as
