
"It was too late to change my mind then," Dal said desperately. "We'd
sent for you. We knew that it would be only a matter of hours before you
arrived."

"Indeed," the Black Doctor said. "Unfortunately, it takes only seconds
for a patient to cross the line between life and death, not hours. And I
suppose you would have stood there quietly and allowed him to expire if
we had not arrived at the time we did?"

Dal shook his head miserably. There was nothing he could answer to that,
and he realized it. What could he say? That the situation seemed quite
different now than it had under pressure in the Moruan operating room?
That he would have been blamed just as much if he had gone ahead, and
then lost the case? His fingers stole down to Fuzzy's soft warm body for
comfort, and he felt the little creature cling closer to his side.

The Black Doctor looked up at the others. "Well? What do the rest of you
have to say?"

Jack Alvarez shrugged his shoulders. "I'm not a surgeon," he said, "but
even I could see that _something_ should be done without delay."

"And what does the Green Doctor think?"

Tiger shrugged. "We misjudged the situation, that's all. It came out
fortunately for the patient, why make all this fuss about it?"

"Because there are other things at stake than just medical
considerations," the Black Doctor shot back. "This planet has a grade I
contract with Hospital Earth. We guarantee them full medical coverage of
all situations and promise them immediate response to any call for
medical help that they may send us. It is the most favorable kind of
contract we have; when Morua VIII calls for help they expect their call
to be answered by expert medical attention, not by inept bungling."

The Black Doctor leafed through the folder in his hands. "We have built
our reputation in the Galactic Confederation on this kind of contract,
and our admission to full membership in the Confederation will
ultimately depend upon how we fulfill our promises. Poor medical
judgment cannot be condoned under any circumstances--but above all, we
cannot afford to jeopardize a contract."

Dal stared at him. "I--I had no intention of jeopardizing a contract,"
he faltered.

"Perhaps not," the Black Doctor said. "But you were the doctor on the
spot, and you were so obviously incompetent to handle the situation that
even these clumsy Moruan surgeons could see it. Their faith in the
doctors from Hospital Earth has been severely shaken. They are even
talking of letting their contract lapse at the end of this term."

Tiger Martin jumped to his feet. "Doctor Tanner, even Four-star Surgeons
lose patients sometimes. These people should be glad that the doctor
they call has sense enough to call for help if he needs it."

"But no help was needed," the Black Doctor said angrily. "Any
half-decent surgeon would have handled the case. If the Moruans see a
patrol ship bring in one incompetent doctor, what are they going to
expect the next time they have need for help? How can they feel sure
that their medical needs are well taken care of?" He shook his head
grimly. "This is the sort of responsibility that doctors on the patrol
ships are expected to assume. If you call for help where there is need
for help, no one will ever complain; but when you turn and run the
moment things get tough, you are not fit for patrol ship service."

The Black Doctor turned to Dal Timgar. "You had ample warning," he said.
"It was clearly understood that your assignment on this ship depended
upon the fulfillment of the duties of Red Doctor here, and now at the
first real test you turn and run instead of doing your job. All right.
You had your opportunity. You can't complain that we haven't given you a
chance. According to the conduct code of the General Practice Patrol,
section XIV, paragraph 2, any physician in the patrol on probationary
status who is found delinquent in executing his duties may be relieved
of his assignment at the order of any Black Doctor, or any other
physician of four-star rank." Doctor Tanner closed the folder with a
snap of finality. "It seems to me that the case is clear. Dal Timgar, on
the authority of the Code, I am now relieving you of duty--"

"Just a minute," Tiger Martin burst out.

The Black Doctor looked up at him. "Well?"

"This is ridiculous," Tiger said. "Why are you picking on _him_? Or do
you mean that you're relieving all three of us?"

"Of course I'm not relieving all three of you," the Black Doctor
snapped. "You and Dr. Alvarez will remain on duty and conduct the ship's
program without a Red Doctor until a man is sent to replace this
bungler. That also is provided for in the code."

"But I understood that we were operating as a diagnostic and therapeutic
team," Tiger protested. "And I seem to remember something in the code
about fixing responsibility before a man can be relieved."

"There's no question where the responsibility lies," the Black Doctor
said, his face darkening. "This was a surgical problem, and Dal Timgar
made the decisions. I don't see anything to argue."

"There's plenty to argue," Tiger said. "Dal, don't you see what he's
trying to do?"

Across the room Dal shook his head wearily. "You'd better keep out of
it, Tiger," he said.

"Why should I keep out of it and let you be drummed out of the patrol
for something that wasn't even your fault?" Tiger said. He turned
angrily to the Black Doctor. "Dal wasn't the one that wanted the
hospital ship called," he said. "I was. If you're going to relieve
somebody, you'd better make it me."

The Black Doctor pulled off his glasses and glared at Tiger. "Whatever
are you talking about?" he said.

"Just what I said. We had a conference after he'd examined the patient
in the operating room, and I insisted that we call the hospital ship.
Why, Dal--Dal wanted to go ahead and try to finish the case right then,
and I wouldn't let him," Tiger blundered on. "I didn't think the patient
could take it. I thought that it would be too great a risk with the
facilities we had here."

Dal was staring at Tiger, and he felt Fuzzy suddenly shivering violently
in his pocket. "Tiger, don't be foolish--"

The Black Doctor slammed the file down on the table again. "Is this
true, what he's saying?" he asked Dal.

"No, not a word of it," Dal said. "I wanted to call the hospital ship."

"Of course he won't admit it," Tiger said angrily. "He's afraid you'll
kick me out too, but it's true just the same in spite of what he says."

"And what do _you_ say?" the Black Doctor said, turning to Jack Alvarez.

"I say it's carrying this big brother act too far," Jack said. "I didn't
notice any conferences going on."

"You were back at the ship getting the surgical pack," Tiger said. "You
didn't know anything about it. You didn't hear us talking, and we didn't
see any reason to consult you about it."

The Black Doctor stared from Dal to Tiger, his face growing angrier by
the minute. He jerked to his feet, and stalked back and forth across the
control room, glaring at them. Then he took a capsule from his pocket,
gulped it down with some water, and sat back down. "I ought to throw
you both out on your ears," he snarled. "But I am forced to control
myself. I mustn't allow myself to get angry--" He crashed his fist down
on the control panel. "I suppose that you would swear to this statement
of yours if it came to that?" he asked Tiger.

Tiger nodded and swallowed hard. "Yes, sir, I certainly would."

"All right," the Black Doctor said tightly. "Then you win this one. The
code says that two opinions can properly decide any course of action. If
you insist that two of you agreed on this decision, then I am forced to
support you officially. I will make a report of the incident to patrol
headquarters, and it will go on the permanent records of all three of
this ship's crew--including my personal opinion of the decision." He
looked up at Dal. "But be very careful, my young friend. Next time you
may not have a technicality to back you up, and I'll be watching for the
first plausible excuse to break you, and your Green Doctor friend as
well. One misstep, and you're through. And I assure you that is not just
an idle threat. I mean every word of it."

And trembling with rage, the Black Doctor picked up the folder, wrapped
his cape around him, and marched out of the control room.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Well, you put on a great show," Jack Alvarez said later as they
prepared the ship for launching from the snow-swept landing field on
Morua VIII. An hour before the ground had trembled as the Black Doctor's
ship took off with Dr. Tanner and the Four-star Surgeon aboard; now Jack
broke the dark silence in the _Lancet_'s control room for the first
time. "A really great show. You missed your calling, Tiger. You should
have been on the stage. If you think you fooled Dr. Tanner with that
story for half a second, you're crazy, but I guess you got what you
wanted. You kept your pal's cuff and collar for him, and you put a black
mark on all of our records, including mine. I hope you're satisfied."

Tiger Martin took off his earphones and set them carefully on the
control panel. "You know," he said to Jack, "you're lucky."

"Really?"

"You're lucky I don't wipe that sneer off your face and scrub the walls
with it. And you'd better not crowd your luck, because all I need right
now is an invitation." He stood up, towering over the dark-haired Blue
Doctor. "You bet I'm satisfied. And if you got a black mark along with
the rest of us, you earned it all the way."

"That still doesn't make it right," Dal said from across the room.

"You just keep out of this for a minute," Tiger said. "Jack has got to
get a couple of things straight, and this is the time for it right now."

Dal shook his head. "I can't keep out of it," he said. "You got me off
the hook by shifting the blame, but you put yourself in trouble doing
it. Dr. Tanner could just as well have thrown us both out of the service
as not."

Tiger snorted. "On what grounds? For a petty little error like this? He
wouldn't dare! You ought to read the log books of some of the other GPP
ships some time and see the kind of bloopers they pull without even a
reprimand. Don't worry, he was mad enough to throw us both out if he
thought he could make it stick, but he knew he couldn't. He knew the
council would just review the case and reverse his decision."

"It was still my error, not yours," Dal protested. "I should have gone
ahead and finished the case on the spot. I knew it at the time, and I
just didn't quite dare."

"So you made a mistake," Tiger said. "You'll make a dozen more before
you get your Star, and if none of them amount to any more than this one,
you can be very happy." He scowled at Jack. "It's only thanks to our
friend here that the Black Doctor heard about this at all. A hospital
ship would have come to take the patient aboard, and the local doctors
would have been quieted down and that would have been all there was to
it. This business about losing a contract is a lot of nonsense."

"Then you think this thing was just used as an excuse to get at me?"

"Ask him," Tiger said, looking at Jack again. "Ask him why a Black
Doctor and a Four-star Surgeon turned up when we just called for a
hospital ship."

"I called the hospital ship," Jack said sullenly.

"But you called Dr. Tanner too," said Tiger. "Your nose has been out of
joint ever since Dal came aboard this ship. You've made things as
miserable for him as you could, and you just couldn't wait for a chance
to come along to try to scuttle him."

"All right," Jack said, "but he was making a mistake. Anybody could see
that. What if the patient had died while he was standing around waiting?
Isn't that important?"

Tiger started to answer, and then threw up his hands in disgust. "It's
important--but something else is more important. We've got a job to do
on this ship, and we can't do it fighting each other. Dal misjudged a
case and got in trouble. Fine, he won't make that mistake again. It
could just as well have been you, or me. We'll all make mistakes, but if
we can't work as a team, we're sunk. We'll all be drummed out of the
patrol before a year is out." Tiger stopped to catch his breath, his
face flushed with anger. "Well, I'm fed up with this back-stabbing
business. I don't want a fight any more than Dal does, but if I have to
fight, I'll fight to get it over with, and you'd better be careful. If
you pull any more sly ones, you'd better include me in the deal, because
if Dal goes, I go too. And that's a promise."

There was silence for a moment as Jack stared up at Tiger's angry face.
He shook his head and blinked, as though he couldn't quite believe what
he was hearing. He looked across at Dal, and then back at Tiger again.
"You mean you'd turn in your collar and cuff?" he said.

"If it came to that."

"I see." Jack sat down at the control panel, still shaking his head. "I
think you really mean it," he said soberly. "This isn't just a big
brother act. You really like the guy, don't you?"

"Maybe I do," Tiger said, "but I don't like to watch anybody get kicked
around just because somebody else doesn't happen to like him."

The control room was very quiet. Then somewhere below a motor clicked
on, and the ventilation fan made a quiet whirring sound. The teletype
clicked sporadically down the corridor in the communications room. Dal
sat silently, rubbing Fuzzy between the eyes and watching the two
Earthmen. It seemed suddenly as if they were talking about somebody a
million miles away, as if he were not even in the room.

Then the Blue Doctor shrugged and rose to his feet. "All right," he said
to Tiger. "I guess I just didn't understand where you stood, and I
suppose it wasn't my job to let the Black Doctor know about the
situation here. I don't plan to be making all the mistakes you think
we're going to make, and I won't take the blame for anybody else's, but
I guess we've got to work together in the tight spots." He gave Dal a
lop-sided grin. "Welcome aboard," he said. "We'd better get this crate
airborne before the people here come and cart it away."

They moved then, and the subject was dropped. Half an hour later the
_Lancet_ lifted through the atmospheric pull of the Moruan planet and
moved on toward the next contact point, leaving the recovering patient
in the hands of the native physicians. It was not until hours later that
Dal noticed that Fuzzy had stopped quivering, and was resting happily
and securely on his shoulder even when the Blue Doctor was near.




CHAPTER 7

ALARUMS AND EXCURSIONS


Once more the crew of the _Lancet_ settled down to routine, and the
incident on Morua VIII seemed almost forgotten.

But a change had come about in the relations between the three doctors,
and in every way the change was for the better. If Jack Alvarez was not
exactly cordial to Dal Timgar, at least he had dropped the open
antagonism that he had shown before. Apparently Tiger's angry outburst
had startled Jack, as though he had never really considered that the big
Earthman might honestly be attached to his friend from Garv II, and the
Blue Doctor seemed sincere in his agreement to work with Dal and Tiger
as a team.

But bit by bit Dal could sense that the change in Jack's attitude went
deeper than the surface. "You know, I really think he was _scared_ of
me," Dal said one night when he and Tiger were alone. "Sounds silly, but
I think it's true. He pretends to be so sure of himself, but I think
he's as worried about doing things wrong as we are, and just won't admit
it. And he really thought I was a threat when I came aboard."
