"Slick!" exclaimed Connel. "I just bawled him out for wearing a dirty
uniform."

"He's responsible for our success," asserted Arnold. "And what's more,
those receivers can be taken apart and reassembled again in less than
ten minutes."

"Incredible," gasped Connel. "I've got to see those things right away.
Come along, Corbett."

Tom followed the major out of the office and back to the jet car. They
were about to drive off to the opposite end of the field when they heard
someone shout to them. Tom stopped the speedy little car and Connel
turned around to see who had called them.

Carter Devers rushed up and greeted the Solar Guard officer
enthusiastically. "Major, this is a surprise."

"Hello, Carter. What are you doing here?" Connel asked bluntly.

"Had some business here on Mars," said Devers. "I've finished and I'm
on my way back to Earth. You wouldn't, by any chance, be going back
soon, would you? I saw the Solar Guard cruiser come in and one of the
attendants told me that they were preparing it for immediate
blast-off--"

"Of course, Carter," Connel said briskly. "Get in. We're just going over
to inspect the receivers and then we'll be heading back."

Devers jumped into the jet car and Tom headed across the broad expanse
of the spaceport.

Connel turned to Devers and said enthusiastically, "Can you imagine,
Devers? Some young officer here at Marsport has worked out a way to
assemble and transport the receivers in a fantastically small amount of
time."

"That's amazing," said Devers. "I'd like very much to see them." He
looked at Tom and said, "Incidentally, who is your young friend?"

"Oh, sorry," replied Connel. "This is Cadet Corbett of the _Polaris_
unit. No doubt you've heard of them. He and his unit mates manage to get
into more trouble than all the monkeys in the Venusian jungle."

Carter laughed. "I've known Lou Connel long enough to know that when he
says something like that about you, son, he thinks very highly of you."

"Thank you, sir," replied Tom, not knowing what else to say.

While Connel and Devers talked of the problems surrounding the
projectile operation, Tom concentrated on his driving. He was following
directions given him by Jim Arnold to reach the testing grounds and this
made it necessary for Tom to drive right through the center of the
spaceport, weaving in and out of the dozens of spaceships parked on the
concrete ramps.

Tom swept past them, driving expertly, heading toward a group of
concrete blockhouses enclosed by a fence which he knew would be the
testing area. Beside the fence, a short, stubby-nosed spaceship was
loading cargo, and beneath the vessel, two huge jet trucks were backing
into position. Tom steered the car up to the gate and stopped at the
signal of an armed guard. Connel, Devers, and Tom stepped out of the car
and waited for a minute, and then young Lieutenant Slick appeared,
wearing a clean uniform.

Slick checked their names off against a list he carried and then drew
Connel to one side. "I'm sorry, sir," he said, just out of Tom and
Dever's hearing, "I can't allow the cadet inside this area."

"Why not?" asked Connel. "I'll vouch for him."

"I'm sorry, sir," said Slick. "Those are my orders. I can let you and
Mr. Devers in, but not Cadet Corbett." He showed Connel a list of names:
Connel, Strong, Hemmingwell, Walters, Devers, and Barret. They were the
only names on it.

Connel nodded. "I understand," he said and turned to Tom. "You'll have
to stay here, Corbett," he called. "Wait for me in the car."

"Yes, sir," replied Tom and hopped back in the jet.

He backed out through the gate, pulling up alongside the fence near the
stubby-nosed freighter. When Connel and Devers, escorted by Slick, had
disappeared behind a blockhouse inside the restricted area, Tom
casually walked over to watch the loading operation of the spaceship. A
few of the workers stopped when he walked up, and recognizing his cadet
uniform, greeted him warmly.

"Space Cadet, eh?" said one of the men. "Sure wish I could get my boy in
the Academy."

"Me too," said another man. "All I hear from morning until night is
Space Academy--Space Academy."

Tom smiled his appreciation of their admiration. While he answered their
questions about the training school of the Solar Guard, they continued
working. After a while the conversation turned to the restricted area
behind the fence.

"Some pretty important work going on in there," said one of the men.
"But how come they wouldn't let you go in?"

"I haven't been cleared by security," replied Tom. "It's top secret."

"Secret," said a man who had just joined the group. Tom had noticed him
before, climbing out of one of the huge jet trucks parked near the gate.
"Why, there ain't nothing secret about what's going on in there," he
continued.

"Why do you say that?" asked Tom alertly.

"Why, we all know about it, Cadet," said one of the first men Tom had
spoken to. "They're building receivers for cargo projectiles."

Tom gulped in surprise. "But how did you know?" he asked.

"Why, it's the only thing we've been talking about down at the garage
and at Sloppy Sam's, the jet-truckers hangout," replied the trucker.
"If this thing works, surface transportation will be finished."

"That's right," asserted another worker. "The whole industry will be
wiped out overnight. Nobody will have anything trucked any more.
Cargo'll be loaded into a projectile and shot off into space to a
passing freighter. Then the freighter carries it to its destination and
shoots it back down to a receiver."

"But how could you know all this?" asked Tom. "It is one of the Solar
Guard's most closely guarded secrets."

"It's all over Mars," declared the truck driver with a derisive laugh.
"Why, everybody knows it."

Suddenly one of the men yelled and pointed toward the fence. The jet
truck parked near the gate was rolling forward slowly. As Tom and the
men watched in horror, the giant vehicle crashed through the fence and
rolled into the restricted area, picking up speed.

In a flash Tom was inside the jet car, driving right through the hole in
the fence and speeding after the huge machine. Around him, guards were
running after the truck, shouting frantic warnings. Far ahead of him,
Tom saw Major Connel and Devers standing near several receivers lined up
outside a blockhouse. The truck was rolling straight toward them.
Hearing the shouts of alarm, the two men turned and saw their danger.
Devers immediately jumped into the safety of the blockhouse, but Connel
stumbled and fell heavily. Tom's blood ran cold. He saw that the major
had struck his head against one of the receivers and he lay on the
ground, dazed and unable to move.

Tom jammed the accelerator of the tiny jet car to the floor and shot
ahead like a rocket. He was alongside the truck now, but the distance
between the huge machine and Connel was narrowing rapidly. Tom clenched
his teeth and urged the little car on faster. He knew that there was not
enough time for him to jump into the truck and pull the brake. There
was only one thing he could do.

Regaining his senses, Connel tried to crawl to safety, but there was no
time. He braced himself for what he knew would be instant death, and
then to his amazement he saw Tom's jet car swerve sharply in front of
the runaway truck.

[Illustration: _Tom swerved the jet car in front of the runaway truck_]

There was a wrenching crash of metal, a shrill scream of skidding tires,
climaxed by a thunderous roar. After that, deathly silence.

For a second Connel stood frozen in horror, staring at the overturned
truck and the tangle of twisted metal that was the jet car. Then he
lunged forward with a frantic cry.

"Corbett! Corbett!"

[Illustration]




CHAPTER 8


"Tom! Tom!"

Connel knelt beside the limp form of the Space Cadet, calling
frantically, praying that the boy would be miraculously unhurt, yet
fearing the worst. A few moments later Tom groaned and opened his eyes.

"Did I--did I stop the truck?" he asked weakly.

"You sure did, son!" said Connel, breathing a sigh of relief. "And thank
the lucky spaceman's stars that you're all right. I don't see how you
got out alive."

Tom sat up. "I jumped from the jet car at the last minute," he said. "I
guess I must have bumped my head." He looked down at his torn uniform.
"Wow," he said. "Look at me."

"Don't worry about it." Connel laughed. He turned to Lieutenant Slick
who had just rushed up.

"Lieutenant, I want a complete check on the men who were standing
outside the fence when that truck ran away."

"Yes, sir." The young lieutenant patted Tom on the shoulder. "Good
work, Cadet," he said and started away.

Tom grinned his thanks at the young officer and struggled to his feet.
"Sir," he said to Connel, "I think I should explain something about that
truck."

"The truck!" cried Connel. He turned and called, "Lieutenant, come back
here." The young officer turned back. "Go ahead, Tom," said Connel.

While Tom told his story of the truck having been parked near the gate,
and having started to roll by itself, Connel and Slick listened
intently. Quietly Devers joined them. Finally, when Tom had finished,
Connel rubbed his chin thoughtfully and stared at the truck which was
being examined by a swarm of guards.

A few moments later the sergeant in command reported to Connel that they
had found a worn clutch plate that could have slipped and caused the
truck to roll of its own accord, especially if the motor was turning
over.

Connel nodded and then ordered, "Get the driver over here."

The man that had spoken to Tom about the secret project came forward
under guard. He was thoroughly frightened and Connel was aware of it.
"Relax, friend," he said. "I just want to ask you one question."

"Yes, sir," gulped the truck driver.

"Was there anything wrong with your truck?" demanded Connel.

"Yes, sir," replied the driver. "I had a slipping clutch."

Connel turned abruptly to Lieutenant Slick. "All right, Slick, release
this man and get that fence back up. I'm satisfied that it was an
accident."

"Yes, sir," replied Slick, and left the group with the grateful driver.

Connel relaxed for the first time and turned to Carter Devers who had
been standing by silently. "Well, Carter," he said, "see what I meant
about the _Polaris_ unit getting into trouble! Blast it, if they don't
start it, they sure can finish it." He turned to Tom. "Son, you deserve
some time off. Go back to the Spacelanes Hotel in Marsport and get
yourself a room. Just forget everything and relax. And get a new
uniform, too."

"And send the bill to me," Devers suddenly spoke up. "It's the least I
can do."

"Thank you, sir," said Tom. "I could sure use a little sleep."

Hitching a ride on a jet sled, Tom rode over to the administration
building where he managed to clean up enough to make himself presentable
at the hotel. Later, as he rode along the curving canal in a jet cab
into the main section of Marsport, he relaxed for the first time and
enjoyed the sights.

The city of Marsport was built in a hurry--at least, the old section of
the city was. Like many other planets, when first colonized by the early
great conquerors of space several hundred years before, the city grew
out of immediate need, with no formalized plan.

Years later, when the Solar Alliance was formed and there was uniform
government all over the solar system, the citizens of Mars began to
regard their ugly little capital with distaste. A major effort was made
to clean up its squalid appearance and huge cargoes of Titan crystal
were shipped to Mars for modern construction. Now, as Tom Corbett rode
in comfort along a speedway bordering one of the ancient canals, he
approached the city with a vague feeling of awe. Gleaming towers,
reflecting the last rays of the setting sun, loomed just ahead of him,
and the wavy lines of heat rising out of the sandy deserts seemed to
make the buildings dance. It was a sunset ballet that never failed to
thrill even the oldest Martian citizen.

At the magnificent Spacelanes Hotel, Tom was greeted with the greatest
respect. Already his feat of stopping the runaway truck had been
announced over the stereo newscasts, and when he asked the location of
the nearest supply store to buy a uniform, one was immediately brought
to his room by the manager.

"But how did you know?" asked Tom, astounded.

The manager showed Tom a photograph of himself in his ragged clothes,
taken while he was talking to Connel. In the background was the remains
of the jet car.

"Major Connel called and said you would be staying here," said the
manager. "From the looks of you in this picture, we knew you would need
a new uniform."

"And you've got my size!" exclaimed Tom, holding up the gleaming new
blouse.

"We called the Academy." The manager smiled. "We wanted to be sure.
Incidentally, there is a message for you." The manager handed Tom a
typed space-o-gram and left. The cadet ripped it open and smiled as he
read:

     TRYING TO HOG ALL THE STEREO SPACE YOU CAN WHILE YOU LEAVE THE REAL
     COMPETITION AT HOME, YOU RAT! CONGRATULATIONS!

     ASTRO AND ROGER

Laughing to himself, Tom left the message on the desk, stripped off his
torn, dirty clothes, and stepped into a hot, refreshing shower. Half an
hour later he was digging into a thick steak with French fried potatoes.

After a third helping of dessert, the cadet stretched out on the bed and
closed his eyes. But sleep would not come. The incidents at the
spaceport that afternoon kept flashing through his mind. He tossed
restlessly, something he couldn't quite remember was tugging at the back
of his mind.

He retraced the events of the day, beginning with the landing of the
_Polaris_ and ending with the crash of the jet truck.

Suddenly he sat up straight. Then quickly he jumped out of bed,
hurriedly threw on the new uniform, and rammed his feet into the soft
space boots.

Ten minutes later, having used the service elevator to avoid the lobby,
he stood on the corner of Lowell Lane and Builker Avenue. He hailed a
passing jet cab, and climbing in, asked the driver, "Do you know a
restaurant or a bar called Sloppy Sam's?"

"Sure," said the driver. "That where you want to go?"

"As fast as this wagon will get me there," replied Tom.

"Why?" asked the driver strangely. "You look like a nice kid. That
joint's for--for--well, it ain't for a Space Cadet," he concluded
lamely.

"The first thing they teach us at the Academy, buddy," said Tom
impatiently, "is how to take care of ourselves, and the second thing is
to mind our own business."

"Right," said the driver, tight-lipped. He slammed the car into motion
and the force hurled Tom back in his seat.
