making them wait for nearly three hours, Vidac finally received them.

"Well, what now?" demanded Vidac.

"We would like to ask a question, sir," said Tom.

"Speak up!" snorted Vidac impatiently.

"It's about Sergeant Marshall, sir," said Tom.

"What about him?"

"We would like to know, sir, under what article of the space code was
Sergeant Marshall sentenced to the brig?"

Vidac's eyes sharpened. He spoke quickly and crisply. "I suspected that
there was some connection between Marshall looking in the log and your
coming here to see me. I don't know what you have in mind, Corbett, but
I'm going to lay it on the line. This is the last time you will question
my authority. From this moment on, and until you are released from my
jurisdiction, _I_ am the space code. Do I make myself clear?"

"Very clear, sir," said Tom tightly. "Then will the lieutenant governor
please put in writing any further orders he might have for us?"

"I will not!" snarled Vidac. "But I tell you what I will do. I'll
confine you to your quarters for ten days for that impertinent request!
And if I so much as see your noses outside your quarters, I'll really
get tough! Dismissed!"

[Illustration]




CHAPTER 8


"This is highly irregular, Logan," said Vidac to the Venusian farmer,
"but I guess you can see the cadets. Perhaps a little advice from you
will help them mend their ways."

Logan nodded. "I have a boy of my own, Governor," he said, "and I know
how rambunctious they can get."

Vidac smiled thinly. "You'll find them in their quarters. The first
ladder to your right and down two decks."

"Thank you, sir," replied Logan. He left Vidac's quarters and two
minutes later stepped through the hatch leading into the cadet's room.
After seven days of confinement, the three boys greeted Logan with a
yell of pure joy.

"We have guests!" bellowed Astro, grabbing Roger who was asleep in his
bunk and then banging on the shower door where Tom was taking a shower.

Roger tumbled out of the bunk and Tom came rushing out of the shower
wrapped in a towel. They all began talking at once.

"How'd you know we were confined to quarters, sir?" asked Tom.

"It's a wonder Vidac allowed you to come see us!" yelled Roger.

"Never mind the questions, sir," said Astro. "It's just plain good to
see a different face besides these two space jokers. One more game of
space chess with Manning and I think I'd--"

Logan laughed at the cadets' enthusiasm, holding up both hands to stem
their eager babbling questions. After Tom had dressed hastily and Roger
had cleared off a bunk, they began to talk calmly.

"I didn't know you boys were in trouble," said Logan, "until I came over
to the _Polaris_ to see you. Then Vidac told me all about it."

"Was there any special reason why you wanted to see us, sir?" asked Tom.

"Well, as a matter of fact, there was a little reason. Billy, my son,
has been pestering me to get some of your Academy books and audioscripts
so he can study to become a Space Cadet when he gets old enough."

The three cadets grinned at each other and soon the Venusian farmer was
piled high with manuals, audioscripts, tapes, and general information
about the Academy.

"Thank you, boys," said Logan. "That's real nice of you, but--"

"But what, sir?" asked Tom.

"That was the little reason for coming to see you. I have a big reason
too."

"What's that, sir?" asked Roger.

"I don't know how to say it exactly," began Logan, his voice low and
hesitant, "but do you remember when you three came over to inspect
Number Twelve?"

The boys all nodded and Logan continued in a hushed voice.

"Well, I told you then that everything was as nice as it could be. At
that time it was. But now--"

"What's happened, sir?" asked Tom.

"What hasn't happened you mean!" snorted Logan. "The very next day we
had a visit from Vidac himself. He made a routine check of all the
departments, stopped and talked to some of the colonists, and he seemed,
in general, like a nice fellow. Then all of a sudden it started."

"What?" asked Astro.

"Our skipper Winters and another fellow, Ed Bush, began treating us
like--well, like prisoners!"

"Prisoners!" cried Tom.

"Yes!" said Logan. "They began to tell us when we couldn't go to the
workshop and to the stereos, and made us eat our meals together in the
main assembly room, with the wives taking turns doing all the cooking.
And the schooling has been cut altogether."

"Why, why--" Tom was floored by the information. "But how can that be?"

"I don't know," said Logan, "but that's the way it is. I came over to
tell you boys about it, since you were the only ones I knew. You struck
me as being honest and I felt I could trust you."

"What else have Winters and Bush done?" asked Astro tensely.

"I guess the worst of all is the fact that we're having to pay for
everything we eat," said Logan.

"Pay!" exclaimed Roger. "But, but--how can you? You don't have any
credits. The Solar Council decided to let the colony work on a barter
basis--share and share alike--until it could take its place in the
over-all economy of the Solar Alliance."

"I know, I know," said Logan resignedly. "We're having to pay for the
things we get by signing over a percentage of our future profit over the
next seven years."

The three cadets looked at each other in disbelief. The idea of two men
openly violating the laws of the expedition, treating the Solar
Alliance citizens as if they were prisoners, was overwhelming.

Tom got up and began to pace the deck. Finally he turned and faced
Logan. "Have you said anything to Vidac about this?" he asked.

"Ummmpf!" snorted Logan. "Every one of us signed a petition and had it
sent to the governor himself. We didn't even get a reply. Vidac must
have heard about it and told Winters and Bush to take it easy, because
the next day we were allowed to eat again without having to sign over
part of our profit to them. But everything else is the same."

"But how could they force you to pay?" asked Roger. "Couldn't you
refuse?"

"Sonny," declared Logan emphatically, "I'm brave as the next man. But
you don't argue against a paralo-ray gun, especially when there are
women and children to worry about."

Tom whirled around and faced Roger and Astro. "I guess we don't need any
more proof now," he said coldly. "Jeff Marshall is thrown into the brig
for looking into a logbook; we're relieved of our jobs here on the
_Polaris_; my monthly report to Captain Strong isn't sent to Space
Academy, and now this. One of two things is happening. Either Governor
Hardy is in on this with Vidac, or Vidac is taking over without Hardy
knowing anything about it."

"All right--all right," growled Astro, "but what are we going to do
about it?"

"We've got to get word to Space Academy or Captain Strong someway,
somehow. We've got to let them know what's going on."

"There's only one way to do that," said Roger. "But with the
communications controlled by Vidac's men, we don't have the chance of a
snowball on the sunny side of Mercury!"

"Then," announced Tom firmly, "we'll have to build our own
communications unit."

"But how?" asked Logan.

"Roger here can make a communicator out of spit and bailing wire," said
Astro. "All he needs is the essential parts."

"Look," said Tom tensely, "Jeff Marshall will be getting out of the brig
when we do. He'll be working with Professor Sykes, along with us. Why
can't we build one on the sly in the observatory?"

Roger thought a moment. "It's the only thing we can do. I just hope that
Mr. Logan's coming here hasn't aroused suspicion."

"Don't worry about that," said Logan. "I told Vidac I wanted this
information about Space Academy for Billy. That seemed to satisfy him."

"I don't know," mused Tom. "He's pretty smart."

"What else can we do?" asked Astro.

"Nothing," said Tom bitterly. "Not a space-blasting thing until we get
out of here!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"We've _got_ to have that triple vacuum tube," declared Roger. "That's
the only thing that will transmit a voice quickly back to Earth from
this fix out in space."

The three boys and Jeff Marshall were back in their quarters after their
first week of active duty again. They had surreptitiously begun
collecting parts for the communicator and were sorting them out on one
of the bunks when Roger mentioned the necessity for the special vacuum
tube.

"How quickly?" asked Astro.

Tom explained. "The equipment we have now is strong enough to talk to
the Academy, but it'll take about six hours for my voice to reach it.
And then another six hours for the Academy's answer to get back to us.
At the end of twelve hours we might not be ready to receive and the
communications officer might pick up their answer. Then we'd be in the
middle of a space hurricane!"

"I see," said Astro. "You've got to be able to talk directly to the
Academy, so that when they answer, you'll be ready!"

"Right," said Tom. "We might only get ten or fifteen minutes of free
time, when the professor would be away from the observatory."

"Where do you think I could get one of those tubes, besides on the radar
bridge, Roger?" asked Jeff. He had been the main source of supply for
the equipment used in the communicator. Since getting out of the brig,
his movements had not been as restricted as the cadets'.

"That's just it," said Roger. "I remember distinctly loading all of them
in the locker near the main scanner on the radar deck."

"Then we have to get it from another ship," said Tom. "The chances of
getting one here, aboard the _Polaris_, are zero."

"Say, Roger," suddenly asked Astro, "do you think you remember enough
about that triple vacuum tube to draw me a blueprint?"

"Sure," said Roger. "And you could probably build it too. But how are
you going to get the inside tube vacuumized, then the second one, and
finally the third. They have to be absolutely clean!"

"How about outside in space?" Astro suggested. "We could take the parts
of the tube with us and assemble it out there. You can't ask for a
better vacuum than outer space."

Tom grinned and slapped the big Venusian on the back. "Astro, you're the
hero of the day. Come on, Roger, start drawing that tube! Astro can make
it on the power deck as if he were repairing something. Make it as
simple as possible."

"Right," said Roger, "all I need is the vacuum and of course the copper
filament inside the inner third tube for sending and receiving. We can
make it so the tubes screw together inside of each other and then seal
them."

"Right," said Astro.

"Meantime," said Tom, "Jeff and I will get you a set of earphones, if we
have to tear them off the head of the radarman!"

Meanwhile, in Vidac's quarters, the second-in-command was facing the
irascible Professor Sykes.

"Say that again, Professor," said Vidac. Sykes was standing before him
holding a slip of paper in his hand.

"I said," the professor snorted, "that in forty-eight hours and some odd
minutes we will be passing through a very thick cluster of asteroids,
about ten thousand miles in depth."

"Is it on our present course?" asked Vidac.

"Yes," replied Sykes. "We'll have to go around it. I wouldn't give you a
plugged credit for our chances of getting through it."

"I didn't ask you for your opinion!" snapped Vidac. "All right, you've
given me your information. Now get out!"

Sykes abruptly turned and left the lieutenant governor's compartment.
Alone, Vidac paced the floor. After a moment of deep thought he snapped
his fingers in decision and turned on the ship's intercom.

"Corbett! Manning! Astro!" he bellowed. "Report to the control deck on
the double."

A few moments later the three cadets stood before Vidac at rigid,
stone-faced attention. Vidac turned on the chart projection screen and
pointed to their position in space.

"Professor Sykes has just warned me that the fleet is approaching a
freakish asteroid cluster," he announced. "He estimates it to be of this
size." Vidac swept his arm over the chart, taking in most of the space
directly in front of their path. "To go around it, over it, or under it
would mean altering the course of the whole fleet and losing about six
days' transit time." He turned back to the cadets who had been watching
closely. "I want you three to see if you can find a route through the
belt and save us the detour time." He glanced at his wrist chronograph.
"The belt is about forty-one hours ahead of us now. Take a rocket scout,
look it over, and report back to me."

"Yes, sir," said Tom. "Anything else, sir?"

"Yes," said Vidac. He stepped closer to the three boys. "This is not a
joy ride. I expect you to find a way through that cluster. You have
enough time to explore the greater part of it."

"But you said forty-one hours, sir," retorted Tom.

"That's plenty of time if you travel at full space speed."

"Full thrust!" exploded Roger. "In an unknown asteroid cluster? Why, the
odds are better than a thousand to one that we'll be ripped open by a
space rock. The best we can do is one-quarter space speed."

"You'll open those jets wide or you'll spend the rest of the trip to
Roald in the brig and I'll send a report back to the Academy on your
cowardice!" Vidac paused, then added quietly, "Do I make myself clear?"

"Yes, sir," said Tom, tight-lipped. "You make yourself perfectly
clear!"




CHAPTER 9


"Do you think it will be safe there?" asked Roger, as he watched Tom and
Astro push the half-completed communications set under a workbench
behind several large cartons.

"As safe as any place," replied Tom. "If Vidac has any idea we're
building it, we could hide it any place and he'd find it. So, as the
saying goes, the least hidden is the best hidden. We'll have to take a
chance."

"Besides," chimed in Astro, "here in the storeroom, Jeff will have his
eye on it all the time. If Vidac starts getting nosy, Jeff will be able
to shift it to another hiding place without too much trouble."

"Well, that's all we can do now," said Tom, straightening up. "Come on.
Let's get to the scout ship and blast off before Vidac wants to know
what we're doing."

Checking the hiding place one last time, the three cadets left the
storeroom and headed for the jet-boat deck. In a few moments they were
blasting through space toward the rear of the fleet where a rocket scout
was waiting for them. The scouts were being carried by the larger space
freighters to save fuel. Now one had been fueled and was blasting
alongside its carrier ship with a skeleton crew. When the cadets' jet
boat came alongside, the crew of the scout transferred into the jet boat
and the three cadets took over the scout.

On the control deck, Tom checked his instruments and made preliminary
tests on the circuits. Suddenly Roger's voice crackled over the ship's
intercom. "Blast that guy Vidac!" he yelled. "He's one jump ahead of us
again!"

Startled, Tom called into the intercom. "What do you mean, Roger?"

"The ship's communicator," snorted Roger. "I figured once we got aboard
the scout we'd be able to use this set to contact the Academy instead of
having to monkey around with the homemade job back on the _Polaris_. But
it's no soap."

"Why not?" boomed Astro over the intercom.

"The only open circuit here is beamed to the _Polaris_. And the radar is
