by shaking. Note any change in the color of the limewater. If it turns
white, the presence of carbon dioxide is proved.

2. Burn a splinter in a large vessel of air, keeping the top covered. Add
limewater and shake. Note and account for the result.

3. Place several pieces of marble (limestone) in a jar holding at least
half a gallon. Barely cover the marble with water, and then add
hydrochloric acid until a gas is rapidly evolved. This gas is carbon
dioxide.

(_a_) Does it possess color?

(_b_) Insert a burning splinter to see if it supports combustion.

(_c_) Place a bottle of oxygen by the side of the vessel of carbon
dioxide. Light a splinter and extinguish the flame by lowering it into the
vessel of carbon dioxide. Withdraw immediately, and if a spark remains on
the splinter, thrust it into the bottle of oxygen. Then insert the
relighted splinter into the carbon dioxide. Repeat several times, kindling
the flame in one gas and extinguishing it in the other. Finally show that
the spark also may be extinguished by holding the splinter a little longer
in the carbon dioxide.

(_d_) Tip the jar containing the carbon dioxide over the mouth of a
tumbler, as in pouring water, though not far enough to spill the acid, and
then insert a burning splinter in the tumbler. Account for the result.
Inference as to the weight of carbon dioxide.

                                [Fig. 59]


Fig. 59--*Simple apparatus* for illustrating passage of oxygen through the
                                  body.


(_e_) Review experiments (page 101) showing the presence of carbon dioxide
in the breath.

*To illustrate the General Movement of Oxygen through the Body.*--Into a
glass tube, six inches in length and open at both ends, place several
small lumps of charcoal (Fig. 59). Fit into one end of this tube, by means
of a stopper, a smaller glass tube which is bent at right angles and which
is made to pass through a close-fitting stopper to the bottom of a small
bottle. Another small tube is fitted into a second hole in this stopper,
but terminating near the top of the bottle, and to this is connected a
rubber tube about eighteen inches in length. The arrangement is now such
that by sucking air from the top of the bottle, it is made to enter at the
distant end of the tube containing the charcoal. After filling the bottle
one third full of limewater, heat the tube containing the charcoal until
it begins to glow. Then suck the air through the apparatus (as in smoking,
without drawing it into the lungs), observing what happens both in the
tube and in the bottle. What are the proofs that the oxygen, in passing
through the tube, unites with the carbon, forms carbon dioxide, and
liberates energy? Compare the changes which the oxygen undergoes while
passing through the tube with the changes which it undergoes in passing
through the body.




CHAPTER IX - FOODS AND THE THEORY OF DIGESTION


The body is constantly in need of new material. Oxidation, as shown in the
preceding chapter, rapidly destroys substances at the cells, and these
have to be replaced. Upon this renewal depends the supply of energy.
Moreover, there is found to be an actual breaking down of the living
material, or protoplasm, in the body. While this does not destroy the
cells, as is sometimes erroneously stated, it reduces the quantity of the
protoplasm and makes necessary a process of repair, or rebuilding, of the
tissues. This also requires new material. Finally, substances, such as
water and common salt, are required for the aid which they render in the
general work of the body. Since these are constantly being lost in one way
or another, they also must be replaced. These different needs of the body
for new materials are supplied through

*The Foods.*--Foods are substances that, on being taken into the healthy
body, are of assistance in carrying on its work. This definition properly
includes oxygen, but the term is usually limited to substances introduced
through the digestive organs. As suggested above, foods serve at least
three purposes:

1. They, with oxygen, supply the body with energy.

2. They provide materials for rebuilding the tissues.

3. They supply materials that aid directly or indirectly in the general
work of the body.

*The Simple Foods, or Nutrients.*--From the great variety of things that
are eaten, it might appear that many different kinds of substances are
suitable for food. When our various animal and vegetable foods are
analyzed, however, they are found to be similar in composition and to
contain only some five or six kinds of materials that are essentially
different. While certain foods may contain only a single one of these,
most of the foods are mixtures of two or more. These few common materials
which, in different proportions, form the different things that are eaten,
are variously referred to as simple foods, food-stuffs, and _nutrients_,
the last name being the one generally preferred. The different classes of
nutrients are as follows:

             Nutrients:
              Proteids
            (Albuminoids)
            Carbohydrates
                Fats
            Mineral salts
                Water

It is now necessary to become somewhat familiar with the different
nutrients and the purposes which they serve in the body.

*Proteids.*--The proteids are obtained in part from the animal and in part
from the plant kingdom, there being several varieties. A well-known
variety, called _albumin_, is found in the white of eggs and in the plasma
of the blood, while the muscles contain an abundance of another variety,
known as _myosin_. Cheese consists largely of a kind of proteid, called
_casein_, which is also present in milk, but in a more diluted form. If a
mouthful of wheat is chewed for some time, most of it is dissolved and
swallowed, but there remains in the mouth a sticky, gum-like substance.
This is _gluten_, a form of proteid which occurs in different grains.
Again, certain vegetables, as beans, peas, and peanuts, are rich in a kind
of proteid which is called _legumen_.

Proteids are compounds of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, and a small
per cent of sulphur. Certain ones (the nucleo-proteids from grains) also
contain phosphorus. All of the proteids are highly complex compounds and
form a most important class of nutrients.

*Purposes of Proteids.*--The chief purpose of proteids in the body is to
rebuild the tissues. Not only do they supply all of the main elements in
the tissues, but they are of such a nature chemically that they are
readily built into the protoplasm. They are absolutely essential to life,
no other nutrients being able to take their place. An animal deprived of
them exhausts the proteids in its body and then dies. In addition to
rebuilding the tissues, proteids may also be oxidized to supply the body
with energy.

*Albuminoids* form a small class of foods, of minor importance, which are
similar to proteids in composition, but differ from them in being unable
to rebuild the tissues. Gelatin, a constituent of soup and obtained from
bones and connective tissue by boiling, is the best known of the
albuminoid foods. On account of the nitrogen which they contain, proteids
and albuminoids are often classed together as _nitrogenous foods_.

*Carbohydrates.*--While the carbohydrates are not so essential to life as
are the proteids, they are of very great value in the body. They are
composed of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, and are obtained mainly from
plants. There are several varieties of carbohydrates, but they are similar
in composition. All of those used as food to any great extent are starch
and certain kinds of sugar.

*Starch* is the carbohydrate of greatest importance as a food, and it is
also the one found in the greatest abundance. All green plants form more
or less starch, and many of them store it in their leaves, seeds, or roots
(Fig. 60). From these sources it is obtained as food. _Glycogen_, a
substance closely resembling starch, is found in the body of the oyster.
It is also formed in the liver and muscles of the higher animals, being
prepared from the sugar of the blood, and is stored by them as reserve
food (Chapter XI). Glycogen is, on this account, called _animal starch_.
Starch on being eaten is first changed to sugar, after which it may be
converted into glycogen in the liver and in the muscles.

                                [Fig. 60]


   Fig. 60--*Starch grains* in cells of potato as they appear under the
                    microscope. (See practical work.)


*Sugars.*--There are several varieties of sugar, but the important ones
used as foods fall into one or the other of two classes, known as _double
sugars_ (disaccharides) and _single sugars_ (monosaccharides). To the
first class belong _cane sugar_, found in sugar cane and beets, _milk
sugar_, found in sweet milk, and _maltose_, a kind of sugar which is made
from starch by the action of malt. The important members of the second
class are _grape sugar_, or dextrose, and _fruit sugar_, or levulose, both
of which are found in fruits and in honey.

The most important of all sugars, so far as its use in the body is
concerned, is _dextrose_. To this form all the other sugars, and starch
also, are converted before they are finally used in the body. The close
chemical relation between the different carbohydrates makes such a
conversion easily possible.

*Fats.*--The fats used as foods belong to one or the other of two classes,
known as solid fats and oils. The solid fats are derived chiefly from
animals, and the oils are obtained mostly from plants. Butter, the fat of
meats, olive oil, and the oil of nuts are the fats of greatest importance
as foods. Fats, like the carbohydrates, are composed of carbon, hydrogen,
and oxygen. They are rather complex chemical compounds, though not so
complex as proteids. Since neither fats nor carbohydrates contain
nitrogen, they are frequently classed together as _non-nitrogenous_ foods.

*Purpose Served by Carbohydrates, Fats, and Albuminoids.*--These classes of
nutrients all serve the common purpose of supplying energy. By uniting
with oxygen at the cells, they supply heat and the other forms of bodily
force. This is perhaps their only purpose.(50) Proteids also serve this
purpose, but they are not so well adapted to supplying energy as are the
carbohydrates and the fats. In the first place they do not completely
oxidize and therefore do not supply so much energy; and, in the second
place, they form waste products that are removed with difficulty from the
body.

*Mineral Salts and their Uses.*--Mineral salts are found in small
quantities in all of the more common food materials, and, as a rule, find
their way into the body unnoticed. They supply the elements which are
found in the body in small quantities and serve a variety of purposes.(51)
Calcium phosphate and calcium carbonate are important constituents of the
bones and teeth; and the salts containing iron renew the hemoglobin of the
blood. Others perform important functions in the vital processes. The
mineral compound of greatest importance perhaps is sodium chloride, or
common salt.(52) This is a natural constituent of most of our foods, and
is also added to food in its preparation for the table. When it is
withheld from animals for a considerable length of time, they suffer
intensely and finally die. It is necessary in the blood and lymph to keep
their constituents in solution, and is thought to play an important role
in the chemical changes of the cells. It is constantly leaving the body as
a waste product and must be constantly supplied in small quantities in the
foods.

*Importance of Water.*--Water finds its way into the body as a pure liquid,
as a part of such mixtures as coffee, chocolate, and milk, and as a
constituent of all our solid foods. (See table of foods, page 126.) It is
also formed in the body by the oxidation of hydrogen. It passes through
the body unchanged, and is constantly being removed by all the organs of
excretion. Though water does not liberate energy in the body nor build up
the tissues in the sense that other foods do, it is as necessary to the
maintenance of life as oxygen or proteids. It occurs in all the tissues,
and forms about 70 per cent of the entire weight of the body. Its presence
is necessary for the interchange of materials at the cells and for keeping
the tissues soft and pliable. As it enters the body, it carries digested
food substances with it, and as it leaves it is loaded with wastes. Its
chief physiological work, which is that of a _transporter of material_,
depends upon its ability to dissolve substances and to flow readily from
place to place.

*Relative Quantity of Nutrients Needed.*--Proteids, carbohydrates, and fats
are the nutrients that supply most of the body's nourishment. The most
hygienic diet is the one which supplies the proteids in sufficient
quantity to rebuild the tissues and the carbohydrates and fats in the
right amounts to supply the body with energy. Much experimenting has been
done with a view to determining these proportions, but the results so far
are not entirely satisfactory. According to some of the older estimates, a
person of average size requires for his daily use five ounces of proteid,
two and one half ounces of fat, and fifteen ounces of carbohydrate. Recent
investigations of this problem seem to show that the body is as well, if
not better, nourished by a much smaller amount of proteid--not more than
two and one half ounces (60 grams) daily.(53)

While there is probably no necessity for the healthy individual's taking
his proteid, fat, and carbohydrate in _exact_ proportions (if the
proportions best suited to his body were known), the fact needs to be
emphasized that proteids, although absolutely necessary, should form but a
small part (not over one fifth) of the daily bill of fare. In recognition
of this fact is involved a principle of health and also one of economy.
The proteids, especially those in meats, are the most expensive of the
nutrients, whereas the carbohydrates, which should form the greater bulk
of one's food, are the least expensive.

*Effects of a One-sided Diet.*--The plan of the body is such as to require
a _mixed diet_, and all of the great classes of nutrients are necessary.
If one could subsist on any single class, it would be proteids, for
proteids are able both to rebuild tissue and to supply energy. But if
proteids are eaten much in excess of the body's need for rebuilding the
tissues, and this excess is oxidized for supplying energy, a strain is
thrown upon the organs of excretion, because of the increase in the
wastes. Not only is there danger of overworking certain of these organs
(the liver and kidneys), but the wastes may linger too long in the body,
causing disorder and laying the foundation for disease. On the other hand,
if an insufficient amount of proteid is taken, the tissues are improperly
nourished, and one is unable to exert his usual strength. What is true of
the proteids is true, though in a different way, of the other great
classes of foods. A diet which is lacking in proteid, carbohydrate, or
fat, or which has any one of them in excess, is not adapted to the
requirements of the body.

*Composition of the Food Materials.*--One who intelligently provides the
daily bill of fare must have some knowledge of the nature and quantity of
the nutrients present in the different materials used as food. This
information is supplied by the chemist, who has made extensive analyses
for this purpose. Results of such analyses are shown in Table 1 (page
126), which gives the percentage of proteids, fats, carbohydrates, water,
and mineral salts in the edible portions of the more common of our foods.

                                [Fig. 61]


 Fig. 61--Relative proportions of different nutrients in well-known foods.


*Food Supply to the Table.*--The main problem in supplying the daily bill
of fare is that of securing through the different food materials the
requisite amounts of proteids, carbohydrates, and fats. In this matter a
table showing the composition of foods can be used to great advantage.
Consulting the table on page 126, it is seen that large per cents of
proteids are supplied by lean meat, eggs, cheese, beans, peas, peanuts,
and oatmeal, while fat is in excess in fat meat, butter, and nuts (Fig.
61). Carbohydrates are supplied in abundance by potatoes, rice, corn,
sugar, and molasses. The different cereals also contain a large percentage
of carbohydrates in the form of starch.

                                  TABLE I. THE COMPOSITION OF
                                       FOOD MATERIALS(54)
Food         Water      Solids     Proteid    Fat        Carbohydrates   Mineral    Heat
Materials                                                                Matter     Value of
                                                                                    One
                                                                                    Pound
Animal       Per cent   Per cent   Per cent   Per cent   Per cent        Per cent   Calories(55)
foods,
edible
portion
Beef:        63.9       36.1       19.5       15.6       ...             1          1020
Shoulder
       Rib   48.1       51.9       15.4       35.6       ...             .9         1790
   Sirloin   60         40         18.5       20.5       ...             1          1210
     Round   68.2       31.8       20.5       10.1       ...             1.2        805
Veal:        68.8       31.2       20.2       9.8        ...             ...        790
Shoulder
Mutton:      61.8       38.2       18.3       19         ...             .9         1140
Leg
      Loin   49.3       50.7       15         35         ...             .7         1755
Pork:        50.3       49.7       16         32.8       ...             .9         1680
Shoulder
   Ham,      41.5       58.5       16.7       39.1       ...             2.7        1960
   salted,
   smoked
    Fat,     12.1       87.9       .9         82.8       ...             4.2        3510
    salted
Sausage:     41.5       58.8       13.8       42.8       ...             2.2        2065
Pork
Bologna      62.4       37.6       18.8       42.8       ...             3          1015
Chicken      72.2       27.8       24.4       1          ...             1.4        540
Eggs         73.8       26.2       14.9       10.5       ...             .8         721
Milk         87         13         3.6        4          4.7             .7         325
Butter       10.5       89         .6         85         .5              .3         3515
Cheese:      30.2       69.8       28.3       35.5       1.8             4.2        2070
Full
cream
 Skim milk   41.3       58.7       38.4       6.8        6.9             4.6        1165
Fish:        82.6       17.4       15.8       .5         ...             1.2        310
Codfish
    Salmon   63.6       36.4       21.6       13.4       ...             1.4        965
   Oysters   87.1       12.9       6          1.2        3.7             2          230
Vegetable
foods
Wheat        12.5       87.5       11         1.1        74.9            .5         1645
flour
Graham       13.1       86.9       11.7       1.7        71.7            1.8        1635
flour
(wheat)
Rye flour    13.1       86.9       6.7        .8         78.7            .7         1625
Buckwheat    14.6       85.4       6.9        1.4        76.1            1          1605
flour
Oatmeal      7.6        92.4       15.1       7.1        68.2            2          1850
Cornmeal     15         85         9.2        3.8        70.6            1.4        1645
Rice         12.4       87.6       7.4        .4         79.4            .4         1630
Peas         12.3       87.7       26.7       1.7        56.4            2.9        1565
Beans        12.6       87.4       23.1       2          59.2            3.1        1615
Potatoes     78.9       21.1       2.1        .1         17.9            1          375
Tomatoes     95.3       4.7        .8         .4         3.2             .3         80
Apples       83.2       16.8       .2         .4         15.9            .3         315
Sugar,       2          98         ...        ...        97.8            .3         1820
granulated
White        32.3       67.7       8.2        1.7        56.3            .0         1280
bread
(wheat)
Peanuts      9.2        90.8       25.8       24.4       38.6            2          2560
Almonds      4.8        95.2       21         17.3       54.9            2          3030
Walnuts      2.5        97.5       16.6       16.1       63.4            1.4        3285
(English)

_Variety_ in the selection of foods for the table is an essential feature,
but this should not increase either the work or the expense of supplying
the meals. Each single meal can, and should, be simple in itself and, at
the same time, differ sufficiently from the meal preceding and the one
following to give the necessary variety in the course of the day. The bill
of fare should, of course, include fruits (for their tonic effects) and
very small amounts perhaps of substances which stimulate the appetite,
such as pepper, mustard, etc., known as condiments.

*Purity of Food.*--The fact that many of the food substances are perishable
makes it possible for them to be eaten in a slightly decayed condition.
Such substances are decidedly unwholesome (some containing poisons) and
should be promptly rejected. Not only do fresh meats, fruits, and
vegetables need careful inspection, but canned and preserved goods as
well. If canned foods are imperfectly sealed or if not thoroughly cooked
in the canning process, they decay and the acids which they generate act
on the metals lining the cans, forming poisonous compounds. The contents
of "tin" cans should for this reason be transferred to other vessels as
soon as opened.

Foods are also rendered impure or weakened through adulteration, the
watering of milk being a familiar example. The manufacture of jellies,
preserves, sirups, and various kinds of pickles and condiments has perhaps
afforded the largest field for adulterations, although it is possible to
adulterate nearly all of the leading articles of food. A long step in the
prevention of food and drug adulteration was taken in this country by the
passage of the _Pure Food Law_. By forcing manufacturers of foods and
medicines to state on printed labels the composition of their products,
this law has made it possible for the consumer to know what he is
purchasing and putting into his body.

*Alcohol not a Food.*--Many people in this and other countries drink in
different beverages, such as whisky, beer, wine, etc., a varying amount of
alcohol. This substance has a temporary stimulating or exciting effect,
and the claim has been made that it serves as a food. Recently it has been
shown that alcohol when introduced into the body in small quantities and
in a greatly diluted form, is nearly all oxidized, yielding energy as does
fat or sugar. If no harmful effects attended the use of alcohol, it might
on this account be classed as a food. But alcohol is known to be harmful
to the body. When used in large quantities, it injures nearly all of the
tissues, and when taken habitually, even in small doses, it leads to the
formation of the alcohol habit which is now recognized and treated as a
disease. This and other facts show that alcohol is not adapted to the body
plan of taking on and using new material (Chapter XI), and no substance
lacking in this respect can properly be classed as a food.(56) Instead of
classing alcohol as a food, it should be placed in that long list of
substances which are introduced into the body for special purposes and
which are known by the general name of

*Drugs.*--Drugs act strongly upon the body and tend to bring about unusual
and unnatural results. Their use should in no way be confused with that of
foods. If taken in health, they tend to disturb the physiological balance
of the body by unduly increasing or diminishing the action of the
different organs. In disease where this balance is already disturbed, they
may be administered for their counteractive effects, but always under the
advice and direction of a physician. Knowing the nature of the disturbance
which the drug produces, the physician can administer it to advantage,
should the body be out of physiological balance, or diseased. Not only are
drugs of no value in health, but their use is liable to do much harm.



NATURE OF DIGESTION


Before the nutrients can be oxidized at the cells, or built into the
protoplasm, they undergo a number of changes. These are necessary for
their entrance into the body, for their distribution by the blood and the
lymph, and for the purposes which they finally serve. The first of these
changes is preparatory to the entrance of the nutrients and is known as
_digestion_. The organs which bring about this change, called digestive
organs, have a special construction which adapts them to their work. It
will assist materially in understanding these organs if we first learn
something of the nature of the work which they have to perform.

*How the Nutrients get into the Body.*--The nature of digestion is
determined by the conditions affecting the entrance of nutrients into the
body. Food in the stomach and air in the lungs, although surrounded by the
body, are still outside of what is called the _body proper_. To gain
entrance into the body proper, a substance must pass through the body
wall. This consists of the skin on the outside and of the mucous linings
of the air passages and other tubes and cavities which are connected with
the external surface.

To get from the digestive organs into the blood, the nutrients must pass
through the mucous membrane lining these organs and also the walls of
blood or lymph vessels. Only _liquid materials_ can make this passage. It
is necessary, therefore, to reduce to the liquid state all nutrients not
already in that condition. _This reduction to the liquid state constitutes
the digestive process_.

*How Substances are Liquefied.*--While the reduction of solids to the
liquid state is accomplished in some instances by heating them until they
melt, they are more frequently reduced to this state by subjecting them to
the action of certain liquids, called _solvents_. Through the action of
the solvent the minute particles of the solid separate from each other and
disappear from view. (Shown in dropping salt in water.) At the same time
they mix with the solvent, forming a _solution_, from which they separate
only with great difficulty. For this reason solids in solution can diffuse
through porous partitions along with the solvents in which they are
dissolved (page 73).

By digestion the nutrients are reduced to the form of a solution. _The
process is_, simply speaking, _one of dissolving_. The liquid employed as
_the digestive solvent is water_. The different nutrients dissolve in
water, mixing with it to form a solution which is then passed into the
body proper.

*Digestion not a Simple Process.*--Digestion is by no means a simple
process, such, for instance, as the dissolving of salt or sugar in water.
These, being soluble in water, dissolve at once on being mixed with a
sufficient amount of this liquid. The majority of the nutrients, however,
are insoluble in water and are unaffected by it when acting alone. Fats,
starch, and most of the proteids do not dissolve in water. Before these
can be dissolved they have to be changed chemically and converted into
substances that are _soluble in water_. This complicates the process and
_prevents the use of water alone_ as the digestive solvent.

*A Similar Case.*--If a piece of limestone be placed in water, it does not
dissolve, because it is insoluble in water. If hydrochloric acid is now
added to the water, the limestone is soon dissolved (Fig. 62). (See
Practical Work.) It seems at first thought that the acid dissolves the
limestone, but this is not the case. The acid produces a chemical change
in the limestone (calcium carbonate) and converts it into a compound
(calcium chloride) that is soluble in water. As fast as this is formed it
is dissolved by the water, which is the real solvent in the case. The acid
simply plays the part of a chemical converter.

                                [Fig. 62]


 Fig. 62--The dissolving of limestone in water containing acid, suggesting
            the double action in the digestion of most foods.


*The Digestive Fluids.*--Several fluids--saliva, gastric juice, pancreatic
juice, bile, and intestinal juice--are employed in the digestion of the
food. The composition of these fluids is in keeping with the nature of the
digestive process. While all of them have water for their most abundant
constituent, there are dissolved in the water small amounts of active
chemical agents. It is the work of these agents to convert the insoluble
nutrients into substances that are soluble in water. The digestive fluids
are thus able to act in a _double_ manner on the nutrients--to change them
chemically and to dissolve them. The chemical agents which bring about the
changes in the nutrients are called _enzymes_, or digestive ferments.

*Foods Classed with Reference to Digestive Changes.*--With reference to the
changes which they undergo during digestion, foods may be divided into
three classes as follows:

1. Substances already in the liquid state and requiring no digestive
action. Water and solutions of simple foods in water belong to this class.
Milk and liquid fats, or oils, do not belong to this class.

2. Solid foods soluble in water. This class includes common salt and
sugar. These require no digestive action other than dissolving in water.

3. Foods that are insoluble in water. These have first to be changed into
soluble substances, after which they are dissolved.

*Summary.*--Materials called foods are introduced into the body for
rebuilding the tissues, supplying energy, and aiding in its general work.
Only a few classes of substances, viz., proteids, carbohydrates, fats,
water, and some mineral compounds have all the qualities of foods and are
suitable for introduction into the body. Substances known as drugs, which
may be used as medicines in disease, should be avoided in health. Before
foods can be passed into the body proper, they must be converted into the
liquid form, or dissolved. In this process, known as digestion, water is
the solvent; and certain chemical agents, called enzymes, convert the
insoluble nutrients into substances that are soluble in water.
