
Another burst of automatic fire smashed out the lights at the bottom
of the ascent tube. Dirzed and Dalla struggled across the room,
pushing a heavy steel cabinet between them; Verkan Vall, who was
holding Olirzon's submachine-gun, moved aside to allow them to drop it
on edge in the open doorway, then wedged the door half-shut against
it. Sarnax came over, bringing rifles, hunting pistols, and
ammunition.

"What's the situation, up there?" Verkan Vall asked him. "What force
have they, and why did they turn against us?"

"Lord Virzal!" Dirzed objected, scandalized. "You have no right to ask
Sarnax to betray confidences!"

Sarnax spat against the door. "In the face of Jirzyn of Starpha!" he
said. "And in the face of his _zortan_ mother, and of his father,
whoever he was! Dirzed, do not talk foolishly; one does not speak of
betraying betrayers." He turned to Verkan Vall. "They have three
menservants of the family of Starpha; your Assassin, Olirzon,
discarnated the other three. There is one of Prince Jirzyn's poor
relations, named Girzad. There are three other men, Volitionalist
precinct workers, who came with Girzad, and four Assassins, the three
who were here, and one who came with Girzad. Eleven, against the three
of us."

"The four of us, Sarnax," Dalla corrected. She had buckled on a
hunting pistol, and had a light deer rifle under her arm.

Something moved at the bottom of the descent tube. Verkan Vall gave it
a short burst, though it was probably only a dummy, dropped to draw
fire.

"The four of us, Lady Dallona," Sarnax agreed. "As to your other
Assassin, the one who stayed in the airboat, I don't know how he
fared. You see, about twenty minutes ago, this Girzad arrived in an
airboat, with an Assassin and these three Volitionalist workers.
Erarno and I were at the top of the dome when he came in. He told us
that he had orders from Prince Jirzyn to discarnate the Lady Dallona
and Dirzed at once. Tarnod, the gamekeeper"--Sarnax spat ceremoniously
against the door again--"told him you were here, and that Marnik was
one of your men. He was going to shoot Marnik at once, but Erarno and
I and his Assassin stopped him. We warned Marnik about the change in
the situation, according to the code, expecting Marnik to go down here
and join you. Instead, he lifted the airboat, zoomed over Girzad's
boat, and let go a rocket blast, setting Girzad's boat on fire. Well,
that was a hostile act, so we all fired after him. We must have hit
something, because the boat went down, trailing smoke, about ten miles
away. Girzad got another airboat out of the hangar and he and his
Assassin started after your man. About that time, your Assassin,
Olirzon--happy reincarnation to him--came up, and the Starpha servants
fired at him, and he fired back and discarnated two of them, and then
jumped down the descent tube. One of the servants jumped after him; I
found his body at the bottom when I came down to warn you formally.
You know what happened after that."

"But why did Prince Jirzyn order our discarnation?" Dalla wanted to
know. "Was it to blame the Statisticalists with it?"

Sarnax, about to answer, broke off suddenly and began firing at the
opening of the ascent tube with a hunting pistol.

"I got him," he said, in a pleased tone. "That was Erarno; he was
always playing tricks with the tubes, climbing down against negative
gravity and up against positive gravity. His body will float up to the
top--Why, Lady Dallona, that was only part of it. You didn't hear
about the big scandal, on the newscast, then?"

"We didn't have it on. What scandal?"

Sarnax laughed. "Oh, the very father and family-head of all scandals!
You ought to know about it, because you started it; that's why Prince
Jirzyn wants you out of the body--You devised a process by which
people could give themselves memory-recalls of previous
reincarnations, didn't you? And distributed apparatus to do it with?
And gave one set to young Tarnov, the son of Lord Tirzov of Fastor?"

Dalla nodded. Sarnax continued:

"Well, last evening, Tarnox of Fastor used his recall outfit, and what
do you think? It seems that thirty years ago, in his last
reincarnation, he was Jirzid of Starpha, Jirzyn's older brother.
Jirzid was betrothed to the Lady Annitra of Zabna. Well, his younger
brother was carrying on a clandestine affair with the Lady Annitra,
and he also wanted the title of Prince and family-head of Starpha. So
he bribed this fellow Tarnod, whom I had the pleasure of discarnating,
and who was an underservant here at the hunting lodge. Between them,
they shot Jirzid during a boar hunt. An accident, of course. So Jirzyn
married the Lady Annitra, and when old Prince Jarnid, his father,
discarnated a year later, he succeeded to the title. And immediately,
Tarnod was made head gamekeeper here."

"What did I tell you, Lord Virzal? I knew that son of a _zortan_ had
something on Jirzyn of Starpha!" Dirzed exclaimed. "A nice family,
this of Starpha!"

"Well, that's not the end of it," Sarnax continued. "This morning,
Tarnov of Fastor, late Jirzid of Starpha, went before the High Court
of Estates and entered suit to change his name to Jirzid of Starpha
and laid claim to the title of Starpha family-head. The case has just
been entered, so there's been no hearing, but there's the blazes of an
argument among all the nobles about it--some are claiming that the
individuality doesn't change from one reincarnation to the next, and
others claiming that property and titles should pass along the line of
physical descent, no matter what individuality has reincarnated into
what body. They're the ones who want the Lady Dallona discarnated and
her discoveries suppressed. And there's talk about revising the entire
system of estate-ownership and estate-inheritance. Oh, it's an utter
obscenity of a business!"

"This," Verkan Vall told Dalla, "is something we will not emphasize
when we get home." That was as close as he dared come to it, but she
caught his meaning. The working of major changes in out-time social
structures was not viewed with approval by the Paratime Commission on
the First Level. "_If_ we get home," he added. Then an idea occurred
to him.

"Dirzed, Sarnax; this place must have been used by the leaders of the
Volitionalists for top-level conferences. Is there a secret passage
anywhere?"

Sarnax shook his head. "Not from here. There is one, on the floor
above, but they control it. And even if there were one down here, they
would be guarding the outlet."

"That's what I was counting on. I'd hoped to simulate an escape that
way, and then make a rush up the regular tubes." Verkan Vall shrugged.
"I suppose Marnik's our only chance. I hope he got away safely."

"He was going for help? I was surprised that an Assassin would desert
his client; I should have thought of that," Sarnax said. "Well, even
if he got down carnate, and if Girzad didn't catch him, he'd still be
afoot ten miles from the nearest city unit. That gives us a little
chance--about one in a thousand."

"Is there any way they can get at us, except by those tubes?" Dalla
asked.

"They could cut a hole in the floor, or burn one through," Sarnax
replied. "They have plenty of thermite. They could detonate a charge
of explosives over our heads, or clear out of the dome and drop one
down the well. They could use lethal gas or radiodust, but their
Assassins wouldn't permit such illegal methods. Or they could shoot
sleep-gas down at us, and then come down and cut our throats at their
leisure."

"We'll have to get out of this room, then," Verkan Vall decided. "They
know we've barricaded ourselves in here; this is where they'll
attack. So we'll patrol the perimeter of the well; we'll be out of
danger from above if we keep close to the wall. And we'll inspect all
the rooms on this floor for evidence of cutting through from above."

Sarnax nodded. "That's sense, Lord Virzal. How about the lifter
tubes?"

"We'll have to barricade them. Sarnax, you and Dirzed know the layout
of this place better than the Lady Dallona or I; suppose you two check
the rooms, while we cover the tubes and the well," Verkan Vall
directed. "Come on, now."

       *       *       *       *       *

They pushed the door wide-open and went out past the cabinet. Hugging
the wall, they began a slow circuit of the well, Verkan Vall in the
lead with the submachine-gun, then Sarnax and Dirzed, the former with
a heavy boar-rifle and the latter with a hunting pistol in each hand,
and Hadron Dalla brought up in the rear with her rifle. It was she who
noticed a movement along the rim of the balcony above and snapped a
shot at it; there was a crash above, and a shower of glass and plastic
and metal fragments rattled on the pavement of the court. Somebody had
been trying to lower a scanner or a visiplate-pickup, or something of
the sort; the exact nature of the instrument was not evident from the
wreckage Dalla's bullet had made of it.

The rooms Dirzed and Sarnax entered were all quiet; nobody seemed to
be attempting to cut through the ceiling, fifteen feet above. They
dragged furniture from a couple of rooms, blocking the openings of the
lifter tubes, and continued around the well until they had reached the
gun room again.

Dirzed suggested that they move some of the weapons and ammunition
stored there to Prince Jirzyn's private apartment, halfway around to
the lifter tubes, so that another place of refuge would be stocked
with munitions in event of their being driven from the gun room.

Leaving him on guard outside, Verkan Vall, Dalla and Sarnax entered
the gun room and began gathering weapons and boxes of ammunition.
Dalla finished packing her game bag with the recorded data and notes
of her experiments. Verkan Vall selected four more of the heavy
hunting pistols, more accurate than his shoulder-holster weapon or the
dead Olirzon's belt arm, and capable of either full or semi-automatic
fire. Sarnax chose a couple more boar rifles. Dalla slung her bag of
recorded notes, and another bag of ammunition, and secured another
deer rifle. They carried this accumulation of munitions to the private
apartments of Prince Jirzyn, dumping everything in the middle of the
drawing room, except the bag of notes, from which Dalla refused to
separate herself.

"Maybe we'd better put some stuff over in one of the rooms on the
other side of the well," Dirzed suggested. "They haven't really begun
to come after us; when they do, we'll probably be attacked from two
or three directions at once."

They returned to the gun room, casting anxious glances at the edge of
the balcony above and at the barricade they had erected across the
openings to the lifter tubes. Verkan Vall was not satisfied with this
last; it looked to him as though they had provided a breastwork for
somebody to fire on them from, more than anything else.

He was about to step around the cabinet which partially blocked the
gun-room door when he glanced up, and saw a six-foot circle on the
ceiling turning slowly brown. There was a smell of scorched plastic.
He grabbed Sarnax by the arm and pointed.

"Thermite," the Assassin whispered. "The ceiling's got six inches of
spaceship-insulation between it and the floor above; it'll take them a
few minutes to burn through it." He stooped and pushed on the
barricade, shoving it into the room. "Keep back; they'll probably drop
a grenade or so through, first, before they jump down. If we're quick,
we can get a couple of them."

Dirzed and Sarnax crouched, one at either side of the door, with
weapons ready. Verkan Vall and Dalla had been ordered, rather
peremptorily, to stay behind them; in a place of danger, an Assassin
was obliged to shield his client. Verkan Vall, unable to see what was
going on inside the room, kept his eyes and his gun muzzle on the
barricade across the openings to the lifter tubes, the erection of
which he was now regretting as a major tactical error.

Inside the gun room, there was a sudden crash, as the circle of
thermite burned through and a section of ceiling dropped out and hit
the floor. Instantly, Dirzed flung himself back against Verkan Vall,
and there was a tremendous explosion inside, followed by another and
another. A second or so passed, then Dirzed, leaning around the corner
of the door, began firing rapidly into the room. From the other side
of the door, Sarnax began blazing away with his rifle. Verkan Vall
kept his position, covering the lifter tubes.

Suddenly, from behind the barricade, a blue-white gun flash leaped
into being, and a pistol banged. He sprayed the opening between a
couch and a section of bookcase from whence it had come, releasing his
trigger as the gun rose with the recoil, squeezing and releasing and
squeezing again. Then he jumped to his feet.

"Come on, the other place; hurry!" he ordered.

Sarnax swore in exasperation. "Help me with her, Dirzed!" he implored.

Verkan Vall turned his head, to see the two Assassins drag Dalla to
her feet and hustle her away from the gun room; she was quite
senseless, and they had to drag her between them. Verkan Vall gave a
quick glance into the gun room; two of the Starpha servants and a man
in rather flashy civil dress were lying on the floor, where they had
been shot as they had jumped down from above. He saw a movement at the
edge of the irregular, smoking, hole in the ceiling, and gave it a
short burst, then fired another at the exit from the descent tube.
Then he took to his heels and followed the Assassins and Hadron Dalla
into Prince Jirzyn's apartment.

As he ran through the open door, the Assassins were letting Dalla down
into a chair; they instantly threw themselves into the work of
barricading the doorway so as to provide cover and at the same time
allow them to fire out into the central well.

[Illustration: ]

For an instant, as he bent over her, he thought Dalla had been killed,
an assumption justified by his knowledge of the deadliness of Akor-Neb
bullets. Then he saw her eye-lids flicker. A moment later, he had the
explanation of her escape. The bullet had hit the game bag at her
side; it was full of spools of metal tape, in metal cases, and notes
in written form, pyrographed upon sheets of plastic ring fastened into
metal binders. Because of their extreme velocity, Akor-Neb bullets
were sure killers when they struck animal tissue, but for the same
reason, they had very poor penetration on hard objects. The
alloy-steel tape, and the steel spools and spool cases, and the
notebook binders, had been enough to shatter the little bullet into
splinters of magnesium-nickel alloy, and the stout leather back of the
game bag had stopped all of these. But the impact, even distributed as
it had been through the contents of the bag, had been enough to knock
the girl unconscious.

He found a bottle of some sort of brandy and a glass on a serving
table nearby and poured her a drink, holding it to her lips. She
spluttered over the first mouthful, then took the glass from him and
sipped the rest.

"What happened?" she asked. "I thought those bullets were sure death."

"Your notes. The bullet hit the bag. Are you all right, now?"

She finished the brandy. "I think so." She put a hand into the game
bag and brought out a snarled and tangled mess of steel tape. "Oh,
_blast_! That stuff was important; all the records on the preliminary
auto-recall experiments." She shrugged. "Well, it wouldn't have been
worth much more if I'd stopped that bullet, myself." She slipped the
strap over her shoulder and started to rise.

As she did, a bedlam of firing broke out, both from the two Assassins
at the door and from outside. They both hit the floor and crawled out
of line of the partly-open door; Verkan Vall recovered his
submachine-gun, which he had set down beside Dalla's chair. Sarnax was
firing with his rifle at some target in the direction of the lifter
tubes; Dirzed lay slumped over the barricade, and one glance at his
crumpled figure was enough to tell Verkan Vall that he was dead.

"You fill magazines for us," he told Dalla, then crawled to Dirzed's
place at the door. "What happened, Sarnax?"

"They shoved over the barricade at the lifter tubes and came out into
the well. I got a couple, they got Dirzed, and now they're holed up in
rooms all around the circle. They--Aah!" He fired three shots,
quickly, around the edge of the door. "That stopped that." The
Assassin crouched to insert a fresh magazine into his rifle.

[Illustration: ]

Verkan Vall risked one eye around the corner of the doorway, and as he
did, there was a red flash and a dull roar, unlike the blue flashes
