doing to them, but I'm scared of it."

"I know one thing it's doing," Meillard said. "It's keeping them
from their work in the fields. For all we know, it may cause them
to lose a crop they need badly for subsistence."

       *       *       *       *       *

The native they had come to call the Lord Mayor evidently thought
so, too. He was with the others, the next morning, squatting with
his staff across his knees, as bemused as any of them, but when the
pump stopped he rose and approached a group of Terrans, launching
into what could only be an impassioned tirade. He pointed with his
staff to the pump house, and to the semicircle of still motionless
villagers. He pointed to the fields, and back to the people, and to
the pump house again, gesturing vehemently with his other hand.

_You make the noise. My people will not work while they hear it.
The fields lie untended. Stop the noise, and let my people work._

Couldn't possibly be any plainer.

Then the pump started again. The Lord Mayor's hands tightened on the
staff; he was struggling tormentedly with himself, in vain. His face
relaxed into the heartbroken expression of joy; he turned and
shuffled over, dropping onto his haunches with the others.

"Shut down the pump, Dave!" Meillard called out. "Cut the power off."

The _thugg-thugg_-ing stopped. The Lord Mayor rose, made an odd
salaamlike bow toward the Terrans, and then turned on the people,
striking with his staff and shrieking at them. A few got to their
feet and joined him, screaming, pushing, tugging. Others joined.
In a little while, they were all on their feet, straggling away
across the fields.

Dave Questell wanted to know what it meant; Meillard explained.

"Well, what are we going to do for water?" the Navy engineer asked.

"Soundproof the pump house. You can do that, can't you?"

"Sure. Mound it over with earth. We'll have that done in a few hours."

That started Gofredo worrying. "This happens every time we colonize
an inhabited planet. We give the natives something new. Then we find
out it's bad for them, and we try to take it away from them. And
then the knives come out, and the shooting starts."

Luis Gofredo was also a specialist, speaking on his subject.

       *       *       *       *       *

While they were at lunch, Charley Loughran screened in from
the other camp and wanted to talk to Bennet Fayon.

"A funny thing, Bennet. I took a shot at a bird ... no, a flying
mammal ... and dropped it. It was dead when it hit the ground,
but there isn't a mark on it. I want you to do an autopsy, and
find out how I can kill things by missing them."

"How far away was it?"

"Call it forty feet; no more."

"What were you using, Charley?" Ayesha Keithley called from the table.

"Eight-point-five Mars-Consolidated pistol," Loughran said. "I'd
laid my shotgun down and walked away from it--"

"Twelve hundred foot-seconds," Ayesha said. "Bow-wave as well as
muzzle-blast."

"You think the report was what did it?" Fayon asked.

"You want to bet it didn't?" she countered.

Nobody did.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mom was sulky. She didn't like what Dave Questell's men were doing
to the nice-noise-place. Ayesha and Lillian consoled her by taking
her into the soundproofed room and playing the recording of the
pump-noise for her. Sonny couldn't care less, one way or another;
he spent the afternoon teaching Mark Howell what the marks on paper
meant. It took a lot of signs and play-acting. He had learned about
thirty ideographs; by combining them and drawing little pictures,
he could express a number of simple ideas. There was, of course,
a limit to how many of those things anybody could learn and
remember--look how long it took an Old Terran Chinese scribe
to learn his profession--but it was the beginning of a method
of communication.

Questell got the pump house mounded over. Ayesha came out and tried
a sound-meter, and also Mom, on it while the pump was running.
Neither reacted.

A good many Svants were watching the work. They began to demonstrate
angrily. A couple tried to interfere and were knocked down with
rifle butts. The Lord Mayor and his Board of Aldermen came out with
the big horn and harangued them at length, and finally got them
to go back to the fields. As nearly as anybody could tell, he was
friendly to and co-operative with the Terrans. The snooper over
the village reported excitement in the plaza.

Bennet Fayon had taken an airjeep to the other camp immediately
after lunch. He was back by 1500, accompanied by Loughran. They
carried a cloth-wrapped package into Fayon's dissecting-room.
At cocktail time, Paul Meillard had to go and get them.

"Sorry," Fayon said, joining the group. "Didn't notice how late it
was getting. We're still doing a post on this svant-bat; that's what
Charley's calling it, till we get the native name.

"The immediate cause of death was spasmodic contraction of every
muscle in the thing's body; some of them were partly relaxed before
we could get to work on it, but not completely. Every bone that
isn't broken is dislocated; a good many both. There is not the
slightest trace of external injury. Everything was done by its own
muscles." He looked around. "I hope nobody covered Ayesha's bet,
after I left. If they did, she collects. The large outer membranes
in the comb seem to be unaffected, but there is considerable
compression of the small round ones inside, in just one area,
and more on the left side than on the right. Charley says it
was flying across in front of him from left to right."

"The receptor-area responding to the frequencies of the report,"
Ayesha said.

Anna de Jong made a passing gesture toward Fayon. "The baby's yours,
Bennet," she said. "This isn't psychological. I won't accept a case
of psychosomatic compound fracture."

"Don't be too premature about it, Anna. I think that's more or less
what you have, here."

Everybody looked at him, surprised. His subject was comparative
technology. The bio and psycho-sciences were completely outside
his field.

"A lot of things have been bothering me, ever since the first
contact. I'm beginning to think I'm on the edge of understanding
them, now. Bennet, the higher life-forms here--the people, and that
domsee, and Charley's svant-bat--are structurally identical with us.
I don't mean gross structure, like ears and combs. I mean molecular
and cellular and tissue structure. Is that right?"

Fayon nodded. "Biology on this planet is exactly Terra type. Yes.
With adequate safeguards, I'd even say you could make a viable
tissue-graft from a Svant to a Terran, or vice versa."

"Ayesha, would the sound waves from that pistol-shot in any
conceivable way have the sort of physical effect we're considering?"

"Absolutely not," she said, and Luis Gofredo said: "I've been shot
at and missed with pistols at closer range than that."

"Then it was the effect on the animal's nervous system."

Anna shrugged. "It's still Bennet's baby. I'm a psychologist,
not a neurologist."

"What I've been saying, all along," Fayon reiterated complacently.
"Their hearing is different from ours. This proves it.

"It proves that they don't hear at all."

He had expected an explosion; he wasn't disappointed. They all
contradicted him, many derisively. Signal reactions. Only Paul
Meillard made the semantically appropriate response:

"What do you mean, Mark?"

"They don't _hear_ sound; they _feel_ it. You all saw what they have
inside their combs. Those things don't transmit sound like the ears
of any sound-sensitive life-form we've ever seen. They transform
sound waves into tactile sensations."

Fayon cursed, slowly and luridly. Anna de Jong looked at him
wide-eyed. He finished his cocktail and poured another. In the
snooper screen, what looked like an indignation meeting was making
uproar in the village plaza. Gofredo cut the volume of the speaker
even lower.

"That would explain a lot of things," Meillard said slowly. "How
hard it was for them to realize that we didn't understand when they
talked to us. A punch in the nose feels the same to anybody. They
thought they were giving us bodily feelings. They didn't know we
were insensible to them."

"But they do ... they do have a language," Lillian faltered.
"They talk."

"Not the way we understand it. If they want to say, 'Me,' it's
_tickle-pinch-rub_, even if it sounds like _fwoonk_ to us, when it
doesn't sound like _pwink_ or _tweelt_ or _kroosh_. The tactile
sensations, to a Svant, feel no more different than a massage by
four different hands. Analogous to a word pronounced by four
different voices, to us. They'll have a code for expressing meanings
in tactile sensation, just as we have a code for expressing meanings
in audible sound."

"Except that when a Svant tells another, 'I am happy,' or 'I have a
stomach-ache,' he makes the other one feel that way too," Anna said.
"That would carry an awful lot more conviction. I don't imagine
symptom-swapping is popular among Svants. Karl! You were nearly
right, at that. This isn't telepathy, but it's a lot like it."

"So it is," Dorver, who had been mourning his departed telepathy
theory, said brightly. "And look how it explains their society.
Peaceful, everybody in quick agreement--" He looked at the screen
and gulped. The Lord Mayor and his party had formed one clump, and
the opposition was grouped at the other side of the plaza; they were
screaming in unison at each other. "They make their decisions by
endurance; the party that can resist the feelings of the other
longest converts their opponents."

"Pure democracy," Gofredo declared. "Rule by the party that can
make the most noise."

"And I'll bet that when they're sick, they go around chanting,
'I am well; I feel just fine!'" Anna said. "Autosuggestion would
really work, here. Think of the feedback, too. One Svant has a feeling.
He verbalizes it, and the sound of his own voice re-enforces it in him.
It is induced in his hearers, and they verbalize it, re-enforcing it
in themselves and in him. This could go on and on."

"Yes. It has. Look at their technology." He felt more comfortable,
now he was on home ground again. "A friend of mine, speaking about
a mutual acquaintance, once said, 'When they installed her circuits,
they put in such big feeling circuits that there was no room left
for any thinking circuits.' I think that's a perfect description of
what I estimate Svant mentality to be. Take these bronze knives, and
the musical instruments. Wonderful; the work of individuals trying
to express feeling in metal or wood. But get an idea like the wheel,
or even a pair of tongs? Poo! How would you state the First Law of
Motion, or the Second Law of Thermodynamics, in tickle-pinch-rub
terms? Sonny could grasp an idea like that. Sonny's handicap, if
you call it that, cuts him off from feel-thinking; he can think
logically instead of sensually."

He sipped his cocktail and continued: "I can understand why the
village is mounded up, too. I realized that while I was watching
Dave's gang bury the pump house. I'd been bothered by that, and by
the absence of granaries for all the grain they raise, and by the
