phenomenon.

How did these masses of gold come together? How did it chance that,
with the exception of the thin crust of the asteroid, nearly all its
substance was composed of the precious metal?

One asserted that it was quite impossible that there should be so much
gold at so great a distance from the sun.

"It is the general law," he said, "that the planets increase in density
toward the sun. There is every reason to think that the inner planets
possess the greater amount of dense elements, while the outer ones are
comparatively light."


Whence Came the Treasure?

But another referred to the old theory that there was once in this
part of the solar system a planet which had been burst in pieces by
some mysterious explosion, the fragments forming what we know as
the asteroids. In his opinion, this planet might have contained a
large quantity of gold, and in the course of ages the gold, having,
in consequence of its superior atomic weight, not being so widely
scattered by the explosion as some of the other elements of the planet,
had collected itself together in this body.

But I observed that Lord Kelvin and the other more distinguished men
of science said nothing during this discussion. The truly learned man
is the truly wise man. They were not going to set up theories without
sufficient facts to sustain them. The one fact that the gold was here
was all they had at present. Until they could learn more they were not
prepared to theorize as to how the gold got there.

And in truth, it must be confessed, the greater number of us really
cared less for the explanation of the wonderful fact than we did for
the fact itself.

Gold is a thing which may make its appearance anywhere and at any time
without offering any excuses or explanations.


Visions of Mighty Fortunes.

"Phew! Won't we be rich?" exclaimed a voice.

"How are we going to dig it and get it back to earth?" asked another.

"Carry it in your pockets," said one.

"No need of staking claims here," remarked another. "There is enough
for everybody."

Mr. Edison suddenly turned the current of talk.

"What do you suppose those Martians were doing here?"

"Why, they were wrecked here."

"Not a bit of it," said Mr. Edison. "According to your own showing they
could not have been wrecked here. This planet hasn't gravitation enough
to wreck them by a fall, and besides I have been looking at their machines
and I know there has been a fight."

"A fight?" exclaimed several, pricking up their ears.

"Yes," said Mr. Edison; "those machines bear the marks of the lightning of
the Martians. They have been disabled, but they are made of some metal or
some alloy of metals unknown to me, and consequently they have withstood
the destructive force applied to them, as our electric ships were unable
to withstand it. It is perfectly plain to me that they have been disabled
in a battle. The Martians must have been fighting among themselves."


A Martian Civil War!

"About the gold!" exclaimed one.

"Of course. What else was there to fight about?"

At this instant one of our men came running from a considerable distance,
waving his arms excitedly, but unable to give voice to his story, in the
inappreciable atmosphere of the asteroid, until he had come up and made
telephonic connection with us.

"There is a lot of dead Martians over there," he said. "They've been
cleaning one another out."

"That's it," said Mr. Edison. "I knew it when I saw the condition of
those machines."

"Then this is not a wrecked expedition, directed against the earth?"

"Not at all."

"This must be the great gold mine of Mars," said the president of
an Australian mining company, opening both his eyes and his mouth as
he spoke.

"Yes, evidently that's it. Here's where they come to get their wealth."

"And this," I said, "must be their harvest time. You notice that this
asteroid, being several million miles nearer to the sun than Mars is,
must have an appreciably shorter period of revolution. When it is in
conjunction with Mars, or nearly so, as it is at present, the distance
between the two is not very great, whereas when it is in the opposite
part of its orbit they are separated by an enormous gap of space and
the sun is between them."

"Manifestly in the latter case it would be perilous if not entirely
impossible for the Martians to visit the golden asteroid, but when it
is near Mars, as it is at present, and as it must be periodically for
several years at a time, then is their opportunity."

"With their projectile cars sent forth with the aid of the mysterious
explosives which they possess, it is easy for them under such
circumstances, to make visits to the asteroid."

"Having obtained all the gold they need, or all that they can carry,
a comparatively slight impulse given to their car, the direction of
which is carefully calculated, will carry them back again to Mars."

"If that's so," exclaimed a voice, "we had better look out for
ourselves! We have got into a very hornet's nest! If this is the place
where the Martians come to dig gold, and if this is the height of
their season, as you say, they are not likely to leave us here long
undisturbed."

"These fellows must have been pirates that they had the fight with,"
said another.

"But what's become of the regulars, then?"

"Gone back to Mars for help, probably, and they'll be here again pretty
quick, I am afraid!"

Considerable alarm was caused by this view of the case, and orders were
sent to several of the electrical ships to cruise out to a safe distance
in the direction of Mars and keep a sharp outlook for the approach
of enemies.


Discovery That the Asteroid is a Solid Mass of Gold.

Meanwhile our prisoner awoke. He turned his eyes upon those standing
about him, without any appearance of fear, but rather with a look of
contempt, like that which Gulliver must have felt for the Lilliputians
who had bound him under similar circumstances.

There were both hatred and defiance in his glance. He attempted to free
himself, and the ropes strained with the tremendous pressure that he
put upon them, but he could not break loose.


The Martian Safely Bound.

Satisfied that the Martian was safely bound, we left him where he
lay, and, while awaiting news from the ships which had been sent to
reconnoitre, continued the exploration of the little planet.

At a point nearly opposite to that where we had landed we came upon
the mine which the Martians had been working. They had removed the thin
coating of soil, laying bare the rich stores of gold beneath, and large
quantities of the latter had been removed. Some of it was so solidly
packed that the strokes of the instruments by means of which they had
detached it were visible like the streaks left by a knife cutting cheese.


Reason for Astonishment.

The more we saw of this golden planet the greater became our
astonishment. What the Martians had removed was a mere nothing in
comparison with the entire bulk of the asteroid. Had the celestial mine
been easier to reach, perhaps they would have removed more, or, possibly,
their political economists perfectly understood the necessity of properly
controlling the amount of precious metal in circulation. Very likely,
we thought, the mining operations were under government control in Mars
and it might be that the majority of the people there knew nothing of
this store of wealth floating in the firmament. That would account for
the battle with the supposed pirates, who, no doubt, had organized a
secret expedition to the asteroid and been caught red-handed at the mine.


Richer Than the Klondike.

There were many detached masses of gold scattered about, and some of the
men, on picking them up, exclaimed with astonishment at their lack of
weight, forgetting for the moment that the same law which caused their
own bodies to weigh so little must necessarily affect everything else
in like degree.

A mass of gold that on the earth no man would have been able to lift
could here be tossed about like a hollow rubber ball.

While we were examining the mine, one of the men left to guard the
Martian came running to inform us that the latter evidently wished to
make some communication. Mr. Edison and others hurried to the side of the
prisoner. He still lay on his back, from which position he was not able
to move, notwithstanding all his efforts. But by the motion of his eyes,
aided by a pantomime with his fingers, he made us understand that there
was something in a metallic box fastened at his side which he wished
to reach.


The Martian's Treasure Box.

With some difficulty we succeeded in opening the box and in it there
appeared a number of bright red pellets, as large as an ordinary egg.

When the Martian saw these in our hands he gave us to understand by
the motion of his lips that he wished to swallow one of them. A pellet
was accordingly placed in his mouth, and he instantly and with great
eagerness swallowed it.


The Mysterious Pellets.

While trying to communicate his wishes to us, the prisoner had seemed
to be in no little distress. He exhibited spasmodic movements which
led some of the bystanders to think that he was on the point of dying,
but within a few seconds after he had swallowed the pellet he appeared
to be completely restored. All evidences of distress vanished, and a
look of content came over his ugly face.

"It must be a powerful medicine," said one of the bystanders. "I wonder
what it is."

"I will explain to you my notion," said Professor Moissan, the great
French chemist. "I think it was a pill of the air, which he has taken."

"What do you mean by that?"


Artificial Atmosphere.

"My meaning is," said Professor Moissan, "that the Martian must have, for
that he may live, the nitrogen and the oxygen. These can he not obtain
here, where there is not the atmosphere. Therefore must he get them in
some other manner. This has he managed to do by combining in these pills
the oxygen and the nitrogen in the proportions which make atmospheric
air. Doubtless upon Mars there are the very great chemists. They have
discovered how this may be done. When the Martian has swallowed his
little pill, the oxygen and the nitrogen are rendered to his blood as
if he had breathed them, and so he can live with that air which has been
distributed to him with the aid of his stomach in the place of his lungs."

If Monsieur Moissan's explanation was not correct, at any rate it
seemed the only one that would fit the facts before us. Certainly the
Martian could not breathe where there was practically no air, yet just
as certainly after he had swallowed his pill he seemed as comfortable
as any of us.


Signals from a Ship.

Suddenly, while we were gathered around the prisoner, and interested
in this fresh evidence of the wonderful ingenuity of the Martians, and
of their control over the processes of nature, one of the electrical
ships that had been sent off in the direction of Mars was seen rapidly
returning and displaying signals.


The Martians Are Coming.

It reported that the Martians were coming!




Chapter VIII.


The alarm was spread instantly among those upon the planet and through
the remainder of the fleet.

One of the men from the returning electrical ship dropped down upon the
asteroid and gave a more detailed account of what they had seen.

His ship had been the one which had gone to the greatest distance in the
direction of Mars. While cruising there, with all eyes intent, they had
suddenly perceived a glittering object moving from the direction of the
ruddy planet, and manifestly approaching them. A little inspection with
the telescope had shown that it was one of the projectile cars used by
the Martians.

Our ship had ventured so far from the asteroid that for a moment it seemed
doubtful whether it would be able to return in time to give warning,
because the electrical influence of the asteroid was comparatively
slight at such a distance, and, after they had reversed their polarity,
and applied their intensifier, so as to make that influence effective,
their motion was at first exceedingly slow.

Fortunately after a time they got under way with sufficient velocity to
bring them back to us before the approaching Martians could overtake them.

The latter were not moving with great velocity, having evidently projected
themselves from Mars with only just sufficient force to throw them within
the feeble sphere of gravitation of the asteroid, so that they should
very gently land upon its surface.

Indeed, looking out behind the electrical ship which had brought us the
warning, we immediately saw the projectile of the Martians approaching. It
sparkled like a star in the black sky as the sunlight fell upon it.


Ready for the Enemy.

The ships of the squadron whose crews had not landed upon the planet were
signalled to prepare for action, while those who were upon the asteroid
made ready for battle there. A number of disintegrators were trained
upon the approaching Martians, but Mr. Edison gave strict orders that
no attempt should be made to discharge the vibratory force at random.

"They do not know that we are here," he said, "and I am convinced that
they are unable to control their motions as we can do with our electrical
ships. They depend simply upon the force of gravitation. Having passed
the limit of the attraction of Mars, they have now fallen within the
attraction of the asteroid, and they must slowly sink to its surface."


The Martians Cannot Stop.

"Having, as I am convinced, no means of producing or controlling
electrical attraction and repulsion, they cannot stop themselves, but must
come down upon the asteroid. Having got here they could never get away
again, except as we know the survivors got away from earth, by propelling
their projectile against gravitation with the aid of an explosive."

"Therefore, to a certain extent they will be at our mercy. Let us allow
them quietly to land upon the planet, and then I think, if it becomes
necessary, we can master them."

Notwithstanding Mr. Edison's reassuring words and manner, the company upon
the asteroid experienced a dreadful suspense while the projectile which
seemed very formidable as it drew near, sank with a slow and graceful
motion toward the surface of the ground. Evidently it was about to land
very near the spot where we stood awaiting it.

Its inmates had apparently just caught sight of us. They evinced signs
of astonishment, and seemed at a loss exactly what to do. We could see
projecting from the fore part of their car at least two of the polished
knobs, whose fearful use and power we well comprehended.

Several of our men cried out to Mr. Edison in an extremity of terror:

"Why do you not destroy them? Be quick, or we shall all perish."

"No," said Mr. Edison, "there is no danger. You can see that they are
not prepared. They will not attempt to attack us until they have made
their landing."


The Martians Land.

And Mr. Edison was right. With gradually accelerated velocity, and yet
very, very slowly in comparison with the speed they would have exhibited
in falling upon such a planet as the earth, the Martians and their car
came down to the ground.

We stood at a distance of perhaps three hundred feet from the point where
they touched the asteroid. Instantly a dozen of the giants sprang from
the car and gazed about for a moment with a look of intense surprise. At
first it was doubtful whether they meant to attack us at all.

We stood on our guard, several carrying disintegrators in our hands,
while a score more of these terrible engines were turned upon the Martians
from the electrical ships which hovered near.


A Speech from Their Leader.

Suddenly he who seemed to be the leader of the Martians began to speak
to them in pantomime, using his fingers after the manner in which they
are used for conversation by deaf and dumb people.

Of course, we did not know what he was saying, but his meaning became
perfectly evident a minute later. Clearly they did not comprehend
the powers of the insignificant-looking strangers with whom they had
to deal. Instead of turning their destructive engines upon us, they
advanced on a run, with the evident purpose of making us prisoners or
crushing us by main force.


Awed by the Disintegrator.

The soft whirr of the disintegrator in the hands of Mr. Edison standing
near me came to my ears through the telephonic wire. He quickly swept
the concentrating mirror a little up and down, and instantly the foremost
Martian vanished! Part of some metallic dress that he wore fell upon the
ground where he had stood, its vibratory rate not having been included
in the range imparted to the disintegrator.

His followers paused for a moment, amazed, stared about as if looking for
their leader, and then hurried back to their projectile and disappeared
within it.

"Now we've got business on our hands," said Mr. Edison. "Look out for
yourselves."

As he spoke, I saw the death-dealing knob of the war engine contained
in the car of the Martians moving around toward us. In another instant
it would have launched its destroying bolt.

Before that could occur, however, it had been dissipated into space by
a vibratory stream from a disintegrator.

But we were not to get the victory quite so easily. There was another
of the war engines in the car, and before we could concentrate our fire
upon it, its awful flash shot forth, and a dozen of our comrades perished
before our eyes.

"Quick! Quick!" shouted Mr. Edison to one of his electrical experts
standing near. "There is something the matter with this disintegrator,
and I cannot make it work. Aim at the knob, and don't miss it."


Martians and Terrestrians Fight a Terrible Battle.

But the aim was not well taken, and the vibratory force fell upon a
portion of the car at a considerable distance from the knob, making a
great breach, but leaving the engine uninjured.

A section of the side of the car had been destroyed, and the vibratory
energy had spread no further. To have attempted to sweep the car from
