journals of America, omits to name our leading scientific monthly, but
introduces with just commendation a venerable cotemporary, now upwards
of three score years of age. Now, it is no disparagement of this
really modest monthly to say, that perhaps there are not sixty hundred
people in the States who know it, even by name; and so far as the use
of "scissors and paste" are made available in our technical journals,
we venture the assertion that the editorial staff expenses of the
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN are as great, if not greater, than those of
_Engineering_. The question, however, is not so much one of original
outlay, but which of the two journals gives most for the money. In
this very essential particular, and with no intention to depreciate
the value of _Engineering_, we assert, with becoming modesty, that the
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN occupies a position which _Engineering_ will never
be able to attain.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE SHERMAN PROCESS.


When people boast of extraordinary successes in processes the details
of which are kept profoundly hidden from public scrutiny, and when the
evidences of success are presented in the doubtful form of specimens
which the public has no means of tracing directly to the process, the
public is apt to be skeptical, and to express skepticism often in not
very complimentary terms.

For a considerable time, the public has been treated to highly-colored
accounts of a wonderful metallurgic process whereby the best iron and
steel were said to be made, from the very worst materials, almost
in the twinkling of an eye. This process has been called after its
assumed inventor, or discoverer, the "Sherman Process." The details of
the process are still withheld, but we last week gave an extract from
an English contemporary, which throws a little light upon the subject.

The agent relied upon to effect the remarkable transformation claimed,
is iodine, used preferably in the form of iodide of potassium, and
very little of it is said to produce a most marvellous change in the
character of the metal.

A very feeble attempt at explaining the rationale of this effect has
been made, in one or two English journals, which we opine will not
prove very satisfactory to chemists and scientific metallurgists. The
_Engineer_ has published two three-column articles upon the subject,
the first containing very little information, and the second a great
number of unnecessary paragraphs, but which gives the proportion of
the iodide used, in the extremely scientific and accurate formula
expressed in the terms "a small quantity."

Assertions of remarkable success have also been given. Nothing,
however, was said of remarkable failures, of which there have
doubtless been some. A series of continued successes would, we
should think, by this time, have sufficed for the parturition of
this metallurgic process, and the discovery would ere this have been
introduced to the world, had there not been some drawbacks.

We are not prepared to deny _in toto_ that the process is all that is
claimed for it; but the way in which it has been managed is certainly
one not likely to encourage faith in it.

The very name of "process" implies a system perfected, and if it be
still so far back in the experimental stage that nothing definite in
the way of results can be relied upon, it is not yet a process. If, in
the use of iodine, in some instances, fine grades of iron or steel are
produced, and in as many other experiments, with the same material,
failures result, it is just as fair to attribute the failures to the
iodine, as the successes. A process worthy the name is one that acts
with approximate uniformity, and when, in its use, results vary
widely from what is usual, the variation may be traced to important
differences in the conditions of its application.

On the whole, we are inclined to believe Mr. Sherman's experiments
have not yet developed a definite process, and we shall receive with
much allowance the glowing statements published in regard to it, until
such time as it can face the world and defy unbelief.

The patents obtained by Mr. Sherman seem to cover the use of iodine,
rather than the manner of using it, and throw no light upon the
rationale of the process.

A patent was granted by the United States Patent Office, Sept. 13,
1870, to J. C. Atwood, in which the inventor claims the use of iodide
of potassium in connection with the carbons and fluxes used in making
and refining iron. In his specification he states that he uses about
_fifteen grains_ of this salt to eighty pounds of the metal. This
is about 1/373 of one per cent. He uses in connection with this
exceedingly small proportion of iodide of potassium, about two ounces
of lampblack, or charcoal, and four ounces of manganese, and asserts
that steel made with these materials will be superior in quality
to that made by the old method. These claims we are inclined to
discredit. Certainly, we see no chemical reason why this small amount
of iodide should produce such an effect, and the specification itself
throws no light upon our darkness.

If the experiments in these so-called processes have no better basis
than is apparent from such information as at present can be gathered
respecting them, it is probable we shall wait some time before the
promised revolution in iron and steel manufacture is accomplished
through their use.

       *       *       *       *       *




RUBBER TIRES FOR TRACTION ENGINES.


When it was first discovered that a smooth-faced driving wheel,
running on a smooth-faced rail, would "bite," the era of iron railways
and locomotive engines may be said to have fairly commenced. The
correction of a single radical error was, in this case, the dawn of a
new system of travel, so extensive in its growth and marvelous in its
results, that even the wildest dreamer could not, at that time, have
imagined the consequences of so simple a discovery.

A popular and somewhat similar error regarding the bite of wheels on
rough and uneven surfaces, has also prevailed. We say popular error,
because engineers have not shared it, and it has obtained, to any
notable extent, only among those unfamiliar with mechanical science.
The error in question is, that hard-surfaced wheels will not bite on
a moderately rough surface, sufficiently to give an efficient tractile
power. It seems strange that this error should have diffused itself
very extensively, when it is remembered that a certain degree of
roughness is essential to frictional resistance. The smoothness of the
ordinary railway track is roughness compared to that of an oiled or
unctuous metallic surface; and it has been amply demonstrated that
the resistance of friction, of two bearing surfaces depends, not
upon their extent, but upon the pressure with which they are forced
together. A traction wheel, of given weight, resting upon two square
inches of hard earth or rock, would develop the same tractile power
as though it had a bearing surface of two square feet of similar
material.

On very rough and stony ways, however, another element practically of
no importance on moderately rough ways, like a macadam surface or a
concrete road, where the prominences are nearly of uniform hight, and
so near together as to admit between their summits only very small
arcs of the circumference of the wheel; comes into action. This
element is the constantly recurring lifting of the superincumbent
weight of the machine. Even this would not result in loss of power,
could the power developed in falling be wholly applied to useful work
in the direction of the advance of the engine. The fact is, however,
that it is not so applied, and in any method of propulsion at present
known to engineering science, cannot be so applied. Above a certain
point where friction enough is developed to prevent slip, the more
uneven the road surface is, the greater the power demanded for the
propulsion of the locomotive. And this will hold good for both hard
and soft-tired wheels.

What then is the advantage, if any, of rubber-tired wheels? The
advantages claimed may be enumerated as follows: increased tractile
power, with a given weight, secured without damage to roadways; ease
of carriage to the supported machinery, whereby it--the machinery--is
saved from stress and wear; and economy of the power, expended in
moving the extra weight required by rigid-tired wheels, to secure the
required frictional resistance. The last-mentioned claim depends upon
the first, and must stand or fall with it. The saving of roadway,
ease of carriage, and its favorable result upon the machinery, are
generally conceded.

A denial of the first claim has been made, by those interested in the
manufacture of rigid-tired traction engines and others, in so far
as the rubber tires are employed on comparatively smooth surfaces;
although the increased tractile power on quite _rough_ pavements and
roads is acknowledged.

This denial is based upon results of experiments performed on the
streets of Rochester, England, between the 9th October and the 2nd
November, 1870, by a committee of the Royal Engineers (British Army),
with a view to determine accurately the point in question.

Care was taken to make the circumstances, under which the trials
took place, exactly alike for both the rubber and the iron tires. The
experiments were performed with an Aveling and Porter six-horse power
road engine, built in the Royal Engineers' establishment. The weight
of the engine, without rubber tires, was 11,225 pounds; with rubber
tires, it weighed 12,025 pounds. Without rubber tires it drew 2.813
times its own weight up a gradient of 1 in 11; with rubber
tires, it drew up the same incline 2.763 times the weight of engine,
with the weight of rubber tires added; showing that, although it drew
a little over 2,200 pounds more than it could do without the rubber
tires, the increase of traction was only that which might be expected
from the additional weight.

It is claimed, moreover, that the additional traction power and
superior ease of carriage on rough roads, secured with rubber tires,
is dearly bought at the very great increase in cost, of an engine
fitted with them, over one not so fitted.

This is a point we regard as not fully settled, though it will not
long remain in doubt. There are enough of both types of wheels now in
use to soon answer practically any question there may be of durability
(upon which the point of economy hinges), so far as the interest on
the increased cost due to rubber tires, is offset against the greater
wear and tear of iron rimmed wheels. It is stated, on good authority
that a rubber tired engine, started at work in Aberdeen, Scotland,
wore out its tires between April and September, inclusive, and when
it is taken into consideration, that the cost of these tires is
about half that of other engines, made with solid iron rimmed driving
wheels, it will be seen that, unless very much greater durability than
this can be shown for the rubber, the advantages of such tires are
very nearly, if not more than, balanced by their disadvantages.

The fact that one set of tires wore out so soon does not prove a rule.
There may have been causes at work which do not affect such tires
generally, and it would be, we think, quite premature to form
favorable or unfavorable judgment, of relative economy from such data
as have been yet furnished.

The difference in the current expenses of running the two most
prominent types of engines, with hard and soft tires, now in use, does
not affect the question of rubber tires, unless it can be shown that
these tires necessitate, _per se_, such a form of engine as requires
a greater consumption of fuel, and greater cost of attendance, to
perform a given amount of work.

       *       *       *       *       *




CENTRAL SHAFT OF THE HOOSAC TUNNEL.


As many of our readers have evinced much interest and ingenuity on
the question of the propriety of placing reliance upon the accuracy of
dropping a perpendicular from the top to the bottom of a shaft 1,030
feet in depth, by means of an ordinary plummet, we take the earliest
opportunity of settling the matter beyond dispute, by reporting
the results lately obtained, through a series of experiments by the
engineers in charge, for the ultimate purpose of laying down the
correct line for the tunnel.

The perpendicular line has, of course, been dropped many times, and
the main result taken. The plummet used is made of steel, properly
balanced and polished, in shape something like a pineapple, and of
about the same size, weighing fifteen pounds. It was suspended, with
the large end downwards, by a thin copper wire, one fortieth of an
inch in diameter, immersed in water; and, after careful steadying with
the hand, occupied about an hour in assuming its final position or
motion, which, contrary to the expectation and theories of many,
resulted in a circular motion around a fixed point, the diameter of
the circle being a mean of one quarter of an inch. The suspending
wire in these operations was not quite the entire length of the shaft,
being only 900 feet; and before the plummet had settled, the wire had
stretched nearly twenty feet.

The suspension of the plummet in water was not considered necessary
for any other reason than that water was continually trickling down
the wire, and dropping on the plummet. The experiments so far have
not been of the perfect character it is determined to attain, when the
final alignment is made, as, until the headings east and west of the
shaft have advanced to a considerable distance, any slight error would
be of no account.

A neat and ingenious instrument has been constructed for determining
the variation of the plummet, and will be used when great accuracy is
desired; the plummet will also be suspended in oil.

The bearing of the tunnel is about S. 81 deg. E.; but, independently of
its near approach to the line of revolution described by the earth,
it is not considered necessary to take into account any motion it may
derive from this cause. In fact, the opinion is, that the motion of
the earth will not practically have any effect.

On the whole, after the still imperfect experiments which have been
made, enough is established to show there is no difficulty to be
encountered, other than the accurate and delicate manipulation of the
plummet and its attachments.

The shaft headings are progressing favorably. The rock is not so hard
or varied as that met with at the west end markings. Already nearly
300 feet have been taken out, and with the proved energy of the
contractors, this great task will doubtless be prosecuted steadily and
surely to completion, within the contract time expiring March 1, 1874.

       *       *       *       *       *




A MUSEUM OF ART AND NATURAL HISTORY.


Our recent articles on "Scientific Destitution in New York" and "The
Scientific Value of the Central Park," have called forth numerous
letters from correspondents, and have been extensively noticed by the
press. We now learn that the legislature of the State has taken
the matter in hand, and there is some prospect, with an honest
administration of the appropriations, of something being done to
relieve our city of the opprobrium that rests upon it. A bill is
pending, before the Senate, authorizing the Park Commissioners to
build, equip, and furnish, on Manhattan Square, or any other public
square or park, suitable fire-proof buildings, at a cost not exceeding
$500,000 for each corporation, for the purpose of establishing a
museum of art, by the Metropolitan Museum of Art, and of a museum
of natural history, by the American Museum of Natural History, two
societies recently incorporated by the Legislature. This is a million
dollars to begin with, and an ample site, without cost, to the
aforementioned corporations.

Manhattan Square extends from Seventy-seventh to Eighty-first streets,
and from Eighth to Ninth avenues, and spans about eighteen acres.
Until it was set apart by the state Board of Commissioners, for the
purposes of a Zoological Garden, it was proposed, by a number of
enlightened citizens of New York, to devote it to the uses of four of
our existing corporations, giving to each one a corner, and an equal
share in the allotment of space. The societies were, "the Academy of
Design," for art, "the Historical Society," for public records and
libraries, "the Lyceum of Natural History," for science, and "the
American Institute," for technology. These have been incorporated
for many years, and are known to include the leading artists, men
of letters, science, and the arts, of the city, on their lists of
members. The committee went so far as to have plans of the building
drawn by competent architects; but, like many other well-meant
schemes, want of money compelled the originators of the plan to
abandon any further attempts. In the meantime, the Legislature
chartered the American Botanical and Zoological Society, and gave the
Commissioners of the Park authority to set apart a portion of it,
not exceeding sixty acres, for the use of the Society, for the
establishment of a zoological and botanical garden. This society
was duly organized under the act, and Mr. Hamilton Fish was made
its president, and considerable sums of money were subscribed. But,
according to the sixth annual report of the Board of Commissioners,
"the society never manifested its desire for an allotment of ground."
It appears to have died, and made no sign. Some of our citizens,
fearing that the Central Park would go the way of every other public
work in the city, made strenuous effort to revive the Zoological
Society, for the purpose of obtaining a perpetual lease of a suitable
site, on which to establish a zoological garden, similar to those in
London, Paris, Amsterdam, and Cologne. Their object was to remove this
