occasional weekend home if you're lucky enough to draw your hometown
for a terminal point. This might help the population rate but it
sure doesn't do anything for the institution of matrimony."

[Illustration]

"I know some troopers that are married," Kelly said.

"But there aren't very many," Ben countered. "Comes the time they pull
me off the cars and stick me behind a desk somewhere, then I'll think
about it."

"You might be too old by then," Kelly murmured.

Ben grinned. "You sound as though you're worried about it," he said.

"No," Kelly replied softly, "no, I'm not worried about it. Just
thinking." She averted her eyes and looked out into the night again.
"I wonder what NorCon would do with a husband-wife team?" she
murmured, almost to herself.

Ben looked sharply at her and frowned. "Why, they'd probably split
them up," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Split what up?" Clay inquired, standing in the door of the cab.

"Split up all troopers named Clay Ferguson," Kelly said disgustedly,
"and use them for firewood--especially the heads. They say that
hardwood burns long and leaves a fine ash. And that's what you've been
for years."

She sat erect in the jump seat and looked sourly at the young trooper.

Clay shuddered at the pun and squeezed by the girl to get to his seat.
"I'll take it now, pop," he said. "Go get your geriatrics treatment."

Ben got out of his seat with a snort. "I'll 'pop' you, skinhead," he
snapped. "You may be eight years younger than I am but you only have
one third the virility and one tenth the brains. And eight years from
now you'll still be in deficit spending on both counts."

"Careful, venerable lord of my destiny," Clay admonished with a grin,
"remember how I spent my vacation and remember how you spent yours
before you go making unsubstantiated statements about my virility."

Kelly stood up. "If you two will excuse me, I'll go back to the
dispensary and take a good jolt of male hormones and then we can come
back and finish this man-to-man talk in good locker room company."

"Don't you dare," Ben cried, "I wouldn't let you tamper with one
single, tiny one of your feminine traits, princess. I like you just
the way you are."

Kelly looked at him with a wide-eyed, cherubic smile. "You really mean
that, Ben?"

The older trooper flushed briefly and then turned quickly into the
galley. "I'm going to try for some shut-eye. Wake me at two, Clay, if
nothing else breaks." He turned to Kelly who still was smiling at him.
"And watch out for that lascivious young goat."

"It's all just talk, talk, talk," she said scornful. "You go to bed
Ben. I'm going to try something new in psychiatric annals. I'm going
to try and psychoanalyze a dummy." She sat back down on the jump seat.

At 2400 hours it was Vincennes Check with the density reports, all
down in the past hour. The patrol was settling into what looked like a
quiet night routine. Kelly chatted with Ferguson for another half hour
and then rose again. "I think I'll try to get some sleep," she said.
"I'll put on a fresh pot of coffee for you two before I turn in."

She rattled around in the galley for some time. "Whatcha cooking?"
Clay called out. "Making coffee," Kelly replied.

"It take all that time to make coffee?" Clay queried.

"No," she said. "I'm also getting a few things ready so we can have a
fast breakfast in case we have to eat on the run. I'm just about
through now."

A couple of minutes later she stuck her head into the cab. "Coffee's
done. Want some?"

Clay nodded. "Please, princess."

She poured him a cup and set it in the rack beside his seat.

"Thanks," Clay said. "Good night, Hiawatha."

"Good night, Babe," she replied.

"You mean 'Paul Bunyon,' don't you?" Clay asked. "'Babe' was his blue
ox."

"I know what I said," Kelly retorted and strolled back to the
dispensary. As she passed through the crew cubby, she glanced at Ben
sleeping on the bunk recently vacated by Ferguson. She paused and
carefully and gently pulled a blanket up over his sleeping form. She
smiled down at the trooper and then went softly to her compartment.

In the cab, Clay sipped at his coffee and kept watchful eyes on the
video monitors. Beulah was back on auto drive and Clay had dropped her
speed to a slow fifty as the traffic thinned.

At 0200 hours he left the cab long enough to go back and shake Ben
awake and was himself re-awakened at 0400 to take back control. He let
Ben sleep an extra hour before routing him out of the bunk again at
0700. The thin, gray light of the winter morning was just taking hold
when Ben came back into the cab. Clay had pulled Beulah off to the
service strip and was stopped while he finished transcribing his
scribbled notes from the 0700 Washington Criminal Control broadcast.

Ben ran his hand sleepily over his close-cropped head. "Anything
exciting?" he asked with a yawn. Clay shook his head. "Same old thing.
'All cars exercise special vigilance over illegal crossovers. Keep all
lanes within legal speed limits.' Same old noise."

"Anything new on our hit-runner?"

"Nope."

"Good morning, knights of the open road," Kelly said from the galley
door. "Obviously you both went to sleep after I left and allowed our
helpless citizens to slaughter each other."

"How do you figure that one?" Ben laughed.

"Oh, it's very simple," she replied. "I managed to get in a full seven
hours of sleep. When you sleep, I sleep. I slept. Ergo, you did
likewise."

"Nope," Clay said, "for once we had a really quiet night. Let's hope
the day is of like disposition."

Kelly began laying out the breakfast things. "You guys want eggs this
morning?"

"You gonna cook again today?" Clay inquired.

"Only breakfast," Kelly said. "You have the honors for the rest of the
day. The diner is now open and we're taking orders."

"I'll have mine over easy," Ben said. "Make mine sunny-up," Clay
called.

Kelly began breaking eggs into the pan, muttering to herself. "Over
easy, sunny-up, I like 'em scrambled. Next tour I take I'm going to
get on a team where everyone likes scrambled eggs."

A few minutes later, Beulah's crew sat down to breakfast. Ben had just
dipped into his egg yolk when the radio blared. "Attention all cars.
Special attention Cars 207, 56 and 82."

"Just once," Ben said, "just once, I want to sit down to a meal and
get it all down my gullet before that radio gives me indigestion." He
laid down his fork and reached for the message pad.

The radio broadcast continued. "A late model, white over green
Travelaire, containing two men and believed to be the subjects wanted
in earlier broadcast on murder, robbery and hit-run murder, was
involved in a service station robbery and murder at Vandalia,
Illinois, at approximately 0710 this date. NorCon Criminal Division
believes this subject car escaped filter check and left NAT 26-West
sometime during the night.

"Owner of this stolen vehicle states it had only half tanks of fuel at
the time it was taken. This would indicate wanted subjects stopped for
fuel. It is further believed they were recognized by the station
attendant from video bulletins sent out by this department last date
and that he was shot and killed to prevent giving alarm.

"The shots alerted residents of the area and the subject car was last
seen headed south. This vehicle may attempt to regain access to
NAT-26-West or it may take another thruway. All units are warned once
again to approach this vehicle with extreme caution and only with the
assistance of another unit where possible. Acknowledge. Washington
Criminal Control out."

Ben looked at the chrono. "They hit Vandalia at 0710, eh. Even in the
yellow they couldn't get this far for another half hour. Let's finish
breakfast. It may be a long time until lunch."

The crew returned to their meal. While Kelly was cleaning up after
breakfast, Clay ran the quick morning engine room check. In the cab,
Ben opened the arms rack and brought out two machine pistols and
belts. He checked them for loads and laid one on Clay's control seat.
He strapped the other around his waist. Then he flipped up a cover in
the front panel of the cab. It exposed the breech mechanisms of a
pair of twin-mounted 25 mm auto-cannon. The ammunition loads were
full. Satisfied, Ben shut the inspection port and climbed into his
seat. Clay came forward, saw the machine pistol on his seat and
strapped it on without a word. He settled himself in his seat. "Engine
room check is all green. Let's go rabbit hunting."

Car 56 moved slowly out into the police lane. Both troopers had their
individual sets of video monitors on in front of their seats and were
watching them intently. In the growing light of day, a white-topped
car was going to be easy to spot.

       *       *       *       *       *

It had all the earmarks of being another wintery, overcast day. The
outside temperature at 0800 was right on the twenty-nine-degree mark
and the threat of more snow remained in the air. The 0800 density
reports from St. Louis Control were below the 14,000 mark in all lanes
in the one-hundred-mile block west of the city. That was to be
expected. They listened to the eastbound densities peaking at
twenty-six thousand vehicles in the same block, all heading into the
metropolis and their jobs. The 0800, 1200 and 1600 hours density
reports also carried the weather forecasts for a five-hundred-mile
radius from the broadcasting control point. Decreasing temperatures
with light to moderate snow was in the works for Car 56 for the first
couple of hundred miles west of St. Louis, turning to almost blizzard
conditions in central Kansas. Extra units had already been put into
service on all thruways through the midwest and snow-burners were
waging a losing battle from Wichita west to the Rockies around
Alamosa, Colorado.

Outside the temperature was below freezing; inside the patrol car it
was a comfortable sixty-eight degrees. Kelly had cleared the galley
and taken her place on the jump seat between the two troopers. With
all three of them in the cab, Ben cut from the intercom to commercial
broadcast to catch the early morning newscasts and some pleasant
music. The patrol vehicle glided along at a leisurely sixty miles an
hour. An hour out of St. Louis, a big liquid cargo carrier was stopped
on the inner edge of the green lane against the divider to the police
lane. The trucker had dropped both warning barriers and lights a half
mile back. Ben brought Beulah to a halt across the divider from the
stopped carrier. "Dropped a track pin," the driver called out to the
officers.

Ben backed Beulah across the divider behind the stalled carrier to
give them protection while they tried to assist the stalled vehicle.

Donning work helmets to maintain contact with the patrol car, and its
remote radio system, the two troopers dismounted and went to see what
needed fixing. Kelly drifted back to the dispensary and stretched out
on one of the hospital bunks and picked up a new novel.

Beulah's well-equipped machine shop stock room produced a matching
pin and it was merely a matter of lifting the stalled carrier and
driving it into place in the track assembly. Ben brought the patrol
car alongside the carrier and unshipped the crane. Twenty minutes
later, Clay and the carrier driver had the new part installed and the
tanker was on his way once again.

Clay climbed into the cab and surveyed his grease-stained uniform
coveralls and filthy hands. "Your nose is smudged, too, dearie,"
Martin observed.

Clay grinned, "I'm going to shower and change clothes. Try and see if
you can drive this thing until I get back without increasing the
pedestrian fatality rate." He ducked back into the crew cubby and
stripped his coveralls.

Bored with her book, Kelly wandered back to the cab and took Clay's
vacant control seat. The snow had started falling again and in the
mid-morning light it tended to soften the harsh, utilitarian landscape
of the broad thruway stretching ahead to infinity and spreading out in
a mile of speeding traffic on either hand.

"Attention all cars on NAT 26-West and east," Washington Criminal
Control radio blared. "Special attention Cars 56 and 82. Suspect
vehicle, white over green Travelaire reported re-entered NAT 26-West
on St. Louis interchange 179. St. Louis Control reports communications
difficulty in delayed report. Vehicle now believed...."

"Car 56, Car 56," St. Louis Control broke in. "Our pigeon is in your
zone. Commercial carrier reports near miss sideswipe three minutes ago
in blue lane approximately three miles west of mile Marker 957.

"Repeating. Car 56, suspect car...."

Ben glanced at the radiodometer. It read 969, then clicked to 970.

"This is Five Six, St. Louis," he broke in, "acknowledged. Our
position is mile marker 970...."

Kelly had been glued to the video monitors since the first of the
bulletin. Suddenly she screamed and banged Ben on the shoulder. "There
they are. There they are," she cried, pointing at the blue lane
monitor.

Martin took one look at the white-topped car cutting through traffic
in the blue lane and slammed Beulah into high. The safety cocoons
slammed shut almost on the first notes of the bull horn. Trapped in
the shower, Clay was locked into the stall dripping wet as the water
automatically shut off with the movement of the cocoon.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I have them in sight," Ben reported, as the patrol car lifted on its
air pad and leaped forward. "They're in the blue five miles ahead of
me and cutting over to the yellow. I estimate their speed at two
