the screw, A, by a plain hole. It is screwed on the outside, and the
plate in which it fits acts as its nut. It is fast to the handle, D,
and is in fact operated by it. The handle or lever is provided with a
catch, E, pivoted in the enclosed box, F, which also contains a means
of detaining the catch in the notches of the wheel, or of holding it
free from the same when it is placed clear. If, then, the lever, D, be
moved back and forth the feed screw, A, and hence the three slide
rests, will be operated; while, if the catch be placed in one of the
notches on the wheel, B, both the screws, A and C, will act to operate
the rests. When, therefore, the operator is cutting screws, he sets
the catch, E, into one of the notches so soon as the tools are
properly adjusted to the work; and then lifting the catch, E, he turns
the wheel, B, so that the catch falls into the next notch, and this
puts the cut on. When the tool has taken that cut, and while the
latter saddle is traveling back, the catch is placed in the next
notch, and so on, the cut for the forward travel always being put on
as above while the saddle is traveling back. Thus is insured an
exactly equable amount of cut on the whole three rests. When the
lever, D, is not in use, the catch is removed from the wheel, B, and
is allowed to rest against the pins, G or A, provided for that
purpose. For piston rods, or for work such as cutting jack screws,
this lathe is very useful. It is obviously, however, a special tool.

       *       *       *       *       *




NATURAL ORNAMENTS IN WINTER.


Now that the hedges are no longer green, and the trees stand black and
bare on the landscape, is the time to seek for endless variety and
beauty waiting to be admired in its turn. What miniature fairy glens
and grottoes are distributed over the hedge banks of our country
lanes! Mosses, delicate and beautiful, may be found in the interstices
of any old wall, or at the foot of almost any tree or shrub. In the
winter time mosses and lichens are found in fruit, and are beautiful
objects. A pocket microscope lens is essential for their proper
observation; and though the delicate carmine cups of the species known
as the cup moss, and the familiar gray and yellow mosaic appearance we
see on twigs and branches on our way, are easily recognized, the study
of this form of winter vegetation is an inexhaustible one, and is an
occupation for a lifetime, if earnestly pursued. We do not however,
suggest that every one who endeavors to recognize the different
species of moss, lichens, or fungi should necessarily do so through
the medium of the microscope; but it will greatly add to the pleasure
of making a collection out of doors if there be a good microscope at
home, so that when the contents of the basket be turned out, after the
winter's walk, there should be interest even in the fragments left,
after a little pile of varied bits has been constructed, rivalling the
choicest summer bouquet in beauty of form and color. We have seen such
a collection formed into a beautiful object by raising a little mound
of rough bits of bark in a plate or saucer, and placing on it
varieties of fungus of every shade of red, brown, yellow, and gray.
They seem to spring forth from a bed of sphagnum or bog moss of
brightest emerald green; while a clump of the screw wall moss in
fruit, with its curious little box-like capsules, supports a gray or
yellow lichen, which has been gently removed from some old wall or
tree. A bit of stick or a twig, incrusted with a bright orange-colored
lichen, supports a trailing branch of delicate green ivy, the most
beautiful and adaptable of all winter foliage. Over this little
arrangement is placed a bell glass, to preserve it from dust and the
effect of a dry atmosphere; and we know how pleasing to the eye is its
varied beauty of form and color, lasting thus, a constant source of
pleasure, for many a day without renewal.--_Chambers' Journal_.

       *       *       *       *       *




IMPROVED HARNESS COCKEYE.


We illustrate herewith a very simple little device for attaching
traces to the single tree. It forms a secure fastening which may be
instantly attached, and which, by its construction, is prevented from
wearing out rapidly.

[Illustration: Figs. 1 and 2]

Fig. 1 shows the cockeye attached to the single tree, and Fig. 2
exhibits parts in section, displaying the construction very clearly.
The yoke is of the usual pattern. Swiveled to it is a long loop, which
is chambered out to receive a spiral spring which acts upon a plunger.
The latter is provided with a follower having a semicircular notch,
which corresponds in form to the inside of the end of the loop. The
follower also has guiding lips which extend over the sides of the
loop. Through the yielding of the spring, the space between the
follower and loop adjusts itself to studs or hooks of any size.
Patented December 12, 1876, through the Scientific American Patent
Agency. For further particulars, address the inventors, Messrs. F.W.
Knapp and C. Schallhorn, Fiddletown, Amador county, Cal.

       *       *       *       *       *




PROPOSED CREMATION TEMPLE.


Cremation, in this country at least, is not popular. For a time, it
occupied here some public attention, but only in a sensational way;
and the sober discussion of the subject, which followed after its
novelty had worn off, led to the general opinion that, while every one
might be quite willing to see his dead neighbors cremated, no one
would acquiesce in the disposal of his friends and relatives in so
abnormal a manner. Hence, with the single exception of the late
revolting exhibition in Pennsylvania, which we alluded to at the time,
the dead in this country have continued to be deposited in their
hallowed resting places, and have not been packed away, in an
incinerated state, in labeled urns. In Europe, however, cremation
still finds many warm adherents; and during last summer a congress of
the "Friends of Cremation" (a society which, we are informed by
_Engineering_, whence we take the annexed engravings, has branches in
various parts of the world), was held in Dresden. Before this meeting,
a large number of designs for cremation and mortuary buildings were
brought in competition, and finally the prize was awarded to Mr. G.
Lilienthal, a Berlin architect, for the imposing structure illustrated
herewith.

This will be the grand temple of cremation when it is erected--a
proceeding to take place in the dim future: when or where not stated.
On each side of a central chapel there is a circular memorial hall;
and extending so as to inclose the garden of the establishment, on the
sides of the halls are wings containing a large number of niches for
the reception of funeral urns.

The cremation ceremony is proposed to be as follows: The body, having
been brought into the hall, is subjected to the usual medical
examination; or when an inquest is necessary, it is removed to offices
in another part of the building, where the required investigation can
be held. When all is ready, the body, placed on the platform, B, Fig.
2, is raised by a lift into the hall, A, where visitors are gathered,
and here the result of the medical examination is declared, and
whatever preliminary religious ceremonies that are desired are
performed. The body is then transported to the chapel, E, in front of
the pulpit, F, where the burial service is performed. The bier is
afterward lowered mechanically, and brought to the furnaces, which are
arranged in a semicircle and partitioned for the reception of several
biers. The ashes are subsequently placed in an urn, on which the
name, etc., of the deceased are recorded, and which is set up in a
suitable niche.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.--DESIGN FOR A CREMATION TEMPLE]

The building, which we illustrate both in elevation, Fig. 1, and in
plan, Fig. 2, is designed to contain 100,000 urns, and is adapted for
a town of 200,000 inhabitants. The architect has certainly exhibited
much taste in his design for the building, and has provided every
convenience in the internal arrangement for carrying on a large
business in the cremation line.

[Illustration: Fig. 2.--SECTION OF A CREMATION TEMPLE.]

       *       *       *       *       *


HOW TO REJUVENATE AN OLD ROSE BUSH.

Never give up a decaying rose bush till you have tried watering it two
or three times a week with soot tea. Make the concoction with boiling
water, from soot taken from the chimney or stove in which wood is
burned. When cold, water the bush with it. When it is used up, pour
boiling hot water on the soot a second time. Rose bushes treated in
this way will often send out thrifty shoots, the leaves will become
large and thick, the blossoms will greatly improve in size and be more
richly tinted than before.--D.H. Jacques.

       *       *       *       *       *




A CLOCK COLLECTOR.


One of those odd geniuses, who spend their lives and means in
collecting curious and rare articles, lately died. His name was
Sylvester Bonaffon, a retired merchant of Philadelphia. His elaborate
collections were sold at auction, and their oddity has attracted
general attention. His chief mania was for clocks, which literally
covered every portion of available space in his apartments, whether
they were placed on chairs, tables, shelves, or hung against the wall.
Some of these timepieces were of unique construction. One clock was
made to run for 400 days after one winding; another was set in the
dashboard of his carriage, and he used Mr. Bonaffon also had an
especial fondness for electrical apparatus. His windows were provided
with ingenious burglar alarms, his rooms with fire alarms, and he
ignited his gas always by electricity. His place of business, his
stable, the Continental Hotel where he dined, were all connected with
instruments in his room; and he even had perfected arrangements so
that he could set at home and send his own messages to California.
Besides the clocks and electric apparatus, there was an immense
collection of _bric-a-brac_ of every conceivable variety, which was
sold at the auction--as is usually the case--at prices much below
those paid by its late owner.

       *       *       *       *       *




FERTILIZING INFLUENCE OF SNOW.


Snow is often called the "poor man's manure;" and if it is true that
it has any manurial value, the farmer's prospects for the next season
are certainly flattering. The body of snow upon the ground in all the
Northern and Middle States is very great, and millions of acres of
land are covered by it as with a blanket of the whitest wool. It is
probable that seldom, perhaps never, has so wide an area of our
country been covered as during this month of January, 1877. The
question whether snow is capable of affording to lands any of the
elements of fertility is one often asked; and in reply, the Boston
_Journal of Chemistry_ says that it probably is. The atmosphere holds
ammonia and some other nitrogenous products, which are without doubt
brought to the soil by snowflakes as well as by rain drops.
Experiments both here and abroad would seem to prove the truth of this
conclusion.

Rains are not only valuable for the moisture which they supply, but
for what they bring to us from the atmosphere. During a thunderstorm
nitric acid is produced in considerable quantities; and dissolved in
the rain drops to a high degree of attenuation, its effects upon soils
are highly salutary, as the nitrogen permeates the entire soil.

       *       *       *       *       *


ACTION OF SEA WATER ON LEAD.

The _Journal of the Chemical Society_ says that freshly cut strips of
lead were kept in a bottle of sea water for four days, the bottle
being frequently shaken. No trace of lead could be detected in the
water, but the bright surface of the strips was coated with an
insoluble lead compound. Hence lead pipes may be used in marine
aquaria without any fear of injury to their inhabitants.

       *       *       *       *       *




PAPIN'S STEAM ENGINE.

BY PROFESSOR CHARLES A. JOY.


It is a matter of history that, as early as 1688, Denis Papin,
Professor of Physics and Mathematics at the University of Marburg,
proposed to substitute steam for powder in the engine invented by
Huyghens, and that in 1695 he published a description of several new
inventions, in which steam played an important part. The Elector Carl,
of Hesse-Cassel, was anxious to be free from the annoyances and
impositions practised upon his boatmen by the authorities at Muenden,
and he proposed to avoid that city by constructing a canal connecting
the Weser with the river that flowed through Cassel. Much of the work
was accomplished, and the half finished line of the canal can be
traced even at the present day. Papin was authorized to build a
powerful steam pump by which the supply of water was to be regulated.
A working model of this pump was completed; and the Elector was on the
point of visiting the laboratory to witness its operation, when a
fearful explosion frightened the workmen, and afforded an opportunity
for enemies to intrigue for the expulsion of Papin from the country.
The model was preserved for a long time in Cassel; but at the time of
the French invasion, it disappeared, and no trace of it has since been
found. In writing about his inventions, Papin says, in 1695: "It would
occupy too much space for me to describe in what manner this principle
could be applied to removing water from mines, throwing bombs, sailing
against the wind, and for many other similar purposes; everyone
according to his wants can imagine the constructions that could be
made. I cannot, however, refrain from remarking how much preferable
this power would be to oars for those whose business calls them to the
sea." And further on he says: "The steam cylinders could be employed
for a great variety of purposes." One of the cylinders, which was to
form a part of the pump, was cast at the foundry in Cassel, and after
various vicissitudes has finally become the property of the Historical
Museum in that city, where it will be preserved, with jealous care,
from any further injury. During the recent exhibition of philosophical
instruments in London, this remnant of Papin's invention played an
important part, it having been generously loaned by the authorities
for that occasion. After the flight of Papin from Germany, the
cylinder was used as a receptacle for iron turnings and borings in the
royal works; and after the destruction of those works by fire, it came
into the possession of Henschel, the founder of one of the most
extensive locomotive works in Germany. This man fully appreciated the
value of the historical relic; and when I visited him at the works,
twenty-five years ago, he pointed out with pride to me the inscription
on its side, "Papin's Cylinder," and said that he intended to have it
placed upon a solid pedestal near the gate. His grandson has since
presented it to the city, and its preservation from destruction or
sale is now secured. A copy of the drawing made by Papin of the pump
of which this cylinder was to form a part, and which was published in
1695, has recently appeared in Dingler's _Journal_, and I send it to
you, hoping that you will have it engraved and perpetuated in your
valuable paper. It is a peculiar combination of Savery's invention and
Papin's piston engine, suggested for another purpose, and is a decided
