care to meet."

He took her hand, and to Murgatroyd's great relief they went back to the
vessel.

Redgrave then raised the _Astronef_ a couple of hundred feet and, by
directing the repulsive force against the mountain walls, developed just
sufficient energy to keep them moving at about twelve miles an hour.

They began to cross the plain with their searchlights flashing out in
all directions. They had scarcely gone a mile before the head-light fell
upon a moving form half walking, half crawling among some stunted
brown-leaved bushes by the side of a broad, stagnant stream.

"Look!" said Zaidie, clasping his arm, "is that a gorilla, or--no, it
_can't_ be a man."

The light was turned full upon the object. If it had been covered with
hair it might have passed for some strange type of the ape tribe, but
its skin was smooth and of a livid grey. Its lower limbs were evidently
more powerful than its upper; its chest was enormously developed, but
the stomach was small. The head was big and round and smooth. As they
came nearer they saw that in place of fingernails it had long white
feelers which it kept extended and constantly waving about as it groped
its way towards the water. As the intense light flashed full on it, it
turned its head towards them. It had a nose and a mouth--the nose, long
and thick, with huge mobile nostrils; the mouth forming an angle
something like a fish's lips. Teeth there seemed none. At either side of
the upper part of the nose there were two little sunken holes--in which
this thing's ancestors of countless thousands of years ago had once had
eyes.

As she looked upon this awful parody of what had once perhaps been a
human face, Zaidie covered hers with her hands and uttered a little moan
of horror.

"Horrible, isn't it?" said Redgrave. "I suppose that's what the last
remnants of the Lunarians have come to. Evidently once men and women,
something like ourselves. I daresay the ancestors of that thing have
lived here in coldness and darkness for hundreds of generations. It
shows how tremendously tenacious Nature is of life.

"Ages ago, no doubt, that brute's ancestors lived up yonder when there
were seas and rivers, fields and forests, just as we have them on earth,
among men and women who could see and breathe and enjoy everything in
life and had built up civilisations like ours!

"Look, it's going to fish or something. Now we shall see what it feeds
on. I wonder why the water isn't frozen. I suppose there must be some
internal heat left still. A few patches with lakes of lava under them.
Perhaps this valley is just over one, and that's why these creatures
have managed to survive.

"Ah! there's another of them, smaller, not so strongly formed. That
thing's mate, I suppose--female of the species. Ugh! I wonder how many
hundred of thousands of years it will take for _our_ descendants to come
to that."

"I hope our dear old earth will hit something else and be smashed to
atoms before that happens!" exclaimed Zaidie, whose curiosity had now
partly overcome her horror. "Look, it's trying to catch something!"

The larger of the two creatures had groped its way to the edge of the
sluggish, oily water and dropped, or rather rolled, quietly into it. It
was evidently cold-blooded, or nearly so, for no warm-blooded animal
would have taken to such water so naturally. Presently the other dropped
in too, and both disappeared for some moments. Then, in the midst of a
violent commotion in the water a few yards away, they rose to the
surface of the water, the larger with a wriggling, eel-like fish between
its jaws.

They both groped their way towards the edge, and had just reached it and
were pulling themselves out when a hideous shape rose out of the water
behind them. It was like the head of an octopus joined to the body of a
boa-constrictor, but head and neck were both of the same ghastly, livid
grey as the other two creatures. It was evidently blind, too, for it
took no notice of the brilliant glare of the searchlight, but it moved
rapidly towards the two scrambling forms, its long white feelers
trembling out in all directions. Then one of them touched the smaller of
the two shapes. Instantly the rest shot out and closed round it, and
with scarcely a struggle it was dragged beneath the water and vanished.

[Illustration: _A hideous shape rose out of the water behind them._]

Zaidie uttered a little low scream and covered her face again, and
Redgrave said:

"The same old brutal law you see, life preying upon life even on a dying
world, a world that is more than half dead itself. Well, I think we've
seen enough of this place. I suppose those are about the only types of
life we should meet anywhere, and I don't want to know much more about
them. I vote we go and see what the invisible hemisphere is like."

"I have had all I want of this side," said Zaidie, looking away from the
scene of the hideous tragedy, "so the sooner we go, the better I shall
like it."

A few minutes later the _Astronef_ was again rising towards the stars
with her searchlights still flashing down into the Valley of Expiring
Life, which had seemed to them even worse than the Valley of Death. As
he followed the rays with a pair of powerful field glasses, Redgrave
fancied that he saw huge, dim shapes moving about the stunted shrubbery
and through the slimy pools of the stagnant rivers, and once or twice he
got a glimpse of what might well have been the ruins of towns and
cities, but the gloom soon became too deep and dense for the
searchlights to pierce and he was glad when the _Astronef_ soared up
into the brilliant sunlight once more. Even the ghastly wilderness of
the lunar landscape was welcome after the nameless horrors of that
hideous abyss.

After a couple of hours' rapid travelling, Redgrave pointed down to a
comparatively small, deep crater, and said:

"There, that is Malapert. It is almost exactly at the south pole of the
moon, and there," he went on, pointing ahead, "is the horizon of the
hemisphere which no earthborn eyes have ever seen."

"Except ours," said Zaidie somewhat inconsequently, "and I wonder what
_we_ shall see."

"Probably something very like what we have seen on this side," replied
Redgrave, and as the event proved, he was right.

Contrary to many ingenious speculations which have been indulged in by
both scientist and romancer, they found that the hemisphere, which for
countless ages had never been turned towards the earth, was almost an
exact replica of the visible one. Fully three-fourths of it was
brilliantly illuminated by the sun, and what they saw through their
glasses was practically the same as what they had beheld on the
earthward side; huge groups of enormous craters and ringed mountains,
long, irregular chains crowned with sharp, splintery peaks, and between
these vast, deeply depressed areas, ranging in colour from dazzling
white to grey-brown, marking the beds of the vanished lunar seas.

As they crossed one of these, Redgrave allowed the _Astronef_ to sink to
within a few thousand feet of the surface, and then he and Zaidie swept
it with their telescopes. Their chance search was rewarded by something
they had not seen in the sea-beds of the other hemisphere.

These depressions were far deeper than the others, evidently many
thousands of feet below the average surface, but the sun's rays were
blazing full into this one, and, dotted round its slopes at varying
elevations, they made out little patches which seemed to differ from the
general surface.

"I wonder if those are the remains of cities," said Zaidie. "Isn't it
possible that the old peoples of the moon might have built their cities
along the seas just as we do, and that their descendants may have
followed the waters as they retreated, I mean as they either dried up or
disappeared into the centre?"

"Very probable indeed, dearest of philosophers," he said, picking her up
with one arm and kissing the smiling lips which had just uttered this
most reasonable deduction. "Now we'll go down and see."

He diminished the vertically repulsive force a little, and the
_Astronef_ dropped slantingly towards the bed of what might once have
been the Pacific of the Moon.

When they were within about a couple of thousand feet of the surface it
became perfectly plain that Zaidie was correct in her hypothesis. The
vast sea floor was thickly strewn with the ruins of countless cities and
towns, which had been inhabited by an equally countless series of
generations of men and women, who had perhaps lived and loved in the
days when our own world was a glowing mass of molten rock, surrounded by
the envelope of vapours which has since condensed to form our oceans.

They dropped still lower and ran diagonally across the ocean-bed, and as
they did so Zaidie's proposition was more and more completely confirmed,
for they saw that the towns and cities which stood highest were the most
dilapidated, and that the buildings had evidently been torn and crumbled
away by the action of wind and water, snow and ice.

The nearer they approached to the central and deepest depression, the
better preserved and the simpler the buildings became, until down in the
lowest depths they found a collection of low-built square edifices,
scarcely better than huts, which had clustered round the little lake
into which, ages before, the ocean had dwindled. But where the lake had
been there was now only a shallow depression covered with grey sand and
brown rock.

Into this they descended and touched the lunar surface for the last
time. A couple of hours' excursion among the houses proved that they had
been the last refuge of the last descendants of a dying race, a race
which had socially degenerated just as the succession of cities had done
architecturally, age by age, as the long-drawn struggle for mere
existence had become keener and keener until the two last essentials,
air and water, had failed--and then the end had come.

The streets, like the square of the great Temple of Tycho, were strewn
with myriads and myriads of bones, and there were myriads more scattered
round what had once been the shores of the dwindling lake. Here, as
elsewhere, there was not a sign or a record of any kind--carving or
sculpture. If there were any such on the surface of the moon they had
not discovered them. The buildings which they had seen evidently
belonged to the decadent period during which the dwindling remnants of
the Selenites asked only to eat and drink and breathe.

Inside the great Pyramid of the City of Tycho they might, perhaps, have
found something--some stone or tablet which bore the mark of the
artist's hand; elsewhere, perhaps, they might have found cities reared
by older races, which might have rivalled the creations of Egypt and
Babylon, but they had neither time nor inclination to look for these.

All that they had seen of the Dead World had only sickened and saddened
them. The untravelled regions of Space peopled by living worlds more
akin to their own were before them. The red disc of Mars was glowing in
the zenith among the diamond-white clusters which gemmed the black sky
behind him.

More than a hundred millions of miles had to be traversed before they
would be able to set foot on his surface, and so, after one last look
round the Valley of Death about them, Redgrave turned on the full energy
of the repulsive force in a vertical direction, and the _Astronef_ leapt
upwards in a straight line for her new destination. The Unknown
Hemisphere spread out in a vast plain beneath them, the blazing sun rose
on their left, and the brilliant silver orb of the earth on their right,
and so, full of wonder and yet without regret, they bade farewell to the
World that Had Been.




CHAPTER IX


The earth and the moon had been left more than a hundred million miles
behind in the depths of Space, and the _Astronef_ had crossed this
immense gap in eleven days and a few hours; but this apparently
inconceivable speed was not altogether due to the powers of the
Space-Navigator, for her commander had taken advantage of the passage of
the planet along its orbit towards that of the earth. Hence, while the
_Astronef_ was approaching Mars with ever-increasing speed, Mars was
travelling towards the _Astronef_ at the rate of sixteen miles a second.

The great silver disc of the earth had diminished until it looked only a
little larger than Venus appears to human eyes. In fact the planet Terra
is to the inhabitants of Mars what Venus is to us, the Star of the
Morning and the Evening.

Breakfast on the morning of the twelfth day--or, since there is neither
day nor night in Space, it would be more correct to say the twelfth
period of twenty-four earth-hours as measured by the chronometers--was
just over, and Redgrave was standing with Zaidie in the forward end of
the deck-chamber, looking downwards at a vast crescent of rosy light
which stretched out over an arc of more than ninety degrees. Two tiny
black spots were travelling towards each other across it.

"Ah," she said, going towards one of the telescopes, "there are the
moons. I was reading my Gulliver last night. I wonder what the old Dean
would have given to be here, and see how true his guess was. Are we
going to land on them?"

"I don't see why we shouldn't," he said. "I think we might find them
convenient stopping places; besides, you know this isn't only a
pleasure-trip. We have to add as much as we can to the sum of human
knowledge, and so of course we shall have to find out whether the moons
of Mars have atmospheres and inhabitants."

"What, people living on those wee things!" she laughed. "Why they're
only about thirty or forty miles round, aren't they?"

"About," he said, "but then that's just one of the points I want to
solve; and as for life, it doesn't always mean people, you know. We are
only a few hundred miles away from Deimos, the outer one, and he is
twelve thousand five hundred miles from Mars. I vote we drop on him
first and let him carry us towards Phobos. And then when we've examined
him we'll pay a visit to his brother and take a trip round Mars on him.
Phobos does the journey in about seven hours and a half, and as he's
only three thousand seven hundred miles above the surface, we ought to
get a very good view of our next stopping-place."

"That ought to be quite delightful," said Zaidie. "But how commonplace
you are getting, Lenox. That's so like you Englishmen. We are doing what
has only been dreamt of before, and here you are talking about moons and
planets as if they were railway stations."

"Well, if your Ladyship prefers it, we will call them undiscovered
islands and continents in the Ocean of Space. That does sound a little
bit better, doesn't it? Now I think I had better go down and see to my
engines."

When he had gone, Zaidie sat down to the telescope again and kept it
focussed on one of the little black spots travelling across the crescent
of Mars. Both it and the other spot rapidly grew larger, and the
features of the planet itself became more distinct. Soon even with her
unaided eyes she could make out the seas and continents and the
mysterious canals quite plainly through the clear, rosy atmosphere, and,
with the aid of the telescope, she could even see the glimmering
twilight which the inner moon threw upon the unlighted portion of the
planet's disc.

Deimos grew bigger and bigger, and in about half an hour the _Astronef_
grounded gently on what looked to Zaidie like a dimly lighted circular
plain, but which, when her eyes became accustomed to the light, was more
like the summit of a conical mountain. Redgrave raised the keel a little
from the surface again and steered towards a thin circle of light on the
tiny horizon.

As they crossed into the sunlit portion it became quite plain that
Deimos, at any rate, was as airless and lifeless as the moon. The
surface was composed of brown rock and red sand broken up into miniature
hills and valleys. There were a few traces of bygone volcanic action,
but it was evident that the internal fires of this tiny world must have
burnt themselves out very quickly.

"Not much to be seen here," said Redgrave, as he came up the
companion-way, "and I don't think it would be safe to go out. The
attraction is so weak here that we might find ourselves falling off with
very little exertion. Still, you may as well take a couple of
photographs of the surface, and then we'll be off to Phobos."

Zaidie got her apparatus to work, and when she had taken her slides down
to the dark-room, Redgrave turned the R. Force on very slightly and
Phobos began to sink away beneath them. The attraction of Mars now began
to make itself strongly felt, and the _Astronef_ dropped rapidly through
the eight thousand miles which separate the inner and outer satellites.

As they approached Phobos they saw that half the little disc was
brilliantly lighted by the same rays of the sun which were glowing on
the rapidly increasing crescent of Mars beneath them. By careful
manipulation of his engines Redgrave managed to meet the approaching
satellite with a hardly perceptible shock about the centre of its
lighted portion, that is to say the side turned towards the planet.

Mars now appeared as a gigantic rosy moon filling the whole vault of the
heavens above them. Their telescopes brought the three thousand seven
hundred and fifty miles down to about ten. The rapid motion of the tiny
satellite afforded them a spectacle which might be compared to the
rising of a moon glowing with rosy light and hundreds of times larger
than the earth. The speed of the vehicle of which they had taken
possession, something like four thousand two hundred miles an hour,
caused the surface of the planet to apparently sweep away from below
them, just as the earth seems to glide from under the car of a balloon.

Neither of them left the telescopes for more than a few minutes during
this aerial circumnavigation. Murgatroyd, outwardly impassive, but
inwardly filled with solemn fears for the fate of this impiously daring
voyage, brought them wine and sandwiches, and later on tea and toast and
more sandwiches; but they took no moment's heed of these, so absorbed
were they in the wonderful spectacle which was swiftly passing under
their eyes.

The main armament of the _Astronef_ consisted of four pneumatic guns,
which could be mounted on swivels, two ahead and two astern, which
carried a shell containing either one of two kinds of explosives
invented by her creator.

One of these was a solid, and burst on impact with an explosive force
equal to about twenty pounds of lyddite. The other consisted of two
liquids separated by a partition in the shell, and these, when mixed by
the breaking of the partition, burst into a volume of flame which could
not be extinguished by any known human means. It would burn even in a
vacuum, since it supplied its own elements of combustion. The guns would
throw these shells to a distance of about seven terrestrial miles. On
the upper deck there were also stands for a couple of light machine guns
capable of discharging seven hundred explosive bullets a minute.

Professor Rennick, although a man of peace, had little sympathy with the
laws of "civilised" warfare which permit men to be blown into rags of
flesh and splinters of bone by explosive shells of a pound weight and
upward, and only allow projectiles of less weight to be used against
"savages." There was no humbug about him. He believed that when war
_was_ necessary it had to _be_ war--and the sooner it was over the
better for everybody concerned.

The small arms consisted of a couple of heavy ten-bore elephant guns
carrying three-ounce melinite shells; a dozen rifles and fowling-pieces
