Now it is all gone."

"All? Then we shall smother," said Jack, and his voice trembled.

"Not at once," went on Mr. Henderson in a calm voice. "There is enough
air in the entire ship, including that which has leaked from the tanks
to last us five hours. After that----" he paused and looked at his
watch.

"Well?" asked Andy. "After that?"

"There is enough stored in the small tanks of the diving suits to last
another two hours, perhaps. Seven hours in all."

"Then what?" asked Mark.

"We shall smother to death," said the professor in a low tone. "That
is," he went on, "unless before that time we can raise the _Porpoise_ to
the surface of the sea and get a fresh supply of air."

"Then we must work to raise the ship," put in Bill. "Let' get out and
see if we can't cut through the sea weed."

"It would be useless," said Mr. Henderson. "We can only depend on the
power of the ship herself. But do not be discouraged. We may escape.
Come, Washington, start the engine again. By keeping it going constantly
we can, perhaps, break loose from the grass. It is our only hope."

Steadily the machinery worked. It might as well have remained
stationary, however, as far as any noticeable effect was made on the
boat's progress. The grass of the Sargasso Sea held the _Porpoise_ in a
firm grasp.

Four hours passed. There was nothing to do but wait and see what would
happen. It all depended on the engines. Silently the navigators of the
realms under the ocean sat and hoped. Now and then the professor would
go to the engine room to adjust the machines.

The atmosphere in the cabin was growing noticeably heavier. The boys'
heads began to ring with strange noises, and there was a tightness
across their chests. The lack of fresh air was beginning to tell.

"We might as well use that in the diving suit reservoirs," remarked the
professor. "We will feel better, at least for a little while."

The helmets of the suits were brought in, and the vapor released from
the small tanks. A change was at once noticed. The old stale air in the
cabin was forced out of the exhaust pipes, and the fresh took its place.
Every one felt better.

Faster and faster revolved the big screw. The ship vibrated more and
more. Yet it did not move, nor did it rise. The crew were still
prisoners beneath the water.

For an hour or so conditions were fairly comfortable. Then the same
unpleasantness was experienced as was noticed before.

"If we could only open a window," sighed Mark, "and let in a lot of
fresh air, how nice it would be."

The air rapidly became more foul. Soon Washington was gasping for
breath. Tom and Bill showed signs of uneasiness.

"Lie down on the floor," counseled the professor. "You will find the air
a little fresher down there."

They all did as he advised, the inventor himself stretching out at full
length. A little relief was experienced.

They knew it could not last long. Even the professor seemed to have
given up hope. The engine was not going to free the ship in time to save
the lives of those on board.

Washington crawled to the engine room, as some of the bearings needed
oiling. The professor seemed in despair. He opened one of the slides
that covered the glass bulls eye windows. Then he turned off the
electric lights. The opening was black, showing that the sea of grass
still surrounded them. With a groan Mr. Henderson turned aside. The last
hope was gone. He sank down on the floor of the darkened cabin.

Just then Mark happened to look at the bull's-eye. He saw a glimmer of
light. Then he noticed several fishes swimming about. The water was
clear. The grass had disappeared from the vicinity of the window.

"Look!" cried Mark to the professor.

The inventor peered forth. As he did so he uttered a cry. Then he
staggered rather than ran to the engine room.

"What are you doing?" he called to Washington.

"I jest let some ob de sulphuric acid out ob de storage battery tank,"
replied the colored man.

"That's it! That's it!" exclaimed the professor. "Quick, let some more
out, Washington. Let out all there is in that tank. It will save our
lives."

Wonderingly Washington obeyed. The air in the ship was growing more foul
every second. It was hard to breathe even on the floor, and all were
gasping for breath. A few minutes more and they would all become
unconscious and death would come in a little while if the air was not
freshened.

The professor staggered back to the main cabin. He looked out of the
bull's-eye windows. Then he exclaimed:

"See, it is getting lighter! Thank Heaven we are saved!"

The next instant the ship began to move backward. Then with increasing
speed it pulled out of the grip of the long grass, and in another minute
was floating on top of the water, at the edge of the Sargasso Sea.

"Quick! Open the man hole cover!" said Amos Henderson.

Washington threw back the lever cams, and in rushed the fresh air. It
was a blessed relief from the terrible oppressiveness of the foul
atmosphere of the boat. They all breathed deeply, and, in a few minutes
the effects of their long imprisonment had passed off.

They went out on the small deck. It was getting dusk, and the reflection
of the red sunset shone brightly on the heaving water.

"I 'spected I'd neber see dis again," said Washington. "Thought suah I
was a gone chicken!"

"We had a most fortunate escape," said the professor. "You did the trick
for us when you let the acid run from that tank into the sea. It mingled
with the water and burned or ate through the stems of the grass so they
no longer held the ship. I saw what had happened as soon as I looked out
of the bull's-eye, and that's why I had you turn out all the acid you
could. It was just as if liquid fire had touched the sea weed and burnt
it off."

"Golly!" exclaimed Washington. "Fust I know I'll be a perfessor myself!"

Supper was eaten with the ship on the surface of the ocean, for it was
impossible to go below until the leak in the air tanks had been
repaired. Work was begun on this the next day, and though it proved a
difficult job it was accomplished by Mr. Henderson and the boys.

There were several minor repairs to be made to the machinery, and it was
a week before all was in readiness for another descent beneath the
waves. In the meanwhile the craft had moved slowly southward on the
surface, where no very great speed was possible.

Toward evening, on the seventh day after their adventure with the
Sargasso Sea, the travelers closed the man hole, and with air tanks well
filled slowly sank beneath the waves. Supper was eaten at a depth of
sixty feet, and after the meal, while Washington was washing the dishes,
the others sat and looked out through the bull's-eyes at the big fishes
which floated past.

"I wouldn't like to catch one of them air things on my hook an' line,"
observed Bill, as a particularly large fish went past. "I reckon I'd
have trouble landin' him."

"More likely he'd pull you in," said Mark.

For several minutes they watched the strange procession of deep-sea
life. Presently Jack, who was sitting near the engine room door, sprang
up. At the same instant there was the sound of an explosion.

"What's the matter?" cried the professor.

"Come quick!" yelled Washington.

"It's a fire!" yelled Jack. "One of the electrical fuses has blown out,
and the ship is on fire!"




CHAPTER XIII

THE GHOST OF THE SUBMARINE


They all rushed toward the engine room. It was dark, because the lights
had gone out all over the ship, and they could see only by the glare of
the flames, which were increasing.

"Light one of the oil lanterns!" called the professor, and Bill did so.

"Unreel the hose," the inventor continued, and Mark and Jack ran to do
this.

In a few minutes the line was stretched into the engine room, and water
was being thrown on the flames, for Washington had started the pump as
soon as he saw the conflagration.

The fire was in one corner, near the electrical switch board, and had
been caused by the blowing out of one of the fuses, which occasioned the
little explosion. The wood work near the switches was blazing fiercely,
and soon the ship was filled with smoke.

"Empty the ballast tanks!" called the professor. "We must rise to the
surface!"

"We'll all be burned up!" cried Tom. "First we nearly smother and then
we get on fire. Neber saw such luck!"

With a rush the _Porpoise_ began to rise, as her tanks were lightened.
With steady hands, though with fear in their hearts, Jack and Mark
continued to play the water on the flames, while the professor and
Washington got out a second line and aided them.

"The fire is dying out!" exclaimed Mr. Henderson. "We'll soon get the
best of it."

In five minutes the worst was over, though it had been an anxious time,
and one of danger. The ship came to the surface, and the open man-hole
let out the thick smoke that had nearly suffocated the travelers.

As soon as it was cool enough in the engine room an examination was made
of the damage done. It was not as bad as the professor had feared, and
the running part of the ship was not harmed. A new fuse was put in and
the electric lights turned on.

The night was spent with the ship floating on the surface of the ocean,
only enough speed being kept up to give her steerage way. The professor
did not want to go below the waves until he had repaired the switch
board.

Watch was kept, for, though they were out of the regular line of ocean
travel, there was no telling when a vessel might come along and run
them down, for the _Porpoise_ did not show above the waves more than a
few feet, and carried no lights.

Mark had the watch just after midnight, and was sitting in the conning
tower, the door of which opened out on the small deck. He had swept the
surface of the water with powerful glasses and was sure there were no
ships in sight. So, feeling that he would like to stretch his legs, he
walked up and down on the platform.

He had reached the after end, and was about to turn and go back, when he
was startled to see between him and the conning tower a white object. At
first Mark thought it was a cloud of mist, or something the matter with
his eyes. He rubbed them, but the object did not disappear.

Then it moved, and, to his horror Mark saw that it had the shape of a
man, tall and thin. The two arms were outstretched, and to Mark's
imagination seemed to be pointed toward him.

In spite of trying not to be, Mark was frightened.

He did not believe in ghosts, and had always felt that all stories about
them were due to persons' imaginations. Now he saw something that was
hard to explain.

As he watched it, the white object turned and glided without making the
slightest noise, toward the conning tower. It entered and Mark breathed
a sigh of relief.

Perhaps, after all, it was some one from down in the cabin, maybe the
professor himself in his night shirt, who had come up to see that all
was right.

"I'll go and look," said Mark to himself.

He had to nerve himself for the ordeal, as, in spite of assuring himself
that there were no such things as ghosts, he was frightened.

It was absolutely quiet. The only sound was the gentle swish of the
water against the sides of the ship. The engine was running so slowly
that it caused no noise.

Half way on his journey to the conning tower Mark paused. There,
advancing toward him, was the white object. With outstretched arms it
glided nearer and nearer until Mark's heart was beating as if it would
burst through his ribs. His mouth was dry and he could not have cried
out had he tried.

There was a splash in the water off to the left as some big fish sprang
out and dropped back again. Involuntarily Mark turned in that direction.
Then he thought of the ghost and looked for it again. To his surprise
the white object was nowhere to be seen!

The boy waited a few minutes, and then, screwing up his courage, he went
to the tower. There was no one inside, and, along the length of deck
nothing was to be seen of the ghost.

"I wonder if I have been asleep and dreaming," the boy asked himself. He
gave his leg a pinch, and the sensation of pain told him he was not
slumbering.

"Well, I'll say nothing about it," Mark went on to himself. "They'll
only laugh at me."

Entering the tower Mark looked for the glasses in order to make another
observation. He could not find them, yet he was sure he had left them on
a shelf in the tower.

"I wonder if the ghost took them," he said.

He heard some one coming up the iron stairs of the small companionway
that led down into the interior of the ship through the man-hole. At
first he thought it was his queer midnight visitor returning. Then the
head and shoulders of Jack appeared.

"I've come to relieve you," said Jack. "Your watch is up; it's two
o'clock. Here are the night glasses. I found them on the cabin table. I
thought you had them with you."

"I did," replied Mark.

"Then how did they get below?"

"I--I don't know," said Mark.

The mystery was deepening, yet he did not want to tell Jack just yet.

"Well, that's queer," remarked Jack. "Maybe the captain came up and got
them while you were asleep."

"I didn't go to sleep," answered Mark rather crossly.

Jack said nothing more, but took his place in the conning tower, while
Mark went below. Thinking to discover if the ghost might by any chance
have been one of the persons on the _Porpoise_, Mark looked into each
bunk. From the captain to Washington, all the inmates were peacefully
slumbering.

"Queer," murmured Jack, as he took a look into the engine room before
turning in. The engine needed no attention, as it worked automatically,
and all there was to do was to steer the ship. Even this needed little
care as the course was a straight one, and the wheel could be locked,
leaving the lookout little to do.

"Did you see anything during your watch?" asked Mark of Jack the next
morning.

"See anything? What do you mean?"

"I mean anything unusual."

"Nothing, only a school of porpoises went past and gave me a little
scare. They were like a lot of water kittens at play."

Mark concluded he would say nothing of the white visitor until he
ascertained whether any one else had seen it.

It was several nights later, when the ship was once more proceeding
slowly along the surface of the water, that the ghost again appeared.
This time Washington had the midnight watch.

But the colored man was not one to remain quiet when he had such a scary
visitor, and his yells aroused the ship.

"It's a ghostess! A big white ghostess!" yelled Washington. "I don seen
it wid my eyes, an' it waved his arms at me. I's goin' to die suah!"

"What's all this nonsense?" demanded the professor sternly. Then
Washington, more or less excitedly, told of what he had seen. It was
just as it had happened to Mark.

"You were dreaming," said the professor to Washington. "There are no
such things as ghosts."

Every one, from old Andy to Tom and Bill, had been roused by
Washington's cries, and listened to his story. At the close of the
recital of how the white thing had suddenly disappeared, Washington
refused to continue his watch, unless some one stayed with him.

Mark volunteered to do this. He was anxious to see if the ghost would
reappear to him. But nothing happened; and the rest of the night passed
off quietly.

The next day the _Porpoise_ was taken below the surface, in order to
allow of better speed being made. She was running along, submerged to a
depth of two hundred feet, when there came a sudden jar, and the ship
