cup-shaped disk; stamens numerous; anthers red: ovary short-stalked;
stigmas two, 2-lobed, large, wavy-margined.

=Fruit.=--Fruiting catkins drooping, 4-6 inches long: capsules ovoid,
acute, longer than the pedicels, green: seeds numerous, hairy.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy throughout New England; grows in all
excepting very wet soils, in full sun or light shade, and in exposed
situations; of rapid growth, but subject to the attacks of borers, which
kill the branches and make the head unsightly; also spreads from the
roots, and therefore not desirable for ornamental plantations; most
useful in the formation of shelter-belts; readily transplanted but not
common in nurseries. Propagated from cuttings.

[Illustration: PLATE XVIII.--Populus balsamifera.]

  1. Branch with sterile flowers.
  2. Sterile flower, back view.
  3. Sterile flower, side view.
  4. Scales of sterile flower.
  5. Branch with fertile catkins.
  6. Fertile flower.
  7. Fruiting catkins, mature.
  8. Branch with mature leaves.


=Populus candicans, Ait.=

_Populus balsamifera_, var. _candicans, Gray._

BALM OF GILEAD.

=Habitat and Range.=--In a great variety of soils; usually in cultivated
or pasture lands in the vicinity of dwellings; infrequently found in a
wild state. The original site of this tree has not been definitely
agreed upon. Professor L. H. Bailey reports that it is indigenous in
Michigan, and northern collectors find both sexes in New Hampshire and
Vermont; while in central and southern New England the staminate tree is
rarely if ever seen, and the pistillate flowers seldom if ever mature
perfect fruit. The evidence seems to indicate a narrow belt extending
through northern New Hampshire, Vermont and Michigan, with the
intermediate southern sections of the Province of Ontario as the home of
the Balm of Gilead.

     Nova Scotia and New Brunswick,--occasional; Ontario,--frequent.

New England,--occasional throughout.

     South to New Jersey; west to Michigan and Minnesota.

=Habit.=--A medium-sized tree, 40-60 feet high; trunk 1-3 feet in
diameter, straight or inclined, sometimes beset with a few crooked,
bushy branchlets; head very variable in shape and size; solitary in open
ground, commonly _broad-based, spacious, and pyramidal_, among other
trees more often rather small; loosely and irregularly branched, with
sparse, coarse, and often crooked spray; _foliage dark green, handsome,
and abundant_; all parts characterized by a strong and peculiar resinous
fragrance. A single tree multiplying by suckers often becomes parent of
a grove covering half an acre, more or less, made up of trees of all
ages and sizes.

=Bark.=--Bark of trunk and lower portions of large branches dark gray,
rough, irregularly striate and firm in old trees; in young trees and
upon smaller branches smooth, soft grayish-green, often flanged by
prominent ridges running down the stalk from the vertices of the
triangular leaf-scars; season's shoots often flanged, shining reddish or
olive green, with occasional longitudinal gray lines, viscid.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Buds dark reddish-brown, rather closely set
along the stalk, conical or somewhat angled, narrow, often falcate,
sharp-pointed, resinous throughout, viscid, aromatic, exhaling a
powerful odor when the scales expand, terminal about 3/4 inch long.
Leaves 4-6 inches long and nearly as wide, yellowish-green at first,
becoming dark green and smooth on the upper surface with the exception
of a _minute pubescence along the veins_, dull light green beneath,
finely serrate with incurved glandular points, usually ciliate with
minute stiff, whitish hairs; base heart-shaped; apex short-pointed;
petioles about 1-1-1/2 inches long, _more or less hairy_, somewhat
flattened at right angles to the blade; stipules short, ovate, acute,
soon falling.

=Inflorescence.=--Similar to that of _P. balsamifera_.

=Fruit.=--Similar to that of _P. balsamifera_.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy throughout New England; has an attractive
foliage and grows rapidly in all soils and situations, but the branches
are easily broken by the wind, and its habit of suckering makes it
objectionable in ornamental ground; occasionally offered by nurserymen
and collectors. Propagated from cuttings.

[Illustration: PLATE XIX.--Populus candicans.]

  1. Winter bud.
  2. Branch with fertile catkins.
  3. Fertile flower.
  4. Fruiting branch.


=Populus alba, L.=

ABELE. WHITE POPLAR. SILVER-LEAF POPLAR.

=Range.=--Widely distributed in the Old World, extending in Europe from
southern Sweden to the Mediterranean, throughout northern Africa, and
eastward in Asia to the northwestern Himalayas. Introduced from England
by the early settlers and soon established in the colonial towns, as in
Plymouth and Duxbury, on the western shore of Massachusetts bay. Planted
or spontaneous over a wide area.

     New Brunswick and Nova Scotia,--occasional.

New England,--occasional throughout, local, sometimes common.

     Southward to Virginia.

=Habit.=--A handsome tree, resembling _P. grandidentata_ more than any
other American poplar, but of far nobler proportions; 40-75 feet high
and 2-4 feet in diameter at the ground; growing much larger in England;
head large, spreading; round-topped, in spring enveloped in a dazzling
cloud of cotton white, which resolves itself later into two
conspicuously contrasting surfaces of dark green and silvery white.

=Bark.=--Light gray, smooth upon young trees, in old trees furrowed upon
the trunk.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Buds not viscid, cottony. Leaves 1-4 inches
long, densely white-tomentose while expanding, when mature dark green
above and white-tomentose to glabrous beneath; outline ovate or deltoid,
3-5-lobed and toothed or simply toothed, teeth irregular; base
heart-shaped or truncate; apex acute to obtuse; leafstalk long, slender,
compressed; stipules soon falling.

=Inflorescence and Fruit.=--April to May. Sterile catkins 2-4 inches
long, cylindrical, fertile at first shorter,--stamens 6-16; anthers
purple: capsules 1/4 inch long, narrow-ovoid; seeds hairy.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy. Thrives even in very poor soils and in
exposed situations; grows rapidly in good soils; of distinctive value in
landscape gardening but not adapted for planting along streets and upon
lawns of limited area on account of its habit of throwing out numerous
suckers and its liability to damage from heavy winds. The sides of
country roads where the abele has been planted are sometimes obstructed
for a considerable distance by the thrifty shoots from underground.


=Salix discolor. Muhl.=

PUSSY WILLOW. GLAUCOUS WILLOW.

=Habitat and Range.=--Low, wet grounds; banks of streams, swamps, moist
hillsides.

     Nova Scotia to Manitoba.

Maine,--abundant; common throughout the other New England states.

     South to North Carolina; west to Illinois and Missouri.

=Habit.=--Mostly a tall shrub with several stems, but occasionally
assuming a tree-like habit, with a height of 15-20 feet and trunk
diameter of 5-10 inches; one tree reported at Laconia, N. H., 35 feet
high (F. W. Batchelder); branches few, stout, ascending, forming a very
open, hemispherical head.

=Bark.=--Trunk reddish-brown; branches dark-colored; branchlets light
green, orange-dotted.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Buds ovate-conical; apex obtuse to acute.
Leaves simple, alternate, 2-4 inches long, smooth and bright green
above, smooth and whitish beneath when fully grown; outline
ovate-lanceolate to narrowly oblong-oval, crenulate-serrate to entire;
apex acute, base acute and entire; leafstalk short; stipules toothed or
entire.

=Inflorescence.=--March to April. Appearing before the leaves in
catkins, sterile and fertile on separate plants, occasionally both kinds
on the same plant, sessile,--sterile spreading or erect,
oblong-cylindrical, silky; calyx none; petals none; bracts entire,
reddish-brown turning to black, oblong to oblong-obovate, with long,
silky hairs; stamens 2; filaments distinct: fertile catkins spreading;
bracts oblong to ovate, hairy; style short; stigma deeply 4-lobed.

=Fruit.=--Fruiting catkins somewhat declined: capsules ovate-conical,
tomentose, stem two-thirds the length of the scale: seeds numerous.

=Horticultural Value.=--Picturesque in blossom and fruit; its value
dependent chiefly upon its matted roots for holding wet banks, and its
ability to withstand considerable shade. Sold by plant collectors;
easily propagated from cuttings.

[Illustration: PLATE XX.--Salix discolor.]

  1. Leaf-buds.
  2. Branch with sterile catkins.
  3. Sterile flower.
  4. Branch with fertile catkins.
  5. Fertile flower.
  6. Fruiting branch.
  7. Mature leaves.


=Salix nigra, Marsh.=

BLACK WILLOW

=Habitat and Range.=--In low grounds, along streams or ponds, river
flats.

     New Brunswick to western Ontario.

New England,--occasional throughout, frequent along the larger streams.

     South to Florida; west to Dakota, Nebraska, Kansas, Indian
     territory, Louisiana, Texas, southern California, and south into
     Mexico.

=Habit.=--A large shrub or small tree, 25-40 feet high and 10-15 inches
in trunk diameter, attaining great size in the Ohio and Mississippi
valleys and the valley of the lower Colorado; trunk short, surmounted by
an irregular, open, often roundish head, with stout, spreading branches,
slender branchlets, and twigs brittle towards their base.

_S. nigra_, var. _falcata_, Pursh., covers about the same range as the
type and differs chiefly in its narrower, falcate leaves.

=Bark.=--Trunk rough, in young trees light brown, in old trees
dark-colored or nearly black, deeply and irregularly ridged, separated
on the surface into thick, plate-like scales; branchlets reddish-brown;
twigs bronze olive.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Buds narrowly conical, acute. Leaves simple,
alternate, appearing much later than those of _S. discolor_, 2-5 inches
long, somewhat pubescent on both sides when young, when mature green and
smooth above, paler and sometimes pubescent along the veins beneath;
outline narrowly lanceolate, finely serrate; apex acute or acuminate,
often curved; base acutish to rounded or slightly heart-shaped; petiole
short, usually pubescent; stipules large and persistent, or small and
soon falling.

=Inflorescence.=--April to May. Appearing with the leaves from the axils
of the short, lateral shoots, in catkins, sterile and fertile on
different trees, stalked,--sterile spreading, narrowly cylindrical;
calyx none; corolla none; bracts entire, rounded to oblong, villous,
ciliate; stamens about 5: fertile catkins spreading; calyx none; corolla
none; bracts ovate to narrowly oblong, acute, villous; ovary
short-stalked, with two small glands at its base, ovate-conical,
sometimes obovate, smooth; stigmas 2, short.

=Fruit.=--Fertile catkins drooping: capsules ovate-conical,
short-stemmed, minutely granular; style very short: seeds numerous.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy in New England; grows rapidly in all
soils, particularly useful in very wet situations; seriously affected by
insects; occasionally offered in nurseries; transplanted readily;
propagated from cuttings.

[Illustration: PLATE XXI.--Salix nigra.]

  1. Winter buds.
  2. Branch with sterile catkins.
  3. Sterile flower, side view.
  4. Sterile flower, front view.
  5. Branch with fertile catkins.
  6. Fertile flower, side view.
  7. Fertile flower, front view.
  8. Fruiting branch.
  9. Fruit enlarged.


=Salix fragilis and Salix alba.=

The _fragilis_ and _alba_ group of genus _Salix_ gives rise to puzzling
questions of determination and nomenclature. Pure _fragilis_ and pure
_alba_ are perfectly distinct plants, _fragilis_ occasional, locally
rather common, and _alba_ rather rare within the limits of the United
States. Each species has varieties; the two species hybridize with each
other and with native species, and the hybrids themselves have varietal
forms. This group affords a tempting field for the manufacture of
species and varieties, about most of which so little is known that any
attempt to assign a definite range would be necessarily imperfect and
misleading. The range as given below in either species simply points out
the limits within which any one of the various forms of that species
appears to be spontaneous.


=Salix fragilis, L.=

CRACK WILLOW. BRITTLE WILLOW.

=Habitat and Range.=--In low land and along river banks. Indigenous in
southwestern Asia, and in Europe where it is extensively cultivated;
introduced into America probably from England for use in basket-making,
and planted at a very early date in many of the colonial towns; now
extensively cultivated, and often spontaneous in wet places and along
river banks, throughout New England and as far south as Delaware.

=Habit.=--Tree often of great size; attaining a maximum height of 60-90
feet; head open, wide-spreading; branches except the lowest rising at a
broad angle; branchlets reddish or yellowish green, smooth and polished,
very brittle at the base. In 1890 there was standing upon the Groome
estate, Humphreys Street, Dorchester, Mass., a willow of this species
about 60 feet high, 28 feet 2 inches in girth five feet from the ground,
with a spread of 110 feet (_Typical Elms and other Trees of
Massachusetts_, p. 85).

=Bark.=--Bark of the trunk gray, smooth in young trees, in old trees
very rough, irregularly ridged, sometimes cleaving off in large plates.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Buds about 1/3 inch long, reddish-brown,
narrow-conical. Leaves simple, alternate, 2-6 inches long, smooth, dark
green and shining above, pale or glaucous beneath and somewhat pubescent
when young; outline lanceolate, glandular-serrate; apex long-acuminate;
tapering to an acute or obtuse base; leafstalk short, glandular at the
