sure that he had the Imperial attention, before continuing: "Inasmuch as
this question also seems to involve a scientific experiment, I would
suggest that the Ministry of Science and Technology is also interested
and since there is at present no Minister holding that portfolio, I
would suggest that the discussion be continued after a Minister has been
elected."

The Minister of Health and Sanity jumped to his feet.

"Your Imperial Majesty; permit me to concur with the proposal of His
Venerable Highness, and to extend it with the subproposal that the
Ministry of Science and Technology be abolished, and its functions and
personnel divided among the other Ministries, specifically those of
Education and of Economics."

The Minister of Fine Arts was up before he was fully seated.

"Your Imperial Majesty; permit me to concur with the proposal of Count
Guilfred, and to extend it further with the proposal that the Ministry
of Defense, now also vacant, be likewise abolished, and its functions
and personnel added to the Ministry of Security under His Highness
Prince Travann."

So that was it! Marris, beside him, said, "Well!" He had long ago
discovered that she could pack more meaning into that monosyllable than
the average counselor could into a half-hour's speech. Prince Ganzay was
thunderstruck, and from the Bench of Counselors six or eight voices were
babbling loudly at once. Four Ministers were on their feet clamoring for
recognition; Count Duklass of Economics was yelling the loudest, so he
got it.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Your Imperial Majesty; it would have been most unseemly in me to have
spoken in favor of the proposal of Count Guilfred, being an interested
party, but I feel no such hesitation in concurring with the proposal of
Baron Garatt, the Minister of Fine Arts. Indeed, I consider it a most
excellent proposal----"

"And I consider it the most diabolically dangerous proposal to be made
in this Hall in the last six centuries!" old Admiral Gaklar shouted.
"This is a proposal to concentrate all the armed force of the Empire in
the hands of one man. Who can say what unscrupulous use might be made of
such power?"

"Are you intimating, Prince-Counselor, that Prince Travann is
contemplating some tyrannical or subversive use of such power?" Count
Tammsan, of all people, demanded.

There was a concerted gasp at that; about half the Plenary Session were
absolutely sure that he was. Admiral Geklar backed quickly away from the
question.

"Prince Travann will not be the last Minister of Security," he said.

"What I was about to say, Your Majesty, is that as matters stand,
Security has a virtual monopoly on armed power on this planet. When
these disorders in the city--which Prince Travann's men are now bringing
under control--broke out, there was, I am informed, an order sent out to
bring Regular Army and Planetary Militia into Asgard. It will be hours
before any of the former can arrive, and at least a day before the
latter can even be mobilized. By the time any of them get here, there
will be nothing for them to do. Is that not correct, Prince Ganzay?"

The Prime Minister looked at him angrily, stung by the realization that
somebody else had a personal intelligence service as good as his own,
then swallowed his anger and assented.

"Furthermore," Count Duklass continued, "the Ministry of Defense,
itself, is an anachronism, which no doubt accounts for the condition in
which we now find it. The Empire has no external enemies whatever; all
our defense problems are problems of internal security. Let us therefore
turn the facilities over to the Ministry responsible for the tasks."

The debate went on and on; he paid less and less attention to it, and it
became increasingly obvious that opposition to the proposition was
dwindling. Cries of, "Vote! Vote!" began to be heard from its
supporters. Prince Ganzay rose from his desk and came to the throne.

"Your Imperial Majesty," he said softly. "I am opposed to this
proposition, but I am convinced that enough favor it to pass it, even
over Your Majesty's veto. Before the vote is called, does Your Majesty
wish my resignation?"

He rose and stepped down beside the Prime Minister, putting an arm over
Prince Ganzay's shoulder.

"Far from it, old friend," he said, in a distinctly audible voice. "I
will have too much need for you. But, as for the proposal, I don't
oppose it. I think it an excellent one; it has my approval." He lowered
his voice. "As soon as it's passed, place General Dorflay's name in
nomination."

The Prime Minister looked at him sadly for a moment, then nodded,
returning to his desk, where he rapped for order and called for the
vote.

"Well, if you can't lick them, join them," Marris said as he sat down
beside her. "And if they start chasing you, just yell, 'There he goes;
follow me!'"

The proposal carried, almost unanimously. Prince Ganzay then presented
the name of Captain-General Dorflay for elevation to the Bench of
Counselors, and the emperor decreed it. As soon as the Session was
adjourned and he could do so, he slipped out the little door behind the
throne, into an elevator.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the room at the top of the Octagon Tower, he laid aside his belt and
dress dagger and unfastened his tunic, than sat down in his deep chair
and called a serving robot. It was the one which had brought him his
breakfast, and he greeted it as a friend; it lit a cigarette for him,
and poured a drink of brandy. For a long time he sat, smoking and
sipping and looking out the wide window to the west, where the orange
sun was firing the clouds behind the mountains, and he realized that he
was abominably tired. Well, no wonder; more Empire history had been made
today than in the years since he had come to the Throne.

Then something behind him clicked. He turned his head, to see Yorn
Travann emerge from the concealed elevator. He grinned and lifted his
drink in greeting.

"I thought you'd be a little late," he said. "Everybody trying to climb
onto the bandwagon?"

Yorn Travann came forward, unbuckling his belt and laying it with
Paul's; he sank into the chair opposite, and the robot poured him a
drink.

"Well, do you blame them? What would it have looked like to you, in
their place?"

"A _coup d'etat_. For that matter, wasn't that what it was? Why didn't
you tell me you were springing it?"

"I didn't spring it; it was sprung on me. I didn't know a thing about it
till Max Duklass buttonholed me down by the landing stage. I'd intended
fighting this proposal to partition Science and Technology, but this
riot blew up and scared Duklass and Tammsan and Guilfred and the rest of
them. They weren't too sure of their majority--that's why they had the
election postponed a couple of times--but they were sure that the riot
would turn some of the undecided Counselors against them. So they
offered to back me to take over Defense in exchange for my supporting
their proposal. It looked too good to pass up."

"Even at the price of wrecking Science and Technology?"

"It was wrecked, or left to rust into uselessness, long ago. The main
function of Technology has been to suppress anything that might threaten
this state of economic _rigor mortis_ that Duklass calls stability, and
the function of Science has been to let muttonheads like Khane and
Dandrik dominate the teaching of science. Well, Defense has its own
scientific and technical sections, and when we come to carving the bird,
Duklass and Tammsan are going to see a lot of slices going onto my
plate."

"And when it's all cut up, it will be discovered that there is no
provision for original research. So it will please My Majesty to
institute an Imperial Office of Scientific Research, independent of any
Ministry, and guess who'll be named to head it."

"Faress. And, by the way, we're all set on Khane, too. First Citizen
Yaggo is as delighted to have him as we are to get rid of him. Why don't
we get Vann Evaratt back, and give him the job?"

"Good. If he takes charge there at the opening of the next academic
year, in ten years we'll have a thousand young men, maybe ten times that
many, who won't be afraid of new things and new ideas. But the main
thing is that now you have Defense, and now the plan can really start
firing all jets."

"Yes." Yorn Travann got out his cigarettes and lit one. Paul glanced at
the robot, hoping that its feelings hadn't been hurt. "All these native
uprisings I've been blowing up out of inter-tribal knife fights, and all
these civil wars my people have been manufacturing; there'll be more of
them, and I'll start yelling my head off for an adequate Space Navy, and
after we get it, these local troubles will all stop, and then what'll we
be expected to do? Scrap the ships?"

They both knew what would be done with some of them. It would have to be
done stealthily, while nobody was looking, but some of those ships would
go far beyond the boundaries of the Empire, and new things would happen.
New worlds, new problems. Great and frightening changes.

"Paul, we agreed upon this long ago, when we were still boys at the
University. The Empire stopped growing, and when things stop growing,
they start dying, the death of petrifaction. And when petrifaction is
complete, the cracking and the crumbling starts, and there's no way of
stopping it. But if we can get people out onto new planets, the Empire
won't die; it'll start growing again."

"You didn't start that thing at the University, this morning, yourself,
did you?"

"Not the student riot, no. But the hooligan attack, yes. That was some
of my own men. The real hooligans began looting after Handrosan had
gotten the students out of the district. We collared all of them,
including their boss, Nutchy the Knife, right away, and as soon as we
did that, Big Moogie and Zikko the Nose tried to move in. We're cleaning
them up now. By tomorrow morning there won't be one of these nonworkers'
voting blocks left in Asgard, and by the end of the week they'll be
cleaned up all over Odin. I have discovered a plot, and they're all
involved in it."

"Wait a moment." Paul got to his feet. "That reminds me; Harv Dorflay's
hiding Rod and Olva out in the mountains. I wanted him out of here while
things were happening. I'll have to call him and tell him it's safe to
come in, now."

"Well, zip up your tunic and put your dagger on; you look as though
you'd been arrested, disarmed and searched."

"That's right." He hastily repaired his appearance and went to the
screen across the room, punching out the combination of the screen with
Rodrik's picnic party.

       *       *       *       *       *

A young lieutenant of the Household Troops appeared in it, and had to be
reassured. He got General Dorflay.

"Your Majesty! You are all right?"

"Perfectly all right, general, and it's quite safe to bring His Imperial
Highness in. The conspiracy against the Throne has been crushed."

"Oh, thank the gods! Is Prince Travann a prisoner?"

"Quite the contrary, general. It was our loyal and devoted subject,
Prince Travann, who crushed the conspiracy."

"But--But, Your Majesty----!"

"You aren't to be blamed for suspecting him, general. His agents were
working in the very innermost councils of the conspirators. Every one of
the people whom you suspected--with excellent reason--was actually
working to defeat the plot. Think back, general; the scheme to put the
