at all.

"But I'd think, just for efficiency if nothing else," Garlock argued,
"you'd support the Arpales _some_ way. Lighter guns or something. Why,
thousands of them must have been killed, just in this last hour or so."

"Yeah, but that's their business. They breed fast and die fast.
Everything has to balance, you know."

"Perhaps so." Garlock was silenced, if not convinced. "Well, it's about
over. What happens to the bodies they're dumping down manholes? They
can't go down a sewer that way?"

"Oh, you didn't know? Food."

"Food? For what?"

"The Arpales and us, of course."

"What? You don't mean--you _can't_ mean that they--and by your thought,
you Arpalones, too--are cannibals!"

"Cannibals? Explain, please? Oh, eaters-of-our-own-species. Of
course--certainly. Why not?"

"Why, self-respect ... common decency ... respect for one's fellow-man
... family ties...." Garlock was floundering; to be called upon to
explain his ingrained antipathy to such a custom was new to his
experience.

"You are silly. Worse, squeamish. Worst, supremely illogical." The
Arpalone paused, then went on as though trying to educate a hopelessly
illogical inferior, "While we do not kill Arpales purposely--except when
they over-breed--why waste good meat as fertilizer? If a diet is
wholesome, nutritious, well-balanced, and tasty, what shred of
difference can it _possibly_ make what its ingredients once were?"

"Well, I'll be damned." Garlock quit.

Belle agreed. "This whole deal makes me sick at the stomach and I think
my face is turning green too. But I'm devilishly and gleefully glad,
Clee, that I was here to hear _somebody_ give you cards, spaces, and big
casino and still beat the lights and liver out of you at your own game
of cold-blooded logic!"

"We gunners must go now. Would you like to come along with us and see
the end of this particular breeding-hole of sencors?"

At high speed the seven flew back along the line of advance of the
flying-tiger horde; across a barren valley, toward and to the side of a
mountain.

        *           *           *

An area almost a mile square of that mountain's side was a burned,
blasted, churned, pocked, cratered and flaming waste; and the four
helicopters were still working on it. High-energy beams blasted, fairly
volatilizing the ground as they struck in as deep as they could be
driven. High-explosive shells bored deep and detonated, hurling
shattered rock and soil and yellow smoke far and wide; establishing new
craters by destroying the ones existing a moment before.

While it seemed incredible that any living thing larger than a microbe
could emerge under its own power from such a hell of energy, many flying
tigers did; apparently being blown aloft along with the hitherto
undisturbed volume of soil in which the creatures had been. Most of them
were not fully grown; some were so immature as to be unrecognizable to
an untrained eye; but from all four helicopters hand-guns snapped and
cracked. Nothing--but _nothing_--was leaving that field of carnage
alive.

"What are you gunners supposed to be doing here?" Garlock asked.

"Oh, the 'copters will be leaving pretty soon--they've got other places
to go. But they won't get them all--some of the hatches are too deep--so
us four gunners will stick around for two-three days to kill the
late-hatchers as they come out."

"I see," and Garlock probed. "There are four cells they won't reach.
Shall I bomb 'em out?"

"I'll ask." The slitted red eyes widened and he sent a call. "Commander
Knahr, can you hop over here a minute? I want you to meet these things
we've been hearing about. They look human, but they really aren't.
They're killers, with more stuff and more brains than any of us ever
heard of."

Another Arpalone appeared, indistinguishable to Tellurian eyes from any
one of the others.

"But why do you want to mix into something that's none of your
business?" Knahr was neither officious nor condemnatory. He simply could
not understand.

"Since you have no concept of our quality of curiosity, just call it
education. The question is, do or do you not want those four
deeply-buried cells blasted out of existence?"

"Of course I do."

"Okay. You've got all of 'em you're going to get. Tell your 'copters to
give us about five miles clearance, and we'll all fall back, too."

They drew back, and there were four closely-spaced explosions of such
violence that one raggedly mushroom-shaped cloud went into the
stratosphere and one huge, ragged crater yawned where once churned
ground had been.

"But that's _atomic_!" Knahr gasped the thought. "Fall-out!"

"No fall-out. Complete conversion. Have you got a counter?"

They had. They tested. There was nothing except the usual background
count.

"There's no life left underground, so you needn't keep this squad of
gunners tied up here," Garlock told the commander. "Before we go, I want
to ask a question. You have visitors once in a while from other solar
systems, so you must have a faster-than-light drive. Can you tell me
anything about it?"

"No. Nothing like that would be any of my business." Knahr and the four
gunners disappeared; the helicopters began to lumber away.

"Well, _that_ helps--I don't think," Garlock thought, glumly. "_What_ a
world! Back to the Main?"

        *           *           *

In the Main, after a long and fruitless discussion, Garlock called
Governor Atterlin, who did not know anything about a faster-than-light
drive, either. There was one, of course, since it took only a few days
or a few weeks to go from one system to another; but Hodell didn't have
any such ships. No ordinary planet did. They were owned and operated by
people who called themselves "Engineers." He had no idea where the
Engineers came from; they didn't say.

Garlock then tried to get in touch with the Arpalone Inspector who had
checked the _Pleiades_ in, and could not find out even who it had been.
The Inspector then on duty neither knew or cared anything about either
faster-than-light drives or Engineers. Such things were none of his
business.

"What difference would it make, anyway?" James asked. "No drive that
takes 'a few weeks' for an intra-galaxy hop is ever going to get us back
to Tellus."

"True enough; but if there is such a thing I want to know how it works.
How are you coming with your calculations?"

"I'll finish up tomorrow easily enough."

Tomorrow came, and James finished up, but he did not find any familiar
pattern of Galactic arrangement. The other three watched James set up
for another try for Earth.

"You don't think we'll ever get back, do you, Clee?" Belle asked.

"Right away, no. Some day, yes. I've got the germ of an idea. Maybe
three or four more hops will give me something to work on."

"I hope so," James said, "because here goes nothing," and he snapped the
red switch.

        *           *           *

It was not nothing. Number Two was another guardian Inspector and
another planet very much like Hodell. It proved to be so far from both
Earth and Hodell, however, that no useful similarities were found in any
two of the three sets of charts.

Number Three was equally unproductive of helpful results. James did,
however, improve his technique of making galactic charts; and he and
Garlock designed and built a high-speed comparator. Thus the time
required per stop was reduced from days to hours.

Number Four produced a surprise. When Garlock touched the knob of the
testing-box he yanked his hand away before it had really made contact.
It was like touching a high-voltage wire.

"You are incompatible with our humanity and must not land," the
Inspector ruled.

"Suppose we blast you and your jets out of the air and land anyway?"
Garlock asked.

"That is perhaps possible," the Inspector agreed, equably enough. "We
are not invincible. However, it would do you no good. If any one of you
four leaves that so-heavily-insulated vessel in the atmosphere of this
planet you will die. Not quickly, but slowly and with difficulty."

"But you haven't tested _me_!" Belle said. "Do you mean they'll attack
us on sight?"

"There is no need to test more than one. Anyone who could live near any
of you could not live on this planet. Nor will they attack you. Don't
you know what the thought 'incompatible' means?"

"With us it does not mean death."

"Here it does, since it refers to life forces. The types are mutually,
irreconcilably antagonistic. Your life forces are very strong. Thus, no
matter how peaceable your intentions may be, many of our human beings
would die before you would, but you will not live to get back to your
ship if you land it and leave its protective insulation."

"Why? What is it? How does it work?" Belle demanded.

"It is not my business to know; only to tell. I have told. You will go
away now."

Garlock's eyes narrowed in concentration. "Belle, can you blast? I mean,
could you if you wanted to?"

"Certainly ... why, I don't _want_ to, Clee!"

"I don't, either--and I'll file that one away to chew on when I'm hungry
some night, too. Take her up, Jim, and try another shot."

        *           *           *

Numbers Five to Nine, inclusive, were neither productive nor eventful.
All were, like the others, Hodell all over again, in everything
fundamental. One was so far advanced that almost all of its humanity
were Seconds; one so backward--or so much younger--that its strongest
telepaths were only Fours. The Tellurians became acquainted with, and
upon occasion fought with, various types of man-sized monsters in
addition to the three varieties they had seen on Hodell.

Every planet they visited had Arpalones and Arpales. Not by those names,
of course. Local names for planets, guardians, nations, cities, and
persons went into the starship's tapes, but that welter of names need
not be given here; this is not a catalogue. Every planet they visited
was peopled by _Homo Sapiens_; capable of inter-breeding with the
Tellurians and eager to do so--especially with the Tellurian men. Their
strict monogamy was really tested more than once; but it held. Each had
been visited repeatedly by starships; but all Garlock could find out
about them was that they probably came from a world somewhere that was
inhabited by compatible human beings of Grade Two. He could learn
nothing about the faster-than-light drive.

Number Ten was another queer--the Tellurians were found incompatible.

"Let's go down anyway." Belle suggested. "Overcome this unwillingness of
ours and find out. What do you think they've got down there, Clee
Garlock, that could possibly handle you and me both?"

"I don't think it's a case of 'handling' at all. I don't know what it
is, but I believe it's fatal. We won't go down."

"But it doesn't make sense!" Belle protested.

"Not yet, no; but it's a datum. Enough data and we'll be able to
formulate a theory."

        *           *           *

"You and your theories! I wish we could get some _facts_!"

"You can call that a fact. But I want you and Jim to do some
math. We know that we're making mighty long jumps. Assuming that they're
at perfect random, and of approximately the same length, the probability
is greater than one-half that we're getting farther and farther away
from Tellus. Is there a jump number, N, at which the probability is
one-half that we land nearer Tellus instead of farther away? My
jump-at-conclusions guess is that there isn't. That the first jump set
up a bias."

"Ouch. _That_ isn't in any of the books," James said. "In other words,
do we or do we not attain a maximum? You're making some bum assumptions;
among others that space isn't curved and that the dimensions of the
universe are very large compared to the length of our jumps. I'll see if
I can put it into shape to feed to Compy. You've always held that these
generators work at random--the rest of those assumptions are based on
your theory?"

"Check. I'm not getting anywhere studying my alleged Xenology, so I'm
going to work full time on designing a generator that will steer."

"You tried to before. So did everybody else."

"I know it, but I've got a lot more data now. And I'm not promising,
just trying. Okay? Worth a try?"

"Sure--I'm in favor of anything that has any chance at all of working."

Jumping went on; and Garlock, instead of going abroad on the planets,
stayed in the _Pleiades_ and worked.

        *           *           *

At Number Forty-three, their reception was of a new kind. They were
compatible with the people of this world, but the Inspector advised them
against landing.

"I do not forbid you," he explained, carefully. "Our humans are about to
destroy themselves with fission and fusion bombs. They send missiles,
without warning, against visitors. Thus, the last starship to visit us
here disregarded my warning and sent down a sensing device as
usual--Engineers do not land on non-telepathic worlds, you know--and it
was destroyed."

"You're a Guardian of Humanity," Garlock said. "Can't you straighten
people out?"

"Of course not!" The Arpalone was outraged. "We guard humanity against
incompatibles and non-humans; but it is not our business to interfere
with humanity if it wishes to destroy itself. That is its privilege and
its own business!"

Garlock probed down. "No telepathy, even--not even a Seven. This planet
_is_ backward--back to Year One. And nothing but firecrackers--we're
