distance, the bow-beacon seemed streaming upon us. We could not see
that it illumined the _Cometara_, nor could our instruments measure
any added illumination. Our flight-orbit, if held, would carry us with
a swing some ten thousand miles above the South Pole of the Moon. It
would cross diagonally in front of the trajectory that the enemy
vessel was maintaining. But we were off our predetermined course, with
a side-drift toward the enemy. That bow-beacon radiance was exerting a
force upon us, a strange gravitational pull.

Grantline gasped when Drac said it. "If it's that now, what will it be
when we get closer?"

The minutes were passing. The thirty thousand miles between us and the
enemy was cut to ten thousand; to five. The ship was soon visible to
the naked eye. Its visual movement, for all this time measurable only
as a drift upon the amplified images of our instruments, now was
obvious. We could see it plunging forward, could see that probably we
would cross its bow. Within fifty miles? We hoped and guessed that
would be the result, so that with this first passing we could use our
weapons. Fifty miles of distance at combined speeds of some fifty
thousand miles an hour: that would be something like three seconds
from a collision. The danger of a collision, which both ships would do
anything to avert, was negligible; in the immensity of space two
objects so small could not strike each other, even with intention,
once in a million times.

We could not calculate the passing so closely, but suddenly it seemed
that perhaps the enemy could. The bow-beacon radiance, so obviously a
miniature of the weird light-beams streaming from Earth, Mars and
Venus, now swung away from us and was extinguished. Whatever
alteration of our course the enemy had made, they seemed to be
satisfied. The passing would be to their liking. Would it be to ours?

Grantline had left the turret. He was down on the deck, ready with his
men. The weapons were ready.

We had long since advanced beyond the possibility of mathematical
calculations keeping pace with our changing position in relation to
the enemy, but it seemed that the passing would be within fifty miles.
Grantline's weapons would carry their bolt that far.

It was barely two thousand miles away now. Two minutes of time before
the passing. I stared at it, a long, low ship of dark metal, red where
the moonlight struck upon it. I estimated its size to be about that of
the _Cometara_, but it was much more nearly globular. Upon its top,
seeming to project from the terraced dome, was an up-pointing funnel,
like the smokestack of an old-fashioned surface steam vessel; or like
a great black muzzle of an old-fashioned gun. And in a row along the
bulging middle of the hull there was a series of little discs.

The vessel was still a tiny blob, but every instant it was enlarging,
doubling its visual size. Drac said tensely, "Fifteen hundred miles!
We'll pass in a minute and a half."

I turned the angle of the stern rocket-streams. The firmament slowly
began swinging; the enemy ship seemed swaying up over us. I was
turning our top to it, so that Grantline might fire directly upward
from both sides almost simultaneously. It might be possible, if I
could roll us over at just the proper seconds.

But the enemy anticipated us. As they observed our roll, again the
bow-beacon flashed on. It visibly struck us, bathed all our length in
its spreading opalescent radiance.

It seemed for an instant to do nothing. Our dome did not crack; there
was no shock. But our side-roll slowed. The heavens stopped their
swing, and then swung back! We were upon an even keel again, the enemy
level with our bow. Against the force of my turning rocket-streams
this radiation had righted us. It clung a few seconds more, and again
vanished.

Grantline's deck audiphone rang with his startled voice: "Gregg, roll
us over! Quick! I can only fire from one side."

"I can't."

It was too late now. A few hundred miles of distance! Drac stood
clutching me, staring through the port. And I stared, breathless,
awaiting the results of these next few seconds.

The ships passed like crossing, speeding meteors. A few seconds of
final approach; I saw the enemy vessel as an elongated, flattened
globe, with a triple-terraced dome and terraced decks beneath it. That
queer stack on top! The round discs, like ten-foot eyes, gleamed along
the equator of the bulging hull.

One of Grantline's weapons fired a silent flash. Still out of range.
The spit of our electrons leaped from our side. The enemy was
untouched.

The thought stabbed at me: _Anita! Not killed by that one._

Another shot from Grantline.

No result. It seemed that I saw the bolt strike. There was a
reddening, a flash upon that bulging hull, but nothing more.

I was aware again of the enemy bow-beam swinging upon us. The beam was
pressing us over again so that in a moment we would be hull-bottom to
the enemy and Grantline could not fire.

He anticipated it. The ship was broadside to us. In the split second
of that passing I saw that it was not fifty miles away, hardly ten.
Grantline flung his remaining bolts. The enemy was a streaked blur
going by; and all in that second it was past, reddening in the
distance. Untouched by our bolts? It seemed so. The bow radiance
darted ahead of it. The globular shape, unharmed, dwindled in the
distance behind us.

And it had done nothing to us!

The control levers were in my hands. I would shift the gravity-plates,
and make the quickest turn we could. We would go around the Moon,
probably, and come back within an hour or two. Perhaps our adversary
would also turn to encounter us again.

At that second I had not seen the little discs, but I saw them now!
They came sailing in a line, ten foot, flat, circular discs of a dark
metal; they gleamed reddish where the sunlight painted them. They had
been fastened outside the enemy vessel and in our passing they had
been discharged. They sailed now like whirling plates. There seemed
perhaps twenty of them, heading in a curve toward us.

Grantline's voice came again from the deck audiphone. "Missed them,
Gregg. That's what I thought but at least two of our bolts must have
struck. But it didn't hurt them."

"No," I replied. "It seemed not. They must have a defensive barrage."

Drac was pulling at me. "Those things out there, those discs...."

Grantline demanded, "Yes, what in hell are they?"

We could not tell. It seemed that their curve would take them behind
our stern. Grantline added: "Will you try going back after that ship?"

"Yes."

But I did not. To the naked eye the enemy ship had already
disappeared; but with the 'scopes we saw that it seemed to be turning.

I did not attempt to turn us, for we were afraid of those oncoming
discs which took all our attention. They passed within five miles
astern of us, but in a great curve they swung and now seemed heading
across our bow. With what tremendous velocity they had been endowed by
their firing mechanisms! Their elliptical curve swung them a mile or
so ahead of us.

They were circling us like tiny satellites in a narrowing spiral
ellipse. Our attraction, the normal gravity of our close bulk, was
drawing them to us.

The men on the _Cometara's_ deck stood gazing, surprised but not yet
alarmed. The lookout calls sounded with routine notification each time
the discs passed across our bow and stern. In the helio cubby, Waters
was still trying to raise an Earth station.

Grantline came running to the control turret. "If those cursed things,
should strike us, Gregg!"

I had set the gravity-plates into new combinations, turning our course
downward, trying to swing us under the plane of the discs' orbit. But
they swung downward with us; they were no more than two thousand feet
away now.

Grantline said, "At the next broadside passing I'll fire at them."

Drac looked up from his calculating instruments. "Look! A circular
rotation: Horribly swift. But I've caught a picture. Look!"

He had a still image of one of the discs. It had saw-teeth at its thin
knife-like outer circumference. Whirling at tremendous speed, these
saw-toothed metal discs might cut into our dome, or some other part of
our ship.

At the next round, Grantline fired. The discs reddened a little, but
came on unharmed. From the other side, he fired again. Three of the
discs seemed to have been caught full. His bolts, sustained for their
fullest ten seconds of duration at this close, thousand-foot range,
took effect. The three discs seemed to crumble with a puff of
queerly-radiant vacuum spark-glows, then were gone.

But the others came closing in.

The _Cometara_ rang now with the excitement and alarm of the men.
Grantline could not set his gauges fast enough to fire at every round.

I had a sudden thought. With the rear rockets, I rolled us over. For a
moment we were hull-down to the passing discs. From our hull
gravity-plates I flung a full repulsion. Would it stave them off, bend
their orbit outward? It did not. Their course was unaltered.

Again Grantline was shouting at me, "Roll us back! I must fire!"

It had been an error, that rolling; Grantline lost several shots
because of it. I swung us level. The discs passed within a hundred
feet; half a dozen of them were still closer. Gleaming, whirling
circles, thin as knife-blades; they passed close under our stern, came
broadside.

These were tense, horrible seconds. The discs skimmed our bow; one
seemed to miss our dome by inches. Grantline's volley annihilated four
more, but there were still eight of them. They swung in at our stern.

I was aware of confusion throughout the _Cometara_. The crew and
stewards were running up to the bow quarter-deck. My second officer
stood there, stricken. The stern lookout screamed his futile warning.

Useless! I saw one of the discs strike our stern dome, then another.
Still others. They were silent blows, but it seemed that I could feel
them cutting into the dome-plates.

The dome was cracking! Then, after that horrible instant, came the
sound: crunch, a rumble; the grind of crushed and breaking metal;
then the puff and surge of the outward explosion.

I saw the whole tip of the stern dome cracking, bursting outward,
forced by our interior air pressure. And over all the _Cometara_ the
outgoing air was sucking and whining with a growing rush of wind.

I shouted, "Drac! Close the stern bulkhead!"

I set the word-buttons for the distress siren, and pulled the lever.
Its voice screamed over the uproar. "_Keep forward! Take the
space-suits! Prepare to abandon ship!_"




7


In the midst of the chaos I was aware that all the remaining discs
struck us upon the port stern quarter. The broken dome of the stern
showed a jagged hole, but the up-sliding cross-bulkhead partially shut
it off. Two or three of the crew and the stern lookout were gone
behind that closing bulkhead. Their bodies in a moment would be blown
into space.

"It may hold, Drac. Order Waters out of his cubby. Forward!"

I was calling the engine-room. "Order your men up by the bow, not the
stern." But I got no answer from the engine-chief.

I raised Grantline. "Order your men forward: Clear amidships! I want
to close the central bulkheads. If the stern one breaks with the
pressure...."

"Right, Gregg. Are we lost?"

"God knows! We'll know in a minute or two. Get all your men into their
space-suits. Keep in the bow. Prepare the exit-port there."

"Right, Gregg. You coming down?"

"Yes. When I finish." I cut him off. "Drac, get out of here! Did you
order Waters forward?"

"He won't leave."

"Why the hell not?"

"He thinks he may be able to get communication with Earth."

"He can't stay where he is; there's no protection up here! When that
stern bulkhead goes...."

It was breaking. I could see it bending sternward under the pressure.
And at best it was leaking air, so that the decks were a rush of wind.
Already Drac and I were gasping with the lowered pressure.

"Drac, get out of here. Go get Waters; bring him forward. The hell
with his transmitter: this is life or death!"

"But you?"

"I'm coming down. From the forward deck, call the hull control rooms.
Order everybody forward and to the deck."

"What about the pressure pumps?"

"I can keep them going from here."

I set the circulating system to guide the fresh air forward, but it
was futile against the sucking rush of wind toward the stern. As the
pumps speeded up I saw, with the little added pressure, the great
cross panel of the stern bulkhead straining harder. It would go in a
moment.

Drac was clinging to me. "Tell me what to do!"

"I've told you what to do!" I shoved him to the catwalk. "Get out of
here. Get Waters forward. Get the men out of the hull."

His anguished eyes stared at me; then he turned and ran forward on the
catwalk. I saw him forcibly dragging the bald-headed Waters from the
helio cubby. It was the last time I ever saw either of them.

A buzzer was ringing in the turret, and I plunged back for it. The
exertion put a band of pain across my chest, a panting constriction
from the lowering pressure.

Fanning, assistant engineer, was still at the pressure pumps. His
voice came up: "Pumps and renewers working. Will you use the gravity
shifters?"

"Hell, no! Get out of there, Fanning. We're smashed. Air going. It's a
matter of minutes--abandoning ship. Get forward!"

Suddenly the stern bulkhead cracked with a great diagonal rift. I
waited a moment to give them all time to get forward; then I slid all
the cross 'midship bulkheads.

It was barely in time. The stern bulkhead went out with a gale of
wind, but the barrier amidships stemmed it. Half of the vessel
sternward was devoid of air, but here in the bow we could last a
little longer. Beneath me I could see Grantline's men--some of them,
not all--and a few of the stewards, crew and officers, crowding the
deck, donning space-suits. The two side chambers were ready; half a
dozen men crowded into each of them. The deck doors slid closed. The
outer ports opened; helmeted, goggled, bloated figures were blown by
the outgoing air from the chamber into space. Then the outer slides
went closed. The pumps filled up the chambers; the deck doors opened
again. Another batch of men....

I saw Grantline, suited but with his helmet off, dashing from one side
of the deck to the other, commanding the abandonment.

The central bulkheads seemed momentarily holding. Then little red
lights in the panel board before me showed where in the hull corridors
