

In the handsome engraving herewith are shown the male and female of
the Hercules beetle (_Dynastes hercules_) of Brazil. The family of
the _Dynastidae_ comprises some of the largest and most beautiful of
the beetle race, and all of them are remarkable for enormous
developments of the thorax and head. They are all large bodied and
stout limbed, and by their great strength abundantly justify their
generic name, _Dynastes_, which is from the Greek and signifies
powerful. The larvae of these beetles inhabit and feed upon decaying
trees and other rotting vegetable matter, and correspond in size
with the mature insects. Most of them inhabit tropical regions,
where they perform a valuable service in hastening the destruction
of dead or fallen timber.

An admirable example of this family of beetles is the one here
represented. In the male of the Hercules beetle the upper part of
the thorax is prolonged into a single, downward curving horn fully
three inches long, the entire length of the insect being about six
inches. The head is prolonged into a similar horn, which curves
upward, giving the head and thorax the appearance of two enormous
jaws, resembling the claw of a lobster. The real jaws of the insect
are underneath the lower horn, which projects from the forepart of
the head. The under surface of the thorax-horn carries a ridge of
stiff, short, golden-yellow hairs, and the under surface and edges
of the abdomen are similarly ornamented.

The head, thorax, and legs are shining black; the elytra, or
wing-covers, are olive-green, dotted with black spots, and are much
wrinkled. The wings are large and powerful.

[Illustration: THE HERCULES BEETLE]

The female Hercules is quite unlike the male. It is much smaller,
being not more than three and a half inches long, is without horns,
and is covered with a brown hairy felt.

These beetles are nocturnal in habit, and are rarely seen in the
daytime, except in dark hiding places in the recesses of Brazilian
forests.

       *       *       *       *       *




A POULTERER'S VIEW OF MECHANICAL POULTRY RAISING.


A prominent dealer in poultry, Mr. H. W. Knapp, of Washington Market,
gives a discouraging opinion of the probable success of chicken raising
by artificial means in this country. He said recently when questioned on
this subject by a representative of the _Evening Post_:

"I went to France to study the matter, for if it can be made to succeed
it will make an immense fortune, as it has already done in Paris. I was
delighted with what I saw there, and the matter at first sight seems to
be so fascinating that I do not wonder that new men here are always
ready to take hold of it as soon as those who have bought dear
experience are only too glad to get out of it. Even clergymen and actors
are bitten with the desire to transform so many pounds of corn into so
many pounds of spring chicken. The now successful manager, Mackaye,
spent about a thousand dollars, in constructing hatching machines and
artificial mothers in Connecticut, but he found that the stage paid
better, and his expensive devices may now be bought for the value of old
tin.

"Enthusiasts will tell you that by the new discovery chickens may be
made out of corn with absolute certainty. In Paris this has been done;
but the conditions are entirely different here. There the land is
valuable, and they cannot devote large fields to a few hundred chickens;
the French climate is so uniform that the markets of Paris cannot be
supplied from the south with produce which ripens or matures before that
of the neighborhood of Paris; the price of chickens is so high and labor
so cheap that more care can be given with profit to one spring chicken
than one of our poultry raisers could give to a dozen. Here we have
plenty of land, the climate south of us is so far advanced in warmth
that even with steam we cannot raise poultry ahead of the south, and the
margin of profit is so small that one failure with a large batch of
chickens sweeps away the profits from several successful experiments.

"When persons wanted me to go into the project I declined and was called
an old fogy. One man spent a fortune on the enterprise in New Jersey,
and at first was hailed as a public benefactor. What was the result of
all his outlay and work? He managed to hatch quantities of young
chickens every February, but although he could fatten them by placing
them in boxes and forcing a fattening mixture down their throats, he
could not make them grow; they had no exercise; they remained puny
little things, and another defect soon appeared: though fat they were
tough and stringy. The breeder sent lots of them to me, and they looked
fat and tender; but my customers complained that they could not be
young, for they were tough and tasteless, and that I must have sold them
aged dwarfs under the name of spring chickens. It was found absolutely
necessary to let them run out of doors as soon as the weather allowed
it, and by the time that they were ready for market the southern
chickens were here and could be sold for less than these. The upshot of
the business is that this breeder has sold out, and another man has now
taken hold of a small part of his old establishment to try other methods
of making it a success.

"As to raising turkeys in that manner it will tail more disastrously
than the chicken business. Size and weight are wanted in turkeys; and
that reminds me," continued Mr. Knapp, "that the newspapers ought to
impress the country people with the necessity of improving their poultry
stock; breeding in and in is ruining poultry; every year the stock we
receive is deteriorating, and this is the cause. I could give you some
striking examples from my experience of forty years in the business.
Some years ago we poulterers thought that ducks were going to disappear
from bills of fare altogether; they were tasteless, worthless birds
which people avoided. On Long Island a farmer made experiments in
breeding with an old Muscovy drake, tough as an alligator, and the
common duck. The result was superb and has changed the whole duck
industry. If the farmers of Southern New Jersey, the sandy country best
suited to turkeys, would bring from the West a few hundred wild turkeys
we should have an immediate improvement. I see no such turkey now as we
had twenty years ago. The breast is narrow and the body runs to length;
it is all neck and legs, and can be bought by the yard. Rhode Island
sends us the best turkeys, but they are not what they used to be. If,
instead of attempting to beat nature at her own game, the rich men who
have money to spend would devote it to better breeding, there would be
an improvement. I do not yet despair of seeing immense farms wholly
devoted to raising better poultry than we yet have."

       *       *       *       *       *




THE EMBRACE OF THE MANTIS.


Mr. Addison Ellsworth favors us with a transcript of a letter from Mr.
Albert D. Rust, of Ennis, Ellis County, Texas, describing a remarkable
exhibition of copulative cannibalism on the part of the mantis. The
ferocious nature of these strange insects is well known, and is in
striking contrast with the popular name, "praying mantis," which they
have gained by the pious attitude they take while watching for the flies
and other insects which they feed upon.

About sunrise, August 28, 1880, Mr. Rust's attention was attracted by a
pair of mantis, whether _Mantis religiosa_ or not, he was not sure, but
from the length of the body and the shortness of the wings he was
inclined to think them of some other species. The female had her arms
tightly clasped around the head of the male, while his left arm was
around her neck. Mr. Rust watched intently to see whether the embrace
was one of war or for copulation. It proved to be both. As the two
abdomens began to approach each other the female made a ferocious attack
upon the male, greedily devouring his head, a part of the body, and all
the arm that had encircled her neck. A moment after the eating began,
Mr. Rust observed a complete union of the sexual organs, and the eating
and copulation went on together. On being forcibly separated the female
exhibited signs of fear at her headless mate, and it was with difficulty
that they were brought together again. On being suddenly tossed upon the
back of the female the male seized her with a grasp from which she could
not extricate herself, and immediately the sexual union was renewed, to
all appearances as perfectly as before.

The pair were accidentally killed, otherwise, Mr. Rush thinks, the
female would have continued her cannibalistic repast until she had
devoured the entire body of her companion.

This peculiarity of the mantis seems not to have been observed before,
though their mutually destructive disposition has been noted by several.
Desiring to study the development of these insects, M. Roesel raised a
brood of them from a bag of eggs. Though plentifully supplied with
flies, the young mantis fought each other constantly, the stronger
devouring the weaker, until but one was left.

M. Poiret was not more successful. When a pair of mantis were put
together in a glass they fought viciously, the fight ending with the
decapitation of the male and his being eaten by the female.

       *       *       *       *       *




VARIEGATION OF LEAVES.

BY JAMES HOGG.


At the meeting of the Association of Nurserymen in Chicago, last July,
one of our prominent horticulturists described leaf variegation as a
disease. Incidentally this brought up the question: Does the graft
affect the stock upon which it is inserted?

Much confusion of ideas exists upon this subject, largely due to a loose
application of the term disease. Strictly speaking, this term is only
applicable to that which shows the health of the plant to be impaired.
It should be distinguished from aberrant or abnormal forms, for these
are not necessarily indicative of disease. Nobody thinks of saying that
red or striped roses are diseased because they are departures in color
from the white flower of the type species; or that white, yellow, or
striped roses are diseased when the color of the type species is red.
Nobody thinks of saying that double flowers are evidences of disease in
the plant, or that diminution in the size of leaves or variation in
their form is a disease. Why then should it be said that because leaves
may become of some other color than green, or become party-colored,
therefore they are diseased? If it be said that flowers are not leaves,
and that therefore the analogy is not a good one, the reply is, that
flowers in all their parts, and fruits also, are only leaves differently
developed from the type. This fact is a proven one, and so admitted to
be by all botanists and vegetable physiologists of the present day. If
it be objected that by becoming double, flowers lose the power of
reproducing the variety or species, the answer is, that this loss of
power is not necessarily the result of disease, but may arise from
various other causes. Because an animal is castrated, it surely will not
be claimed that therefore it is diseased. In man and in the higher
animals the power of reproduction ceases at certain ages, but it cannot
therefore be said that such men or animals are diseased. Neither is a
redundancy of parts an unequivocal evidence of disease.

Topknot fowls and ducks are as healthy as those which do not have such
appendages, and a Shetland pony is as healthy as a Percheron horse,
notwithstanding the difference in their size and weight. Again, color in
block or in variegation is not positive evidence of disease in animal
life. The white Caucasian is as healthy as the negro, the copper-colored
Malay as the red Indian. The horse, ox, and hog run through white and
red to black both in solid and party-color, and all are equally healthy;
so with the rabbit, dog, cat, and others of our domestic animals. In
wild animals, birds, reptiles, fishes, and insects, it is the same, so
that mere difference in color or combinations of color are not _prima
facie_ evidence of disease.

But some will say this may be true of animal life, but not of plant
life. That there is a strong and evident analogy, the one with the
other, is now universally admitted by physiologists. Formerly many
physiologists considered leaf variegation a disease, because it
generally ran in stripes lengthwise of the leaf or in spots. In the
former case it was supposed to originate from disease in the leaf cells
of the leaf stalk, which, as the cells grow longitudinally, naturally
prolonged it to the end of the leaf. But the originating of varieties in
which the variegation did not assume this form, with other
considerations, has done much to upset this theory. In the variegated
leaved snowberry we have the center and border of the leaf green,
separated the one from the other by an isolated white or yellow zone. In
the zebra-leaved eulalia and the zebra-leaved juncus, from Japan, we
have the variegation of the leaf transversely instead of longitudinally,
so that according to the old theory we have the anomaly of a healthy
portion of the leaf producing an unhealthy portion, and that again a
healthy one, and thus alternately along the whole length of the leaf.

When we dissect a leaf in its primal development, we find that its cells
contain colorless globules, by botanists called chlorophyl or
phyto-color; these undergo changes according as they are acted upon by
light, oxygen, or other agents, producing green, yellow, red, and other
tints. This chlorophyl only exists in the outer or superficial cells of
the parenchyma or cellular tissue of the leaf, and thus differs from
starch and other substances produced in the internal cells, from which
the light is more or less excluded. It is a fatty or wax-like substance,
readily dissolved in alcohol or ether. The primal color of all leaves
and flowers is white or a pale yellowish hue, as can readily be seen by
cutting open a leaf or flower bud. The seed leaves of the French bean
are white when they come out of the earth, but they become green an hour
afterward under the influence of bright sunshine. A case is on record
where in a certain section, some miles in extent, in this country, about
the time of the trees coming into leaf, the sun did not shine for twenty
days; the leaves developed to nearly their full size, but were of a pale
or whitish color; finally, one forenoon the sun shone out fully, and by
the middle of the afternoon the trees were in full summer dress. These
facts show that the green color of leaves is due to the action of light.
Variegation is sometimes produced independently of the chlorophyl, as in
_Begonia argyrostigma_ and _Carduus marianus_, in which it is produced
by a layer of air interposed between the epidermis or outer skin of the
leaf and the cells beneath; this gives the leaf a bright, silvery
appearance.

To what, then, are we to ascribe leaf variegation? I think that it is
entirely due to diminished root power; by this I do not mean that the
roots are diseased, but that they are either in an aberrant or abnormal
state; but disease cannot be predicated upon either of these states. To
explain: everybody knows _Spirea callosa_ to be a strong growing shrub,
having umbels of rosy-colored flowers and strong, stout roots; the white
flowered variety is quite dwarf, is more leafy and bushy than the
species, and has more fibrous and delicate roots than the type; the
crisp-leaved variety is still more dwarf, very bushy, and very leafy,
and has very fine threadlike roots. This would indicate that the
aberrance is in the roots; the two varieties are much more leafy in
proportion to their size than the species, so that if the leaves
controlled the roots, the latter should have been larger in proportion
than those of the species. Again, once when, in the autumn, I was
preparing my greenhouse plants for their winter quarters, I cut back a
"Lady Plymouth" geranium, which chanced to be set away in a cool and
somewhat damp cellar. When discovered the following February and started
into growth in the greenhouse it produced nothing but solid green
leaves, and never afterward produced a variegated leaf. This I
attributed to its having gained greater root power during its long
season of rest. By this I mean that the roots had grown and greatly
increased in size, although there had not been any leaf growth. That
roots under certain circumstances do so is well known. The roots of fir
trees have been found alive and growing forty five years after the
trunks were felled. The same has occurred in an ash tree after its trunk
had been sawn off level with the ground. A root of _Ipomea sellowii_ has
been known to keep on growing for twelve years after its top had been
destroyed by frost; and in all that time it never made buds or leaves,
yet it increased to seven times its original weight. The tuberous roots
of some of the _Tropoeolums_ will continue to grow and increase in
size after the tops have been accidentally broken off; and potatoes
buried so deep in the earth that they cannot produce tops will produce a
