
The first table covers were great curiosities, and the homes of the
Baileys were visited by all the neighboring housewives, who were
anxious to see "how they worked." Of course, it was easy to keep them
clean, and they saved the woodwork of the table, which was
recommendation enough. To see a cloth was to covet it, and it was not
long before Ezekiel Bailey had a considerable business. Employing a
boy to help him, he turned out table cloths as fast as his limited
facilities would permit, and, as he progressed, new ideas for
decorating took shape in his mind. In less than a year he had men out
on the road selling them.

The turning out to perfection of an oilcloth carpet in those days was
a task that would make a person in these piping times of labor-saving
machinery wish for something easier. All the smoothing or rubbing down
was done by hand. Heavy, long-bladed knives, as big as the "Sword of
Bunker Hill," were used to scrape down the rough body coats of paint,
and a smooth surface, on which to stamp the geometrical figures in
colors, was fetched after long and laborious polishing with bricks and
pumice stone.

Drummers employed by Mr. Bailey traveled to Massachusetts, to New
York, and away down into the South, and ere long the demand for
oilcloth carpeting became so general that other factories were built
and made to chatter and clank with the new industry. There was living
not far from East Winthrop at this time a shrewd, wideawake Yankee
farmer named Sampson, who had kept his weather eye peeled on the
progress of Ezekiel Bailey, and when housewives everywhere began to
yearn for the new carpeting, taking a neighbor in as a partner, Mr.
Sampson built a factory, and in a very short time was in a position to
be considered a formidable rival of Mr. Bailey.

But the originator of the oilcloth carpet was not to be outdone.
Discerning good returns from a plant established close to a big center
of consumption, Mr. Bailey entered into a deal with New Jersey
capitalists, and a big factory was set a-going in that State. A
trusted employe of the Bailey concern, Levi Richardson (who still
lives and is the proprietor of a modest little store in East
Winthrop), was sent to New Jersey to instruct the green hands there
in the art of manufacture. While thus engaged, Mr. Richardson's brain
was busy with the problem of labor saving, and one day a phantom
device for smoothing and rubbing down the first rough coats on the
burlaps took form in his mind, and for some weeks he spent his spare
time in experimenting. The result was the present patent used in most
factories, whereby as much rubbing down can be done in one day as
could have been accomplished in four by the old hand method.
--Industrial World.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE KOPPEL ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVES.


The question of the design of small locomotives for use on pioneer
lines has been always a difficult matter.

The needs of the railway contractor have called for such locomotives,
for which several systems of power have been tried. In many ways the
electric locomotive has distinct advantages over its rivals, steam and
compressed air, for these narrow gage lines. Reviewing these
advantages briefly, we see that the electrical equipment is more
economical to work, as one good stationary engine develops power much
more cheaply than several small locomotives. Again, the electric
locomotive can be more readily designed for narrow gages than steam or
compressed air locomotives.

[Illustration: FIG. 1--AN ELECTRIC LINE EQUIPPED ON THE KOPPEL
SYSTEM.]

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--THE SECTION WITH THE SUPPORT FOR THE OVERHEAD
LINE.]

A new system of equipment of such lines is now being introduced into
this country by Mr. Arthur Koppel, of 96 Leadenhall Street, E. C. The
keynote of this system is flexibility, the arrangements being such
that extensions or alterations can be readily effected. In fact, the
line is portable, and it is claimed also to be cheaper than the
ordinary construction. The overhead conductor is employed, as can be
seen from Fig. 1, which gives a general view of a locomotive and train
of skips on a line actually at work abroad. The supports for the wire
are not provided by separate posts and brackets in the usual way, but
by arched carriers attached to the sections of railway line, thereby
forming a portable section of the electric railway, as illustrated by
Fig. 2. The steel carrier or "arch" is fixed to one of the sleepers,
which is made of sufficient length for that purpose. On the straight
line these line supports are placed about 25 yards apart. In curves of
a small radius each section of tramway is provided with an arch, to
keep the line of the wire as nearly as possible parallel to the curve
of the line. Apart from these special extended sleepers with wire
carriers attached, the line is constructed in the ordinary mariner
with rails 14 lb. per yard and upward. As the electric locomotives are
lighter than steam locomotives, the weight of rail required is
somewhat less. The special trolley for erecting the wires along the
railway line is shown in Fig. 3. This consists of an ordinary four
wheeled platform wagon with ladder, and wire drum with tightening gear
and clamps or grips for anchoring the trolley to the line. The wire is
led over a sheave on top of the ladder and fixed to the picket post at
the beginning of the line. When erecting the wire the trolley is
pushed beyond the first carrier arch, clamped on to the rails, and the
wire is then tightened by means of the tightening gear. It is then
firmly fixed to the insulator on the carrier arch The tension in the
copper wire is taken up by a second portable ladder, which is also
provided with a tightening gear and can be clamped to the rails in the
same manner as the trolley, so that the trolley can then be pushed
behind the second carrier arch and the process previously described
repeated. By the tension in the wire the carrier arches acquire the
necessary stability, while without the procedure previously described
it would be impossible to use such light arches attached to the
sleepers. On permanent lines, the extreme ends of the wire are
attached to properly anchored picket posts. On portable lines, on the
other hand, the trolley with the wire drum is fixed to the rails at
the end of the line, as shown in Fig. 3, so as to enable the line to
be lengthened or shortened, as may be required, with ease.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.--THE STRAINING GEAR AND TERMINAL ANCHOR.]

Care is taken in insulating the drum and ladders so as to prevent
leakage from this erecting trolley to earth. The feeders from the
power house to the overhead wire and to the rails respectively are
erected on light iron posts, which have also been standardized by Mr.
Koppel. A specimen of these posts with an anchored stay is shown in
Fig. 4. All these details are arranged for convenience of the
contractor required to rapidly equip a line of railway, which can also
be removed as soon as the work has been done.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.--LIGHT POLE FOR CARRYING THE FEEDERS.]

[Illustration: FIG. 5.--THE KOPPEL LOCOMOTIVE.]

The locomotive used is varied in form with the gage of the line, but
we are particularly concerned with those for gages under 24 inches.
One form of such locomotive without a hood to protect the driver is
shown in Fig. 5. In this locomotive the gear is the same as that of
the next illustration, but it is securely boxed in a watertight iron
cover. The controlling gear is then placed vertically in front. Figs.
6 and 7 show the details of the electrical and mechanical parts of
this locomotive when fitted with a platform at either end, and with a
hood. The motor. M, is of the internal pole type, and is supported on
the underframe of the wagon. A double gear is used. The first is a
spur gearing, connecting the motor to a countershaft placed under the
motor. This gear reduces the speed of rotation to about 200
revolutions. The countershaft is then connected to the two axles of
the trolley by chain gearing. This gives the necessary flexibility
between the car body and the wheel required, as the springs give to
any inequality of the rails. In this gearing there is no change of
speed. The underframe is provided with spring axle boxes, and also
with spring buffers and drawbars. The speed of the motor can be
regulated within very wide limits by the regulator, R. An effective
hand brake is also provided.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.--END ELEVATION OF LOCOMOTIVE.]

[Illustration: FIG. 7.--DETAILED ELEVATION OF A KOPPEL LOCOMOTIVE WITH
A DOUBLE PLATFORM AND HOOD.]

For gages of 20 inches and upward the motors can be mounted on springs
and attached to the running axles inside of the wagon underframe. This
construction is particularly recommended by Mr. Koppel where, in order
to mount heavy gradients, the dead load of the motor car must be
assisted by the paying load to produce the necessary adhesion. In such
cases several motor wagons would be used in the same train. As regards
the working voltage, this can be varied to suit special requirements,
but the locomotive we illustrate was designed for 110 volts. At this
pressure its possible working speed was at least eight miles per hour.
The supply of power is also a matter not referred to particularly, as
in many cases a lighting plant is used by the contractors, which could
also be employed to provide the necessary energy for the electric
railway. The good work done by small electric locomotives in the
excavation work for the Waterloo and City Railway[1] will convince our
large contractors of the valuable service which electricity can render
both above and below ground.--The Electrical Engineer.

  [Footnote 1: Electrical Engineer, vol. xvi., p. 499.]

       *       *       *       *       *

A connection between Servian and Roumanian railways is to be
established by bridging the Danube. It is reported proposals have
already been made to the governments interested, by the Union Bridge
Company, also by British and French constructors.--Uhland's
Wochenschrift.

       *       *       *       *       *




LIQUID RHEOSTATS.

BY H. S. WEBB.[1]

   [Footnote 1: In American Electrician.]


The object in view when the following tests were commenced was to
obtain some data from which the dimensions of a liquid rheostat for
the dissipation as heat of a given amount of energy could be
calculated, or at least estimated, when the maximum current and E.M.F.
are known. These tests were rather hastily made and are far from being
as complete as I should like to have them, and are published only to
answer some inquiries for information on the subject.

In the first test, an ordinary Daniell jar (61/4 inches in diameter by 8
inches deep) with horizontal sheet iron electrodes was filled with tap
water. It would not carry 4 amperes for over fifteen or twenty
minutes, although the jar was full of water and the plates only 3/4 inch
apart. After that length of time it became too hot, causing great
variation in the current on account of the large amount of gas
liberated, much of which adhered to the under surface of the upper
electrode. The difference of potential between the plates was 200
volts.

A run was made with 1 ampere and then with 2 amperes for one hour. In
the latter case the voltage between the electrodes was about 71 volts
and the temperature rose to about 167 deg. F.

From these tests it would be safe to allow a vessel with a cross
section of 30.7 square inches to carry from 2 to 21/2 amperes when tap
water and horizontal electrodes are used.

In test No. 2 the same jar and electrodes were used as in the
preceding test, but the tap water was replaced by a saturated solution
of salt water. Eleven amperes with a potential difference of 7 volts
between the electrodes, which were 73/4 inches apart, were passed
through the solution for three hours, and the temperature at the end
of the run was 122 deg. F., and was rising very slowly.

Although the current per square inch is much greater, the watts
absorbed per cubic inch is much less in this case than when water was
used. With the water carrying 2 amperes the watts absorbed would be
over 10 per cubic inch, while for the saturated solution of salt when
carrying 11 amperes it would be only about 0.4 watt.

In test No. 3 use was made of a long, wooden rectangular trough (42
inches by 61/2 inches by 8 inches) with vertical, sheet iron electrodes.
The cross section of the liquid, which was a 10 per cent. solution of
salt in water, was 44 square inches, and with 10 amperes passing
through the solution for 13/4 hours the temperature rose to 95 deg. F., and
was rising slowly at the end of the run.

The plates were 413/4 inches apart, and at the end of the run the
voltmeter across the terminals read 20. This gives a current density
of nearly 1/4 ampere per square inch and 0.11 watt per cubic inch. These
values are too low to be considered maximum values, for this cross
section of a 10 per cent. salt solution would probably carry 13 to 15
amperes safely.

It appears that as the amount of salt in the solution is increased
from zero to saturation, the maximum current carrying capacity is
increased, but the watts absorbed per cubic inch are less.

A very small addition of salt to tap water makes the solution a much
better conductor than the water, and reduces greatly the safe maximum
watts absorbed. In using glass vessels, such as Daniell jars, there is
danger of cracking the jar if the temperature rises much above 165 deg. to
175 deg. F.

In test No. 4 an ordinary whisky barrel, filled up with tap water, was
used. Two horizontal circular iron plates (3/16 inch thick) were used
for electrodes. The diameter of the inside of the barrel was
approximately 19-1/2 inches. With the two plates 26-3/8 inches apart a
difference of potential of 486 volts gave a current of 2.6 amperes.
With the plates 7/8 inch apart, 228 volts gave 35.5 amperes at the end
of one hour, when all the water in the barrel was very hot (175 deg. F.),
and there was quite a good deal of gas given off. The current density
in this case was about 0.12 ampere per square inch and the watts
absorbed 30.5 per cubic inch. If it were not for the large amount of
water above both electrodes, it is doubtful if this current density
could have been maintained.

In test No. 5 a rectangular box, in which were placed two vertical
sheet iron plates, was filled with tap water. The distance between the
plates was 5/8 inch, and with a difference of potential of 414 at
start and 397 at end of the run, a current of 35 amperes was kept
flowing for 35 minutes. Cold tap water was kept running in between the
electrodes at the rate of 6.11 pounds per minute (about 1/10 cubic
foot) by means of a small rubber tube about 1/4 inch inside diameter.
This test is very interesting in comparison with the preceding. The
current carrying capacity, 0.3 ampere per square inch, was more than
double, and the energy absorbed 183 watts per cubic inch, more than
six times as great as in case where running water was not used.

The temperature in some places between the plates occasionally rose as
high as 205 deg. F., and it was necessary, in order to avoid too violent
ebullition, to keep the inflowing stream of water directed along the
water surface between the two plates. Less water would not have been
sufficient, and, of course, by using more water, the temperature
could have been kept lower, or with the same temperature the watts
absorbed could have been increased.

When a large current density is used, there is considerable
decomposition of the iron electrodes when either salt or pure water is
used, and in the case of horizontal electrodes, the under surface of
the top plate may become covered with bubbles of gas, making the
resistance between the plates quite variable. For large current
density a horizontal top plate is not advisable, unless a large number
of holes are drilled through it. A better form for the top electrode
would be a hollow cylinder long enough to give sufficient surface.
Washing soda is often a convenient substance to use instead of salt.

If, from experience, the size of a liquid rheostat for absorbing a
given amount of energy cannot be estimated, the dimensions may be
calculated approximately as follows:

Suppose, for instance, it is desired to absorb 60 amperes at 40 volts
difference of potential between the electrodes. Now, it is
inconvenient to obtain a saturated solution of salt, and to use tap
water would require too large a cross section--especially if a barrel
or trough is to be used--in order to have the resistance with the
plates at a safe distance apart, small enough to give 60 amperes with
40 volts.

Let us try a 10 per cent. solution of salt. Suppose the maximum
current this will carry is 1/4 ampere per square inch, which will give a
cross section of the solution of at least 60 / 1/4 = 240 square inches.
Now, the specific resistance per inch cube (i.e., the resistance
between two opposite surfaces of a cube whose side measures 1 inch) of
the 10 per cent. solution of salt used in test No. 3 was 2.12 ohms.
The drop, CR, will be 2.12 x 1/4 = 0.53 volt per inch length of solution
between electrodes. Hence, the electrodes will have to be 40/0.53 = 75
inches apart. This would require about three barrels connected in
series. This was taken merely as an illustration, because its specific
resistance was known when the current density was 1/4 ampere per square
inch. This solution, however, will carry safely 1/3 ampere per square
inch, but I used the previous figure, since I did not know its
specific resistance for this current density, because its specific
resistance will be lower for a larger current density on account of
the higher temperature which it will have, for the resistance of a
solution decreases as its temperature increases.

To reduce this length would require a solution of higher specific
resistance, that is, a solution containing less than 10 per cent. of
salt, and an increase in the cross section, since the maximum carrying
capacity also diminishes as the percentage of salt diminishes. Only
approximate calculations are useful because variations in temperature,
amount of salt actually in solution and the rate at which heat can be
radiated, all combine to give results which may vary widely from those
calculated.

As a matter of fact, it is seldom necessary or advisable to use a
solution containing over 2 or 3 per cent. of salt. The best way to
add salt to a liquid rheostat is to make a strong solution in a
separate vessel and add as much of this solution as is needed. This
avoids the annoying increase in conductivity of the solution which
happens when the salt itself is added and is gradually dissolved.

Liquid rheostats are ever so much more satisfactory for alternating
than for direct current testing. The electrodes and solution are
practically free from decomposition, and a given cross section seems
to be able to carry a larger alternating than direct current--probably
due partly to the absence of the scum on the surface which hinders the
radiation of heat.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE PROGRESS OF MEDICAL EDUCATION IN THE UNITED STATES.


A retrospective survey of the progress made and of the reforms
instituted in medical education in the United States is instructive.
In many respects there is cause for much congratulation, while for
other reasons the situation gives rise to feelings of alarm. It is
pleasing to note and it augurs well for the future that a decided
advance has been made in the direction of a more thorough medical
training, yet at the same time it is discouraging to observe that,
despite these progressive steps, competition does not abate, but
rather daily becomes more acute. Dr. William T. Slayton has just
issued his small annual volume on "Medical Education and Registration
in the United States and Canada." From a study of this book, which
fairly bristles with facts, a sufficiently comprehensive opinion may
be formed in regard to the present state of medical education in this
country. According to this work, there is now a grand total of one
hundred and fifty-four medical schools. Of this number, one hundred
and seventeen require attendance on four annual courses of lectures,
and twenty-seven require attendance on sessions of eight months, and
ten on nine months each year. Twenty-nine States and the District of
Columbia require an examination for license to practice medicine;
eighteen of these require both a diploma from a recognized college and
an examination. Fifteen States require a diploma from a college
recognized by them or an examination. Five States, viz., Vermont,
Michigan, Kansas, Wyoming and Nevada, have practically no laws
governing the practice of medicine; Alaska the same. In order to gain
a clear comprehension of the existing state of affairs, a comparison
of the number of students at two periods, with a lapse of years
intervening sufficient to eliminate all minor variations, will be more
to the point than merely regarding the multiplication of schools. Many
of these mushroom institutions are not worthy of notice, containing
perhaps a dozen students, and brought into existence only for the
purpose of profit or from other motives of self-interest. The number
of students is as reliable an index as can be given. For instance,
taking the decade between 1883-84 and 1893-94, it will be found that
the students in regular schools in 1883-84 numbered 10,600; in 1893-94
they had increased to 17,601. Students in homoeopathic schools in
1883-84 were 1,267; in 1893-94, 1,666. The number of eclectic students
was stationary at the two periods. The increase during the period from
1893-94 to the present time has been at about the same ratio.

These figures reveal more plainly than words the existing condition of
affairs, which must, too, in the nature of things, continue until that
time when all the States fall into line and resolve to adopt a four
years' course of not less than eight months.

To make yet another comparison, the total number of medical schools in
Austria and Germany, with a population exceeding that of this country,
is twenty-nine. Great Britain, with more than half the population, has
seventeen; while Russia, with one hundred million inhabitants, has
nine. Of course we do not argue that America, with her immense
territory and scattered population, does not need greater facilities
for the study of medicine than do thickly inhabited countries, as
Germany and Great Britain; but we do contend that when a city of the
size of St. Louis has as many schools as Russia, the craze for
multiplying these schools is being carried to absurd and harmful
lengths. However, that the number of schools and their yearly supply
of graduates of medicine are far beyond the demand is perfectly well
