there, a dark winged shape dotted with colored lights. A signal flash--a
sharp command to Georg, but, of course, he could not answer. Then the
Director's finder picked him out. The _volan_ was fluttering, spiralling
slowly as Georg struggled to hold his place.

And then the patrol launched its tender. It came darting down like a
wasp. A moment more, and Georg and Maida were taken aboard it. The
_volan_ fluttered to the forest unguided and was lost in the black
treetops, now no more than a thousand feet below.

Surrounded by amazed officials, Maida and Georg entered the patrol
vessel. Georg Brende, escaped safely from Tarrano! The Brende secret
released from Tarrano's control! The Director flashed the news to
Washington and to Great London. Orders came back. A score of other
vessels of this Patrol-Division came dashing up--a convoy which soon was
speeding northward to Washington with its precious messenger.




CHAPTER XI

_Recaptured_


In Washington during those next few days, events of the Earth, Venus and
Mars swirled and raged around Georg as though he were engulfed in the
Iguazu or Niagara. Passive himself at first--a spectator merely; yet he
was the keystone of the Earth Council's strength. The Brende secret was
desired by the publics of all three worlds. Even greater than its real
value as a medical discovery, it swayed the popular mind.

Tarrano possessed the Brende secret. The only model, and Dr. Brende's
notes were in his hands. Washington had ordered him to give them up, and
he had refused. But now the status was changed. Georg held the secret
also--and Georg was in Washington. It left the Earth Council free to
deal with Tarrano.

During those days Georg was housed in official apartments, with Maida
very often near him. Inactive, they were much together, discussing their
respective worlds. The Princess Maida was hereditary ruler of the Venus
Central State--the only living heir to the throne. When Tarrano's forces
threatened revolution from the Cold Country she had been seized by
spies, brought to Earth, to Tarrano in Venia, and imprisoned in the
tower from which Georg had so lately rescued her. Wolfgar for years had
been her friend and loyal retainer, though he had pretended service to
Tarrano.

In the Central State, Maida, too young to rule, had been represented by
a Council. The public loved her--but a majority of it had gone astray
when she disappeared--lured by Tarrano's glowing promises.

Maida told Georg all this with a sweet, gentle sadness that was
pathetic. And with an earnest, patriotic fervor--the love of her country
and her people for whom she would give her life.

She added: "If only I could get back there, Georg--I could make them
realize the right course. I could win them again. Tarrano will play them
false--_you_ know it, and so do I."

Pathetic earnestness in this girl still no more than seventeen! And
Georg, sitting beside her, gazing into her solemn, beautiful face, felt
that indeed she could win them, with those limpid blue eyes and her
words which rang with sincerity and truth.

They sat generally in an unofficial instrument room adjoining the
government offices. A room high in a spire above the upper levels of the
city. And around them rolled the momentous events of which they were the
center.

The time limit of the Earth Council's ultimatum to Tarrano expired.
Already Tarrano had answered it with defiance. But on the stroke of its
expiration, came another note from him. Georg read it from the tape to
Maida:

_"To the Earth Council from Tarrano, its loyal subject----"_

A grimly ironical note, yet so worded that the ignorant masses would not
see its irony. It stated that Tarrano could not comply with the demand
that he deliver himself and the Brende model to Washington because he
did not have the model. It was on its way to Venus. He now proposed to
recall it. He had already recalled it, in fact. He assured the Council
that it was now on its way back, direct to Washington. He had done this
because he felt that the Earth leaders were making a mistake--a grave
mistake in the interests of their own people. Georg Brende was in
Washington--that was true. But Georg Brende was a silly, conceited young
man, flattered by his prominence in the public eye, his head turned by
his own importance. Dr. Brende had been a genius. The son was a mere
upstart, pretending to a scientific knowledge he did not have.

"Trickery!" exclaimed Georg. "But he knows the people may believe it.
Some of them undoubtedly will."

"And you cannot thwart your public," Maida said. "Even your Earth
Council, secure in its power, cannot do that."

"Exactly," Georg rejoined. He was indignant, as well he might have been.
"Tarrano is trying to avoid being attacked. Time--any delay--is what he
wants."

The note went on. Tarrano--seeking only the welfare of the people--could
not stand by and see the Earth Council wreck its public. Tarrano had
reconsidered his former note. The Brende model was vital, and since the
Earth Council demanded the model (for the benefit of its people) the
people should have it. In a few days it would be in Washington. Tarrano
himself would not come to Washington. His doing that could not help the
public welfare, and he was but human. The Earth Council had made itself
his enemy; he could not be expected to trust his life in enemy hands.

The note closed with the suggestion that the Council withdraw its patrol
from Venia. This talk of war was childish. Withdraw the patrol, and
Tarrano himself might go back to Venus. He would wait a day for answer
to this request; and if it were not granted--if the patrol were not
entirely removed--then the Brende model would be destroyed. And if the
publics of three worlds wished to depend upon a conceited, ignorant
young man like Georg Brende for the everlasting life, they were welcome
to do so.

A clever piece of trickery, and it was awkward to deal with. One had
only to watch its effect upon the public to realize how insidious it
was. Tarrano had told us--in the tower in Venia: "I shall have to
bargain with them." And chuckled as he said it.

A series of notes from the Earth Council and back again, followed during
the next few days. But the patrol was not withdrawn; nor was war
declared. The Earth Council knew that Tarrano had not ordered the model
back--nor would he destroy it. Yet if the Earth forces were to overwhelm
Tarrano, and the model were lost, a revolution upon Earth could easily
take place before Georg could convince the people that he was able to
build them another model.

This delay--while Tarrano was held virtually a prisoner in Venia--was
decided upon at the instigation of Georg himself. He--Georg--would
address the publics of the three worlds. With Maida beside him to
influence her own public in Venus, they would convince everyone that
Georg had the secret--and that he alone would use it for the public
good.

Youthful plans! Youthful enthusiasm! The belief that they could win
confidence to their cause by the very truthfulness in their hearts! The
belief that right makes might--which Tarrano would have told them was
untrue!

Yet it was a good plan, and the Earth Council approved it, since it
could do no harm to try. And it perhaps would have been successful but
for one thing, of which even at that moment I--in Venia--was aware.
Tarrano's trickery was not all on the surface. He had written into that
note--by a code of diabolically ingenious wording--a secret message to
his own spies in Washington. Commands for them to obey. A dozen of his
spies were in the Earth government's most trusted, highest service--and
some of them were there in Washington, close around Georg and Maida as
they made their altruistic plan.

The attempt was to be made from the high-power sending station in the
mountains of West North America.[13] Our observatory was there; and the
only one of its kind on the Earth. It was equipped to send a radio voice
audibly to every part of the Earth; and by helio, also to Mars and
Venus, there to be re-transformed from light to sound and heard
throughout those other worlds. And moving images of the speakers, seen
on the finders all over the Earth, Venus and Mars simultaneously. The
power, the generating equipment was at this station; and no matter where
in the sky Venus or Mars might be, from the Mountain Station the
vibrations of mingled light and sound were relayed elsewhere on Earth to
other stations from which the helios could be flashed direct.

[Footnote 13: The Rocky Mountains, in the United States or possibly
Alberta.]

To Skylan, as the Mountain Station was popularly called, Georg and Maida
were taken in official aero under heavy convoy. Yet, even then, at their
very elbows, spies of Tarrano must have been lurking.

The official flyer landed them on the broad stage amid deep, soft snow.
It was night--a brief trip from the late afternoon, through dinner and
they were there. A night of clear shining stars--brilliant gems in deep
purple. Clear, crisp, rarefied air; a tumbling expanse of white, with
the stars stretched over it like a close-hung canopy.

They were ushered into the low, rambling building. The attempt was to be
made at once. Mars was mounting the eastern sky; and to the west, Venus
was setting. Both visible from direct helios at that moment--Red Mars,
from this mountain top, glowing like the tip of an arrant-cylinder up
there.

In the brief time since the party had left Washington, the worlds had
been notified. The eyes and ears of the millions of three planets were
waiting to see and hear this Georg Brende and this Princess Maida.

The sending room was small, circular, and crowded with apparatus. And
above its dome, opened to the sky, wherein the intensified helios shaded
so that no ray of them might blind the operators, were sputtering as
though eager to be away with their messages.

With a dozen officials around him, Georg prepared to enter the sending
room. He had parted from Maida a few moments before, when she had left
him to be shown to her apartment by the women attendants.

As she moved away, on impulse he had stopped her. "We shall succeed,
Maida."

Her hand touched his arm. A brave smile, a nod, and she had passed on,
leaving him standing there gazing after her with pounding heart.
Pounding, not with excitement at the task before him in that sending
room; pounding with the sudden knowledge that the welfare of this frail
little woman meant more to him than the safety of all these worlds.

At last Georg stood in the sending room. The officials sat grouped
around him. Maida had not yet arrived from her apartment. There was a
small platform, upon which she and Georg were to stand together. He took
his place upon it, waiting for her.

Before him was the sending disc; it glowed red as they turned the
current into it. Then they illumined the mirrors; a circle of them, each
with its image of Georg upon the platform. The white lights above him
flashed on, beating down upon him with their hot, dazzling glare. The
reflected beams from the mirrors, struck upward into the dome overhead.
The helios up there were humming and sputtering loudly.

Beyond the circle of intense white light in which Georg was standing,
the spectators sat in gloom behind the mirrors. Maida had not come. The
Skylan Director, impatient ordered a woman to go for her.

Then, suddenly, Georg said to this Director:

"I--these lights--this heat. It makes me feel faint--standing here."

Georg had stumbled from the platform. Between two of the mirrors, shaded
from the glare, the perturbed Director met him. Moisture beaded Georg's
forehead.

"I'll--be quite all right in a moment. I'm going over there." He smiled
weakly. A dozen feet away there was an opened outer casement. It looked
down twenty feet, perhaps, to the deep snow that covered the station's
grounds. The Director started with Georg; but Georg pushed him violently
away.

"No! No! You let me alone!" His accents were those of a spoiled child.
The Director hesitated, and Georg, with a hand to his forehead, wavered
toward the casement. The Director saw him standing there; saw him sway,
then fall or jump forward, and disappear.

They rushed outside. The snow was trampled all about with heavy
footprints, but Georg had vanished. From the women's apartment, the
attendant came back. The Princess Maida could not be found!

And in those moments of confusion, from outside across the starlit snow,
an aero was rising. Silent, black--and no one saw it as it winged away
into the night.




CHAPTER XII

_Tara_


I must revert now to those moments in the tower room when Tarrano
dissolved the isolation barrage which Wolfgar had thrown around us.
Georg escaped, as I have recounted. Tarrano--there in the tower
room--rendered me unconscious. I came to myself on the broad divan and
found Elza bending over me.

I sat up, dizzily, with the room reeling.

"Jac! Jac, dear----" She made me lie back, until I could feel the blood
returning to my clammy face; and the room steadied, and the clanging of
the gongs in my ears died away.

"I--why, I'm--all right," I gasped. And I lay there, clinging to her
hand. Dear little Elza! In that moment of relief that I had come to my
senses, she could not hide the love which even now was unspoken between
us. Tarrano! I lay there weak and faint; but with the pressure of Elza's
hand, I did not fear that this Tarrano could win her from me.

Wolfgar was standing across the room from us. He came forward.

"You did not die," he said; and smiled. "I told her you would not die."

It was now morning. Wolfgar and Elza told me I had been unconscious some
hours. We were still imprisoned as before in the tower. Georg had
escaped with Maida, they said; or at least, they hoped so. And they
described the burning of the other tower. The city had been in a
turmoil. It still was; I could hear now the shouts of the crowd outside.
And turning as I lay there, through the casement I could see the
blackened, still smoking ruins of Maida's tower; the broken iron
terrace; the spider bridge melted away, hanging loose and dangling like
an aimless pendulum.

The latest news, Elza and Wolfgar could not give me. The instrument room
of our tower had been disconnected by Tarrano when he left some hours
before. As they said it, we heard a familiar buzz; then the drone of an
announcer's voice. Tarrano's guard had doubtless observed my recovery
and had had orders to throw current into our instruments. Strange man,
this Tarrano! He wished the news spread before us again. Confident of
his own dominance over every crisis, he wanted Elza and me to hear it as
it came from the discs.

We went to the instrument room. I found myself weak, but quite
uninjured. Elza left us there, and went to prepare food which I needed
to strengthen me.

The public events of those hours and days following, I have recounted as
Georg saw them and took part in them in Washington. We observed them,
here in the tower, with alternate hopes and fears. Our life of
imprisonment went on much as before. Occasionally, Tarrano visited us,
always making us sit like children before him, while at his ease he
reclined on our divan.

But he would never give us much real information; the man always was an
enigma.

"Your friend Georg has a wonderful plan," he announced to us ironically
early one evening. He smiled his caustic smile. "You have seen the
tape?"

"Yes," I said. It was Georg's plan to address with Maida, the publics of
Earth, Venus and Mars.

Tarrano nodded. "He and the Princess are going to convince everyone that
I am an impostor."

I did not answer that; and abruptly he chuckled. "That would be
unfortunate for me--if they could do that. Do you think they'll be able
to?"

"I hope so," I said.

He laughed openly. "Of course. But they will not. That long note of mine
to your government--you read it, naturally. But you didn't read in it my
secret instructions to my agents in Washington, did you? Well, they were
there in it--my commands--the letters ending its words made another
message."

He was amused at our discomfiture. "Simple enough? Yet really an
intricate code in itself. It made the phrasing of the main note a little
difficult to compose, that was all." He sat up with his accustomed snap
of alertness, and his face turned grim. "Georg will never address his
audience. Nor the Princess--she will never appear before those sending
mirrors. I have seen to that." Again he was chuckling. "No, no, I could
not let them do a thing like that. They might turn people against me."

Elza began indignantly: "You--you are----"

His gesture checked her. "Your brother is quite safe, Lady Elza. And the
Princess Maida also. Indeed, they are on the point of falling in love
with each other. Natural! And perfectly right. It is as I would have
it."

His strong brown fingers were rubbing each other with his satisfaction.
"Curious, Lady Elza--how fortunate I am in all my plans."

"I don't think you are," I said. "Our government has you a prisoner
here. They didn't withdraw the patrol as you demanded, did they?"

He frowned a trifle. "No. That was too bad. I rather hoped they would.
It would have been a stupid thing for them to do--but still, I almost
thought they'd do it."

I shook my head. "What they will do is sweep down here and overwhelm
you."

"You think so?"

"Yes."

He shifted himself to a more comfortable position. "They are playing for
time--so that when I fail to produce the model as I agreed, then the
public will realize I am not to be trusted."

"Exactly," I said.

"Well, I am playing for time, also."

He seemed so willing to discuss the thing that I grew bolder.

"What have you to gain by playing for time?" I demanded.

He stared. "You would question me, Jac Hallen? How absurd!" He looked at
Elza, as though to share with her his amazement at my temerity.

Wolfgar said suddenly to Tarrano: "You will gain nothing."

Tarrano's face went impassive. I understood him better now; that cold,
inscrutable look often concealed his strongest emotions. He said evenly:

"I should prefer you not to address me, Wolfgar. A traitor such as
you--the sound of your voice offends me."

It struck me then as very strange--as it had for days before--that
Tarrano should have failed to punish Wolfgar. I would have expected
death; least of all, that Tarrano would have allowed Wolfgar to live
here in the tower, in comparative ease and comfort. Tarrano's words now
answered my unspoken questions. He was not looking at Wolfgar, but at
Elza.

"You, Wolfgar--deserve death. You know why I cannot kill you? Why I let
you stay here in the tower?" A faint, almost wistful smile parted his
thin lips; he did not take his eyes from Elza.

"I am greatly handicapped, Wolfgar. The Lady Elza here would not like to
have me put you to death. She would not even care to have me mistreat
you. She is very tender hearted." He raised a deprecating hand. "Ah,
Lady Elza, does that surprise you? You never told me I must be lenient
with this traitor? Of course not."

"I----" Elza began, but he stopped her.

"You see, Lady Elza, I have already learned to obey you." He was smiling
very gently. "Learned to obey even your unspoken commands."

I wondered how much of this attitude might be sincere, and how much
calculated trickery. Could Elza, indeed, control him?

She must have had much the same thought, for she said with a forced
smile: "You give me a great deal of power. If you--wish to obey me,
you'll set us free--send us all to Washington."

That amused him. "Ah, but I cannot do that."

She gained confidence. "You are willing to be very gracious in things
which do not inconvenience you, Tarrano. It is not very impressive."
