
"The fleet has entered the atmosphere belt a thousand miles east of
here," replied the Nepthalim. "They are dropping to an altitude of five
miles and will then approach. They should arrive in an hour. It is well
that they hurry."

"What rush is there?" asked Damis in surprise. "We may not be able to
leave here, but, at the same time, all the forces the slaves can muster
would never force an entrance."

                   *       *       *       *       *

"You have not heard then?" exclaimed the other in surprise.
"No--certainly not, if you have been on outpost--for I just learned it
myself. There is a rumor that Havenner lied when he said that he killed
Turgan, the Kildare and Damis, the renegade--the curse of Tubain rest on
him--on Mars. It is said that they not only escaped death but have
returned to Earth armed with the weapons of the red planet. Havenner is
with Glavour now and no one knows what the outcome will be. Since Tubain
is at hand, doubtless nothing will be done until he arrives. That is the
reason why Tubain altered his course and came down so far away instead
of directly overhead. He hopes thus to elude the Martian weapons if the
Earthmen really have them."

"Surely that is a lie!" cried Damis.

"We hope that it is, yet Havenner would have been slain without mercy
had he admitted that he left Mars without slaying or capturing Turgan
and Damis. Many believe that it is true."

"Is Glavour in the council room?" asked Damis. "I have a message."

"It would be better for you to defer the message if it be ill news until
Tubain arrives, brother, for Glavour is enraged beyond measure at all of
us. He threatens to sacrifice us at the next games and he may do so
unless Tubain alters the decree. He has not loved us since Damis broke
his arm a month ago."

"Nevertheless, I will deliver my message," replied Damis. "While it may
not please him, it is essential that he get it before Tubain arrives."

"Good luck go with you, brother," replied the Nepthalim with a shrug of
his shoulders. "The temper of the Viceroy of God is an uncertain quality
at best. He is in his seraglio."

                   *       *       *       *       *

Damis saluted the messenger and made his way toward the inner portion of
the palace where the women whom the lustful Viceroy had dragged into his
harem were kept. He had no plausible excuse for passing the guards into
this forbidden portion of the palace, but that was a matter which caused
him small worry. There were few of the secrets of the palace which were
not well known to Damis, who had at one time been major domo of the
building. There were some well known to him, the existence of which was
not even suspected by the majority of the Sons of God.

As he neared the seraglio, he turned off to his right and passed through
a maze of little-used passages until he halted before what was
apparently a blank wall. Casting a rapid glance around to ensure himself
that there was no one in sight, he touched a hidden catch and a portion
of the wall swung inward, opening a way before him. He entered a passage
built in the thickness of the wall and lighted with radium bulbs. The
door closed softly behind him. He removed his sandals lest even their
quiet tread should betray him and on bare feet crept forward.

The passage bent and twisted as it followed the walls until Damis knew
that he was in one of the walls of the seraglio. Praying that it would
work noiselessly, he slid open a panel of stone and found himself
looking through a semi-transparent hanging into the sacred precincts of
the seraglio itself. Glavour stood facing him, his heavy face drawn up
in a scowl of rage. Damis noted with satisfaction that one of the
Viceroy's arms was supported by a silk scarf and that he made no attempt
to use it. With a pale face, Havenner stood before his ruler.

                   *       *       *       *       *

"The word has been brought to me from a source which I trust as much as
I do your own word, Havenner," Glavour was saying. "I tell you, I do not
believe your story. If Damis and Turgan were dead, the Terrestrials
would not see them alive again on Earth. Neither would they have weapons
of which we know nothing. One of our observers admits that he saw a
space ship land a few hours ago, coming from the direction of Mars. You
failed in your mission, Havenner, and on you I pronounce the doom. I
sentence you to the twilight of the gods."

"I appeal to Tubain from that sentence!" cried the equerry with dry
lips.

"Your appeal shall be noted and laid before him at the proper time,"
replied the Viceroy savagely; "yet, by the time he arrives, it will be
too late. Ho, Guards! Take him away."

Havenner turned as though to resist, but six of the huge Jovians
answered the Viceroy's call. Two of them grasped him by the arms and
started to lead him from the room.

"I appeal!" cried Havenner again. "I brought back the maiden whom I was
sent to fetch, and for that reason I made no failure. To bring her was
the principal item of my orders."

Glavour's face grew purple with rage.

"And who sent the message to Tubain which resulted in the orders which
he sent me?" he demanded savagely. "It was sent by one of your henchmen
and by your orders. You slew the sender before I could question him, but
I know whose orders he obeyed. Take him away!"

The guards started to drag the luckless equerry from the presence of the
Viceroy, but Havenner made a final appeal for his life.

"I will confess, Viceroy of God," he cried. "No message was sent to
Tubain. I dared not send such a message lest such orders would be
returned as I caused to be given to you. I coveted the maiden for myself
and I took this means of getting her. I had a false message delivered to
you which would prevent you from taking her before Tubain arrived. In
reward for my services as spy on you, I planned to ask that she be given
to me. I surrender all claims to her, Glavour. Spare my life and you may
have her."

                   *       *       *       *       *

For a moment Glavour could not speak for rage.

"So you have been the spy who has reported my every doing and my every
secret council to Tubain!" he gasped. "But for you, I would long ago
have conquered Venus and Mercury and declared myself independent of the
Jovian overlord. In time I might have even overthrown him, but every
move was known to him before I made it. Not once, but a dozen times,
would you go through the twilight were Tubain not at hand. Niton, it is
my order that the twilight be as slow as our instruments will allow.
Give him time to learn to suffer and to pray for the blessing of death
at my hand. Take him away!"

The struggling Havenner was removed by the guards despite his efforts at
resistance and his cries for mercy. Glavour stared after him for a
moment and an evil gleam came into his eyes.

"Sonom!" he called sharply.

A guard entered the room and saluted.

"Sonom, bring me the Daughter of Man, Lura!" cried the Viceroy. "When
you have brought her here, post guards at all doors and see that no one
is admitted under any circumstances until Tubain himself arrives and
demands admittance."

The guard hesitated.

"Your Excellency," he faltered, "the orders from Tubain were--"

"False rumors given out by the traitor, Havenner, who has now gone to
the twilight of the gods," interrupted the Viceroy. "By the crown of
Tubain, do I need to repeat my orders? I am Viceroy of the Earth and am
supreme until Tubain revokes my rank. Obey my orders!"

                   *       *       *       *       *

The guard saluted and withdrew. Glavour licked his thick lips in
anticipation and strode restlessly back and forth across the room.
Inside the hangings, Damis' face hardened and he drew his dagger from
under his robe. The door opened and Sonom returned, dragging Lura after
him. The face of the Earth-girl was pale and drawn, yet, when she saw
Glavour, her head rose in an expression of defiance. Sonom saluted the
Viceroy and left the room, the massive door clanging shut behind him.
Glavour stared at the girl with an evil leer on his heavy countenance.

"I have learned, Daughter of Man," he said slowly, "of how you seduced
one of my servants from his duty to me and caused him to forge an order
from the great Tubain in order that he might keep you for his own
pleasure. For a time the stratagem succeeded, but now my eyes are open.
When I first looked upon your face and form I swore to myself that you
should be the solace of my leisure hours. Now the time is come. I was
minded once to honor you as Hortan once honored a Terrestrial and let
you amuse yourself by sitting on a throne, but your treachery has
changed my intention. Not even as an accepted concubine shall you rank,
but only as a slave to be used as a toy and tossed to one of my guards
when I am tired of you. Come hither!"

Lura made no move to obey the order, and Glavour with an oath stepped
toward her, his one good arm outstretched in a grasping gesture. Lura
did not move until his hand almost closed on her arm and then she sprang
back. Her hand sought the bosom of her robe and the Viceroy recoiled as
a glittering dagger flashed in the air.

"Back, Jovian!" cried Lura in ringing tones. "Think you that the
daughter of a king of men is to be a toy for your base Jovian passions?
The point of this dagger is poisoned so that one touch through your skin
will mean death. One step nearer and I will strike!"

                   *       *       *       *       *

The Viceroy hesitated for a moment and then drew from his robe a short
thick tube. Lura correctly interpreted the gesture.

"Raise that tube and I will bury the blade in my own body!" she cried.
"I know that you have the power to clasp me in your arms, but it will be
a corpse which you clasp."

She lowered the knife until the point rested against the skin of her
throat. The slightest pressure would cause it to penetrate her skin and
bring about her almost instant death. Glavour watched her like a cat,
the tube ready in his hand. With a grim laugh he threw the tube from him
and walked a few steps away. Lura lowered the knife. As she did so,
Glavour turned with a movement so swift that the eye could hardly follow
it. His eyes caught Lura's and she straightened back her head, powerless
against his will, caught as she was, momentarily off her guard.

"Throw down your knife," said Glavour's voice slowly. Lura struggled to
raise the weapon against herself, but she could not. Slowly her fingers
relaxed and the weapon clattered on the floor. Still holding her eyes
with his own, Glavour stepped forward until his huge splayed foot rested
on the weapon. He averted his gaze and swiftly picked it up. Lura gave a
scream of horror and strove to fly, but the heavy door was barred
against her. Glavour placed the weapon in a cabinet on the wall which he
locked and then turned to her, an expression of triumph on his face.

"It is useless, Daughter of Man, to struggle against the will of the
Sons of God," he said mockingly. "What we desire is ours. Come to me."

Lura's face showed an expression of loathing as she looked at the huge
misshapen monstrosity before her. The Viceroy forgot the momentary
satisfaction of his triumph in his rage at her attitude. With a growl of
anger he grasped at her. Lura avoided his rush and ran along the side of
the room, Glavour in pursuit. He cornered her at last and she stopped
with her back to the tapestry with which the room was hung. Glowering in
his triumph, Glavour approached and reached out his hand to seize her.
His huge paw descended, but before it touched her shoulder a hand with
fingers of steel reached through the hangings and grasped his wrist.

                   *       *       *       *       *

When Sonom had dragged Lura into the room, Damis inserted the point of
his dagger into the tapestry and started to cut a slit through which he
could enter the room. The keen-edged knife cut for a few inches readily
enough and then stopped. Damis withdrew the blade and examined the stuff
before him. An expression of dismay crossed his face, for the material
was crisscrossed with stellanium wires, set six inches apart. Each
juncture was braised together and the whole made a web through which he
could not force his way. Cautiously he exerted his strength. The keen
blade hewed through the first of the stellanium strands, but Damis held
his breath as the wire parted. It seemed impossible that the ting of
parting metal which sounded like a thunderclap in his ears would not be
heard by the Viceroy. He knew that there must be an entrance into the
room through the hangings and he made his way cautiously forward,
testing the draperies from time to time with his knife.

When Lura laid her dagger against her breast and threatened to end her
life, it took all of Damis' self-control to keep from crying out and
striving to force his way into the room by sheer strength. He knew the
toughness of stellanium well enough to realize the impossibility of even
his enormous strength tearing apart a webbing of it. The certainty that
Glavour would not push matters far enough to rob himself of his prey
aided him to restrain his ardor and to pursue his systematic search.

He came at last to a corner where his knife met with no resistance as it
made its way through the silken stuff on the walls. Swiftly he cut a
slit through which he could rush. As he parted the material, Lura rushed
past him and stood with her back to the wall to await the oncoming
Viceroy. Damis raised his hand and stood ready. As Glavour's huge paw
descended on Lura's shoulder Damis' hand shot out. Still holding the
wrist of the Viceroy in a grip of steel, he emerged from his hiding
place, tearing off the black wig and beard which disguised him.

"Damis!" cried Lura in wonder and delight as she saw him.

                   *       *       *       *       *

Glavour stared with unbelieving eyes for a moment and then a hoarse cry
of alarm burst from his lips. Desperately he strove to release his
wrist from the Nepthalim's grip, but to no avail. He disengaged his
crippled arm from the scarf which supported it and groped under his robe
for a weapon. Lura cried out in warning, but Damis had anticipated such
a move. With a quick effort he whirled about and drew the Viceroy's arm
over his shoulder. He bent forward and exerted his full strength. The
huge bulk of Glavour rose in the air and pitched forward over Damis'
shoulder. There was a crash as he landed on the marble floor. Quick as a
cat, Damis sprang on him and pinioned down his arms.

"Take his weapons, Lura!" he cried.

Lura bent over the prostrate form of the Jovian to take from his belt
the tubes which he habitually carried there. As she stooped, Glavour
raised one of his huge feet and struck her with all the force of his
mighty thighs behind the blow. With a cry of pain, Lura flew halfway
across the room. Damis leaped to her assistance, forgetting for a moment
the potentialities for destruction which the Viceroy bore on his person.
A sudden sound made him whirl about. He bent over Lura and picked her
from the floor. With her in his arms he leaped to one side just as a
flash of violet light stabbed through the air. It missed them by inches.
He dropped Lura on a rug and turned to face Glavour.

On the Jovian's face was an expression of fiendish triumph. In his hand
was a short black tube which he aimed with deliberate slowness at the
crouching Nepthalim. Damis shifted his gaze from the Viceroy's eyes and
concentrated it on the muscles of his wrist. Glavour's grip tightened
and Damis leaped to one side as the violet light again stabbed the air.
With an oath, Glavour swung the deadly ray in an arc trying to reach the
Nepthalim, but Damis moved like a cat. Once, as the ray almost touched
him, he sprang high in the air and let it sweep by under him. With each
movement he came nearer to the Viceroy. Slowly the violet began to lose
its intensity of color. Glavour dropped it and reached for a second
tube. Before he could draw one, Damis was on him.




CHAPTER VII

_The Deluge_


