
"But you----"

"Yeah, I know. I wasn't taking such a chance, though, at that. Truth of
the matter is I'm about as bad as your father. You couldn't make me
give you the right time if I didn't feel like it." Masterson's eyes
crinkled in an amused smile.

"Go ahead. Try it."

Don shook his head. "I'll take your word," he said. "I tried to tell
Dad off once. Somehow, things get a little unpleasant."

"Yeah." Masterson stretched luxuriously. "Anyway, I figured you'd be a
lot handier around here alive and in operating condition. The last
thing I could let happen would be for Rayson to get you on that trick
table of his. Once he got that thing to rocking and rolling, he'd stand
back there, making soothing noises, and almost anyone would break down
and give him all they'd ever known. After that, they'd lie back and
believe anything he felt like telling them." He waved a hand back and
forth as Don started to speak.

"Later, huh? We can discuss all the ins and outs some day when this is
all over. Right now, let's be getting back to business." He smiled
disarmingly and leaned back in his chair.

"Somehow, Stern's hand has got to be forced. He's off balance right
now, and we want him further off. We want him to make a move he can't
back out of. And you may be able to make him do just that."

"I might?"

"Yes. Suppose the hill tribes joined with the Waernu and demanded that
a conclave consider Pete's claim to the throne. What then?"

"I guess there'd be a conclave."

"There might, at that. Now, let's go a little further. Suppose the
Waernu claim were upheld and we got a new king--let's see, he'd drop a
syllable--King Petonar. Where would our friend, Stern, end up?"

Don grinned wolfishly. "Khor Fortress. Even I can figure that much
out."

Masterson stood up and paced around the office.

"So, if we can get Jasu and his son in motion and get them up in the
Morek, something's bound to break. Right?" He stopped in front of Don.

"Oh, of course, Stern might call out the Royal Guard and scream
rebellion. He'd probably do just that, if things went that far. He's
getting in the propaganda groundwork for it now. But what he doesn't
know is that he'd help us that way." He perched on Rayson's desk.

"You see, we've got some colonists that would yell at the top of their
lungs for protection of their interests by the Federation. And then
there would be a conclave--with plenty of supervision. Either way, he'd
get right into checkmate." He clasped one knee in his hands and rocked
back and forth.

"But there's one thing that stands in our way. Jasu Waern's scared to
death. We've never quite dared explain this whole thing to him, and now
no one can get near enough to talk to him. Harle was the clan head and
the one with the nerve. He's gone, and Jasu's holed up. Won't let his
son out of the house. Won't let anyone in. We can't move."

He got back to his feet and walked over to the window.

"Now, let's take some more suppositions. Suppose a flier went out of
control and crashed in the middle of the Waern house. Or suppose some
major criminal took refuge close to the place and decided to shoot it
out with the Enforcement Corps. Seems to be a habit criminals have
gotten into lately. And suppose a stray inductor beam just happened to
graze the Waern living room.

"Then, who's checkmated?"

He looked down at his chair, then walked over and dropped into it.

"There's only one way to get Jasu in motion. You're it. The way you
slammed Rayson back in his chair yesterday gave me an idea. You can get
in there, and you'll have to move him--by force--compulsion--however
you want to.

"Meantime, I'll get some things going. Your father can start the hill
tribes getting together. He knows all the important head men. I'll give
him a little push in that direction. Then, we'll get some more people
to work."

Don looked at him for a moment. "Well, Dad told me I'd probably have to
earn my keep. Anything else I ought to know?"

                    *      *      *      *      *

Jasu Waern looked up in annoyance, then got to his feet.

"Who are you?" he demanded. "How did you get in here?" He reached into
a pocket.

Don Michaels spread his hands away from his body.

"Leave that weapon alone," he said sharply. "I came as a friend, and
I'd hate to have someone shooting at me."

"But who are you?"

"I'm Donald Michaels. I want to talk to Pete ... Petoen, I should say."

"My son is seeing no one. There has been----"

"I know," interrupted Don. "Trouble. Listen, I've had trouble myself in
the past couple of days. It all started when I prevented a bunch of
roughnecks from slapping Pete around." He frowned.

"Since then, things haven't been too pleasant." He held up a finger.

"I got accused of falsifying my report on the affair in the locker
room. Pete didn't show up to testify, and everyone was looking at me."
He extended a second finger.

"Pressure was put on me to sign a statement saying Pete used mental
influence to make me put in a false statement. And I got into it with
the school psychologist." A third finger snapped out.

"Next thing, I was being accused of accepting a money bribe from Pete.
And I really got into it with the faculty advisor. That's not good." He
dropped his hands to his sides.

"Right now, I'm not too popular at school. And I want to know what's
going on. I want to know why Pete didn't show up to give me backing. I
want to know what can be done to unscramble this mess."

Wearn shook his head slowly. "There are other schools--private
schools," he said. "And we are still possessed of some----"

"Careful, Mr. Waern." Don held up a warning hand. "I don't carry the
sling, but I do come from the Morek. Don't say something that might be
misinterpreted. I want to see things straightened out. I didn't come
here to start a feud with you."

Jasu Waern shivered a little. "But you are galactic, are you not?
Surely, you are no hillman."

"I was brought up among them. Now get Pete. I want to talk to both of
you."

Waern looked unhappy. But he walked across the room and pulled at a
cord.

A servant came to the door.

"Tell Master Petoen," ordered Waern, "that I would like to see him in
here."

The man bowed and left. Waern turned back to Don.

"You see, Mr. Michaels," he said apologetically, "we are in difficult
times here. My brother----"

"I know." Don nodded. "Pete was upset the other evening. He told me a
little. A little more than is made public."

Waern's eyebrows went up. "He said nothing about that."

Don waved negligently. "It did no harm. Maybe it was a good thing." He
turned toward the door, waiting.

                    *      *      *      *      *

Pete came in, looking about the room. "You brought Don Michaels here,
Father?"

Waern shook his head. "He came. He insisted on talking to you, Petoen.
And I find he is very persuasive."

"Oh." Pete turned. "I'm sorry, Don. Father thought that I----"

Don laughed shortly. "He was right--to some extent. But I'd like to
talk to both of you about a few things."

He moved back, to perch on the edge of a heavily carved table.

"Let's look at it this way. I got into trouble over the affair. Not
good, of course, but what happened to me is just one small incident.
All over Oredan, good intentioned people have things happening to them.
Sometimes, they're pretty serious things--like someone getting killed.
And they usually can't figure out what hit them. These things happen
pretty often. Why?"

Waern looked uncomfortable, but said nothing. Don looked at him
curiously.

"Do you really think, Mr. Waern, that you can sit here in peace? That
if you ignore this whole mess, it'll go away?"

Jasu Waern spread his hands. "What dare I do? My brother was trying to
do something. He is gone."

"True. He tried to clean up a little here and fix a little there. And
that only in one city. He didn't come boldly out and demand. He was
playing on the edge of the board, not in the center. A king could do
much more than that."

Waern looked at him, shaking his head.

"Yes, I know about the succession," Don told him. "And why shouldn't
you demand? You could get the support of the hill tribes. All you need
do is ask."

"I have thought of that. Perhaps we should have done that--once. But
now? After my brother's death? And what could the hillmen do against
the weapons of the plains?"

Don smiled at him. "Would the hillmen believe the stories about your
brother in the face of your personal denial before their own council?
Would they accept such a thing about any of the Waernu unless it were
proven by strong evidence? Yours is one of the clans, even yet, you
must remember. And how about the honor of the Waernu?"

Jasu's face was suddenly drawn. Don continued.

"And would the plainsmen dare use their weapons against a legitimate
claimant? For that matter, what good would their weapons be against a
Federation Strike Group, even if they did use them?"

"You seem so sure."

"Not just sure. Certain." Don glanced at his watch, then frowned.

"We've lost a lot of time." His voice sharpened.

"Come on," he snapped. "My sportster will carry three people. Let's get
out of here while we can still make it." He made shooing motions.

Waern moved toward the door, then turned.

"To the Morek?"

"That's right. Up to the Morek. We're going to start a feud."

                    *      *      *      *      *

Andrew Masterson looked at the handset approvingly. Little Mike was
getting the idea. He was still just as fast as he'd ever been. He made
a little noise in his throat, then spoke.

"Well, if you have any questions, Mr. Michaels, feel free to call us
here. Thank you, and good-by."

He dropped the handset to its cradle and leaned back again.

So that was set up. Little Mike would be on his way out to the hills by
the time he'd completed this next call. And he'd have the clans ready
for talks with the Waernu. Now, the next step would be to alert Jahns,
down in the Resident Commissioner's office.

He looked at the surface of his desk, considering, then reached for the
phone again. He'd have to be careful on this one.

The door opened and two men came through. One of them held out a card.

"Masterson?"

"That's right."

"Like to have you come with us. People investigating Rayson's accident
have some questions they'd like to ask you."

"Oh?" Masterson's eyebrows went up. "I'm afraid I wouldn't be much help
on that. I saw him go down, of course, but the view from this window
isn't the best. I really----"

The other shook his head. "Look, don't tell me about it. They just told
us to come out and get you. Got a lot of experts down there. They'll
ask the questions."

Masterson looked at the man appraisingly, then glanced at his partner,
who stood by the door, leaning against the wall.

These two, he thought, would be no great problem. Nothing here but arms
and legs. But----

[Illustration]

He smiled to himself.

_It would be you or the whole tribe_, he thought.

He might still be able to remain under cover, and he'd be a lot more
effective that way.

So maybe they were a little suspicious. He glanced down at the desk.
The little control box was safely destroyed and its operation had left
no evidence. Even if they did suspect the cause of Rayson's crash, they
couldn't prove a thing. No, his best bet was to go along with these two
and hope the questioning would be short enough to allow him to brief
Jahns with plenty of time to spare. He shrugged.

"Well," he said aloud, "I'll go with you, of course, though I don't see
how I can be of any help. Terrible thing, losing Rayson that way."

"Yeah. Real bad." The other nodded curtly. "Come on. Let's go."

                    *      *      *      *      *

Daniel Stern looked angrily at his aide.

"Just who is responsible for this report?" he demanded.

The aide looked aside. "It came in from Riandar Headquarters, your
honor," he said. "Colonel Konir signed it himself."

"I can read," snapped Stern. "But who's responsible? What idiot let
this thing fall apart?" He shook the papers angrily.

