approved the plans for this arrangement are going to say when I call
this little back door to their attention, it almost makes it worth the
trouble."

"Yes, sir," Thomas said. He sprawled on the deck and looked around the
Bridge, staring at the unfamiliar screens, indicator dials, controls.

       *       *       *       *       *

From where I lay, I could see the direct vision screen. I wasn't sure,
but I thought the small bright object in the center of it might be our
target. Thomas looked at the dead radar screen, then said, "Cap'n, that
there radarscope out of action?"

"It sure is, Thomas," I said. "Our unknown friends blew the works before
they left us." I was surprised that he recognized a radarscope.

"Mind if I take a look at it, Cap'n?" he said.

"Go ahead," I replied. I tried to explain the situation to Thomas. The
elapsed time since we had started our pursuit was two hours and ten
minutes; I wanted to close to no more than a twenty mile gap before
launching my missiles; and I had better alert my interceptor missiles in
case the Mancji hit first.

Thomas had the cover off the radar panel and was probing around. He
pulled a blackened card out of the interior of the panel.

"Looks like they overloaded the fuse," Thomas said. "Got any spares,
Cap'n?"

"Right beside you in the cabinet," I said. "How do you know your way
around a radar set, Thomas?"

Thomas grinned. "I useta be a radar technician third before I got inta
waste disposal," he said. "I had to change specialities to sign on for
this cruise."

I had an idea there'd be an opening for Thomas a little higher up when
this was over.

I asked him to take a look at the televideo, too. I was beginning to
realize that Thomas was not really simple; he was merely uncomplicated.

"Tubes blowed here, Cap'n," he reported. "Like as if you was to set her
up to high mag right near a sun; she was overloaded. I can fix her easy
if we got the spares."

I didn't take time to try to figure that one out. I could feel the
dizziness coming on again.

"Thomas," I called, "let me know when we're at twenty miles from
target." I wanted to tell him more, but I could feel consciousness
draining away. "Then ..." I managed, "first aid kit ... shot...."

I could still hear Thomas. I was flying away, whirling, but I could hear
his voice. "Cap'n, I could fire your missiles now, if you was to want me
to," he was saying. I struggled to speak. "No. Wait." I hoped he heard
me.

       *       *       *       *       *

I floated a long time in a strange state between coma and consciousness.
The stuff Kramer had given me was potent. It kept my mind fairly clear
even when my senses were out of action. I thought about the situation
aboard my ship.

I wondered what Kramer and his men were planning now, how they felt
about having let me slip through their fingers. The only thing they
could try now was blasting their way into the Bridge. They'd never make
it. The designers of these ships were not unaware of the hazards of
space life; the Bridge was an unassailable fortress. They couldn't
possibly get to it.

I guessed that Kramer was having a pretty rough time of it now. He had
convinced the men that we were rushing headlong to sure destruction at
the hands of the all-powerful Mancji, and that their Captain was a fool.
Now he was trapped with them in the panic he had helped to create. I
thought that in all probability they had torn him apart.

I wavered in and out of consciousness. It was just as well; I needed the
rest. Then I heard Thomas calling me. "We're closin' now, Cap'n," he
said. "Wake up, Cap'n, only twenty-three miles now."

"Okay," I said. My body had been preparing itself for this, now it was
ready again. I felt the needle in my arm. That helped, too.

"Hand me the intercom, Thomas," I said. He placed the mike in my hand. I
keyed for a general announcement.

"This is the Captain," I said. I tried to keep my voice as steady as
possible. "We are now at a distance of twenty-one miles from the enemy.
Stand by for missile launching and possible evasive action. Damage
control crews on the alert." I paused for breath.

"Now we're going to take out the Mancji ship, men," I said. "All two
miles of it."

I dropped the mike and groped for the firing key. Thomas handed it to
me.

"Cap'n," he said, bending over me. "I notice you got the selector set
for your chemical warheads. You wouldn't want me to set up pluto heads
for ya, would ya, Cap'n?"

"No, thanks, Thomas," I said. "Chemical is what I want. Stand by to
observe." I pressed the firing key.

Thomas was at the radarscope. "Missiles away, Cap'n. Trackin' O.K. Looks
like they'll take out the left half a that dumbbell."

I found the mike again. "Missiles homing on target," I said. "Strike in
thirty-five seconds. You'll be interested to know we're employing
chemical warheads. So far there is no sign of offense or defense from
the enemy." I figured the news would shock a few mutineers. David wasn't
even using his slingshot on Goliath. He was going after him bare-handed.
I wanted to scare some kind of response out of them. I needed a few
clues as to what was going on below.

I got it. Joyce's voice came from the wall annunciator. "Captain, this
is Lt. Joyce reporting." He sounded scared all the way through, and
desperate. "Sir, the mutiny has been successfully suppressed by the
loyal members of the crew. Major Kramer is under arrest. We're prepared
to go on with the search for the Omega Colony. But Sir ..." he paused,
gulping. "We ask you to change course now before launching any effective
attack. We still have a chance. Maybe they won't bother with us when
those firecrackers go off ..."

       *       *       *       *       *

I watched the direct vision screen. Zero second closed in. And on the
screen the face of the left hand disk of the Mancji ship was lit
momentarily by a brilliant spark of yellow, then another. A
discoloration showed dimly against the dark metallic surface. It spread,
and a faint vapor formed over it. Now tiny specs could be seen moving
away from the ship. The disk elongated, with infinite leisure, widening.

"What's happenin'? Cap'n?" Thomas asked. He was staring at the scope in
fascination. "They launchin' scouts, or what?"

"Take a look here, Thomas," I said. "The ship is breaking up."

The disk was an impossibly long ellipse now, surrounded by a vast array
of smaller bodies, fragments and contents of the ship. Now the stricken
globe moved completely free of its companion. It rotated, presenting a
crescent toward us, then wheeled farther as it receded from its twin,
showing its elongation. The sphere had split wide open. Now the
shattered half itself separated into two halves, and these in turn
crumbled, strewing debris in a widening spiral.

"My God, Cap'n," Thomas said in awe. "That's the greatest display I ever
seen. And all it took to set her off was 200 kilos a PBL. Now that's
somethin'."

I keyed the mike again. "This is the Captain," I said. "I want ten
four-man patrols ready to go out in fifteen minutes. The enemy ship has
been put out of action and is now in a derelict condition. I want only
one thing from her; one live prisoner. All Section chiefs report to me
on the Bridge on the triple."

"Thomas," I said, "go down in the lift and open up for the Chiefs.
Here's the release key for the combination; you know how to operate it?"

"Sure, Cap'n; but are you sure you want to let them boys in here after
the way they jumped you an' all?"

I opened my mouth to answer, but he beat me to it. "Fergit I asked ya
that, Cap'n, pleasir. You ain't been wrong yet."

"It's O.K., Thomas," I said. "There won't be any more trouble."




EPILOGUE


On the eve of the twentieth anniversary of Reunion Day, a throng of
well-heeled celebrants filled the dining room and overflowed onto the
terraces of the Star Tower Dining Room, from whose 5,700 foot height
above the beaches, the Florida Keys, a hundred miles to the south, were
visible on clear days.

The _Era_ reporter stood beside the vast glass entry way surveying the
crowd, searching for celebrities from whom he might elicit bits of color
to spice the day's transmission.

At the far side of the room, surrounded by chattering admirers, stood
the Ambassador from the New Terran Federation; a portly, graying, jolly
ex-Naval officer. A minor actress passed at close range, looking the
other way. A cabinet member stood at the bar talking earnestly to a ball
player, ignoring a group of hopeful reporters and fans.

The _Era_ stringer, an experienced hand, passed over the hard pressed
VIP's near the center of the room and started a face-by-face check of
the less gregarious diners seated at obscure tables along the sides of
the room.

He was in luck; the straight-backed gray-haired figure in the dark
civilian suit, sitting alone at a tiny table in an alcove, caught his
eye. He moved closer, straining for a clear glimpse through the crowd.
Then he was sure. He had the biggest possible catch of the day in his
sights; Admiral of Fleets Frederick Greylorn.

The reporter hesitated; he was well aware of the Admiral's reputation
for near-absolute silence on the subject of his already legendary
cruise, the fabulous voyage of the _Galahad_. He couldn't just barge in
on the Admiral and demand answers, as was usual with publicity-hungry
politicians and show people. He could score the biggest story of the
century today; but he had to hit him right.

You couldn't hope to snow a man like the Admiral; he wasn't somebody you
could push around. You could sense the solid iron of him from here.

Nobody else had noticed the solitary diner. The _Era_ man drifted
closer, moving unhurriedly, thinking furiously. It was no good trying
some tricky approach; his best bet was the straight-from-the-shoulder
bit. No point in hesitating. He stopped beside the table.

The Admiral was looking out across the Gulf. He turned and glanced up at
the reporter.

The news man looked him squarely in the eye. "I'm a reporter, Admiral,"
he said. "Will you talk to me?"

The Admiral nodded to the seat across from him. "Sit down," he said. He
glanced around the room.

The reporter caught the look. "I'll keep it light, sir," he said. "I
don't want company either." That was being frank.

       *       *       *       *       *

"You want the answers to some questions, don't you?" the Admiral said.

"Why, yes, sir," the reporter said. He started to inconspicuously key
his pocket recorder, but caught himself. "May I record your remarks,
Admiral?" he said. Frankness all the way.

"Go ahead," said the Admiral.

"Now, Admiral," the reporter began, "the Terran public has of course
..."

"Never mind the patter, son," the Admiral said mildly. "I know what the
questions are. I've read all the memoirs of the crew. They've been
coming out at the rate of about two a year for some time now. I had my
own reasons for not wanting to add anything to my official statement."

The Admiral poured wine into his glass. "Excuse me," he said. "Will you
join me?" He signalled the waiter.

"Another wine glass, please," he said. He looked at the golden wine in
the glass, held it up to the light. "You know, the Florida wines are as
good as any in the world," he said. "That's not to say the California
and Ohio wines aren't good. But this Flora Pinellas is a genuine
original, not an imitation Rhine; and it compares favorably with the
best of the old vintages, particularly the '87."

The glass arrived and the waiter poured. The reporter had the wit to
remain silent.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The first question is usually, how did I know I could take the Mancji
ship. After all, it was big, vast. It loomed over us like a mountain.
The Mancji themselves weighed almost two tons each; they liked six gee
gravity. They blasted our communication off the air, just for practice.
They talked big, too. We were invaders in their territory. They were
amused by us. So where did I get the notion that our attack would be
anything more than a joke to them? That's the big question." The Admiral
shook his head.

"The answer is quite simple. In the first place, they were pulling six
gees by using a primitive dumbbell configuration. The only reason for
that type of layout, as students of early space vessel design can tell
you, is to simplify setting up a gee field effect using centrifugal
force. So they obviously had no gravity field generators.

"Then their transmission was crude. All they had was simple
old-fashioned short-range radio, and even that was noisy and erratic.
