lightless storehouse of memory I'd never known was there to belong to
me.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a medium-size glade in a forest. Through the half-naked
black branches shone a dark cold sky, like ashes of silver, early
evening.

The glade had two horns, as it were, narrowing back to either side and
going off through the forest. A chilly breeze was blowing out of them,
almost enough to put out the candle. Its flame rippled.

Rather far back in the horn to my left, but not very far, were clumped
two dozen or so men in dark cloaks they huddled around themselves.
They wore brimmed tallish hats and pale stuff showing at their necks.
Somehow I assumed that these men must be the "rude fellows from the
City" I remembered Beau mentioning a million or so years ago. Although
I couldn't see them very well, and didn't spend much time on them,
there was one of them who had his hat off or excitedly pushed way
back, showing a big pale forehead. Although that was all the conscious
impression I had of his face, he seemed frighteningly familiar.

In the horn to my right, which was wider, were lined up about a dozen
horses, with grooms holding tight every two of them, but throwing
their heads back now and then as they strained against the reins, and
stamping their front hooves restlessly. Oh, they frightened me, I
tell you, that line of two-foot-long glossy-haired faces, writhing
back their upper lips from teeth wide as piano keys, every horse of
them looking as wild-eyed and evil as Fuseli's steed sticking its head
through the drapes in his picture "The Nightmare."

To the center the trees came close to the stage. Just in front of them
was Queen Elizabeth sitting on the chair on the spread carpet, just as
I'd seen her out there before; only now I could see that the braziers
were glowing and redly high-lighting her pale cheeks and dark red hair
and the silver in her dress and cloak. She was looking at Martin--Lady
Mack--most intently, her mouth grimaced tight, twisting her fingers
together.

Standing rather close around her were a half dozen men with fancier
hats and ruffs and wide-flaring riding gauntlets.

Then, through the trees and tall leafless bushes just behind
Elizabeth, I saw an identical Elizabeth-face floating, only this one
was smiling a demonic smile. The eyes were open very wide. Now and
then the pupils darted rapid glances from side to side.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a sharp pain in my left wrist and Sid whisper-snarling at
me, "Accustomed action!" out of the corner of his shadowed mouth.

I tolled on obediently, "It is an accustomed action with her, to seem
thus washing her hands: I have known her continue in this a quarter of
an hour."

Martin had set down the candle, which still flared and guttered, on a
little high table so firm its thin legs must have been stabbed into
the ground. And he was rubbing his hands together slowly, continually,
tormentedly, trying to get rid of Duncan's blood which Mrs. Mack knows
in her sleep is still there. And all the while as he did it, the
agitation of the seated Elizabeth grew, the eyes flicking from side to
side, hands writhing.

He got to the lines, "Here's the smell of blood still: all the
perfumes of Arabia will not sweeten this little hand. Oh, oh, oh!"

As he wrung out those soft, tortured sighs, Elizabeth stood up from
her chair and took a step forward. The courtiers moved toward her
quickly, but not touching her, and she said loudly, "Tis the blood of
Mary Stuart whereof she speaks--the pails of blood that will gush from
her chopped neck. Oh, I cannot endure it!" And as she said that last,
she suddenly turned about and strode back toward the trees, kicking
out her ash-colored skirt. One of the courtiers turned with her and
stooped toward her closely, whispering something. But although she
paused a moment, all she said was, "Nay, Eyes, stop not the play, but
follow me not! Nay, I say leave me, Leicester!" And she walked into
the trees, he looking after her.

Then Sid was kicking my ankle and I was reciting something and Martin
was taking up his candle again without looking at it saying with a
drugged agitation, "To bed; to bed; there's knocking at the gate."

Elizabeth came walking out of the trees again, her head bowed. She
couldn't have been in them ten seconds. Leicester hurried toward her,
hand anxiously outstretched.

Martin moved offstage, torturedly yet softly wailing, "What's done
cannot be undone."

Just then Elizabeth flicked aside Leicester's hand with playful
contempt and looked up and she was smiling the devil-smile. A horse
whinnied like a trumpeted snicker.

As Sid and I started our last few lines together I intoned
mechanically, letting words free-fall from my mind to my tongue. All
this time I had been answering Lady Mack in my thoughts, _That's what
you think, sister._




               VIII

    God cannot effect that anything which is
      past should not have been.
    It is more impossible than rising the dead.
                     --Summa Theologica


The moment I was out of sight of the audience I broke away from Sid
and ran to the dressing room. I flopped down on the first chair I saw,
my head and arms trailed over its back, and I almost passed out. It
wasn't a mind-wavery fit. Just normal faint.

I couldn't have been there long--well, not very long, though the
battle-rattle and alarums of the last scene were echoing tinnily from
the stage--when Bruce and Beau and Mark (who was playing Malcolm,
Martin's usual main part) came in wearing their last-act stage-armor
and carrying between them Queen Elizabeth flaccid as a sack. Martin
came after them, stripping off his white wool nightgown so fast that
buttons flew. I thought automatically, _I'll have to sew those._

They laid her down on three chairs set side by side and hurried out.
Unpinning the folded towel, which had fallen around his waist, Martin
walked over and looked down at her. He yanked off his wig by a braid
and tossed it at me.

I let it hit me and fall on the floor. I was looking at that white
queenly face, eyes open and staring sightless at the ceiling, mouth
open a little too with a thread of foam trailing from the corner, and
at that ice-cream-cone bodice that never stirred. The blue fly came
buzzing over my head and circled down toward her face.

"Martin," I said with difficulty, "I don't think I'm going to like
what we're doing."

He turned on me, his short hair elfed, his fists planted high on his
hips at the edge of his black tights, which now were all his clothes.

"You knew!" he said impatiently. "You knew you were signing up for
more than acting when you said, 'Count me in the company.'"

Like a legged sapphire the blue fly walked across her upper lip and
stopped by the thread of foam.

"But Martin ... changing the past ... dipping back and killing the
real queen ... replacing her with a double--"

His dark brows shot up. "The real--You think this is the real Queen
Elizabeth?" He grabbed a bottle of rubbing alcohol from the nearest
table, gushed some on a towel stained with grease-paint and, holding
the dead head by its red hair (no, wig--the real one wore a wig too)
scrubbed the forehead.

The white cosmetic came away, showing sallow skin and on it a faint
tattoo in the form of an "S" styled like a yin-yang symbol left a
little open.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Snake!" he hissed. "Destroyer! The arch-enemy, the eternal opponent!
God knows how many times people like Queen Elizabeth have been dug out
of the past, first by Snakes, then by Spiders, and kidnapped or killed
and replaced in the course of our war. This is the first big operation
I've been on, Greta. But I know that much."

My head began to ache. I asked, "If she's an enemy double, why didn't
she know a performance of Macbeth in her lifetime was an anachronism?"

"Foxholed in the past, only trying to hold a position, they get
dulled. They turn half zombie. Even the Snakes. Even our people.
Besides, she almost did catch on, twice when she spoke to Leicester."

"Martin," I said dully, "if there've been all these replacements,
first by them, then by us, what's happened to the _real_ Elizabeth?"

He shrugged. "God knows."

I asked softly, "But does He, Martin? Can He?"

He hugged his shoulders in, as if to contain a shudder. "Look, Greta,"
he said, "it's the Snakes who are the warpers and destroyers. We're
restoring the past. The Spiders are trying to keep things as first
created. We only kill when we must."

_I_ shuddered then, for bursting out of my memory came the glittering,
knife-flashing, night-shrouded, bloody image of my lover, the Spider
soldier-of-change Erich von Hohenwald, dying in the grip of a giant
silver spider, or spider-shaped entity large as he, as they rolled in
a tangled ball down a flight of rocks in Central Park.

But the memory-burst didn't blow up my mind, as it had done a year
ago, no more than snapping the black thread from my sweater had ended
the world. I asked Martin, "Is that what the Snakes say?"

"Of course not! They make the same claims we do. But somewhere, Greta,
you have to _trust_." He put out the middle finger of his hand.

I didn't take hold of it. He whirled it away, snapping it against his
thumb.

"You're still grieving for that carrion there!" he accused me. He
jerked down a section of white curtain and whirled it over the
stiffening body. "If you must grieve, grieve for Miss Nefer! Exiled,
imprisoned, locked forever in the past, her mind pulsing faintly in
the black hole of the dead and gone, yearning for Nirvana yet nursing
one lone painful patch of consciousness. And only to hold a fort! Only
to make sure Mary Stuart is executed, the Armada licked, and that all
the other consequences flow on. The Snakes' Elizabeth let Mary live
... and England die ... and the Spaniard hold North America to the
Great Lakes and New Scandinavia."

Once more he put out his middle finger.

       *       *       *       *       *

"All right, all right," I said, barely touching it. "You've convinced
me."

"Great!" he said. "'By for now, Greta. I got to help strike the set."

"That's good," I said. He loped out.

I could hear the skirling sword-clashes of the final fight to the
death of the two Macks, Duff and Beth. But I only sat there in the
empty dressing room pretending to grieve for a devil-smiling snow
tiger locked in a time-cage and for a cute sardonic German killed for
insubordination that _I_ had reported ... but really grieving for a
girl who for a year had been a rootless child of the theater with a
whole company of mothers and fathers, afraid of nothing more than
subway bogies and Park and Village monsters.

As I sat there pitying myself beside a shrouded queen, a shadow fell
across my knees. I saw stealing through the dressing room a young man
in worn dark clothes. He couldn't have been more than twenty-three. He
was a frail sort of guy with a weak chin and big forehead and eyes
that saw everything. I knew at one he was the one who had seemed
familiar to me in the knot of City fellows.

He looked at me and I looked from him to the picture sitting on the
reserve makeup box by Siddy's mirror. And I began to tremble.

He looked at it too, of course, as fast as I did. And then he began to
tremble too, though it was a finer-grained tremor than mine.

The sword-fight had ended seconds back and now I heard the witches
