
Phil sat with his face averted, his hands clenched between his knees.
"The instinct to survive," he said in a muffled voice. "I can't blame
you for what you did, but it was cruel! What a damnable trick to play
on the parents!"

"Believe me, I know what you feel but there was no other way."

"No other!" He swung around, his face mottled and his breathing heavy.
"Whatever you are, you made a Machiavellian puppet-master out of a
lousy, flea-bitten mongrel! Was it beyond _those_ powers to heal Timmy's
mind?"

"I am not a psychopathic criminal."

"Do you imply that healing Timmy would involve repeating the swindle you
worked on Homer?"

"No. I could have by-passed the simple neural block that was leaving
Timmy helpless, and so have given him what to you would have seemed his
normal intelligence. In addition, I could have completed the work that
nature left incomplete in all of you, and so have released his full,
enormous capabilities. I could have done all this--can still do it--and
still leave Timmy's ego untouched, to develop in its own way, among its
own kind, knowing nothing of me for what I am."

"But you haven't done so. Why? Why!"

"I dared not."

"Danger? From a small boy?"

"Deadly danger--danger of infection that might threaten every
intelligent race in the galaxy and even spread across the great gulfs of
space beyond--"

"All this from poor little Timmy?"

"From what he might thereby become."

"I'm licked." Phil threw out his hands angrily. "I try to get a straight
answer and all I get is implications. You tell me an outrageous story,
and I believe you. You tell me you've neatly arranged to break the
hearts of two of my best friends, and I respect your good intentions in
doing so. Why? I love you like a brother, but I'm ready to take a rock
and crush your skull in for a monster. I mean it! I could kill Homer
with a single kick! I could--"

"I know, and I'm afraid of that hysterical impulse. I know the nature of
the struggle going on in your mind better than you do, but only you can
fight for control. I must wait for the outcome. When you have control of
yourself--"

"You're so bloody sane and smug you with your secondhand suit and
hand-me-down knowledge!" He jumped up in a fury and turned his back on
Timmy, addressing himself directly to Homer whose patient, pain-filled
eyes held undeniable understanding. "Look at you! The telepathic genius
with personal immortality--at a price only you could stomach! Too bad
you got caught short and had to live in a cur! Tough, isn't it, having
to wait for a mere moron to get control of himself! _You_ know all the
answers--why don't _you_ control the situation?"

"Because the hand-me-down knowledge is no longer backed by the mental
capacity of a Challon."

Phil stiffened as Tim's answering voice sounded behind him, quiet and
friendly. Against his will, he turned back to the boy and seated himself
again on the log. The boy's eyes caught and held his.

"The morality and outlook of the Challon are my morality and outlook,
whether I wish it so or not." Tim might have been making a pleasantly
inconsequential remark about the weather for all the importance he
seemed to attach to his statement, yet his eyes held the strained,
tight-lipped face. "The insight and understanding bequeathed by the
Challon are sufficient to keep Homer's mind sane under long stress,
and of course--"

His soothing voice went on and on, and presently his lungs expelled
a soft breath of relief as Phil relaxed a trifle, still breathing
raggedly. Alert eyes watched him mop his damp forehead but the quiet
words flowed in an unhurried stream, soothing, distracting, keeping the
thread intact. At last the crises seemed behind them. "... So I can only
wait for you to absorb the emotional impact of what I've told you. I had
planned to prepare you, to break it gently if I could, but ... you
understand?" The voice paused, then repeated gently and insistently,
"You understand, don't you?"

"Uh ... yes. Homer--"

       *       *       *       *       *

"He can't last much longer, and so of course I can't. I've landed one
kick after another right smack in your emotional solar plexus and you're
trying to catch your wind." Tim's hand casually struck a match for the
cigarette Phil had put unlit in his mouth and the man leaned forward
automatically, puffed, and automatically muttered a word of thanks. The
quiet voice went on, taking an even more casual note. "What with trying
to examine the implications of everything at once, you've stirred up a
fine old Irish stew of fears, resentments and envies, all of them trying
to reconcile the certain knowledge that I can be trusted and the
essentially neurotic fear that I'm playing you for an almighty sucker.

"Remember, it has been even harder for me to reconcile myself to you
human beings than it can possibly be for you to accept the existence
of the Challon. The concept of telepathy is not a completely new or
alien one to you, but the concept of a nontelepathic civilization was
dismissed by the Challon ages ago as a simple contradiction of terms,
a self-evident absurdity such as lifting oneself by one's bootstraps.

"It seemed so obvious that a civilized society could not develop without
the capacity for intelligent cooeperation, and intelligent cooeperation of
any real complexity was impossible without adequate communication. What
means of communication could adequately replace the direct linking of
mind and mind? Failing any answers short of fantasy, the proposition
always remained a sort of classroom joke with us. In fact, several
classic satires exist on the subject and one of the least
successful--because it seemed too ridiculous--suggested an elaborately
coded system of vocalizing. We have a very elementary spoken language
and a more complex code of inscriptions for essential records, but
neither the written nor the spoken system could possibly be called an
adequate means of communication.

"I realize now that one of the satires was not the rather frightening
effort that it seemed to be, but a brilliant scientific prediction of
the probable development and history of a race of highly intelligent
nontelepaths. The composer of the epic pointed out that where the
culture and character of the Challon neither permitted nor desired
concealment of any sort, a race that lacked adequate communication would
have no choice but to live as disharmonious groups of strangers, never
truly knowing either their fellows or themselves. He postulated what
you now call traumatic experiences which, unrecognized and, therefore,
untreated, would fester in secrecy from childhood onward until they
manifested as compulsive drives or inhibitive complexes. He invented
deranged emotions which you describe as 'guilt' and 'shame' and he
showed how they would cause buried memories to erupt in changed form,
lead to cankerous misunderstandings, cause unhealthy repressions, and
foster frustrations.

       *       *       *       *       *

"But his master-stroke--and this was pure genius, for it was almost
inconceivable--was when he traced the development of his 'nontelepathic
civilization' to the point where he predicted criminals, criminal and
moral codes of unbelievable complexity, and a great multitude of harmful
and illogical taboos, local customs, and regional superstitions.
It was a superb achievement of creative imagination and scientific
deduction--but not even its creator thought it was more than an exercise
in fantasy and perhaps not in the best of taste. The basic assumption
was simply too absurd for serious consideration."

"Yeah. I guess we were as indigestible to you as you are to me. Maybe
I'm getting over it. Sorry ... uh ... Homer."

"Call me Tim. I don't think of myself as Homer and my Challon
identification is a mental-verbal linkage. Even 'Challon' is a
compromise simplification."

"I guess it would be. Those cracks I made--"

"Forget them. To what you call the hag-ridden moron jittering out of
sight in your mind, so many things equate to a threat to survival.
And so many survival reactions outlast their usefulness, becoming
essentially antisocial and antisurvival. For a telepathic race there
are no false fronts or motives or impulses. In a nontelepathic society,
nothing but false faces are ever seen."

"It's beginning to get home to me ... what about that night near the
swamp?"

"My poor Challonari. The shockwave of 'my' death left it alert but
bewildered. It could not recognize nontelepathic intelligences and tried
to turn them aside like the first one. Their deaths are on my head--or
on the organic dust that eight years ago was a Challon. The Challonari
was confused by the contradictions of my present identity, subtly
altered as it has been by Homer's channeling mind, and went insane when
faced with a basic conflict of duties. It was like ... losing a simple
child."

"So we return to Timmy."

"And to you."

"Me? I'm going downhill fast. Let's have it before I hit rock-bottom and
_really_ get around to reacting. And let's have a few straight answers.
You could have by-passed the first block that makes Timmy an idiot.
O. K., why didn't you?"

"I would have lost control of him at once, of course. For one thing, as
an ordinary child his mind would be closed to me just as yours is and I
would be a voiceless animal with no protector, my existence likely to
end at the bottom of a river in a weighted sack."

"No dice. Remember, I know you too well to believe you'd place your own
interests first, much as I hate to admit it."

"As Homer I might, survival being a basic drive. As the Challon-Homer,
however, I needed a better reason than simple self-preservation. I have
that better reason. It lies in you, in Timmy, and in all your kind.
Perhaps you'll see the connection when I tell you that although the
Challon are the most intelligent race yet known to exist, Homo sapiens
is _at present_ not far behind them. Only more efficient communication
and the great strides that it makes possible has advanced the Challon
culture and science so disproportionately far beyond your own."

       *       *       *       *       *

"So the Challon are a bit brighter and a lot more advanced than we are.
O. K., they seem like a good bunch ... or are they? Come to think of it,
I saw them from your viewpoint which was predisposed to favor them."
Another thought struck him and he fell silent for a moment. "You say we
are almost their equal _at present_. What happens--if this inhibited
potential you speak of--is released--if Man is made whole?"

[Illustration]

The answer came quietly.


"You would have no equal in the known universe."

Phil's face grew thoughtful, sober, while the Challon-Homer watched
through Tim's eyes the progress of a calculated gamble.

"Would the Challon--resent--our becoming superior?"

"For the same reason that the present Challon superiority is not
resented by races of lower intelligence, they would not themselves
resent the appearance of intellects far greater than their own."

"I have a feeling there's a lot more in that answer than meets the eye.
Can you estimate to what extent we would surpass the Challon?"

"If my Challon memory serves me, they had no knowledge of any
mind-structure of a capacity remotely approaching that of Man. It is
a maze, incredibly complex, with far-reaching resources I can only
guess at. The Challon part of my mind has the profoundest admiration
for a superb mechanism it can only dimly comprehend, but beneath the
Challon"--the voice dropped almost to a whisper--"beneath the Challon is
the dog, and the dog sees his god." The power of that factor he had not
considered.

Phil laughed uneasily, both shocked and repelled.

"I hope you're joking. We sound like the sweet-smelling Flower of
Creation! When a dog reaches the level you ... um ... Homer has, it
becomes Man's equal, not his pet."

"Until Man's advance thrusts the dog back to an even lower relative
position, as it inevitably must when ... if ... Man comes into his own.
I told you I dared not leave myself isolated and speechless by clearing
the simple short-circuit immobilizing Timmy. Now you see why I dared not
go even farther and release--untrained _and with no hope of adequate
training_--the true Homo superior, the transcendent man."

"That's like turning a tiger loose in a kindergarten! Give a man a
really high-powered intellect and for all his shortcomings--"

"The intellect is nothing. The data, the circumstances, the influences,
the environment that shape the intellect, _these_ are what count. Your
theorists say that although Man may some day create wonderful mechanical
brains with a creative capacity almost equal to Man's own, you can never
create a brain that is your superior. That is true, and the reasoning is
obvious. In a more limited sense, your body repairs itself daily but it
cannot improve on itself, it cannot spontaneously develop functions it
never had--_it cannot even repair severe damage without outside help_.
The same applies to the mind. A sick mind cannot achieve the objectivity
needed to repair itself, if the damage is too great. No, the intellect
is nothing until it learns. What would Timmy have learned, and from
whom? Take a minute to think of _all_ the connotations." Phil thought of
some of them, uneasily. "Assume that from the start his status as Homo
superior was recognized ... is that a fair assumption?"

"It ... ah ... would sooner or later become apparent."

"After how much damage had been done that could not be undone, since
Homo sapiens cannot ever be competent to guide and train Homo superior?"

"Well ... what about what he could learn from your Challon mind?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"I would have no voice and no assurance that telepathy would be
possible. No influence that I could exert on him at any time could hold
him, if other factors impelled him to break free. A few months ago I
recalled a formula known to the Challon and with nothing more than
household chemicals prepared the quick and harmless anaesthetic I used
with you. What brought it to mind was a side-reaction reported as a
curiosity in one of the scientific journals Jerr ... Dad subscribes to.
It had an unexpected side-reaction for me, too, making direct telepathic
contact possible with you, but only under difficult and limited
conditions."
