workers work. They don't have to like him--they just get on the job
when he's around. Know what'll happen if they slack off.

"And a good staffman leaves the thinking to guys that get paid to do
it. He follows established procedure."

He leaned close to Stan, frowning.

"What are you? Some kind of Federation plant?"

Abruptly, his right hand flashed out, to crash against Stan's cheek. A
heavy finger trailed across one eye, bringing a sudden spurt of tears.
The hand moved back, poised for a more solid blow.

Stan's head bounced back against the chair, then forward again.

[Illustration]

And the diffuse fury in him coalesced and burst into novalike flame.
It had a single target. It focused. He glared at the big man.

"Those hands," he snapped. "Get them to your side!

"Now, get over into that corner. Move when I tell you!"

For an instant, Wizow stood immobile. The frown faded, leaving the
heavy face empty.

He tried to raise his hand again, then gave a little sob of hopeless
rage and moved back, one slow, reluctant step at a time, until he was
wedged into a corner of the room.

"That's good," Stan told him. "Now stay there. And keep quiet."

He turned toward Mauson.

"You. Turn off that gravito unit. Then sit still."

He pushed himself out of the chair as the constraining force was
removed.

"Now," he growled, "you can kick it in again. Give it a little power,
too, while you're at it." He wheeled around.

"All right," he snapped at Wizow, "turn around. Get into that chair."

He watched as the big body was pressed into the cushions. Wizow's face
showed strain. Stan went around Mauson's desk.

"I said a little power." He reached down and gave the gravito control
an abrupt twist.

Wizow's mouth popped open, agony showing in his eyes. Stan grinned
tightly and eased off on the knob.

"I really should spin this thing up to a proof load," he said. "Might
be interesting to see what kind of an assembly job they did on you.
But we'll just leave you this way. All you've got to do is keep quiet.
You're deaf, dumb, and blind, you understand?" He turned on Mauson.

"Now, for you--" His voice trailed off.

The man was sitting like a puppet whose controlling strings had been
cut. Stan's blazing fury started to burn down.

These minds, he suddenly realized, had been virtually paralyzed. He
didn't need anything to tie them down. All he had to do was point his
finger. They'd jump. He shook his head.

"Funny," he told himself. "All you have to do is be a little forceful.
Why didn't somebody tell me about this?" He looked calculatingly at
Mauson.

"Tell you what we're gonna do," he said rhythmically. "Get your car
over here. You know, the shielded job. We don't want anyone snapping
at us with flashers." His voice hardened.

"Come on," he ordered, "get on that box. Tell 'em you want that car."

       *       *       *       *       *

As the car rolled down the street, he leaned forward a little.

"All right, driver," he said peremptorily, "when we get to the
Federation Building, swing into the official driveway."

The driver moved his head slightly. Stan sat back, waiting.

He looked at the building fronts as they swept past. When he'd first
come here, he'd noticed the clean beauty of the city. And he's been
unable to understand the indefinable warning he'd felt. But now--he'd
looked beneath the surface.

The car slowed. A guard was flagging them down at the building
entrance. Stan touched a window control.

"Stand aside, Guardsman," he ordered. "We're coming in." He flicked
the window control again.

"Keep going, driver," he ordered. "You can let us out inside. Then
find a place to park, and wait."

Another guard came toward them as the car rolled to a stop.

"Hey," he protested, "this is--"

Stan looked at him coldly.

"Which way to the Guard commander's office?"

The man pointed. "Elevator over there. Fifth floor. But--"

"I didn't ask for a story. Get our driver into a parking space and
keep him there." Stan turned to Mauson.

"All right. Get out."

He shepherded the man into the elevator and out again. In the hall, he
glanced around, then walked through a doorway.

A middle-aged guardsman looked at him inquiringly.

"Can I do something for you gentlemen?"

"Yes. We want to see the commander."

The guardsman smiled. "Well, now, perhaps--"

Stan looked at him sternly.

"I've had my quota of runarounds today. I said we want to see the
commander. Now, all you have to do is take us to him. Move!"

The smile faded. For an instant, the man seemed about to rebel. Then
he turned.

"This way," he said evenly. He led the way through a large room, then
tapped at a door on the other side.

"Yes?"

The voice was vaguely familiar to Stan. He frowned, trying to place
it.

"Two men to see you, sir. Seems a little urgent."

"Oh? Well, bring them in."

Stan relaxed. This was getting easier, he thought. Now he could get
these people to take Mauson before a determinator. His statements
would furnish plenty of evidence for a full search of Janzel's
Personnel files.

He jerked his head at Mauson.

"Inside."

He waited as the man stepped through the door, then followed.

A slender man was standing behind a wide desk.

"Well," he said calmly. "Welcome home, Graham. Glad you could make
it."

"Major Michaels!" Stan forgot everything he had planned to say.

The other smiled. "Let's say Agent Michaels," he corrected. "Special
Corpsmen don't have actual Guard rank. Most of us got thrown out of
the Academy in the first couple of years."

He glanced at the guardsman, then flicked a finger out to point at
Mauson.

"Take this down and put it away somewhere till we need it, deSilva.
Graham and I have some talking to do."

"Yes, sir." The middle-aged man turned toward Stan.

"Congratulations, sir." He jerked a thumb at Mauson.

"Come on, you. March."

Michaels held up a hand as Stan opened his mouth.

"Never mind," he said quietly. "DeSilva is quite capable of handling
that one. Take care of three or four more like him if he had to.
Pretty good man." He reached for a box on his desk.

"Here," he said. "Light up. Got a few things to talk about."

"But I've got--"

"It can wait. Wall put the whole story on the tape when you were
talking to him downstairs. We've been sweating you out."

"You've been sweating me out? I had to practically force my way up
here."

"That you did." Michaels took a cigarette from the box, started to put
it in his mouth, then pointed it at Stan.

"That's normal procedure. You've heard of the Special Corps for
Investigation, I presume?"

"Yes. But--"

"Ever think of being a corpsman yourself?"

"Of course. You know that--we've talked about it. But I never could--"

"That's right." Michaels waved the cigarette. "We don't have
recruiting offices. All our people have to force their way in. Tell
me, do you know anything about the history of this planet?"

Stan clenched his teeth. Somehow, he had lost the initiative in this
interview. He took a deep breath.

"Look," he said decisively, "I--"

"Later." Michaels shook his head. "You are familiar with this culture
by now, then?"

