and I'll drive you home. But if you want that explanation, my working
office seems like a good place to talk."

For a moment, Duke wavered. But he'd reached the end of his own
research, and he'd come here to find the answers. Leaving now would
only make him more of a fool. "O.K.," he decided. "I'll stay for the
big unveiling."

Flannery grimaced. "There's no great secret, though we don't broadcast
the facts for people and races not ready for them. We figure those who
finish growing up here will soak up most of it automatically. Did you
get around to the film file on interstellar wars at the library?"

Duke nodded, wondering how much they knew about his activities. He'd
spent a lot of time going over the film for clues. It was so old that
the color had faded in places. The rest would have been easier to take
without color. Most wasn't good photography, but all was vivid. It was
the record of all the wars since Earth's invention of the
high-drive--nearly two hundred of them. Gimsul, Hathor, Ptek, Sugfarth,
Clovis, and even Meloa--the part he hadn't seen, beyond Kordule where
the real damage lay; Ronda had been wrong, and cannibalism had been
discovered, along with much that was worse. Two hundred wars in which
victor and vanquished alike had been ruined--in which the supreme
effort needed to win had left most of the victors worse than the
defeated systems.

"War!" The word was bitter on Flannery's lips. "Someone starts building
war power--power to insure peace, as they always say. Then other
systems must have power to protect themselves. Strength begets
force--and fear and hatred. Sooner or later, the strain is too great,
and you have a war so horrible that its very horror makes surrender
impossible. You saw it on Meloa. I've seen it fifty times!"

                    *      *      *      *      *

They reached the Foreign Office building and began crossing its lobby.
Flannery glanced up at the big seal on the wall with its motto in
twisted Latin--_Per Astra ad Aspera_--and his eyes turned back to
Duke's, but he made no comment. He led the way to a private elevator
that dropped them a dozen levels below the street, to a small room,
littered with things from every conceivable planet. One wall was
covered with what seemed to be the control panel of a spaceship,
apparently now used for a desk. The director dropped into a chair and
motioned Duke to another.

He looked tired, and his voice seemed older as he bent to pull a small
projector and screen from a drawer and set them up. "The latest chapter
of the film," he said bitterly, throwing the switch.

It was a picture of the breakup of the Outer Federation, and in some
ways worse than the other wars. Chumkt rebelled against Kel's
leadership and joined the aliens, while a civil war sprang up on her
surface. Two alien planets went over to Kel. The original war was
forgotten in a struggle for new combinations, and a thousand smaller
wars replaced it. The Federation was dead and the two dozen races were
dying.

"When everything else fails, the fools try federation," Flannery said
as the film ended. "We tried it on Earth. Another race discovered the
interstellar drive before we did and used it to build an empire. We've
found the dead and sterile remains of their civilization. It's always
the same. When one group unites its power, those nearby must ally for
protection. Then there's a scramble for more power, while jealousies
and fears breed new hatreds, internally and externally. And finally,
there's ruin--because at the technological level of interstellar
travel, victory in war is absolutely, totally impossible!"

He sat back, and Duke waited for him to resume, until it was obvious he
had finished. At last, the younger man gave up waiting. "All right," he
said. "Earth won't fight! Am I supposed to turn handsprings? I figured
that much out myself. And I learned a long time ago about the blessed
meek who were to inherit the Earth--but I can't remember anything being
said about the stars!"

"You think peace won't work?" Flannery asked mildly.

"I know it won't!" Duke fumbled for a cigarette, trying to organize his
thoughts. "You've been lucky so far. You've counted on the fact that
war powers have to attack other powers nearby before they can safely
strike against Earth, and you've buffered yourself with a jury-rigged
economic trading system. But what happens when some really bright
overlord decides to by-pass his local enemies? He'll drop fifty planet
bombs out of your peaceful skies and collect your vassal worlds before
they can rearm. You won't know about that, though. You'll be wiped
out!"

"I wouldn't call our friends vassals, or say the system was jury-rigged,"
Flannery objected. "Ever hear of paradynamics? The papers call it
the ability to manipulate relationships, when we let them write a
speculative article. It's what lets us rebuild worlds in less than half
a century--and form the first completely peaceful politico-economic
culture we've ever known. Besides, I never said we had no weapons for
our defense."

Duke considered it, trying to keep a firm footing on the shifting
quicksand of the other's arguments. He knew a little of paradynamics,
of course, but only as something supposed to remake the world and all
science in some abstract future. It had been originated as a complex
mathematical analysis of nuclear relationships, and had been seized on
for some reason by the sociologists. It had no bearing he could see on
the main argument.

"It won't wash, Flannery. Without a fleet, it won't matter if you have
the plans of every weapon ever invented. The first time a smart power
takes the chance, you'll run out of time."

"We didn't!" Flannery swung to the control board that served as his
desk, and his fingers seemed to play idly with the dials. From
somewhere below them, there was a heavy vibration, as if great engines
had sprung into life. He pressed another switch.

                    *      *      *      *      *

[Illustration: FLANNERY]

Abruptly, the room was gone. There was a night sky above them, almost
starless, and with a great, glaring moon shining down, to show a rough,
mossy terrain that seemed covered endlessly with row after row of
rusting, crumbling spaceships. Atomic cannon spilled from their
hatches, and broken ramps led down to the ground. Down one clearer lane
among the countless ships that surrounded him, Duke saw what might be a
distant fire with a few bent figures around it, giving the impression
of age.

Beside him, Flannery sat in his chair, holding a small control. There
was nothing else of the office visible.

The director shook his head. "It's no illusion, O'Neill. You're
here--fifty odd thousand light-years from Earth, where we transferred
the attacking fleet. You never heard of that, of course. The
dictator-ruler naturally didn't make a report when his fleet simply
vanished without trace. Here!"

The liquor burned in Duke's throat, but it steadied him. He bent down,
to feel the mossy turf under his hand.

"It's real," Flannery repeated. "Paradynamics handles all
relationships, captain. And the position of a body is simply a
statement of its geometrical relationships. What happens if we change
those relationships--with power enough, that is? There is no motion, in
any classic sense. But newspapers appear two high-drive days away
minutes after they're printed. We arrive here. And fleets sent against
Earth just aren't there any more!"

He pressed a button, and abruptly the walls of his office were around
them again--the office that was suddenly the control room of a building
that was more of a battleship than any Duke had ever seen.

He found himself clutching the chair, and forced himself to relax,
soaking up the shock as he had soaked up so many others. His mind faced
the facts, accepted them, and then sickly extended them.

"All right, you've got weapons," he admitted, and disgust was heavy in
his voice. "You can defend yourself. But can the galaxy defend itself
when somebody decides it's a fine offensive weapon? Or are all Earthmen
supposed to be automatically pure, so this will never be turned to
offensive use? Prove that to me and maybe I'll change my mind about
this planet and take that job of yours!"

Flannery leaned back, nodding soberly. "I intend to," he answered.
"Duke, we tried making peaceful citizens of our youngsters here a
century ago, but it wouldn't work. Kids have to have their little gang
wars and their fisticuffs to grow up naturally. We can't force them.
Their interests aren't those of adults. In fact, they think adults are
pretty dull. No adventure. They can't see that juggling a
twenty-million gamble on tooling up for a new competitive product is
exciting; they can't understand working in a dull laboratory to dig
something new out of nature's files can be exciting and dangerous.
Above all, they can't see that the greatest adventure is the job of
bringing kids up to be other adults. They regret the passing of dueling
and affairs of honor. But an adult civilization knows better--because
the passing of such things is the first step toward a race becoming
adult, because it is adopting a new type of thinking, where such things
have no value. You didn't hit me when I called you names, because it
made no sense from an adult point of view. Earth doesn't go to war for
the same reason. Thank God, we grew up just before we got into space,
where adult thinking is necessary to survival!"

There had been the kids and their seemingly pointless argument on the
street. There had been the curiously distant respect the Meloans had
shown him, as if they guessed that only his exterior was similar. There
were a lot of things Duke could use to justify believing the director.
It made a fine picture--as it was intended to.

                    *      *      *      *      *

"It must be wonderful to sit here safely, while agents do your
dangerous work, feeling superior to anyone who shows any courage," he
said bitterly. "I suppose every clerk and desk-jockey out there feeds
himself the same type of rationalization. But words don't prove
anything. How do you prove the difference between maturity and timidity
or smugness?"

"You asked for it," Flannery said simply.

The button went down on the control again. The air was suddenly thin
and bitingly cold as they looked down on a world torn with war, where a
hundred ships shaped like half-disks and unlike anything Duke had seen
were mixed up in some maneuver. The button was pushed again, and this
time there was a world below that had a port busy with similar ships,
not fighting now. A third press brought them onto the surface of a
heavy world that seemed to be composed of solid buildings and
factories, where the ships were being outfitted with incomprehensible
goods. A thing like a pipe-stem man looked up from a series of
operations, made a waving motion to them, and abruptly disappeared.

"Did you really think we could be the only adult race in the universe?"
Flannery asked. "You're looking at the Allr, the closest cultural
gestalt to us, and somewhere near our level. Now--"

Something squamous perched on a rock on what seemed to be a barren
world. Before it floated bright points of light that were obviously
replicas of planets, with tiny lines of light between them, and a
shuttling of glints along the lines. The thing seemed to look at them,
briefly. A tentacle whipped up and touched Flannery, who sat with his
hands off the control box. Without its use, they were abruptly back in
their office.

Flannery shivered, and there was strain on his face, while Duke felt
his mind freeze slowly, as if with physical cold. The director cleared
his throat. "Or maybe we should look at more routine things, though you
might consider that we have to get ready for the day when our advancing
culture touches on other cultures. Because we can't put it off
forever."

This time, they were in a building, like a crude shed, and there were
men there, standing in front of a creature that seemed like a human in
armor--but chitinous armor that was part of him. The alien suddenly
turned, though Duke could now see that they were in a section behind
one-way glass. Nevertheless, it seemed to sense them. Abruptly,
something began pulling at his mind, as if his thoughts were being
drained. Flannery hit the button again. "Telepathic race, and very
immature," he said, and there was worry in his voice. "Thank God, the
only one we've found, and out of our immediate line of advance."

There were other scenes. A human being who walked endlessly three feet
off the floor, fighting against some barrier that wasn't there, with
his face frozen in fear, while creatures that seemed to be metallic
moved about. "He found something while working on one of our
paradynamic problems," Flannery said. "He transported himself there and
has been exactly like that ever since--three years, now. So far, our
desk-jockeys here haven't been able to discover exactly what line he
was working on, but they're trying!"

