of us now."

I had to go after her. "I love her," I said hopelessly. "I can't
see her hurt and upset like that. I've got to--"

But he was shaking his head. "You haven't got a chance," Wally
said. "She'll never forgive you for having precognition. _That's_
why she made the study of psi her life-work. She's wanted PC for
herself, and was sure she was pure enough of heart to deserve to
have the power. Well, she doesn't have it, and she'll hate you
for having what she thinks she deserves. Forget her."

Talk about your cup brimming over! Well, if I had to get used to
being cut off from the human race, perhaps Shari was the place to
start. That's what happens to superhumans!

There was one desperate hope. "This wasn't hallucination?" I
tried.

"No, Tex," he said calmly. "This was on the level. Just for fun,"
he went on. "Can you do it when there isn't any money riding on
it?"

Reluctantly I came back to his desk and looked down at the back
of the top card. "Heart," I said dully. I hit ten in a row for
him. The spade was on top four times, the heart six times.

"And was that on the level?" I asked.

He scowled at me and chewed his thin lips. "Yeah," he said.

"That settles it," I said, sagging back into my seat. "I'm a
snake. A rotten PC!"

"Don't you believe it!" Wally growled, lunging out of his chair.
He started to pace back and forth across the office, his chin
stuck way out ahead of him as he prowled. "I don't know what you
are, Tex," he declared. "But you're no PC!"

"I'm a Normal after all!" I gasped, feeling a surge of blessed
relief.

He swiped at the air with a hand. "Don't be silly!" he snapped.
"You've got a psi power so incredible that--" He whirled on me
while I died for good.

"You explain it," he insisted. "After your lovely Dr. King flew
out of here, I shuffled the cards ten times under the desk, and
you hit ten in a row, right?"

"Right." Dismally.

"I cheated on the shuffle," he told me. "I used TK to make sure
that I put the two of spades on top all ten times."

"No," I insisted. "Six times the heart was on top. You turned
them over yourself."

"That's just it," he whispered, leaning toward me. "_I put that
spade on top every time!_ I _did_! But when I turned it over,
more than half the time it was a heart. What did you do?"

"You mean I'm a hallucinator?" I asked. "Look, this is getting
ridiculous! I was kidding myself, too?"

"Nonsense. It was real." His face jerked in surprise. "You
couldn't!" he gasped, as the idea hit him. "But you did!" he
reminded himself. "Wait till Maragon hears this!"

And then he told me. It couldn't be, I knew. But it _was_. He
proved it to me--or I proved it to us.

At some stage you have to get excited about it, if it's no more
than a grisly fascination. At that, it was dawn before we could
stop our intoxicated talk. Maragon had been yanked out of bed
again, and when he heard the news, woke up a darned sight faster
than the night before. Pheola of the race-horse legs joined us,
and several other psis as well. Before it was over the Grand
Master had put on a ridiculous piece of regalia and mumbled me
into probationary membership in the Lodge. There was nothing
creepy about the ritual--only about the way I felt.

I guess, if we hadn't gotten hungry, we'd be there yet. Wally had
one last little wrinkle for me as I started down the corridor for
the elevator.

"Pheola," he called.

"Yes, darlin' Billy," she said, coming to his side.

"How's Tex going to make out with that overeducated iceberg he's
hot after?" he asked her. I flinched at the thought of Shari--I
was getting used to considering her a memory.

Pheola looked into the corner for a moment. "Oh, yum!" she said,
smiling and showing the braces on her teeth. She kissed me. I
think I was about as startled as Wally was. "Just so you let her
be the only Cassandra," she said. "And you call that an iceberg?"
She looked at me curiously. "You'd better start eating red meat,
Tex," she told me, and would say no more.

       *       *       *       *       *

I had a heck of a time getting Shari on the 'phone. An hour
before lunch she caved in and accepted my call.

She looked pale and shaken, even in the black and white of the
screen. "Please," she said. "I've had all I can stand. You stayed
there all night, didn't you?"

"I'm not a PC, Shari," I said.

Nothing else would have caught her ear.

"Not?"

"Proved it before I left," I said. "I can prove it to you, too."

"Ridiculous. You can't prove a negative."

"Well, in a manner of speaking. What I can do is show you how the
card trick was worked."

I had her hooked. "You mean it? It really _was_ a trick after
all?" she said, slumping.

"It sure wasn't PC," I said. "Let me show you."

"At the lab," Shari said. "I'll be there in ten minutes."

A couple graduate students were there, fooling around with Rhine
cards when we arrived, and Shari chased them out without
ceremony. She locked the door behind them. We were to have
privacy. She didn't bother with her lab coat this time.

"Show me," she insisted.

"The apparatus, Shari," I grinned. She gave me a deck of cards,
and pulled out the two of hearts and two of spades.

"We'll do it face-up," I said. "So you can see how it's done!"

I laid the two cards side by side on her blotter, face up. "Now
put a finger on each one." I directed. "And watch them like a
hawk. What card is under your right forefinger?"

"Heart," Shari said.

"Wrong," I told her. "Spade."

They could have heard that shriek clear to Keokuk. Good thing we
were in a sound-proof laboratory.

I got her calmed down after a while. "It didn't happen!" she
insisted, clutching at her temples.

"If you won't holler," I said. "I'll do it again. Remember, it's
just a phenomenon, like osmosis."

"It is _not_!" she gasped.

But I did it for her. Ten times in a row. The cards changed under
her fingers without moving.

"So it's not PC," I said.

"Oh, Tex, but what _is_ it?"

"You agree it's real?"

Shari nodded. "It's real. You can do it, whatever it is. What
_is_ it?"

"TK," I told her. "Telekinesis."

"Nonsense," she said. "Are you trying to make me believe I
wouldn't have felt the cards move if you'd snapped them out from
under my fingers? I was pressing hard on them every time."

"I didn't move the cards," I explained.

"But you said it was telekinesis!"

"Sure. I just moved the molecules of pigment in the printing ink
and reassembled them in the opposite cards. You didn't expect to
feel molecular movement, did you?"

"No. Then it really happened?" I nodded. "What an incredible
power!" she said. A glow of satisfaction spread over me. "Can you
really test this molecular hypothesis?" she asked.

       *       *       *       *       *

I told her of the hours of demonstrations I had made during the
night. "The perception on scanning part of it goes on at some
subconscious level, Shari," I said. "But we had evidence that it
can be made completely conscious."

She shuddered and hugged her arms to herself. "I hate to say this
to you," she said. "But you're a freak."

I took a deep breath and smiled. "Unique is the way the Grand
Master puts it," I said, pleased with myself. "He says it has
terrific possibilities." And then it hit me, that delicious
thought that I was among the elect, that I always had been.
