I looked around, seeing a waiter near me. He had just served drinks to
the rear, half of the table, to the gamblers nearest the dealers. His
tray was still half-full. This was the moment. It was a generalized sort
of lift, the kind of thing that qualifies a TK for the Thirty-third
degree. I heaved at the thousand-dollar bills I had had marked in the
morning, without the faintest idea of where they were. The tray lurched
in the waiter's hand, throwing glasses to the floor. Most of them
shattered when they struck the real wood planks, splashing whisky and
mix on our legs.

I looked across the table and grinned at Fowler Smythe. His scowl had an
awful lot of forehead to work on. "What the devil!" I could read his
lips say over the racket. But Barney, the stick-man who'd felt my
Blackout, caught on a lot quicker.

I was about to freeze him with a clamp on his thyroid. It's just as
effective as wrapping your fingers around the throat. But Pheola upset
the apple cart.

She grabbed my right arm, so newly powerful. "No, Billy Joe!" she cried.
"I _don't_ want to die!"

"Who's dying?" I snapped.

"He's shooting me!" she gasped.

Shoot? With what? I had one terrified moment--what to lift? What was
aimed at her? At the last possible moment I saw it. His crap-stick was a
hollow tube, and he was raising it toward _me_, not toward Pheola. I'd
heard of things like that--a gas-powered dart gun. Silent, and shooting
a tiny needle with a nerve poison in grooves cut in its tip.

I lifted, but half in panic. Fowler Smythe squeezed his trigger and the
tiny dart leaped unseen across the crap layout. My lift had been way
off--it should have thrown the stick toward the ceiling, where no one
would have been hurt. Instead it merely twitched the crap-stick, and the
dart struck Pheola in the left hand. She screeched a little and grabbed
at the needle-prick with her fingernails.

You never know how much power there is in Psi until you use it without
restraint. I threw the crowd back away from us with a lift that nearly
blacked me out, and had Pheola on the wet boards of the floor before
she could blink. She had only seconds to live unless I blocked all
circulation to and from her arm. I found the spots in her armpit and
lifted the veins and arteries into a complete block.

A whiff of garlic told me that Simonetti had reached the table. He'd
been watching on the TV monitor, of course. He knelt down beside us.

"A doctor, quick," I said. "She's been pinked with nerve poison."

"She's gone, then," he said huskily. "Who done it?"

"Fowler Smythe," I said bitterly. "A snake within the Lodge. You might
try to stop him. But your partner, Rose, is the real crook. Get the doc,
then tie up Rose."

"She's gone," he insisted. "Nerve poison kills right now."

"He's right, Billy Joe," Pheola said softly. "I'm going numb all over."

"What did I tell you?" Simonetti husked at me. I had enough left to hit
him sharply over the temples with a lift. "A doctor. With antidote," I
snapped. He trotted away.

"Darlin' Billy!" she said, and her heart stopped. She was dead. I picked
her up in my arms and carried her to the same sawdust-strewn private
dining room where I'd given Barney the Blackout.

I had to split the lift. The tourniquet was an absolute necessity, or
more of the nerve poison would enter her system. But her heart
_couldn't_ stop. The brain can only stand a few seconds of that. I
hadn't let it miss three beats. Even as I carried her from the casino, I
lifted the main coronary muscle and started a ragged pumping, maybe
forty beats a minute. Once in the smaller room I began artificial
respiration with my mouth.

The sawbones was there in three minutes. I guided the tip of his
hypodermic into a vein in her right arm, the one that still had blood
coursing through it. He depressed the piston, pumping the antidote into
her bloodstream. Little by little I let up on the clamp on her wounded
left arm, dribbling the poisoned blood into her system, so that the
antidote could react with it gradually. She stayed unconscious.

Then I felt it. Her heart muscle tugged back at my lift. It was
struggling to beat on its own. I matched my lifts to its ragged
impulses, feeling it steady to a normal seventy-two as the antidote took
effect.

Her eyes opened at last, and we stopped respiration. "Billy Joe!" she
smiled. She was back from the dead.

       *       *       *       *       *

In an hour we had returned to the motel. She was as good as new, but
badly shaken.

"I still don't know what happened," she said.

I shrugged. "Smoke screen, Pheola. Every time there's a run of luck on a
crap table, somebody yells 'TK!' And I suppose there's a number of TK's
who aren't in the Lodge, and who figure to make a killing here and a
killing there by tipping the dice. But any decent TK, even a Fowler
Smythe, can spot them.

"There was TK in this, but not tipping dice. Smythe is a skunk. He's no
Twenty-fifth, or he wouldn't have any need to go crooked. He saw a
chance to make a killing. He suggested it to Rose, who fell for it and
went along. Rose decided to steal Simonetti's half of the business from
his partner with Smythe's help. It was no more complicated than
smuggling thousand dollar bills off the table in false bottoms of trays
that drinks were being served on. Smythe was using TK to lift the bills
into those false bottoms, well screened by the trays from the TV
monitors. Barney was in on it, of course. And after the joint had lost
enough dough that way, Rose and Simonetti would have had to sell out.
Only the buyer would have been a dummy for Rose and Smythe, using money
Smythe had lifted off the tables.

"The whole TK business was just a smoke screen to keep matters
confused," I concluded.

"How come they dared send for a TK like you? Why weren't they scared
you'd catch them, just like you did?"

"It took a little more than TK," I reminded her. "TK is just a power,
one more ability in life. It doesn't make you God. Once in a while it
gives you a little more vigorish than the other guy has, that's all. And
sometimes it's not enough."

"But you had enough vigorish to catch them," she pointed out.

"In a way," I said. "I told them TK wasn't enough--that it would take
precognition. And I don't have PC. I had to bring a PC with me. You,
Pheola. That's why I'm alive. Smythe would have killed me with that dart
gun of his. _You_ were my vigorish!"

We rode the 'copter together to the airport. Old Grand Master Maragon
would sneer out of the other side of his face when I brought Pheola to
him. He couldn't keep _her_ from PC training. She _had_ it.

"Tell me," I asked her. "Can you always tell what I'm going to do next?"

"I reckon," she said. "If I think hard about it."

"But you can't _control_ what I'm going to do next, can you?" I grinned.

"I wonder," she said. "Never tried, yet."

"Oh, no!" I groaned.

She showed me her buck teeth in a smile. "I figger first you'll have
them straighten my teeth," she said. "You'd like a pretty wife."

"If it's got to be," I said weakly. "That would help. I just wish there
was some way to handle that hysterical sniffle of yours, that's all. But
I guess that's the price you have to pay for that awful load of Psi
power you have."

"Oh, that," she said. "I ought to be over that by tomorrow. I hardly
ever get a cold, darlin' Billy, and when I do, I throw it off in a few
days."

Well, I guess it's a cinch I'm no PC.


THE END





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Vigorish, by Gordon Randall Garrett

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK VIGORISH ***

