
    2. The characteristics of this device have been investigated by the
    Technical Division, Central Coordination Agency, and it has been
    found that the device does in fact permit communication between
    persons by telepathic or some similar means.

    3. This device is presently being offered for sale in retail luxury
    stores throughout the nation. The volume of sales and of potential
    sales warrants distribution of the manufacturing load to
    manufacturers other than the Consolidated Electronics Company, who,
    it is understood, presently hold an exclusive manufacturing
    agreement with the office of the District Leader, District Twelve,
    Region Nine. This arrangement is inconsistent with the sales and use
    potential of the device in question.

    4. The agreement between District Twelve, Region Nine, and the
    Consolidated Electronics Company will be forwarded immediately to
    this headquarters for consideration. It is contemplated that this
    agreement will be terminated and replaced by a manufacturing license
    from the Products Division, Central Coordinating Agency, who will
    further license other manufacturers to produce this device.

    By Command of Chief Coordinator Gorman

                                        KELLER
                                        Comptroller
    MRK/pem

The Fiscal chief shook his head. This one spelled trouble--in capitals.
The royalty payments from Consolidated had become one of the major
sources of income for the district. And Morely had ordered project after
project, using those funds to pay for them. Some of the projects were
still outstanding. The Old Man would blow his top.

He looked again at the small scrap of paper which was clipped to the
letter. On it was scrawled: "DeVore--See me--HRM."

For a moment, DeVore considered using his own mentacom, then he
discarded the idea. To be sure, the leader had insisted that his
subordinates use the devices for their own communications, and he'd cut
Fixed Communications to the bone. But he still insisted on either
communicator calls or personal contact when he wished to talk to any of
his people. And he discouraged any but essential use of the communicator
system, generally demanding that people come in to see him.

DeVore wrinkled his face disgustedly. It _was_ hard to communicate with
the district leader by means of a headband. There was a repellent
characteristic about the man's mental emanations, and he seemed to fail
to comprehend nuances of meaning. Similes, he ignored completely.
Thoughts had to be completely and clearly detailed, then phrased into
normal, basic wordage before he would acknowledge them. None of the
short-cuts used by other members of the administrative staff seemed to
work out in his case. He apparently didn't notice visualizations, and he
never made one. His transmission was as stiff and labored as the type of
communication he required from others--more so, if anything. DeVore
scratched his neck.

"How," he asked himself, "does one define a telepathic monotone?"

There were a few others with whom DeVore had experienced similar
difficulties, but most people, he had found, picked up meanings and
concepts without difficulty--even seemed to anticipate at times. And
since the new induction mentacoms had come on the market, with the
annoying contacts and headstraps removed, virtually everyone seemed to
be either in possession of one of the devices, or about to get one. And,
they were worn everywhere.

He smiled as he thought of the young father-to-be, who had bored
through the evening traffic rush yesterday. The youngster had been so
intent on getting his wife to the hospital that he'd probably failed to
see half the ships that clawed out of his way. And his visualization had
been almost painfully clear. He'd probably be apologizing for weeks to
everyone he contacted.

DeVore straightened in his chair. What would happen, he wondered, if the
leader ever ran into one of those situations?

"Yipe!" he muttered. "What a row that would be."

He shrugged, got out of his chair, and walked out into the corridor.

"Better get it over with," he told himself.

       *       *       *       *       *

As he approached the leader's door, it opened, and Ward Kirk came out.
He closed the door with a careful gentleness, then faced it for an
instant. DeVore was conscious of a wave of hopeless fury, and a fleeting
glimpse of Morely's face, framed by brilliant flame. Then, Kirk faced
around and saw him.

"_Careful_," DeVore thought. "_You're broadcasting. He'll pick you up._"

Kirk grimaced and DeVore saw a faint image of a tyrannosaur, which
reared up, jaws agape. Blood dripped from the human figure gripped in
the creature's talons.

"_The old ... wouldn't understand if he did._"

DeVore grinned. "_See what you mean. Well, guess I'm the next victim._"

He stepped to the door and tapped.

"Come in."

Morely looked up as his Fiscal Chief entered, then swept some papers
aside. "Well, what do _you_ want?"

DeVore held out the letter. "You wanted to see me, sir, about this." He
placed the paper within the reach of his superior, who snatched at it,
held it up for a moment, then dropped it to his desk.

"Yes, I did. What can we do about it?"

"Why," DeVore spread his hands slightly, "we'll have to comply."

"That isn't what I meant, Idiot! How can we continue to receive the
payments from Consolidated?"

"I don't think we can, sir. If Central Coordinating wants to put the
device on a national basis, we can't do anything about it."

Morely looked down at the letter, then glared searchingly at DeVore.
"The way I read this," he declared, "they want to distribute
manufacturing rights on the communicator to plants in other regions than
this. Right?"

"Yes, sir."

"But they don't say anything about our continuing the Consolidated
payments on an overwrite basis, for the sale of devices they may make.
Now, do they?"

"No, sir. But that's implied. In cases like this, Central always takes
over all rights." DeVore hesitated. "I believe regulations--"

"I don't care what's implied, DeVore. And I don't care what you
believe. All I see is what's in this letter. They want to distribute the
manufacturing load, and I'm quite willing that they should. I want to
continue receiving the payments from Consolidated. Now, you arrange it
so that they're satisfied and I'm satisfied."

[Illustration]

"But that'll mean Consolidated will have to pay double. We can't--"

"Don't say 'can't' to me!" Morely held up a hand angrily. "DeVore, I'm
not going to tell you how to do this. I want it done. The details are
your affair, and if I have to teach you your business, I'll get someone
who can do things without having to have them spelled out to him." He
leaned back, to glare at DeVore.

"Now, get on the job. I told you to make arrangements for me so that we
will retain our payments from Consolidated. And I'm not interested in
what arrangements you make with them, or what arrangements they make
with Central. Is that a simple enough order for you to understand?"

"Yes, sir. I understand all right. But--"

"Good! I'm glad I managed to get at least one simple idea into your
head." The spring in the chair twanged as Morely came forward, to poke
his head at DeVore. "Now, get to work on it."

He jerked his head down for a quick look at the letter on his desk, then
looked up again.

"And I'll expect a report from you by tonight that you've got the matter
taken care of."

DeVore looked at his superior expressionless for a heartbeat. He had
been given peculiar orders before, and he'd always managed to work out
the problems involved. But this was the ultimate. This one seemed to be
just plain illegal. And there was no point in arguing further. There was
just the barest chance that there might be some legitimate way out. If
he challenged the Old Man on an illegal order, he just might get his
ears pinned back. He'd simply have to go back to his office and try to
hunt out a technicality. He nodded.

"Yes, sir. I'll get on it immediately."

He saluted and started to leave the office. But he didn't make it.

"And, DeVore!"

The Fiscal chief halted abruptly, and turned.

"Sir?"

"I'm getting tired of the negative thinking you people seem to have
fallen into lately. I'm sick of going into every routine detail with
you. When you got that letter, you should have immediately worked out a
method of retaining the royalties. Then, you could have come in and
presented it for my approval. That is the kind of work I want. And
that's the kind of work I mean to get in the future. Do you understand?"

Sternly, DeVore suppressed a sarcastic thought. He held his mind and
face blank and nodded with a semblance of respect.

"Yes, sir."

"Very well." Morely waved a hand. "Now get something done."

       *       *       *       *       *

As DeVore walked through the corridor, he thought over the situation. Of
course, the easy way out would be to force Consolidated to continue the
payments in addition to their license fees from Central. That could be
done. There were all kinds of methods by which pressure could be brought
to bear on any company by the district leader's office. And from
Consolidated's point of view, double payments could offer a cheap means
of keeping out of difficulties. They would be able to pass most of the
cost to the consumer by a slight price increase, justified by a minor
modification of the devices.

But they wouldn't be happy about it, and there would come a day when an
auditing team from Central would be checking in the district. And that
would be the day of days!

DeVore turned in at the door to his own office, crossed the room, and
sat down at his desk.

To be sure, he could request a share of the fees from Central, and
they'd make an award. But they'd never award more than fifty per cent,
and it'd be hard to get that much. That was no good. The Old Man would
want the same payments he'd been getting.

Or, he could try to negotiate a new agreement with Consolidated, double
the royalties, and then request fifty per cent from Central. He grinned
wryly. That would be within legal limits, he was sure, but Central knew
the present arrangement, and he knew that they knew. And so would most
of the interested manufacturers in other regions. The first-class
citizens who owned the plants had their own liaison. They'd all balk.
Then, Central would invalidate both old and new agreements and refuse
compensation of any kind to district. That would be a suicidal course.

He looked up, thinking of one of the girls out in the legal crew.

"_Fiscal regulations, please. And Markowitz on royalties, too._"

The girl turned half around, and he could see a faint impression of her
view of office details. Then, she went to a book rack. For a few
seconds, she glanced over the books, then selected two large volumes.

"_Shall I look it up, or do you want the books?_"

"_I'll take them. Might need quite a bit of research._"

Shortly, the girl appeared in his doorway. Quickly, she laid the two
volumes on his desk.

DeVore nodded his thanks and opened regulations. Some of the paragraphs
were delightfully vague, and could be subject to more than one
interpretation. But one paragraph was clear and explicit. And that was
the one he was concerned with.

A royalty agreement with, or manufacturing license from Central
Coordination definitely abrogated any agreement with, or payment to, any
lesser headquarters. Such an agreement or license barred any further
negotiation between any lesser headquarters and a manufacturer, relating
to the product concerned. Double royalties were prohibited in any case.

He pushed the books aside. There was no need of looking in Markowitz.
That regulation paragraph took care of this exact situation, and
disposed of it neatly. For an instant, he thought of taking the volume
in to the leader's office. Then, he remembered the threatening note in
the authoritative voice and the flat, deadly thoughts he had noted as
secondaries.

That wouldn't work either. He thought of the undercurrent in Kirk's
thoughts. Kirk had been carrying a regulation book, he remembered. He
contacted the Fixed Communications chief.

"_Don't_," he was told. "_I tried it. Know what happened?_"

"_Go ahead._"

"_He got the regional director on the communicator. I've been
transferred to Outpost. They seem to need a cable maintenance chief up
there. And I was lucky at that. I started to protest, and they nearly
had me for insubordination._" Abruptly, Kirk cut away.

       *       *       *       *       *

DeVore stared unseeingly across the desk. He'd been at Outpost for a
short time once, on an inspection trip, and he still remembered the
place. At one time, it had been a well supplied, well organized post. At
that time, observational duty had been regarded more highly than now,
and the place had been desirable for any single officer, though the
married men had objected to being separated from their families by the
many miles of frozen waste. But that had changed.

Now, Outpost was the end of the line. The dilapidated surface quarters
offered poor protection from the fierce cold. Supply ships were rarely
scheduled to the place, and were often held up by storms when they were
scheduled. Half rations--even quarter rations--were commonplace. He
shook his head. Kirk was in real trouble, and there would be no point in
joining him. That would help neither of them.

This, he thought, was a situation. Then, he realized something else.
From Morely's point of view, it was a perfectly safe situation, with
nothing to lose. The district leader could easily disclaim any
