blindly forward, toward the hill. They ran with all their strength,
making no sound. Kieran and Webber ran with them, with Paula between
them. Webber seemed absolutely appalled.

"Where's that gun you had?" Kieran panted.

"It's not a gun, only a short-range shocker," he said. "It wouldn't stop
these things. Look at them!"

They bounded, sporting around them, howling with a sound like laughter.
They were as large as leopards and their eyes glowed in the
cluster-light. They seemed to be enjoying themselves, as though hunting
was the most delightful game in the world. One of them ran up to
within two feet of Kieran and snapped at him with its great jaws,
dodging agilely when he raised his arm. They drove the people, faster
and faster. At first the men had formed around the women and children.
But the formation began to disintegrate as the weaker ones dropped
behind, and no attempt was made to keep it. Panic was stronger than
instinct now. Kieran looked ahead. "If we can make it to that hill--"

[Illustration]

Paula screamed and he stumbled over a child, a girl about five, crawling
on her hands and knees. He picked her up. She bit and thrashed and tore
at him, her bare little body hard as whalebone and slippery with sweat.
He could not hold onto her. She kicked herself free of his hands and
rushed wildly out of reach, and one of the black hunters pounced in and
bore her away, shrieking thinly like a fledgling bird in the jaws of a
cat.

"Oh my God," said Paula, and covered her head with her arms, trying to
shut out sight and sound. He caught her and said harshly, "Don't faint,
because I can't carry you." The child's mother, whichever of the women
it might have been, did not look back.

An old woman who strayed aside was pulled down and dragged off, and then
one of the white-haired men. The hill was closer. Kieran saw now what
was wrong with it. Part of it was a building. He was too tired and too
sick to be interested, except as it offered a refuge. He spoke to
Webber, with great difficulty because he was winded. And then he
realized that Webber wasn't there.

       *       *       *       *       *

Webber had stumbled and fallen. He had started to get up, but the
hunters were on him. He was on his hands and knees facing them,
screaming at them to get away from him. He had, obviously, had little or
no experience with raw violence. Kieran ran back to him, with Paula
close behind.

"Use your gun!" he yelled. He was afraid of the black hunters, but he
was full of rage and the rage outweighed the fear. He yelled at them,
cursing them. He hurled sand into their eyes, and one that was creeping
up on Webber from the side he kicked. The creature drew off a little,
not frightened but surprised. They were not used to this sort of thing
from humans. "Your gun!" Kieran roared again, and Webber pulled the
snub-nosed thing out of his pocket. He stood up and said unsteadily, "I
told you, it's not a gun. It won't kill anything. I don't think--"

"Use it," said Kieran. "And get moving again. Slowly."

They started to move, and then across the sky a great iron voice spoke
like thunder. "Lie down," it said, "please. Lie down flat."

Kieran turned his head, startled. From the direction of the building on
the hill a vehicle was speeding toward them.

"The Sakae," said Webber with what was almost a sob of relief. "Lie
down."

As he did so, Kieran saw a pale flash shoot out from the vehicle and
knock over a hunter still hanging on the flanks of the fleeing people.
He hugged the sand. Something went whining and whistling over him, there
was a thunk and a screech. It was repeated, and then the iron voice
spoke again.

"You may get up now. Please remain where you are." The vehicle was much
closer. They were bathed in sudden light. The voice said, "Mr. Webber,
you are holding a weapon. Please drop it."

"It's only a little shocker," Webber said, plaintively. He dropped it.

The vehicle had wide tracks that threw up clouds of sand. It came
clanking to a halt. Kieran, shading his eyes, thought he distinguished
two creatures inside, a driver and a passenger.

       *       *       *       *       *

The passenger emerged, climbing with some difficulty over the steep step
of the track, his tail rattling down behind him like a length of thick
cable. Once on the ground he became quite agile, moving with a sort of
oddly graceful prance on his powerful legs. He approached, his attention
centered on Kieran. But he observed the amenities, placing one delicate
hand on his breast and making a slight bow.

"Doctor Ray." His muzzle, shaped something like a duck's bill,
nevertheless formed Paula's name tolerably well. "And you, I think, are
Mr. Kieran."

Kieran said, "Yes." The star-cluster blazed overhead. The dead beasts
lay behind him, the people with their flying hair had run on beyond his
sight. He had been dead for a hundred years and now he was alive again.
Now he was standing on alien soil, facing an alien form of life,
communicating with it, and he was so dog-tired and every sensory nerve
was so thoroughly flayed that he had nothing left to react with. He
simply looked at the Saka as he might have looked at a fence-post, and
said, "Yes."

The Saka made his formal little bow again. "I am Bregg." He shook his
head. "I'm glad I was able to reach you in time. You people don't seem
to have any notion of the amount of trouble you make for us--"

Paula, who had not spoken since the child was carried off, suddenly
screamed at Bregg, "Murderer!"

She sprang at him, striking him in blind hysteria.


8.

Bregg sighed. He caught Paula in those fine small hands that seemed to
have amazing strength and held her, at arm's length. "Doctor Ray," he
said. He shook her. "Doctor Ray." She stopped screaming. "I don't wish
to administer a sedative because then you will say that I drugged you.
But I will if I must."

Kieran said, "I'll keep her quiet."

He took her from Bregg. She collapsed against him and began to cry.
"Murderers," she whispered. "That little girl, those old people--"

Webber said, "You could exterminate those beasts. You don't have to let
them hunt the people like that. It's--it's--"

"Unhuman is the word you want," said Bregg. His voice was exceedingly
weary. "Please get into the car."

They climbed in. The car churned around and sped back toward the
building. Paula shivered, and Kieran held her in his arms. Webber said
after a moment or two, "How did you happen to be here, Bregg?"

"When we caught the flitter and found it empty, it was obvious that you
were with the people, and it became imperative to find you before you
came to harm. I remembered that the trail ran close by this old outpost
building, so I had the patrol ship drop us here with an emergency
vehicle."

Kieran said, "You knew the people were coming this way?"

"Of course." Bregg sounded surprised. "They migrate every year at the
beginning of the dry season. How do you suppose Webber found them so
easily?"

Kieran looked at Webber. He asked, "Then they weren't running from the
Sakae?"

"Of course they were," Paula said. "You saw them yourself, cowering
under the trees when the ship went over."

"The patrol ships frighten them," Bregg said. "Sometimes to the point of
stampeding them, which is why we use them only in emergencies. The
people do not connect the ships with us."

"That," said Paula flatly, "is a lie."

Bregg sighed. "Enthusiasts always believe what they want to believe.
Come and see for yourself."

She straightened up. "What have you done to them?"

"We've caught them in a trap," said Bregg, "and we are presently going
to stick needles into them--a procedure necessitated by your presence,
Doctor Ray. They're highly susceptible to imported viruses, as you
should remember--one of your little parties of do-gooders succeeded in
wiping out a whole band of them not too many years ago. So--inoculations
and quarantine."

       *       *       *       *       *

Lights had blazed up in the area near the building. The car sped toward
them.

Kieran said slowly, "Why don't you just exterminate the hunters and have
done with them?"

"In your day, Mr. Kieran--yes, I've heard all about you--in your day,
did you on Earth exterminate the predators so that their natural prey
might live more happily?"

Bregg's long muzzle and sloping skull were profiled against the lights.

"No," said Kieran, "we didn't. But in that case, they were all animals."

"Exactly," said Bregg. "No, wait, Doctor Ray. Spare me the lecture. I
can give you a much better reason than that, one even you can't quarrel
with. It's a matter of ecology. The number of humans destroyed by these
predators annually is negligible but they do themselves destroy an
enormous number of small creatures with which the humans compete for
their food. If we exterminated the hunters the small animals would
multiply so rapidly that the humans would starve to death."

The car stopped beside the hill, at the edge of the lighted area. A sort
of makeshift corral of wire fencing had been set up, with wide wings to
funnel the people into the enclosure, where a gate was shut on them. Two
Sakae were mounting guard as the party from the car approached the
corral. Inside the fence Kieran could see the people, flopped around in
positions of exhaustion. They did not seem to be afraid now. A few of
them were drinking from a supply of water provided for them. There was
food scattered for them on the ground.

Bregg said something in his own language to one of the guards, who
looked surprised and questioned him, then departed, springing strongly
on his powerful legs. "Wait," said Bregg.

They waited, and in a moment or two the guard came back leading one of
the black hunting beasts on a chain. It was a female, somewhat smaller
than the ones Kieran had fought with, and having a slash of white on the
throat and chest. She howled and sprang up on Bregg, butting her great
head into his shoulder, wriggling with delight. He petted her, talking
to her, and she laughed doglike and licked his cheek.

"They domesticate well," he said. "We've had a tame breed for
centuries."

       *       *       *       *       *

He moved a little closer to the corral, holding tight to the animal's
chain. Suddenly she became aware of the people. Instantly the
good-natured pet turned into a snarling fury. She reared on her hind
legs and screamed, and inside the corral the people roused up. They were
not frightened now. They spat and chattered, clawing up sand and pebbles
and bits of food to throw through the fence. Bregg handed the chain to
the guard, who hauled the animal away by main force.

Paula said coldly, "If your point was that the people are not kind to
animals, my answer is that you can hardly blame them."

"A year ago," Bregg said, "some of the people got hold of her two young
ones. They were torn to pieces before they could be saved, and she saw
it. I can't blame her, either."
