"Not at all, professor," the captain answered me after a
slight hesitation, "since you'll never leave this underwater boat.
Come into the lounge.  It's actually our work room, and there you'll
learn the full story about the Nautilus!"









CHAPTER 13



Some Figures



A MOMENT LATER we were seated on a couch in the lounge, cigars between
our lips.  The

captain placed before my eyes a working drawing that gave the ground plan,
cross section, and side view of the Nautilus.  Then he began his
description as follows:

"Here, Professor Aronnax, are the different dimensions of this boat
now transporting you.  It's a very long cylinder with conical ends.
It noticeably takes the shape of a cigar, a shape already
adopted in London for several projects of the same kind.
The length of this cylinder from end to end is exactly seventy meters,
and its maximum breadth of beam is eight meters.  So it isn't
quite built on the ten-to-one ratio of your high-speed steamers;
but its lines are sufficiently long, and their tapering gradual enough,
so that the displaced water easily slips past and poses no obstacle
to the ship's movements.

"These two dimensions allow you to obtain, via a simple calculation,
the surface area and volume of the Nautilus.  Its surface area
totals 1,011.45 square meters, its volume 1,507.2 cubic meters--
which is tantamount to saying that when it's completely submerged,
it displaces 1,500 cubic meters of water, or weighs 1,500 metric tons.

"In drawing up plans for a ship meant to navigate underwater,
I wanted it, when floating on the waves, to lie nine-tenths below
the surface and to emerge only one-tenth. Consequently, under these
conditions it needed to displace only nine-tenths of its volume,
hence 1,356.48 cubic meters; in other words, it was to weigh only
that same number of metric tons.  So I was obliged not to exceed
this weight while building it to the aforesaid dimensions.

"The Nautilus is made up of two hulls, one inside the other;
between them, joining them together, are iron T-bars that give this ship
the utmost rigidity.  In fact, thanks to this cellular arrangement,
it has the resistance of a stone block, as if it were completely solid.
Its plating can't give way; it's self-adhering and not dependent
on the tightness of its rivets; and due to the perfect union
of its materials, the solidarity of its construction allows it
to defy the most violent seas.

"The two hulls are manufactured from boilerplate steel, whose relative
density is 7.8 times that of water.  The first hull has a thickness
of no less than five centimeters and weighs 394.96 metric tons.
My second hull, the outer cover, includes a keel fifty centimeters high
by twenty-five wide, which by itself weighs 62 metric tons; this hull,
the engine, the ballast, the various accessories and accommodations,
plus the bulkheads and interior braces, have a combined weight
of 961.52 metric tons, which when added to 394.96 metric tons,
gives us the desired total of 1,356.48 metric tons.  Clear?"

"Clear," I replied.

"So," the captain went on, "when the Nautilus lies on the waves
under these conditions, one-tenth of it does emerge above water.
Now then, if I provide some ballast tanks equal in capacity
to that one-tenth, hence able to hold 150.72 metric tons, and if I
fill them with water, the boat then displaces 1,507.2 metric tons--
or it weighs that much--and it would be completely submerged.
That's what comes about, professor.  These ballast tanks exist
within easy access in the lower reaches of the Nautilus.  I open
some stopcocks, the tanks fill, the boat sinks, and it's exactly
flush with the surface of the water."

"Fine, captain, but now we come to a genuine difficulty.  You're able
to lie flush with the surface of the ocean, that I understand.
But lower down, while diving beneath that surface, isn't your
submersible going to encounter a pressure, and consequently
undergo an upward thrust, that must be assessed at one atmosphere
per every thirty feet of water, hence at about one kilogram per
each square centimeter?"

"Precisely, sir."

"Then unless you fill up the whole Nautilus, I don't see how you
can force it down into the heart of these liquid masses."

"Professor," Captain Nemo replied, "static objects mustn't be
confused with dynamic ones, or we'll be open to serious error.
Comparatively little effort is spent in reaching the ocean's
lower regions, because all objects have a tendency to become 'sinkers.'
Follow my logic here."

"I'm all ears, captain."

"When I wanted to determine what increase in weight the Nautilus
needed to be given in order to submerge, I had only to take note
of the proportionate reduction in volume that salt water experiences
in deeper and deeper strata."

"That's obvious," I replied.

"Now then, if water isn't absolutely incompressible, at least
it compresses very little.  In fact, according to the most
recent calculations, this reduction is only .0000436 per atmosphere,
or per every thirty feet of depth.  For instance, to go 1,000
meters down, I must take into account the reduction in volume
that occurs under a pressure equivalent to that from a 1,000-meter
column of water, in other words, under a pressure of 100 atmospheres.
In this instance the reduction would be .00436. Consequently, I'd have
to increase my weight from 1,507.2 metric tons to 1,513.77. So
the added weight would only be 6.57 metric tons."

"That's all?"

"That's all, Professor Aronnax, and the calculation is easy to check.
Now then, I have supplementary ballast tanks capable of shipping 100
metric tons of water.  So I can descend to considerable depths.
When I want to rise again and lie flush with the surface, all I
have to do is expel that water; and if I desire that the Nautilus
emerge above the waves to one-tenth of its total capacity, I empty
all the ballast tanks completely."

This logic, backed up by figures, left me without a single objection.

"I accept your calculations, captain," I replied, "and I'd be ill-mannered
to dispute them, since your daily experience bears them out.
But at this juncture, I have a hunch that we're still left with
one real difficulty."

"What's that, sir?"

"When you're at a depth of 1,000 meters, the Nautilus's plating
bears a pressure of 100 atmospheres.  If at this point you want
to empty the supplementary ballast tanks in order to lighten your
boat and rise to the surface, your pumps must overcome that pressure
of 100 atmospheres, which is 100 kilograms per each square centimeter.
This demands a strength--"

"That electricity alone can give me," Captain Nemo said swiftly.
"Sir, I repeat:  the dynamic power of my engines is nearly infinite.
The Nautilus's pumps have prodigious strength, as you must
have noticed when their waterspouts swept like a torrent over
the Abraham Lincoln.  Besides, I use my supplementary ballast
tanks only to reach an average depth of 1,500 to 2,000 meters,
and that with a view to conserving my machinery.  Accordingly, when I
have a mind to visit the ocean depths two or three vertical leagues
beneath the surface, I use maneuvers that are more time-consuming
but no less infallible."

"What are they, captain?"  I asked.

"Here I'm naturally led into telling you how the Nautilus is maneuvered."

"I can't wait to find out."

"In order to steer this boat to port or starboard, in short, to make
turns on a horizontal plane, I use an ordinary, wide-bladed rudder
that's fastened to the rear of the sternpost and worked by a wheel
and tackle.  But I can also move the Nautilus upward and downward
on a vertical plane by the simple method of slanting its two fins,
which are attached to its sides at its center of flotation;
these fins are flexible, able to assume any position, and can be
operated from inside by means of powerful levers.  If these fins
stay parallel with the boat, the latter moves horizontally.
If they slant, the Nautilus follows the angle of that slant and,
under its propeller's thrust, either sinks on a diagonal as steep
as it suits me, or rises on that diagonal.  And similarly, if I want
to return more swiftly to the surface, I throw the propeller in gear,
and the water's pressure makes the Nautilus rise vertically, as an air
balloon inflated with hydrogen lifts swiftly into the skies."

"Bravo, captain!"  I exclaimed.  "But in the midst of the waters,
how can your helmsman follow the course you've given him?"

"My helmsman is stationed behind the windows of a pilothouse,
which protrudes from the topside of the Nautilus's hull and is fitted
with biconvex glass."

"Is glass capable of resisting such pressures?"

"Perfectly capable.  Though fragile on impact, crystal can still
offer considerable resistance.  In 1864, during experiments on
fishing by electric light in the middle of the North Sea, glass panes
less than seven millimeters thick were seen to resist a pressure
of sixteen atmospheres, all the while letting through strong,
heat-generating rays whose warmth was unevenly distributed.
Now then, I use glass windows measuring no less than twenty-one
centimeters at their centers; in other words, they've thirty
times the thickness."

"Fair enough, captain, but if we're going to see, we need light
to drive away the dark, and in the midst of the murky waters,
I wonder how your helmsman can--"

"Set astern of the pilothouse is a powerful electric reflector
whose rays light up the sea for a distance of half a mile."

"Oh, bravo!  Bravo three times over, captain!  That explains
the phosphorescent glow from this so-called narwhale that so puzzled
us scientists!  Pertinent to this, I'll ask you if the Nautilus's
running afoul of the Scotia, which caused such a great uproar,
was the result of an accidental encounter?"

"Entirely accidental, sir.  I was navigating two meters beneath
the surface of the water when the collision occurred.  However, I could
see that it had no dire consequences."

"None, sir.  But as for your encounter with the Abraham Lincoln . . . ?"

"Professor, that troubled me, because it's one of the best ships in the
gallant American navy, but they attacked me and I had to defend myself!
All the same, I was content simply to put the frigate in a condition
where it could do me no harm; it won't have any difficulty getting
repairs at the nearest port."

"Ah, commander," I exclaimed with conviction, "your Nautilus is truly
a marvelous boat!"

"Yes, professor," Captain Nemo replied with genuine excitement,
"and I love it as if it were my own flesh and blood!  Aboard a
conventional ship, facing the ocean's perils, danger lurks everywhere;
on the surface of the sea, your chief sensation is the constant feeling
of an underlying chasm, as the Dutchman Jansen so aptly put it;
but below the waves aboard the Nautilus, your heart never fails you!
There are no structural deformities to worry about,
because the double hull of this boat has the rigidity of iron;
no rigging to be worn out by rolling and pitching on the waves;
no sails for the wind to carry off; no boilers for steam to burst open;
no fires to fear, because this submersible is made of sheet iron not wood;
no coal to run out of, since electricity is its mechanical force;
no collisions to fear, because it navigates the watery deep all by itself;
no storms to brave, because just a few meters beneath the waves,
it finds absolute tranquility!  There, sir.  There's the ideal ship!
And if it's true that the engineer has more confidence in a craft
than the builder, and the builder more than the captain himself,
you can understand the utter abandon with which I place my trust
in this Nautilus, since I'm its captain, builder, and engineer
all in one!"

Captain Nemo spoke with winning eloquence.  The fire in his eyes
and the passion in his gestures transfigured him.  Yes, he loved
his ship the same way a father loves his child!

But one question, perhaps indiscreet, naturally popped up, and I
couldn't resist asking it.

"You're an engineer, then, Captain Nemo?"

"Yes, professor," he answered me.  "I studied in London, Paris,
and New York back in the days when I was a resident of
the earth's continents."

"But how were you able to build this wonderful Nautilus in secret?"

"Each part of it, Professor Aronnax, came from a different spot
on the globe and reached me at a cover address.  Its keel was forged
by Creusot in France, its propeller shaft by Pen & Co.  in London,
the sheet-iron plates for its hull by Laird's in Liverpool, its propeller
by Scott's in Glasgow.  Its tanks were manufactured by Cail & Co.
in Paris, its engine by Krupp in Prussia, its spur by the Motala
workshops in Sweden, its precision instruments by Hart Bros.
in New York, etc.; and each of these suppliers received my
specifications under a different name."

"But," I went on, "once these parts were manufactured, didn't they
have to be mounted and adjusted?"

"Professor, I set up my workshops on a deserted islet in midocean.
There our Nautilus was completed by me and my workmen, in other words,
by my gallant companions whom I've molded and educated.
Then, when the operation was over, we burned every trace of our stay
on that islet, which if I could have, I'd have blown up."

"From all this, may I assume that such a boat costs a fortune?"

"An iron ship, Professor Aronnax, runs 1,125 francs per metric ton.
Now then, the Nautilus has a burden of 1,500 metric tons.
Consequently, it cost 1,687,000 francs, hence 2,000,000 francs
including its accommodations, and 4,000,000 or 5,000,000 with all
the collections and works of art it contains."

"One last question, Captain Nemo."

"Ask, professor."

"You're rich, then?"

"Infinitely rich, sir, and without any trouble, I could pay off
the ten-billion-franc French national debt!"

I gaped at the bizarre individual who had just spoken these words.
Was he playing on my credulity?  Time would tell.








CHAPTER 14



The Black Current



THE PART OF THE planet earth that the seas occupy has been assessed at
3,832,558 square myriameters, hence more than 38,000,000,000 hectares.
This liquid mass totals 2,250,000,000 cubic miles and could form
a sphere with a diameter of sixty leagues, whose weight would
be three quintillion metric tons.  To appreciate such a number,
we should remember that a quintillion is to a billion what a billion
is to one, in other words, there are as many billions in a quintillion
as ones in a billion!  Now then, this liquid mass nearly equals
the total amount of water that has poured through all the earth's
rivers for the past 40,000 years!

During prehistoric times, an era of fire was followed by an era of water.
At first there was ocean everywhere.  Then, during the Silurian period,
the tops of mountains gradually appeared above the waves,
islands emerged, disappeared beneath temporary floods, rose again,
were fused to form continents, and finally the earth's geography
settled into what we have today.  Solid matter had wrested from liquid
matter some 37,657,000 square miles, hence 12,916,000,000 hectares.

The outlines of the continents allow the seas to be divided
into five major parts:  the frozen Arctic and Antarctic oceans,
the Indian Ocean, the Atlantic Ocean, and the Pacific Ocean.

The Pacific Ocean extends north to south between the two polar circles
and east to west between America and Asia over an expanse of 145
degrees of longitude.  It's the most tranquil of the seas; its currents
are wide and slow-moving, its tides moderate, its rainfall abundant.
And this was the ocean that I was first destined to cross under
these strangest of auspices.

"If you don't mind, professor," Captain Nemo told me, "we'll determine
our exact position and fix the starting point of our voyage.
It's fifteen minutes before noon.  I'm going to rise to the surface
of the water."

The captain pressed an electric bell three times.  The pumps began
to expel water from the ballast tanks; on the pressure gauge,
a needle marked the decreasing pressures that indicated the Nautilus's
upward progress; then the needle stopped.

"Here we are," the captain said.

I made my way to the central companionway, which led to the platform.
I climbed its metal steps, passed through the open hatches,
and arrived topside on the Nautilus.

The platform emerged only eighty centimeters above the waves.
The Nautilus's bow and stern boasted that spindle-shaped outline
that had caused the ship to be compared appropriately to a long cigar.
I noted the slight overlap of its sheet-iron plates, which resembled
the scales covering the bodies of our big land reptiles.  So I had
a perfectly natural explanation for why, despite the best spyglasses,
this boat had always been mistaken for a marine animal.

Near the middle of the platform, the skiff was half set in the
ship's hull, making a slight bulge.  Fore and aft stood two cupolas
of moderate height, their sides slanting and partly inset with heavy
biconvex glass, one reserved for the helmsman steering the Nautilus,
the other for the brilliance of the powerful electric beacon
lighting his way.

The sea was magnificent, the skies clear.  This long aquatic
vehicle could barely feel the broad undulations of the ocean.
A mild breeze out of the east rippled the surface of the water.
Free of all mist, the horizon was ideal for taking sights.

There was nothing to be seen.  Not a reef, not an islet.
No more Abraham Lincoln.  A deserted immenseness.

Raising his sextant, Captain Nemo took the altitude of the sun,
which would give him his latitude.  He waited for a few minutes
until the orb touched the rim of the horizon.  While he was taking
his sights, he didn't move a muscle, and the instrument couldn't
have been steadier in hands made out of marble.

"Noon," he said.  "Professor, whenever you're ready. . . ."

I took one last look at the sea, a little yellowish near the landing
places of Japan, and I went below again to the main lounge.

There the captain fixed his position and used a chronometer
to calculate his longitude, which he double-checked against his
previous observations of hour angles.  Then he told me:

"Professor Aronnax, we're in longitude 137 degrees 15' west--"

"West of which meridian?"  I asked quickly, hoping the captain's
reply might give me a clue to his nationality.

"Sir," he answered me, "I have chronometers variously set to the
meridians of Paris, Greenwich, and Washington, D.C. But in your honor,
I'll use the one for Paris."

This reply told me nothing.  I bowed, and the commander went on:

"We're in longitude 137 degrees 15' west of the meridian of Paris,
and latitude 30 degrees 7' north, in other words, about 300 miles
from the shores of Japan.  At noon on this day of November 8,
we hereby begin our voyage of exploration under the waters."

"May God be with us!"  I replied.

"And now, professor," the captain added, "I'll leave you to your
intellectual pursuits.  I've set our course east-northeast at a depth
of fifty meters.  Here are some large-scale charts on which you'll
be able to follow that course.  The lounge is at your disposal,
and with your permission, I'll take my leave."

Captain Nemo bowed.  I was left to myself, lost in my thoughts.
They all centered on the Nautilus's commander.  Would I ever learn
the nationality of this eccentric man who had boasted of having none?
His sworn hate for humanity, a hate that perhaps was bent
on some dreadful revenge--what had provoked it?  Was he one of
those unappreciated scholars, one of those geniuses "embittered
by the world," as Conseil expressed it, a latter-day Galileo,
or maybe one of those men of science, like America's Commander Maury,
whose careers were ruined by political revolutions?  I couldn't say yet.
As for me, whom fate had just brought aboard his vessel,
whose life he had held in the balance:  he had received me coolly
but hospitably.  Only, he never took the hand I extended to him.
He never extended his own.

For an entire hour I was deep in these musings, trying to probe this
mystery that fascinated me so.  Then my eyes focused on a huge world
map displayed on the table, and I put my finger on the very spot
where our just-determined longitude and latitude intersected.

Like the continents, the sea has its rivers.  These are exclusive
currents that can be identified by their temperature and color,
the most remarkable being the one called the Gulf Stream.
Science has defined the global paths of five chief currents:
one in the north Atlantic, a second in the south Atlantic,
a third in the north Pacific, a fourth in the south Pacific,
and a fifth in the southern Indian Ocean.  Also it's likely
that a sixth current used to exist in the northern Indian Ocean,
when the Caspian and Aral Seas joined up with certain large Asian
lakes to form a single uniform expanse of water.

Now then, at the spot indicated on the world map, one of these seagoing
rivers was rolling by, the Kuroshio of the Japanese, the Black Current:
heated by perpendicular rays from the tropical sun, it leaves the Bay
of Bengal, crosses the Strait of Malacca, goes up the shores of Asia,
and curves into the north Pacific as far as the Aleutian Islands,
carrying along trunks of camphor trees and other local items, the pure
indigo of its warm waters sharply contrasting with the ocean's waves.
It was this current the Nautilus was about to cross.
I watched it on the map with my eyes, I saw it lose itself in the
immenseness of the Pacific, and I felt myself swept along with it,
when Ned Land and Conseil appeared in the lounge doorway.

My two gallant companions stood petrified at the sight of the
wonders on display.

"Where are we?" the Canadian exclaimed.  "In the Quebec Museum?"

"Begging master's pardon," Conseil answered, "but this seems more
like the Sommerard artifacts exhibition!"

"My friends," I replied, signaling them to enter, "you're in neither
Canada nor France, but securely aboard the Nautilus, fifty meters
below sea level."

"If master says so, then so be it," Conseil answered.
"But in all honesty, this lounge is enough to astonish even someone
Flemish like myself."

"Indulge your astonishment, my friend, and have a look, because there's
plenty of work here for a classifier of your talents."

Conseil needed no encouraging.  Bending over the glass cases,
the gallant lad was already muttering choice words from the
naturalist's vocabulary:  class Gastropoda, family Buccinoidea,
genus cowry, species Cypraea madagascariensis, etc.

Meanwhile Ned Land, less dedicated to conchology, questioned me
about my interview with Captain Nemo.  Had I discovered who he was,
where he came from, where he was heading, how deep he was taking us?
In short, a thousand questions I had no time to answer.

I told him everything I knew--or, rather, everything I didn't know--
and I asked him what he had seen or heard on his part.

"Haven't seen or heard a thing!" the Canadian replied.
"I haven't even spotted the crew of this boat.  By any chance,
could they be electric too?"

"Electric?"

"Oh ye gods, I'm half tempted to believe it!  But back to you,
Professor Aronnax," Ned Land said, still hanging on to his ideas.
"Can't you tell me how many men are on board?  Ten, twenty,
fifty, a hundred?"

"I'm unable to answer you, Mr. Land.  And trust me on this:
for the time being, get rid of these notions of taking over
the Nautilus or escaping from it.  This boat is a masterpiece
of modern technology, and I'd be sorry to have missed it!
Many people would welcome the circumstances that have been handed us,
just to walk in the midst of these wonders.  So keep calm,
and let's see what's happening around us."

"See!" the harpooner exclaimed.  "There's nothing to see,
nothing we'll ever see from this sheet-iron prison!  We're simply
running around blindfolded--"

Ned Land was just pronouncing these last words when we were
suddenly plunged into darkness, utter darkness.  The ceiling lights
went out so quickly, my eyes literally ached, just as if we had
experienced the opposite sensation of going from the deepest gloom
to the brightest sunlight.

We stood stock-still, not knowing what surprise was waiting for us,
whether pleasant or unpleasant.  But a sliding sound became audible.
You could tell that some panels were shifting over the Nautilus's sides.

"It's the beginning of the end!"  Ned Land said.

". . . order Hydromedusa," Conseil muttered.

Suddenly, through two oblong openings, daylight appeared on both
sides of the lounge.  The liquid masses came into view, brightly lit
by the ship's electric outpourings.  We were separated from the sea
by two panes of glass.  Initially I shuddered at the thought
that these fragile partitions could break; but strong copper bands
secured them, giving them nearly infinite resistance.

The sea was clearly visible for a one-mile radius around
the Nautilus.  What a sight!  What pen could describe it?
Who could portray the effects of this light through these translucent
sheets of water, the subtlety of its progressive shadings into
the ocean's upper and lower strata?

The transparency of salt water has long been recognized.
Its clarity is believed to exceed that of spring water.
The mineral and organic substances it holds in suspension actually
increase its translucency.  In certain parts of the Caribbean Sea,
you can see the sandy bottom with startling distinctness as deep
as 145 meters down, and the penetrating power of the sun's
rays seems to give out only at a depth of 300 meters.
But in this fluid setting traveled by the Nautilus, our electric
glow was being generated in the very heart of the waves.
It was no longer illuminated water, it was liquid light.

If we accept the hypotheses of the microbiologist Ehrenberg--
who believes that these underwater depths are lit up by
phosphorescent organisms--nature has certainly saved one of her
most prodigious sights for residents of the sea, and I could
judge for myself from the thousandfold play of the light.
On both sides I had windows opening over these unexplored depths.
The darkness in the lounge enhanced the brightness outside, and we
stared as if this clear glass were the window of an immense aquarium.

The Nautilus seemed to be standing still.  This was due to the lack
of landmarks.  But streaks of water, parted by the ship's spur,
sometimes threaded before our eyes with extraordinary speed.

In wonderment, we leaned on our elbows before these show windows,
and our stunned silence remained unbroken until Conseil said:

"You wanted to see something, Ned my friend; well, now you have
something to see!"

"How unusual!" the Canadian put in, setting aside his tantrums
and getaway schemes while submitting to this irresistible allure.
"A man would go an even greater distance just to stare at such a sight!"

"Ah!"  I exclaimed.  "I see our captain's way of life!
He's found himself a separate world that saves its most astonishing
wonders just for him!"

"But where are the fish?" the Canadian ventured to observe.
"I don't see any fish!"

"Why would you care, Ned my friend?"  Conseil replied.
"Since you have no knowledge of them."

"Me?  A fisherman!"  Ned Land exclaimed.

And on this subject a dispute arose between the two friends, since both
were knowledgeable about fish, but from totally different standpoints.

Everyone knows that fish make up the fourth and last class in
the vertebrate branch.  They have been quite aptly defined as:
"cold-blooded vertebrates with a double circulatory system,
breathing through gills, and designed to live in water."
They consist of two distinct series:  the series of bony fish,
in other words, those whose spines have vertebrae made of bone;
and cartilaginous fish, in other words, those whose spines have
vertebrae made of cartilage.

Possibly the Canadian was familiar with this distinction, but Conseil
knew far more about it; and since he and Ned were now fast friends,
he just had to show off.  So he told the harpooner:

"Ned my friend, you're a slayer of fish, a highly skilled fisherman.
You've caught a large number of these fascinating animals.
But I'll bet you don't know how they're classified."

"Sure I do," the harpooner replied in all seriousness.
"They're classified into fish we eat and fish we don't eat!"

"Spoken like a true glutton," Conseil replied.  "But tell me,
are you familiar with the differences between bony fish
and cartilaginous fish?"

"Just maybe, Conseil."

"And how about the subdivisions of these two large classes?"

"I haven't the foggiest notion," the Canadian replied.

"All right, listen and learn, Ned my friend!  Bony fish are subdivided
into six orders.  Primo, the acanthopterygians, whose upper jaw is fully
formed and free-moving, and whose gills take the shape of a comb.
This order consists of fifteen families, in other words,
three-quarters of all known fish.  Example:  the common perch."

"Pretty fair eating," Ned Land replied.

"Secundo," Conseil went on, "the abdominals, whose pelvic fins hang
under the abdomen to the rear of the pectorals but aren't attached to
the shoulder bone, an order that's divided into five families and makes
up the great majority of freshwater fish.  Examples:  carp, pike."

"Ugh!" the Canadian put in with distinct scorn.  "You can keep
the freshwater fish!"

"Tertio," Conseil said, "the subbrachians, whose pelvic fins are
attached under the pectorals and hang directly from the shoulder bone.
