had dulled the proclivities of the Han women for brazen flirtation. And
turn around she did.

Before I could lower my head she had seen my face, and knew I was no
Han. I saw her eyebrows arch in surprise. But she seemed puzzled rather
than scared. Before she could make up her mind about me, however, her
car had swung out of the main tunnel on its predetermined course, and my
own automatically was closing up the gap to the car ahead. The passenger
in this one wore the uniform of a medical officer, but he did not turn
around before I swung out of main traffic to the little station at the
head of the shaft.

This particular shaft was intended to serve the very lowest levels
exclusively, and since its single car carried nothing but express
traffic, it was used only by repair men and other specialists who
occasionally had to descend to those levels.

       *       *       *       *       *

There were only three people on the little platform, which reminded me
very much of the subway stations of the Twentieth Century. Two men and a
girl stood facing the gate of the shaft, waiting for the car to return
from below. One of these was a soldier, apparently off duty, for though
he wore the scarlet military coat he carried no weapons other than his
knife. The other man wore nothing but sandals and a pair of loose short
pants of some heavy and serviceable material. I did not need to look at
the compact tool kit and the ray machines attached to his heavy belt,
nor the gorgeously jewelled armlet and diadem that he wore to know him
for a repair man.

The girl was quite scantily clad, but wore a mask, which was not unusual
among the Han women when they went forth on their flirtatious
expeditions, and there was something about the sinuous grace of her
movements that seemed familiar to me. She was making desperate love to
the repair man, whose attitude toward her was that of pleased but lofty
tolerance. The soldier, who was seeking no trouble, occupied himself
strictly with his own thoughts and paid little attention to them.

I stepped from my car, still carrying my bundle in which the "air ball"
was concealed, and the car shot away as I threw the release lever over.
Not so successful as the soldier in simulating lack of interest in the
amorous girl and her companion, I drew from the latter a stare of
haughty challenge, and the girl herself turned to look at me through her
mask.

She gasped as she did so, and shrank back in alarm. And I knew her then
in spite of her mask. She was the favorite of the Heaven-Born himself.

"Ngo-Lan!" I exclaimed before I could catch myself.

At the mention of her name, the soldier's head jerked up quickly, and
the girl herself gave a little cry of terror, shrinking against her
burly companion. This would mean death for her if it reached the ears of
her lord.

And her companion, arrogant in his immunity as a repair man, hesitated
not a second. His arm shot out toward the soldier, who was nearer to him
than I. There was the flash of a knife blade, and the soldier sagged on
his feet, then tumbled over like a sack of potatoes, and before my mind
had grasped the danger, he had swept the girl aside and was springing at
me.

       *       *       *       *       *

That I lived for a moment even was due to the devotion of my wife,
Wilma, who somewhere in the mountains to the east was standing loyally
before the control board of the air ball I carried.

For even as the Han leaped at me, the bundle containing the air ball,
which I had placed at my feet, shot diagonally upward, catching the
fellow in the middle of his leap, hurling him back against the grilled
gate of the elevator shaft, and pinning his lifeless body there.

An instant the girl gazed in speechless horror at what had been her
secret lover, then she threw herself at my feet, writhing and shrieking
in terror.

At this moment, the elevator shot to a sudden stop behind the grill, and
prepared for the worst, I faced it, disintegrator pistol raised.

But I lowered the pistol at once, with a sigh of relief. The elevator
was empty. For a moment I considered. I dared not leave either of these
bodies nor the girl behind in descending the shaft. At any moment other
passengers might glide out of the tunnel to take the elevator, and give
an alarm.

So I played the beam of the pistol for an instant on the two dead
bodies. They vanished, of course, into nothingness, as did part of the
station platform. The damage to the platform, however, would not
necessarily be interpreted as evidence of a prisoner escaping.

Then I threw open the elevator gate, dragging Ngo-Lan into the car and
stifling her hysterical shrieks, pressed the button that caused it to
shoot downward. In a few moments I stepped out several thousand feet
below, into a shaft that ran toward one of the Valley Gates.

The pistol again became serviceable, this time for the destruction of
the elevator, thus blocking any possible pursuit, yet without revealing
my flight.

Ngo-Lan fought like a cat, but despite her writhing, scratching and
biting, I bound and gagged her with her own clothing, and left her lying
in the tunnel while I stepped in a car and shot toward the gate.

As the car glided swiftly along the brilliantly lit but deserted tunnel
I conversed again with Wilma through the metallic speaker of the air
ball.

"The only obstacle now," I told her, "is the massive gate at the end of
the tunnel. The gate-guard, I think, is posted both outside and inside
the gate."

"In that case, Tony," she replied, "I will shoot the ball ahead, and
blow out the gate. When you hear it bump against the gate, throw
yourself flat in the car, for an instant later I will explode it. Then
you can rush through the gate into the night. Scout ships are now
hovering above, and they will see you with their ultroscopes, though the
darkness will leave you invisible to the Hans."

       *       *       *       *       *

With this the ball shot out of the car and flashed away, down the tunnel
ahead of me. I heard a distant metallic thump, and crouched low in the
speeding car, clapping my hands to my ears. The heavy detonation which
followed, struck me like a blow, and left me gasping for breath. The car
staggered like a living thing that had been struck, then gathered speed
again and shot forward toward the gaping black hole where the gate had
been.

I brought it to a stop at the pile of debris, and climbed through this
to freedom and the night. Stumblingly I made my way out into the open,
and waited.

Behind, and far above me on the mountain peak, the lights of the city
gleamed and flashed, while the iridescent beams of countless
disintegrator ray batteries on surrounding mountain peaks, played
continuously and nervously, criss-crossing in the sky above it.

Then with a swish, a line dropped out of the sky, and a little seat
rested on the ground beside me. I climbed into it, and without further
ado was whisked up into the swooper that floated a few hundred feet
above me.

A half an hour later I was deposited in a little forest glade where the
headquarters of the Wyoming Gang were located, and was greeted with a
frantic disregard for decorum by the Deputy Boss of the Wyomings, who
rushed upon me like a whirlwind, laughing, crying and whispering
endearments all in the same breath, while I squeezed her, Wilma, my
wife, until at last she gasped for mercy.




CHAPTER XIV

The Destruction of Lo-Tan


"How did you know I had been taken to Lo-Tan as a prisoner?" I asked the
little group of Wyoming Bosses who had assembled in Wilma's tent to
greet me. "And how does it happen that our gang is away out here in the
Rocky Mountains? I had expected, after the fall of Nu-Yok, that you
would join the forest ring around Bah-Flo (Buffalo I called it in the
Twentieth Century) or the forces beleaguering Bos-Tan."

They explained that my encounter with the Han airship had been followed
carefully by several scopemen. They had seen my swooper shoot skyward
out of control, and had followed it with their telultronoscopes until it
had been caught in a gale at a high level, and wafted swiftly westward.
Ultronophone warnings had been broadcast, asking western Gangs to rescue
me if possible. Few of the Gangs west of the Alleghanies, however, had
any swoopers, and though I was frequently reported, no attempts could be
made to rescue me. Scopemen had reported my capture by the Han ground
post, and my probable incarceration in Lo-Tan.

The Rocky Mountain Gangs, in planning their campaign against Lo-Tan, had
appealed to the east for help, and Wilma had led the Wyoming veterans
westward, though the other eastern Gang had divided their aid between
the armies before Bah-Flo and Bos-Tan.

The heavy bombardment which I had heard from Lo-Tan, they told me, was
merely a test of the enemy's tactics and strength, but it accomplished
little other than to develop that the Hans had the mountains and peaks
thickly planted with rocket gunners of their own. It was almost
impossible to locate these gun posts, for they were well camouflaged
from air observation, and widely scattered; nor did they reveal their
positions when they went into action as did their ray batteries.

The Hans apparently were abandoning their rays except for air defense. I
told what I knew of the Han plans for abandoning the city, and their
escape tunnels. On the strength of this, a general council of Gang
Bosses was called. This council agreed that immediate action was
necessary, for my escape from the city probably would be suspected, and
San-Lan would be inclined to start an exodus at once.

       *       *       *       *       *

As a matter of fact, the destruction of the city presented no real
problem to us at all. Explosive air balls could be sent against any
target under a control that could not be better were their operators
riding within them, and with no risk to the operators. When a ball was
exploded on its target by the operator, or destroyed by accident, he
simply reported the fact to the supply division, and a fresh one was
placed on the jump-off, tuned to his controls.

To my own Gang, the Wyomings, the Council delegated the destruction of
the escape tunnels of the enemy. We had a comfortably located camp in a
wooded canyon, some hundred and thirty miles northeast of the city, with
about 500 men, most of whom were bayonet-gunners, 350 girls as
long-gunners and control-board operators, 91 control boards and about
250 five-foot, inertron-protected air balls, of which 200 were of the
explosive variety.

I ordered all control boards manned, taking Number One myself, and
instructed the others to follow my lead in single file, at the minimum
interval of safety, with their projectiles set for signal rather than
contact detonation.

In my mind I paid humble tribute to the ingenuity of our engineers as I
gently twisted the lever that shot my projectile vertically into the air
from the jump-off clearing some half mile away.

The control board before me was a compact contrivance about five feet
square. The center of it contained a four-foot viewplate. Whatever view
was picked up by the ultronoscope "eye" of the air ball was
automatically broadcast on an accurate tuning channel to this viewplate
by the automatic mechanism of the projectile. In turn my control board
broadcast the signals which automatically controlled the movements of
the ball.

Above and below the viewplate were the pointers and the swinging needles
which indicated the speed and angle of vertical movement, the altimeter,
the directional compass, and the horizontal speed and distance
indicators.

At my left hand was the lever by which I could set the "eye" for
penetrative, normal or varying degrees of telescopic vision, and at my
right the universally jointed stick (much like the "joy stick" of the
ancient airplanes) with its speed control button on the top, with which
the ball was directionally "pointed" and controlled.

The manipulation of these levers I had found, with a very little
practice, most instinctive and simple.

So, as I have said, I pointed my projectile straight up and let it shoot
to the height of two miles. Then I levelled it off, and shot it at full
speed (about 500 miles an hour with no allowance for air currents) in a
general southwesterly direction, while I eased my controls until I
brought in the telescopic view of Lo-Tan. I centered the picture of the
city on the crossed hairlines in the middle of my viewpoint, and watched
its image grow.

       *       *       *       *       *

In about fifteen minutes the "string" of air balls was before the city,
and speaking in my ultrophone I gave the order to halt, while I swung
the scope control to the penetrative setting and let my "eye" rove
slowly back and forth through the walls of the city, hunting for a spot
from which I might get my bearings. At last, after many penetrations, I
managed to bring in a view of the head of the shaft at the bottom of
which I knew the tunnels were located, and saw that we were none too
soon, for all the corridors leading toward this shaft were packed with
Hans waiting their turn to descend.

Slowly I let my "eye" retreat down one of these corridors until I
"pulled it out" through the outer wall of the city. There I held the
spot on the crossed hairlines and ordered Number Two Operator to my
control board, where I pointed out to her the exact spot where I desired
a breach in the wall. Returning to her own board, she withdrew her ball
from the "string," and focussing on this spot in the wall, eased her
projectile into contact with it and detonated.

The atomic force of the explosion shattered a vast section of the wall,
and for the moment I feared I had balked my own game by not having
provided a less powerful projectile.

After some fumbling, however, I was able to maneuver my ball through a
gap in the debris and find the corridor I was seeking. Down this
corridor I sent it at the speed of a Twentieth Century bullet, (this is
to say, about half speed) to spare myself the sight of the slaughter as
it cut a swath down the closely packed column of the enemy. If there
were any it did not kill, I knew they would be taken care of by the
other balls in the string which would follow.

I had to slow it up, however, near the head of the shaft to take my
bearings; and a sea of evil faces, contorted with livid terror, looked
at me from my viewplate. But not even the terror could conceal the hate
in those faces, and there arose in my mind the picture of their long
centuries of ruthless cruelty to my race, and the hopelessness of
changing the tigerish nature of these Hans. So I steeled myself, and
drove the ball again and again into that sea of faces, until I had
cleared the station platform of any living enemy, and sent the survivors
crushing their way madly along the corridors away from it. There was
blinding flash or two on my viewplate as some Han officer tried his ray
pistol on my projectile, but that was all, except that he must have
disintegrated many of his fellows, for our balls were sheathed in
inertron, and suffered no damage themselves.

       *       *       *       *       *

Cautioning my unit to follow carefully, I pushed my control lever all
the way forward until my "eye" pointed down, and there appeared on my
viewplate the smooth cylindrical interior of the shaft, fading down
toward the base of the mountain, and like a tiny speck, far, far down,
was the car, descending with its last load.

I dropped my ball on it, battering it down to the bottom of the shaft,
and with hammer-like blows flattening the wreckage, that I might squeeze
the ball out of the shaft at the lower station.

It emerged into the great vaulted excavation, capable of holding a
thousand or more persons, from which the various escape tunnels
radiated. Down these tunnels the last remnants of a crowd of fugitives
were disappearing, while red-coated soldiers guided the traffic and
suppressed disorder with the threat of their spears, and the occasional
flourish of a ray pistol.

As I floated my ball out into the middle of the artificial cavern I
could see them stagger back in terror. Again the blinding flashes of a
few ray pistols, and instantaneous borings of the rays into the walls.
The red coats nearest the escape tunnels fled down them in panic. Those
whose escape I blocked dropped their weapons and shrank back against the
smooth, iridescent green walls.

I marshalled the rest of my string carefully into the cavern, and
counted the tunnel entrances, slowly swinging my "eye" around the
semicircle of them. There were 26 corridors diverging to the north and
west. I decided to send three balls down each, leave 12 in the cavern,
then detonate them all at once.

Assigning my operators to their corridors, I ordered intervals of five
miles between them, and taking the lead down the first corridor, I
ordered "go."

Soon my ball overtook the stream of fugitives, smashing them down
despite ray pistols and even rockets that were shot against it. On and
on I drove it, time and again battering it through detachments of
fleeing Hans, while the distance register on my board climbed to ten,
twenty, fifty miles.

Then I called a halt, and suspended my previous orders. I had had no
idea that the Hans had bored these tunnels for such distances under the
surface of the ground as this. It would be necessary to trace them to
their ends and locate their new underground cities in which they
expected to establish themselves, and in which many had established
themselves by now, no doubt.

Fifty miles of air in these corridors, I thought, ought to prove a
pretty good cushion against the shock of detonation in the cavern. So I
ordered detonation of the twelve balls we had left behind. As I
expected, there was little effect from it so far out in the tunnels.

But from our scopemen who were covering the city from the outside, I
learned that the effects of the explosion on the mountain were terrific;
far more than I had dared to hope for.

       *       *       *       *       *

The mountain itself burst asunder in several spots, throwing out
thousands of tons of earth and rock. One-half the city itself tore loose
and slid downward, lost in the debris of the avalanche of which it was a
part. The remainder, wrenched and convulsed like a living thing in
agony, cracked, crumbled and split, towers tumbling down and great
fissures appearing in its walls. Its power plant and electro machinery
went out of commission. Fifteen of its scout ships hovering in the air
directly above, robbed of the power broadcast and their repeller beams
disappearing, crashed down into the ruins.

But out in the escape tunnels, we continued our explorations, now sure
that no warnings could be broadcast to the tunnel exits, and mowed down
contingent after contingent of the hated yellow men.

My register showed seventy-five miles before I came to the end of the
tunnel, and drove my ball out into a vast underground city of great,
brilliantly illuminated corridors, some of them hundreds of feet high
and wide. The architectural scheme was one of lace-like structures of
curving lines and of indescribable beauty.

Word had reached us now of the destruction of the city itself, so that
no necessity existed for destroying the escape tunnels. In consequence,
I ordered the two operators, who were following me, to send their balls
out into this underground city, seeking the shaft which the Hans were
sure to have as a secret exit to the surface of the earth above.

But at this juncture events of transcending importance interrupted my
plans for a thorough exploration of these new subterranean cities of the
Hans. I detonated my projectile at once and ordered all of the operators
