
Do the lungs ever rest?

You never stop breathing, not even in the night. But if you watch your
own breathing you will notice a little pause between the breaths. Each
pause is a rest. But the lungs are very steady workers, both by night
and by day. The least we can do for them, is to give them fresh air and
plenty of room to work in.

You may say: "We can't give them more room than they have. They are
shut up in our chests."

I have seen people who wore such tight clothes that their lungs did not
have room to take a full breath. If any part of the lungs can not
expand, it will become useless. If your lungs can not take in air enough
to purify the blood, you can not be so well and strong as God intended,
and your life will be shortened.

If some one was sewing for you, you would not think of shutting her up
in a little place where she could not move her hands freely. The lungs
are breathing for you, and need room enough to do their work.


THE AIR.

The lungs breathe out the waste matter that they have taken from the
blood. This waste matter poisons the air. If we should close all the
doors and windows, and the fireplace or opening into the chimney, and
leave not even a crack by which the fresh air could come in, we would
die simply from staying in such a room. The lungs could not do their
work for the blood, and the blood could not do its work for the body.

Impure air-will poison you. You should not breathe it. If your head
aches, and you feel dull and sleepy from being in a close room, a run in
the fresh air will make you feel better.

The good, pure air makes your blood pure; and the blood then flows
quickly through your whole body and refreshes every part.

We must be careful not to stay in close rooms in the day-time, nor sleep
in close rooms at night. We must not keep out the fresh air that our
bodies so much need.

It is better to breathe through the nose than through the mouth. You can
soon learn to do so, if you try to keep your mouth shut when walking or
running.

If you keep the mouth shut and breathe through the nose, the little
hairs on the inside of the nose will catch the dust or other impurities
that are floating in the air, and so save their going to the lungs. You
will get out of breath less quickly when running if you keep your mouth
shut.


DOES ALCOHOL DO ANY HARM TO THE LUNGS?

The little air-cells of the lungs have very delicate muscular (m[)u]s'ku
lar) walls. Every time we breathe, these walls have to move. The muscles
of the chest must also move, as you can all notice in yourselves, as you
breathe.

All this muscular work, as well as that of the stomach and heart, is
directed by the nerves.

You have learned already what alcohol will do to muscles and nerves, so
you are ready to answer for stomach, for heart, and for lungs. Is
alcohol a help to them?


REVIEW QUESTIONS.

          1. Besides carrying food all over the body, what
          other work does the blood do?

          2. Why does the blood in the veins look blue?

          3. Where is the blood made pure and red again?

          4. Where is it sent, from the lungs?

          5. What must the lungs have in order to do this
          work?

          6. When do the lungs rest?

          7. Why should we not wear tight clothes?

          8. How does the air in a room become spoiled?

          9. How can we keep it fresh and pure?

          10. How should we breathe?

          11. Why is it better to breathe through the nose
          than through the mouth?

          12. Why is alcohol not good for the lungs?




CHAPTER XVI.

THE SKIN.


[Illustration: T]HERE is another part of your body carrying away waste
matter all the time--it is the skin.

The body is covered with skin. It is also lined with a more delicate
kind of skin. You can see where the outside skin and the lining skin
meet at your lips.

There is a thin outside layer of skin which we can pull off without
hurting ourselves; but I advise you not to do so. Because under the
outside skin is the true skin, which is so full of little nerves that it
will feel the least touch as pain. When the outer skin, which protects
it, is torn away, we must cover the true skin to keep it from harm.

In hot weather, or when any one has been working or playing hard, the
face, and sometimes the whole body, is covered with little drops of
water. We call these drops perspiration (p[~e]r sp[)i] r[=a]'sh[)u]n).

[Illustration: _Perspiratory tube._]

Where does it come from? It comes through many tiny holes in the skin,
called pores (p[=o]rz). Every pore is the mouth of a tiny tube which is
carrying off waste matter and water from your body. If you could piece
together all these little perspiration tubes that are in the skin of one
person, they would make a line more than three miles long.

Sometimes, you can not see the perspiration, because there is not enough
of it to form drops. But it is always coming out through your skin, both
in winter and summer. Your body is kept healthy by having its worn-out
matter carried off in this way, as well as in other ways.


THE NAILS.

The nails grow from the skin.

The finger nails are little shields to protect the ends of your fingers
from getting hurt. These finger ends are full of tiny nerves, and would
be badly off without such shields. No one likes to see nails that have
been bitten.


CARE OF THE SKIN.

Waste matter is all the time passing out through the perspiration tubes
in the skin. This waste matter must not be left to clog up the little
openings of the tubes. It should be washed off with soap and water.

When children have been playing out-of-doors, they often have very dirty
hands and faces. Any one can see, then, that they need to be washed. But
even if they had been in the cleanest place all day and had not touched
any thing dirty, they would still need the washing; for the waste matter
that comes from the inside of the body is just as hurtful as the mud or
dust of the street. You do not see it so plainly, because it comes out
very little at a time. Wash it off well, and your skin will be fresh and
healthy, and able to do its work. If the skin could not do its work, you
would die.

Do not keep on your rubber boots or shoes all through school-time.
Rubber will not let the perspiration pass off, so the little pores get
clogged and your feet begin to feel uncomfortable, or your head may
ache. No part can fail to do its work without causing trouble to the
rest of the body. But you should always wear rubbers out-of-doors when
the ground is wet. Certainly, they are very useful then.

When you are out in the fresh air, you are giving the other parts of
your body such a good chance to perspire, that your feet can bear a
little shutting up. But as soon as you come into the house, take the
rubbers off.

Now that you know what the skin is doing all the time, you will
understand that the clothes worn next to your skin are full of little
worn-out particles, brought out by the perspiration. When these clothes
are taken off at night, they should be so spread out, that they will
air well before morning. Never wear any of the clothes through the
night, that you have worn during the day.

Do not roll up your night-dress in the morning and put it under your
pillow. Give it first a good airing at the window and then hang it where
the air can reach it all day. By so doing, you will have sweeter sleep
at night.

You are old enough to throw the bed-clothes off from the bed, before
leaving your rooms in the morning. In this way, the bed and bed-clothes
may have a good airing. Be sure to give them time enough for this.


WORK OF THE BODY.

You have now learned about four important kinds of work:--

1st. The stomach prepares the food for the blood to take.

2d. The blood is pumped out of the heart to carry food to every part of
the body, and to take away worn-out matter.

3d. The lungs use fresh air in making the dark, impure blood, bright and
pure again.

4th. The skin carries away waste matter through the little perspiration
tubes.

All this work goes on, day and night, without our needing to think about
it at all; for messages are sent to the muscles by the nerves which keep
them faithfully at work, whether we know it or not.


REVIEW QUESTIONS.

          1. What covers the body?

          2. What lines the body?

          3. Where are the nerves of the skin?

          4. What is perspiration? What is the common name
          for it?

          5. What are the pores of the skin?

          6. How does the perspiration help to keep you
          well?

          7. Of what use are the nails?

          8. How should they be kept?

          9. What care should be taken of the skin?

          10. Why should you not wear rubber boots or
          overshoes in the house?

          11. Why should you change under-clothing night and
          morning?

          12. Where should the night-dress be placed in the
          morning?

          13. What should be done with the bed-clothes? Why?

          14. Name the four kinds of work about which you
          have learned.

          15. How are the organs of the body kept at work?




CHAPTER XVII.

THE SENSES.


[Illustration: W]E have five ways of learning about all things around
us. We can see them, touch them, taste them, smell them, or hear them.
Sight, touch, taste, smell, and hearing, are called the five senses.

You already know something about them, for you are using them all the
time.

In this lesson, you will learn a little more about seeing and hearing.


THE EYES.

In the middle of your eye is a round, black spot, called the pupil. This
pupil is only a hole with a muscle around it. When you are in the light,
the muscle draws up, and makes the pupil small, because you can get all
the light you need through a small opening. When you are in the dark,
the muscle stretches, and opens the pupil wide to let in more light.

The pupils of the cat's eyes are very large in the dark. They want all
the light they can get, to see if there are any mice about.

[Illustration: _The eyelashes and the tear-glands._]

The pupil of the eye opens into a little, round room where the nerve of
sight is. This is a safe place for this delicate nerve, which can not
bear too much light. It carries to the brain an account of every thing
we see.

We might say the eye is taking pictures for us all day long, and that
the nerve of sight is describing these pictures to the brain.


CARE OF THE EYES.

The nerves of sight need great care, for they are very delicate.

Do not face a bright light when you are reading or studying. While
writing, you should sit so that the light will come from the left side;
then the shadow of your hand will not fall upon your work.

One or two true stories may help you to remember that you must take good
care of your eyes.

The nerve of sight can not bear too bright a light. It asks to have the
pupil made small, and even the eyelid curtains put down, when the light
is too strong.

Once, there was a boy who said boastfully to his playmates: "Let us see
which of us can look straight at the sun for the longest time."

Then they foolishly began to look at the sun. The delicate nerves of
sight felt a sharp pain, and begged to have the pupils made as small as
possible and the eyelid curtains put down.

But the foolish boys said "No." They were trying to see which would bear
it the longest. Great harm was done to the brains as well as eyes of
both these boys. The one who looked longest at the sun died in
consequence of his foolish act.

The second story is about a little boy who tried to turn his eyes to
imitate a schoolmate who was cross-eyed. He turned them; but he could
not turn them back again. Although he is now a gentleman more than fifty
years old and has had much painful work done upon his eyes, the doctors
have never been able to set them quite right.

You see from the first story, that you must be careful not to give your
eyes too much light. But you must also be sure to give them light
enough.

When one tries to read in the twilight, the little nerve of sight says:
"Give me more light; I am hurt, by trying to see in the dark."

If you should kill these delicate nerves, no others would ever grow in
place of them, and you would never be able to see again.


THE EARS.

What you call your ears are only pieces of gristle, so curved as to
catch the sounds and pass them along to the true ears. These are deeper
in the head, where the nerve of hearing is waiting to send an account
of each sound to the brain.


CARE OF THE EARS.

The ear nerve is in less danger than that of the eye. Careless children
