are Yardsticks, with more coming every year. The older people hold
the key positions and the power. Of course there's a lot of friction
and resentment. But you know all that."

"Certainly." Wolzek nodded. "All that and more. Much more. I know that
up until a few years ago, no Yardstick held any public office or
government position. Now they're starting to move in, particularly in
Europasia. But there's so many of them now--adults, in their early
twenties--that the pressure is building up. They're impatient, getting
out of hand. They won't wait until the old folks die off. They want
control now. And if they ever manage to get it, we're finished for
good."

"Impossible!" Eric said.

"Impossible?" Wolzek's voice was a mocking echo. "You sit here in this
tomb and when somebody tells you that the world you know has died, you
refuse to believe it. Even though every night, after you sneak home
and huddle up inside your room trying not to be noticed, ten guards
patrol this place with subatomics, so the Yardstick gangs won't break
in and take over. So they won't do what they did down south--overrun
the office buildings and the factories and break them up, cut them
down to size for living quarters."

"But they were stopped," Eric objected. "I saw it on the telescreen,
the security forces stopped them--"

"Crapola!" Wolzek pronounced the archaicism with studied care. "You
saw films. Faked films. Have you ever traveled, Eric? Ever been down
south and seen conditions there?"

"Nobody travels nowadays. You know that. Priorities."

"I travel, Eric. And I know. Security forces don't suppress anything
in the south these days. Because they're made up of Yardsticks now;
that's right, Yardsticks exclusively. And in a few years that's the
way it will be up here. Did you ever hear about the Chicagee riots?"

"You mean last year, when the Yardsticks tried to take over the
synthetic plants at the Stockyards?"

"Tried? They _succeeded_. The workers ousted management. Over fifty
thousand were killed in the revolution--oh, don't look so shocked,
that's the right word for it!--but the Yardsticks won out in the end."

"But the telescreen showed--"

"Damn the telescreen! I know because I happened to be there when it
happened. And if _you_ had been there, you and a few million other
ostriches who sit with your heads buried in telescreens, maybe we
could have stopped them."

"I don't believe it. I can't!"

"All right. Think back. That was last year. And since the first of
this year, what's happened to the standard size meat-ration?"

"They cut it in half," Eric admitted. "But that's because of Ag
shortages, according to the telescreen reports--" He stood up,
gulping. "Look here, I'm not going to listen to any more of this kind
of talk. By rights, I ought to turn your name in."

"Go ahead." Wolzek waved his hand. "It's happened before. I was
reported when I blasted the Yardsticks who shot my father down when he
tried to land his jet in a southern field. I was reported when they
killed Annette."

"Annette?"

"You remember that name, don't you, Eric? Your first girl, wasn't she?
Well, I'm the guy who married her. Yes, and I'm the guy who talked her
into having a baby without the benefit of Leff shots. Sure, it's
illegal, and only a few of us ever try it any more, but we both agreed
that we wanted it that way. A real, life-sized, normal baby. Or
abnormal, according to the Yardsticks and the stupid government.

"It was a dirty scum of a government doctor who let her die on the
table when he discovered the child weighed seven pounds. That's when I
really woke up, Eric. That's when I knew there was going to be only
one decision to make in the future--kill or be killed."

"Annette. She died, you say?"

Wolzek moved over and put his hand on Eric's shoulder. "You never
married, did you, Eric? I think I know why. It's because you felt the
way I did about it. You wanted a regular kid, not a Yardstick. Only
you didn't quite have the guts to try and beat the law. Well, you'll
need guts now, because it's getting to the point where the law can't
protect you any more. The government is made up of old men, and
they're afraid to take action. In a few years they'll be pushed out of
office all over the world. We'll have Yardstick government then, all
the way, and Yardstick law. And that means they'll cut us down to
size."

"But what can you--we--do about it?"

"Plenty. There's still a little time. If we Naturalists can only get
together, stop being just a name and become an organized force, maybe
the ending will be different. We've got to try, in any case."

"The Yardsticks are human beings, just like us," Eric said, slowly.
"We can't just declare war on them, wipe them out. It's not their
_fault_ they were born that way."

Wolzek nodded. "I know. Nothing is anybody's fault, really. This whole
business began in good faith. Leffingwell and some of the other
geniuses saw a problem and offered what they sincerely believed was a
solution."

"But it didn't work," Eric murmured.

"Wrong. It worked only too well. That's the trouble. Sure, we
eliminated our difficulties on the physical level. In less than thirty
years we've reached a point where there's no longer any danger of
overcrowding or starvation. But the psychological factor is something
we can't cope with. We thought we'd ended war and the possibilities of
war a long time ago. But it isn't foreign enemies we must fear today.
We've created a nation divided into Davids and Goliaths--and David and
Goliath are always enemies."

"David killed Goliath," Eric said. "Does that mean we're going to
die?"

"Only if we're as stupid as Goliath was. Only if we wear our
telescreens like invincible armor and pay no attention to the
slingshot in David's hands."

Eric lit a reef. "All right," he said. "You don't have to lecture. I'm
willing to join. But I'm no Goliath, really. I never had a fight in my
life. What could I do to help?"

"You're a rental agent. You have the keys to this building. The guards
don't bother you by day, do they? You come and go as you please. That
means you can get into the cellars. You can help us move the stuff
down there. And we'll take care of the guards some night, after that."

"I don't understand."

The friendly pressure on Eric's shoulder became a fierce grip. "You
don't have to understand. All you do is let us plant the stuff in the
cellars and let us get rid of the guards afterwards in our own way.
The Yardsticks will do the rest."

"You mean, take over the building when it's not protected?"

"Of course. They'll take it over completely, once they see there's no
opposition. And they'll remodel it to suit themselves, and within a
month there'll be ten thousand Yardsticks sitting in this place."

"The government will never stand still for that."

"Wake up! It's happening all over, all the time, and nothing is being
done to prevent it. Security is too weak and officials are too timid
to risk open warfare. So the Yardsticks win, and I'm going to see that
they win this place."

"But how will that help us?"

"You don't see it yet, do you? And neither will the Yardsticks. Until,
some fine day three or four months from now, we get around to what
will be planted in the cellars. Somebody will throw a switch, miles
away, and--boom!"

"Wolzek, you couldn't--"

"It's coming. Not only here, but in fifty other places. We've got to
fight fire with fire, Eric. It's our only chance. Bring this thing out
into the open. Make the government realize this is war. Civil war.
That's the only way to force them to take real action. We can't do it
any other way; it's illegal to organize politically, and petitions do
no good. We can't get a hearing. Well, they'll have to listen to the
explosions."

"I just don't know--"

"Maybe you're the one who should have married Annette after all."
Wolzek's voice was cold. "Maybe you could have watched her, watched
her scream and beg and die, and never wanted to move a muscle to do
anything about it afterwards. Maybe you're the model citizen, Eric;
you and the thousands of others who are standing by and letting the
Yardsticks chop us down, one by one. They say in Nature it's the
survival of the fittest. Well, perhaps you're not fit to survive."

Eric wasn't listening. "She screamed," he said. "You heard her
scream?"

Wolzek nodded. "I can still hear her. I'll always hear her."

"Yes." Eric blinked abruptly. "When do we start?"

Wolzek smiled at him. It was a pretty good smile for a man who can
always hear screaming. "I knew I could count on you," he murmured.
"Nothing like old friends."

"Funny, isn't it?" Eric tried to match his smile. "The way things work
out. You and I being kids together. You marrying my girl. And then, us
meeting up again this way."

"Yes," said Wolzek, and he wasn't smiling now. "I guess it's a small
world."




10. Harry Collins--2032


Harry's son's house was on the outskirts of Washington, near what had
once been called Gettysburg. Harry was surprised to find that it _was_
a house, and a rather large one, despite the fact that almost all the
furniture had been scaled down proportionately to fit the needs of a
man three feet high.

But then, Harry was growing accustomed to surprises.

He found a room of his own, ready and waiting, on the second floor;
here the furniture was of almost antique vintage, but adequate in
size. And here, in an atmosphere of unaccustomed comfort, he could
talk.

"So you're a physician, eh?" Harry gazed down into the diminutive
face, striving to accept the fact that he was speaking to a mature
adult. His own son--his and Sue's--a grown man and a doctor! It seemed
incredible. But then, nothing was more incredible than the knowledge
that he was actually here, in his child's home.

"We're all specialists in one field or another," his son explained.
"Every one of us born and surviving during the early experimental
period received our schooling under a plan Leffingwell set up. It was
part of his conditional agreement that we become wards of the state.
He knew the time might come when we'd be needed."

"But why wasn't all this done openly?"

"You know the answer to that. There was no way of educating us under
the prevailing system, and there was always a danger we might be
singled out as freaks who must be destroyed--particularly in those
early years. So Leffingwell relied on secrecy, just as he did during
his experimentation period. You know how _you_ felt about that. You
believed innocent people were being murdered. Would you have listened
to his explanations, accepted the fact that his work was worth the
cost of a few lives so that future billions of human beings might be
saved? No, there was no time for explanation or indoctrination.
Leffingwell chose concealment."

"Yes," Harry sighed. "I understand that better now, I think. But I
couldn't see it then, when I tried to kill him." He flushed. "And I
still can't quite comprehend why he spared me after that attempt."

"Because he wasn't the monster you thought him to be. When I pleaded
with him--"

"_You_ were the one!"

Harry's son turned away. "Yes. When I was told who you really were, I
went to him. But I was only a child, remember that. And he didn't
spare you out of sentimentality. He had a purpose."

"A purpose in sending me to prison, letting me rot all these years
while--"

"While I grew up. I and the others like myself. And while the world
outside changed." Harry's son smiled. "Your friend Richard Wade was
right, you know. He guessed a great deal of the truth. Leffingwell and
Manschoff and the rest of their associates deliberately set out to
assemble a select group of nonconformists--men of specialized talents
and outlooks. There were over three hundred of you at Stark Falls.
Richard Wade knew why."

"And so he was dragged off and murdered."

"Murdered? No, Father, he's very much alive, I assure you. In fact,
he'll be here tonight."

"But why was he taken away so abruptly, without any warning?"

"He was needed. There was a crisis, when Dr. Leffingwell died."
Harry's son sighed. "You didn't know about that, did you? There's so
much for you to learn. But I'll let him tell you himself, when you see
him this evening."

Richard Wade told him. And so did William Chang and Lars Neilstrom and
all the others. During the ensuing weeks, Harry saw each of them
again. But Wade's explanation was sufficient.

"I was right," he said. "There was no Underground when we were at
Stark Falls. What I didn't realize, though, was that there was an
Overground."

"Overground?"

"You might call it that. Leffingwell and his staff formed the nucleus.
They foresaw the social crisis which lay ahead, when the world became
physically divided into the tall and the short, the young and the old.
They knew there'd be a need of individuality then--and they _did_
create a stockpile. A stockpile of the younger generation, specially
educated; a stockpile of the older generation, carefully selected. We
conspicuous rebels were incarcerated and given an opportunity to think
the problem through, with limited contact with one another's
viewpoints."

"But why weren't we told the truth at the beginning, allowed to meet
face-to-face and make some sensible plans for the future?"

Harry's son interrupted. "Because Dr. Leffingwell realized this would
defeat the ultimate purpose. You'd have formed your own in-group, as
prisoners, dedicated to your own welfare. There'd be emotional ties--"

"I still don't know what you're talking about. What are we supposed to
prepare for now?"

Richard Wade shrugged. "Leffingwell had it all planned. He foresaw
that when the first generation of Yardsticks--that's what they call
themselves, you know--came of age, there'd be social unrest. The young
people would want to take over, and the older generation would try to
remain in positions of power. It was his belief that tensions could be
alleviated only by proper leadership on both sides.

"He himself had an important voice in government circles. He set up an
arrangement whereby a certain number of posts would be assigned to
people of his choice, both young and old. Similarly, in the various
professions, there'd be room for appointees he'd select. Given a year
or two of training, Leffingwell felt that we'd be ready for these
positions. Young men, like your son, would be placed in key spots
where their influence would be helpful with the Yardsticks. Older men
such as yourself would go into other assignments--in communications
media, chiefly. The skillful use of group-psychological techniques
could avert open clashes. He predicted a danger-period lasting about
twenty years--roughly, from 2030 to 2050. Once we weathered that span,
equilibrium would be regained, as a second and third generation came
along and the elders became a small minority. If we did our work well
and eliminated the sources of prejudice, friction and hostility, the
transition could be made. The Overground in governmental circles would
finance us. This was Leffingwell's plan, his dream."

"You speak in the past tense," Harry said.

"Yes." Wade's voice was harsh. "Because Leffingwell is dead, of
cerebral hemorrhage. And his plan died with him. Oh, we still have
some connections in government; enough to get men like yourself out of
Stark Falls. But things have moved too swiftly. The Yardsticks are
already on the march. The people in power--even those we relied
upon--are getting frightened. They can't see that there's time left to
train us to take over. And frankly, I'm afraid most of them have no
inclination to give up their present power. They intend to use
force."

"But you talk as though the Yardsticks were united."

"They are uniting, and swiftly. Remember the Naturalists?"

Harry nodded, slowly. "I was one, once. Or thought I was."

"You were a liberal. I'm talking about the _new_ Naturalists. The ones
bent on actual revolution."

"Revolution?"

"That's the word. And that's the situation. It's coming to a head,
fast."

"And how will we prevent it?"

"I don't know." Harry's son stared up at him. "Most of us believe it's
too late to prevent it. Our immediate problem will be survival. The
Naturalists want control for themselves. The Yardsticks intend to
destroy the power of the older generation. And we feel that if matters
come to a head soon, the government itself may turn on us, too.
They'll have to."

"In other words," said Harry, "we stand alone."

"Fall alone, more likely," Wade corrected.

"How many of us are there?"

"About six hundred," said Harry's son. "Located in private homes
throughout this eastern area. If there's violence, we don't have a
chance of controlling the situation."

"But we can survive. As I see it, that's our only salvation at the
moment--to somehow survive the coming conflict. Then, perhaps, we can
find a way to function as Leffingwell planned."

"We'll never survive here. They'll use every conceivable weapon."

"But since there's no open break with the government yet, we could
still presumably arrange for transportation facilities."

"To where?"

"Some spot in which we could weather the storm. What about
Leffingwell's old hideout?"

"The units are still standing." Harry's son nodded. "Yes, that's a
possibility. But what about food?"

"Grizek."

"What?"

"Friend of mine," Harry told him. "Look, we're going to have to work
fast. And yet we've got to do it in a way that won't attract any
attention; not even from the government. I suggest we set up an
organizing committee and make plans." He frowned. "How much time do
you think we have--a year or so?"

"Six months," his son hazarded.

"Four, at most," Wade said. "Haven't you been getting the full reports
on those riots? Pretty soon they'll declare a state of national
emergency and then nobody will be going anywhere."

"All right." Harry Collins grinned. "We'll do it in four months."

       *       *       *       *       *

Actually, as it worked out, they did it in just a day or so under
three.

Five hundred and forty-two men moved by jetter to Colorado Springs;
thence, by helicopter, to the canyon hideaway. They moved in small
groups, a few each week. Harry himself had already established the
liaison system, and he was based at Grizek's ranch. Grizek was dead,
but Bassett and Tom Lowery remained and they cooperated. Food would be
ready for the 'copters that came out of the canyon.

The canyon installation itself was deserted, and the only problem it
presented was one of rehabilitation. The first contingent took over.

The jetters carried more than their human cargo; they were filled with
equipment of all sorts--microscans and laboratory instruments and
devices for communication. By the time the entire group was assembled,
they had the necessary implementation for study and research. It was a
well-conceived and well-executed operation.

To his surprise, Harry found himself acting as the leader of the
expedition, and he continued in this capacity after they were
established. The irony of the situation did not escape him; to all
intents and purposes he was now ruling the very domain in which he had
once languished as a prisoner.

But with Wade and Chang and the others, he set up a provisional system
which worked out very well. And proved very helpful, once the news
reached them that open revolt had begun in the world outside.

A battered 'copter landed one evening at dusk, and the wounded pilot
poured out his message, then his life's blood.

Angelisco was gone. Washington was gone. The Naturalists had struck,
using the old, outlawed weapons. And it was the same abroad, according
to the few garbled reports thereafter obtainable only _via_ ancient
shortwave devices.

From then on, nobody left the canyon except on weekly 'copter-lifts to
the ranch grazing lands for fresh supplies. Fortunately, that area was
undisturbed, and so were its laconic occupants. They neither knew nor
cared what went on in the world outside; what cities were reported
destroyed, what forces triumphed or went down into defeat, what
activity or radioactivity prevailed.

Life in the canyon flowed on, more peacefully than the river cleaving
its center. There was much to do and much to learn. It was, actually,
a monastic existence, compounded of frugality, abstinence, continence
and devotion to scholarly pursuits. Within a year, gardens flourished;
within two years herds grazed the grassy slopes; within three years
cloth was being woven on looms in the ancient way and most of the
homespun arts of an agrarian society had been revived. Men fell sick
and men died, but the survivors lived in amity. Harry Collins
celebrated his sixtieth birthday as the equivalent of a second-year
student of medicine; his instructor being his own son. Everyone was
studying some subject, acquiring some new skill. One-time rebellious
natures and one-time biological oddities alike were united by the
common bond of intellectual curiosity.

It was, however, no Utopia. Some of the younger men wanted women, and
there were no women. Some were irked by confinement and wandered off;
three of the fleet of eleven 'copters were stolen by groups of
malcontents. From time to time there would be a serious quarrel. Six
men were murdered. The population dwindled to four hundred and twenty.

But there was progress, in the main. Eventually Banning joined the
group, from the ranch, and under his guidance the study-system was
formalized. Attempts were made to project the future situation, to
prepare for the day when it would be possible to venture safely into
the outside world once again and utilize newly-won abilities.

Nobody could predict when that would be, nor what kind of world would
await their coming. By the time the fifth year had passed, even
shortwave reports had long since ceased. Rumors persisted that
radioactive contamination was widespread, that the population had been
virtually decimated, that the government had fallen, that the
Naturalists had set up their own reign only to fall victim to internal
strife.

"But one thing is certain," Harry Collins told his companions as they
assembled in the usual monthly meeting on the grounds before the old
headquarters building one afternoon in July. "The fighting will end
soon. If we hear nothing more within the next few months, we'll send
out observation parties. Once we determine the exact situation, we can
plan accordingly. The world is going to need what we can give. It will
use what we have learned. It will accept our aid. One of these days--"

And he went on to outline a carefully-calculated program of making
contact with the powers that be, or might be. It sounded logical and
even the chronic grumblers and habitual pessimists in the group were
encouraged.

If at times they felt the situation fantastic and the hope forlorn,
they were heartened now. Richard Wade summed it up succinctly
afterwards, in a private conversation with Harry.

"It isn't going to be easy," he said. "In the old science fiction
yarns I used to write, a group like this would have been able to
prevent the revolution. At the very least, it would decide who won if
fighting actually broke out. But in reality we were too late to
forestall revolt, and we couldn't win the war no matter on whose side
we fought. There's just one job we're equipped for--and that's to win
the peace. I don't mean we'll step out of here and take over the
world, either. We'll have to move slowly and cautiously, dispersing in
little groups of five or six all over the country. And we'll have to
sound out men in the communities we go to, find those who are willing
to learn and willing to build. But we can be an influence, and an
important one. We have the knowledge and the skill. We may not be
chosen to lead, but we can _teach_ the leaders. And that's important."

Harry smiled in agreement. They _did_ have something to offer, and
surely it would be recognized--even if the Naturalists had won, even
