
"Before the last of them reached the tunnel, green things dropped to the
ground, and started after those who remained. They had to close the
doors between the cities to keep the creatures from entering this dome.
It is the first time that anything has happened to my people, and we
don't know what it could be."

For a long time the earthmen remained silent. The troubles of this
civilization had been dumped into their laps already--in the form of a
terrible calamity. It sounded _almost_ as if some kind of life forms had
broken through the domes _from the outside_! Perhaps there was more
danger than could be imagined. One dome had been injured, if not
destroyed, and others might follow!

A meeting of the earthmen was called immediately, much to their
surprise. Dick dared not let conditions stay as they were, for fear of
future trouble. Action must be taken at once.

"We don't know what we're facing, but the fate of the race as well as
our own lives, seem to be in danger. The break in the dome might have
been accident, and the moving forms the imagination of fear. But we know
that over a thousand people were killed--whatever caused the trouble!"

The men went back to their domes to rest, and plan some means of
entering the deserted city, but were disturbed before they had time for
sleep.

_The agricultural dome had been attacked!_ The pounding had begun within
a short time of their arrival.

One thing was certain, the injured dome had been _attacked_! It was not
accident that the metal ceiling fell. _There were living beings in the
gases outside their civilization!_

The first dome had been attacked just after the space ship left for the
earth, and this attack came just after its return to the domes. There
was little doubt that movement of the ship had disturbed the serenity of
existence. Perhaps the gas creatures hadn't known what was beneath the
metal hives until the ship appeared.

The banging on the agricultural dome, _had to be stopped_! A hole would
let in the gas! Rifles, that had been brought back on the ship as
curiosities, were given to each earthman. They loaded them carefully
while they searched for some means of reaching the trouble.

When the leader of the dome heard what they were planning, he showed
them sealed openings to a space between the sections of metal, which
hadn't been used since the city was built. The dome was constructed in
three layers, for insulation, and to give added protection. It was like
a maze, to work their way toward the pounding through the network of
struts. At times they had to crawl on their hands and knees, at others
there were clearly defined passages.

They were afraid, and not ashamed to show it. They were hunting
creatures which they knew nothing about--didn't even know whether
bullets would affect them! They might face thinking beings, or forms of
life that only wanted to search in the domes for food. It was not a
pleasant thought.

Every rifle was cocked as they neared the source of the pounding. Every
nerve drawn to the finest point.

Suddenly Dick stopped. He was ahead of the others and first to glimpse
what they faced. He motioned to use the oxygen masks, as he fastened his
own in place.

As they crept closer, light glinted on the giant pointed hammer,
operated from beyond the outer layer of metal. It rose and fell at even
intervals, through the rent in the upper surface. The ram had already
crushed through two thicknesses of metal, and was battering at the inner
layer.

The inside section was more like glass than metal and dim light passed
through, but the outer layers were opaque. When the huge ram disappeared
from the glow of light it left a gaping hole where it had been. It was
of material they had never seen and glistened with a brownish hue. It
appeared to shorten and expand in diameter, each time it struck the
surface.

For a moment they hesitated, trying to decide the best means of attack.
Whatever animated the ram was above their vision, and they had to be
close to the opening to see it.

Each time the shiny object descended, the dome vibrated beneath their
feet. As long as the vibration remained they were safe, but when it felt
like a thud--the metal would be cracking!

Thousands of helpless people were depending on the action of earthmen,
for their future existence. They seemed to think that it was only
necessary to _tell_ their troubles to these amazing strangers, to have
them solved. Stories about the use of water to drive the space ship, had
circulated throughout the cities, crediting the newcomers with
superhuman powers.

As the little party crept nearer, they separated, to approach the
opening from every direction. Dick was to fire first--if he saw anything
to shoot at! It might be a powerful machine, clamped to the outer
surface, instead of a being that could be injured. The glass globes of
the masks were clouding with moisture, and it was hard to see.

A thud came, that didn't vibrate quite as much, and the men could feel
the hair on their necks stiffen. It was now or never, and Dick fired
although he was still several feet from the opening. He fired at the
topmost section of the ram, hoping it might stop the hammering for a
moment even if it didn't injure the equipment. Two more shots rang out,
before the object could deliver another blow.

_It was alive!_ The heavy ram _jumped_ from the shock of the bullets,
curving convulsively to one side of the opening. Then it drew back out
of sight.




CHAPTER VIII

_Battle with a Monster_


Minutes passed, while the earthmen hardly dared breathe. Their ebbing
heartbeat seemed to almost echo in their breasts. Then the object
appeared at the opening, hesitated, and was thrust in!

_The hammer was a head!!!_ It swayed back and forth, like the head of a
huge caterpillar, and every gun fired in unison. Shot after shot pumped
into the head with rapid and unerring accuracy.

The giant head moved from one side to the other, while two gigantic eyes
peered around. It didn't know enough to draw back from the danger zone,
but muscular reaction finally moved it out of sight.

Dick crept forward, motioning for the others to wait until he
investigated. There was no need for all of them to enter the danger
zone.

He turned the flashlight on, that had been strapped to his waist, and
played it around the jagged opening, then climbed to the next level and
searched again.

When he crawled to the outer surface, the creature was writhing a few
feet away. He motioned, and the other men soon joined him, where they
could watch the creature.

They were standing almost on the direct center of the dome, where it was
almost flat. The flashlights penetrated the mists enough to mark out the
shape of the attacker, when they were all centered.

Suddenly they felt sick to their stomachs.

It _was_ a caterpillar! As loathsome a creature as they could have
imagined with its curled body, and the farthest possible thing from a
human being. A form of life that existed in the poison gases, where men
would die within minutes. The muscles of the creature had to be
terrifically strong, to move against the gravity of the huge globe.

Even at the center of the dome, they felt less effect of the neutralized
gravity of the interior. It required effort to stand on their feet. Some
effect of the neutralizers in the giant pillars, which eliminated most
of the weight of the dome, enabled them to handle their bodies.

The creature before them was accustomed to normal gravity of the heavy
planet, and even the metal of the dome was not beyond the pounding of
its hammer. What they had mistaken for a battering ram, was the brown
tip of the mammoth insect. From end to end it measured over sixty feet.
The men finally turned away in disgust, as it writhed in muscular
reaction.

John McCarthy was climbing into the opening behind the other men, when
he happened to glance back. His flashlight dimly lighted the spot where
the monster had been, and _it was gone_!

He hesitated with one foot in the air, then realized what had happened.
The movement of the body had moved it farther and farther from the
center of the dome. It had reached a place where the curve was
sufficient to let it slide on the smooth metal. A moment later, a slight
jar was felt through the entire structure--it had slid from the man-made
mound, to crash on the ground below. Memory of that sight made a sober
return to the interior.

Before they dared rest, metal sheets were carried to the opening and
blocked in place. Then dome men welded them to the solid metal. They
didn't want to see any of those creatures in the cities!

Twelve hours had passed by the time the opening was sealed, and the
earthmen dragged their tired forms through the maze of supports for the
last time.

They were almost asleep before they could reach their own apartments,
and tumble onto comfortable beds. They had conquered the first problem.

Dick was awakened by an excited man, talking faster than he could
understand the new language. When he grasped what the other was saying,
he leaped from bed wide awake.

_Every dome had been attacked!!!_ The caterpillars were pounding many
spots on each one. They seemed to be trying to get at the creatures that
had destroyed one of their number.

       *       *       *       *       *

In that moment Dick felt like an old man. He thought of the space ship;
the only way of attacking from the outside, and gave that up. There
wasn't enough fuel to handle it, and the blasts might injure the metal
domes. His mind searched frantically for some way of fighting _all_ of
the creatures--and knew it couldn't be done.

He was racing across the open ground, while thousands of people gazed at
the banging overhead. Suddenly he stopped, then turned back toward his
apartment, running just as hard. There was a system of communication
between the domes--that _sometimes_ worked! It was not efficient, but if
he could get in touch with the others immediately, there was _one_
chance!

He tried frantically to get a connection, but it wasn't until one of the
natives helped with the intricate system of signals, that he heard the
voice of Andrew Smith. A few moments later Philip Jones answered, then
Jerold Brown and Peter Yarbro. Each man was given quick, yet explicit,
instruction.

When Dick turned away from the phone, John McCarthy entered the room,
followed by George Martin. The noise in the city had finally aroused
them from their slumber.

John started to smile, but the expression on Barrow's face drove all
thought of greeting away.

"_What is it?_ I thought the people were doing a day's work--but
_you_----!!!" His face turned ashen as he ran to the balcony, George
Martin only a step behind. After gazing up for a moment, McCarthy turned
slowly to face Dick.

"The worms? It sounds like _hundreds of them_! We better work fast, or
they'll have the whole roof down around our ears."

"No, John. We can't fight them with guns. _They have attacked every dome
on the planet!_"

When full realization came to the big Irishman, he sank slowly into a
chair. "Then what? Have you got any plan--or are we helpless?"

"We've got work to do and plenty of it. There's a slight chance of
saving the cities. I've already instructed the others."

As the three men raced toward the power plant, Dick explained. John and
George were to do the work, while he traveled from dome to dome to make
sure the people were prepared, and see that the power plants were used
as he intended.

By the time they reached the entrance of the building, John nodded, and
Barrow turned back as the other men entered the door. The first dome
people that Dick saw were told to remove everyone from the buildings,
and gather them in the open spaces of the parks. _Leaving no one within
any structure!_

The expression on his face scared them even more than the pounding of
the worms, and they hurried to obey.

Dick jumped into the nearest ground car. He couldn't be bothered
traveling on the railroads. This happened to belong to the assistant
head of the dome, whom he dispossessed. It jerked crazily across streets
and parks, while he learned to handle the controls.

An hour later Dick was back at the powerhouse in the big dome. Every
city was ready. In several places the hammering heads had broken through
