"Thus we conclude that the _novelty_ of _an invention_ consists in
making something 'useful to society,' and that in an original and
novel way, so as to embody the great principle of invention." Or, as
far as the writer has informed us, the novelty is the useful, the
useful is the original and novel, and the original and novel are the
great principle, and the great principle is the novelty or something
else.

"We offer an explanation, not an apology for the want of a more full
variety of scientific matter."

"Fisher's Magazine publishes a complete list, comprising the Railroads
of the U. States, as far as they are completed, and as far as
particulars are known."

"The French government has patronized an exploration of the island of
Cyprus, for the purpose of exploring its architectural remains."

Under the head of "Editors' Table," I subjoin the principal and most
important sentence:

"In this department we have but little room, and in this case it is,
perhaps, well we have little, as it is seldom much in the way of
articles for notice, are placed before an editorial corps before the
appearance of the first number."

With the exception of three or four articles, the whole number is
discreditable to The National Association of Inventors. A second
number should not appear until the editors have had the benefit of at
least one term in the preparatory school of Columbia College.

    Sept. 15, 1846.                                      S. F.

       *       *       *       *       *


A heron measuring over six feet from tip to tip of his wings, and
nearly four feet from beak to toe, was lately captured in Whately,
Mass. His beak was six inches in length.

       *       *       *       *       *


The print works of East Greenwich, R. I. engaged in printing
mousseline-de-laines, are preparing to close business and shut up.

       *       *       *       *       *


WORTHY OF ATTENTION.--"We wonder at the foolish practice of the
Chinese, in the uncomfortable form and pressure of their shoes, while
at the time, the construction of our own is often but little better.
If shoes were made in the shape of our feet so as to exert an equal
pressure on every part, corns and bunions would never exist."--[N. Y.
Organ, Sept. 19, 1846.

[Symbol: right Index] The above truthful and judicious remarks
emanating from the able editors of the above valuable Journal, should
strongly present itself to the minds of every person having an eye to
the comforts of life. To those who have given a trial of the Superior
Boots and Shoes manufactured with DICK'S Patent Elastic Metallic
Shanks, information would be needless; for they could not be induced
to purchase elsewhere. But we would respectfully ask attention of the
entire Boot and Shoe wearing community, to call at 109 Nassau street,
being assured that it gives the proprietors great pleasure to impart
every information for the ease and comfort of the UNDERSTANDING, and
also with regard to their entirely new mode of taking the measurement
of the foot, to give an equal pressure on every part.

       *       *       *       *       *




ADVERTISEMENTS.

[Symbol: right Index] THIS paper circulates in every State in the
Union, and is seen principally by mechanics and manufacturers. Hence,
it may be considered the best medium of advertising, for those who
import or manufacture machinery, mechanics tools, or such wares and
materials as are generally used by those classes. The few
advertisements in this paper are regarded with much more attention
than those in closely printed dailies.

Advertisements are inserted in this paper at the following rates:

One square, of eight lines one insertion,          $ 0.50
 "    "     "    "     "   two        do.,            .75
 "    "     "    "     "   three      do.,           1.00
 "    "     "    "     "   one      month,           1.25
 "    "     "    "     "   three      do.,           3.75
 "    "     "    "     "   six        do.,           7.50
 "    "     "    "     "   twelve     do.,          15.00

TERMS:--CASH IN ADVANCE.

GENERAL AGENTS

FOR THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN.
New York City,                 GEO. DEXTER.
 "   "    "                    WM. TAYLOR & CO.
Boston,                        Messrs. HOTCHKISS & CO.
Philadelphia,                  Messrs. COLON & ADRIANCE.

LOCAL AGENTS

Albany,                        PETER COOK.
Baltimore, Md.,                S. SANDS.
Cabotville, Mass.,             E. F. BROWN.
Hartford, Ct.,                 WM. WOODWARD.
Lynn, Mass.,                   J. E. F. MARSH.
Middletown, Ct.,               WM. WOODWARD.
Norwich, Ct.,                  SAFFORD & PARKS.
New Haven, Ct.,                E. DOWNES.
New Bedford, Mass.,            WM. ROBINSON & CO.
Newark, N.J.,                  J. L. AGENS.
Patterson, N.J.,               L. GARSIDE.
Providence, R. I.,             H. & J.S. ROWE.
Springfield, Mass.,            WM. B. BROCKET.
Salem, Mass.,                  S. CHANDLER.
Troy, N.Y.,                    W. SMITH.
Taunton, Mass.,                W. P. SEAVER.
Worcester, Mass.,              S. THOMPSON.

TRAVELLING AGENTS

V. D. DAVID, JOHN STOUGHTON, JOHN MURRAY, SYLVESTER DIERFENORF.

CITY CARRIERS

CLARK SELLECK, SQUIRE SELLECK, NATHAN SELLECK.

Persons residing in the city or Brooklyn, can have the paper left at
their residences regularly, by sending their address to the office,
128 Fulton st., 2nd floor.

       *       *       *       *       *


GOLD PENS!!--In consequence of the increased facility afforded by
machinery for the manufacture of my GOLD PENS, I am enabled to furnish
them to the Trade, at a much less price than they have heretofore
obtained them through my Agent.

Those purchasing direct of the manufacturer will have the double
advantage of the lowest market price, and the privilege of returning
those that are imperfect. In connection with the above, I am
manufacturing the usual style of PENHOLDER, together with PENCIL. All
orders thankfully received, and punctually attended to.

                                                    A. G. BAGLEY.

sept 25.  1*                                    189 Broadway. N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *


SHERWOOD'S MAGNETIC MACHINE,--Is warranted to be greatly superior to
every other manufactured, by whatever imitations or pretensions
foisted upon the public. No premium has ever been obtained over this
machine at the American or any other Institute, as has been falsely
represented. It imparts the magnetic forces more continuously, with
less violence to the sensations of the patient, and with more
permanent efficacy, than any other invented, while the cures it has
actually effected are incomparably more numerous. It is compactly
fitted, together withs it batteries, wires and other appliances in
neat cases, of several sizes, and powers, at $10, $12, $14, and $16
each. Each case is accompanied with a Manual, (eighth edition, pp.
234, 8vo.) in the English or French language, according to order,
containing specific direction for the new method of using the
instrument, and which alone can render it effectual.
                           H. H. SHERWOOD, M.D.
                              102 Chambers st.
sept. 8                                                       to2*

       *       *       *       *       *


GENERAL PATENT AGENCY.--The subscriber has established an agency at
his warehouse, 12 Platt street, New York, for the protection and
general advancement of the rights and interests of Inventors and
Patentees.

The objects of this agency are more particularly to aid and assist
Inventors and Patentees in effecting sales of their inventions and of
goods and wares made therewith--and also for the sale and transfer of
Patent Rights.

Arrangements have been made with a lawyer familiar with the Patent
Laws, who will attend to the legal branch of the business upon
reasonable terms. Satisfactory references will be given. Applications
may be made to the undersigned personally, or by letter, post paid.
                              SAMUEL C. HILLS
   45-2dv6*                                     General Patent Agent.

       *       *       *       *       *


ENGRAVING ON WOOD.


NEATLY AND PROMPTLY EXECUTED AT the OFFICE OF THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN,
128 Fulton st, three doors from the Sun Office. Designs, DRAWINGS of
all kinds for PATENTS, &c., also made, as above, at very low charges.

       *       *       *       *       *


COPPER SMITH!--The subscriber takes this method of informing the
public that he is manufacturing Copper Work of every description.
Particular attention is given to making and repairing LOCOMOTIVE
tubes. Those at a distance, can have any kind of work made to
drawings, and may ascertain costs, &c., by addressing

                                L. R. Bailey
              cor. of West and Franklin sts., N. Y.
   N. B.--Work shipped to any part of the country.
   45to2dv18*

       *       *       *       *       *


BLACK LEAD POTS!--The subscriber offers for sale, in lots to suit
purchasers, a superior article of BLACK LEAD POTS, that can be used
without annealing. The price is low, and founders are requested
to make a trial.                                  SAMUEL C. HILLS,
   45to2ndv6                        Patent Agent, 12 Platt street.

       *       *       *       *       *




ELECTRICITY.


SMITH'S CELEBRATED TORPEDO, OR VIBRATING ELECTRO MAGNETIC MACHINE--This
instrument differs from those in ordinary use, by having a third
connection with the battery, rendering them much more powerful and
beneficial. As a CURIOUS ELECTRICAL MACHINE, they should be in the
possession of every one, while their wonderful efficacy as a medical
agent, renders them invaluable. They are used with extraordinary
success, for the following maladies.

RHEUMATISM--Palsy, curvature of the Spine, Chronic Diseases,
Tic-doloureaux, Paralysis, Tubercula of the brain, heart, liver,
spleen, kidneys, sick-headache.

TOOTHACHE--St Vitus dance, Epilepsy, Fevers, diseases of the eye,
nose, antrum, throat, muscles, cholera, all diseases of the skin,
face, &c.

DEAFNESS--Loss of voice, Bronchitis, Hooping cough.

These machines are perfectly simple and conveniently managed. The
whole apparatus is contained in a little box 8 inches long, by 4 wide
and deep. They may easily be sent to any part of the United States. To
be had at the office of the Scientific Americcan, 128 Fulton st, 2nd
floor, (Sun building) where they may be seen IN OPERATION, at all
times of the day and evening.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE BALL OF THE BEARS.


As Stanilaus Augustus, the last king of Poland, was a tool of Russia,
and did not enjoy any consideration, the Polish grandees played him
many tricks. Prince Radziwill came to court in a carriage drawn by six
wild bears;--the horses of course, were extremely frightened; in
consequence of which, some accidents happened. The king pointed out to
the prince the impropriety of his conduct. Radziwill added, that the
bears were not cross, as whip, gold, and patience can put in order
every thing; He added also, that, sometimes the ace beats the king at
cards, and paid liberally the damages. After some time, he gave a
splendid party, to which he invited all the ambassadors, and all the
leading personages in Poland, and displayed extraordinary luxury. The
dancing was kept up in several drawing rooms. After the supper, he
conducted a select parly to a separate apartment--where, to their
astonishment, they found four girls of uncommon beauty, richly
dressed, in company not with four gentlemen, but with four enormous
bears!--which, after the first outbreak of music, began to dance with
the girls all the figures of French quadrilles, with the utmost
accuracy, and with as much ease as if they were highly educated
gentlemen. At first the guests were alarmed; but, seeing the extra
ordinary tameness of the beasts, struck with amazement, they seemed to
have been pleased with this extraordinary sight. After the dance was
over, their bear-ships conducted themselves with the utmost propriety,
and, at a sign from the keeper, each of them made a bow to his lady,
and withdrew to another room. For some time, nothing was talked of at
Warsaw but that singular ball.

       *       *       *       *       *




ALL IS NOT GOLD THAT GLITTERS.


A lady, at a ball lately given in Calcutta, attracted the attention of
all, and excited the jealousy of many, in consequence of the splendor
and brilliancy which her diamonds shed upon her person and all around
her. At length that curiosity which is the moving spring of woman's
actions, could be no longer resisted by her female admirers, who at
the close of the ball, instituted a rigid examination of the nature of
those incomparable brilliants, when, to their astonishment, they found
that they were no more or less than so many fire flies, which the envy
of the ball-room had secured in gauze bags, and which as she moved
about, fluttered, and thus threw out their varied brilliant hues.

       *       *       *       *       *


The Odd Fellows procession to the dedication of their new Hall at
Philadelphia, says our exchanges "_came off_ on Thursday". We suppose
the procession "came off" this way, as we saw a part of it passing
through this city.

       *       *       *       *       *


A young lady by the name of Emma D. Tower, sixteen years of age, has
been missing from her parents and home in Providence, R. I., since the
11th. Her parents are distressed with anxiety to find or hear of her.

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration: Curious Arts]


PAINTING IN IMITATION OF ROSE-WOOD.


(By the particular request of a "Mechanic" in Cherryfield, Me.)--In
this art the process is various according to the circumstances, and
the ground on subjects to which it is applied. In painting common
chairs, the ground is prepared by a coat of paint composed of ivory
black and rose-pink,--equal quantities, ground in a mixture of equal
parts of linseed oil, drying japan and spirits of turpentine.--When
this is dry, the graining color, consisting of three parts of
rose-pink with one of vermillion, ground in a mixture of oil, japan
and spirits of turpentine, is applied with a common flat graining
brush. Fancy boxes and cabinet furniture are painted by a different
