                                                                     ------
    Apparent volume of air containing carbon dioxide                 1367.5
Air in potash-lime can, second sulphuric-acid vessel and connections,
  sodium-bicarbonate cans, and pipes to calorimeter chamber            23.5
                                                                     ------
    Apparent volume of air containing carbon dioxide, water, oxygen,
      and nitrogen                                                   1391.0

These volumes represent conditions existing inside the chamber without
the subject, _i. e._, conditions under which an alcohol check-test would
be conducted. In an experiment with man it would be necessary to deduct
the volume of the man, books, urine bottles, and all supplemental
apparatus and accessories. Under these circumstances the apparent volume
of the air in the chamber may at times be diminished by nearly 90 to 100
liters. At the beginning of each experiment the apparent volume of air
is calculated.


RESIDUAL ANALYSES.

CALCULATION FROM RESIDUAL ANALYSES.

The increment in weight of the absorbers for water and carbon dioxide
and the loss in weight of the oxygen cylinder give only an approximate
idea of the amounts of carbon dioxide and water-vapor produced and
oxygen absorbed during the period, and it is necessary to make
correction for change in the composition of the air as shown by the
residual analyses and for fluctuations in the actual volume. In order to
compute from the analyses the total carbon-dioxide content of the
residual air, it is necessary to know the relation of the air used for
the sample to the total volume, and thus we must know accurately the
volume of air passing through the gas-meter.

In the earlier apparatus 10-liter samples were used, and the volume of
the respiration chamber was so large that it was necessary to multiply
the values found in the residual sample by a very large factor, 500.
Hence, the utmost caution was taken to procure an accurate measurement
of the sample, the exact amounts of carbon dioxide absorbed, and
water-vapor absorbed. To this end a large number of corrections were
made, which are not necessary with the present type of apparatus with a
volume of residual air of but about 1,300 liters, and accordingly the
manipulation and calculations have been very greatly simplified.

While formerly pains were taken to obtain the exact temperature of the
air leaving the gas-meter, with this apparatus it is unnecessary. When
the earlier type of apparatus was in use there were marked changes in
the temperature of the calorimeter laboratory and in the water in the
meter which were naturally prejudicial to the accurate measurement of
the volume of samples, but with the present control of temperature in
this laboratory it has been found by repeated tests that the temperature
of the water in the meter does not vary a sufficient amount to justify
this painstaking measurement and calculation. Obviously, this
observation also pertains to the corrections for the tension of aqueous
vapor. It has been found possible to assume an average laboratory
temperature and reduce the volume as read on the meter by means of a
constant factor.

The quantity of air passing through the meter is so adjusted that
exactly 10 liters as measured on the dial pass through it for one
analysis. The air as measured in the meter is, however, under markedly
different conditions from the air inside the respiration chamber. While
there is the same temperature, there is a material difference in the
water-vapor present, and hence the moisture content as expressed in
terms of tension of aqueous vapor must be considered. This obviously
tends to diminish the true volume of air in the meter.

Formerly we made accurate correction for the tension of aqueous vapor
based upon the barometer and the temperature of the meter at the end of
the period, but it has now been found that the reduction of the meter
readings to conditions inside of the chamber can be made with a
sufficient degree of accuracy by multiplying the volume of air passing
through the meter by a fraction, _(h-t)/h_, in which _h_ represents the
barometer and _t_ the tension of aqueous vapor at the temperature of the
laboratory, 20 deg. C. Since the tension of aqueous vapor at the
laboratory temperature is not far from 15 mm., a simple calculation will
show that there may be considerable variations in the value of _h_ without
affecting the fraction materially, and we have accordingly assumed a
value of _h_ as normally 760 mm., and the correction thus obtained is
(760 - 15)/760 = 0.98, and all readings on the meter should be
multiplied by this fraction.

On the one hand, then, there is the correction on the meter itself,
which correction is +1.4 per cent (see page 75); and on the other hand
the correction on the sample for the tension of aqueous vapor, which is
-2.0 per cent, and consequently the resultant correction is -0.6 per
cent. From the conditions under which the experiments are made, however,
it is rarely possible to read the meter closer than +-0.05 liter, as the
graduations on the meter correspond to 50 cubic centimeters. It will be
seen, then, that this final correction is really inside the limit of
error of the instrument, and consequently with this particular meter now
in use no correction whatever is necessary for the reduction of the
volume. The matter of temperature corrections has been taken up in great
detail in an earlier publication, and where there are noticeable
differences in temperature between the meter and the calorimeter chamber
the calculation is very much more complicated.

For practical purposes, therefore, we may assume that the quantity of
air passed through the meter, as now in use, represents exactly 10
liters measured under the conditions obtaining inside of the respiration
chamber, and in order to find the total amount of water-vapor present in
the chamber it is necessary only to multiply the weight of water found
in the 10-liter sample by one-tenth of the total volume of air
containing water-vapor.

The total volume of air which contains water-vapor is not far from 1,360
liters; consequently multiplying the weight of water in the sample by
136 gives the total amount of water in the chamber and the piping. The
volume of air containing carbon dioxide is that contained in the chamber
and piping to the first sulphuric-acid vessel plus 16 liters of air
above the sulphuric acid and connections in the first porcelain vessel,
and in order to obtain the amount of carbon dioxide from the sample it
is only necessary to multiply the weight of carbon dioxide in the sample
by 137.6.

Since in the calculation of the total amount of residual oxygen volumes
rather than weights of gases are used, it is our custom to convert the
weights of carbon dioxide and water-vapor in the chamber to volumes by
multiplying by the well-known factors. The determination of oxygen
depends upon the knowledge of the true rather than the apparent volume
of air in the system, and consequently the apparent volume must be
reduced to standard conditions of temperature and pressure each time the
calculation is made. To this end, the total volume of air in the
inclosed circuit (including that in the tension-equalizer, amounting to
1,400 liters in all) is reduced to 0 deg. and 760 millimeters by the usual
methods of computation. The total volume of air (which may be designated
as _V_) includes the volumes of carbon dioxide, water-vapor, oxygen, and
nitrogen. From the calculations mentioned above, the volumes of
water-vapor and carbon dioxide have been computed, and deducting the sum
of these from the reduced volume of air gives the volume of oxygen plus
nitrogen. If the volume of nitrogen is known, obviously the volume of
oxygen can be found.

At the beginning of the experiment, it is assumed that the chamber is
filled with ordinary air. By calculating the amount of nitrogen in the
chamber at the start as four-fifths of the total amount, no great error
is introduced. In many experiments actual analyses of the air have been
made at the moment of the beginning of the experiment. The important
thing to bear in mind is that having once sealed the chamber and closed
it tightly, no nitrogen can enter other than that admitted with the
oxygen, and hence the residual amount of nitrogen remains unaltered save
for this single exception. If care is taken to keep an accurate record
of the amount of nitrogen admitted with the oxygen, the nitrogen
residual in the chamber at any given time is readily computed. While
from an absolute mathematical standpoint the accuracy of this
computation can be questioned, here again we are seeking an accurate
record of differences rather than an absolute amount, and whether we
assume the volume of the air in the chamber to contain 20.4 per cent of
oxygen or 21.6 per cent is a matter of indifference. It is of importance
only to note the increases in the amount of nitrogen, since these
increases represent decrease in the residual oxygen and it is with the
changes in the residual oxygen that we particularly have to do.


INFLUENCE OF FLUCTUATIONS IN TEMPERATURE AND PRESSURE ON THE APPARENT
VOLUME OF AIR IN THE SYSTEM.

The air, being confined in a space with semi-rigid walls, is subjected
naturally to variations in true volume, depending upon the temperature
and barometric pressure. If the air inside of the chamber becomes
considerably warmer there is naturally an expansion, and were it not for
the tension-equalizer there would be pressure in the system. Also, if
the barometer falls, there is an expansion of air which, again, in the
absence of the tension-equalizer, would produce pressure in the system.
It is necessary, therefore, in calculating the true volume of air, to
take into account not only the apparent volume, which, as is shown
above, is always a constant amount at the end of each period, but the
changes in temperature and barometric pressure must also be noted. Since
there is a volume of about 1,400 liters, a simple calculation will show
that for each degree centigrade change in temperature there will be a
change in volume of approximately 4.8 liters. In actual practice,
however, this rarely occurs, as the temperature control is usually
inside of 0.1 deg. C. and for the most part within a few hundredths. A
variation in barometric pressure of 1 millimeter will affect 1,400
liters by 1.8 liters.

In actual practice, therefore, it is seen that if the barometer falls
there will be an expansion of air in the system. This will tend to
increase the volume by raising the rubber diaphragm on the
tension-equalizer, the ultimate result of which is that at the final
filling with oxygen at the end of the period less is used than would be
the case had there been no change in the barometer. In other words, for
each liter expansion of air inside of the system, there is 1 liter less
oxygen required to bring the apparent volume the same at the end of the
period. Similarly, if there is an increase in temperature of the air,
there is expansion, and a smaller amount of oxygen is required than
would be the case had there been no change; and conversely, if the
barometer rises or the temperature falls, more oxygen would be supplied
than is needed for consumption. It is thus seen that the temperature and
barometer changes affect the quantity of oxygen admitted to the chamber.


INFLUENCE OF FLUCTUATIONS IN THE AMOUNTS OF CARBON DIOXIDE AND
WATER-VAPOR UPON RESIDUAL OXYGEN.

Any variations in the residual amount of carbon dioxide or water-vapor
likewise affect the oxygen. Thus, if there is an increase of 1 gram in
the amount of residual carbon dioxide, this corresponds to 0.51 liter,
and consequently an equal volume of oxygen is not admitted to the
chamber during the period, since its place has been taken by the
increased volume of carbon dioxide. A similar reasoning will show that
increase in the water-vapor content will have a similar effect, for each
gram of water-vapor corresponds to 1.25 liters and therefore influences
markedly the introduction of oxygen. All four of the factors, therefore
(barometric pressure, temperature, residual carbon dioxide, and residual
water-vapor), affect noticeably the oxygen determination.


CONTROL OF RESIDUAL ANALYSES.

Of the three factors to be determined in the residual air, the oxygen
(which is most important from the standpoint of the relative weight to
be placed upon the analysis) unfortunately can not be directly
determined without great difficulty. Furthermore, any errors in the
analysis may be very greatly multiplied by the known errors involved in
the determination of the true volume of the air in the chamber as a
result of the difficulties in obtaining the average temperature of the
air. Believing that the method of analysis as outlined above should be
controlled as far as possible by other independent methods, we were able
to compare the carbon dioxide as determined by the soda-lime method with
that obtained by the extremely accurate method used by Sonden and
Pettersson. An apparatus for the determination of carbon dioxide and
oxygen on the Pettersson principle has been devised by Sonden and
constructed for us by Grave, of Stockholm.

In the control experiments, the air leaving the mercury valve D (fig.
30, page 66) was caused to pass through a T-tube, one arm of which
connected directly with the sampling pipette of the Sonden gas-analysis
apparatus, the other arm connecting with the U-tubes for residual
analyses. By lowering and raising the mercury reservoir on the
gas-analysis apparatus, a sample of air could be drawn into the
apparatus for analysis. The results of the analysis were expressed on
the basis of moist air in volume per cents rather than by weight, as is
done with the soda-lime method. Hence in comparison it was necessary to
convert the weights to volume, and during this process the errors due to
not correcting for temperature and barometer are made manifest. However,
the important point to be noted is that whatever fluctuations in
composition of the residual air were noted by the soda-lime method,
similar fluctuations of a corresponding size were recorded by the
volumetric analysis with the Sonden apparatus. Under these conditions,
therefore, we believe that the gravimetric method outlined above is
sufficiently satisfactory, so far as the carbon-dioxide content is
concerned, for ordinary work where there are no wide variations in the
composition of the air from period to period.


NITROGEN ADMITTED WITH THE OXYGEN.

It is impossible to obtain in the market absolutely chemically pure
oxygen. All the oxygen that we have thus far been able to purchase
contains nitrogen and, in some instances, measurable amounts of
water-vapor and carbon dioxide. The better grade of oxygen, that
prepared from liquid air, is practically free from carbon dioxide and
water-vapor, but it still contains nitrogen, and hence with every liter
of oxygen admitted there is a slight amount of nitrogen added. This
amount can readily be found from the gasometric analysis of the oxygen
and from the well-known relation between the weight and the volume of
nitrogen the weight can be accurately found. This addition of nitrogen
played a very important role in the calculation of the oxygen
consumption as formerly employed. As is seen later, a much abbreviated
form of calculation is now in use in which the nitrogen admitted with
the oxygen does not influence the calculation of the residual oxygen.


REJECTION OF AIR.

In long-continued experiments, where there is a possibility of a
noticeable diminution in the percentage of oxygen in the chamber--a
diminution caused either by a marked fall in barometer, which expands
the air inside of the chamber and permits admission of less oxygen than
would otherwise be required, or by the use of oxygen containing a high
percentage of nitrogen, thus continually increasing the amount of
nitrogen present in the system--it is highly probable that there may be
such an accumulation of nitrogen as to render it advisable to provide
for the admission of a large amount of oxygen to restore the air to
approximately normal conditions. In rest experiments of short duration
this is never necessary. The procedure by which such a restoration of
oxygen percentage is accomplished has already been discussed
elsewhere.[25] It involves the rejection of a definite amount of air by
allowing it to pass into the room through the gas-meter and then making
proper corrections for the composition of this air, deducting the volume
of oxygen in it from the excess volume of oxygen introduced and
correcting the nitrogen residual in order to determine the oxygen
absorption during the period in which the air has been rejected.


INTERCHANGE OF AIR IN THE FOOD-APERTURE.

The volume of air in the food-aperture between the two glass doors is
approximately 5.3 liters. When the door on the inside is opened and the
material placed in the food-aperture and the outer door is subsequently
opened, there is by diffusion a passage outward of air of the
composition of the air inside of the chamber, and the food-aperture is
now filled with room air. When the inner door is again opened this room
air enters the chamber and is replaced by air of the same composition as
that in the chamber. It is seen, then, that there may theoretically be
an interchange of air here which may have an influence on the results.
In severe work experiments, where the amount of carbon dioxide in the
air is enormously increased, such interchange doubtless does take place
in measurable amounts and correction should undoubtedly be made. In
ordinary rest experiments, where the composition of the air in the
chamber is much more nearly normal, this correction is without special
significance. Furthermore, in the two forms of calorimeter now in use,
the experiments being of but short duration, provision is made to render
it unnecessary to open the food-aperture during the experiment proper.
Consequently at present no correction for interchange of air in the
food-aperture is made, and for the same reason the slight alteration in
volume resulting from the removal or addition of material has also not
been considered here.


USE OF THE RESIDUAL BLANK IN THE CALCULATIONS.

To facilitate the calculations and for the sake of uniformity in
expressing the results, a special form of blank is used which permits
the recording of the principal data regarding the analyses of air in the
chamber at the end of each period. Thus at the head of the sheet are
recorded the time, the number of the period, kind of experiment, the
name or initials of the subject, and the statement as to which
calorimeter is used. The barometer recorded in millimeters is indicated
in the column at the left and immediately below the heading, together
with the temperature of the calorimeter as expressed in degrees
centigrade. The temperature of the calorimeter as recorded by the
physical observer is usually expressed in the arbitrary scale of the
Wheatstone bridge and must be transposed into the centigrade scale by
means of a calibration table.

The apparent air-volumes in the subsections of the ventilating system
are recorded under the headings I, which represents the volume of air
containing water-vapor and therefore is the air in the chamber plus the
air in the piping to the surface of the acid in the first sulphuric-acid
absorber; I-II, which represents the air containing carbonic acid and
includes volume I plus the volume of the air in the first sulphuric-acid
vessel and the volume of air in the potash-lime absorber; I-III, which
includes the total confined volume of the whole system, since this air
contains both oxygen and nitrogen. These volumes change somewhat,
depending upon the size of the body of the subject, the volume of the
materials taken into the chamber, and the type of calorimeter.

The data for the residual analyses are recorded in the lower left-hand
corner: first the weight of the water absorbed from 10 liters of air
passing through the meter; to the logarithm of this is added the
logarithm of volume I; the result is the logarithm of the total weight
of water-vapor in the ventilating air-current. To convert this into
liters the logarithmic factor 09462[26] is added to the logarithm of the
weight of water and (_a_) is the logarithm of water expressed in liters.
A similar treatment is accorded the weight of carbon dioxide absorbed
from the air-sample, (_b_) being ultimately the logarithm of the volume
of carbon dioxide.

In order to determine the total volume of air in the chamber under
standard conditions of temperature and pressure, to the logarithm of
volume I-III is added, first, a logarithmic factor for the temperature
recorded for the calorimeter to correct the volume of air to standard
temperature. As the temperature fluctuations are all within 1 degree, a
table has been prepared giving the standard fluctuation represented by
the formula

       1
     -----
     1 + _at_

in which _t_ is the temperature of the calorimeter. The correction for
pressure has also been worked out in a series of tables and the
logarithmic factor here corresponds to the ratio _p_/760, in which _p_
is the observed barometer. The logarithm of the total volume is recorded
as a result of the addition of these three logarithms enumerated, and
from this logarithm is expressed the total volume of air in liters.
Deducting the sum of the values (_a_) and (_b_) from the total volume
leaves the volume of oxygen plus nitrogen.

The calculation of the residual volume of nitrogen and the record of the
additions thereto was formerly carried out with a refinement that to-day
seems wholly unwarranted when other factors influencing this value are
taken into consideration. For the majority of experiments the residual
volume of nitrogen may be considered as constant in spite of the fact
that some nitrogen is regularly admitted with the oxygen. The
significance of this assumption is best seen after a consideration of
the method of calculating the amount of oxygen admitted to the chamber.

RESIDUAL SHEET  No. 1.

Calculation of residual amounts of nitrogen, oxygen, carbon dioxide and
water-vapor remaining in chamber at 8.10 A. M., June 24, 1909.

Residual at end of Prelim. period.       Exp.: Parturition.        No.........
        Subject: Mrs. Whelan.                 Calorimeter: Bed.

-------------------------------------------+-------------------------------
    Barometer, 756.95 mm.                  |     Miscellaneous Calculations
    Temp. cal., 20.08 deg.C                |      875            48.65
-------------------------------------------+      164.55         25.9
                                           |      ------         90.
Apparent Volume of Air                     |      710.46        ------
                                           |         4.6        164.55
I    containing H_{2}O 715. liters         |      ------
I-II     "      CO_{2} 781.   "            |       715.0 I
I-III    "      O+N    755.   "            |        14
-------------------------------------------+      ------
Log. wt. H_{2}O to residual                |       781.0  I-II
.0815           = 91116                    |        24
Log. I          = 85431                    |      ------
                  -----                    |       755.0  I-III
                  76547 = 5.88 gms. H_{2}O +-----------------------------
Gms. to liters,   09462                    |    (a) 7.26 l.
                  -----                    |    (b) 1.57 l.
            (a)   86909 = 7.25 l. H_{2}O   |        -----
                                           |        8.82  = l. CO_{2} + H_{2}O
                                           |
Log. wt. CO_{2} in residual                | Log. I-III    = 87796
.0438           = 62634                    | "    temp.    = 96912
Log. I-II       = 84392                    | "    pressure = 99856
                  -----                    |                ------
                  49026 = 3.09 gms. CO_{2} | Total volume    84588  = 700.37 l.
Gms. to liters,        70680               | Volume CO_{2} + H_{2}O =   8.82 l.
                       -----               |                          ------
            (b)   19706 = 1.57 l. CO_{2}   |    "   O + N           = 691.56 l.
                                           |    "     N             = 552.96 l.
                                           |                           ------
                                           |    "     O             = 186.57 l.
                                           |


ABBREVIATED METHOD OF COMPUTATION OF OXYGEN ADMITTED TO THE CHAMBER FOR
USE DURING SHORT EXPERIMENTS.

Desiring to make the apparatus as practicable and the calculations as
simple as possible, a scheme of calculation has been devised whereby the
computations may be very much abbreviated and at the same time there is
not too great a sacrifice in accuracy. The loss in weight of the oxygen
cylinder has, in the more complicated method of computation, been
considered as due to oxygen and about 3 per cent of nitrogen. The amount
of nitrogen thus admitted has been carefully computed and its volume
taken into consideration in calculating the residual oxygen. If it is
considered for a moment that the admission of gas out of the steel
cylinder is made at just such a rate as to compensate for the decrease
in volume of the air in the system due to the absorption of oxygen by
the subject, it can be seen that if the exact volume of the gas leaving
the cylinder were known it would be immaterial whether this gas were
pure oxygen, oxygen with some nitrogen, or oxygen with any other inert
gas not dangerous to respiration or not absorbed by sulphuric acid or
potash-lime. If 10 liters of oxygen had been absorbed by the man in the
course of an hour, to bring the system back to constant apparent volume
it would be necessary to admit 10 liters of such a gas or mixture of
gases, assuming that during the hour there had been no change in the
temperature, the barometric pressure, or the residual amounts of carbon
dioxide or water-vapor.

Under these assumed conditions, then, it would only be necessary to
measure the amount of gas admitted in order to have a true measure of
the amount of oxygen absorbed. The measure of the volume of the gas
admitted may be used for a measure of the oxygen absorbed, even when it
is necessary to make allowances for the variations in the amount of
carbon dioxide or water-vapor in the chamber, the temperature, and
barometric pressure. From the loss in weight of the oxygen cylinder, if
the cylinder contained pure oxygen, it would be known that 10 liters
would be admitted for every 14.3 grams loss in weight.

From the difference in weight of 1 liter of oxygen and 1 liter of
nitrogen, a loss in weight of a gas containing a mixture of oxygen with
a small per cent of nitrogen would actually represent a somewhat larger
volume of gas than if pure oxygen were admitted. The differences in
weight of the two gases, however, and the amount of nitrogen present are
so small that one might almost wholly neglect the error thus arising
from this admixture of nitrogen and compute the volume of oxygen
directly from the loss in weight of the cylinder.

As a matter of fact, it has been found that by increasing the loss in
weight of the cylinder of oxygen containing 3 per cent nitrogen by 0.4
per cent and then converting this weight to volume by multiplying by
0.7, the volume of gas admitted is known with great accuracy. This
method of calculation has been used with success in connection with the
large chamber and particularly for experiments of short duration. It has
also been introduced with great success in a portable type of apparatus
described elsewhere.[27] Under these conditions, therefore, it is
unnecessary to make any correction on the residual volume of nitrogen as
calculated at the beginning of the experiment. When a direct comparison
of the calculated residual amount of oxygen present is to be made upon
determinations made with a gas-analysis apparatus the earlier and much
more complicated method of calculation must be employed.


CRITICISM OF THE METHOD OF CALCULATING THE VOLUME OF OXYGEN.

Since the ventilating air-current has a confined volume, in which there
are constantly changing percentages of carbon dioxide, oxygen, and
water-vapor, it is important to note that the nitrogen present in the
apparatus when the apparatus is sealed remains unchanged throughout the
whole experiment, save for the small amounts added with the commercial
oxygen--amounts well known and for which definite corrections can be
made. Consequently, in order to find the amount of oxygen present in the
residual air at any time it is only necessary to determine the amounts
of carbon dioxide and water-vapor and, from these two factors and from
the known volume of nitrogen present, it is possible to compute the
total volume of oxygen after calculating the total absolute volume of
air in the chamber at any given time.

While the apparent volume of the air remains constant throughout the
whole experiment, by the conditions of the experiment itself the
absolute amount may change considerably, owing primarily to the
fluctuations in barometric pressure and secondarily to slight
fluctuations in the temperature of the air inside of the chamber.
Although the attempt is made on the part of the observers to arbitrarily
control the temperature of this air to within a few hundredths of a
degree, at times the subject may inadvertently move his body about in
the chair just a few moments before the end of the period and thus
temporarily cause an increased expansion of the air. The apparatus is,
in a word, a large air-thermometer, inside the bulb of which the subject
is sitting. If the whole system were inclosed in rigid walls there would
be from time to time noticeable changes in pressure on the system due to
variations in the absolute volume, but by means of the tension-equalizer
these fluctuations in pressure are avoided.

The same difficulties pertain here which were experienced with the
earlier type of apparatus in determining the average temperature of the
volume of air inside of the chamber. We have on the one hand the warm
surface of the man's body, averaging not far from 32 deg. C. On the other
hand we have the cold water in the heat-absorbers at a temperature not
far from 12 deg. C. Obviously, the air in the immediate neighborhood of
these two localities is considerably warmer or colder than the average
temperature of the air. The disposition of the electric-resistance
thermometers about the chamber has, after a great deal of experimenting,
been made such as to permit the measurement as nearly as possible of the
average temperature in the chamber. But this is at best a rough
