charge of this village." He had glanced back into the door of his hut.

"I had no part in causing those deaths. The life of a headman here in
Tibara is short and none but a fool would fight for this position of
mine. It is not a good one. The master's demands are heavy and his hand
is even heavier."

This didn't match with the reputation of Kio Barra as a considerate
host--a fair man to do business with. It made him wonder.

Had his brother actually ever left this place? But if not, where were
his drivers? What had happened to his train of draft brutes? How had the
cargo he carried been disposed of?

Oh, of course, he knew there were caravan masters who would accept
freight and ask a minimum of questions. Goods could be disposed of. And
this was a breeding estate. The slaves? He shook his head. Too simple!

He brought himself back to the present, looking thoughtfully at the
drivers' lodge ahead of him. Then he probed gently, trying to establish
rapport with Dar Girdek. The man could be in real danger.

He frowned and probed with more force. There was nothing. The frown
deepened.

After his talk with Retonga, he had established rapport with the caravan
master, but the older man had attached no importance to his suspicions.

"No," he had thought back, "you are seeing a robber behind every rock
now. Kio Barra is a tough master, of course. He's got a big estate here,
and he really keeps it up to the mark. He's a good host and a really
good man to deal with--liberal trader. Remember, I know this guy. I've
been here before." There had been the impression of a smile.

"Besides, this guy's harmless, remember? Sure, he's a businessman. But
if he should try anything violent, I could take care of him without
taking time out to think about it." A final, dismissing thought had
come.

"Look, forget about it, will you? If you had to suspect someone of dirty
work, pick on some of those northerners. Kio Barra's too well known for
fair dealing. I'll make a deal with him, then we can go up to the
northern swing and really look around to see if we can find any trace of
that caravan of your brother's."

Naran kicked at the trail. Dar Girdek was a good trader and a successful
caravan master. He knew goods and their value, and he was expert in
handling beasts and drivers. But he had never been too sensitive. And
he'd absolutely refused to wear a probe amplifier.

"Look," he'd thought disgustedly, "how would you like to do business
with some guy that wore a great, big, yellow headlight to tell you he
wanted to poke around in your mind?"

Naran put his foot on the lowest rung of the short ladder leading to the
lodge door.

Unless he was badly mistaken, he knew now where his brother had gone.
And now Dar Girdek had joined him. The details? He shrugged.

They were unimportant. But what was next? What would be the next step in
Barra's plans? And what could be done about this guy? He climbed the
ladder and went into the lodge.

Of course, if the Council found out about this, they could deal with the
situation. All they'd need would be a little proof and Kio Barra would
be well and promptly taken care of. But how would someone get word out?

The estate was loaded with surrogates, he knew that. A caravan--even a
single man--would find it impossible to either enter or leave without
the knowledge and consent of the Master Protector. He smiled.

He could just visualize Kio Barra letting anyone out with proof of his
activities. The smile faded.

A distant projection? There were those surrogates again. They were broad
tuned and he knew it. They'd flare like a field of beacons.

Of course, he could get out a flash appeal and it would be heard. He
grinned.

Now, there was a nice way to commit suicide. There'd be no time for help
to arrive, he was sure of that. And no shield would stand up under that
heavy-duty distorter, even if Barra could only summon a minimum of power
to operate it. He shook his head, looking around the room.

       *       *       *       *       *

Drivers were beginning to stir and get to their feet. Naran looked at
the flunky.

"Better get with it, Bintar," he said. "Going to be a bunch of hungry
men around you in a couple of minutes."

"Yeah." The man started out the door, yawning. "Got to eat, if we don't
do anything else." He climbed down the ladder.

Naran glanced at the drivers.

"Soon's we've eaten," he said, "I'd like to check up on the long-necks.
See whether they've wandered during the night. I'd hate to have them get
mixed up with the village herd."

A driver looked around at him.

"Aw," he protested, "the master probably pinned 'em down good before he
left. Besides, he can identify 'em anyway. They won't go far--not with
those herd boys running around."

"Sure," Naran told him. "The master would really like spending half a
day cutting out his long-necks from the village herd. And how about that
Master Protector? What would he think of our caravan?"

The other looked at him disgustedly. "Aw, who cares about that? Why
worry about what one of them witchmen thinks about another? Long's we
don't get twisted around, what's the difference?"

Naran growled to himself. He'd blundered on that one. There was no
answer to that argument that he could present. He had learned to
understand--and in some measure sympathize with--the deep-seated
resentment of the non-psi for the psionic. The non-psionics felt they
were just as good men as anyone, yet here were these psionics with their
incomprehensible powers. And there was nothing to be done about it
except obey.

Of course, they didn't like it--or their masters.

As far as that went, the caravan herd was unimportant now. The only
trouble was Retonga. If the herds were mixed, he would be in real
trouble.

"Well," he said aloud, "I'm not about to get the master to spinning.
Long's we keep him happy, we'll all be a lot better off. As I said,
right after breakfast. I want everyone out on the herd." He started to
turn away.

"Aagh," growled the other. "Why don't you face it? You're just one of
those guys likes to toss orders around and make people jump. It's about
time someone showed you a few things."

Naran turned back. Rosel had been resentful ever since the caravan had
formed. He had expected to be lead driver on this trip and he'd made no
effort to hide his fury and disappointment at being displaced in favor
of a newcomer.

For an instant, Naran considered. There was no point in continuing his
masquerade any further. Dar Girdek was gone and he'd have to take the
caravan back anyway--if he could work his way out of here, past Barra.

If he couldn't get out--if he joined his brother and Dar Girdek--it
would make no difference what the caravan drivers thought.

He could put this man in his place right now. Then, he could give him
the job of lead driver.

But there was something else to think of. If he got the train out of
here, he would have to work with this guy. And there would always be an
even greater resentment added to the normal fear and hatred of the
psionic. That could demoralize the whole train. Naran sighed.

Rosel had put his feelings in the open now and Naran would have to play
out the role he had assumed.

He crossed the room to confront Rosel. Abruptly, he thrust a hand out.
The other made a grab for it and Naran moved smoothly forward, locking
the grasping hand.

Quickly he extended a leg and threw Rosel over it. As the man hit the
floor, Naran retained his grip and brought his other hand over, twisting
the man's arm. His foot went out, to smack into the man's face, pinning
him to the floor. Slowly, he put pressure on the prisoned hand.

"Once more," he said coldly, "I'm going to have everyone out on the herd
right after breakfast. Now, do you want to go out and work with 'em, or
do I keep winding up on this thing and then have 'em load you up with
the rest of the spare gear?"

"Aw, look." Rosel's voice was muffled. "Didn't mean a thing, I was just
making a crack."

"Yeah, sure." Naran's voice was scornful. "Just having a little fun
before breakfast. Now you listen to me. So long as I'm lead driver,
you're going to do what I say--when I say it. If you give me any more
trouble, I'll pull your head off and make you carry it under one arm.
Got it?"

"Ow! Yeah, I got it. You're the lead driver."

Naran released his pressure and stepped back.

"All right," he said. "Let's forget it. Now, we'll get breakfast over
with and then we'll take care of the long-necks. You take the drivers
out, Rosel. I'm going to make some arrangements in the village. Be with
you later." He swung away.

       *       *       *       *       *

Barra looked at his reflection with satisfaction. It was too bad, he
thought, that he didn't have some companion to appreciate his wealth and
power. He examined his equipment carefully.

Everything was clean. Everything was in order. There was no device
lacking.

Proudly, he looked down at the huge, yellow pendant he was wearing for
the first time. It was funny, he thought, that he had never considered a
probe unit before. Now that he thought of it, this was a most
satisfactory device. Now, he could look into his villagers' minds and
see clearly what lay there. Even, he could get some ideas of the
intentions of visiting caravan masters.

Fitting the device and becoming familiar with it had been hard work, of
course, but he had mastered it. And today, he could wear the jewel and
use it. It would make the day's work easier.

He activated his levitator, floated to his boat, and pulled it away from
its shelter, setting the course toward Tibara.

The hard part of this operation was over, he thought. The rest was
simple routine.

This caravan master had given him a bit more trouble than some of the
others, but his final reaction had been just like all the others. He
smiled.

That flash of incredulity, followed by sudden, horrified comprehension,
then blankness, was becoming perfectly familiar. In fact, even this was
simple routine.

He wondered if he might be able to extend just a little. Perhaps he
could operate on a wider scale. There should be some way he could work
out to take over a neighboring estate and go from there.

Surely, there must be some outlet for his abilities, beyond mere
increase in the wealth of Kira Barra. And there must be some way to gain
a companion of sorts. He would have to think that over.

He swung the boat to the pier and floated away, grandly ignoring the
pseudomen who hurried to secure his lines.

He examined the village with approval as he stood in the center of the
clearing. There had been a great improvement since he had taken that
headman in hand. Perhaps this fellow would be satisfactory--might even
learn to take some pride in the appearance of his village--if, that is,
a pseudoman were capable of pride.

He looked over toward the headman's hut.

The fellow had come out, followed by the lead driver of the caravan.
Good, that would save the trouble of hunting the fellow out.

He concentrated on the caravan slave.

"Your master has decided to remain at the Residence for a time," he
thought confidently. "You may have your drivers load up and move to a
more permanent location."

The answering thought was unexpectedly distinct.

"This location looks as though it were designed for a caravan's stay.
