jewels as they disappeared.

"I expect Cardinal Ugolini to take some of the gold and use it to build
a strong party in Orvieto that will oppose the alliance." He eyed her,
trying to see into her heart. "Can he manage such a thing?"

"Oh, Adelberto is an old hand at intrigue. How else do you suppose he
got to be a cardinal? Indeed, he is the camerlengo for the College of
Cardinals."

"What does that mean?" Daoud asked as he buckled his belt.

"He acts as a kind of chancellor to the pope, making announcements,
calling the College together, conducting ceremonies--that sort of
thing."

Daoud nodded. "Good. It is my hope that he can use this money to draw
cardinals and Church officials to him, one way or another. And they will
join together to turn the pope against the Tartars."

"With all the money those jewels will bring, you can indeed create such
a faction, but I don't know what effect it will have on the pope. The
Tartars offer the pope a chance to wipe out Islam once and for all."

"Yes, and then after that the Tartars will wipe out Christianity," Daoud
said. "I can tell those who will work with us what the Tartars are truly
like. I have seen them, fought against them. I have seen what they have
done to those they conquered." Like a cloud passing over the sun, a
memory of ruined Baghdad darkened his mind.

Tilia's eyes opened wide. "You intend to meet and talk--to bishops, to
cardinals?"

He touched his face with his fingertips. "This is why Baibars sent
me--because I can go among Christians as a Christian. I will be David of
Trebizond, a silk merchant who has traveled in the lands ravaged by the
Tartars."

"Trebizond?"

He could see the doubt in her face. He must seem confident to her. He
must not let her know that he himself wondered how he, a warrior from a
land utterly strange to these people, could make the great ones of
Christendom listen to him and believe in him. He could do it only with
the help of Tilia and Cardinal Ugolini--and they would not help him
unless they believed he could do it.

"Trebizond is on the eastern shore of the Black Sea. Far enough away
that I am not likely to meet anyone in Orvieto who knows anything about
it."

"Do not be too sure. The pope makes a point of seeing people from
everywhere."

"Then he will probably want to meet me, since I am from a strange and
faraway place."

Her eyes widened and her full lips parted. Her teeth were small, bright,
and widely spaced.

"You even want to meet with the _pope_?"

He knew the enormity of what he was proposing. But he fought down the
doubt that her evident horror had aroused in him. He made himself sound
absolutely sure when he answered.

"Certainly. Cardinal Ugolini will arrange an audience for me. If the
pope has not yet made a decision, he will want to listen to one who has
seen with his own eyes what these Tartars are. I will tell him that an
agreement with them would be like a lamb allying itself with a panther."

"Talk to the pope! How would you know how to behave before the pope?"

"Among my people, Madonna, I am not just a warrior. I stand high in the
highest councils. I have met with kings and great men of religion. As
for the details of etiquette of an audience with the pope, as a traveler
from Trebizond I might be expected to make mistakes."

Daoud saw that her olive skin had turned a yellowish-white. "Do you want
to be torn to pieces by teams of horses?" she whispered. "I do not, and
neither does Cardinal Ugolini. We cannot risk your being found out."

He must overcome her doubt of him by seeming supremely confident.

He said, "Then, for your own protection, you will teach me everything I
need to know."

And if Christians moved closer to Tartars despite intrigue and
persuasion, he and Baibars had already considered more desperate
measures. The risk of failure would be greater and the consequences more
dire. He would not tell Tilia about these more drastic steps. If his
presence and intentions already frightened her and Ugolini, it was best
they not know the lengths he was prepared to go to.

He hoped he would not have to attempt such things. The complexities and
difficulties of making them happen, the likelihood of things going
disastrously wrong, all made these courses too daunting.

Insh'Allah, if it be God's will, he would manage, with the help of such
allies as he found in Orvieto, to oppose and obstruct and delay the
alliance until the project died of old age, or the Tartar ambassadors
themselves died.

_Time fights for Islam_, Baibars had told him. _The Tartar empire is
beginning to break apart, and the Christians are losing their eagerness
for crusading. Only delay this alliance long enough, and their
opportunity to destroy us will be lost._

Tilia broke in on his thoughts, holding out her hands to him. "Help me
up. My legs are getting cramped. I feel hungry. Do you have anything to
eat?"

He was not surprised that she asked for food. Mustapha al-Zaid, the
chief eunuch of Baibars's harem, was monstrously fat, and was always
eating.

He sprang to his feet and pulled her up. The cross on her bosom swung
and flashed. The top of her head came only to the middle of his chest,
but he suspected that she weighed as much or more than he did.

She smiled at him. "You are strong, and you move like a warrior."

Ignoring the flattery, he said, "Sophia has bread and cheese that we
bought at a village called Bagnioregio. And some red wine to wash it
down."

Tilia laughed. "Bagnioregio? Then you must have passed near the ruins of
Ferento--the town that was destroyed for the heresy of displaying a
statue of Christ on the cross with open eyes."

"What? I saw no ruins. Open eyes?"

"The ruins are off the road. But that will give you an idea of how
careful one must be where religion is concerned. I cannot imagine that
anyone makes decent wine in Bagnioregio. There is another town near
here, Montefiascone, where they make the best wine in the world. Wait
until you taste that."

"I drink wine only to deceive Christians," he said gruffly. "I do not
like it. Let us finish this conversation before you refresh yourself. I
do not want those two to know any more than I tell them."

Annoyance flickered in her face. She was not used to being denied, Daoud
thought. But she shrugged. "I presume you plan to use that beautiful
woman who travels with you as bait to win over some of the high-ranking
churchmen."

To Daoud's surprise, the thought pained him.

"She is a skilled courtesan and was Manfred's mistress," he said. "And
before that, King Manfred told me, she was a favorite of the Emperor of
Constantinople. We will want to keep her in reserve. I have in mind that
she could live with the cardinal, pose as his niece."

"Hm. And the other girl? She is very pretty and very young. The older
and more powerful churchmen are, the more they are drawn to youth."

"We owe Rachel a debt. We have promised to find a home for her among the
Jews of Orvieto."

"Oh, is she a Jew? But there are no Jews in Orvieto."

"Somewhere nearby, then."

"The nearest Jews live in Rome."

Rome--where the Jews had already turned Rachel away. "She cannot go to
Rome."

"Well, the girl would find working for me far more rewarding than living
on charity."

"I am sure of it," said Daoud. But a dark memory from long ago rose to
trouble him.

He fixed his eyes on hers. "You would not force her into whoring, would
you?"

Tilia pressed her hand to her bosom in mock horror. "Force! Women _beg_
to be accepted into the family of Tilia Caballo."

_A terrible thing to do to the child, but it would solve my problem_,
thought David. _Rachel already must be aware that Sophia and Lorenzo and
I are involved together in some secret enterprise. It would be best to
keep her where we can watch her._

"For the time being, Rachel will stay with us at the cardinal's mansion,
serving Sophia as her maid," he said.

Tilia looked up at him, startled. "You _all_ intend to live with the
cardinal?"

Her surprise, in turn, startled Daoud. But then he saw that her eyes
were too firmly fixed upon him, and knew that she was dissembling.

"As Morgiana, did you not approve this arrangement with my lord the
sultan?"

She shrugged. "That was when we thought you were coming alone."

"Sophia and Lorenzo will be of great help to us. We will give it out
that I am the cardinal's guest. Lorenzo will be my servant, Giancarlo.
And Sophia will be the cardinal's niece."

"Hm." Tilia frowned. "I am _very_ hungry. Let me sample the delicacies
your Greek woman bought in Bagnioregio. Then I will go back to the city
and send word to the cardinal of what you have told me."

Daoud heard the false note in her voice and bristled with suspicion.

_And you would keep me waiting out here while you warn him of what a
danger I am to him._

"I will tell him everything myself."

Her eyes clouded over. "The cardinal will send for you when he has heard
my report."

"Great God, woman!" Daoud's voice rasped in his anger. "Do you expect
me to wait out here until the Tartars come to Orvieto? I am sent by the
sultan, I bring great wealth to you and your master, I am fighting for
my faith, _and I will not wait_!"

Tilia patted his arm placatingly. "Look here, Daoud, in all honesty,
Cardinal Ugolini is terrified. When he first got Baibars's message about
you, he wept for hours, cursing himself over and over for a fool.
Imagine the outrage if the Christians were to discover that a Muslim
agent has come so close to their pope. The cardinal would never have
taken the first denaro picciolo from your sultan if he had ever known
that it would lead to this--a Turk at his door demanding his help in a
plot against the pope."

"I am not at his door," said Daoud pointedly.

"No, and before you arrive there, you must give me time to assure him
that you know what you are doing, that you do not look anything like a
Turk, and above all that you bring him such great wealth as to make the
risk worthwhile. If you just appear at his palace when he has insisted
that you wait here, it might throw him into a panic. He might do
something very foolish."

Anger flared up in him. She was obstructing him and threatening him, and
he had had enough.

_She means he might expose me. Or order his men-at-arms to kill me. This
is Manfred's indecision all over again._

He seized Tilia's arm, his fingers sinking into soft flesh under her
silk sleeve. "I am going to the cardinal, with my party. And you will
equip me with a message for him, telling him you feel assured it is safe
for him to admit us."

She stared up at him, expressionless, for a long time. He sensed that
she was trying to see into his heart, to weigh his will.

"No," she said. "You are not going now. First--"

His grip on her arm tightened, and in his anger he was about to shake
her, when her hand darted to lift the pectoral cross from her breast.
Her thumb pressed a dark red carbuncle between the arms, and a thin
blade sprang out of the shaft.

"Please notice that the cross is attached to my neck by a chain, David.
I cannot hurt you unless you come too close to me. I have no wish to
attack you. There is asp venom on the blade, by the way."

His anger turned against himself. It was foolish to try violence on a
woman like this. Had he not told himself he could not force Tilia and
Ugolini to do anything, that he must persuade them?

_This woman herself is as dangerous as an asp. But I need her._

He let go of her arm. "Pardon my crudity, Madama."

Tilia pointed her blade straight up and pressed another jewel in the
cross. The blade dropped back into the shaft.

"I do not mind crudity," she said, "but I do not like to be manhandled."
She smiled slyly. "Unless I've invited it. I had already made my mind
up, before you laid violent hands on me, that I would agree to your
going at once to the cardinal. I have decided that you may be able to
accomplish what you set out to do without getting us all killed. You are
brave and intelligent, but you know how to bargain, too. You know when
to yield and you know when to stand your ground."

Daoud felt pleasure at her compliments, but even more pleasure that she
was going to cooperate with him.

"Then why did you just say we would not be going to the cardinal?"

"I was about to add that first you _will_ feed me bread and cheese and
the execrable wine of Bagnioregio. _Then_ I _will_ give you a message
that will get you into Cardinal Ugolini's mansion."

Daoud laughed. That Tilia had yielded was a great relief. And she was
both witty and dangerous, a combination he admired.




XI


Simon was surprised at how young Cardinal Paulus de Verceuil looked. The
man who stood with him in a vineyard on the road to Orvieto had a long,
fine-skinned face and glossy black hair that fell in waves to his
shoulders. If his scalp was shaved in a clerical tonsure, his red velvet
cap covered it. His handsome violet silk tunic reminded Simon that his
own surcoat was travel-stained and that Thierry had not polished his
mail in days.

De Verceuil tossed away the cluster of pale green grapes he had been
nibbling and spoke suddenly.

"Count, a report has reached me that you spoke rudely to the doge of
Venice." His booming bass voice sounded as if it were emerging from the
depths of a tomb. "You do realize that your actions reflect on the crown
of France?"

He thrust his face into Simon's as he spoke, which made Simon
involuntarily draw back. De Verceuil was one of the few men Simon had
ever met who matched his own unusual height.

Simon felt his face grow hot. "Yes, Your Eminence."

"And how could you dismiss the trovatore Sordello from the post to which
Count Charles himself appointed him?"

"If Sordello had stayed with us, the Tartars might have taken such
offense as to go back to Outremer."

"Do not be absurd. Would they abandon a mission of such importance
because of a tavern brawl?"

Simon felt shame, but, deeper than that, resentment. He was the Count de
Gobignon, and not since he was a child had anyone chastised him like
this.

He heard a rustling as someone came down the row of vines where they
were standing. He turned to see Friar Mathieu, and hoped he was about to
be rescued.

After the Franciscan had humbly greeted the cardinal and kissed his
sapphire ring, he said, "I must tell Your Eminence that what happened
was not a mere tavern brawl. Sordello stabbed and nearly killed the heir
to the throne of Armenia, an important ally of the Tartars."

De Verceuil stared at Friar Mathieu. The cardinal had a mouth so small
it looked quite out of place below his large nose and above his large
chin. A mean mouth, Simon thought.

"Your opinion does not interest me," de Verceuil said. "I cannot imagine
why King Louis trusted a beggar-priest to conduct diplomacy with the
empire of Tartary."

The resentment Simon had felt at the cardinal's harsh speech at his
expense now flared up in anger.

_I am young and I do make mistakes_, Simon thought. _But, cardinal or
not, this man has no right to stand there in his velvet and satin and
jewels and sneer at this fine old man. No right at all._

But the old friar merely stroked his white beard with a wry smile and
said, "I said that very thing to him myself, when he ordered me to go."

Still angry, Simon took a deep breath and said, "Since Your Eminence
feels I have embarrassed the king and displeased the Count of Anjou,
there is only one course open to me. I will resign my command of the
ambassadors' guards."

Simon stared into de Verceuil's eyes, and the cardinal's eyelids
fluttered. In the silence Simon heard a blackbird calling in nearby
olive trees.

_I never wanted to come here. I let Uncle Charles talk me into it. I do
not mind the danger. And it would be exciting to outguess a hidden enemy
who is trying to murder the Tartars. But I cannot endure the way this
man humiliates me and my friends. I will go back to Gobignon now._

"You must not let a bit of fatherly correction wound you so deeply,
Count," said the cardinal, his voice still deep and dirgelike but no
longer full of scorn. "I would never suggest the Count of Anjou had made
a mistake in choosing you for this post."

_Fatherly! What a disgusting thought!_

But Simon could see that his resigning worried de Verceuil. Uncle
Charles wanted Simon to guard the ambassadors, just as he had wanted
Sordello to head the archers. He had his reasons. And de Verceuil did
not want to cross Charles d'Anjou.

Friar Mathieu laughed gently, and patted Simon on the shoulder. "If you
please, be kind enough to change your mind about resigning. All of us
are aware that you have carried out the task with intelligence and zeal.
Is that not right, Your Eminence?"

"Of course," said de Verceuil, his mouth puckered and sour. "Count, I
would have you present these Tartar dignitaries to me."

"I will be happy to interpret for you, Your Eminence," said Friar
Mathieu. De Verceuil did not answer him.

As they crossed the vineyard, the cardinal stretched out his long arm
and said, "I have brought musicians, jongleurs, senators of Orvieto,
men-at-arms, two archbishops, six bishops, an abbot, and many monsignors
and priests." A long line of men stretched down the road into the nearby
woods. Most of them wore various shades of red; a few were in
cloth-of-gold or blue. The points of long spears flashed in the
sunlight. Banners with fringes of gold and silver swung at the tops of
poles. Seeking protection from the mid-August heat, men walked horses in
the shade of the woods.

Beyond the treetops rose a distant pedestal of grayish-yellow rock
crowned by a city. An astonishing sight, Orvieto.

"The Holy Father will be meeting us at the cathedral and will say a
special mass of thanksgiving for the safe arrival of the ambassadors,"
said de Verceuil. "I want the entry of the Tartars into Orvieto to
impress both the Tartars themselves and the pope and his courtiers."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Monsters!"

"Cannibals!"

Rotten apples, pears and onions, chunks of moldy bread, flew through the
air. Small stones that did not injure, but stung. And worse.

The shouts and missiles came from both sides of the street, but always
when Simon was looking the other way, so he could not see his
assailants. The people crowded in front of the shops were mostly young
men, but women and children were scattered among them. They wore the
dull grayish and brownish garments of workers and peasants. The
street-level windows behind them were shuttered, and the doors were
closed tight. That was a sure sign, Simon knew from his Paris student
days, that the shopkeepers expected trouble.

From the Porta Maggiore, the main gate where they had entered, the
street curved toward the south side of the town. Though the upper
stories of many houses overshadowed the street, there was room enough
for the procession to move along, four horses abreast, and for the
unruly people to gather on either side. Approaching the south wall of
the city, the street made a sharp bend to the left, and Simon had lost
sight of the Tartar emissaries behind, who were--_What a
mistake!_--being carried in an open sedan chair. Were they being pelted
with garbage?

Why were the people of Orvieto doing this? True, everyone in Christendom
had heard wild tales of the Tartars. That they were monsters with dogs'
heads. That they bit off the breasts of women. That they stank so
abominably they overcame whole armies just with their smell. That they
were determined to kill or enslave everyone on earth. There were
churches where people prayed every Sunday to be delivered "from the fury
of the Tartars."

But it had been over twenty years since the Tartars had invaded Europe,
and even then they had come no farther than Poland and Hungary. Why
should these people of Orvieto turn so violently against them now, when
they came in peace?

Undoubtedly someone was stirring them up.

_Hang de Verceuil and his orders_, Simon thought. _I should be with the
ambassadors. If someone wants to kill them, this would be a perfect
chance._

He tugged on the reins of his palfrey, pulling her head around. "Make
way!" he shouted, spurring his horse back the way he had come.
Men-at-arms with spears and crossbows cursed at him in various Italian
dialects, but they opened a path, pushing back the people. Thierry rode
a small horse in Simon's wake.

"Imps of Satan!" came a shout from the crowd. "The Tartars are devils!"

Simon scanned the faces below him. Some looked angry, some frightened,
many bewildered. No one looked happy. The cardinal's hope for an
impressive entry into Orvieto had been quite dashed, and Simon felt a
sneaking pleasure at that.

Passing the corner where the procession had turned, he saw again a
building he had passed earlier, a formidable three-story cube of yellow
stone with slotted windows on the ground floor and iron bars over the
wider upper windows.

_And there is a man who looks happy._

He was standing in sunlight, leaning out from the square Guelfo
battlements on the roof of the big building. His hair was the color of
brass, his skin a smooth brown, such as Simon had seen on pilgrims newly
returned from the crusader strongholds in Outremer. The blond man gazed
down on the jostling, shouting crowd, smiling faintly.

As Simon rode past him, their eyes met. Simon was startled by the
intensity of the other's gaze. It was as if a wordless message had
crossed the space between them. A challenge. But then the blond man
looked away.

The Tartar ambassadors, seated side by side in a large sedan chair, were
farther up the street. Here, Simon noticed with relief, the crowd had
fallen quiet. Perhaps curiosity about the Tartars, with their round
brown faces and many-colored robes, had overcome whatever had roused
these people against them. Then, too, the Tartars were surrounded by
their Armenians marching on foot, curved swords drawn, as well as by
Simon's knights on horseback, and Venetian crossbowmen. The archers'
bows, Simon noticed, were loaded and drawn. Who had ordered that?

De Verceuil on a huge black horse--no palfrey this, but a powerful
charger--rode up to Simon. "Why did you not remain in the forefront?
What is going on up ahead?"

Without trying to defend himself, Simon described the disturbance.

"Could you not control the rabble?" de Verceuil growled, and turned to
take a position beside the Tartars' sedan chair.

Simon's face burned, and his hands trembled as he stared after de
Verceuil.

When they passed the yellow stone building, Simon looked up and saw the
blond man still there on the roof. The man was staring down at the
Tartars with that same burning look he had thrown at Simon, but there
were no weapons in the hands that gripped the battlements.

Simon heard a slapping sound and an angry cry. He turned to see de
Verceuil, his right cheek smeared brown.

_God's death! Someone threw shit at him! And hit him right in the face._

The cardinal, his face distorted as if he were about to vomit, was
staring at the stained hand with which he had just wiped his cheek.

There was laughter from the crowd, mixed with angry cries of "Bestioni!
Creatures from hell!"

For an instant Simon felt laughter bubbling up to his lips, but cold
horror swept all amusement away as he sensed what was about to happen.

De Verceuil turned to the nearest crossbowmen, who had not suppressed
their own smiles.

"Shoot!" he shouted. "Shoot whoever did that!"

The smiles remained fixed on the faces of the Venetians as three of them
aimed their already-loaded crossbows at the crowd. They did not
hesitate. This was not their city; these were not their people. They
were fighting men who did as they were ordered.

People screamed and shrank back against the shuttered doors and windows.

Three loud snaps of the bowstrings came at the same moment as Simon's
cry of "No!"

He shouted without thinking, and was surprised to hear his own voice.
His cry echoed in a sudden and terrible quiet.

Screams of agony immediately followed. People darted away from the place
where the crossbowmen had aimed, leaving that part of the street empty.

Empty save for three people. Two of them screamed. One was silent--a
young man who half sat, half lay against the stone wall of a house.
Blood was pouring out of his mouth and more blood was running from a
hole in his chest. Simon saw that the blood was coming in a steady
stream, not in rhythmic spurts, which meant the fellow's heart had
stopped. A glance at the white face told Simon the dead youth could be
no more than sixteen.

Beside the boy, a woman knelt and wept. She was plump and middle-aged,
perhaps his mother. Her white linen tunic was bloodied.

"He did nothing!" she cried. "Oh, Jesus! Mary! He did nothing!" There
was a plea in her voice, as if she might bring the boy back to life if
only she could persuade people of his innocence.

The other cries came from a man who stood about a yard from the dead
boy. The bolt had gone through his left shoulder just above the armpit
and pinned him to the oaken post of a doorway. He wanted to fall, but he
had to stand or suffer unbearable pain.

"Help me!" he begged, casting pain-blinded eyes right and left. "Help
me!"

Simon jumped down from his horse, throwing the reins to Thierry, and ran
to the man. He put his left hand on the chest and pulled at the flaring
end of the quarrel with his right. He could not move it. The bolt was
buried too deeply in the wood. The man's forehead fell against Simon's
shoulder, and he was silent. Simon hoped he had fainted.

Now Simon saw where the third bolt had gone. Six inches of it, half its
length, was buried in a wall a few feet to Simon's right. The wall was
made of the same grayish-yellow stone Orvieto was built on.

The crossbow bolt in the man's shoulder was thick and made of hard wood.
Simon had nothing that would cut the man loose without hurting him even
more. He looked up and down the street. It was quite empty now, except
for a few people watching from a distance. The procession had gone on.
He glanced up and saw that the blond man had left his place on the roof.

Friar Mathieu knelt beside the dead young man, one hand moving in
blessing, the other resting on the shoulder of the weeping woman.

De Pirenne and Thierry, both mounted, the equerry holding Simon's horse,
looked at him uncertainly.

"Go, Alain!" said Simon impatiently. "Stay with the Tartars."

He himself was neglecting his duty, he thought, as de Pirenne galloped
off. But now that he was trying to help this poor devil, he could not
abandon him.

"Can I do anything, Monseigneur?" Thierry asked.

As Simon was about to answer, he saw a middle-aged man wearing a
carpenter's apron.

"Messere, can you bring a saw?" he called. "Hurry!"

It seemed hours before the man returned with a small saw with a pointed
end and widely spaced teeth. He held it out to Simon.

Simon wanted to shout at the carpenter, but he took a grip on himself
and said patiently, "You are bound to be better at sawing than I. Per
favore, cut away the end of the crossbow bolt so we can free this man."

Gingerly at first, then working with a will, the carpenter sawed off the
flaring end of the bolt with its thin wooden vanes. The pinned man awoke
and was sobbing and groaning.

Once the protruding part of the bolt was sawed away, Simon took a deep
breath, wrapped his arms around the sobbing man, and pulled him away
from the wall. The man screamed so loudly that Simon's ears rang; then
the man sagged to the ground. Blood flowed from the wound in his
shoulder, soaking his tunic. Blood coated the stump of the bolt, still
stuck in the door post. Simon dropped to his knees beside the wounded
man. A pool of bright red widened rapidly on the flat paving stones.

_Now what do I do with him? I must get back to my duty._

He spoke with the carpenter. "Press your hand on the wound, hard. That
will slow the bleeding." Simon took the man's hand and put it on the
hole the crossbow bolt had made.

"Here, let me do that." Friar Mathieu was on his knees beside the hurt
man, his hand covering the wound. "Messere," he said to the carpenter,
"ride my donkey to the hospital of the Franciscans. Tell them there is a
man badly hurt here and Friar Mathieu d'Alcon says they are to send
brothers to take him for treatment."

Simon stood up slowly as the carpenter climbed on Mathieu's donkey.

"It is not safe for you to stay here," he said to Friar Mathieu. "The
people know you were part of the procession and may blame you for what
happened."

Mathieu shook his head. "No one will hurt me. Go along now."

Simon jumped into the saddle and spurred his palfrey to a trot. Thierry
rode beside him.

"Those two didn't throw anything," Thierry said.

"Of course not." Simon wondered if de Verceuil cared that the Venetians
had shot two innocent men.

When Simon caught up with the procession, de Verceuil was still
furiously scrubbing his face with his pale violet cloak.

"If you had done something sooner about the rioting, this outrage would
not have happened to me," he said, a quaver of anger in his deep voice.

_God help me_, thought Simon. _I could easily grow to hate him. Cardinal
or not._

       *       *       *       *       *

Word of the shootings must have spread through the city, Simon thought,
because the twisting street leading to the cathedral was nearly empty.

But the piazza in front of Orvieto's cathedral of San Giovenale was
packed with people. Simon's eye was immediately drawn to the top of the
cathedral steps. There stood a white-bearded man wearing a red mantle
over white robes glittering with gold ornament. On his head a tall white
lozenge-shaped miter embroidered with a red and gold cross. In his hand,
a great golden shepherd's crook at least seven feet tall. Simon's mouth
fell open and he held his breath.

The ruler of the whole Catholic Church the world over, the chosen of
God, the anointed of Christ, the heir of Saint Peter. His Holiness,
Urban IV, the pope himself. Simon felt almost as much awe as he had that
day in Paris when King Louis had let him kiss the Crown of Thorns.

_How lucky I am to be here and see this man whom most Christians never
see. It is close as one can come to seeing Jesus Christ Himself._

It looked to Simon as if the Holy Father were glowing with a
supernatural light. To his left and his right stood a dozen or more men
in bright red robes and wide-brimmed red hats with long red tassels
dangling down to their shoulders. The cardinals, the princes of the
Church. Simon wondered if the Tartars realized what honor this did them.

As soon as their sedan chair was set before the pope, the two short
brown men stepped out of it, knelt, and pressed their foreheads to the
cobblestones. They stayed that way until the pope gestured to de
Verceuil, who bent and touched them on the shoulder and raised them up.

The pope turned and, followed by the Tartars and then the cardinals,
proceeded into the cathedral. For this meeting to succeed, a papal mass
was the best possible beginning.

So many people were ahead of Simon that Friar Mathieu caught up with him
before he was able to enter the door of the cathedral.

"What do you think stirred up the crowd like that?" Simon asked as they
pushed through the people standing in the nave of the church.

"In the cities of Italy the mob is always either furious or ecstatic,"
said Friar Mathieu.

"But to defile a cardinal!" Simon said. "That would never happen in
France."

"Italians do not reverence the clergy as much as Frenchmen do," the
Franciscan said with a little smile. "They have had to put up with the
princes of the Church for so long that they are a good deal less awed by
them."

The interior of the cathedral was ablaze with the light of a thousand
candles, but Simon was not impressed by the windows, which were small
and narrow and filled with dull-colored glass. This was an old church,
he thought, remembering the huge windows of many-colored glass in the
newer cathedrals of France.

The crowd was so tightly packed that Simon and Friar Mathieu could not
get to the front of the nave, where chairs had been set before the altar
for dignitaries. They had to be content with standing halfway down the
length of the church. Simon thought wryly that he was getting used to
being pushed into the background. Perhaps he was accepting it too
easily.

Pope Urban, his white hair uncovered, had raised high the round wafer of
bread for the Consecration of the Mass, when an angry shout echoed
through the cathedral.

A chill went through Simon's body, cold as a knife blade. Using his
shoulder as a wedge, he forced his way through the crowd toward the
source of the sound, near the front of the church.

"Ex Tartari furiosi!" the man was shouting in Latin. "Libera nos,
Domine!" _From the fury of the Tartars, Lord deliver us!_ Cries of
dismay rang out near the disturbance, and people began shouting in
Italian.

"Stand aside! Let me through!" Simon shouted. If this were an assassin,
reverence for the mass, even for the pope, must be set aside. Again and
again the shout rose, "Ex Tartari furiosi!" It was harder to move
through the crowd. People were struggling to get away from the man
making the uproar.

Simon stopped, shoved men right and left to make room, and pulled his
scimitar from his scabbard.

People around him turned at the unmistakable rasp of steel on leather, a
sound that so often preceded sudden death. They saw the Saracen sword in
Simon's hands and drew back. As Simon hoped, more people noticed and
fell over one another trying to get out of his way.

Like Moses' rod parting the Red Sea, Simon's scimitar opened a path for
him.

Simon saw a young man with a tangled mass of brown hair whipping about
his face and a brown beard that spread over his chest. He was big and
broad-shouldered, and he wore a plain white robe, ragged and gray with
dirt, and sandals. In one hand he held a dagger.

_Blood of Jesus! He must have come here to kill the Tartars._

Terrified people had opened a circle around the white-robed man, and as
he moved toward the front of the cathedral the open space moved with
him.

"Stop!" Simon cried.

Baring greenish-looking teeth in a snarl, the man swiveled his shaggy
head toward Simon, then immediately rushed at him.
