closely touching on disrespect. At the halfway of the meal, a gorgeous
popinjay--he was a governor of an out-province driven into the capital
by a rebellion in his own lands--this gorgeous fop, I say, walked up
between the groups of feasters with flushed face and unsteady gait, and
did obeisance before the divan. "Most astounding Empress," cried he,
"fairest among the Goddesses, Queen regnant of my adoring heart, hail!"

Phorenice with a smile stretched him out her cup. I looked to see him
pour respectful libation, but no such thing. He set the drink to his
lips and drained it to the final drop. "May all your troubles," he
cried, "pass from you as easily, and leave as pleasant a flavour."

The Empress turned to me with one of her quick looks. "You do not like
this new habit?"

To which I replied bluntly enough that to pour out liquor at a person's
feet had grown through custom to be a mark of respect, but that drinking
it seemed to me mere self-indulgence, which might be practised anywhere.

"You still keep to the old austere teachings," she said. "Our newer code
bids us enjoy life first, and order other things so as not to meddle
with our more immediate pleasure."

And so the feast went on, the guests practising their gluttonies and
their absurdities, and the guards standing to their arms round the
circuit of the walls as motionless and as stern as the statues carven
in the white stone beyond them. But a term was put to the orgy with
something of suddenness. There was a stir at the farther doorway of the
banqueting-hall, and a clash, as two of the guards joined their spears
across the entrance. But the man they tried to stop--or perhaps it was
to pin--passed them unharmed, and walked up over the pavement between
the lights, and the groups of feasters. All looked round at him; a few
threw him ribald words; but none ventured to stop his progress. A few,
women chiefly, I could see, shuddered as he passed them by, as though a
wintry chill had come over them; and in the end he walked up and stood
in front of Phorenice's divan, and gazed fixedly on her, but without
making obeisance.

He was a frail old man, with white hair tumbling on his shoulders, and
ragged white beard. The mud of wayfaring hung in clots on his feet and
legs. His wizened body was bare save for a single cloth wound about
his shoulders and his loins, and he carried in his hand a wand with the
symbol of our Lord the Sun glowing at its tip. That wand went to show
his caste, but in no other way could I recognize him.

I took him for one of those ascetics of the Priests' Clan, who had
forsworn the steady nurtured life of the Sacred Mountain, and who lived
out in the dangerous lands amongst the burning hills, where there is
daily peril from falling rocks, from fire streams, from evil vapours,
from sudden fissuring of the ground, and from other movements of those
unstable territories, and from the greater lizards and other monstrous
beasts which haunt them. These keep constant in the memory the might of
the Holy Gods, and the insecurity of this frail earth on which we have
our resting-place, and so the sojourners there become chastened in the
spirit, and gain power over mysteries which even the most studious and
learned of other men can never hope to attain.

A silence filled the room when the old man came to his halt, and
Phorenice was the first to break it. "Those two guards," she said, in
her clear, carrying voice, "who held the door, are not equal to their
work. I cannot have imperfect servants; remove them."

The soldiers next in the rank lifted their spears and drove them home,
and the two fellows who had admitted the old man fell to the ground. One
shrieked once, the other gave no sound: they were clever thrusts both.

The old man found his voice, thin, and high, and broken. "Another crime
added to your tally, Phorenice. Not half your army could have hindered
my entrance had I wished to come, and let me tell you that I am here to
bring you your last warning. The Gods have shown you much favour; they
gave you merit by which you could rise above your fellows, till at last
only the throne stood above you. It was seen good by those on the Sacred
Mountain to let you have this last ambition, and sit on this throne
that has as long and honourably been filled by the ancient kings of
Atlantis."

The Empress sat back on the divan smiling. "I seemed to get these things
as I chose, and in spite of your friends' teeth. I may owe to you, old
man, a small parcel of thanks, though that I offered to repay; but for
my lords the priests, their permission was of small enough value when
it came. I would have you remember that I was as firm on the throne of
Atlantis as this pyramid stands upon its base when your worn-out priests
came up to give their tottering benediction."

The old man waved aside her interruption. "Hear me out," he said. "I am
here with no trivial message. There is nothing paltry about the threat
I can throw at you, Phorenice. With your fire-tubes, your handling of
troops, and your other fiendish clevernesses, you may not be easy to
overthrow by mere human means, though, forsooth, these poor rebels who
yap against your city walls have contrived to hold their ground for long
enough now. It may be that you are becoming enervated; I do not know.
It may be that you are too wrapped up in your feastings, your dressings,
your pomps, and your debaucheries, to find leisure to turn to the art
of war. It may be that the man's spirit has gone out from your arm and
brain, and you are a woman once more--weak, and pleasure-loving; again I
do not know.

"But this must happen: You must undo the evil you have done; you must
give bread to the people who are starving, even if you take it from
these gluttons in this hall; you must restore Atlantis to the state in
which it was entrusted to you: or else you must be removed. It cannot
be permitted that the country should sink back into the lawlessness
and barbarism from which its ancient kings have digged it. You hear,
Phorenice. Now give me true answer."

"Speak him fair. Oh! For the sake of your fortune, speak him fair," came
Ylga's voice in a hurried whisper from behind us. But the Empress took
no notice of it. She leaned forward on the cushions of the divan with a
knit brow.

"Do you dare to threaten me, old man, knowing what I am?"

"I know your origin," he said gravely, "as well as you know it yourself.
As for my daring, that is a small matter. He need be but a timid man who
dares to say words that the High Gods put on his lips."

"I shall rule this kingdom as I choose. I shall brook interference from
no creature on this earth, or beneath it, or in the sky above. The Gods
have chosen me to be Their regent in Atlantis, and They do not depose me
through such creatures as you. Go away, old man, and play the fanatic in
another court. It is well that I have an ancient kindliness for you, or
you would not leave this place unharmed."

"Now, indeed, you are lost," I heard Ylga murmur from behind, and the
old man in front of us did not move a step. Instead, he lifted up the
Symbol of our Lord the Sun, and launched his curse. "Your blasphemy
gives the reply I asked for. Hear me now make declaration of war on
behalf of Those against whom you have thrown your insults. You shall be
overthrown and sent to the nether Gods. At whatever cost the land shall
be purged of you and yours, and all the evil that has been done to it
whilst you have sullied the throne of its ancient kings. You will not
amend, neither will you yield tamely. You vaunt that you sit as firm on
your throne as this pyramid reposes on its base. See how little you
know of what the future carries. I say to you that, whilst you are yet
Empress, you shall see this royal pyramid which you have polluted
with your debaucheries torn tier from tier, and stone from stone, and
scattered as feathers spread before a wind."

"You may wreck the pyramid," said Phorenice contemptuously. "I myself
have some knowledge of the earth forces, as I have shown this night. But
though you crumble every stone above us now and grind it into grit and
dust, I shall still be Empress. What force can you crazy priests bring
against me that I cannot throw back and destroy?"

"We have a weapon that was forged in no mortal smithy," shrilled the
old man, "whereof the key is now lodged in the Ark of the Mysteries. But
that weapon can be used only as a last resource. The nature of it even
is too awful to be told in words. Our other powers will be launched
against you first, and for this poor country's sake I pray that they may
cause you to wince. Yet rest assured, Phorenice, that we shall not step
aside once we have put a hand to this matter. We shall carry it through,
even though the cost be a universal burning and destruction. For know
this, daughter of the swineherd, it is agreed amongst the most High Gods
that you are too full of sin to continue unchecked."

"Speak him fairly," Ylga urged from behind. "He has a power at which you
cannot even guess."

The Empress made to rise, but Ylga clung to her skirt. "For the sake of
your fame," she urged, "for the sake of your life, do not defy him." But
Phorenice struck her fiercely aside, and faced the old man in a tumult
of passion. "You dare call me a blasphemer, who blaspheme yourself? You
dare cast slurs upon my birth, who am come direct from the most high
Heaven? Old man, your craziness protects you in part, but not in all.
You shall be whipped. Do you hear me? I say, whipped. The lean flesh
shall be scourged from your scraggy bones, and you shall totter away
from this place as a red and bleeding example for those who would dare
traduce their Empress. Here, some of you, I say, take that man, and let
him be whipped where he stands."

Her cry went out clearly enough. But not a soul amongst those glittering
feasters stirred in his place. Not a soldier amongst the guards stepped
from his rank. The place was hung in a terrible silence. It seemed as
though no one within the hall dared so much as to draw a breath. All
felt that the very air was big with fate.

Phorenice, with her head crouched forward, looked from one group to
another. Her face was working. "Have I no true servants," she asked,
"amongst all you pretty lip-servers?"

Still no one moved. They stood, or sat, or crouched like people
fascinated. For myself, with the first words he had uttered, I had
recognized the old man by his voice. It was Zaemon, the weak governor
who had given the Empress her first step towards power; that earnest
searcher into the mysteries, who knew more of their powers, and more
about the hidden forces, than any other dweller on the Sacred Mountain,
even at that time when I left for my colony. And now, during his strange
hermit life, how much more might he not have learned? I was torn by
warring duties. I owed much to the Priests' Clan, by reason of my oath
and membership; it seemed I owed no less to Phorenice. And, again, was
Zaemon the truly accredited envoy of the high council of the priests of
the Sacred Mountain? And was the Empress of a truth deposed by the High
Gods above, or was she still Empress, and still the commander of my
duty? I could not tell, and so I sat in my seat awaiting what the event
would sow.

Phorenice's fury was growing. "Do I stand alone here?" she cried. "Have
I pampered you creatures out of all touch with gratitude? It seems that
at last I want a new chief to my guards. Ho! Who will be chief of the
guards of the Empress?"

There was a shifting of eyes, a hesitation. Then a great burly form
strode up from the farther end of the hall, and a perceptible shudder
went up from all the others as they watched him.

"So, Tarca, you prefer to take the risks, and remain chief of the guard
yourself?" she said with an angry scoff. "Truly there did not seem to be
many thrusting forward to strip you of the office. I shall have a fine
sorting up of places in payment for this night's work. But for the
present, Tarca, do your duty."

The man came up, obviously timorous. He was a solidly made fellow, but
not altogether unmartial, and though but little of his cheek showed
above his decorated beard, I could see that he paled as he came near
to the priest. "My lord," he said quietly, "I must ask you to come with
me."

"Stand aside," said the old man, thrusting out the Symbol in front of
him. I could see his eyes gather on the soldier and his brows knit with
a strain of will.

Tarca saw this too, and I thought he would have fallen, but with an
effort he kept his manhood, and doggedly repeated his summons. "I must
obey the command of my mistress, and I would have you remember, my lord,
that I am but a servant. You must come with me to the whip."

"I warn you!" cried the old man. "Stand from out of my path, you!"

It must have been with the courage of desperation that the soldier dared
to use force. But the hand he stretched out dropped limply back to his
side the moment it touched the old man's bare shoulder, as though it had
been struck by some shock. He seemed almost to have expected some such
repulse; yet when he picked up that hand with the other, and looked
at it, and saw its whiteness, he let out of him a yell like a wounded
beast. "Oh, Gods!" he cried. "Not that. Spare me!"

But Zaemon was glowering at him still. A twitching seized the man's
face, and he put up his sound hand to it and plucked at his beard,
which was curled and plaited after the new fashion of the day. A woman
standing near screamed as the half of the beard came off in his fingers.
Beneath was silver whiteness over half his face. Zaemon had smitten him
with a sudden leprosy that was past cure.

Yet the punishment was not ended even then. Other twitchings took him
on other parts of the body, and he tore off his armour and his foppish
clothes, and always where the bare flesh showed, there had the horrid
plague written its white mark; and in the end, being able to endure no
more, the man fell to the pavement and lay there writhing.

Zaemon said no further word. He lifted the Symbol before him, set
his eyes on the farther door of the banqueting-hall and walked for
it directly, all those in his path shrinking away from him with open
shudders. And through the valves of the door he passed out of our sight,
still wordless, still unchecked.

I glanced up at Phorenice. The loveliness of her face was drawn and
haggard. It was the first great reverse, this, she had met with in
all her life, and the shock of it, and the vision of what might follow
after, dazed her. Alas, if she could only have guessed at a tenth of the
terrors which the future had in its womb, Atlantis might have been saved
even then.




6. THE BITERS OF THE CITY WALLS


Here then was the manner of my reception back in the capital of
Atlantis, and some first glimpse at her new policies. I freely confess
to my own inaction and limpness; but it was all deliberate. The old ties
of duty seemed lost, or at least merged in one another. Beforetime, to
serve the king was to serve the Clan of the Priests, from which he had
been chosen, and whose head he constituted. But Phorenice was self-made,
and appeared to be a rule unto herself; if Zaemon was to be trusted,
he was the mouthpiece of the Priests, and their Clan had set her at
defiance; and how was a mere honest man to choose on the instant between
the two?

But cold argument told me that governments were set up for the good
of the country at large, and I said to myself that there would be my
choice. I must find out which rule promised best of Atlantis, and do my
poor best to prop it into full power. And here at once there opened up
another path in the maze: I had heard some considerable talk of rebels;
of another faction of Atlanteans who, whatever their faults might be,
were at any rate strong enough to beleaguer the capital; and before
coming to any final decision, it would be as well to take their claims
in balance with the rest. So on the night of that very same day on which
I had just re-planted my foot on the old country's shores, I set out to
glean for myself tidings on the matter.

No one inside the royal pyramid gainsaid me. The banquet had ended
abruptly with the terrible scene that I have set down above on these
tablets, for with Tarca writhing on the floor, and thrusting out the
gruesome scars of his leprosy, even the most gluttonous had little
enough appetite for further gorging. Phorenice glowered on the feasters
for a while longer in silent fury, but saying no further word; and then
her eyes turned on me, though softened somewhat.

"You may be an honest man, Deucalion," she said, at length, "but you are
a monstrous cold one. I wonder when you will thaw?" And here she smiled.
"I think it will be soon. But for now I bid you farewell. In the morning
we will take this country by the shoulders, and see it in some new
order."

She left the banqueting-hall then, Ylga following; and taking
precedence of my rank, I went out next, whilst all others stood and made
salutation. But I halted by Tarca first, and put my hand on his unclean
flesh. "You are an unfortunate man," I said, "but I can admire a brave
soldier. If relief can be gained for your plague, I will use interest to
procure it for you."

The man's thanks came in a mumble from his wrecked mouth, and some of
those near shuddered in affected disgust. I turned on them with a
black brow: "Your charity, my lords, seems of as small account as
your courage. You affected a fine disbelief of Zaemon's sayings, and
a simpering contempt for his priesthood, but when it comes to laying
a hand on him, you show a discretion which, in the old days, we should
have called by an ugly name. I had rather be Tarca, with all his
uncleanness, than any of you now as you stand."

With which leave-taking I waited coldly till they gave me my due
salutation, and then walked out of the banqueting-hall without offering
a soul another glance. I took my way to the grand gate of the pyramid,
called for the officer of the guard, and demanded exit. The man was
obsequious enough, but he opened with some demur.

"My lord's attendants have not yet come up?"

"I have none."

"My lord knows the state of the streets?"
