
In order to increase the power of a spectroscope, it is necessary to
add to the number of prisms. Each extra prism has the effect of
lengthening the coloured strip still more, so that lines, which at first
appeared to be single merely through being crowded together, are
eventually drawn apart and become separately distinguishable.

On this principle it has gradually been determined that the sun is
composed of elements similar to those which go to make up our earth.
Further, the composition of the stars can be ascertained in the same
manner; and we find them formed on a like pattern, though with certain
elements in greater or less proportion as the case may be. It is in
consequence of our thus definitely ascertaining that the stars are
self-luminous, and of a sun-like character, that we are enabled to speak
of them as _suns_, or to call the sun a _star_.

In endeavouring to discover the elements of which the planets and
satellites of our system are composed, we, however, find ourselves
baffled, for the simple reason that these bodies emit no real light of
their own. The light which reaches us from them, being merely reflected
sunlight, gives only the ordinary solar spectrum when examined with the
spectroscope. But in certain cases we find that the solar spectrum thus
viewed shows traces of being weakened, or rather of suffering
absorption; and it is concluded that this may be due to the sunlight
having had to pass through an atmosphere on its way to and from the
surface of the planet from which it is reflected to us.

Since the sun is found to be composed of elements similar to those which
go to make up our earth, we need not be disheartened at this failure of
the spectroscope to inform us of the composition of the planets and
satellites. We are justified, indeed, in assuming that more or less the
same constituents run through our solar system; and that the elements of
which these bodies are composed are similar to those which are found
upon our earth and in the sun.

The spectroscope supplies us with even more information. It tells us,
indeed, whether the sun-like body which we are observing is moving away
from us or towards us. A certain slight shifting of the lines towards
the red or violet end of the spectrum respectively, is found to follow
such movement. This method of observation is known by the name of
_Doppler's Method_,[9] and by it we are enabled to confirm the evidence
which the sunspots give us of the rotation of the sun; for we find thus
that one edge of that body is continually approaching us, and the other
edge is continually receding from us. Also, we can ascertain in the same
manner that certain of the stars are moving towards us, and certain of
them away from us.


[9] The idea, initiated by Christian Doppler at Prague in 1842, was
originally applied to sound. The approach or recession of a source from
which sound is coming is invariably accompanied by alterations of pitch,
as the reader has no doubt noticed when a whistling railway-engine has
approached him or receded from him. It is to Sir William Huggins,
however, that we are indebted for the application of the principle to
spectroscopy. This he gave experimental proof of in the year 1868.




CHAPTER XII

THE SUN


The sun is the chief member of our system. It controls the motions of
the planets by its immense gravitative power. Besides this it is the
most important body in the entire universe, so far as we are concerned;
for it pours out continually that flood of light and heat, without which
life, as we know it, would quickly become extinct upon our globe.

Light and heat, though not precisely the same thing, may be regarded,
however, as next-door neighbours. The light rays are those which
directly affect the eye and are comprised in the visible spectrum. We
_feel_ the heat rays, the chief of which are beyond the red portion of
the spectrum. They may be investigated with the _bolometer_, an
instrument invented by the late Professor Langley. Chemical rays--for
instance, those radiations which affect the photographic plate--are for
the most part also outside the visible spectrum. They are, however, at
the other end of it, namely, beyond the violet.

Such a scale of radiations may be compared to the keyboard of an
imaginary piano, the sound from only one of whose octaves is audible to
us.

The brightest light we know on the earth is dull compared with the light
of the sun. It would, indeed, look quite dark if held up against it.

It is extremely difficult to arrive at a precise notion of the
temperature of the body of the sun. However, it is far in excess of any
temperature which we can obtain here, even in the most powerful electric
furnace.

A rough idea of the solar heat may be gathered from the calculation that
if the sun's surface were coated all over with a layer of ice 4000 feet
thick, it would melt through this completely in one hour.

The sun cannot be a hot body merely cooling; for the rate at which it is
at present giving off heat could not in such circumstances be kept up,
according to Professor Moulton, for more than 3000 years. Further, it is
not a mere burning mass, like a coal fire, for instance; as in that case
about a thousand years would show a certain drop in temperature. No
perceptible diminution of solar heat having taken place within historic
experience, so far as can be ascertained, we are driven to seek some
more abstruse explanation.

The theory which seems to have received most acceptance is that put
forward by Helmholtz in 1854. His idea was that gravitation produces
continual contraction, or falling in of the outer parts of the sun; and
that this falling in, in its turn, generates enough heat to compensate
for what is being given off. The calculations of Helmholtz showed that a
contraction of about 100 feet a year from the surface towards the centre
would suffice for the purpose. In recent years, however, this estimate
has been extended to about 180 feet. Nevertheless, even with this
increased figure, the shrinkage required is so slight in comparison with
the immense girth of the sun, that it would take a continual
contraction at this rate for about 6000 years, to show even in our
finest telescopes that any change in the size of that body was taking
place at all. Upon this assumption of continuous contraction, a time
should, however, eventually be reached when the sun will have shrunk to
such a degree of solidity, that it will not be able to shrink any
further. Then, the loss of heat not being made up for any longer, the
body of the sun should begin to grow cold. But we need not be distressed
on this account; for it will take some 10,000,000 years, according to
the above theory, before the solar orb becomes too cold to support life
upon our earth.

Since the discovery of radium it has, on the other hand, been suggested,
and not unreasonably, that radio-active matter may possibly play an
important part in keeping up the heat of the sun. But the body of
scientific opinion appears to consider the theory of contraction as a
result of gravitation, which has been outlined above, to be of itself
quite a sound explanation. Indeed, the late Lord Kelvin is said to have
held to the last that it was amply sufficient to account for the
underground heat of the earth, the heat of the sun, and that of all the
stars in the universe.

One great difficulty in forming theories with regard to the sun, is the
fact that the temperature and gravitation there are enormously in excess
of anything we meet with upon our earth. The force of gravity at the
sun's surface is, indeed, about twenty-seven times that at the surface
of our globe.

The earth's atmosphere appears to absorb about one-half of the
radiations which come to us from the sun. This absorptive effect is very
noticeable when the solar orb is low down in our sky, for its light and
heat are then clearly much reduced. Of the light rays, the blue ones are
the most easily absorbed in this way; which explains why the sun looks
red when near the horizon. It has then, of course, to shine through a
much greater thickness of atmosphere than when high up in the heavens.

What astonishes one most about the solar radiation, is the immense
amount of it that is apparently wasted into space in comparison with
what falls directly upon the bodies of the solar system. Only about the
one-hundred-millionth is caught by all the planets together. What
becomes of the rest we cannot tell.

That brilliant white body of the sun, which we see, is enveloped by
several layers of gases and vaporous matter, in the same manner as our
globe is enveloped by its atmosphere (see Fig. 10, p. 131). These are
transparent, just as our atmosphere is transparent; and so we see the
white bright body of the sun right through them.

This white bright portion is called the _Photosphere_. From it comes
most of that light and heat which we see and feel. We do not know what
lies under the photosphere, but, no doubt, the more solid portions of
the sun are there situated. Just above the photosphere, and lying close
upon it, is a veil of smoke-like haze.

Next upon this is what is known as the _Reversing Layer_, which is
between 500 and 1000 miles in thickness. It is cooler than the
underlying photosphere, and is composed of glowing gases. Many of the
elements which go to make up our earth are present in the reversing
layer in the form of vapour.

The _Chromosphere_, of which especial mention has already been made in
dealing with eclipses of the sun, is another layer lying immediately
upon the last one. It is between 5000 and 10,000 miles in thickness.
Like the reversing layer, it is composed of glowing gases, chief among
which is the vapour of hydrogen. The colour of the chromosphere is, in
reality, a brilliant scarlet; but, as we have already said, the
intensely white light of the photosphere shines through it from behind,
and entirely overpowers its redness. The upper portion of the
chromosphere is in violent agitation, like the waves of a stormy sea,
and from it rise those red prominences which, it will be recollected,
are such a notable feature in total solar eclipses.

[Illustration: FIG. 10.--A section through the Sun, showing how the
prominences rise from the chromosphere.]

The _Corona_ lies next in order outside the chromosphere, and is, so
far as we know, the outermost of the accompaniments of the sun. This
halo of pearly-white light is irregular in outline, and fades away into
the surrounding sky. It extends outwards from the sun to several
millions of miles. As has been stated, we can never see the corona
unless, when during a total solar eclipse, the moon has, for the time
being, hidden the brilliant photosphere completely from our view.

The solar spectrum is really composed of three separate spectra
commingled, _i.e._ those of the photosphere, of the reversing layer, and
of the chromosphere respectively.

If, therefore, the photosphere could be entirely removed, or covered up,
we should see only the spectra of those layers which lie upon it. Such a
state of things actually occurs in a total eclipse of the sun. When the
moon's body has crept across the solar disc, and hidden the last piece
of photosphere, the solar spectrum suddenly becomes what is technically
called "reversed,"--the dark lines crossing it changing into bright
lines. This occurs because a strip of those layers which lie immediately
upon the photosphere remains still uncovered. The lower of these layers
has therefore been called the "reversing layer," for want of a better
name. After a second or two this reversed spectrum mostly vanishes, and
an altered spectrum is left to view. Taking into consideration the rate
at which the moon is moving across the face of the sun, and the very
short time during which the spectrum of the reversing layer lasts, the
thickness of that layer is estimated to be not more than a few hundred
miles. In the same way the last of the three spectra--namely, that of
the chromosphere--remains visible for such a time as allows us to
estimate its depth at about ten times that of the reversing layer, or
several thousand miles.

When the chromosphere, in its turn during a total eclipse, has been
covered by the moon, the corona alone is left. This has a distinct
spectrum of its own also; wherein is seen a strange line in the green
portion, which does not tally with that of any element we are acquainted
with upon the earth. This unknown element has received for the time
being the name of "Coronium."




CHAPTER XIII

THE SUN--_continued_


The various parts of the Sun will now be treated of in detail.


I. PHOTOSPHERE.

The photosphere, or "light-sphere," from the Greek [phos] (_phos_),
which means _light_, is, as we have already said, the innermost portion
of the sun which can be seen. Examined through a good telescope it shows
a finely mottled structure, as of brilliant granules, somewhat like rice
grains, with small dark spaces lying in between them. It has been
supposed that we have here the process of some system of circulation by
which the sun keeps sending forth its radiations. In the bright granules
we perhaps see masses of intensely heated matter, rising from the
interior of the sun. The dark interspaces may represent matter which has
become cooled and darkened through having parted with its heat and
light, and is falling back again into the solar furnace.

The _sun spots_, so familiar to every one nowadays, are dark patches
which are often seen to break out in the photosphere (see Plate V., p.
134). They last during various periods of time; sometimes only for a few
days, sometimes so long as a month or more. A spot is usually composed
of a dark central portion called the _umbra_, and a less dark fringe
around this called the _penumbra_ (see Plate VI., p. 136). The umbra
ordinarily has the appearance of a deep hole in the photosphere; but,
that it is a hole at all, has by no means been definitely proved.

[Illustration: PLATE V. THE SUN, SHOWING SEVERAL GROUPS OF SPOTS

From a photograph taken at the Royal Observatory, Greenwich. The
cross-lines seen on the disc are in no way connected with the Sun, but
belong to the telescope through which the photograph was taken.

(Page 134)]

Sun spots are, as a rule, some thousands of miles across. The umbra of
a good-sized spot could indeed engulf at once many bodies the size of
our earth.

Sun spots do not usually appear singly, but in groups. The total area of
a group of this kind may be of immense extent; even so great as to cover
the one-hundredth part of the whole surface of the sun. Very large
spots, when such are present, may be seen without any telescope; either
through a piece of smoked glass, or merely with the naked eye when the
air is misty, or the sun low on the horizon.

The umbra of a spot is not actually dark. It only appears so in contrast
with the brilliant photosphere around.

Spots form, grow to a large size in comparatively short periods of time,
and then quickly disappear. They seem to shrink away as a consequence of
the photosphere closing in upon them.

That the sun is rotating upon an axis, is shown by the continual change
of position of all spots in one constant direction across his disc. The
time in which a spot is carried completely round depends, however, upon
the position which it occupies upon the sun's surface. A spot situated
near the equator of the sun goes round once in about twenty-five days.
The further a spot is situated from this equator, the longer it takes.
About twenty-seven days is the time taken by a spot situated midway
between the equator and the solar poles. Spots occur to the north of
the sun's equator, as well as to the south; though, since regular
observations have been made--that is to say, during the past fifty years
or so--they appear to have broken out a little more frequently in the
southern parts.

From these considerations it will be seen that the sun does not rotate
as the earth does, but that different portions appear to move at
different speeds. Whether in the neighbourhood of the solar poles the
time of rotation exceeds twenty-seven days we are unable to ascertain,
for spots are not seen in those regions. No explanation has yet been
given of this peculiar rotation; and the most we can say on the subject
is that the sun is not by any means a solid body.

_Faculae_ (Latin, little torches) are brilliant patches which appear here
and there upon the sun's surface, and are in some way associated with
spots. Their displacement, too, across the solar face confirms the
evidence which the spots give us of the sun's rotation.

Our proofs of this rotation are still further strengthened by the
Doppler spectroscopic method of observation alluded to in Chapter XI. As
was then stated, one edge of the sun is thus found to be continually
approaching us, and the other side continually receding from us. The
varying rates of rotation, which the spots and faculae give us, are duly
confirmed by this method.

[Illustration: PLATE VI. PHOTOGRAPH OF A SUNSPOT

This fine picture was taken by the late M. Janssen. The granular
structure of the Sun's surface is here well represented. (From
_Knowledge_.)

(Page 135)]

The first attempt to bring some regularity into the question of
sunspots was the discovery by Schwabe, in 1852, that they were subject
to a regular variation. As a matter of fact they wax and wane in their
number, and the total area which they cover, in the course of a period,
or cycle, of on an average about 11-1/4 years; being at one part of this
period large and abundant, and at another few and small. This period of
11-1/4 years is known as the sun spot cycle. No explanation has yet been
given of the curious round of change, but the period in question seems
to govern most of the phenomena connected with the sun.


II. REVERSING LAYER.

This is a layer of relatively cool gases lying immediately upon the
photosphere. We never see it directly; and the only proof we have of its
presence is that remarkable reversal of the spectrum already described,
when during an instant or two in a total eclipse, the advancing edge of
the moon, having just hidden the brilliant photosphere, is moving across
the fine strip which the layer then presents edgewise towards us. The
fleeting moments during which this reversed spectrum lasts, informs us
that the layer is comparatively shallow; little more indeed than about
500 miles in depth.

The spectrum of the reversing layer, or "flash spectrum," as it is
sometimes called on account of the instantaneous character with which
the change takes place, was, as we have seen, first noticed by Young in
1870; and has been successfully photographed since then during several
eclipses. The layer itself appears to be in a fairly quiescent state; a
marked contrast to the seething photosphere beneath, and the agitated
chromosphere above.


III. THE CHROMOSPHERE.

The Chromosphere--so called from the Greek [chroma] (_chroma_), which
signifies _colour_--is a layer of gases lying immediately upon the
preceding one. Its thickness is, however, plainly much the greater of
the two; for whereas the reversing layer is only revealed to us
_indirectly_ by the spectroscope, a portion of the chromosphere may
clearly be _seen_ in a total eclipse in the form of a strip of scarlet
light. The time which the moon's edge takes to traverse it tells us that
it must be about ten times as deep as the reversing layer, namely, from
5000 to 10,000 miles in depth. Its spectrum shows that it is composed
chiefly of hydrogen, calcium and helium, in the state of vapour. Its red
colour is mainly due to glowing hydrogen. The element helium, which it
also contains, has received its appellation from [helios] (_helios_),
the Greek name for the sun; because, at the time when it first attracted
attention, there appeared to be no element corresponding to it upon our
earth, and it was consequently imagined to be confined to the sun alone.
Sir William Ramsay, however, discovered it to be also a terrestrial
element in 1895, and since then it has come into much prominence as one
of the products given off by radium.

Taking into consideration the excessive force of gravity on the sun, one
would expect to find the chromosphere and reversing layer growing
gradually thicker in the direction of the photosphere. This, however, is
not the case. Both these layers are strangely enough of the same
densities all through; which makes it suspected that, in these regions,
the force of gravity may be counteracted by some other force or forces,
exerting a powerful pressure outwards from the sun.


IV. THE PROMINENCES.

We have already seen, in dealing with total eclipses, that the exterior
surface of the chromosphere is agitated like a stormy sea, and from it
billows of flame are tossed up to gigantic heights. These flaming jets
are known under the name of prominences, because they were first noticed
in the form of brilliant points projecting from behind the rim of the
moon when the sun was totally eclipsed. Prominences are of two kinds,
_eruptive_ and _quiescent_. The eruptive prominences spurt up directly
from the chromosphere with immense speeds, and change their shape with
great rapidity. Quiescent prominences, on the other hand, have a form
somewhat like trees, and alter their shape but slowly. In the eruptive
prominences glowing masses of gas are shot up to altitudes sometimes as
high as 300,000 miles,[10] with velocities even so great as from 500 to
600 miles a second. It has been noticed that the eruptive prominences
are mostly found in those portions of the sun where spots usually
appear, namely, in the regions near the solar equator. The quiescent
prominences, on the other hand, are confined, as a rule, to the
neighbourhood of the sun's poles.

Prominences were at first never visible except during total eclipses of
the sun. But in the year 1868, as we have already seen, a method of
employing the spectroscope was devised, by means of which they could be
observed and studied at any time, without the necessity of waiting for
an eclipse.

A still further development of the spectroscope, the
_Spectroheliograph_, an instrument invented almost simultaneously by
Professor Hale and the French astronomer, M. Deslandres, permits of
photographs being taken of the sun, with the light emanating from _only
one_ of its glowing gases at a time. For instance, we can thus obtain a
record of what the glowing hydrogen alone is doing on the solar body at
any particular moment. With this instrument it is also possible to
obtain a series of photographs, showing what is taking place upon the
sun at various levels. This is very useful in connection with the study
of the spots; for we are, in consequence, enabled to gather more
evidence on the subject of their actual form than is given us by their
highly foreshortened appearances when observed directly in the
telescope.


V. CORONA. (Latin, _a Crown_.)

This marvellous halo of pearly-white light, which displays itself to our
view only during the total phase of an eclipse of the sun, is by no
means a layer like those other envelopments of the sun of which we have
just been treating. It appears, on the other hand, to be composed of
filmy matter, radiating outwards in every direction, and fading away
gradually into space. Its structure is noted to bear a strong
resemblance to the tails of comets, or the streamers of the aurora
borealis.

Our knowledge concerning the corona has, however, advanced very slowly.
We have not, so far, been as fortunate with regard to it as with regard
to the prominences; and, for all we can gather concerning it, we are
still entirely dependent upon the changes and chances of total solar
eclipses. All attempts, in fact, to apply the spectroscopic method, so
as to observe the corona at leisure in full sunlight in the way in which
the prominences can be observed, have up to the present met with
failure.

The general form under which the corona appears to our eyes varies
