that HERSCHEL undervalued the labors of his cotemporaries.

This impression was fostered no doubt by his general habit of not
quoting previous authorities in the fields which he was working.

A careful reading of his papers will, I think, show that his definite
indebtedness to his _cotemporaries_ was vanishingly small. The work of
MICHELL and WILSON he alludes to again and again, and always with
appreciation. Certainly he seems to show a vein of annoyance that the
papers of CHRISTIAN MAYER, _De novis in coelo sidereo phaenomenis_
(1779), and _Beobachtungen von Fixsterntrabanten_ (1778), should have
been quoted to prove that the method proposed by HERSCHEL in 1782 for
ascertaining the parallax of the fixed stars by means of observations of
those which were double, was not entirely original with himself.

There is direct proof that it was so,[22] and if this was not
forthcoming it would be unnecessary, as he has amply shown in his
Catalogue of Double Stars. One is reminded of his remarks on the use of
the high magnifying powers by the impatience of his comments.

His proposal to call the newly discovered minor planets _asteroids_
(1802) was received as a sign that he wished to discriminate between the
discoveries of PIAZZI and OLBERS and his own discovery of URANUS.[23]

He takes pains to quietly put this on one side in one of his papers,
showing that he was cognizant of the existence of such a feeling.

I am tempted to resurrect from a deserved obscurity a notice of
HERSCHEL'S _Observations on the Two Lately Discovered Celestial Bodies_
(_Philosophical Transactions_, 1802), printed in the first volume
of the _Edinburgh Review_, simply to show the kind of envy to which even
he, the glory of England, was subject.

The reviewer sets forth the principal results of HERSCHEL'S
observations, and, after quoting his definition of the new term
asteroid, goes on to say:

    "If a new name must be found, why not call them by some appellation
    which shall, in some degree, be descriptive of, or at least
    consistent with, their properties? Why not, for instance, call them
    _Concentric Comets_, or _Planetary Comets_, or _Cometary Planets_?
    or, if a single term must be found, why may we not coin such a
    phrase as _Planetoid_ or _Cometoid_?"

Then follows a general arraignment of HERSCHEL'S methods of expression
and thought, as distinguished from his powers of mere observation. This
distinction, it may be said, exists only in the reviewer's mind; there
was no such distinction in fact. If ever a series of observations was
directed by profound and reasonable thought, it was HERSCHEL'S own.

    "Dr. HERSCHEL'S passion for coining words and idioms has often
    struck us as a weakness wholly unworthy of him. The invention of a
    name is but a poor achievement for him who has discovered whole
    worlds. Why, for instance, do we hear him talking of the
    _space-penetrating power_ of his instrument--a compound epithet and
    metaphor which he ought to have left to the poets, who, in some
    future age, shall acquire glory by celebrating his name. The other
    papers of Dr. HERSCHEL, in the late volumes of the _Transactions_,
    do not deserve such particular attention. His catalogue of 500 new
    nebulae, though extremely valuable to the practical astronomer, leads
    to no general conclusions of importance, and abounds with the
    defects which are peculiar to the Doctor's writings--a great
    prolixity and tediousness of narration--loose and often
    unphilosophical reflections, which give no very favorable idea of
    his scientific powers, however great his merit may be as an
    observer--above all, that idle fondness for inventing names without
    any manner of occasion, to which we have already alluded, and a use
    of novel and affected idioms.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "To the speculations of the Doctor on the nature of the Sun, we have
    many similar objections; but they are all eclipsed by the grand
    absurdity which he has there committed, in his hasty and erroneous
    theory concerning the influence of the solar spots on the price of
    grain. Since the publication of Gulliver's voyage to Laputa, nothing
    so ridiculous has ever been offered to the world. We heartily wish
    the Doctor had suppressed it; or, if determined to publish it, that
    he had detailed it in language less confident and flippant."

One is almost ashamed to give space and currency to a forgotten attack,
but it yields a kind of perspective; and it is instructive and perhaps
useful to view HERSCHEL'S labors from all sides, even from wrong and
envious ones.

The study of the original papers, together with a knowledge of the
circumstances in which they were written, will abundantly show that
HERSCHEL'S ideas sprung from a profound meditation of the nature of
things in themselves. What the origin of trains of thought prosecuted
for years may have been we cannot say, nor could he himself have
expressed it. A new path in science was to be found out, and he found
it. It was not in his closet, surrounded by authorities, but under the
open sky, that he meditated the construction of the heavens. As he says,
"My situation permitted me not to consult large libraries; nor, indeed,
was it very material; for as I intended to view the heavens myself,
Nature, that great volume, appeared to me to contain the best
catalogue."

His remarkable memoirs on the invisible and other rays of the solar
spectrum were received with doubt, and with open denial by many of the
scientific bodies of Europe. The reviews and notices of his work in this
direction were often quite beyond the bounds of a proper scientific
criticism; but HERSCHEL maintained a dignified silence. The discoveries
were true, the proofs were open to all, and no response was needed from
him. He may have been sorely tempted to reply, but I am apt to believe
that the rumors that reached him from abroad and at home did not then
affect him as they might have done earlier. He was at his grand
climacteric, he had passed his sixty-third year, his temper was less
hasty than it had been in his youth, and his nerves had not yet received
the severe strain from whose effects he suffered during the last years
of his life.

       *       *       *       *       *

We have some glimpses of his personal life in the reminiscences of him
in the _Diary and Letters_ of Madame D'ARBLAY, who knew him well:

    "1786.--In the evening Mr. HERSCHEL came to tea. I had once seen
    that very extraordinary man at Mrs. DE LUC'S, but was happy to see
    him again, for he has not more fame to awaken curiosity than sense
    and modesty to gratify it. He is perfectly unassuming, yet openly
    happy, and happy in the success of those studies which would render
    a mind less excellently formed presumptuous and arrogant.

    "The king has not a happier subject than this man, who owes it
    wholly to His Majesty that he is not wretched; for such was his
    eagerness to quit all other pursuits to follow astronomy solely,
    that he was in danger of ruin, when his talents and great and
    uncommon genius attracted the king's patronage. He has now not only
    his pension, which gives him the felicity of devoting all his time
    to his darling study, but he is indulged in license from the king to
    make a telescope according to his new ideas and discoveries, that is
    to have no cost spared in its construction, and is wholly to be paid
    for by His Majesty.

    "This seems to have made him happier even than the pension, as it
    enables him to put in execution all his wonderful projects, from
    which his expectations of future discoveries are so sanguine as to
    make his present existence a state of almost perfect enjoyment.
    Mr. LOCKE himself would be quite charmed with him.

    "He seems a man without a wish that has its object in the
    terrestrial globe. At night Mr. HERSCHEL, by the king's command,
    came to exhibit to His Majesty and the royal family the new comet
    lately discovered by his sister, Miss HERSCHEL; and while I was
    playing at piquet with Mrs. SCHWELLENBURG, the Princess AUGUSTA came
    into the room and asked her if she chose to go into the garden and
    look at it. She declined the offer, and the princess then made it to
    me. I was glad to accept it for all sorts of reasons. We found him
    at his telescope. The comet was very small, and had nothing grand or
    striking in its appearance; but it is the first lady's comet, and I
    was very desirous to see it. Mr. HERSCHEL then showed me some of his
    new discovered universes, with all the good humor with which he
    would have taken the same trouble for a brother or a sister
    astronomer; there is no possibility of admiring his genius more than
    his gentleness."

    "_1786, December 30th_.--This morning my dear father carried me to
    Dr. HERSCHEL. That great and very extraordinary man received us
    almost with open arms. He is very fond of my father, who is one of
    the council of the Royal Society this year, as well as himself. . . .
    At this time of day there was nothing to see but his instruments;
    those, however, are curiosities sufficient. . . . I wished very much
    to have seen his sister, . . . but she had been up all night, and
    was then in bed."

    "_1787, September_.--Dr. HERSCHEL is a delightful man; so
    unassuming with his great knowledge, so willing to dispense it to
    the ignorant, and so cheerful and easy in his general manners, that,
    were he no genius, it would be impossible not to remark him as a
    pleasing and sensible man."

    "_1788, October 3d_.--We returned to Windsor at noon, and Mrs. DE
    LUC sent me a most pressing invitation to tea and to hear a little
    music. Two young ladies were to perform at her house in a little
    concert. Dr. HERSCHEL was there, and accompanied them very sweetly
    on the violin; his new-married wife was with him, and his sister.
    His wife seems good-natured; she was rich, too! and astronomers are
    as able as other men to discern that gold can glitter as well as
    stars."


                    DR. BURNEY TO MADAME D'ARBLAY.

                                             "CHELSEA COLLEGE,

                                                 _September 28, 1798_.

    "*   *   *   *   *

    "I drove through Slough in order to ask at Dr. HERSCHEL'S door when
    my visit would be least inconvenient to him--that night or next
    morning. The good soul was at dinner, but came to the door himself,
    to press me to alight immediately and partake of his family repast;
    and this he did so heartily that I could not resist.

            *       *       *       *       *       *       *

    "I expected (not knowing that HERSCHEL was married) only to have
    found Miss HERSCHEL; but there was a very old lady, the mother, I
    believe, of Mrs. HERSCHEL, who was at the head of the table herself,
    and a Scots lady (a Miss WILSON, daughter of Dr. WILSON, of Glasgow,
    an eminent astronomer), Miss HERSCHEL, and a little boy. They
    rejoiced at the accident which had brought me there, and hoped I
    would send my carriage away and take a bed with them. They were
    sorry they had no stables for my horses.

    "We soon grew acquainted--I mean the ladies and I--and before dinner
    was over we seemed old friends just met after a long absence. Mrs.
    HERSCHEL is sensible, good-humored, unpretending, and well bred;
    Miss HERSCHEL all shyness and virgin modesty; the Scots lady
    sensible and harmless; and the little boy entertaining, promising,
    and comical. HERSCHEL, you know, and everybody knows, is one of the
    most pleasing and well-bred natural characters of the present age,
    as well as the greatest astronomer.

    "Your health was drunk after dinner (put that into your pocket), and
    after much social conversation and a few hearty laughs, the ladies
    proposed to take a walk, in order, I believe, to leave HERSCHEL and
    me together. We walked and talked round his great telescopes till it
    grew damp and dusk, then retreated into his study to philosophize.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "He made a discovery to me, which, had I known it sooner, would have
    overset me, and prevented my reading any part of my work.[24] He
    said that he had almost always had an aversion to poetry, which he
    regarded as the arrangement of fine words, without any useful
    meaning or adherence to truth; but that when truth and science were
    united to these fine words, he liked poetry very well."


                         1798, December 10.

                    DR. BURNEY TO MADAME D'ARBLAY.

    "HERSCHEL has been in town for short spurts, and back again two or
    three times, leaving Mrs. HERSCHEL behind (in town) to transact law
    business. I had him here two whole days."

    The reading of the manuscript of the _Poetical History of Astronomy_
    was continued, "and HERSCHEL was so humble as to confess that I
    knew more of the history of astronomy than he did, and had surprised
    him with the mass of information I had got together.

    "He thanked me for the entertainment and instruction I had given
    him. 'Can anything be grander?' and all this before he knows a word
    of what I have said of himself--all his discoveries, as you may
    remember, being kept back for the twelfth and last book."


                    DR. BURNEY TO MADAME D'ARBLAY.

                             "SLOUGH, _Monday morning._ _July 22, 1799_,
                                 in bed at Dr. HERSCHEL'S, half-past
                                 five, where I can neither sleep nor lie
                                 idle.

    "My Dear Fanny:--I believe I told you on Friday that I was going to
    finish the perusal of my astronomical verses to the great astronomer
    on Saturday.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "After tea Dr. HERSCHEL proposed that we two should retire into a
    quiet room in order to resume the perusal of my work, in which no
    progress has been made since last December. The evening was
    finished very cheerfully; and we went to our bowers not much out of
    humor with each other or the world. . . . After dinner we all agreed
    to go to the terrace [at Windsor]--Mr., Mrs., and Miss H., with
    their nice little boy, and three young ladies. Here I met with
    almost everybody I wished and expected to see previous to the
    king's arrival.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "But now here comes Will, and I must get up, and make myself up to
    go down to the perusal of my last book, entitled _Herschel_. So
    good-morrow."


                                                "CHELSEA, _Tuesday._

    "Not a moment could I get to write till now. . . . I must tell you
    that HERSCHEL proposed to me to go with him to the king's concert at
    night, he having permission to go when he chooses, his five nephews
    (GRIESBACHS) making a principal part of the band. 'And,' says he,
    'I know you will be welcome.'"

An intimacy was gradually established between HERSCHEL and Dr. BURNEY.
They saw each other often at the meetings of the Royal Society, and
HERSCHEL frequently stayed at the doctor's house. "On the first evening
HERSCHEL spent at Chelsea, when I called for my ARGAND lamp, HERSCHEL,
who had not seen one of those lamps, was surprised at the great effusion
of light, and immediately calculated the difference between that and a
single candle, and found it sixteen to one."[25]

In 1793 we find HERSCHEL as a witness for his friend JAMES WATT, in the
celebrated case of WATT _vs._ BULL, which was tried in the Court of
Common Pleas. And from MUIRHEAD'S Life of WATT, it appears that HERSCHEL
visited WATT at Heathfield in 1810.

A delightful picture of the old age of HERSCHEL is given by the poet
CAMPBELL,[26] whose nature was fitted to perceive the beauties of a
grand and simple character like HERSCHEL'S:


                                      "[BRIGHTON], _September 15, 1813_.

    . . . "I wish you had been with me the day before yesterday, when you
    would have joined me, I am sure, deeply in admiring a great, simple,
    good old man--Dr. HERSCHEL. Do not think me vain, or at least put up
    with my vanity, in saying that I almost flatter myself I have made
    him my friend. I have got an invitation, and a pressing one, to go
    to his house; and the lady who introduced me to him, says he spoke
