Mr. Correy and I--"

An attention signal sounded sharply to interrupt me. I answered it
instantly.

"Sentry at exit, sir," said an excited voice. "Mr. Hendricks and the
woman stowaway are here asking for you. They say it is very urgent."

"Bring them both here at once, under guard," I ordered. "Be sure you
are properly relieved."

"Right, sir!"

I turned to Correy and Kincaide, who were watching me with curious
eyes. My excitement must have shown upon my face.

"Mr. Hendricks and Liane are at the exit, asking to see me," I
snapped. "They'll be here in a moment. What do you suppose is in the
air?"

"Hendricks?" muttered Correy, his face darkening. "It seems to me he
has a lot of nerve to--"

There was a sharp tap on the door.

"Come!" I ordered quickly. The door opened and Liane, followed by
Hendricks, hurried into the room.

"That will do," I nodded to the guard who had accompanied them. "You
may go."

"You wonder why we're here, I suppose?" demanded Liane. "I'll tell
you, quickly, for every instant is precious."

This was a very different Liane. She was no longer clad in diaphanous
black; she was wearing a tunic similar to the one she had worn on
board the _Ertak_, save that this one was torn and soiled. Her lips,
as she talked, twitched with an insane anger; her amazing eyes were
like those of a cornered beast of the wilderness.

"My council of wise old men turned against me when I told them my
plans to marry the man of my choice. They said he was an outsider, an
enemy, a foreigner. They would have none of him. They demanded that I
give him to the Flame, and marry one of my own kind. They had not, of
course, understood what I had said to you there in the great chapel of
the Flame.

"I defied them. We escaped through a passage which is not known to any
save myself, and the existence of which my father taught me years ago.
We are here, but they will guess where we have gone. My old men are
exciting my people against me--and for that shall all, down to the
last one, know the embrace of the Flame!" She gritted her teeth on the
words, her nostrils distended with rage.

"I--I am safe. I can command them; I can make them know my power, and I
shall. The Flame will have much to feed upon in the days which are to
come, I promise you. But my beloved would not be safe; at this moment I
cannot protect him. So I have brought him back. I--I know he ... but I
will not be weak. I am Liane!"

       *       *       *       *       *

She faced Hendricks, who had stood there like a graven image, watching
her. Her arms went about his neck; her lips sought his.

"My beloved!" she whispered. "Liane was but a woman, after all.
Darling! Good-by!" She kissed him again, and hurried to the door.

"One more thing!" she cried. "I must master them myself. I must show
them I--I, Liane--am ruler here. You promise? You promise me you will
not interfere; that you will do nothing?"

"But--"

Liane interrupted me before I could put my objections into words.

"Promise!" she commanded. "There are hundreds, thousands of them! You
cannot slay them all--and if you did, there would be more. I can bend
them to my will; they know my power. Promise, or there will be many
deaths upon your hands!"

"I promise," I said.

"And you--all of you?" she demanded, sweeping Correy and Kincaide with
her eyes.

"Commander Hanson speaks for us all," nodded Kincaide.

With a last glance at Hendricks, whose eyes had never left her for an
instant, she was gone.

Hendricks uttered a long, quivering sigh. His face, as he turned to
us, was ghastly white.

"She's gone," he muttered. "Forever."

"That's exceedingly unfortunate, sir, for you," I replied crisply. "As
soon as it's perfectly safe, we'll see to it that you depart also."

The sting of my words apparently did not touch him.

"You don't understand," he said dully. "I know what you think, and I
do not blame you. She came back; you know that.

"'You are coming with me,' she said. 'I care for you. I want you. You
are coming with me, at once.' I told her I was not; that I loved her,
but that I could not, would not, go.

"She opened a port and showed me one of her countrymen, standing not
far away, watching the ship. He held something in his hand.

"'He has one of your hand bombs,' she told me. 'I found it while I
was hidden and took it with me when I left. If you do not come with
me, he will throw it against the ship, destroy it, and those within
it.'

"There was nothing else for me to do. She permitted me to explain no
more than I did in the note I left. I pleaded with her; did all I
could. Finally I persuaded her to give you the word she did, there
before the great flame.

"She brought me back here at the risk of her own life, and, what is
even more precious to her, her power. In--in her own way, she loves
me...."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was an amazing story; a second or two passed before any of us could
speak. And then words came, fast and joyous; our friend, our trusted
fellow-officer had come back to us! I felt as though a great black
cloud had slid from across the sun.

And then, above our voices, rose a great mutter of sound. We glanced
at one another, wonderingly. Hendricks was the first to make a move.

"That's the mob!" he said, darting toward the door. We followed him
swiftly to the exit of the ship, through the air-lock, out into the
open.

Hendricks had spoken the truth. Liane was walking, very slowly and
deliberately, her head flung back proudly, toward the city. Coming
toward her, like a great ragged wave, was a mighty mass of humanity,
led by capering old men--undoubtedly the lesser priests, who had
turned against her.

"The portable projectors, sir!" begged Correy excitedly. "A pair of
them, and that mob--"

"We're bound by our promise," I reminded him. "She's not afraid; her
power is terrible. I believe she'll win without them. Look!"

Liane had paused. She lifted one hand in a gesture of command, and
called out to the rabble. Correy translated the whole thing for me
later.

"Halt!" she cried sharply. "Who moves upon the Chief Priestess of the
Flame earns the embrace of the Flame!"

The crowd halted, cowering; then the old man shouted to them and
gestured them onward. With a rush, the front ranks came on.

"So!" Liane called out to them. "You would disobey Liane? Yet even yet
it is not too late; Liane gives you one chance more. You little know
the Chief Priestess of the Flame if you think she will tolerate an
encroachment of her power. Back! Back, I say, or you all shall feel
the might of Liane!"

Before her tirade the mob faltered, but again the crazed old men led
them on.

Liane turned, saw us, and made a regal gesture of farewell. From the
bosom of her tunic she snatched a small black object, and swung it
high above her head.

"The bomb!" shouted Hendricks. "She has it; she--"

At the very feet of the onrushing crowd the black object struck. There
was a hollow roar; a blast of thundering air swept us backward to the
ground.

When we scrambled to our feet, Liane was gone. The relentless mob had
gone. Where they had been was a great crater of raw earth, strewn with
ghastly fragments. Far back toward the city a few straggling figures
ran frantically away from that scene of death.

"Gone!" I said. "Power was a mania, an obsession with her. Even her
death was a supreme gesture--of power, of authority."

"Liane," Hendricks whispered. "Chief Priestess of the Flame ... Giver
of Death...."

       *       *       *       *       *

With Liane gone, and with her the old men who had tried to snatch her
