
"Flyers of the United Americas! In the name of our country I ask that
volunteers gather on the eastern coast, each flyer proceeding at once to
the nearest coast-landing, after dropping all passengers. Your
commanders have already been named by your various organizations, as
required by franchise, and orders for the movement of the entire winged
armada will come from this station. However, the orders will simply be
this: Hold Moyen's forces at bay for a period of two hours! And know
that many of you go to certain death, and make your own decisions as to
whether you shall volunteer!"

This ended, Prester Kleig, excitement mounting high, hurried back to the
Secret Room.

Now the public knew, and as the American public is given to doing, it
steadied down when it knew the worst. Fear of the unknown had changed
the public into a myriad-souled beast gone berserk. Now that knowledge
was exact men grew calm of face, determined, and women assumed the
supporting role which down the ages has been that of brave women,
mothers of men.

       *       *       *       *       *

A period of silence for a time after Prester Kleig's pronouncement.

As he entered the first door leading into the Secret Room, Carlos Kane
met and passed him with a smile.

"You called for winged volunteers, did you not, Kleig?" he asked
quietly.

Kleig nodded. "You are going?" he said.

"Yes. It is my duty."

No other words were necessary, as the men shook hands. Prester Kleig
going on to the Secret Room, Carlos Kane going out to join the mighty
armada which must fight against the minions of Moyen.

The words of Prester Kleig were heard by the pilots of the sky-lanes.
The passenger pits, equipped with self-opening parachutes which dropped
jumpers in series of long falls in order to acquire swift but accurate
and safe landing--they opened at intervals in long falls of two thousand
feet, stayed the fall, then closed again, so that drops were almost
continuous until the last four hundred feet--and pilots, swiftly making
up their minds, dropped their passengers, banked their planes, and raced
into the east.

       *       *       *       *       *

All over the Americas pilots dropped their passengers and their loads if
their franchises called for the carrying of freight, and banked about to
take part in the first skirmish with the Moyenites.

Dropping figures almost darkened the sky as passengers plunged downward
after the startling signal from Washington. Flowers, which were the
umbrellas of chutes, opened and closed like breathing winged orchids,
letting their burdens safely to earth.

And clouds and fleets of airplanes came in from all directions to land,
in rows and rows which were endless, wing and wing, along the eastern
coast.

Prester Kleig had scarcely entered the Secret Room than the hated voice
of Moyen again broke upon the ears of the machinelike Secret Agents.

"This is madness, gentlemen! My people will annihilate yours!"

But, since time for speech had passed, not one of the Secret Agents made
answer or paid the slightest heed to the warning, though deep in the
heart of each and every one was the belief that Moyen spoke no more than
the truth.

Too, there was a growing respect for the half-god of Asia, in that he
was good enough to warn them of the holocaust which faced their country.

By hundreds and thousands, wing and wing, airplanes dropped to the
Atlantic coast at the closest point of contact, when the signal reached
them. At high altitudes, planes crossing the Atlantic turned back and
returned at top speed, dropping their passengers as soon as over land.
That Moyen made no move to prevent the return of flyers out over the
ocean, and now coming back, was an ominous circumstance.

It seemed to show that he held the American flyers, all of them, in
utter contempt.

       *       *       *       *       *

Prester Kleig regarded the time. It had been half an hour since Moyen
had spoken of attack, half an hour since the monsters of the deep had
started the inexorable move toward land. On the screen the submarines
were bulking larger and larger as the moments fled, until it seemed to
the Secret Agents that the great composite shadow of them already was
sweeping inland from the coast.

As the coast came close ahead of the monster subs the little aero-subs,
to the surprise of the Secret Agents, all vanished into their respective
mother ships.

"But they have to use them," groaned Munson. "For their submarines are
useless in frontal attack against our shores!"

"I am not so sure of that," said Prester Kleig. "For I have a suspicion
that those submarines have tractors under their keels, and that they can
come out on land! If this is so the monsters can, guarded by
armour-plate, penetrate to the very heart of our most populated areas
before their aero-subs are released."

None of the Secret Agents as yet had stopped to ponder how the monsters
had reached their positions, and why Moyen was attacking from the east,
when the Pacific side of the continents would have appeared to be the
obvious point of attack, and would have obviated the necessity of long,
secret under-sea journeys wherein discovery prematurely must have been
one of the many worries of the submarine commanders.

The mere fact of the presence of the monsters was enough. What had
preceded their presence was unimportant, save that their presence, and
their near approach to the shore undetected, further proved the
executive and planning genius of Moyen.

Two miles, on an average, off the eastern coast the submarines laid
their eggs--the aero-subs, which darted from the sides of the mother
ships in flights and squadrons, made the surface, and leaped into the
sky.

Five minutes later and the signal went forth to the phalanx of the
volunteers.

"Take off! Fly east and engage the enemy, and hold him in check, and the
God of our fathers go with you!"

One hour had passed since Moyen's ultimatum when the first vanguard of
the American flyers, obeying the peremptory signal, took the air and
darted eastward to meet the winged death-harbingers of Moyen.




CHAPTER X

"_They Shall Not Pass!_"


Prester Kleig's heartfelt desire, as the American flyers closed with the
first of the aero-subs, was to go out with them and aid them in the
attack against the Moyenites. But he knew, and it was a tacit thing,
that he best served his country from the safe haven of the Secret Room.

As he watched the scenes unfold on the screen of Maniel's genius, with
occasional glances at the somewhat mysterious but profound and
concentrated labors of Maniel, Charmion Kane rose from her place and
came to his side.

Wide-eyed as she watched the joining of battle, she stood there, her
tiny hand encased in the tense one of Prester Kleig.

"You would like to be out there," she murmured. "I know it! But your
country needs you here--and I have already given Carlos!"

Prester Kleig tightened his grip on her hand.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was deep, silent understanding between these two, and Prester
Kleig, in fighting against the Moyenites, realized, even above his
realization that his labors were primarily for the benefit of his
country, that he really matched wits with Moyen for the sake of
Charmion. Had anyone asked him whether he would have sacrificed her for
the benefit of his country, it would have been a difficult question to
answer.

He was glad that the question was never asked.

"Yes, beloved," he whispered, "I would like to be out there, but the
greatest need for me is here."

But even so he felt as though he was betraying those intrepid flyers he
was sending to sure death. Yet they had volunteered, and it was the only
way.

Maniel, a gnomelike little man with a Titan's brain, labored with his
calculations, made swiftly concrete his theories, while at the
Sound-and-Vision apparatus excitable General Munson ranged the aerial
battlefield to see how the tide of battle ebbed and flowed.

That neither side would either ask or give quarter was instantly
apparent, for they rushed head-on to meet each other, those vast
opposing winged armadas, at top speed, and not a single individual
swerved from his course, though at least the Americans knew that death
rode the skyways ahead.

Then....

The battle was joined. Moyen's forces were superior in armament. Their
sky-steeds were faster, more readily maneuverable, though the flying
forces of the Americas in the last five years had made vast strides in
aviation. But what the Americans lacked in power they made up for in
fearless courage.

       *       *       *       *       *

The plan of battle seemed automatically to work itself out.

The first vanguard of American planes came into contact with the forces
of Moyen, and from the noses of countless aero-subs spurted that golden
streak which the Secret Agents knew and dreaded.

The first flight of planes, stretching from horizon to horizon, vanished
from the sky with that dreadful surety which had marked the passing of
the _Stellar_, and such of those warships as had felt the full force of
the visible ray.

From General Munson rose a groan of anguish. These convertible fighting
planes had been the pride of the heart of the old warrior. To do him
credit, however, it was the wanton, so terribly inevitable destruction
of the flyers themselves which affected him. It was so final, so
absolute--and so utterly impossible to combat.

"Wait!" snapped Prester Kleig.

For the intrepid flyers behind that vanguard which had vanished had
witnessed the wholesale disintegration of the leading element of the
vast armada, and the pilots realized on the instant that no headlong
rush into the very noses of the aero-subs would avail anything.

The vast American formation broke into a mad maelstrom of whirling,
darting, diving planes. Every third plane plummeted downward, every
second one climbed, and the remaining ships, even in the face of what
had happened to the vanished first flight, held steadily to the front.

In this mad, seemingly meaningless formation, they closed on the
aero-subs. Without having seen the fight, the Americans were aping the
action of that one nameless flyer who had charged the aero-sub that had
been destroyed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Kleig remembered. A score of ships had been destroyed utterly above the
graveyard of dreadnoughts, yet only one aero-sub, and that quite by
chance, had been marked off in the casualty column.

Death rode the heavens as the American flyers went into action. For
head-on fights, flyers went in at top speed, their planes whirling on
the axes of fuselages, all guns going. Planes were armored against their
own bullets, and they were not under the necessity of watching to see
that they did not slay their own friends.

Even so, bullets were rather ineffective against the aero-subs, whose
apparently flimsy, almost transparent outer covering diverted the
bullets with amazing ease.

A whirling maelstrom of ships. The monsters of Moyen had drawn first
blood, if the expression may be used in an action where no blood at all
was drawn, but machines and men simply erased from existence.

Hundreds of planes already gone when the second flight of ships closed
with the aero-subs. Yellow streaks of death flashed from aero-sub
nostrils, but even as aero-sub operators set their rays into motion the
American flyers in head-on charge rolled, dived or zoomed, and kept
their guns going.

High above the first flight of aero-subs, behind which another flight
was winging swiftly into action, American flyers tilted the noses of
their planes over and dived under full power--to sure death by suicide,
though none knew it there at the moment.

       *       *       *       *       *

These aero-subs could not be driven from the sky by usual means, and
could destroy American ships even before those planes could come to
handgrips; but they, the flyers plainly believed, could be crashed out
of the sky and so, never guessing what besides death in resulting
crashes they faced, the flyers above the aero-subs, even as aero-subs in
rear flashed in to prevent, dived down straight at the backs of the
aero-subs.

In a hundred places the dives of the Americans worked successfully, and
American planes crashed full and true, full power on, into the backs of
the "flying fish." In some aero-subs the container of the Moyen-dealing
agency apparently remained untouched, and airplanes and aero-subs,
welded together, plunged down the invisible skylanes into the sea.

Under water, some of the aero-subs were seen to keep in motion, limping
toward the nearest mother submarines.

"I hope," said Prester Kleig, "the American flyers in such cases are
already dead, for Moyen will be a maniac in his tortures. Munson, do you
hurriedly examine the mother-subs and see if you can locate Moyen."

       *       *       *       *       *

However, only a scattered aero-sub here and there went down without the
strange substance of the yellow ray being released. In most cases, upon
the contact of plane with aero-sub, the aero-subs and planes were
instantly blotted from view by the yellow, golden flames from the heart
of the winged harbingers of Moyen.

Golden flames, blinding in their brightness, dropping down, mere
shapeless blotches, then fading out to nothingness in a matter of
seconds--with aero-sub and airplane totally erased from action and from
existence.

The American flyers saw and knew now the manner of death they faced. Yet
all along the battle front not an American tried to evade the issue and
draw out of the fight. A sublime, inspiring exhibition of mass courage
which had not been witnessed down the years since that general
engagement which men of the time had called the Great War.

Prester Kleig turned to look at Maniel. Drops of perspiration bathed the
cheeks of the master scientist, but his eyes were glowing like coals of
fire. His face was set in a white mask of concentration, and Prester
Kleig knew that Maniel would find the answer to the thing he sought if
such answer could be found.

Would the American flyers be able to hold off the minions of Moyen until
Maniel was ready? The fight out there above the waters was a terrible
thing, and the Americans fought and died like men inspired, yet
inexorably the winged armada of Moyen, preceded by those licking golden
tongues, was moving landward.

"Great God!" cried Munson. "Look!"

       *       *       *       *       *

There was really no need for the order, for every Secret Agent saw as
soon as did Munson. Under the sea, just off the coast, the mother-subs
had touched their blunt nose against the upward shelving of the sea
bottom--had touched bottom, and were slowly but surely following the
underwater curve of the land, up toward the surface, like unbelievable
antediluvian monsters out of some nightmare.

"Yes," said Kleig quietly, "those monsters of Moyen can move on land,
and the aero-subs can operate from them as easily on land as under
water."

Kleig regarded the time, whirled to look at Professor Maniel.

One hour and forty minutes had passed since Maniel had begged for two
