Rankin, he calls himself. At our table--a big, good-looking blond
American. He says he is a magician. Ever hear of him?"

"That's what he told me. No, I never heard of him."

"Nor did I. And I thought I had heard of everyone of any importance. He
is listed for the same theater where I'm going. Nice sort of fellow."
She paused, and added suddenly, "If he's a professional entertainer, I'm
a motor-oiler."

       *       *       *       *       *

It startled me. "Why do you say that?"

Instinctively my gaze swept the deck. An Earth woman and child and a
small Venus man were in sight, but not within earshot.

"Why do you look so furtive?" she retorted. "Gregg, there's something
strange about this voyage. I'm no fool, nor you, and you know it as well
as I do."

"Rance Rankin--" I prompted.

She leaned closer toward me. "He could fool you. But not me--I've known
too many real magicians." She grinned. "I challenged him to trick me.
You should have seen him trying to evade!"

"Do you know Ob Hahn?" I interrupted.

She shook her head. "Never heard of him. But he told me plenty at
breakfast. By Satan, what a flow of words that devil-driver can muster!
He and the Englishman don't mesh very well, do they?"

She stared at me. I had not answered her grin; my mind was too busy with
queer fancies. Halsey's words: "Things are not always what they seem--"
Were these passengers masqueraders? Put here by George Prince? And then
I thought of Miko the Martian, and the burn upon his arm.

"Come back, Gregg! Don't go wandering off like that!" She dropped her
voice to a whisper. "I'll be serious. I want to know what in the hell is
going on aboard this ship. I'm a woman, and I'm curious. You tell me."

       *       *       *       *       *

"What do you mean?" I parried.

"I mean a lot of things. What we've just been talking about. And what
was the excitement you were in just before breakfast this morning?"

"Excitement?"

"Gregg, you may trust me." For the first time she was wholly serious.
Her gaze made sure no one was within hearing. She put her hand on my
arm. I could barely hear her whisper: "I know they might have a ray upon
us--I'll be careful."

"They?"

"Anyone. Something's going on. You know it--you are in it. I saw you
this morning, Gregg. Wild-eyed, chasing a phantom--"

"You?"

"And I heard the phantom! A man's footsteps. A magnetic reflecting
invisible cloak. You couldn't fool an audience with that--it's too
commonplace. If Rance Rankin tried--"

I gripped her. "Don't ramble, Venza! You saw me?"

"Yes. My stateroom door was open. I was sitting with a cigarillo. I saw
the purser in the smoking room. He was visible from--"

"Wait! Venza, that prowler went through the smoking room!"

"I know he did. I could hear him."

"Did the purser hear him?"

"Of course. The purser looked up, followed the sound with his gaze. I
thought that was queer. He never made a move. And then you came along
and he acted innocent. Why? What's going on, that's what I want to
know!"

       *       *       *       *       *

I held my breath. "Venza, where did the prowler run to? Can you--"

She whispered calmly, "Into A 20. I saw the door open and close--I even
think I could see the blurred outline of him. Those magnetic cloaks!"
She added, "Why should George Prince be sneaking around with you after
him? And the purser acting innocent? And who is this George Prince,
anyway?"

The huge Martian, Miko, with his sister Moa came strolling along the
deck. They nodded as they passed us.

I whispered, "I can't explain anything now. But you're right, Venza:
there is something going on. Listen! Whatever you learn--anything you
encounter which looks unusual--will you tell me? I--well, I do trust
you--really I do!--but the thing isn't mine to tell."

The somber pools of her eyes were shining. "You are very lovable, Gregg.
I won't question you." She was trembling with excitement. "Whatever it
is, I want to be in it. Here's something I can tell you now. We've two
high-class gold-leaf gamblers aboard. Did you know that?"

"No. Who are--"

"Shac and Dud Ardley. Let me state every detective in Great-New York
knows them. They had a wonderful game with that Englishman, Sir Arthur
Coniston, this morning. Stripped him of half a pound of eight-inch
leaves--a neat little stack. A crooked game, of course. Those fellows
are more nimble-fingered than Rance Rankin ever dared to be!"

       *       *       *       *       *

I sat staring at her. She was a mine of information, this girl.

"And Gregg, I tried my charms on Shac and Dud. Nice men, but dumb.
Whatever's going on, they're not in it. They wanted to know what kind of
a ship this was. Why? Because Shac has a cute little eavesdropping
microphone of his own. He had it working in the night last night. He
overheard George Prince and that big giant Miko arguing about the
moon!"

I gasped. "Venza, softer!"

Against all propriety of this public deck she pretended to drape herself
upon me. Her hair smothered my face as her lips almost touched my ear.

"Something about treasure on the moon--Shac couldn't understand what.
And they mentioned you. He didn't hear what they said because the purser
joined them." Her whispered words tumbled over one another. "A hundred
pounds of gold leaf--that's the purser's price. He's with them, whatever
it is. He promised to do something for them."

She stopped. "Well?" I prompted.

"That's all. Shac's current was interrupted."

"Tell him to try it again, Venza! I'll talk with him. No! I'd better let
him alone. Can you get him to keep his mouth shut?"

"I think he might do anything I told him. He's a man."

"Find out what you can."

She sat away from me suddenly. "There's Anita and George Prince."

       *       *       *       *       *

They came to the corner of the deck, but turned back. Venza caught my
look. And understood it.

"So you love Anita Prince so much as that, Gregg?" Venza was smiling. "I
wish you--I wish some man handsome as you would gaze after me like
that."

She turned solemn. "You may be interested to know that she loves you. I
could see it. I knew it when I mentioned you to her this morning."

"Me? Why, we've hardly spoken!"

"Is it necessary? I never heard that it was."

I could not see Venza's face; she stood up suddenly. And when I rose
beside her, she whispered,

"We should not be seen talking so long. I'll find out what I can."

I stared after her slight robed figure as she turned into the lounge
archway and vanished.


CHAPTER VI

_A Traitor, and a Passing Asteroid_

Captain Carter was grim. "So they've bought him off, have they? Go bring
him in here, Gregg. We'll have it out with him now."

Snap, Dr. Frank, Balch, our first officer, and I were in the captain's
chart-room. It was 4 P. M.--our Earth starting time. We were sixteen
hours upon our voyage.

I found Johnson in his office in the lounge. "Captain wants to see you.
Close up."

He closed his window upon an American woman passenger who was demanding
details of Martian currency, and followed me forward. "What is it,
Gregg?"

"I don't know."

Captain Carter banged the slide upon us. The chart-room was insulated.
The hum of the current was obvious. Johnson noticed it. He started at
the hostile faces of the surgeon and Balch. And he tried to bluster.

"What is this? Something wrong?"

Carter wasted no words. "We have information, Johnson--there's some
under cover plot here aboard. I want to know what it is. Suppose you
tell us frankly."

       *       *       *       *       *

The purser looked blank. "What do you mean? We've gamblers aboard, if
that's--"

"To hell with that," growled Balch. "You had a secret interview with
that Martian, Set Miko, and with George Prince!"

Johnson scowled from under his heavy brows, and then raised them in
surprise.

"Did I? You mean changing their money? I don't like your tone, Balch.
I'm not your under-officer!"

"But you're under me," roared the captain. "By God, I'm master here!"

"Well, I'm not disputing that," said the purser mildly. "This fellow
Balch--"

"We're in no mood for argument," Dr. Frank cut in. "Clouding the
issue."

"I won't let it be clouded," the captain exclaimed. I had never seen
Carter so choleric. He was evidently under a tremendous strain. He
added,

"Johnson, you've been acting suspiciously. I don't give a damn whether
I've proof of it or not--I say it. Did you, or did you not meet George
Prince and that Martian last night?"

"No, I did not. And I don't mind telling you, Captain Carter, that your
tone also is offensive!"

"Is it?" Carter suddenly seized him. They were both big men. Johnson's
heavy face went purplish red.

"Take your hands!--" They were struggling. Carter's hands were fumbling
at the purser's pockets. I leaped, flung an arm around Johnson's neck,
pinning him.

"Easy there! We've got you, Johnson!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Snap tried to help me. "Go on, bang him on the head, Gregg. Now's your
chance!"

We searched him. A heat-ray cylinder--that was legitimate. But we found
a small battery and eavesdropping microphone similar to the one Venza
had mentioned that Shac the gambler was carrying.

"What are you doing with that?" the captain demanded.

"None of your business! Is it criminal? Carter, I'll have the Line
officials dismiss you for this! Take your hands off me, all of you!"

"Look at this!" exclaimed Dr. Frank.

From Johnson's breast pocket the surgeon drew a folded document. It was
the scale drawing of the Planetara's interior corridors, the lower
control rooms and mechanisms. It was always kept in Johnson's safe. And
with it, another document: the ship's clearance papers--the secret code
pass-words for this voyage, to be used if we should be challenged by any
interplanetary police ship.

Snap gasped. "My God, that was in my helio-room strong box! I'm the only
one on this vessel except the captain who's entitled to know those
pass-words!"

Out of the silence, Balch demanded, "Well, what about it, Johnson?"

The purser was still defiant. "I won't answer your questions, Balch. At
the proper time, I'll explain--Gregg Haljan, you're choking me!"

       *       *       *       *       *

I eased up. But I shook him. "You'd better talk."

He was exasperatingly silent.

"Enough!" exploded Carter. "He can explain when we get to port.
Meanwhile I'll put him where he'll do no more damage. Gregg, lock him in
the cage."

We ignored his violent protestations. The cage--in the old days of
sea-vessels on Earth, they called it the brig--was the ship's jail. A
steel-lined, windowless room located under the deck in the peak of the
bow. I dragged the struggling Johnson there, with the amazed watcher
looking down from the observatory window at our lunging, starlit forms.

"Shut up, Johnson! If you know what's good for you--"

He was making a fearful commotion. Behind us, where the deck narrowed at
the superstructure, half a dozen passengers were gazing in surprise.

"I'll have you thrown out of the Service, Gregg Haljan!"

I shut him up finally. And flung him down the ladder into the cage and
sealed the deck trap-door upon him. I was headed back for the chart-room
when from the observatory came the lookout's voice.

"An asteroid, Haljan! Officer Blackstone wants you."

I hurried to the turret bridge. An asteroid was in sight. We had
attained nearly our maximum speed now. An asteroid was approaching, so
dangerously close that our trajectory would have to be altered. I heard
Blackstone's signals ringing in the control rooms; and met Carter as he
ran to the bridge with me.

"That scoundrel! We'll get more out of him, Gregg. By God, I'll put the
chemicals on him--torture him, illegal or not!"

       *       *       *       *       *

We had no time for further discussion. The asteroid was rapidly
approaching. Already, under the glass, it was a magnificent sight. I had
never seen this tiny world before--asteroids are not numerous between
the Earth and Mars, or in toward Venus. I never expected to see this one
again. How little of the future can we humans fathom, for all our
science! If I could only have looked into the future, even for a few
short hours! How different then would have been the outcome of this
tragic voyage!

The asteroid came rushing at us. Its orbital velocity, I later computed,
was some twenty-two miles a second. Our own, at the present maximum, was
a fraction over seventy-seven. The asteroid had for some time been under
observation by the lookout. He gave his warning only when it seemed that
our trajectory should be altered to avoid a dangerously close passing.

At the combined speeds of nearly a hundred miles a second the asteroid
swept into view. With the naked eye, at first it was a tiny speck of
star-dust, unnoticed in the gem-strewn black velvet of Space. A speck.
Then a gleaming dot, silver white, with the light of our Sun upon it.

Five minutes. The dot grew to a disc. Expanding. A full moon,
