well on toward four o'clock. His Honor was hanging his robes on a
clothes-tree as I came into his Chambers, and he nodded me politely to
a chair, just as if our last words hadn't been pretty heated.

"Mary Hall?" he asked, fumbling around to find his in-Chambers
glasses. He's too vain to wear them on the bench.

I nodded an answer to his question as he came back to take a creaky
horse-hair swivel, relic of more judges and years than I like to think
about. "I'm here as her counsel," I said.

"What else?" he asked mildly, taking the lid off a big humidor on his
desk and starting to fill a pipe.

"We'd like you to know that Mary has joined an organization that
should do for her all that the social workers would like to see done
for her. She's no longer a behavior problem for Normal society."

"Quite some organization," he said, showing interest. "What one?"

"It has no formal name," I said. "Being a secret organization. In
point of fact, it's an organization of Psis that is revealing itself
for the first time."

"Odd that I never heard of it," Passarelli said, looking at his
fingernails. He puffed smoke around the stem of his pipe. His coolness
bothered me. He should have been much more excited about what I was
saying. I threw my high hard one.

"This organization exercises a formidable discipline over its
members," I went on. "One of its firm rules is that no Psi may use his
powers to the detriment of a Normal."

He chuckled softly. "You're taking advantage of what I told you
yesterday, Maragon," he said calmly. "You know, and I know, that Psis
have never done any such thing. And if they had, why would they pick
you to run their errands? What Psi would ever trust a Normal?"

It was getting sticky. I was skating perilously close to the
brink--once I revealed to a Normal that I had the Stigma, my days as
an attorney were done. "This organization--I'll call it the Lodge, if
I may--has to have an attorney to represent it in Court. And you know
as well as I do they can't hire a Psi attorney--the Bar Association
has taken care of that. They came to me because...."

"Yes, yes," he interrupted, taking his eyes off his nails, and showing
some real interest at last. "If you only knew how much I want to
believe you, Maragon. But I will never believe that Psis would permit
themselves to be represented by a Normal. Too bad, but the social
workers, and not your mythical Lodge, will get Mary Hall. That or a
Federal Grand Jury."

Well, this was the fork in the road, I had been kidding myself, and
now I knew it. Persist in my masquerade as a Normal, and I'd never get
Mary off the hook. But reveal myself as a Psi, and I was through as an
attorney. It really wasn't much of a decision--I had made it when I
revealed myself to Keys, Mary and Elmer.

I looked at the humidor of tobacco on his desk. Without changing
expression, I aimed a lift at it. The container came up smoothly from
the polished walnut and hovered in the air before us.

Passarelli looked at it blandly. I don't think anything in my life has
ever been a greater shock than his unconcern. He should have dropped
his teeth. Slowly I let the lift break, and lowered the humidor to his
desk.

"Fairly good TK, if that's all you're capable of," Passarelli said.
"Or can you do better, Maragon?"

"You slimy Normal!" I exploded. "You _tricked_ me into exposing
myself!"

"What am I, an idiot?" he snapped. "I had to know."

I stood up. "Until now, I never really hated Normals," I began.

"Oh, sit down, for Heaven's sake," he said testily. "Now don't get
emotional and lose all your perspective. Doesn't it occur to you that
there's been just too much coincidence in this whole thing?"

I think the word for it is "collapsed." I fell back into my chair.
"You'll have to spell it out," I said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Passarelli leaned forward, his face concentrated, almost angry. "You
have the Stigma, you admit it?"

"Of course I admit it."

"You think any other attorney is a Psi?"

"No. I certainly do not. It's only a miracle that I ever got through
the screening and made it."

"And yet you, the only attorney with the Stigma, gets tapped to be
Public Defender for a Stigma case--Keys Crescas. Doesn't this strike
you as more than coincidence can account for?"

"Now it does," I admitted. "Are you trying to tell me...."

"I'm telling you I've been suspicious of you for a long time, Pete,"
Passarelli said. "Perhaps you didn't know it, but I was one of the
young attorneys on the Committee from the Bar Association that checked
your heredity. No, you were born in San Francisco. No, your parents
didn't live in the Logan Ring--their home was in Sausalito. But--the
day that neutron bomb was accidentally fired and started the rash of
Psi mutations in the ring outside the fatal area centering on Logan,
your parents were in a jet airliner. I found that out--and kept my
mouth shut. I never told the rest of the Committee that on the 19th of
April in '75 that jet was over Iowa, en route to San Francisco, and
possibly close enough to Logan for its passengers to have been
affected by the neutron spray. Even then I knew the law was painting
itself into a corner with its attitude toward Psi. I hoped. I hoped
you _did_ have the Stigma, and I've waited my time to force you into
the open."

"Stinking Normal!"

"Stop acting like a child. I said I _hoped_!"

"Hoped?"

"Yes. I meant what I said about wishing there were a responsible
organization of Psis we could turn to. Are you serious about this
organization, this Lodge?"

"I guess I am," I said, shaken.

"How many members does it have?"

"It's a secret organization," I protested.

"How many members?"

"Four, including me."

He shrugged. "You start somewhere. Mostly with a man you can trust,
and I trust you, Maragon. You can keep this girl in line?"

"Our discipline is formidable," I reminded him, trying a grin. It was
pretty sick.

"I'll bet," he grinned back. "Well, it had better be, for I'm going to
take a chance on you. Sooner or later the law will have to admit the
existence of Psi. I know as well as you Stigma cases that this gene is
dominant--that there'll be more Psis every generation. We've got to
find some common ground between the two societies--some way to get
along. Give me your personal surety in this Mary Hall thing. As an
attorney, you're an officer of the Court, and I guess I have the
right to make her your responsibility. I certainly don't want it
getting out that I'm playing footsie with an organization of
Psis--this is an elective office, after all."

"After all," I agreed. "But I am glad to hear you sounding like a
politician again."

"We'll have to keep our dealings off the record," Passarelli insisted.
"But if I thought I could call on you when we get one of these sticky
Psi cases before the Courts...."

You'd recruit for the Lodge, I thought to myself. "You've got yourself
a deal, Your Honor!" I said fervently.

"Call it a _modus vivendi_," he smiled. "Now my big problem is to find
a way to eat my words, and let the 99th National Bank accept
restitution of what Mary Hall stole from them."

"No sweat," I grinned, beginning to feel better. "It's already been
done."

"Done? How could it be? I told the bank not to...."

"You told them," I conceded. "But they had no choice, Your Honor. Mary
Hall went to the 99th National Bank this morning and asked for change
of a five dollar bill."

"What!"

"And passed to the teller a hundred dollar bill. After all HC works
both ways. They've got their money back. By noon they had half a dozen
IBM technicians in there trying to figure why they were out of
balance!"
