Whether he believed her then was another matter, of course.

Slightly encouraged, Telzey began to talk. It did sound like a
thoroughly wild story, but the Moderator listened with an appearance
of intent interest. When she had told him as much as she felt he could
be expected to swallow for a start, he said musingly, "So they weren't
wiped out--they went into hiding! Do I understand you to say they did
it to avoid being hunted?"

Telzey chewed her lip frowningly before replying. "There's something
about that part I don't quite get," she admitted. "Of course I don't
quite get either why you'd want to go hunting ... twice ... for
something that's just as likely to bag you instead!"

"Well, those are, ah, merely the statistical odds," the Moderator
explained. "If one has enough confidence, you see--"

"I don't really. But the crest cats seem to have felt the same way--at
first. They were getting around one hunter for every cat that got
shot. Humans were the most exciting game they'd ever run into.

"But then that ended, and the humans started knocking them out with
stunguns from aircars where they couldn't be got at, and hauling them
off while they were helpless. After it had gone on for a while, they
decided to keep out of sight.

"But they're still around ... thousands and thousands of them!
Another thing nobody's known about them is that they weren't only in
the Baluit mountains. There were crest cats scattered all through the
big forests along the other side of the continent."

"Very interesting," the Moderator commented. "Very interesting,
indeed!" He glanced towards the communicator, then returned his gaze
to Telzey, drumming his fingers lightly on the desk top.

She could tell nothing at all from his expression now, but she guessed
he was thinking hard. There was supposed to be no native intelligent
life in the legal sense on Jontarou, and she had been careful to say
nothing so far to make the Baluit cats look like more than rather
exceptionally intelligent animals. The next--rather large--question
should be how she'd come by such information.

If the Moderator asked her that, Telzey thought, she could feel she'd
made a beginning at getting him to buy the whole story.

"Well," he said abruptly, "if the crest cats are not extinct or
threatened with extinction, the Life Banks obviously have no claim on
your pet." He smiled confidingly at her. "And that's the reason you're
here, isn't it?"

"Well, no," Telzey began, dismayed. "I--"

"Oh, it's quite all right, Miss Amberdon! I'll simply rescind the
permit which was issued for the purpose. You need feel no further
concern about that." He paused. "Now, just one question ... do you
happen to know where your aunt is at present?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Telzey had a dead, sinking feeling. So he hadn't believed a word she
said. He'd been stalling her along until the aircar could be found.

She took a deep breath. "You'd better listen to the rest of it."

"Why, is there more?" the Moderator asked politely.

"Yes. The important part! The kind of creatures they are, they
wouldn't go into hiding indefinitely just because someone was after
them."

Was there a flicker of something beyond watchfulness in his
expression. "What would they do, Miss Amberdon?" he asked quietly.

"If they couldn't get at the men in the aircars and couldn't
communicate with them"--the flicker again!--"they'd start looking for
the place the men came from, wouldn't they? It might take them some
years to work their way across the continent and locate us here in
Port Nichay. But supposing they did it finally and a few thousand of
them are sitting around in the parks down there right now? They could
come up the side of these towers as easily as they go up the side of a
mountain. And supposing they'd decided that the only way to handle the
problem was to clean out the human beings in Port Nichay?"

The Moderator stared at her in silence a few seconds. "You're saying,"
he observed then, "that they're rational beings--above the Critical
I.Q. level."

"Well," Telzey said, "legally they're rational. I checked on that.
About as rational as we are, I suppose."

"Would you mind telling me now how you happen to know this?"

"They told me," Telzey said.

He was silent again, studying her face. "You mentioned, Miss Amberdon,
that they have been unable to communicate with other human beings.
This suggests then that you are a xenotelepath...."

"I am?" Telzey hadn't heard the term before. "If it means that I can
tell what the cats are thinking, and they can tell what I'm thinking,
I guess that's the word for it." She considered him, decided she had
him almost on the ropes, went on quickly.

"I looked up the laws, and told them they could conclude a treaty with
the Federation which would establish them as an Affiliated Species ...
and that would settle everything the way they would want it settled,
without trouble. Some of them believed me. They decided to wait until
I could talk to you. If it works out, fine! If it doesn't"--she felt
her voice falter for an instant--"they're going to cut loose fast!"

The Moderator seemed undisturbed. "What am I supposed to do?"

"I told them you'd contact the Council of the Federation on Orado."

"Contact the Council?" he repeated coolly. "With no more proof for
this story than your word Miss Amberdon?"

Telzey felt a quick, angry stirring begin about her, felt her face
whiten.

"All right," she said "I'll give you proof! I'll have to now. But
that'll be it. Once they've tipped their hand all the way, you'll
have about thirty seconds left to make the right move. I hope you
remember that!"

He cleared his throat. "I--"

"NOW!" Telzey said.

Along the walls of the balcony garden, beside the ornamental flower
stands, against the edges of the rock pool, the crest cats appeared.
Perhaps thirty of them. None quite as physically impressive as Iron
Thoughts who stood closest to the Moderator; but none very far from
it. Motionless as rocks, frightening as gargoyles, they waited, eyes
glowing with hellish excitement.

"This is _their_ council, you see," Telzey heard herself saying.

The Moderator's face had also paled. But he was, after all, an old
shikari and a senior diplomat. He took an unhurried look around the
circle, said quietly, "Accept my profound apologies for doubting you.
Miss Amberdon!" and reached for the desk communicator.

Iron Thoughts swung his demon head in Telzey's direction. For an
instant, she picked up the mental impression of a fierce yellow eye
closing in an approving wink.

"... An open transmitter line to Orado," the Moderator was saying into
the communicator. "The Council. And snap it up! Some very important
visitors are waiting."

The offices of Jontarou's Planetary Moderator became an extremely busy
and interesting area then. Quite two hours passed before it occurred
to anyone to ask Telzey again whether she knew where her aunt was at
present.

Telzey smote her forehead.

"Forgot all about that!" she admitted, fishing the sportscar's keys
out of the pocket of her sunbriefs. "They're out on the parking
platform...."

       *       *       *       *       *

The preliminary treaty arrangements between the Federation of the Hub
and the new Affiliated Species of the Planet of Jontarou were formally
ratified two weeks later, the ceremony taking place on Jontarou, in
the Champagne Hall of the Shikaris' Club.

Telzey was able to follow the event only by news viewer in her
ship-cabin, she and Halet being on the return trip to Orado by then.
She wasn't too interested in the treaty's details--they conformed
almost exactly to what she had read out to Iron Thoughts and his
co-chiefs and companions in the park. It was the smooth bridging of
the wide language gap between the contracting parties by a row of
interpreting machines and a handful of human xenotelepaths which held
her attention.

As she switched off the viewer, Halet came wandering in from the
adjoining cabin.

"I was watching it, too!" Halet observed. She smiled. "I was hoping to
see dear Tick-Tock."

Telzey looked over at her. "Well, TT would hardly be likely to show up
in Port Nichay," she said. "She's having too good a time now finding
out what life in the Baluit range is like."

"I suppose so," Halet agreed doubtfully, sitting down on a hassock.
"But I'm glad she promised to get in touch with us again in a few
years. I'll miss her."

Telzey regarded her aunt with a reflective frown. Halet meant it quite
sincerely, of course, she had undergone a profound change of heart
during the past two weeks. But Telzey wasn't without some doubts about
the actual value of a change of heart brought on by telepathic means.
The learning process the crest cats had started in her mind appeared
to have continued automatically several days longer than her rugged
teachers had really intended; and Telzey had reason to believe that by
the end of that time she'd developed associated latent abilities of
which the crest cats had never heard. She'd barely begun to get it all
sorted out yet, but ... as an example ... she'd found it remarkably
easy to turn Halet's more obnoxious attitudes virtually upside down.
It had taken her a couple of days to get the hang of her aunt's
