He felt for his pistol, then remembered it was gone--lost when Chet
sprang upon him. But Chet had his.

"Shoot!" he ordered. "Shoot the damned thing, Chet! Kill the spider!"

Spider! He had named it unconsciously. But the name was inadequate,
for here was a thing of horror beyond even a spider of prodigious
size. This peaceful valley!--and here was its ruler, frightful,
incredibly loathsome!

       *       *       *       *       *

He waited for the sound of a shot. A cursing, instead, was the only
reply: Chet was not firing! Harkness whirled to see the pilot pinned
by one arm to the web.

The fluid had caught him; he had not dropped quickly enough. And his
right hand that had been raised, and the pistol it held, were clamped
fast to the awful stuff.

There was no word of appeal, no call for help, yet Chet Bullard must
have known what this meant. But neither did Harkness wait for that
word. One spring, and he had the pilot by the waist, and he felt the
weight of the girl's slim body added to his as her arms went about him
to help. Chet's face went chalk-white as the hand tore loose. The
pistol remained buried in the clinging stuff.

From the corner of his eye, Harkness saw the monster crouched to
spring. He was half dragging the other two as he stooped and ran for
the bow of the ship. The monstrous body thudded against the metal hull
behind them.

The leap was prodigious. He saw the sack-like body fall inert, the
great, hairy legs shaking. For the moment, the attacker was helpless:
but the respite was brief, as the glaring eyes plainly told.

Below the ledge where the beast had been was an opening in the
rocks--a bit of black shadow that was darker than the lustrous metal
of the cliff. There was a chance--

"I can make it," Chet was saying, as Harkness dragged him on; "help
Diane!" But the girl had sprung before them to gain a foothold and
extend a helping hand. And they were back in the darkness of a rocky
cave before the sunlit entrance was blocked by a hairy head and a
horrible, slavering mouth on a body too huge to enter.


CHAPTER VII

_In the Labyrinth_

Spent and shaken, the three passed onward into the cave. Harkness
searched his pockets for his neolite flash; found it--a tiny pencil
with a tip of glass--and the darkness of the inner cave was flooded
with light.

A box of food tablets was in a pocket of Chet's jacket, and there was
water that trickled in a tiny stream out of the rocks. It could have
been worse, Diane pointed out with forced gaiety. But Harkness, who
had gone back for a final look at the entrance to the cave, found it
difficult to smile.

He had found the entrance an opening no longer: it was sealed with a
giant web of ropy strands--a network, welded together to a glutinous
mesh. They were sealed in as effectively as if the opening were
closed by a thick door of steel.

They gathered fungus that grew in thready clumps on the walls, and
this served as a mattress to soften the rocky floor that must be their
bed. And Harkness sat silent in the darkness long after the others
were asleep--sat alone on guard, to think and to reach, at last, a
conclusion.

A cleavage in the rocks made a narrow crack to the outside world, and
through it the starlight filtered dimly. The thread of light grew
brilliantly golden--moonlight, a hundredfold more bright than
moonlight on Earth. And he realized that the source of light was their
own globe, Earth, shining far through space!

It lighted the cave with a mellow glow. It shone upon the closed eyes
of the sleeping girl, and touched lightly upon the rounded softness of
a lovely face beneath a tangle of brown curls. Harkness stared long
and soberly at the picture she made, and he thought of many things.

No parasite upon society was this girl. He had known such; but her
ready wit, her keen grasp of affairs, had been evident in their talks
on the journey they had made. They had stamped her as one who was able
to share in the work and responsibilities of a world where men and
women worked together. Yet there was nothing of the hardness that so
many women showed. And now she was altogether feminine, and entirely
lovely.

       *       *       *       *       *

Not far away, Chet Bullard was sleeping heavily. His hand, injured
painfully when they tore it from the clinging mass, had been bandaged
by Diane. It troubled him now, and he flung one arm outward. His hand
touched that of the girl, and Harkness saw the instant quiet that came
upon him at the touch. And Diane--her lips were smiling in her sleep.

They had been much together, those two; theirs had been a ready,
laughing comradeship. It had troubled Harkness, but now he put all
thought of self aside.

"This trip," he thought, "can end only in disaster--if it has not
already done so. What a fool I was to bring these two!" And: "If I
want to risk my own life," he told himself bitterly, "that's my own
affair. But for Chet, and Diane, with their lives ahead of them--" His
determination was quickly reached.

He would go back. Somehow, some way, he would get them to the ship.
They would return to Earth. And then.... His plans were vague. But he
knew he could interest capital; he knew that this new world, that was
one great mine of raw metals, would not go long unworked. The metallic
colorations in rock walls and mountains had fairly shouted of rich
ores and untold wealth.

Yes, they would go back, but he would return. He would put from his
mind all thought of this girl; he would forget forever those nebulous
plans that had filled him with hope for a happiness beyond all hoping.
And he would come back here prepared for conquest.

He put aside all speculation as to what other horrible forms of life
the little world might hold: he would be prepared to deal with them.
But he still wondered if there were people. He had hoped to find some
human life.

And this hope, too, left him; his sense of this globe as an
undeveloped world was strong upon him. The monsters; the tropical,
terrible vegetation; the very air itself--all breathed of a world that
was young. There had not been time for the long periods of evolution
through which humanity came.

He tried to tell himself of the wealth that would be his; tried to
feel the excitement that should follow upon such plans. But he could
only feel a sense of loss, of something precious that was gone.
Diane--named for the moon: she seemed more precious now to the lonely
man than all else on moon or Earth. She could never be his; she never
had been. It was Chet upon whom the gods and Diane had smiled. And
Chet deserved it.

Only in this last conviction did he find some measure of consolation
during the long night.

       *       *       *       *       *

"We will rip the big web out with detonite," Harkness told the others
when morning came. "But I want to get the spider, too."

A touch upon the web with a stick brought an instant response. Again
they saw in all its repulsiveness the thing that seemed a creature of
some horrible dream. The eyes glared, while hairy feelers seized the
web and shook it in furious rage. Harkness, fearing another discharge
of the nauseating, viscous liquid, withdrew with the others far back
in the cave.

"Wait," he told them. "I have a plan."

The creature vanished, and Harkness went cautiously forward to the
web. He took a detonite cartridge from his belt and placed it on the
floor close to the ropy strands. Another, and another, until he had a
close-packed circle of the deadly things. Then he placed a heavy,
metallic piece of rock beside them and proceeded, with infinite care,
to build a tower.

One irregular block upon another: it was like a child at play with his
toys. Only now the play was filled with deadly menace. The stones
swayed, then held in precarious, leaning uncertainty; the topmost was
directly above the cartridges on the floor.

"Back!" he ordered the others, "and lie flat on the floor. I must
guess at the amount of explosive for the job."

Chet and Diane were safe as Harkness weighed a fragment of metal in
his hand. One throw--and he must not hit the tower he had built....
The rock struck into the network of cords; he saw it clinging where it
struck, and saw the web shaking with the blow.

Over his shoulder, as he ran, he glimpsed the onrush of the beast.
Again the eyes were glaring, again the feelers were shaking furiously
at the web. They touched the leaning stones!

He had reached the place where Chet and Diane lay and saw the
beginning of the tower's fall; and in the split second of its falling
he threw himself across the body of the prostrate girl to shield her
from flying fragments of stone. A blast of air tore at him; his ears
were numbed with the thunder of the blast--a thunder that ended with a
crashing of stone on stone....

       *       *       *       *       *

Slowly he recovered his breath; then raised himself to his feet to
look toward the entrance. It would be open now, the way cleared. But,
instead of sunlight, he saw utter dark. Where the mouth of the cave
had been was blackness--and nothing else!

He fumbled for his flash, and stood in despairing silence before what
the light disclosed.

The rock was black and shining about the mouth of the cavern. It had
split like glass. In shattered fragments it filled the forward part of
the cave. The whole roof must have fallen, and a crashing slide above
had covered all.

Chet was beside him; Harkness dared not look toward the girl coming
expectantly forward.

"We'll use more of the same," Chet suggested: "we will blast our way
out."

"And bring down more rock with each charge," Harkness told him
tonelessly. "This means we are--"

Diane had overheard. Harkness' pause had come too late.

"Yes?" she encouraged. "This means we are entombed?--buried here? Is
that it?"

Her voice was quiet; her eyes, in the light of the little flash, were
steady in their look upon the man who was leader of the expedition.
Diane Vernier might shudder with horror before some obscene beast--she
would tremble with delight, too, at sight of some sudden beauty--but
she was not one to give way to hysteria when a situation must be
faced. No despair could be long-lived under the spell of those eyes,
brave and encouraging.

"No," said Walter Harkness: "we will find some way to escape. This is
blocked. We will follow the cave back and see where it leads. There
must be other outlets. We're not quitting now." He smiled with a
cheerful confidence that gave no hint of being assumed, and he led the
way with a firm step.

       *       *       *       *       *

Diane followed as usual, close to Chet. But her eyes were upon their
leader; they would have repaid him for a backward look.

To a mineralogist this tunnel that nature had pierced through the rock
would have been an endless delight, but to a man seeking escape from
his living tomb it brought no such ecstasy. The steady, appraising
glance of Harkness was everywhere--darting ahead, examining the walls,
seeking some indication, some familiar geological structure, that
might be of help.

He stopped once to kick contemptuously at a vein of quartz. Three feet
in thickness--and it crumbled to fragments under his foot to release a
network of gold.

"Rotten with it," he said.

And the only comment came from Chet: "A fat lot of good it does us!"
he replied.

The cavern branched and branched again; it opened to a great room
higher than their light could reach; it narrowed to leave apertures
through which they crawled like moles; it became a labyrinth of
passages from which there seemed no escape. Each turn, each new
opening, large or small--it was always the same: Harkness praying
inaudibly for a glimpse of light that would mean day; and,
instead--darkness!--and their own pencil of light so feeble against
the gloom ahead....


CHAPTER VIII

_The Half-Men_

"The Valley of the Fires," Harkness was to call it later, and shorten
it again to "Fire Valley." The misty smokes of a thousand fires rose
skyward from the lava beds of its upper end.

Where the lava flow had stopped and the lower valley began, came
vegetation. Sparse at first, then springing to luxuriant growth, it
contrasted strongly with the barren wall beside it and the equally
barren waste of high ground where the fires were.

Mountains hemmed it in; their distant peaks showed black, with red and
green striations of mineralized deposits. The valleys about them were
dense with foliage, a green so startling and vivid as almost to offend
the eye.

Trees were in the lower end of the valley. They were of tremendous
growth, and the dew of early morning dripped from them like rain.
Trunks smooth and ghostly white, except where the bark had split into
countless fractures and the scarlet color of the sap-wood showed
through. Outflung branches forked to drop down dangling stalks that
rooted again in the ground; these made a forest of slender white
supports for the leafy roof--a forest of spectral shapes in a
shadow-world. Only here and there were arrows of sunlight that
pierced the dense foliage above to strike through and down to the
black earth floor and the carpet of rainbow hues.

And that carpet of radiant colors was trampled into paths that wound
on to lose themselves in the half-light of that ghostly world.

       *       *       *       *       *

From one of the paths came sounds of tramping feet. Cries and snarling
grunts resounded through the silence to send lizards scurrying to the
safety of the trees. Animal cries or hoarse voices of men--it would
have been difficult to tell which. And a sight of the creatures
themselves would have left an observer still in doubt.

A score of them, and they walked upright. Some bodies were naked, a
coppery-black in color; on others the skin was covered by a sparse
growth of hair. Noses that were mere nostril-slits; low foreheads,
retreating flatly to a tangle of matted hair; protruding jaws which
showed the white flash of canine teeth as the ape-like faces twisted
and the creatures tugged at ropes of vines thrown over their
shoulders.

The Neanderthal Man had not learned to use the wheel; and these
man-animals, too, used only the sheer strength of their corded muscles
as they hauled at the body of a beast.

It dragged along the path behind them, rolling at times to show the
white of its belly instead of the flexible armor-plating that
protected its back. Fresh blood flowed from a wound in the white
under-skin; this, and the dripping flints that tipped their spears,
told how death had come. One curving horn that projected from a
wrinkled snout caught at times in the undergrowth, and then the ones
who dragged it would throw themselves upon the head with snarls of
fury and twist the big horn free.

The rocky cliff was honeycombed with caves. A cry, half-human in its
tone, brought an avalanche of figures scurrying forth. Children, whose
distended abdomens told of the alternate feasting and hunger that was
theirs, were cuffed aside by women who shouted shrilly at sight of the
prize. Older men came, too, and in a screaming mob they threw
themselves upon the carcass of the beast that had been dragged into
the open.

       *       *       *       *       *

Flint knives came into play, then sharpened stakes that were thrust
through the bleeding meat. Young and old seized what they could,
leaped across the little stream that trickled downward through the
valley, and raced for the nearest fires.

The fumaroles made places for roasting, and these half-men had learned
the taste of cooked meats. Their jaws were slavering as they waited.
The scents were tantalizing.

A hunter was reaching to snatch a shred of half-cooked meat when a
woman of the tribe gave a scream that was shrill with fear. She
pointed her gnarled hand upward on the face of the cliff.

An opening was there, a black cave-mouth in the black cliff. Above
their own caves, was this higher opening, yet they must have explored
it often--must have followed it as far as they dared, where it led to
the mountain's innermost depths. Yet from this familiar place there
stepped forth an apparition. Another followed, and another--three
strange creatures like none the savage eyes of this world had ever
seen.

Clothing torn to rags--faces black and smeared with blood--hands that
