"Roger, Mike."

"How much fuel do you read in my steering jets?"

"You've been out of fuel for about five minutes, by my gauge. But
don't worry about it," Sid said. "I'll nurse _Nelly_ over there with
my steering jets and pick you up."

"O.K.," I said doubtfully. "But watch it. Bump this bird and we'll
have it all to do over again."

Sid had more trouble than he had figured. He had steering jets to run
him in every direction except fore and aft. For that motion the
retro-rockets were considered enough. But one belch out of them was
enough to get me screaming into the mike: "Cut those retros!" I
yelled, the volume making my earphones crack, as it undoubtedly did
his.

"Roger. What's wrong?"

"You'll burn the solar generators right off the bird, you fool!
Steering jets, do you hear, steering jets!"

"Roger."

But it was not that easy. Finally Sid got _Nelly_ within about twenty
feet, and pretty near at zero relative velocity.

"All right, Sid," I said. "Hold it there. I'll push over."

A gentle shove against the side of Telstar was all it took. I got it
straight, which was all that counted. My drift was slow, and I was a
good five minutes making the twenty-foot crossing. But a handhold came
within reach, and I worked my way back into the cabin and climbed in
without shutting the hatch.

"Don't try that again," I cautioned him. "This thing weighs ten
thousand pounds, and that bird half as much. Even at a couple feet a
second, you can crush me to jelly between them, even if you don't burn
one or the other of us to a crisp."

"Roger," Sid said, not quite so emotionlessly. "Are we ready to move?"

"What for?" I asked him. "Until we get me some steering fuel, I'm
useless."

"I thought we'd abort this mission before we were through," he
sneered.

"Not so fast. You've got the same rig on your suit. All we have to do
is put your fuel tanks on my suit."

"Are you nuts?" he demanded.

"What's the matter with it? Those tanks aren't welded to you, and I've
got tools."

I could see him shake his head in the dim light from the instrument
panel. "You know those fuels ignite on contact with each other," he
pointed out. "If we spill a couple drops of each in here, and they
vaporize, we'll blow this kite to pieces!"

"Then we'll get outside to make the switch," I insisted. "It won't
hurt anything if a few grams burn up out there, will it, with nothing
to confine the expansion."

"But then I won't be able to come after you if anything goes wrong,"
he pointed out. "No dice."

"You're grasping, Stein," I growled. "At this stage I'm in charge
around here. I'll take my chances on getting back."

       *       *       *       *       *

With the cabin light on I went as far as possible in dismounting both
our tanks. After a couple rehearsals to make sure that at least one of
us would always have a glove on a handhold, we both climbed out the
hatch and I made the switch. Just as Sid suspected, we spilled a few
drops. They vaporized, and again as we had feared, combined in what
would have been an explosion in a confined space. The soundless flash,
dim but real, said we had released quite a little energy uniformly all
around us. I never felt a thing except a faint warmth from infrared
through my helmet.

Best of all, my jets worked. We both climbed back aboard _Nelly_,
dogged the hatch, and started after Telstar Two.

The second bird was about fifteen thousand miles ahead of us. I slept
most of the time, for after Sid gave us a jolt of added velocity, we
had to settle down to about six hours of drifting. I woke up as the
belt cut me when he fired the retros. We went through the radar and
searchlight bit, and had the devil's own time finding our bird. But at
last I got the flash of reflection and went to work.

I won't say the second job was any easier, except for the fact that I
removed only one part to make room to do my bit with the insulation,
and thus had very few screws to replace. My navigating in space was a
lot better, and I didn't use steering fuel as wastefully as the first
time. Still, when we dogged down to chase after the final bird, the
cabin gauge said that I had less than half my load of steering fuel
left. Equally glum, _Nelly_ herself was even lower on steering fuel.
Neither Sid nor I had been as expert as we were supposed to be.

Nevertheless, we took off after the third bird, and found it
glistening in bright sunlight without the help of the searchlight. I
thought that was a good omen. But from there on nothing seemed to work
right.

We had been aloft about thirty-six hours, and fatigue was setting in.
I was clumsy on the steering and had quite a time making contact.

The repair went according to Hoyle, but after I had put the spin back
on the bird I found that I had no more steering fuel. I hung about ten
or fifteen feet from Telstar Three and maybe eighty feet from _Nelly_,
drifting slowly from both.

"Sid!"

"Roger, Mike."

"This one will have to make it with the girdle on."

"Can't you get it off?"

"I can't get back to it. Steering fuel gone."

"Oh, no!"

"No sweat, Sid. It occludes a small share of the solar generators, but
not enough to hurt anything."

"That's not what I meant," he said quietly into my ear. "_Nelly's_ out
of steering fuel, too. I can't pick you up!"

I gulped on that one.

"Canaveral Control!" I heard him call.

"Cut that out," I said. "They can't help. Shut up and let me think."

But he didn't, and I couldn't. I had no fuel with which to move. Sid
had only the retros and stern rockets, no good for swinging or
turning. I was out of touching range of the bird, and couldn't shove
against it to build up a little drift. Just as Sylvia said, it's not
like swimming back to shore.

There was a lot of excited chatter in my earphones, in which I did not
participate. Nobody made any sense, and Sid shut the thing down.

"Mike!"

"Yeah." Disgusted.

"Whatever you dope out, make it quick. You don't have all the air in
the world." Sid warned me.

"How much?"

"Ten minutes or so."

"All right," I said. "It ought to be enough. Keep your eye on me. You
may have to reach out an arm or leg for me to grab as I go by."

"How are you going to move?"

"I've got a lifesaver," I said.

       *       *       *       *       *

I writhed and squirmed and made every use of the law of conservation
of angular momentum until I had my back to _Nelly_. Then I wound up
and threw my fancy screwdriver as hard as I could heave it away from
me. I didn't get the zip on it I would have liked, but because it was
sort of like a throwing stick, I got a little more on it than you
might expect, maybe fifty or sixty feet a second. And the thing
weighed about four pounds, with its fancy ratchet and torque clutch.
Since in my suit I weighed just about a hundred times as much, I
started toward _Nelly_ at just one-one-hundredth of the velocity I had
imparted to the screwdriver. In a couple minutes I was drifting pretty
close, but tumbling. I had forgotten that part.

Throwing the screwdriver had given my body the correct vector and some
velocity, but I had set up quite a tumbling moment, since I had thrown
from the shoulder and not from my center of gravity.

I chucked a couple lighter tools away to correct my drift, and Sid
snagged me as I drifted by the hatch.

"Come to Papa," he said, and drew me inside. We didn't horse around
congratulating ourselves. My air tanks were no longer hissing, and we
made a quick swap.

Sid let me dog down the hatch while he figured position. He used the
iron compass method, just taking a close look at Earth, which was more
or less dead ahead of us. That was a good place for it, because we had
no steering fuel.

The re-entry was a mess, from Sid's point of view. We came in at a
weird angle and heated up to beat hell before there was enough
atmosphere for our rudder to swing us around straight. He bounced us
off twice after that as we slowed down, but the creak of heating metal
was all about us each time we dropped in. He cussed me plenty all the
way.

The trick, of course, was to slow down to the point where he could
spiral us down to Muroc Dry Lake. _Nelly_ was a sort of glider. Her
performance at about Mach 10 and two hundred thousand feet was quite
respectable, but the lower and slower we went, the more she flew like
the proverbial kitchen sink. Sid only had one bright spot: Our big
fuel supply gave him plenty of rocket and retro when he wanted it, and
allowed him to get us back over Muroc.

I can't say he made the landing look easy, because he didn't. It
looked like plain hell to me, for we scorched in at something over
