
He stepped into the booth and sat down. The emergency control unit
rested on a shelf at his side; he took it in his hands. He leaned back
and waited for the semi-hypnotic effect to take hold. Dulaq's choice
of this very city and the stat-wand were known. But beyond that,
everything was locked and sealed in Dulaq's subconscious mind. Could
the machine reach into that subconscious, probe past the lock and seal
of catatonia, and stimulate Dulaq's mind into repeating the duel?

Slowly, lullingly, the dueling machine's imaginary yet very real mists
enveloped Leoh. When the mists cleared, he was standing on the upper
pedestrian level of the main commercial street of the city. For a long
moment, everything was still.

_Have I made contact? Whose eyes am I seeing with, my own or Dulaq's?_

And then he sensed it--an amused, somewhat astonished marveling at the
reality of the illusion. Dulaq's thoughts!

_Make your mind a blank_, Leoh told himself. _Watch. Listen. Be
passive._

He became a spectator, seeing and hearing the world through Dulaq's
eyes and ears as the Acquatainian Prime Minister advanced through his
nightmarish ordeal. He felt the confusion, frustration, apprehension
and growing terror as, time and again, Odal appeared in the
crowd--only to melt into someone else and escape.

The first part of the duel ended, and Leoh was suddenly buffeted by a
jumble of thoughts and impressions. Then the thoughts slowly cleared
and steadied.

Leoh saw an immense and totally barren plain. Not a tree, not a blade
of grass; nothing but bare, rocky ground stretching in all directions
to the horizon and a disturbingly harsh yellow sky. At his feet was
the weapon Odal had chosen. A primitive club.

He shared Dulaq's sense of dread as he picked up the club and hefted
it. Off on the horizon he could see a tall, lithe figure holding a
similar club walking toward him.

Despite himself, Leoh could feel his own excitement. He had broken
through the shock-created armor that Dulaq's mind had erected! Dulaq
was reliving the part of the duel that had caused the shock.

Reluctantly, he advanced to meet Odal. But as they drew closer
together, the one figure of his opponent seemed to split apart. Now
there were two, four, six of them. Six Odals, six mirror images, all
armed with massive, evil clubs, advancing steadily on him.

Six tall, lean, blond assassins, with six cold smiles on their intent
faces.

Horrified, completely panicked, he scrambled away, trying to evade the
six opponents with the half-dozen clubs raised and poised to strike.

Their young legs and lungs easily outdistanced him. A smash on his
back sent him sprawling. One of them kicked his weapon away.

They stood over him for a malevolent, gloating second. Then six strong
arms flashed down, again and again, mercilessly. Pain and blood,
screaming agony, punctuated by the awful thudding of solid clubs
hitting fragile flesh and bone, over and over again, endlessly.

Everything went blank.

       *       *       *       *       *

Leoh opened his eyes and saw Hector bending over him.

"Are you all right, sir?"

"I ... I think so."

"The controls all hit the danger mark at once. You were ... well, sir,
you were screaming."

"I don't doubt it," Leoh said.

They walked, with Leoh leaning on Hector's arm, from the dueling
machine booth to the office.

"That was ... an experience." Leoh said, easing himself onto the
couch.

"What happened? What did Odal do? What made Dulaq go into shock? How
does--"

The old man silenced Hector with a wave of his hand, "One question at
a time, please."

Leoh leaned back on the deep couch and told Hector every detail of
both parts of the duel.

"Six Odals," Hector muttered soberly, leaning back against the
doorframe. "Six against one."

"That's what he did. It's easy to see how a man expecting a polite,
formal duel can be completely shattered by the viciousness of such an
attack. And the machine amplifies every impulse, every sensation."

"But how does he do it?" Hector asked, his voice suddenly loud and
demanding.

"I've been asking myself the same question. We've checked over the
dueling machine time and again. There is no possible way for Odal to
plug in five helpers ... unless--"

"Unless?"

Leoh hesitated, seemingly debating with himself. Finally he nodded his
head sharply, and answered. "Unless Odal is a telepath."

"Telepath? But--"

"I know it sounds farfetched. But there have been well-documented
cases of telepathy for centuries throughout the Commonwealth."

Hector frowned. "Sure, everybody's heard about it ... natural
telepaths ... but they're so unpredictable ... I don't see how--"

Leoh leaned forward on the couch and clasped his hands in front of his
chin. "The Terran races have never developed telepathy, or any of the
extrasensory talents. They never had to, not with tri-di
communications and superlight starships. But perhaps the Kerak people
are different--"

Hector shook his head. "If they had uh, telepathic abilities, they
would be using them everywhere. Don't you think?"

"Probably so. But only Odal has shown such an ability, and only ...
_of course!_"

"What?"

"Odal has shown telepathic ability only in the dueling machine."

"As far as we know."

"Certainly. But look, supposed he's a natural telepath ... the same as
a Terran. He has an erratic, difficult-to-control talent. Then he gets
into a dueling machine. The machine amplifies his thoughts. And it
also amplifies his talent!"

"Ohhh."

"You see ... outside the machine, he's no better than any wandering
fortuneteller. But the dueling machine gives his natural abilities the
amplification and reproducibility that they could never have unaided."

Hector nodded.

"So it's fairly straightforward matter for him to have five associates
in the Kerak Embassy sit in on the duel, so to speak. Possibly they
are natural telepaths also, but they needn't be."

"They just, uh, pool their minds with his, hm-m-m? Six men show in the
duel ... pretty nasty." Hector dropped into the desk chair.

"So what do we do now?"

"Now?" Leoh blinked at his young friend. "Why ... I suppose the first
thing we should do is call the hospital and see how Dulaq came
through."

Leoh put the call through. Geri Dulaq's face appeared on the screen.

"How's your father?" Hector blurted.

"The duel was too much for him," she said blankly. "He is dead."

"No," Leoh groaned.

"I ... I'm sorry," Hector said. "I'll be right down there. Stay where
you are."

The young Star Watchman dashed out of the office as Geri broke the
phone connection. Leoh stared at the blank screen for a few moments,
then leaned far back in the couch and closed his eyes. He was suddenly
exhausted, physically and emotionally. He fell asleep, and dreamed of
men dead and dying.

Hector's nerve-shattering whistling woke him up. It was full night
outside.

"What are you so happy about?" Leoh groused as Hector popped into the
office.

"Happy? Me?"

"You were whistling."

Hector shrugged. "I always whistle, sir. Doesn't mean I'm happy."

"All right," Leoh said, rubbing his eyes. "How did the girl take her
father's death?"

"Pretty hard. Cried a lot."

Leoh looked at the younger man. "Does she blame ... me?"

"You? Why, no sir. Why should she? Odal ... Kanus ... the Kerak
Worlds. But not you."

The old professor sighed, relieved. "Very well. Now then, we have much
work to do, and little more than a day in which to finish it."

"What do you want me to do?" Hector asked.

"Phone the Star Watch Commander--"

"My commanding officer, all the way back at Alpha Perseus VI? That's a
hundred light-years from here."

"No, no, no." Leoh shook his head. "The Commander-in-Chief, Sir Harold
Spencer. At Star Watch Central Headquarters. That's several hundred
parsecs from here. But get through to him as quickly as possible."

With a low whistle of astonishment, Hector began punching buttons on
the phone switch.


XIV

The morning of the duel arrived, and precisely at the agreed-upon
hour, Odal and a small retinue of Kerak representatives stepped though
the double doors of the dueling machine chamber.

Hector and Leoh were already there, waiting. With them stood another
man dressed in the black-and-silver of the Star Watch. He was a
blocky, broad-faced veteran with iron-gray hair and hard, unsmiling
eyes.

The two little groups of men knotted together in the center of the
room, before the machine's control board. The white-uniformed staff
meditechs emerged from a far doorway and stood off to one side.

Odal went through the formality of shaking hands with Hector. The
Kerak major nodded toward the other Watchman. "Your replacement?" he
asked mischievously.

The chief meditech stepped between them. "Since you are the challenged
party, Major Odal, you have the first choice of weapon and
environment. Are there any instructions or comments necessary before
the duel begins?"

"I think not," Odal replied. "The situation will be self-explanatory.
I assume, of course, that Star Watchmen are trained to be warriors and
not merely technicians. The situation I have chosen is one in which
many warriors have won glory."

Hector said nothing.

"I intend," Leoh said firmly, "to assist the staff in monitoring this
duel. Your aides may, of course, sit at the control board with me."

Odal nodded.

"If you are ready to begin, gentleman," the chief meditech said.

Hector and Odal went to their booths. Leoh sat at the control console,
and one of the Kerak men sat down next to him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hector felt every nerve and muscle tensed as he sat in the booth,
despite his efforts to relax. Slowly the tension eased, and he began
to feel slightly drowsy. The booth seemed to melt away....

He was standing on a grassy meadow. Off in the distance were wooded
hills. A cool breeze was hustling puffy clouds across the calm blue
sky.

Hector heard a snuffling noise behind him, and wheeled around. He
blinked, then stared.

It had four legs, and was evidently a beast of burden. At least, it
carried a saddle on its back. Piled atop the saddle was a
conglomeration of which looked to Hector--at first glance--like a pile
of junk. He went over to the animal and examined it carefully. The
"junk" turned out to be a long spear, various pieces of armor, a
helmet, sword, shield, battle-ax and dagger.

_The situation I have chosen is one in which many warriors have won
glory._ Hector puzzled over the assortment of weapons. They came
straight out of Kerak's Dark Ages. No doubt Odal had been practicing
with them for months, even years. He may not need five helpers.

Warily, Hector put on the armor. The breastplate seemed too big, and
he was somehow unable to tighten the greaves on his shins properly.
The helmet fit over his head like an ancient oil can, flattening his
ears and nose and forcing him to squint to see through the narrow
eye-slit.

Finally, he buckled on the sword and found attachments on the saddle
for the other weapons. The shield was almost too heavy to lift, and he
barely struggled into the saddle with all the weight he was carrying.

And then he just sat. He began to feel a little ridiculous. _Suppose
it rains?_ he wondered. But of course it wouldn't.

After an interminable wait, Odal appeared, on a powerful trotting
charger. His armor was black as space, and so was his animal.
_Naturally_, Hector thought.

Odal saluted gravely with his great spear from across the meadow.
Hector returned the salute, nearly dropping his spear in the process.

Then, Odal lowered the spear and aimed it--so it seemed to
Hector--directly at the Watchman's ribs. He pricked his mount into a
canter. Hector did the same, and his steed jogged into a bumping,
jolting gallop. The two warriors hurtled toward each other from
opposite ends of the meadow.

And suddenly there were six black figured roaring down on Hector!

The Watchman's stomach wrenched within him. Automatically he tried to
turn his mount aside. But the beast had no intention of going anywhere
except straight ahead. The Kerak warriors bore in, six abreast, with
six spears aimed menacingly.

Abruptly, Hector heard the pounding of other hoof-beats right beside
him. Through a corner of his helmet-slit he glimpsed at least two
other warriors charging with him into Odal's crew.

Leoh's gamble had worked. The transceiver that had allowed Dulaq to
make contact with the dueling machine from his hospital bed was now
allowing five Star Watch officers to join Hector, even though they
were physically sitting in a starship orbiting high above the planet.

The odds were even now. The five additional Watchmen were the
roughest, hardiest, most aggressive man-to-man fighters that the Star
Watch could provide on a one-day notice.

Twelve powerful chargers met head on, and twelve strong men smashed
together with an ear-splitting CLANG! Shattered spears showered
splinters everywhere. Men and animals went down.

Hector was rocked back in his saddle, but somehow managed to avoid
falling off.

On the other hand, he could not really regain his balance, either.
Dust and weapons filled the air. A sword hissed near his head and
rattled off his shield.

With a supreme effort. Hector pulled out his own sword and thrashed at
the nearest rider. It turned out to be a fellow Watchman, but the
stroke bounced harmlessly off his helmet.

It was so confusing. The wheeling, snorting animals. Clouds of dust.
