Pheola protested that. "Please, Lefty," she said, "this has got me all
shaken up. I'd like to be alone for a while. Will you come and get me
for dinner?"

"Sure," I said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Pheola was in better spirits by dinner time, and didn't exactly pick
at her food. At any rate, she was ready to talk when we finally got
back to my apartment.

"Did you understand what I said to Norty about the sine waves,
Pheola?" I asked her.

She shook her head. Her education had not proceeded to calculus, and
her trig was too far behind her for quick recollection of what sine
waves were.

I drew some sketches of overlapping sine waves for her to explain what
I thought was going on. "You are making predictions on this one path,
and actual events are on another path, do you see?" I said. "When the
two paths cross, the events that you predict and actual events are the
same, and at those times you're right."

"I know," she said. "I thought about it all afternoon. I didn't want
to say it to Norty, but when I was giving him all those numbers, there
came times when it was a little fuzzy, and I wasn't so sure."

"And what did you do?"

"I guessed--because it would clear up right after that, and I'd be
sure again."

"Can you explain the fuzziness?" I prodded.

She shrugged. "It's like a fork in the road," she said, holding her
two index fingers next to each other. "And there are _two_ pictures
for a while."

You may not have noticed it, but your index finger is not straight. It
curves in toward your middle finger so that you can hold all the tips
together if you want to. And when Pheola laid her two index fingers
together, they curved away from each other at their tips. I got a
flash and went immediately to my phone.

"Hello," I said to the O-operator cartoon. "Get Norty Baskins. If he's
asleep, wake him."

Norty was quite upset about being awakened.

"I have a suggestion for your machine," I said to him. "Try it in
three dimensions. Instead of sine waves, visualize it as two coil
springs that are all snarled up in each other. Each has a different
pitch, perhaps different diameter. But at certain points the coils
touch each other, and at those times she is right."

"In the morning?" he said weakly, rubbing his eyes.

"Nonsense," I said. "We'll meet you down there."

The trick in getting decent answers out of computers is to ask them
sensible questions. It took us nearly until dawn to get the question
right. And then we got a very sweet answer. There were two helices all
right, as an explanation of how Pheola could be right and then wrong.
I had my own idea about what the helices signified, but that was
unimportant beside the fact that we were now able to predict at what
times in the future the helices would coincide. It was at the time of
their intersection that Pheola would be right in her predictions.

We did a little extrapolation. "Well," I said to her, "it's nice to
know that you're going to be wrong tomorrow and the next day. Maragon
isn't going to die."

"I'm sorry ... oh, I don't mean that!" she apologized. "But I did so
want to be right, and now I know I'm just what he said, a fake!"

"Not all of the time," I reminded her. "But this gives me confidence
in what I want you to do at the hospital today."

       *       *       *       *       *

We grabbed a little shut-eye. Fatigue cuts into TK powers as much as
it cuts into any other human ability, and I wanted Pheola to be at her
best. But around lunch-time we dropped over to see Doc Swartz, and I
explained to him what I thought Pheola could do for Maragon.

"I doubt that clot has had time to get any better," he said. "If
Pheola examines him now and finds it as big as ever, and still soft
and flexible, I think we should entertain your idea."

Pheola made a trip up to Maragon's room, and returned. "Just the
same," she said. "He looks so tired."

"He's not so bad, better than he looks," Swartz said stoutly. "And you
can still feel the clot?"

"Yes."

He turned to me. "Pheola," I said. "Now the question is whether you
can help break it up. Maragon's blood stream is not eroding the clot.
Perhaps it has a sort of envelope of firmer fibrin around it,
something that keeps it from breaking down. The question is whether
you are sensitive enough, and have enough control, to get a good grip
on the clot, and start breaking it up by tearing away at its surface.
It certainly has very little mechanical strength, and you have several
grams of TK in the lab. What do you think?"

The whole idea scared the devil out of her, but we went back to
Maragon's room together, where she felt for the clot with a new
outlook on the problem. After some minutes she nodded, and we went out
in the corridor to put our heads together.

"I think I can do it, Lefty," she said. "But what if something goes
wrong?"

"It won't," I said. "Evaleen Riley says that he isn't going to die,
and I believe her."

"O.K.," said Doc Swartz. "I'll put it up to him."

"I'd put it this way," he said to Maragon, when we had gone back into
his room. "We can keep you here in bed for a while, but sooner or
later you are going to feel well enough to leave, and we won't be able
to make you stay. The first time you do anything that gets your heart
going a little faster than it does lying here, that clot will break
loose and kill you."

"The big thing," I reminded him, "is that Evaleen can't find that you
are going to die. That argues that we are going to succeed."

"And this witch?" Maragon asked, moving his head slightly to indicate
Pheola.

"No reading at all for the next couple days," I said. "She's a
periodic PC."

"I'll bet!" he said. He was beginning to feel better. "Well, go
ahead."

Pheola went over to his side, carefully pulled the blanket down, and
with help from the nurse, drew his gown down from over his hairy
chest. She laid hands on him and stood there for many minutes with her
eyes closed.

"I'm doing it," she said at last. "I have sort of peeled off the top,
and I can shred it away, a little at a time."

"How long will this take?" Maragon grumbled, already beginning to
sound more like his old self.

"A couple hours," she said. "And hush!"

At Doc Swartz's suggestion I stayed there with Pheola. "She depends on
you, Lefty," he whispered.

Toward the end of the two hours they were giving Pete anti-coagulant
injections. "No sense letting another clot form just as soon as Pheola
breaks up this one," Swartz said. "This way we have a good chance that
the open wound will form some scar tissue. Sure, the artery will have
lost some flexibility, but the danger of another coronary will be
past."

They consider the first six days the danger time. At the end of that
period Pheola confirmed that the open sore was gone and that both
areas of clotting had been repaired by Maragon's body's own
restorative processes. They let him out of the hospital at the end of
another week.

       *       *       *       *       *

I went to see him with Pheola the first day that he spent back at his
desk. He didn't seem in any way changed by his ordeal. I suppose, when
you live as close to all the manifestations of Psi as Pete does, that
very little can surprise you.

"Well, young woman," he said to her, getting up to bring her one of
his Bank of England chairs. "The sawbones tell me I have you to thank
for my life. And better than that, they feel there are a number of
delicate TK's around who can be trained in your diagnostic techniques.
This ought to be quite a thing in preventing coronaries."

"Thank you," she said. "I was so frightened that I would let Lefty
down a second time."

"A second time?" he said.

"I was wrong about your dying," she reminded him. "I'm wrong so much
in my predictions. I guess I'll just have to forget about that."

       *       *       *       *       *

He looked over at me. "What about it, Lefty? Can we consider Pheola a
PC, or is she merely a TK?"

I grinned at him. "She is probably the most accurate PC in the Lodge,"
I said to him. His eyebrows went up, and Pheola shook her head.

"Accurate," I repeated, "if you'll let me define accuracy."

