my friend, I was ready to offer you a deal. Since then you've seen--"
He raised his eyes toward the ceiling. "You've seen what's up there.
Only four of us know that secret. We don't relish sharing it with a
fifth."

"Unless you destroy Ann's patent, you're finished anyway."

"Destroy, Captain?" The senile voice turned silky. "No, we want that
machine intact."

"If you'll guarantee Ann's safety and mine--"

"You have an exaggerated idea of your own importance. You would have
been useful to us, particularly since you have been a Consolidated
employee. But this thing you blundered into up there destroys your
value entirely. It makes you potentially as dangerous as the Saymer
patent. That's my opinion.

"The other three who share the Von Rausch secret have an equal vote in
deciding the issue. They may reverse my decision. I've asked them to
come here, and I'm waiting for them now."

The old man was so intent upon making a logical explanation of the
death sentence he pronounced--without putting it into words--that he
didn't notice Hunter edging closer to the desk. Captain Hunter saw no
chance for a reprieve when the other three arrived. Why wait? Having
fought on the frontier, Hunter was aware of a property of the Venusian
crystal which possibly the old man did not know. It was impervious to
blaster fire.

Hunter acted with the split-second timing of an experienced spaceman.
He swung his body in a flying tackle against the old man's chair and
in the same swift motion pushed himself into the leg cubicle carved in
the crystal.

As the chair toppled and before he realized his own danger, the old
man cried the code word that triggered the wall blasters. He was
instantly caught in the deadly cross-fire.

As the weapons slid back into the wall slots, Hunter leaped for the
door, and passed quickly through it. The outer hall was empty. He
sprinted for the walk-way, the echoes of the blast still ringing in
his ears.

A destination marker glowed above a nearby metro-entry. It told him he
was on the Twenty-eighth level of center-city. On a large, public
Tri-D screen Hunter saw a picture of the strike mob in the industrial
area. That was all the data he needed. If the mob was still in the
streets, Eric Young was still manipulating the transmitter.

Hunter took an unchartered autojet and dialed as his destination the
U.F.W. clinic. It was the largest structure in the industrial area,
made from luminous, pink, Martian stone, which had been imported at
great cost--and with a blaze of publicity.

Completed only three years before, the U.F.W. clinic had been given a
continuous flood of publicity. Numerous Tri-D public service programs
had explored its wards, its laboratories, and its service centers, and
even in a distant spaceship Hunter had not remained in ignorance of
the build-up. The knowledge served to his advantage now, for he knew
just where Young's personal penthouse was located and exactly how to
reach it.

There were no armed guards or automatic probes in the clinic. Such an
outward display of force wouldn't have jibed with Young's public
personality. He was the much-loved official head of a union whose
membership totaled millions.

Any protective device would have distorted the illusion and destroyed
the legend completely.

Young's penthouse, thirty floors above street level, was the modest
garden cottage which had been so widely publicized and that, too, was
a part of his illusion. When Hunter saw the tiny house he was able to
appreciate Young's showmanship, his insight into the mental processes
of the credulous.

Hunter moved toward the door. Light glowed inside the cottage, but
through the broad, front window he could see no one. He felt a
momentary doubt. Had he guessed wrong? Was Young holding Ann somewhere
else?

But Hunter was sure Young had not taken that precaution. It would have
involved risks he would not have to contend with at the clinic, unless
he had been reasonably certain he would be found out. And Young had
expected to prevent that by keeping Consolidated and United at each
other's throats.

Hunter kicked open the door. The three small rooms in the cottage were
empty--until a man wearing a union smock emerged from the narrow
galley. He hadn't been there a moment before when Hunter examined the
cubicle, and there was no rear entry to the cottage.

"Mr. Young isn't here, sir." The man said, gliding swiftly toward him.
"If you wish to leave a message--"

Hunter saw the telltale grid wire in the stranger's forehead. He
ducked aside instinctively as the knife gleamed in the man's hand.
With an odd, sighing sound, the blade arched through the air, smashing
the picture window. Hunter's fist shot out, and the man dropped
unconscious.

Hunter went into the galley and found what he had missed before--the
false bank of food slots which masked a narrow stairway. He ran
quickly down the steps, and found the opulent living quarters Eric
Young had concealed on the clinic floor beneath the innocent garden
cottage. Here in gaudy splendor, in the tasteless clutter of objects
assembled from every quarter of the cartel empire, was the true index
to the infinite ambition of the U.F.W. boss.

A dozen men and women lurched at Hunter from an open hall. They wore
white hospital robes and their foreheads were still bandaged.
Obviously they were patients with recently grafted slave grids.
Obedient to the transmission, they fought with a desperate, savage
fury--and a clumsy lack of co-ordination which caricatured normal
human behavior.

Hunter repulsed their attack without difficulty. Yet he felt an inner
disgust and loathing as if he were using his strength to defeat
helpless children. In two minutes it was over. One of the men was
dead, his head bandage torn loose, and the grid ripped out of his
skull. Three more lay sprawled out on the floor, bleeding badly from
freshly opened incisions.

Hunter drew his blaster and entered the thickly-carpeted hall, glowing
with the soft, pink light of the luminous, Martian stone. He cried
Ann's name. His voice fell hollowly in the silence, but there was no
response. He moved to the end of the hall and pushed open a narrow
door.

He saw the white-tiled laboratory, Ann's transmitter standing on a
long table with new platinum grids piled by the dozen beside it, and
the barrack rows of hospital beds. From the angle of the room which
was hidden by the half-open door, Ann Saymer ran toward him with
outstretched hands, crying his name. He took a step toward her. And
something struck the back of his head.


IX

Hunter's mind rocked. He felt himself falling down the long spiral
into unconsciousness. The blaster slipped from his hand and his knees
buckled. But he clawed blindly, with animal instinct, at the hands
closing on his throat.

His head cleared. He saw Eric Young's dark face close to his. Hunter
swung his fist into Young's stomach, and the hands slid away from his
throat. Captain Hunter sprang to his feet, crouching low to meet
Young's next attack. Young's swing went wild. Hunter's fist struck at
the flabby jaw. Eric Young backed away, reeling under the hammer
blows, until he came up against the laboratory table.

Suddenly he slashed at Hunter with a scalpel. The blade nicked Max's
shoulder and cut across his jacket. The cloth parted, sliding down his
arms and pinning his hands together. In the split-second it took
Hunter to free himself from the torn jacket, Young swung the scalpel
again. Hunter dodged. Miscalculating his aim, Eric Young tripped over
Hunter's outstretched leg and fell, screaming, upon the point of his
own weapon.

Hunter stood for an instant with his legs spread wide, looking down at
Young. Then he dropped to his knees and rolled the grievously wounded
man over on his back. The hand grasping the scalpel slowly pulled the
blade from the abdominal wound. Blood pulsed out upon the white tile.
Young was still barely alive.

Hunter walked toward the transmitter, where Ann stood, saying nothing,
her eyes wide and staring. A tremendous conflict was raging within
him. Running away was no solution, but what if he could destroy the
system itself? Break the mold and start anew.

He had the instrument that would do it, the hundreds of obedient
slaves Young had already turned loose on the streets. With Ann's
transmitter he could transform the disciplined strike of human
automatons into a civic disaster. Terror and violence uprooting the
foundations of the city.

But a moment's madness could not overthrow the enduring rationality of
Hunter's adjustment index. To loose that horror was to set himself in
judgment upon the dreams and hopes, the perversion and the sublimity,
of his fellow men. To play at God--a delusion no different from Eric
Young's.

Savagely Hunter lifted a chair and started to swing it at the
transmitter. Instantly, Ann Saymer turned to face him, the blaster
clasped tightly in her hand.

"No, Max."

"But, Ann, those people outside are in desperate danger--"

"I've gone this far. I _won't_ turn back." In her voice was the
familiar drive, the ambition he knew so well. But now it seemed
different, a twisted distortion of something he had once admired.

"We don't need Eric Young," she said. "He's bungled everything. You
and I, Max--" She caressed the transmitter affectionately. "With this,
we'll possess unlimited power."

"You mean, Ann--" He choked on the words. "You came here of your own
free will? You deliberately planned Mrs. Ames' murder?"

"She was dangerous, Max. She guessed too much. We knew that when we
monitored the call you made from the spaceport. But in the beginning
we weren't going to make you responsible. We thought the strangers in
the house--your attempt to expose the other woman who called herself
Mrs. Ames--would be enough to get you committed to a clinic. I didn't
want you to be hurt, Max."

"Why, Ann?" His voice was dead, emotionless. "Because you loved me? Or
because you wanted me to be your ace in the hole, if you failed to
manage Eric Young the way you thought you could?"

"That doesn't matter now, Max, dear. I thought Eric had what I
needed. But I was misjudging you all along."

"You're still misjudging me, Ann. I'm going to smash this machine and
afterward--"

"No you aren't, Max," she said coldly. "I'll kill you first."

Calmly she turned the dial on the blaster. He lifted the chair again,
watching her face, still unable to accept what he knew was true. This
was Ann Saymer, the woman he had loved. It was the same Ann whose
ambition had driven her from the general school to a First in
Psychiatry.

With a fighting man's instinct, Hunter calculated his chances as he
held the chair high above his head. It was Ann who had to die. He
would accomplish nothing if he smashed her transmitter. She knew how
