smooth job of it, but not smooth enough. "I felt some of you would
notice it, but I also felt that gentlemen would prefer to see ladies
given the usual courtesies."

He reshuffled the assorted straws, and then paused. "Mr. Tremaine,
there was a luxury liner named the _Lauri Ellu_ with an assistant
engineer by your name; and I believe you've shown a surprising
familiarity with certain customs of space. A few days ago, Jenny
mentioned something that jogged my memory. Can you still perform the
duties of an engineer?"

Wilcox had started to protest at the delay. Now shock ran through him.
He stared unbelievingly from Muller to me and back, while his face
blanched. I could guess what it must have felt like to see certain
safety cut to a 50 per cent chance, and I didn't like the way Muller
was willing to forget until he wanted to take a crack at Wilcox for
punishment. But....

"I can," I answered. And then, because I was sick inside myself for
cutting under Wilcox, I managed to add, "But I--I waive my chance at
immunity!"

"Not accepted," Muller decided. "Jenny, will you draw?"

It was pretty horrible. It was worse when the pairs compared straws.
The animal feelings were out in the open then. Finally, Muller,
Wilcox, and two crewmen dropped out. The rest of us went up to measure
our straws.

It took no more than a minute. I stood staring down at the ruler,
trying to stretch the tiny thing I'd drawn. I could smell the sweat
rising from my body. But I knew the answer. I had three hours left!

       *       *       *       *       *

"Riggs, Oliver, Nolan, Harris, Tremaine, Napier and Grundy," Muller
announced.

A yell came from Grundy. He stood up, with the engine man named
Oliver, and there was a gun in his hand. "No damned big brain's
kicking me off my ship," he yelled. "You guys know me. Hey,
_roooob_!"

Oliver was with him, and the other three of the crew sprang into the
group. I saw Muller duck a shot from Grundy's gun, and leap out of the
room. Then I was in it, heading for Grundy. Beside me, Peters was
trying to get a chair broken into pieces. I felt something hit my
shoulder, and the shock knocked me downward, just as a shot whistled
over my head.

Gravity cut off!

Someone bounced off me. I got a piece of the chair that floated by,
found the end cracked and sharp, and tried to spin towards Grundy, but
I couldn't see him. I heard Eve's voice yell over the other shouts. I
spotted the plate coming for me, but I was still in midair. It came on
steadily, edge on, and I felt it break against my forehead. Then I
blacked out.


V

I had the grandaddy of all headaches when I came to. Doc Napier's face
was over me, and Jenny and Muller were working on Bill Sanderson.
There was a surprisingly small and painful lump on my head. Pietro and
Napier helped me up, and I found I could stand after a minute.

There were four bodies covered with sheets on the floor. "Grundy, Phil
Riggs, Peters and a deckhand named Storm," Napier said. "Muller gave
us a whiff of gas and not quite in time."

"Is the time up?" I asked. It was the only thing I could think of.

Pietro shook his head sickly. "Lottery is off. Muller says we'll have
to hold another, since Storm and Peters were supposed to be safe. But
not until tomorrow."

Eve came in then, lugging coffee. Her eyes found me, and she managed a
brief smile. "I gave the others coffee," she reported to Muller.
"They're pretty subdued now."

"Mutiny!" Muller helped Jenny's brother to his feet and began helping
him toward the door. "Mutiny! And I have to swallow that!"

Pietro watched him go, and handed Eve back his cup. "And there's no
way of knowing who was on which side. Dr. Napier, could you do
something...."

He held out his hands that were shaking, and Napier nodded. "I can use
a sedative myself. Come on back with me."

Eve and I wandered back to the kitchen. I was just getting my senses
back. The damned stupidity of it all. And now it would have to be
done over. Three of us still had to have our lives snuffed out so the
others could live--and we all had to go through hell again to find out
which.

Eve must have been thinking the same. She sank down on a little stool,
and her hand came out to find mine. "For what? Paul, whoever poisoned
the plants knew it would go this far! He had to! What's to be gained?
Particularly when he'd have to go through all this, too! He must have
been crazy!"

"Bullard couldn't have done it," I said slowly.

"Why should it be Bullard? How do we know he was insane? Maybe when he
was shouting that he wouldn't tell, he was trying to make a bribe to
save his own life. Maybe he's as scared as we are. Maybe he was making
sense all along, if we'd only listened to him. He--"

She stood up and started back toward the lockers, but I caught her
hand. "Eve, he wouldn't have done it--the killer--if he'd had to go
through the lottery! He knew he was safe! That's the one thing we've
been overlooking. The man to suspect is the only man who could be sure
he would get back! My God, we saw him juggle those straws to save
Jenny! He knew he'd control the lottery."

She frowned. "But ... Paul, he practically suggested the lottery!
Grundy brought it up, but he was all ready for it." The frown
vanished, then returned. "But I still can't believe it."

"He's the one who wanted to go back all the time. He kept insisting on
it, but he had to get back without violating his contract." I grabbed
her hand and started toward the nose of the ship, justifying it to her
as I went. "The only man with a known motive for returning, the only
one completely safe--and we didn't even think of it!"

She was still frowning, but I wasn't wasting time. We came up the
corridor to the control room. Ahead the door was slightly open, and I
could hear a mutter of Jenny's voice. Then there was the tired rumble
of Muller.

"I'll find a way, baby. I don't care how close they watch, we'll make
it work. Pick the straw with the crimp in the end--I can do that, even
if I can't push one out further again. I tell you, nothing's going to
happen to you."

"But Bill--" she began.

I hit the door, slamming it open. Muller sat on a narrow couch with
Jenny on his lap. I took off for him, not wasting a good chance when
he was handicapped. But I hadn't counted on Jenny. She was up, and
her head banged into my stomach before I knew she was coming. I felt
the wind knocked out, but I got her out of my way--to look up into the
muzzle of a gun in Muller's hands.

"You'll explain this, Mr. Tremaine," he said coldly. "In ten seconds,
I'll have an explanation or a corpse."

"Go ahead," I told him. "Shoot, damn you! You'll get away with this,
too, I suppose. Mutiny, or something. And down in that rotten soul of
yours, I suppose you'll be gloating at how you made fools of us. The
only man on board who was safe even from a lottery, and we couldn't
see it. Jenny, I hope you'll be happy with this butcher. Very happy!"

He never blinked. "Say that about the only safe man aboard again," he
suggested.

I repeated it, with details. But he didn't like my account. He turned
to Eve, and motioned for her to take it up. She was frowning harder,
and her voice was uncertain, but she summed up our reasons quickly
enough.

And suddenly Muller was on his feet. "Mr. Tremaine, for a damned
idiot, you have a good brain. You found the key to the problem, even
if you couldn't find the lock. Do you know what happens to a captain
who permits a death lottery, even what I called a legal one? He
doesn't captain a liner--he shoots himself after he delivers his ship,
if he's wise! Come on, we'll find the one indispensable man. You stay
here, Jenny--you too, Eve!"

Jenny whimpered, but stayed. Eve followed, and he made no comment. And
then it hit me. The man who had _thought_ he was indispensable, and
hence safe--the man I'd naturally known in the back of my head could
be replaced, though no one else had known it until a little while ago.

"He must have been sick when you ran me in as a ringer," I said, as we
walked down toward the engine hatch. "But why?"

"I've just had a wild guess as to part of it," Muller said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Wilcox was listening to the Buxtehude when we shoved the door of his
room open, and he had his head back and eyes closed. He snapped to
attention, and reached out with one hand toward a drawer beside him.
Then he dropped his arm and stood up, to cut off the tape player.

"Mr. Wilcox," Muller said quietly, holding the gun firmly on the
engineer. "Mr. Wilcox, I've detected evidence of some of the Venus
drugs on your two assistants for some time. It's rather hard to miss
the signs in their eyes. I've also known that Mr. Grundy was an
addict. I assumed that they were getting it from him naturally. And as
long as they performed their duties, I couldn't be choosy on an old
ship like this. But for an officer to furnish such drugs--and to
smuggle them from Venus for sale to other planets--is something I
cannot tolerate. It will make things much simpler if you will
surrender those drugs to me. I presume you keep them in those bottles
of wine you bring aboard?"

Wilcox shook his head slowly, settling back against the tape machine.
Then he shrugged and bowed faintly. "The chianti, sir!"

I turned my head toward the bottles, and Eve started forward. Then I
yelled as Wilcox shoved his hand down toward the tape machine. The gun
came out on a spring as he touched it.

Muller shot once, and the gun missed Wilcox's fingers as the
engineer's hand went to his hip, where blood was flowing. He collapsed
into the chair behind him, staring at the spot stupidly. "I cut my
teeth on _tough_ ships, Mr. Wilcox," Muller said savagely.

The man's face was white, but he nodded slowly, and a weak grin came
onto his lips. "Maybe you didn't exaggerate those stories at that," he
conceded slowly. "I take it I drew a short straw."

"Very short. It wasn't worth it. No profit from the piddling sale of
drugs is worth it."

"There's a group of strings inside the number one fuel locker," Wilcox
said between his teeth. The numbness was wearing off, and the
shattered bones in his hip were beginning to eat at him. "Paul, pull
up one of the packages and bring it here, will you?"

I found it without much trouble--along with a whole row of others,
fine cords cemented to the side of the locker. The package I drew up
weighed about ten pounds. Wilcox opened it and scooped out a
thimbleful of greenish powder. He washed it down with wine.

"Fatal?" Muller asked.

The man nodded. "In that dosage, after a couple of hours. But it cuts
out the pain--ah, better already. I won't feel it. Captain, I was
never piddling. Your ship has been the sole source of this drug to
Mars since a year or so after I first shipped on her. There are about
seven hundred pounds of pure stuff out there. Grundy and the others
would commit public murder daily rather than lose the few ounces a
year I gave them. Imagine what would happen when Pietro conscripted
the _Wahoo_ and no drugs arrived. The addicts find out no more is
coming--they look for the peddlers--and _they_ start looking for their
suppliers...."

He shrugged. "There might have been time and ways, if I could have
gotten the ship back to Earth or Jupiter. It might have been
