done."

"Convenient," grunted Duncan.

And it _was_ convenient. That was what had happened to the Cytha when
he had shot at it--it had split into all its component parts and had
got away. And that night beside the waterhole, it had spied on him,
again in the form of all its separate parts, from the safety of the
thicket.

"You are caught and so am I," the Cytha said. "Both of us will die
here. It seems a fitting end to our association. Do you not agree with
me?"

"I'll get you out," said Duncan wearily. "I have no quarrel with
children."

       *       *       *       *       *

He dragged the rifle toward him and unhooked the sling from the stock.
Carefully he lowered the gun by the sling, still attached to the
barrel, down into the pit.

The Cytha reared up and grasped it with its forepaws.

"Easy now," Duncan cautioned. "You're heavy. I don't know if I can
hold you."

But he needn't have worried. The little ones were detaching themselves
and scrambling up the rifle and the sling. They reached his extended
arms and ran up them with scrabbling claws. Little sneering screamers
and the comic stilt-birds and the mouse-size kill-devils that snarled
at him as they climbed. And the little grinning natives--not babies,
scarcely children, but small editions of full-grown humanoids. And the
weird donovans scampering happily.

They came climbing up his arms and across his shoulders and milled
about on the ground beside him, waiting for the others.

And finally the Cytha, not skinned down to the bare bones of its
Thanksgiving-turkey-size, but far smaller than it had been, climbed
awkwardly up the rifle and the sling to safety.

Duncan hauled the rifle up and twisted himself into a sitting
position.

The Cytha, he saw, was reassembling.

He watched in fascination as the restless miniatures of the planet's
life swarmed and seethed like a hive of bees, each one clicking into
place to form the entire beast.

And now the Cytha was complete. Yet small--still small--no more than
lion-size.

"But it is such a little one," Zikkara had argued with him that
morning at the farm. "It is such a young one."

Just a young brood, no more than suckling infants--if suckling was the
word, or even some kind of wild approximation. And through the months
and years, the Cytha would grow, with the growing of its diverse
children, until it became a monstrous thing.

It stood there looking at Duncan and the tree.

"Now," said Duncan, "if you'll push on the tree, I think that between
the two of us--"

"It is too bad," the Cytha said, and wheeled itself about.

He watched it go loping off.

"Hey!" he yelled.

But it didn't stop.

He grabbed up the rifle and had it halfway to his shoulder before he
remembered how absolutely futile it was to shoot at the Cytha.

He let the rifle down.

"The dirty, ungrateful, double-crossing--"

He stopped himself. There was no profit in rage. When you were in a
jam, you did the best you could. You figured out the problem and you
picked the course that seemed best and you didn't panic at the odds.

He laid the rifle in his lap and started to hook up the sling and it
was not till then that he saw the barrel was packed with sand and
dirt.

He sat numbly for a moment, thinking back to how close he had been to
firing at the Cytha, and if that barrel was packed hard enough or deep
enough, he might have had an exploding weapon in his hands.

He had used the rifle as a crowbar, which was no way to use a gun.
That was one way, he told himself, that was guaranteed to ruin it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Duncan hunted around and found a twig and dug at the clogged muzzle,
but the dirt was jammed too firmly in it and he made little progress.

He dropped the twig and was hunting for another stronger one when he
caught the motion in a nearby clump of brush.

He watched closely for a moment and there was nothing, so he resumed
the hunt for a stronger twig. He found one and started poking at the
muzzle and there was another flash of motion.

He twisted around. Not more than twenty feet away, a screamer sat
easily on its haunches. Its tongue was lolling out and it had what
looked like a grin upon its face.

And there was another, just at the edge of the clump of brush where he
had caught the motion first.

There were others as well, he knew. He could hear them sliding through
the tangle of fallen trees, could sense the soft padding of their
feet.

The executioners, he thought.

The Cytha certainly had not wasted any time.

He raised the rifle and rapped the barrel smartly on the fallen tree,
trying to dislodge the obstruction in the bore. But it didn't budge;
the barrel still was packed with sand.

But no matter--he'd have to fire anyhow and take whatever chance there
was.

He shoved the control to automatic, and tilted up the muzzle.

There were six of them now, sitting in a ragged row, grinning at him,
not in any hurry. They were sure of him and there was no hurry. He'd
still be there when they decided to move in.

And there were others--on all sides of him.

Once it started, he wouldn't have a chance.

"It'll be expensive, gents," he told them.

And he was astonished at how calm, how coldly objective he could be,
now that the chips were down. But that was the way it was, he
realized.

He'd thought, a while ago, how a man might suddenly find himself face
to face with an aroused and cooperating planet. Maybe this was it in
miniature.

The Cytha had obviously passed the word along: _Man back there needs
killing. Go and get him._

Just like that, for a Cytha would be the power here. A life force, the
giver of life, the decider of life, the repository of all animal life
on the entire planet.

There was more than one of them, of course. Probably they had home
districts, spheres of influence and responsibility mapped out. And
each one would be a power supreme in its own district.

Momism, he thought with a sour grin. Momism at its absolute peak.

Nevertheless, he told himself, it wasn't too bad a system if you
wanted to consider it objectively.

But he was in a poor position to be objective about that or anything
else.

       *       *       *       *       *

The screamers were inching closer, hitching themselves forward slowly
on their bottoms.

"I'm going to set up a deadline for you critters," Duncan called out.
"Just two feet farther, up to that rock, and I let you have it."

He'd get all six of them, of course, but the shots would be the signal
for the general rush by all those other animals slinking in the brush.

If he were free, if he were on his feet, possibly he could beat them
off. But pinned as he was, he didn't have a chance. It would be all
over less than a minute after he opened fire. He might, he figured,
last as long as that.

The six inched closer and he raised the rifle.

But they stopped and moved no farther. Their ears lifted just a
little, as if they might be listening, and the grins dropped from
their faces. They squirmed uneasily and assumed a look of guilt and,
like shadows, they were gone, melting away so swiftly that he scarcely
saw them go.

Duncan sat quietly, listening, but he could hear no sound.

Reprieve, he thought. But for how long? Something had scared them off,
but in a while they might be back. He had to get out of here and he
had to make it fast.

If he could find a longer lever, he could move the tree. There was a
branch slanting up from the topside of the fallen tree. It was almost
four inches at the butt and it carried its diameter well.

He slid the knife from his belt and looked at it. Too small, too thin,
he thought, to chisel through a four-inch branch, but it was all he
had. When a man was desperate enough, though, when his very life
depended on it, he would do anything.

He hitched himself along, sliding toward the point where the branch
protruded from the tree. His pinned leg protested with stabs of pain
as his body wrenched it around. He gritted his teeth and pushed
himself closer. Pain slashed through his leg again and he was still
long inches from the branch.

He tried once more, then gave up. He lay panting on the ground.

There was just one thing left.

He'd have to try to hack out a notch in the trunk just above his leg.
No, that would be next to impossible, for he'd be cutting into the
whorled and twisted grain at the base of the supporting fork.

Either that or cut off his foot, and that was even more impossible. A
man would faint before he got the job done.

It was useless, he knew. He could do neither one. There was nothing he
could do.

       *       *       *       *       *

For the first time, he admitted to himself: He would stay here and
die. Shotwell, back at the farm, in a day or two might set out hunting
for him. But Shotwell would never find him. And anyhow, by nightfall,
if not sooner, the screamers would be back.

He laughed gruffly in his throat--laughing at himself.

The Cytha had won the hunt hands down. It had used a human weakness to
win and then had used that same human weakness to achieve a viciously
poetic vengeance.

