


VI


In Consolidated Edison's big power plant, the guard was friendly. "I
hear the Major's over on your boat, pal. Big doings. Got a lot of the
girls there, hey?"

He bent, sniggering, to look at my pass.

"That's right, pal," I said, and slugged him.

Arthur screamed at me with a shrill blast of steam as I came in. But
only once. I wasn't there for conversation. I began ripping apart his
comfy little home of steel braces and copper wires, and it didn't take
much more than a minute before I had him free. And that was very
fortunate because, although I had tied up the guard, I hadn't done it
very well, and it was just about the time I had Arthur's steel case
tucked under my arm that I heard a yelling and bellowing from down the
stairs.

The guard had got free.

"Keep calm, Arthur!" I ordered sharply. "We'll get out of this, don't
you worry!"

But he wasn't worried, or anyway didn't show it, since he couldn't. I
was the one who was worried. I was up on the second floor of the
plant, in the control center, with only one stairway going down that I
knew about, and that one thoroughly guarded by a man with a grudge
against me. Me, I had Arthur, and no weapon, and I hadn't a doubt in
the world that there were other guards around and that my friend would
have them after me before long.

Problem. I took a deep breath and swallowed and considered jumping out
the window. But it wasn't far enough to the ground.

Feet pounded up the stairs, more than two of them. With Arthur
dragging me down on one side, I hurried, fast as I could, along the
steel galleries that surrounded the biggest boiler. It was a nice
choice of alternatives--if I stayed quiet, they would find me; if I
ran, they would hear me, and then find me.

But ahead there was--what? Something. A flight of stairs, it looked
like, going out and, yes, _up_. Up? But I was already on the second
floor.

"Hey, you!" somebody bellowed from behind me.

I didn't stop to consider. I ran. It wasn't steps, not exactly; it was
a chain of coal scoops on a long derrick arm, a moving bucket
arrangement for unloading fuel from barges. It did go up, though, and
more important it went _out_. The bucket arm was stretched across the
clogged roadway below to a loading tower that hung over the water.

If I could get there, I might be able to get down. If I could get
down--yes, I could see it; there were three or four mahogany motor
launches tied to the foot of the tower.

And nobody around.

I looked over my shoulder, and didn't like what I saw, and scuttled up
that chain of enormous buckets like a roach on a washboard, one hand
for me and one hand for Arthur.

       *       *       *       *       *

Thank heaven, I had a good lead on my pursuers--I needed it. I was on
the bucket chain while they were still almost a city block behind me,
along the galleries. I was halfway across the roadway, afraid to look
down, before they reached the butt end of the chain.

Clash-clatter. _Clank!_ The bucket under me jerked and clattered and
nearly threw me into the street. One of those jokers had turned on the
conveyor! It was a good trick, all right, but not quite in time. I
made a flying jump and I was on the tower.

I didn't stop to thumb my nose at them, but I thought of it.

I was down those steel steps, breathing like a spouting whale, in a
minute flat, and jumping out across the concrete, coal-smeared yard
toward the moored launches. Quickly enough, I guess, but with nothing
at all to spare, because although I hadn't seen anyone there, there
was a guard.

He popped out of a doorway, blinking foolishly; and overhead the
guards at the conveyor belt were screaming at him. It took him a
second to figure out what was going on, and by that time I was in a
launch, cast off the rope, kicked it free, and fumbled for the
starting button.

It took me several seconds to realize that a rope was required, that
in fact there was no button; and by then I was floating yards away,
but the pudgy pop-eyed guard was also in a launch, and he didn't have
to fumble. He knew. He got his motor started a fraction of a second
before me, and there he was, coming at me, set to ram. Or so it
looked.

I wrenched at the wheel and brought the boat hard over; but he swerved
too, at the last moment, and brought up something that looked a little
like a spear and a little like a sickle and turned out to be a
boathook. I ducked, just in time. It sizzled over my head as he swung
and crashed against the windshield. Hunks of safety glass splashed out
over the forward deck, but better that than my head.

Boathooks, hey? I had a boathook too! If he didn't have another
weapon, I was perfectly willing to play; I'd been sitting and taking
it long enough and I was very much attracted by the idea of fighting
back. The guard recovered his balance, swore at me, fought the wheel
around and came back.

We both curved out toward the center of the East River in intersecting
arcs. We closed. He swung first. I ducked--

And from a crouch, while he was off balance, I caught him in the
shoulder with the hook.

He made a mighty splash.

I throttled down the motor long enough to see that he was still
conscious.

"_Touche_, buster," I said, and set course for the return trip down
around the foot of Manhattan, back toward the _Queen_.

       *       *       *       *       *

It took a while, but that was all right; it gave everybody a nice long
time to get plastered. I sneaked aboard, carrying Arthur, and turned
him over to Vern. Then I rejoined the Major. He was making an
inspection tour of the ship--what he called an inspection, after his
fashion.

He peered into the engine rooms and said: "Ah, fine."

He stared at the generators that were turning over and nodded when I
explained we needed them for power for lights and everything and said:
"Ah, of course."

He opened a couple of stateroom doors at random and said: "Ah, nice."

And he went up on the flying bridge with me and such of his officers
as still could walk and said: "Ah."

Then he said in a totally different tone: "What the devil's the matter
over there?"

He was staring east through the muggy haze. I saw right away what it
was that was bothering him--easy, because I knew where to look. The
power plant way over on the East Side was billowing smoke.

"Where's Vern Engdahl? That gadget of his isn't working right!"

"You mean Arthur?"

"I mean that brain in a bottle. It's Engdahl's responsibility, you
know!"

Vern came up out of the wheelhouse and cleared his throat. "Major," he
said earnestly, "I think there's some trouble over there. Maybe you
ought to go look for yourself."

"Trouble?"

"I, uh, hear there've been power failures," Vern said lamely. "Don't
you think you ought to inspect it? I mean just in case there's
something serious?"

The Major stared at him frostily, and then his mood changed. He took a
drink from the glass in his hand, quickly finishing it off.

"Ah," he said, "hell with it. Why spoil a good party? If there are
going to be power failures, why, let them be. That's my motto!"

Vern and I looked at each other. He shrugged slightly, meaning, well,
we tried. And I shrugged slightly, meaning, what did you expect? And
then he glanced upward, meaning, take a look at what's there.

But I didn't really have to look because I heard what it was. In fact,
I'd been hearing it for some time. It was the Major's entire air
force--two helicopters, swirling around us at an average altitude of a
hundred feet or so. They showed up bright against the gathering clouds
overhead, and I looked at them with considerable interest--partly
because I considered it an even-money bet that one of them would be
playing crumple-fender with our stacks, partly because I had an idea
that they were not there solely for show.

I said to the Major: "Chief, aren't they coming a little close? I mean
it's _your_ ship and all, but what if one of them takes a spill into
the bridge while you're here?"

He grinned. "They know better," he bragged. "Ah, besides, I want them
close. I mean if anything went wrong."

I said, in a tone that showed as much deep hurt as I could manage:
"Sir, what could go wrong?"

"Oh, you know." He patted my shoulder limply. "Ah, no offense?" he
asked.

I shook my head. "Well," I said, "let's go below."

       *       *       *       *       *

All of it was done carefully, carefully as could be. The only thing
was, we forgot about the typewriters. We got everybody, or as near as
we could, into the Grand Salon where the food was, and right there on
a table at the end of the hall was one of the typewriters clacking
away. Vern had rigged them up with rolls of paper instead of sheets,
and maybe that was ingenious, but it was also a headache just then.
Because the typewriter was banging out:

LEFT FOUR THIRTEEN FOURTEEN AND TWENTYONE BOILERS WITH A FULL HEAD OF
STEAM AND THE SAFETY VALVES LOCKED BOY I TELL YOU WHEN THOSE THINGS
LET GO YOURE GOING TO HEAR A NOISE THATLL KNOCK YOUR HAT OFF

The Major inquired politely: "Something to do with the ship?"

"Oh, _that_," said Vern. "Yeah. Just a little, uh, something to do
with the ship. Say, Major, here's the bar. Real scotch, see? Look at
the label!"

The Major glanced at him with faint contempt--well, he'd had the pick
of the greatest collection of high-priced liquor stores in the world
for ten years, so no wonder. But he allowed Vern to press a drink on
him.

And the typewriter kept rattling:

LOOKS LIKE RAIN ANY MINUTE NOW HOO BOY IM GLAD I WONT BE IN THOSE
WHIRLYBIRDS WHEN THE STORM STARTS SAY VERN WHY DONT YOU EVER ANSWER ME
Q Q ISNT IT ABOUT TIME TO TAKE OFF XXX I MEAN GET UNDER WEIGH Q Q

Some of the "clerks, typists, domestic personnel and others"--that was
the way they were listed on the T/O; it was only coincidence that the
Major had married them all--were staring at the typewriter.

"Drinks!" Vern called nervously. "Come on, girls! Drinks!"

       *       *       *       *       *

