surface of this planet is like--it's a place where evolution has never
managed to leave the tooth-and-nail stage. Dinosaurs from every period
of the Mesozoic, primitive mammals all the way up the scale to the
ancient cats the works. That's why the original seeding team put these
people in the treetops instead."

"Honath, what was your crime?" Gerhardt Adler said.

Honath was almost relieved to have the questioning come so quickly to
this point. Jarl Eleven's aside, with its many terms he could not
understand, had been frightening in its very meaninglessness.

"There were five of us," Honath said in a low voice. "We said we--that
we did not believe in the Giants."

There was a brief silence. Then, shockingly, both Jarl Eleven and
Gerhardt Adler burst into enormous laughter.

Mathild cowered, her hands over her ears. Even Honath flinched and took
a step backward. Instantly, the laughter stopped, and the Giant called
Jarl Eleven stepped into the oval of light and sat down beside them. In
the light, it could be seen that his face and hands were hairless,
although there was hair on his crown; the rest of his body was covered
by a kind of cloth. Seated, he was no taller than Honath, and did not
seem quite so fearsome.

"I beg your pardon," he said. "It was unkind of us to laugh, but what
you said was highly unexpected. Gerhardt, come over here and squat down,
so that you don't look so much like a statue of some general. Tell me,
Honath, in what way did you not believe in the Giants?"

Honath could hardly believe his ears. A Giant had begged his pardon! Was
this still some joke even more cruel? But whatever the reason, Jarl
Eleven had asked him a question.

"Each of the five of us differed," he said. "I held that you were
not--not real except as symbols of some abstract truth. One of us, the
wisest, believed that you did not exist in any sense at all. But we all
agreed that you were not gods."

"And of course we aren't," Jarl Eleven said. "We're men. We come from
the same stock as you. We're not your rulers, but your brothers. Do you
understand what I say?"

"No," Honath admitted.

"Then let me tell you about it. There are men on many worlds, Honath.
They differ from one another, because the worlds differ, and different
kinds of men are needed to people each one. Gerhardt and I are the kind
of men who live on a world called Earth, and many other worlds like it.
We are two very minor members of a huge project called a 'seeding
program', which has been going on for thousands of years now. It's the
job of the seeding program to survey newly discovered worlds, and then
to make men suitable to live on each new world."

"To make men? But only gods--"

"No, no. Be patient and listen," said Jarl Eleven. "We don't make men.
We make them suitable. There's a great deal of difference between the
two. We take the living germ plasm, the sperm and the egg, and we modify
it. When the modified man emerges, we help him to settle down in his new
world. That's what we did on Tellura--it happened long ago, before
Gerhardt and I were even born. Now we've come back to see how you people
are getting along, and to lend a hand if necessary."

He looked from Honath to Mathild, and back again. "Do you understand?"
he said.

"I'm trying." Honath said. "But you should go down to the jungle-top,
then. We're not like the others; they are the people you want to see."

"We shall, in the morning. We just landed here. But, just because you're
not like the others, we're more interested in you now. Tell me, has any
condemned man ever escaped from the jungle floor before you people?"

"No, never. That's not surprising. There are monsters down there."

Jarl Eleven looked sidewise at the other Giant. He seemed to be smiling.
"When you see the films," he remarked, "you'll call that the
understatement of the century. Honath, how did you three manage to
escape, then?"

Haltingly at first, and then with more confidence as the memories came
crowding vividly back, Honath told him. When he mentioned the feast at
the demon's nest, Jarl Eleven again looked significantly at Adler, but
he did not interrupt.

"And finally we got to the top of the chimney and came out on this flat
space," Honath said. "Alaskon was still with us then, but when he saw
you and the metal thing he threw himself back down the cleft. He was a
criminal like us, but he should not have died. He was a brave man, and a
wise one."

"Not wise enough to wait until all the evidence was in," Adler said
enigmatically. "All in all, Jarl, I'd say 'prodigious' is the word for
it. This is easily the most successful seeding job any team has ever
done, at least in this limb of the galaxy. And what a stroke of luck, to
be on the spot just as it came to term, and with a couple at that!"

"What does he mean?" Honath said.

"Just this, Honath. When the seeding team set your people up in business
on Tellura, they didn't mean for you to live forever in the treetops.
They knew that, sooner or later, you'd have to come down to the ground
and learn to fight this planet on its own terms. Otherwise, you'd go
stale and die out."

"Live on the ground all the time?" Mathild said in a faint voice.

"Yes, Mathild. The life in the treetops was to have been only an interim
period, while you gathered knowledge you needed about Tellura and put it
to use. But to be the real masters of the world, you will have to
conquer the surface, too.

"The device your people worked out, that of sending criminals to the
surface, was the best way of conquering the planet that they could have
picked. It takes a strong will and courage to go against custom, and
both those qualities are needed to lick Tellura. Your people exiled just
such fighting spirits to the surface, year after year after year.

"Sooner or later, some of those exiles were going to discover how to
live successfully on the ground and make it possible for the rest of
your people to leave the trees. You and Honath have done just that."

"Observe please, Jarl," Adler said. "The crime in this first successful
case was ideological. That was the crucial turn in the criminal policy
of these people. A spirit of revolt is not quite enough, but couple it
with brains and--_ecce homo_!"

Honath's head was swimming. "But what does all this mean?" he said. "Are
we--not condemned to Hell any more?"

"No, you're still condemned, if you still want to call it that," Jarl
Eleven said soberly. "You've learned how to live down there, and you've
found out something even more valuable: how to stay alive while cutting
down your enemies. Do you know that you killed three demons with your
bare hands, you and Mathild and Alaskon?"

"Killed--"

"Certainly," Jarl Eleven said. "You ate three eggs. That is the
classical way, and indeed the only way, to wipe out monsters like the
dinosaurs. You can't kill the adults with anything short of an anti-tank
gun, but they're helpless in embryo--and the adults haven't the sense to
guard their nests."

Honath heard, but only distantly. Even his awareness of Mathild's warmth
next to him did not seem to help much.

"Then we have to go back down there," he said dully. "And this time
forever."

"Yes," Jarl Eleven said, his voice gentle. "But you wont be alone,
Honath. Beginning tomorrow, you'll have all your people with you."

"_All_ our people? But you're going to drive them out?"

"All of them. Oh, we won't prohibit the use of the vine-webs too, but
from now on your race will have to fight it out on the surface as well.
You and Mathild have proven that it can be done. It's high time the rest
of you learned, too."

"Jarl, you think too little of these young people themselves," Adler
said. "Tell them what is in store for them. They are frightened."

"Of course, of course. It's obvious. Honath, you and Mathild are the
only living individuals of your race who know how to survive down there
on the surface. And we're not going to tell your people how to do that.
We aren't even going to drop them so much as a hint. That part of it is
up to you."

Honath's jaw dropped.

"It's up to you," Jarl Eleven repeated firmly. "We'll return you to your
tribe tomorrow, and we'll tell your people that you two know the rules
for successful life on the ground--and that everyone else has to go down
and live there too. We'll tell them nothing else but that. What do you
think they'll do then?"

"I don't know," Honath said dazedly. "Anything could happen. They might
even make us Spokesman and Spokeswoman--except that we're just common
criminals."

"Uncommon pioneers, Honath. The man and the woman to lead the humanity
of Tellura out of the attic, into the wide world." Jarl Eleven got to
