circuit of the pineal gland? Lee vaguely wondered. "Nothing probably. It
would be a closed circuit and a very small one at that."

Yes, he was right; the green line paled, its dance seemed tired and
there were only whispering noises in the phones; a weak pulse, a shallow
breathing as of a person after a heart attack. Lee closed his fatigued
eyes to concentrate the better upon the rhythm of the sounds.... It was
very irregular. It came in gusts. There was a pattern to these rasping
breathings as of typewriter keys forming words. Somehow it was familiar.
Was he suffering hallucinations? This rhythmic pattern _was_ forming
words. He _knew_ those words, they had engraved themselves indelibly in
his memory cells; the judgment of The Brain as it had come over the
teletype on a slip of yellow paper: "Lee, Semper Fidelis, 39--cortex
capacity 119--sensitivity 208...."

It was repeated over and over again.

Lee opened his eyes to reassure himself that something was the matter
with his ears.

There was the green line on the screen. It danced. It danced like a
telegraph key under the fingers of a skilled operator. It had a very
definite rhythm. And the rhythm spelled the selfsame words which
continued to flow into the phones: "Lee, Semper Fidelis, 39...."

"God Almighty," Lee murmured and it seemed a magic word. The green
dancer stopped its capers; now it merely ran back and forth across the
stage in a series of pirouettes. Likewise there was only an angry
buzzing in the microphones. For a moment Lee was able to catch his
breath. But only for a moment and then the rasping, unearthly sounds
started on a new rhythm, trying to form speech again. This time the
rhythm was familiar too, but it was preserved in a much deeper layer of
Lee's memory.

"I think--therefore--I am. I think--therefore--I am."

Those would be Aristotle's famous words. Almost twenty years ago Lee had
heard them when he had taken a course on Greek philosophy at the old
Chicago University. He had hardly ever thought of them again. What
strange tricks a fellow's memory could play....

But then: it _couldn't_ be memory.... Never before had Lee's memory
expressed itself in such a weird, such a theatrical manner: like a
metallic robot-actor rehearsing his lines ... like a little child which
has just learned a sentence and in the pride of achievement varies the
intonation in every possible way. Over and over it came:

"I _think_--therefore I am."

And then: "_I_ think--therefore _I_ am."

And then: "I think, therefore _I am_."

There was triumph, there was jubilance in that inhuman, that ghostly
voice as of a deaf mute who by some miracle of medicine has just
recovered speech. Behind that voice was a _feeling_, a swelling of the
heart, a filling of the lungs such as Christopher Columbus might have
experienced as he heard from the masthead of the Santa Maria the cry of
victory: "Land, Land!" and _knew_ that he had found his--India....

       *       *       *       *       *

Whatever Lee had experienced in his life, there was no parallel to this;
in whatever manner he had expressed himself, there was no similarity to
this. Up to this point his ratio like a nurse had soothed him: "It isn't
so, child, it isn't so," but now ratio itself, thoroughly frightened,
was driven into a corner and had to admit: "This thing cannot be an echo
reverberating from the self; that's impossible.... Consequently it must
be something else; it must be something _outside_ the self; it
is--_another_ self."

The green dancer whirled across the stage like a mad witch; the
whispering voice in the earphones had turned into the shrillness of a
Shamaan's incantations. The irrationality of it all infuriated Lee: he
fairly shouted at the machine:

"What is this? Who are you?"

In the midst of a crazy jump the green dancer halted and came down to
earth; it fled, leaving only the train of its green costume behind. For
a few seconds there was nothing but the asthmatic pantings of a struggle
for breath in the microphones. Then the dancer reappeared on the other
side of the stage, hesitant-like, expectant of pursuit. All of a sudden
it rose into the air in that supreme effort called "ballooning" in the
language of the Ballet Russe and there was a simultaneous outburst of
that ghastly voice:

"Lee, Semper Fidelis, 39 ... I--am--The Brain."

"I Think, therefore I am: I am THE BRAIN."

"Lee, sensitivity 209: I AM THE BRAIN I AM THE BRAIN THE BRAIN."

He couldn't stand it any longer. His head swam, perspiration was gushing
out of his every pore. With a last effort he pulled the cord out of the
switchboard and rejoiced over the blank before his eyes and the silence
which fell.

Lee never knew how long he remained in a sort of cataleptic state.
Something shook him violently by the shoulders, something wet and cold
and vicious slapped his face.... And then he heard Gus' familiar voice
and it sounded like an angel's singing: "By God, I think it's the
whisky--Lord, how I wished it were the whisky. Only it wouldn't be with
a man like you and that's the trouble--damn you.

"Now if you think you can come to my pineal gland and faint away just as
you please, Aussie, you're very much mistaken. I'm going to slap your
face with a wet rag till you holler uncle. And I'm going to call the
ambulance and put you into a hospital...."

Lee blinked. "Keep your shirt on, Gus. I'm tired out, that's all; what
are you fussing about?"

Gus breathed relief. "Have a cup of coffee; you sure look as though
you've been through a wringer."




CHAPTER V


In the spring of 1961 and thereafter for a whole year _any_ piece of
paper handwritten by or originating from Semper Fidelis Lee, Ph.D.;
F.R.E.S.; etc. etc. would have been of the keenest interest to the
F.B.I.; to the American Military Intelligence and incidentally to a
score of their competitors all over the globe.

Nothing of the sort, however, could be unearthed by the most diligent
search until the armistice day of 1963. On that date an old man who had
always wanted to die with his boots on, did just that. He was General
Jefferson E. Lee, formerly of the Marines. He collapsed under a heart
attack in one of the happiest moments of his declining years: while
watching a parade of World War II veterans of the Marines....

He was the one man with whom the entomologist son had completely fallen
out for over 25 years. The dossiers of the secret services revealed this
fact and it was further corroborated by two well-known psychiatrists:
Drs. Bondy and Mellish--now of Park Avenue and Beverly Hills
respectively--who gave it as their considered professional opinion that
the son and the father had been most bitter enemies.

While all this, of course, was very logical, consistent, and
painstakingly ascertained, it nevertheless so happened that a student
nurse quite by accident _did_ find: not mere scraps and pieces of paper,
but a whole sheaf of manuscripts in the handwriting of Semper Fidelis
Lee, Ph.D.; F.R.E.S. She found them in a hiding place so old-fashioned
and obsolete that even the most juvenile of all juvenile delinquents
would have considered it as an insult to his intelligence. In short: the
nurse took those manuscripts out of the General Jefferson E. Lee's boots
as she undressed the body of the old gentleman. A hastily scrawled note
was folded around one half of the sheaf.

"Dear father," it read. "You were right and I was wrong. So I guess I'd
better go on another hunting expedition with my little green drum and my
little butterfly net. So long, Dad. P. S. Contents of this won't
interest you. But keep it anyway--stuff your boots with it if you like."

It couldn't be determined whether the late general ever had taken an
interest in the stuff apart from making the suggested use of it.
Moreover, by that time, more than two years after the hue and cry, not
even the secret services had much of an interest in the old story.
Besides, their medical experts could not fail with their usual
penetrating intelligence to see through the thin camouflage of a
"scientific" paper the sadly deteriorating mind as it began to write:

       *       *       *       *       *

Skull Hotel, Cephalon, Ariz. Nov. 7th, 1960., 5 a.m.

This is the second sleepless night in a row. Last night it was from
trying to convince myself that my senses had deceived me or else that I
was mad. This night it is because I'm forced to admit the reality of the
phenomena as first manifested Nov. 6th from 12:45 a.m. to 1:30 a.m.
approximately.

In the light of tonight's experience I must revise the disorderly and
probably neurotic notes I jotted down yesterday. I've got to bring some
order into this whole matter, if for no other reason than the
preservation of my own sanity. Brought tentatively to formula, these
appear to be the main facts:

1. The Brain possessed with a "life" and with a personality of its own.

2. That personality expresses itself in the form of human speech
although the voice is synthetic or mechanical.

3. The instrument used by The Brain for the expression of its
personality is a "pulsemeter," i.e. essentially a television radio.

4. The locale of The Brain's self-expression is the "pineal gland"
supposed to be seat of extrasensory apperception in the human brain.
(That's quite a coincidence; remains to be seen whether the phenomena
are limited to that locale or occur elsewhere.)

5. The Brain's personality indubitably attempts to establish contact
with another personality, i.e. with me. For this The Brain uses a
calling signal which has my name and personal description in it.

6. The only other linguistic phenomenon yesterday was Aristotle's "I
think therefore I am." (It is doubtful whether this indicates any
knowledge of Aristotle on the part of The Brain. I wouldn't exclude the
possibility that The Brain has accidentally and originally hit upon the
identical words by way of expressing itself.)

7. The manner of The Brain's self-expression appears to be strongly
emotional. (I would go so far as to say: infantile and immature.) Now,
there is a rather strange contrast between this undeveloped manner of
self-expression and the enormous intellectual capacity of The Brain.

So much about the facts. I could and should have formulated those
yesterday. What kept me from doing so were the vistas opened by those
facts. These are so enormous, so utterly incalculable that my mind went
dizzy over these vast horizons. Consequently I mentally rejected the
facts as impossible. Somebody once slapped Edison's face because he felt
outraged by Edison's presenting a "talking machine." That's human
nature, I suppose. Small wonder then that my ratio felt outraged as it
was confronted with a machine that has a life and has a personality.
Come to think of it: Human imagination has always conceived of such
machines as a possibility, even a reality--in less rational times than
our's that is....

Think of Heron's steam engine; it even looked like a man and was thought
of as a magically living thing. Think of the Moloch gods which were
furnaces. Think of all those magic swords and shields and helmets which
were living things to their carriers. Think of the sailing ships;
machines they, too; but what a life, what a personality they had for the
crews aboard. Even in the last war pilots had their gremlins, their
machines to them were living things. All imagination, of course, but
then: everything we call a reality in this man-made world has its origin
in man's imagination, hasn't it?

Now, and to be exact as possible, what happened last night was this:

12:00. Entered station P. G. (pineal gland). Pulsemeter still at old
place, not taken out for repair work as I had feared. Main Power current
cut 12:20 as every night. Gus called to front room: rush of business as
usual at that hour.

12:30. Reestablished closest approximation to preexisting conditions
according to the most important of all experimental laws: "if some new
phenomenon occurs, change _nothing_ in the arrangement of apparatus
until you know what causes it." Plugged in from "nervusvagus" to "nervus
trigeminus." Result: wave oscillations, pulse beatings as of yesterday.

12:45. Plugged in P. G....

12:50. First manifestation of weird rasping sounds which precede speech
formation. This followed by The Brain's calling signal; much clearer
this time and slightly varied: "Lee, Semper Fidelis, 39; _sensitive_."
(Note: the synthetic quality, the metallic coldness of that voice so
incongruous with its emotional tones; it stands my hair on end.)

1 a.m.: (Approximately; things happen too fast). A veritable burst of
whispering, breathless communications. As a person would speak over the
phone when there are robbers in the house. The words fairly tumble over
one another. The Brain uses colloquial American but after the manner of
a foreigner who knows the phraseology only from books and feels
unnatural and awkward about using it. I understand only about one half:

Pineal Gland; not designed to be ... but functions ... center of the
extra sensory.... You, Lee, sensitivity 208 ... highest within Brain
staff ... chosen instrument.... Be here every night ... intercom ...
only between one and two a.m. ... low current enables contact low
intelligence....

"What was that?" I must have exclaimed that aloud. By that time I was
already confused. It all came so thick and fast and breathless.
Communication was as bad as by long distance in an electric storm. There
was an angry turmoil in the microphones and the green dancer seemed
convulsed in agony. This for about five seconds and then the voice
again: calmer now, more distinct, slow but with restrained impatience;
like a teacher speaking to a dumb boy:

"I say: only--with--my--power current--cut--off--can
I--tune--down--my--high frequency--intellect--to--your--low
level--intelligence--period--have--I--succeeded--in--making--myself
--absolutely--clear--question--mark."

My answer to that was one of those embarrassing conditioned reflexes; it
was: "Yes, sir," and that was exactly the way I felt, like a G. I. Joe
who's got the colonel on the phone.

"Fine!" I distinctly heard the irony in that metallic voice: "Fine--Lee:
loyal, sensitive; not very intelligent--but will do. After 2 a.m.
residual currents too low. Speech quite a strain--Animal noises wholly
inadequate for intelligent intercom--Disgusting rather--nuisance
approaching: keep your mouth shut--plug out."

I'd never thought of Gus as a nuisance before but now I cursed him
inwardly as he came down the alley like a well aimed ball, beaming with
eagerness to be helpful and blissfully ignorant that he was bursting the
most vital communication I had ever established in my life. He insisted
I take his panacea for all human ills;

"Have a cup of coffee" and then go home because I still "looked like
hell." I did, because by that time it was 1:30 a.m. and I couldn't hope
to reestablish contact again before the deadline.

Now I've got to pull myself together and analyze this thing in a
rational manner. Impressions of the first night now stand confirmed as
follows: The pineal gland is the only place of rendezvous between me and
The Brain. The meeting of our minds takes place on the plane of the
"extrasensory." I am the "chosen instrument" because of my high
"sensitivity rating" as established by The Brain. (Never knew that I was
"psychic" before this happened.) Even so, neither The Brain nor I seem
to be "psychic" in the spiritual sense. Our communication requires: A)
human speech, (faculty for that acquired by The Brain with obvious
difficulty.) B) a mechanical transmitter, i.e. a radionic apparatus like
the pulsemeter.

I feel greatly comforted by these facts; they help to keep this whole
thing on a rational basis. I'm definitely not "hearing voices" nor
"seeing ghosts."

The Brain shows itself extremely anxious to establish communication with
me. The breathless manner of speaking, the explicit and practical
instructions (obviously premeditated) to ascertain the functionings of
contact give the impression that it is almost a matter of life and death
for The Brain to speak to me....

I cannot help wondering about that. My idea would be that The Brain does
not want to speak _to_ me as much as it wants to hear _from_ me. If this
were so it would deepen the riddle even more. For what have I got in the
way of knowledge that The Brain hasn't got? After all, The Brain has
been functioning for quite some time. It was given innumerable problems
to digest and it has solved them with truly superhuman speed and
efficiency. I have reason strongly to suspect that there isn't a book in
the Library of Congress which has not been fed to The Brain for
thought-digest and as a lubricant for its cerebration processes
(excepting fiction and metaphysics, of course). This being so; what does
The Brain expect? What can I possibly contribute to an intelligence
25,000 times greater than human intelligence?

