I arrived back in Joe's Tavern to find the barkeep had been revived and
bore none of us any ill-will. This no doubt because of Joy's persuasive
abilities. Cora was sulking in a booth and Uncle Peter was patching the
gash on the barkeep's head.

       *       *       *       *       *

I entered with a heavy heart, realizing, as a good citizen, I must turn
my own uncle over to the police. But there was an interlude before I
would be forced into this unpleasant task. This interlude was furnished
by Bag Ears. After I acquainted the group with the news of how Hands had
taken the easy way out, Bag Ears' face took on a rapt, silent look of
happiness. He was staring at Joy. He said, "Pretty--very pretty!"

Joy said, "Thank you."

Bag Ears said, "Pretty--pretty--pretty."

Joy looked at me. "What's eating _him_?"

There was a bottle on the bar together with some glasses. I stepped over
and poured myself a drink. I certainly needed it. "Bag Ears isn't
referring to you, dear. He's alluding to his bells. He's hearing them
again."

"Oh, my sky-blue panties! Pour me a drink."

I complied. "You see, Bag Ears is somewhat punch-drunk from his years in
the prize ring. I've seen this happen before."

We sipped our brandy and watched Bag Ears move toward the door.

"That's the way it always is. When he hears the bells, he feels a
terrific urge to go forth and search for them. But he always ends up at
Red Nose Tessie's and she takes him home. It's no use trying to stop
him. He'll hang one on you."

As Bag Ears disappeared into the street, there were tears in Joy's eyes.
"He's dreaming of his bells," she murmured. "I think that's beautiful."
She held up her glass. "May he find his bells. Pour me another drink."

I poured two and we drank to that.

"May we all someday find our bells," Joy said with emotion, and I was
delighted to find my wife a girl of such deep sentiment. "Pour me
another."

I did. "Your quotation was wrong, sweetheart," I said. "Don't you mean,
'May we all find our Shangri-La?'"

"Of course. Let's drink to it."

We drank to it and were rudely interrupted by the barkeep who said, "I
hope you got some dough. That stuff ain't water."

I gave him a ten-dollar bill and--with a heavy heart--turned to Uncle
Peter. "Come, Uncle," I said gently. "We might as well get it over
with."

"Get what over with?"

"Our trip to the police station. You must give yourself up of course."

"What for?"

I shook my head sadly. Uncle Peter would never fry. His mind was
obviously out of joint. "For murder."

He looked at Joy. He said, "Oh, my broken test tube! There is no need
of--"

"I know it will be hard for them to convict you without _corpus
delicti_, but you must confess."

"Let's all go over to my laboratory."

"If you wish. You may have one last visit there."

"Excellent--one last visit." He smiled and I wondered if I saw a certain
craftiness behind it.

Cora voiced no objections, seemingly anxious to stay near Uncle Peter.
When we got to his laboratory, he went on through into his living
quarters and took a suit case from the closet.

"What are you going to do?"

"Pack my things."

"Oh, of course. You'll need some things in jail."

"Who said anything about jail? I'm going to Tibet."

"_Tibet!_ Uncle Peter! I won't allow it. You must stay here and face the
music."

"The music is in Tibet, Homer. That's one of the reasons I'm going
there. To a monastery high in Himalayas. There are some wonderful men
there I've always wanted to meet--yogis who have such control over
natural laws that they can walk on water and move straight through solid
walls."

"But, Uncle Peter! If you want to go to Tibet, you should have thought
of it before. It's too late now. You've committed murder."

"Bosh! I haven't killed anyone. The serum I discovered is one of
transition, not murder. It causes the stepping-up of the human physical
structure into an infinitely higher rate of vibration. Two controls are
distilled into it. One is a timer that sets off the catalysis, and the
other is a directive element based upon higher mathematics which allows
the creator of the serum to direct the higher vibratory residue of the
physical form to be put down at any prearranged point on the globe
before the reforming element takes effect."

Joy said, "Oh, my painted G-string!"

I strove to absorb all this. "You mean those people weren't destroyed?"

Joy was quicker on the reaction. "Of course. I couldn't picture Uncle
Peter as a killer somehow. He merely picked them up here and set them
down in Tibet. Can't you understand? He just explained it to you."

Of course I didn't want to admit my mental haziness to Joy, so I skipped
hastily over it and pointed an accusing finger at Uncle Peter. "But why
couldn't you have conducted your experiments on a higher plane. Why did
you have to consort with law-breakers?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Joy had apparently lost interest. She planted a wifely kiss on my cheek
and started toward the door. "I'm going back to Joe's Tavern," she said.
"It's more fun there. When you get all this straightened out, come on
over."

I moved to protest but she waved me down. "Never mind. I'll take a cab."
She smiled at me sweetly. "And don't stay too long, darling. I'm sure
Cora is anxious to get her clothes off."

Cora distinctly pronounced an unprintable name but Joy did not hear it.
She was already gone.

I turned to Uncle Peter. "You did not answer my question."

"It's very simple. Even one of your limited brain power should be able
to understand it. You see, with finishing my experiments I was not
averse to doing the city a favor. Why not, I asked myself, perform them
upon persons undesirable to our law-abiding populace? Cora was
acquainted with Hands McCaffery and it was through him that I learned
who the really undesirable people were."

"But why did you invite them to my wedding reception? I'd think you
could find a more appropriate place to carry out your--"

"It was an ideal place to get the Zinsky mob together. Like your Aunt
Gretchen, Mr. Zinsky has social ambitions, and he anticipated no danger
at the reception."

"I can see your point."

"Also, I wanted to get back at your Aunt Gretchen. She's been very
niggardly with funds lately and I wanted to highlight my displeasure in
a way she would remember."

I had a fairly clear picture of things now. But I still felt Uncle Peter
should be upbraided on a last point. "Uncle Peter, I think it was
shameful of you to inflict those hoodlums on the monks in that monastery
in Tibet. They'll be in panic."

"No. I was careful to send along two policemen to keep them in hand."

"So you're leaving for Tibet?"

"Of course. I've got to follow up and check on the success of my serum,
though there is really no doubt as to its potency. Also I'll be able to
achieve a life-long ambition--that of meeting the yogis from whom I
should learn a great deal."

I glanced at Cora. "Are you taking her with you?"

"Of course."

"But yogis are above things of the flesh."

Uncle Peter looked me straight in the eye. "Maybe the yogis are, but I'm
not."

There seemed nothing else to discuss, so I left Uncle Peter's chambers
and went back to Joe's Tavern. My mind, now at ease, was filled again
with thought of the honeymoon to come. I would pick up Joy and we would
be off to pink-tinted lands.

But there was a slight hitch. When I arrived at Joe's Tavern, Joy was
gone.
