radio bank on the other side of the railing with his back to me. He wore
earphones.

As the door clicked shut, the policeman turned in his swivel chair to
face me.

"Hello, Langston, we've been expecting you," he said.

It was Isaac Grogan.

I smiled and replied with calmness that amazed me:

"Yes, I daresay you have, Zan Matl Blekeke."

       *       *       *       *       *

Maxwell and I were alone in the small, bare, brightly lighted but
windowless room.

Blekeke had spent a half-hour after my arrival trying to find out how
much I knew. But after my initial shocker--letting him know that I
recognized him--I had kept my mind closed tightly; and I was keeping it
closed now. Blekeke was still listening in--I had no doubt of that.
Maxwell knew it too, for he made no attempt at conversation.

He sat with his back to the walls in one corner, and I crouched in
another corner, and we sat there, staring at the walls and at each
other, not daring to speak or to think.

After about ten or fifteen minutes the door opened, and Blekeke stepped
in. He was wearing earphones, and a wire trailed behind him. In one hand
he carried a blaster.

He smiled broadly and nodded, once at each of us. "Something show you,"
he said. "Watching."

He pushed a button on the wall beside the door and the lights died. For
an instant everything was black, and I braved myself. Then the wall
beside Blekeke glowed, flickered--and a scene in black and white came
into focus.

"This observer room," Blekeke said. "Show what camera top meeting hall
see."

The scene was dim; a half-moon bobbed and splashed in ocean waves in the
background. In the right foreground, close and large, dark and dull, was
the spaceship.

It was Martian, but not military. An old cargo carrier. Its rear jets
were extinguished, but the ship was vibrating.

_Leaving?_ I wondered--and Blekeke caught my thought over the telenizer
earphones.

_No--just arriving_, was his answer in my mind. _But it leave again very
soon. You with. Soon no matter what you know. What did. Soon gone._

_How soon?_ I demanded.

Blekeke spoke aloud: "Very soon. Fifteen, twenty, half-hour minutes.
Looking more. All way right."

I looked at the extreme right edge of the picture, where a rough,
shadowy hillock arose. While I watched, an opening appeared in the
hillock and a dim human figure emerged. It stood erect and walked across
the stretch of gravel beach toward the spaceship. Another figure came
from the hillock aperture and followed the first.

The thought came from Blekeke: _Cultists. Evidence. Prove my success._

_Success in what? Why? How?_

Blekeke pushed the button on the wall again, and the lights were
suddenly on, and the wall bare.

"No harm tell you now," he said. "Gone soon. No matter."

       *       *       *       *       *

He leaned against the wall and crossed his fragile arms across his huge
red chest. He said:

"Mars home dying. You know. Need more somewhere. Earth best, but some
Earthmen deciding not want." He shrugged. "Dear Late Doctor--" he did
not bother making the mystic sign--"was brilliant man. Dr. Homer
Reighardt--know name? Psychiatrist. Very old. No, I not kill; death
natural. I wanted live longer, but...." he shrugged again. "Learned much
from, howso. He founded cult. I his servant after joining. He idea very
innocent--cure not really sick with mild 'nosis."

He smiled modestly. "I also brilliant person. Learn tech part much
rapid. Apply own idea, which not so innocent. Fact, very insidious.
Telenize right persons, they _want_ Martian then! Vote to let come,
yups?"

Maxwell broke in: "Then why didn't you start in on the right people at
once? Why not set up your headquarters in Belgrade and telenize the
World Council members, instead of playing around with a bunch of
hypochondriacs here?"

Blekeke held up his hand. "So fast not so. Must work with what got.
Doctor machine very simple, and he telling me not all. Not trusting even
me all way. Needing much work, then. Muchness development. Six months I
working, then need testing. SRI, oaks? So now have proof for Mars
government, which verysome cautious. Demanding evidence."

This time I broke in. "Blekeke," I said, with some of the respect I was
beginning to feel for him, "you're a patriot, I guess, and I have to
admire you for that. But you're also a damned fool. You can't get away
with this--and I think you know it. There are just too many loop-holes."

"Where loop-hole?"

"Well, in the first place, I made a phone call before I got here--while
I was in the car and my defense mech was on. As a result, the police
will be here in a very few minutes--probably before you can get to the
rocket--"

Blekeke smiled blandly. "Where second place?"

"In the second place, assuming that you do get to the spaceship and take
off before the police get here, it still won't matter. They _know_, now,
who has been operating the telenizer. They can track you down. You'll be
picked up long before you get to Mars." I stood up and strode
purposefully toward him. "Give me the blaster, dammit. You're licked
before you're even started."

Blekeke frowned and pointed the blaster at my chest. "Please. So fast
not so. Go back corner, please."

I obediently returned to the corner and sat down. It had been worth a
try.

The Martian lowered the weapon and smiled. "You too brave. I not like
kill. But pfoof for loop-hole. All plugged. Looking what front-door
camera see. Polices here now."

He pushed the button on the wall.

       *       *       *       *       *

A police auto was screeching to a halt in the driveway before the big
house, and a half-dozen uniformed men, armed with deadly blasters, were
piling out. Another car was whipping around the final curve.

I knew that Maxwell was giving me a look of gratitude, but suddenly I
wasn't sure it was warranted. I had assumed on a sort of blind faith
that the police would get here in time--but as I watched the scene, I
didn't feel so good.

For the policemen were not charging the house. They were not even
looking at it.

They were milling around, aimlessly. No, not aimlessly, exactly. They
were looking _for_ something; but they weren't seeing it. One of them
got back in the car and used the radio, and the others wandered around,
glancing unseeingly in all directions.

"Mass telenosis?" I asked quietly, not taking my eyes from the scene,
feeling my heart pound harder as I caught a glimpse of the bobbing,
slower lights of another vehicle on the road far back.

Blekeke said, "Yups. Plug all loop-hole. Police not see house, not see
ship. No one see ship leave, not knowing Blekeke on board. Complete
vanish." He shrugged. "Ship keep commercial schedule. Take auxiliary
power to right course, then switch rocket. Stopped on way, maybe, so
what? Telenize searchers, yups?"

"What about the house?" I asked.

"Go boom when we leave," Blekeke said.

Maxwell said, "Judas! Everyone will just assume that we and Blekeke and
all the cultists have gone boom, too. That's likely to end the
investigation right there. Slow it down plenty, at least."

Blekeke nodded applaudingly. "Yups. Is so."

He pushed the wall-button and we had the spaceship scene again. Men and
Martians were loading large crates into the port of the ship. The other
bulky boxes were being moved across the beach from the opening in the
hill.

"Leaving soon now," Blekeke said as he switched the lights on. "That
most of vital equipment. Other going boom. We work awful quickness,
yups?"

"Just how do you mean?" I asked, more to kill time than out of real
curiosity.

"Ha! You not knowing how quickness we work since morning--since getting
Maxwell brain band on measure machine Sun Ray...."

Maxwell exclaimed; "Oh, hell, of course! Son of a blunder! _That's_ how
you got it."

       *       *       *       *       *

I had already figured that out, and I guessed it was the information
Blekeke had gained from Maxwell's mind that was forcing him to act now,
before he had planned.

"When learned you planning 'vestigate SRI, had move fast," Blekeke
corroborated. "So did. Not know you law man till then. Only that
Langston mind stopped 'nosis. Not even knowing why. Worried for
while--whew!" He wiped the mock perspiration from his brow and smiled.

I said, "The thugs who attacked Maxwell and me were Grogan's men. May I
ask now--just out of curiosity--were they telenized, or was Grogan?"

Blekeke seemed happy to reply. "Grogan. Reighardt happened work on
Grogan in CI. Also your brain wave number in file, but I getting first
on Sun Ray machine."

I had wondered about that, and there was another question that was
bothering me.

"When you started that blood dripping in the bathtub," I said, "was that
a deliberate attempt to scare me away, or was that part of the standard
treatment?"

"Standard," Blekeke replied. "Subject no longer trust own senses after.
But recognize 'nosis, so trying frighten you. Work good on others."

I started to ask another question, but he switched on the spaceship
loading scene again.

A crane was hauling the last huge crate into the hold. All the
humans--the SRI cultists--were apparently aboard ship. None were
visible. A few Martians stood near the ship, some of them looking toward
the hillock opening, and some watching the loading.

Suddenly two policemen came into view on the screen, walking casually
over the hill in which the opening was located. At the top they halted
and looked out over the ocean.

One of the men looked over his shoulder and pulled a bottle from an
inside pocket. He offered it to his companion, who shook his head. The
man shrugged and took a deep swallow himself, tucking the bottle inside
his jacket again.

I caught a sudden note of mild alarm from Blekeke's mind, which reminded
me that he was still listening for careless thoughts of mine.

The policemen continued walking toward the beach, heading to the right
of the spaceship. I saw one of the Martians step back into the shadow
of the ship. The others followed the policemen with their eyes.

"We best going now," Blekeke said. He reached to turn off the
picture....

And his hand froze. He saw the same thing I saw, and at just about the
same time.

He saw a dog.

And he must have felt the triumphant, incoherent chortle that gushed
from my mind.

       *       *       *       *       *

The dog was a small, ragged, spotted terrier. It came trotting
absentmindedly over the hill after the policemen, and at the top it
stopped. It quivered. It sat down, pointed its nose at the spaceship and
opened its mouth in a howl I could almost hear.

Then the scene was gone; the lights in the room glowed; Blekeke was
pointing the blaster at me.

