was a fraud. I am sorry to trick you that way, Philip, but it was all
I could think of. Another day and you would have been back on Terra. I
don't want to remain in this area any longer than necessary. They have
been so certain of finding me out in deep space that I have been able
to stay here without too much danger. But even the purloined letter
was found eventually."

Kramer smoked his cigarette nervously. "What are you going to do?
Where are we going?"

"First, I want to talk to you. I have many things to discuss. I was
very disappointed when you left me, along with the others. I had hoped
that you would remain." The dry voice chuckled. "Remember how we used
to talk in the old days, you and I? That was a long time ago."

The ship was gaining speed. It plunged through space at tremendous
speed, rushing through the last of the defense zone and out beyond. A
rush of nausea made Kramer bend over for a moment.

When he straightened up the voice from the wall went on, "I'm sorry to
step it up so quickly, but we are still in danger. Another few moments
and we'll be free."

"How about yuk ships? Aren't they out here?"

"I've already slipped away from several of them. They're quite curious
about me."

"Curious?"

"They sense that I'm different, more like their own organic mines.
They don't like it. I believe they will begin to withdraw from this
area, soon. Apparently they don't want to get involved with me.
They're an odd race, Philip. I would have liked to study them closely,
try to learn something about them. I'm of the opinion that they use no
inert material. All their equipment and instruments are alive, in some
form or other. They don't construct or build at all. The idea of
_making_ is foreign to them. They utilize existing forms. Even their
ships--"

"Where are we going?" Kramer said. "I want to know where you are
taking me."

"Frankly, I'm not certain."

"You're not certain?"

"I haven't worked some details out. There are a few vague spots in my
program, still. But I think that in a short while I'll have them
ironed out."

"What is your program?" Kramer said.

"It's really very simple. But don't you want to come into the control
room and sit? The seats are much more comfortable than that metal
bench."

Kramer went into the control room and sat down at the control board.
Looking at the useless apparatus made him feel strange.

"What's the matter?" the speaker above the board rasped.

       *       *       *       *       *

Kramer gestured helplessly. "I'm--powerless. I can't do anything. And
I don't like it. Do you blame me?"

"No. No, I don't blame you. But you'll get your control back, soon.
Don't worry. This is only a temporary expedient, taking you off this
way. It was something I didn't contemplate. I forgot that orders would
be given out to shoot me on sight."

"It was Gross' idea."

"I don't doubt that. My conception, my plan, came to me as soon as you
began to describe your project, that day at my house. I saw at once
that you were wrong; you people have no understanding of the mind at
all. I realized that the transfer of a human brain from an organic
body to a complex artificial space ship would not involve the loss of
the intellectualization faculty of the mind. When a man thinks, he
_is_.

"When I realized that, I saw the possibility of an age-old dream
becoming real. I was quite elderly when I first met you, Philip. Even
then my life-span had come pretty much to its end. I could look ahead
to nothing but death, and with it the extinction of all my ideas. I
had made no mark on the world, none at all. My students, one by one,
passed from me into the world, to take up jobs in the great Research
Project, the search for better and bigger weapons of war.

"The world has been fighting for a long time, first with itself, then
with the Martians, then with these beings from Proxima Centauri, whom
we know nothing about. The human society has evolved war as a cultural
institution, like the science of astronomy, or mathematics. War is a
part of our lives, a career, a respected vocation. Bright, alert young
men and women move into it, putting their shoulders to the wheel as
they did in the time of Nebuchadnezzar. It has always been so.

"But is it innate in mankind? I don't think so. No social custom is
innate. There were many human groups that did not go to war; the
Eskimos never grasped the idea at all, and the American Indians never
took to it well.

"But these dissenters were wiped out, and a cultural pattern was
established that became the standard for the whole planet. Now it has
become ingrained in us.

"But if someplace along the line some other way of settling problems
had arisen and taken hold, something different than the massing of men
and material to--"

"What's your plan?" Kramer said. "I know the theory. It was part of
one of your lectures."

"Yes, buried in a lecture on plant selection, as I recall. When you
came to me with this proposition I realized that perhaps my conception
could be brought to life, after all. If my theory were right that war
is only a habit, not an instinct, a society built up apart from Terra
with a minimum of cultural roots might develop differently. If it
failed to absorb our outlook, if it could start out on another foot,
it might not arrive at the same point to which we have come: a dead
end, with nothing but greater and greater wars in sight, until nothing
is left but ruin and destruction everywhere.

"Of course, there would have to be a Watcher to guide the experiment,
at first. A crisis would undoubtedly come very quickly, probably in
the second generation. Cain would arise almost at once.

"You see, Kramer, I estimate that if I remain at rest most of the
time, on some small planet or moon, I may be able to keep functioning
for almost a hundred years. That would be time enough, sufficient to
see the direction of the new colony. After that--Well, after that it
would be up to the colony itself.

"Which is just as well, of course. Man must take control eventually,
on his own. One hundred years, and after that they will have control
of their own destiny. Perhaps I am wrong, perhaps war is more than a
habit. Perhaps it is a law of the universe, that things can only
survive as groups by group violence.

"But I'm going ahead and taking the chance that it is only a habit,
that I'm right, that war is something we're so accustomed to that we
don't realize it is a very unnatural thing. Now as to the place! I'm
still a little vague about that. We must find the place, still.

"That's what we're doing now. You and I are going to inspect a few
systems off the beaten path, planets where the trading prospects are
low enough to keep Terran ships away. I know of one planet that might
be a good place. It was reported by the Fairchild Expedition in their
original manual. We may look into that, for a start."

The ship was silent.

       *       *       *       *       *

Kramer sat for a time, staring down at the metal floor under him. The
floor throbbed dully with the motion of the turbines. At last he
looked up.

"You might be right. Maybe our outlook is only a habit." Kramer got to
his feet. "But I wonder if something has occurred to you?"

"What is that?"

"If it's such a deeply ingrained habit, going back thousands of years,
how are you going to get your colonists to make the break, leave Terra
and Terran customs? How about _this_ generation, the first ones, the
people who found the colony? I think you're right that the next
generation would be free of all this, if there were an--" He grinned.
"--An Old Man Above to teach them something else instead."

Kramer looked up at the wall speaker. "How are you going to get the
people to leave Terra and come with you, if by your own theory, this
generation can't be saved, it all has to start with the next?"

The wall speaker was silent. Then it made a sound, the faint dry
chuckle.

"I'm surprised at you, Philip. Settlers can be found. We won't need
many, just a few." The speaker chuckled again. "I'll acquaint you with
my solution."

At the far end of the corridor a door slid open. There was sound, a
hesitant sound. Kramer turned.

"Dolores!"

Dolores Kramer stood uncertainly, looking into the control room. She
blinked in amazement. "Phil! What are you doing here? What's going
on?"

They stared at each other.

"What's happening?" Dolores said. "I received a vidcall that you had
been hurt in a lunar explosion--"

The wall speaker rasped into life. "You see, Philip, that problem is
already solved. We don't really need so many people; even a single
couple might do."

Kramer nodded slowly. "I see," he murmured thickly. "Just one couple.
