as ever."

I said, "Well, we got to 496 of them this time. That should do it for
sure. Joe says he'll keep a lookout for any males without the two stains
on his shoulder."

Benson narrowed his eyes. "You know, it strikes me that Joe is being
awfully helpful. What reason did you give him for wanting this
information?"

"He didn't ask," I said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our 12-month year was composed of 37-day months, except February which
we shorted six days to make it come out even.

According to this calendar the "May-flies" came in July, just a month
before our first anniversary. The little winged insects were a seasonal
life-form, one more item that escaped the exploratory party, and for
which we were unprepared.

They came out of the north, and they struck us before we could take
shelter in the ship or our plastic-screened huts. They were a little
smaller than flying ants, and even their long wings were jet-black.
Their bites were infinitesimal, but each one smarted like a prick with a
hot needle.

In the midst of the confusion of rescuing babies and herding everyone in
doors, I noticed that all the natives had disappeared into the forest.
Everyone had suffered a hundred bites or more, and we were sorry,
swollen sights. Sue insisted that I cover myself and make a run for the
clinic to see if Dr. Bailey had any remedies for the bites. Richard
Joseph was crying loudly from the irritation, so I agreed.

It was only 75 yards to the clinic, and I made it without collecting
many more stings. But the doctors had nothing to offer. They were
dabbing various salves, astringents and pastes on test patches of their
own skin, but nothing seemed to have any effect at all.

"All we hope," said Sorenson, "is that the flies aren't
microbe-carriers."

I started out the door to return then stepped back and peered through
the screen. The forest was erupting with natives. They staggered into
the clearing, headed for the center of it and sank down as if with great
weariness. On and on they came until the ground among our buildings was
literally paved with their prone bodies.

"Poor devils." Bailey murmured as the clouds of flies continued to sweep
through our village. "Nothing we can do, though. I wonder why they come
out in the open? You'd think they had better protection in the trees."

I had no answers, so I covered my head again and made a dash for my own
hut. Inside I brushed off the clinging flies and stamped on them. "The
medics don't have any help for us," I said. Then I saw him.

Sue was struggling to hold Joe on his feet. His arms were draped loosely
over her shoulders, and for a second I couldn't decided whether he was
ill or making a pass at Sue.

I pulled him off her by one shoulder. He swung around and toppled into
my arms. Remarkably few insect bites showed under the transparent haze
of golden hair, but he reeked of tala.

"You're drunk," I yelled at him. "A lot of help you are at a time like
this!"

"Tala," he said from loose lips. "Much tala."

"You've had much tala, all right!" I said disgusted.

Sue said, "We've got to let him stay in here, Sam. The flies will eat
him alive out there." She went to the window and knocked the flies from
the outside of the screen. Then she screamed. I thought she had just
discovered the massed natives, but she kept on screaming until I went to
her and looked out.

In the late afternoon sun, fuzzy little brown animals were waddling out
of the forest, closing in on the 900 or more natives lying senseless in
the clearing. _Koodi!_ Dozens of them.

I forgot my screaming wife, my crying infant, the drunken wife-stealer
slumped on the floor. I forgot the torture of my own stings. All I
remember is snatching my pistol from its holster that hung by the door
and plunging out and pulling the trigger until fire ceased to come out
of it. Then I was kicking and smashing with a tree limb, and every blow
smashed one of the vile little ghouls into the grass. I thought I saw
Benson firing and kicking, but I blacked out before I could be sure.

I regained consciousness with the flies still keening in my ears. Sue
was calling my name and slapping me sharply in the face. Joe was trying
to pull me to my feet, but the last thing I remember is the both of us
collapsing to the ground.

       *       *       *       *       *

I awoke days later with a burning fever and gloriously drunken sensation
of floating. Joe brought a fruit to me when he saw I was stirring. I
drank the thin, tangy juice in one breath and sank back into a deep
sleep again.

My next drink came from the long, slender fingers of a pretty little
female native. This time it was water, and I stayed awake. Joe came in,
saw I was awake and came back in a few minutes with Benson and Dr.
Bailey.

They both looked terrible, Benson especially. Bailey said, "Take it
easy. Sue's at the clinic. She and the baby are all right, but you
damned near didn't make it."

Benson said, "Can you talk?"

I cleared my throat and decided I could. He waved Joe and the female
out. Then he and Bailey sat down beside me. I asked, "Any casualties?"

"Two of our babies and thirty-six native babies. Some of the _koodi_
came in after dark."

It sounded strange, Benson's listing native casualties with our own.

The memory of the _koodi_ attack brought a wave of nausea over me. I
said, "Benson, I'm sorry, but I'm all done trying to murder Joe's race.
I want no further part of it."

Benson's face was thin and drawn, and he stared at the floor. "If we
haven't murdered it already," he said, "there will be no more attempts
while I am in charge." He covered his face with his hands. "Bailey. Tell
him, Bailey."

The doctor's voice was gravelly and weak. "If it hadn't been for the
natives we'd all have died. The venom from the flies paralyzed everyone
the second day after the swarm hit us. The flies were gone the next
morning, but every soul in the colony passed out. Joe and his friends
took care of us, poured tala down our throats and fed us."

"But they were soused," I said.

"Their only defense against the flies. The little black devils left the
natives pretty well alone, and it appears that the tala was responsible.
Could be that the stuff is what neutralized the toxin, too. They must
have poured a gallon of it down me, judging from the empty skins by my
bed. At any rate, they kept us alive until we could get up and feed
ourselves."

"Why did they come into the clearing when they drank the tala?" I asked.

Bailey said, "Joe told us that the day he saw Sue kill the _koodi_ that
was attacking you, he got the idea that he should do something about
them himself. Through his efforts the natives no longer take the little
devils as an inevitable evil. They kill them wherever they find them
now. And when they had to get drunk to save themselves from the flies,
Joe passed the word for them to head for the clearing. The _koodi_
usually avoid the sunlight, but it was late in the afternoon. They came
anyway."

"Phil," I said, "did I see you out there with me, killing the little
bastards?"

He nodded silently.

"You had changed your mind about the natives at that time?"

"I--I suppose so. Don't rub it in, Sam. It's hard enough to live with
the thought of how wrong I was. All I can do now is pray that whatever
failed in our first try failed again. Joe's people have made the human
race look pretty dismal. They have every right to their planet, and if
we are foolish enough to go native, well--at least we have a stronger
survival instinct."

At that point Susan came in carrying Richard. He had the hiccoughs. Sue
kissed me. "Richard just drew his ration of sterile tala from the
clinic. He still has a slight fever. But thanks to Joe and Harmony--"

"Harmony? Who's that?"

"The native girl who helped Joe nurse us. Her name is really
Hah-ah-arm-ig-hin-ih-hee, or something like that. She answers to
Harmony, though."

And she did. Hearing her name the little golden girl came through the
door towing Joe by one hand.

I said, "One of your favorites, Joe?"

He ran a caressing, four-fingered hand over her shoulder. "I like her,"
he admitted. "She wants to call me husband like Sue calls you."

Bailey smiled. "It seems there is a new fad among the natives. Something
like monogamy, I understand."

I said, "What do you think of the idea, Joe?"

He thought it over. "I have not made up my mind."

Sue pressed him, "Why not marry Harmony, Joe?"

In the blunt manner in which he so often made his curious revelations,
Joe blurted out, "Because I am in much demand among all the females. It
is--very pleasant."

