
But the limp feminine form he held in his arms was Madame Sin, the fury
he had been fighting in Chichester's library! And in his hand was still
the gold link bag he had wrenched from her!

The woman in his arms stirred. She looked blankly up at him, stared
around. A cry came from her lips.

"Where--am I? Who are you all? What are you doing in my room? But this
isn't my room!"

Her face was different, younger-looking, less exotic. She wasn't Madame
Sin; she was a frightened, puzzled girl.

Keane's brain had slipped back into gear, and into comprehension of what
had happened.

"Where do you think you are?" he said gently. "And what is your name?"

"I'm Sylvia Crane," she said. "And I'm in a New York hotel room. At
least I was the last I knew, when I opened the door and the man in the
red mask came in...."

She buried her face in her hands. "After that--I don't know what
happened----"

"Nor do any of us," quavered Gest. "For God's sake, Keane, give us some
idea of what has happened here, if you can!"

       *       *       *       *       *

It was over an hour later when Beatrice and Keane entered the door of
his suite. It had taken that long to explain to the people in Doctor
Grays' rooms. Even then the explanation had been but partial, and most
of it had been frenziedly and stubbornly disbelieved even though proof
was there.

Keane's shoulders were bowed a little and his face wore a bitter look.
He had thwarted Doctor Satan in his attempt to extort a fortune from the
resort. But once more his deadly enemy had got away from him. He had
failed.

Beatrice shook her head.

"Don't look like that. The fact that you're here alive is a miracle that
makes up for his escape. If you could have seen yourself, and that girl,
when the police brought you back from Chichester's house! As soon as
they set you down in the doctor's rooms, you and the girl came together.
You fought again for her purse, as you say you started to do in
Chichester's house ten hours ago. But you moved with such horrible
slowness! It was like watching a slow-motion picture. It took you hours
to raise your arm, hours to take the purse from her hand. And your
expression changed with equal slowness.... I can't tell you how dreadful
it was!"

"All due, as I said, to this," Keane sighed.

He stared at the little metal cage he had taken from the purse.

"The latest product of Doctor Satan's warped genius. A time-diverter, I
suppose you might call it."

"I didn't understand your explanation in Grays' rooms, after you'd
brought those people out of their dreadful coma," said Beatrice.

"I'll try again."

Keane held up the geometric figure.

"Time has been likened to a river. We don't know precisely what it is,
but it seems that the river simile must be apt. Very well, we and all
around us float on this river at the same speed. If there were different
currents in the same river, we might have the spectacle of seeing those
nearby move with lightning rapidity or with snail-like slowness as their
time-environment differed from ours. Normally there is no such
difference, but with this fantastic thing Doctor Satan has succeeded in
producing them artificially.

"He has succeeded in working out several sets of angles which, when
opposed against each other as this geometric figure opposes them, can
either speed up or slow down the time-stream of whatever it is pointed
at. The final angle is formed by this movable bar in its relation to the
whole. By its manipulation, time can be indefinitely retarded or
hastened. He utilized the bizarre creation in this way:

"In New York he contacted a quite innocent party by the name of Sylvia
Crane. He hypnotized her, and forced his spirit into her body while hers
was held in abeyance. Then 'Madame Sin' registered here. She made
acquaintance with Weems. On the roof garden, she pointed the infernal
figure at him, with the little bar turned to retard time. The result was
that Weems suddenly lived and moved at immensely retarded speed. It took
about twenty-four hours for his arm to raise the champagne glass to his
lips, though he thought it took a second. Our actions were so swift by
comparison that they didn't register on his consciousness at all. He
confessed after I'd brought him out of his odd time-state with the
device, that he seemed to raise his glass while in the roof garden, and
start to lower it when he found himself abruptly in Doctor Grays'
bedroom. He didn't know how he got there or anything else. It was the
same with the nine in the roulette room. They came back to normal speed
only a second or two after being retarded in the roulette room. But it
was hours to us, and meanwhile they seemed absolutely motionless."

"How on earth did you ever get a hint of such a thing as this?" said
Beatrice.

"Weems' watch gave a pointer. It was all right, the jeweler said, but it
wouldn't run. Well, it did run--but at a speed so slow that it could not
be recorded. The roulette wheel was another. The ivory ball did not roll
down the side of the wheel because the wheel was rotating--with infinite
slowness after being retarded by the same thing that made the people
look like frozen statues. Satan, as Madame Sin, couldn't do anything
about the wheel. But he--or 'she'--could and did take the watches from
all concerned, to guard against discovery that way. However, there was
no chance to get Weems' watch; there were always people around."

"You said Doctor Satan moved in the body of Chichester as he did in the
girl's body."

"Yes. I got a hint of that when I observed that Chichester and Madame
Sin never seemed to be in evidence at the same time. Also because the
exact sum of Blue Bay's cash reserve was so readily learned. Again when
Wilson was killed in a room where only the three officials sat. He was
killed by Chichester, who was at the moment animated by Satan's soul. He
was killed, by the way, by a _speeding-up_ of time. The rest were
retarded and suffered nothing but nerve shock. Wilson was killed when
the speed of his time-stream was multiplied by a million: you can stop a
heart without injuring it, but you can't suddenly accelerate a heart, or
any other machine, a million times, without bursting it. That's why his
heart looked as though it had blown up in his chest."

Keane stopped. The bitter look grew in his eyes.

"This failure was wholly my own fault," he said in a low tone. "I knew
when I found the duplicate financial statement in Madame Sin's rooms
that it was a trap to draw me to Chichester's home. Doctor Satan would
never have been so careless as to leave a thing like that behind
inadvertently. Knowing it was a trap, I entered it, and found Satan's
soulless body. If I'd destroyed it immediately.... But I didn't dream
that Madame Sin would follow me so quickly."

       *       *       *       *       *

Beatrice's hand touched Keane's fleetingly. He was looking at the
geometric figure and did not see the look in her eyes.

"The world can thank heaven you're alive," she said softly. "With you
dead, Doctor Satan could rule the earth----"

There was a knock at the door. Gest was in the hall.

"Keane," he said. "I suppose this will sound like a small thing after
all you've done. You've saved us from bankruptcy and saved Lord knows
how many people from a living death from that time-business you tried to
explain to us. Now there's one more thing. Workmen in Chichester's home
tell us that they can't build up one of the walls of the library, which
is non-existent for some reason. There the room is, with one wall out,
and it can't be blocked up! Do you suppose you----"

Keane nodded, with a little of his bitterness relieved by a smile.

"I remember. The time-diverter was pointed at that wall for an instant
as the girl and I struggled. Evidently it was set for maximum
acceleration, to burst my heart as it did Wilson's. It got the library
wall, which is gone because in the point of the future which it almost
instantly reached, there is no library or home or anything else on that
spot. I'll bring it back to the present, and to existence again, so you
won't have a physical impossibility to try to explain to nervous guests
of Blue Bay Resort."

"And after that," he added to himself, "I'll destroy this invention of
Hell. And I wish its destruction would annihilate its inventor along
with it--before he contrives some new and even more terrible toy!"





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Mask of Death, by Paul Ernst
