"Have you any water?" I asked abruptly.

He shook his head.

"You have been asking for water for the last hour," he said.

For a moment we were silent, taking stock of each other.  I
dare say he found me a strange enough figure, naked, save for my
water-soaked trousers and socks, scalded, and my face and shoulders
blackened by the smoke.  His face was a fair weakness, his chin
retreated, and his hair lay in crisp, almost flaxen curls on his low
forehead; his eyes were rather large, pale blue, and blankly staring.
He spoke abruptly, looking vacantly away from me.

"What does it mean?" he said.  "What do these things mean?"

I stared at him and made no answer.

He extended a thin white hand and spoke in almost a complaining
tone.

"Why are these things permitted?  What sins have we done?  The
morning service was over, I was walking through the roads to clear my
brain for the afternoon, and then--fire, earthquake, death!  As if it
were Sodom and Gomorrah!  All our work undone, all the work---- What
are these Martians?"

"What are we?" I answered, clearing my throat.

He gripped his knees and turned to look at me again.  For half a
minute, perhaps, he stared silently.

"I was walking through the roads to clear my brain," he said.  "And
suddenly--fire, earthquake, death!"

He relapsed into silence, with his chin now sunken almost to his
knees.

Presently he began waving his hand.

"All the work--all the Sunday schools--What have we done--what has
Weybridge done?  Everything gone--everything destroyed.  The church!
We rebuilt it only three years ago.  Gone!  Swept out of existence!
Why?"

Another pause, and he broke out again like one demented.

"The smoke of her burning goeth up for ever and ever!" he shouted.

His eyes flamed, and he pointed a lean finger in the direction of
Weybridge.

By this time I was beginning to take his measure.  The tremendous
tragedy in which he had been involved--it was evident he was a
fugitive from Weybridge--had driven him to the very verge of his
reason.

"Are we far from Sunbury?" I said, in a matter-of-fact tone.

"What are we to do?" he asked.  "Are these creatures everywhere?
Has the earth been given over to them?"

"Are we far from Sunbury?"

"Only this morning I officiated at early celebration----"

"Things have changed," I said, quietly.  "You must keep your head.
There is still hope."

"Hope!"

"Yes.  Plentiful hope--for all this destruction!"

I began to explain my view of our position.  He listened at first,
but as I went on the interest dawning in his eyes gave place to their
former stare, and his regard wandered from me.

"This must be the beginning of the end," he said, interrupting me.
"The end!  The great and terrible day of the Lord!  When men shall
call upon the mountains and the rocks to fall upon them and hide
them--hide them from the face of Him that sitteth upon the throne!"

I began to understand the position.  I ceased my laboured
reasoning, struggled to my feet, and, standing over him, laid my hand
on his shoulder.

"Be a man!" said I.  "You are scared out of your wits!  What good
is religion if it collapses under calamity?  Think of what earthquakes
and floods, wars and volcanoes, have done before to men!  Did you
think God had exempted Weybridge?  He is not an insurance agent."

For a time he sat in blank silence.

"But how can we escape?" he asked, suddenly.  "They are
invulnerable, they are pitiless."

"Neither the one nor, perhaps, the other," I answered. "And the
mightier they are the more sane and wary should we be.  One of them
was killed yonder not three hours ago."

"Killed!" he said, staring about him.  "How can God's ministers be
killed?"

"I saw it happen." I proceeded to tell him.  "We have chanced to
come in for the thick of it," said I, "and that is all."

"What is that flicker in the sky?" he asked abruptly.

I told him it was the heliograph signalling--that it was the sign
of human help and effort in the sky.

"We are in the midst of it," I said, "quiet as it is.  That flicker
in the sky tells of the gathering storm.  Yonder, I take it are the
Martians, and Londonward, where those hills rise about Richmond and
Kingston and the trees give cover, earthworks are being thrown up and
guns are being placed.  Presently the Martians will be coming this way
again."

And even as I spoke he sprang to his feet and stopped me by a
gesture.

"Listen!" he said.

From beyond the low hills across the water came the dull resonance
of distant guns and a remote weird crying.  Then everything was still.
A cockchafer came droning over the hedge and past us.  High in the
west the crescent moon hung faint and pale above the smoke of
Weybridge and Shepperton and the hot, still splendour of the sunset.

"We had better follow this path," I said, "northward."



CHAPTER FOURTEEN

IN LONDON


My younger brother was in London when the Martians fell at Woking.
He was a medical student working for an imminent examination, and he
heard nothing of the arrival until Saturday morning.  The morning
papers on Saturday contained, in addition to lengthy special articles
on the planet Mars, on life in the planets, and so forth, a brief and
vaguely worded telegram, all the more striking for its brevity.

The Martians, alarmed by the approach of a crowd, had killed a
number of people with a quick-firing gun, so the story ran.  The
telegram concluded with the words: "Formidable as they seem to be, the
Martians have not moved from the pit into which they have fallen, and,
indeed, seem incapable of doing so.  Probably this is due to the
relative strength of the earth's gravitational energy."  On that last
text their leader-writer expanded very comfortingly.

Of course all the students in the crammer's biology class, to which
my brother went that day, were intensely interested, but there were no
signs of any unusual excitement in the streets.  The afternoon papers
puffed scraps of news under big headlines.  They had nothing to tell
beyond the movements of troops about the common, and the burning of
the pine woods between Woking and Weybridge, until eight.  Then the
_St. James's Gazette_, in an extra-special edition, announced the bare
fact of the interruption of telegraphic communication.  This was
thought to be due to the falling of burning pine trees across the
line.  Nothing more of the fighting was known that night, the night of
my drive to Leatherhead and back.

My brother felt no anxiety about us, as he knew from the
description in the papers that the cylinder was a good two miles from
my house.  He made up his mind to run down that night to me, in order,
as he says, to see the Things before they were killed.  He dispatched
a telegram, which never reached me, about four o'clock, and spent the
evening at a music hall.

In London, also, on Saturday night there was a thunderstorm, and my
brother reached Waterloo in a cab.  On the platform from which the
midnight train usually starts he learned, after some waiting, that an
accident prevented trains from reaching Woking that night.  The nature
of the accident he could not ascertain; indeed, the railway
authorities did not clearly know at that time.  There was very little
excitement in the station, as the officials, failing to realise that
anything further than a breakdown between Byfleet and Woking junction
had occurred, were running the theatre trains which usually passed
through Woking round by Virginia Water or Guildford.  They were busy
making the necessary arrangements to alter the route of the
Southampton and Portsmouth Sunday League excursions.  A nocturnal
newspaper reporter, mistaking my brother for the traffic manager, to
whom he bears a slight resemblance, waylaid and tried to interview
him.  Few people, excepting the railway officials, connected the
breakdown with the Martians.

I have read, in another account of these events, that on Sunday
morning "all London was electrified by the news from Woking."  As a
matter of fact, there was nothing to justify that very extravagant
phrase.  Plenty of Londoners did not hear of the Martians until the
panic of Monday morning.  Those who did took some time to realise all
that the hastily worded telegrams in the Sunday papers conveyed.  The
majority of people in London do not read Sunday papers.

The habit of personal security, moreover, is so deeply fixed in the
Londoner's mind, and startling intelligence so much a matter of course
in the papers, that they could read without any personal tremors:
"About seven o'clock last night the Martians came out of the cylinder,
and, moving about under an armour of metallic shields, have completely
wrecked Woking station with the adjacent houses, and massacred an
entire battalion of the Cardigan Regiment.  No details are known.
Maxims have been absolutely useless against their armour; the field
guns have been disabled by them.  Flying hussars have been galloping
into Chertsey.  The Martians appear to be moving slowly towards
Chertsey or Windsor.  Great anxiety prevails in West Surrey, and
earthworks are being thrown up to check the advance Londonward."  That
was how the Sunday _Sun_ put it, and a clever and remarkably prompt
"handbook" article in the _Referee_ compared the affair to a menagerie
suddenly let loose in a village.

No one in London knew positively of the nature of the armoured
Martians, and there was still a fixed idea that these monsters must be
sluggish: "crawling," "creeping painfully"--such expressions occurred
in almost all the earlier reports.  None of the telegrams could have
been written by an eyewitness of their advance.  The Sunday papers
printed separate editions as further news came to hand, some even in
default of it.  But there was practically nothing more to tell people
until late in the afternoon, when the authorities gave the press
agencies the news in their possession.  It was stated that the people
of Walton and Weybridge, and all the district were pouring along the
roads Londonward, and that was all.

My brother went to church at the Foundling Hospital in the morning,
still in ignorance of what had happened on the previous night.  There
he heard allusions made to the invasion, and a special prayer for
peace.  Coming out, he bought a _Referee_.  He became alarmed at the
news in this, and went again to Waterloo station to find out if
communication were restored.  The omnibuses, carriages, cyclists, and
innumerable people walking in their best clothes seemed scarcely
affected by the strange intelligence that the news venders were
disseminating.  People were interested, or, if alarmed, alarmed only
on account of the local residents.  At the station he heard for the
first time that the Windsor and Chertsey lines were now interrupted.
The porters told him that several remarkable telegrams had been
received in the morning from Byfleet and Chertsey stations, but that
these had abruptly ceased.  My brother could get very little precise
detail out of them.

"There's fighting going on about Weybridge" was the extent of their
information.

The train service was now very much disorganised.  Quite a number
of people who had been expecting friends from places on the
South-Western network were standing about the station.  One
grey-headed old gentleman came and abused the South-Western Company
bitterly to my brother.  "It wants showing up," he said.

One or two trains came in from Richmond, Putney, and Kingston,
containing people who had gone out for a day's boating and found the
locks closed and a feeling of panic in the air.  A man in a blue and
white blazer addressed my brother, full of strange tidings.

"There's hosts of people driving into Kingston in traps and carts
and things, with boxes of valuables and all that," he said.  "They
come from Molesey and Weybridge and Walton, and they say there's been
guns heard at Chertsey, heavy firing, and that mounted soldiers have
told them to get off at once because the Martians are coming.  We
heard guns firing at Hampton Court station, but we thought it was
thunder.  What the dickens does it all mean?  The Martians can't get
out of their pit, can they?"

My brother could not tell him.

Afterwards he found that the vague feeling of alarm had spread to
the clients of the underground railway, and that the Sunday
excursionists began to return from all over the South-Western
"lung"--Barnes, Wimbledon, Richmond Park, Kew, and so forth--at
unnaturally early hours; but not a soul had anything more than vague
hearsay to tell of.  Everyone connected with the terminus seemed
ill-tempered.

About five o'clock the gathering crowd in the station was immensely
excited by the opening of the line of communication, which is almost
invariably closed, between the South-Eastern and the South-Western
stations, and the passage of carriage trucks bearing huge guns and
carriages crammed with soldiers.  These were the guns that were
brought up from Woolwich and Chatham to cover Kingston.  There was
an exchange of pleasantries: "You'll get eaten!"  "We're the
beast-tamers!" and so forth.  A little while after that a squad of
police came into the station and began to clear the public off the
platforms, and my brother went out into the street again.

The church bells were ringing for evensong, and a squad of
Salvation Army lassies came singing down Waterloo Road.  On the bridge
a number of loafers were watching a curious brown scum that came
drifting down the stream in patches.  The sun was just setting, and the
Clock Tower and the Houses of Parliament rose against one of the most
peaceful skies it is possible to imagine, a sky of gold, barred with
long transverse stripes of reddish-purple cloud.  There was talk of a
floating body.  One of the men there, a reservist he said he was, told
my brother he had seen the heliograph flickering in the west.

In Wellington Street my brother met a couple of sturdy roughs who
had just been rushed out of Fleet Street with still-wet newspapers and
staring placards.  "Dreadful catastrophe!" they bawled one to the
other down Wellington Street.  "Fighting at Weybridge!  Full
description!  Repulse of the Martians! London in Danger!"  He had to
give threepence for a copy of that paper.

Then it was, and then only, that he realised something of the full
power and terror of these monsters.  He learned that they were not
merely a handful of small sluggish creatures, but that they were minds
swaying vast mechanical bodies; and that they could move swiftly and
smite with such power that even the mightiest guns could not stand
against them.

They were described as "vast spiderlike machines, nearly a hundred
feet high, capable of the speed of an express train, and able to shoot
out a beam of intense heat."  Masked batteries, chiefly of field guns,
had been planted in the country about Horsell Common, and especially
between the Woking district and London.  Five of the machines had been
seen moving towards the Thames, and one, by a happy chance, had been
destroyed.  In the other cases the shells had missed, and the
batteries had been at once annihilated by the Heat-Rays.  Heavy
losses of soldiers were mentioned, but the tone of the dispatch was
optimistic.

The Martians had been repulsed; they were not invulnerable.  They
had retreated to their triangle of cylinders again, in the circle
about Woking.  Signallers with heliographs were pushing forward upon
them from all sides.  Guns were in rapid transit from Windsor,
Portsmouth, Aldershot, Woolwich--even from the north; among others,
long wire-guns of ninety-five tons from Woolwich.  Altogether one
hundred and sixteen were in position or being hastily placed, chiefly
covering London.  Never before in England had there been such a vast
or rapid concentration of military material.

Any further cylinders that fell, it was hoped, could be destroyed
at once by high explosives, which were being rapidly manufactured and
distributed.  No doubt, ran the report, the situation was of the
strangest and gravest description, but the public was exhorted to
avoid and discourage panic.  No doubt the Martians were strange and
terrible in the extreme, but at the outside there could not be more
than twenty of them against our millions.

The authorities had reason to suppose, from the size of the
cylinders, that at the outside there could not be more than five in
each cylinder--fifteen altogether.  And one at least was disposed
of--perhaps more.  The public would be fairly warned of the approach
of danger, and elaborate measures were being taken for the protection
