about 11 inches in length, with an opening some 5 inches in diameter.
The color within is a dull dark violet, while the interior of the
spathe is lined with black, hooked bristles, the whole appearance
of the flower being thoroughly repulsive. The illustrations herewith
presented, Figs. 1 and 2, represent it at one third its natural
size, Fig. 2 showing a section of the flower. It is not certain what
attracts the insects, which are usually of the species known as the
meat fly and the common house fly. They do not seem to seek for the
small quantity of nectar concealed, and yet they cluster about the
fatal opening, as if drawn by some overpowering fascination. Overcome
by lethargy, they fall inert upon the flower, are lightly held by the
bristles, and finally die asphyxiated by the carbonic acid which the
plant disengages in large quantities during its inflorescence. Strange
as is the action of the _arum_, the method whereby the _mentzelia_
takes its prey is even more wonderful. To illustrate on a magnified
scale, let the reader imagine a surface thickly covered with strong
iron posts, on the sides of which are numerous keen barbs pointing
downward. Then between these posts, suppose that jars overflowing with
honey are placed. An elephant, let it be imagined, attracted by the
profusion of sweetness, inserts his trunk between the posts and
finds easy access to the honey. But while he can force his proboscis
downward past the barbs turned in that direction, when he attempts to
withdraw it he finds the keen points catch in the flesh, and render
it impossible to do so. A terrible struggle follows, the unfortunate
animal twisting and writhing in every direction, until finally by
an Herculean effort the head is torn from the body, and the latter
becomes digested by some potent gastric juice, exuding from the
colossal organism of which the trap forms but a portion. Of course
this is vastly exaggerated, and it would puzzle an elephant to pull
his own head off; but if for the post studded trap, we substitute the
surface of a flower, and if we replace the elephant by a fly, we shall
have conceived an accurate picture of what takes place in the peculiar
receptacle with which Nature has provided the _mentzelia ornata_.
This is very beautifully shown in Fig. 3; and at A, in same figure,
is represented the barbed bristles grasping the highly magnified
proboscis of the fly. Between the barbed bristles are mushroom-shaped
projections, from the summits of which a viscous nectar exudes. This
is the honey bait which induces the insect to insert his trunk between
the fatal barbs. There is still another plant, _physianthus albens_,
which captures butterflies by grasping the proboscis. The construction
of the flower is quite complicated, so that the insects are compelled
to insert their trunks through a narrow and winding passage in order
to reach the nectar. The organ then necessarily comes in contact with
an adhesive substance, which prevents its removal.

The _Gronovia scandens_, Fig. 4, is another plant trap, which catches
no flies nor possesses any such wonderfully adapted devices as the
plants already described. It simply has its branches covered with
double barbed bristles of great strength which attach themselves to
anything brought in contact with them. The bristles are strong enough
to hold lizards, as represented by our engraving, the points inserting
themselves in the interstices of the scaly covering of the reptile.
Of course the lizard thus held starves to death, and small birds
often follow a like fate. We are indebted to _La Nature_ for the
illustrations.

[Illustration: Figs. 1 and 2.--ARUM DRACUNCULUS.]

[Illustration: Fig. 3.--MENTZELIA.]

[Illustration: Fig. 4.--GRONOVIA SCANDENS.]

       *       *       *       *       *




POPULAR FALLACIES.


Night air and damp weather are held in great horror by multitudes
of persons who are sickly or of weak constitutions; consequently, by
avoiding the night air, and damp weather, and changeable weather, and
weather that is considered too hot or too cold, they are kept within
doors the much largest portion of their time, and as a matter of
course continue invalids, more and more ripening for the grave
every hour; the reason is, they are breathing an impure atmosphere
nineteen-twentieths of their whole existence.

As nothing can wash us clean but pure water, so nothing can cleanse
the blood, nothing can make health-giving blood, but the agency of
pure air. So great is the tendency of the blood to become impure in
consequence of waste and useless matters mixing with it as it passes
through the body, that it requires a hogshead of air every hour of our
lives to unload it of these impurities; but in proportion as this air
is vitiated, in such proportion does it infallably fail to relieve the
blood of these impurities, and impure blood is the foundation of all
disease. The great fact that those who are out of doors most, summer
and winter, day and night, rain or shine, have the best health the
world over, does of itself falsify the general impression that night
air or any other out-door air is unhealthy as compared with in-door
air at the same time.

Air is the great necessity of life; so much so, that if deprived of it
for a moment, we perish; and so constant is the necessity of the
blood for contact with the atmosphere, that every drop in the body is
exposed to the air through the medium of the lungs every two minutes
and a half of our existence.

Whatever may be the impurity of the out-door air of any locality,
the in-door air of that locality is still more impure, because of
the dust, and decaying and odoriferous matters which are found in
all dwellings. Besides, how can in-door air be more healthy than the
out-door air, other things being equal, when the dwelling is supplied
with air from without?

To this very general law there is one exception, which it is of the
highest importance to note. When the days are hot, and the nights
cool, there are periods of time within each twenty-four hours, when
it is safest to be in-doors, with doors and windows closed; that is to
say, for the hour or two including sunrise and sunset, because about
sunset the air cools, and the vapors which the heats of the day have
caused to ascend far above us, condense and settle near the surface of
the earth, so as to be breathed by the inhabitants; as the night grows
colder, these vapors sink lower, and are within a foot or two of the
earth, so they are not breathed. As the sun rises, these same vapors
are warmed, and begin to ascend, to be breathed again, but as the
air becomes warmer, they are carried so far above our heads as to
be innocuous. Thus it is that the old citizens of Charleston, S.
C., remember, that while it was considered important to live in
the country during the summer, the common observation of the people
originated the custom of riding into town, not in the cool of the
evening or of the morning, but in the middle of the day. They did not
understand the philosophy, but they observed the fact that those who
came to the city at mid-day remained well, while those who did so
early or late suffered from it.

All strangers at Rome are cautioned not to cross the Pontine marshes
after the heat of the day is over. Sixteen of a ship's crew, touching
at one of the West India islands, slept on shore several nights, and
thirteen of them died of yellow fever in a few days, while of two
hundred and eighty, who were freely ashore during the day, not a
single case of illness occurred. The marshes above named are crossed
in six or eight hours, and many travelers who do it in the night
are attacked with mortal fevers. This does, at first sight, seem to
indicate that night air _is_ unwholesome, at least in the locality
of virulent malarias, but there is no direct proof that the air about
sunrise and sunset is not that which is productive of the mischief.

For the sake of eliciting the observations of intelligent men, we
present our theory on this subject.

A person might cross these marshes with impunity, who would set out on
his journey an hour or two after sundown, and finish it an hour or two
before sun-up, especially if he began that journey on a hearty meal,
because, in this way, he would be traveling in the cool of the night,
which coolness keeps the malaria so near the surface of the earth as
to prevent its being breathed to a hurtful extent.

But if it is deadly to sleep out of doors all night in a malarial
locality, would it be necessarily fatal to sleep in a house in such
a locality? It would not. It would be safer to sleep in the house,
especially if the windows and doors were closed. The reason is, that
the house has been warmed during the day, and if kept closed, it
remains much warmer during the night indoors than it is outdoors;
consequently, the malaria is kept by this warmth so high above the
head, and so rarefied, as to be comparatively harmless. This may
seem to some too nice a distinction altogether, but it will be found
throughout the world of Nature that the works of the Almighty are most
strikingly beautiful in their _minutae_, and these _minutae_ are the
foundation of His mightiest manifestations.

Thus it is, too, that what we call fever and ague might be banished
from the country as a general disease, if two things were done. 1.
Have a fire kindled every morning at daylight, from spring to fall,
in the family room, to which all the family should repair from their
chambers, and there remain until breakfast is taken. 2. Let a fire
be kindled in the family room a short time before sundown; let every
member of the family repair to it, and there remain until supper is
taken.

In both cases, the philosophy of the course marked out consists in two
things. First. The fire rarefies the malaria and causes it to ascend
above the breathing point. Second. The food taken into the stomach
creates an activity of circulation which repels disease.--_Hall's
Journal of Health_.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE EXTENSION OF THE PLAGUE.


Our recent English medical exchanges mention, with undisguised
apprehension, the fact that already early this spring authentic
observers state that the plague has broken out in Bagdad, and is
rapidly increasing there; and information from other sources renders
it probable that the disease has shown itself in other places in the
vicinity of that city, some of which have not suffered before since
the new development of the disease in Mesopotamia, three or four years
ago. The progress of the epidemic in and about Bagdad last year shows
that each year since its reappearance in that district it has covered
a wider area, and it will be remembered that last year it crossed the
Turco-Persian frontier, and broke out at Shuster, in Khuzistan. From
the phenomena of the epidemic to this period it was feared, especially
by the physicians on the spot, that, if it should recur in the present
year, it must be expected to extend over a still wider area, and show
itself in even a more aggravated form than had yet been observed. This
opinion is concurred in by Surgeon-Major Colville, the medical officer
attached to the British Embassy at Bagdad, and is expressed in his
official report, on the subject of the last and previous year's
outbreak.

The Turco-Russian struggle in Asia Minor, and the massing of Persian
troops on the western frontier of that country, add an additional and
most grave factor to this ominous intelligence.

It has been so long since Christian Europe has suffered from this
terrible disease that most medical men have never seen a case, and,
indeed, for awhile, epidemiologists flattered themselves it had "died
out." They yet say that a thorough system of sanitation will certainly
check its advance.

Let us hope so; for of all pestilences which have ever scourged
humanity, and desolated empires, none approach in magnitude those of
the plague. Under the name of "the black death," it fills, as Hirsch
remarks, one of the darkest pages in the history of the human race.
It devastated every known country of the earth, and penetrated to the
remotest mountain hamlets and granges, sometimes sweeping away in a
few days every inhabitant, leaving not one to remember the name or to
inherit the goods of the family or the village. Long years afterward,
travelers would come upon these unknown villages, the houses rotting,
the bones of the plague-stricken owners bleaching in the rooms and
streets, and no one to say who they had been.

As an epidemic disease, it no doubt spreads from India, that mother of
pestilence, where, in the province of Kutch and Guzerat, it is found
as an endemic of great malignancy. Far more fatal in its historical
appearance than the cholera, it is well that the medical mind of
Europe is on the alert to meet its approach with the most energetic
measures; and should they fail, it will devolve upon us to lose
no time in taking up the defensive in the most energetic
manner.--_Medical and Surgical Reporter._

       *       *       *       *       *




EDUCATION IN GERMANY.


The compulsory school laws of Prussia are frequently pointed to as
models for similar laws, perhaps with the hope that by imitating her
lower schools we can bring up our high schools to an equal rank with
hers, and place our universities on a level with those which are
producing the most finished scholars, the deepest thinkers, and the
greatest investigators. We are likely to forget that the conditions
are different, and especially that _nascitur, non fit_, is as true of
a chemist as of a poet. The state of popular education in Germany
is, however, a matter of interest, and is best illustrated by the
following table, showing the percentage of unschooled men among the
recruits from different German provinces:

                  Per cent.
  Prussia             3.19
  Bavaria             1.79
  Saxony              0.23
  Wuertemberg          0.02
  Baden               0.22
  Hesse               0.35
  Mecklenburg         1.09
  Thuringia           1.42
  Alsace              3.45

These figures seem to indicate a higher grade of intelligence and
wider diffusion of knowledge among all classes, for recruits are from
every class, than in Austria, although in the latter the figures are
arranged so differently as to make any accurate comparison of Austria
and Germany rather difficult and unsatisfactory.


-----------------+----------+----------------+-----------------+----------
NAME OF DISTRICT.| Number of|   Number of    | Percentage of   | Number of
                 | Common   | inhabitants to | school children |  Normal
                 | Schools. |  each school.  | who attend.     | Schools.
-----------------+----------+----------------+-----------------+----------
Bohemia          |   4,190  |      1,254     |       77        |    12
Bukowina         |     167  |      3,121     |        9        |     1
Dalmatia         |     241  |      1,864     |       12        |     2
Galicia          |   2,374  |      2,341     |       15        |     1
Carinthia        |     318  |      1,060     |        ?        |     2
Carniola         |     234  |      1,187     |       48        |     2
Custrin          |     396  |      1,496     |       38        |     5
Moravia          |   1,866  |      1,082     |       78        |     5
Lower Austria    |   1,267  |      1,578     |       76        |     5
Upper Austria    |     506  |      1,455     |       82        |     2
Salzburg         |     155  |        982     |       85        |     1
Steiermark       |     690  |      1,657     |       59        |     3
Schlesia         |     433  |      1,208     |       77        |     4
Tyrol            |   1,926  |        457     |        ?        |     6
                 |----------|----------------|-----------------|----------
    Total        |  14,763  |                |                 |    51
-----------------+----------+----------------+-----------------+----------

Over 3,000 teachers' positions are said to be vacant at the present
time.

       *       *       *       *       *




BLEACHING SILK AND WOOL.


The methods now in use for bleaching silk, wool, and all animal
fibers, such as sulphurous acid, alkalies, soap, etc., are so
imperfect that Tessie du Motay has patented the following process,
involving the use of binoxide of barium, with or without the addition
of permanganates. The binoxide of barium is pulverized and subjected
to the action of carbonic acid to remove any unconverted caustic
