of anti-aircraft guns and more had been met and shot down by the
night-patrolling airmen.

The next morning saw the unloading beginning anew, while the emptied
transports were taken around into Delaware Bay. Fortunately, the weather
continued unusually fine for late March, bright with sunshine, giving
the dodos no opportunity to attack behind the cover of clouds. There was
just enough cold in the air to make the Australians and South Africans
lively, though the Americans found the temperature caused the oil to
move sluggishly in their metallic joints.

At daybreak the whole American unit had been pushed out to the railroad
line at Greenwood with the advance guard of tanks, and finding no
opposition they continued on to Farmington, where there was an airport
that would serve for the leading squadrons of planes.

"Do you know," said Ben to Murray, "I wish those dodos would show a
little more pep. Fighting them is no cinch. We're a little ahead of the
game now, but it's largely because they've let us alone and haven't
brought up any of those light-beam guns."

"Maybe we've got 'em on the run," replied Murray. "You can't tell when
anyone will develop a yellow streak, you know."

"Yes, but we've seen enough of these babies to know they haven't got a
yellow streak a millimeter wide in their whole make-up. Yet here they
let us do just about as we please. Makes me think they're just laying
for us, and when they get us where they want us--zowie!"

"Mebbe so, mebbe so," replied Murray. "Beeville still thinks it isn't
the birds at all; that they've got a big boss somewhere running the
whole works and till we find out what's behind it we're fighting in the
dark. Well, they'll unload the rest of the army tomorrow and then we'll
get down to cases."

       *       *       *       *       *

The country between Atlantic City and Philadelphia is flat, with a few
gentle elevations and dotted with small towns, farms and tiny bits of
woodland. In the cold spring morning of the next day, with rain
portended, the army of the federated governments pushed out along the
roads through this land like a huge, many-headed snake, tanks and
airplanes in the lead, the steady ranks of infantry and the big guns
coming behind. Back at Atlantic City all machine-shops and factories had
been set in operation and wrecking crews were already clearing the
railroads and mounting huge long-range guns on trucks, preparatory to
covering the advance. All along the route was bustle and hurry; camp
kitchens rumbled along, harassed officers galloped up and down the lines
on their horses (now, like their masters with a strange bluish cast of
skin) and messengers rushed to and fro on popping motorcycles.

Out with the advance the American division of fourteen tanks rolled
along. The dodos seemed to have completely disappeared, even the
scouting aviators, far ahead, reporting no sign of them. The army was
succeeding in establishing itself on American soil.

But around noon a "stop" signal flashed on the control boards of the
tanks. They halted at the crest of a little rise and climbed out to look
around.

"What is it?" asked someone.

"Perhaps gentlemanly general wishes to disport in surf," suggested
Yoshio, with his flashing, steel-toothed smile, "and proceeding is
retained without presence."

"Perhaps," said Gloria, "but I'll bet a dollar to a handful of blue
kangaroos that the dodos are getting in their licks somewhere."

"Well, we'll soon know," said Murray Lee. "Here comes a dispatch rider."

The man on the motorcycle dashed up, saluted. "General Ruby?" he
inquired, and handed the dispatch to Ben. The latter read it, then
motioned the others about him.

"Well, here it is, folks," he said, "Listen to this--'General Grierson
to General Ruby. Our flank guard was heavily attacked at Atsion this
morning. The Third Brigade of the Fourteenth Division has suffered
heavy loss and has been forced back to Chew Road. We are bringing up
heavy artillery. The enemy appear to be using large numbers of light-ray
guns. Advance guard is recalled to Waterford in support of our left
flank.'"

"Oh--oh," said somebody.

"I knew they'd start giving us hell sooner or later," remarked Murray
Lee as he climbed into his tank.

At Waterford there was ordered confusion when they arrived. Just outside
the town a long line of infantrymen were plying pick and shovel in the
formation of a system of trenches. Machine-gun units were installing
themselves in stone or brick buildings and constructing barricades
around their weapons; line after line of tanks had wheeled into position
under cover of woods or in the streets of the town, the little whippets
out in front, fast cruiser-tanks behind them and the lumbering
battle-tanks with their six-inch guns, farther back.

Artillery was everywhere, mostly in little pits over which the gunners
were spreading green strips of camouflage. As the American tanks rolled
up, a battery of eight-inch howitzers behind a railroad embankment at
the west end of the town was firing slowly and with an air of great
solemnity at some target in the invisible distance, the angle of their
muzzles showing that they were using the extreme range. A couple of
airplanes hummed overhead. But of dead or wounded, of dodos or any other
enemy there was no sign. It might have been a parade-war, an elaborately
realistic imitation of the real thing for the movies.

Guides directed the Americans to a post down the line toward Chew Road.
"What's the news?" asked Ben of an officer whose red tabs showed he
belonged to the staff.

"They hit the right wing at Atsion," replied the officer. "Just what
happened, I'm not sure. Somebody said they had a lot of those light-ray
guns and they just crumpled up our flank like that." He slapped his
hands together to show the degree of crumpling the right flank had
endured. "We lost about fifteen hundred men in fifteen minutes. Tanks,
too. But I think we're stopping them now."

"Any dodos?" asked Ben.

"Just a few. The airplanes shot down a flock of seven just before the
battle and after that they kept away.... What is it? General
Witherington wants me? Oh, all right, I'll come. Excuse me, sir," and
the staff officer was off.

Most of the afternoon was spent in an interminable period of waiting and
watching the laboring infantry sink themselves into the ground. About
four o'clock a fine, cold drizzle began to fall. The Americans sought
the shelter of their tanks, and about the same time their radiophones
flashed the order to move up, toward the north and east through a barren
pasture with a few trees in it, to the crest of a low hill. It was
already nearly dark; the tanks bumped unevenly over the stony ground,
their drivers following each other by the black silhouettes in the
gloom. Off to the right a battery suddenly woke to a fever of activity,
then as rapidly became silent and in the intervals of silence between
the motor-sounds the Americans could catch the faint rat-tat of
machine-guns in the heavens above. Evidently dodos were abroad in the
gloom.

At the crest of the hill they could see across a flat valley in the
direction of Chew Road. Something seemed to be burning behind the next
rise; a ruddy glare lit the clouds. Down the line guns began to growl
again, and the earth trembled gently with the sound of an explosion
somewhere in the rear. Murray Lee, sitting alone at the controls of his
tank. So this was war!

There were trees along their ridge, and looking through the side
peep-hole of his tank Murray could make out the vague forms of a line of
whippets among them, waiting, like themselves, for the order to advance.
He wondered what the enemy were like; evidently not all dodos, since so
many tanks had been pushed up to the front. This argued a man or animal
that ran along the ground. The dodos seemed to spend most of their time
in the air....

He was recalled from his meditations by the ringing of the attention
bell and the radiophone began to speak rapidly:

"American tank division--enemy tanks reported approaching. Detain them
as long as possible and then retire. Your machines are not to be
sacrificed; Radio your positions with reference to Clark Creek as you
retire for guidance of artillery registering on enemy tanks. There--"

The voice broke off in mid-sentence. So the dodos had tanks! Murray Lee
snapped in his controls and glanced forward. Surely in the gloom along
that distant ridge there was a darker spot--next to the
house--something.

Suddenly, with a roar like a thousand thunders, a bolt of sheer light
seemed to leap from the dark shape on the opposite hill, straight toward
the trees where Murray had noticed the whippets. He saw one of the trees
leap into vivid flame from root to branch as the beam struck it; saw a
whippet, sharply outlined in the fierce glow, its front armor-plate
caving; then its ammunition blew up in a shower of sparks, and he was
frantically busy with his own controls and gun.




CHAPTER X

Hopelessness


All along the line of the American tanks the guns flamed; flame-streaked
fountains of dirt leaped up around the dark shape on the opposite hill
and a burst of fire came from the farmhouse beside it as a misdirected
shell struck it somewhere.

The beam from the unknown enemy snapped off as suddenly as it had come
on, leaving, like lightning, an aching of the eyes behind it. Murray Lee
swung his tank round, making for the reverse slope of the hill to avoid
the light-beam. Crack! The beam came on again--right overhead this time.
It flashed through the tree-tops leaving a trail of fire. He heard a
torn branch bang on the roof of his tank, manipulated the gun to fire at
the source of the beam and discovered that the magazine was empty. As he
bent to snap on the automatic shell-feeding device, a searchlight from
somewhere lashed out toward the black shape that opposed them, then went
off. In the second's glimpse it afforded the enemy appeared as a huge,
polished, fish-shaped object, its mirror-like sides unscarred by the
bombardment it had passed through, its prow bearing a long, prehensible
snout--apparently the source of the light-beam.

Suddenly a shell screamed overhead and the whole scene leaped into
dazzling illumination as it burst just between the enemy tanks and their
own. It must be a shell from the dodos! The federated armies had no
shells that dissolved into burning light like that. Then another and
another, a whole chorus of shells, falling in the village behind them.
Murray had a better look at their opponent in the light. It seemed to
lie flush with the ground; there was no visible means of either support
or propulsion. It was all of twenty feet in diameter, widest near the
head, tapering backward. The questing snout swung to and fro, fixed its
position and discharged another of those lightning-bolts. Off to the
right came the answering crash as it caved in the armor of another of
the luckless whippets. He aimed his gun carefully at the base of the
snout and pulled the trigger; on the side of the monster there appeared
a flash of flame as the shell exploded, then a bright smear of metal--a
direct hit, and not the slightest damage!

Ben Ruby's voice came through the radiophone, cool and masterful. "Pull
out, folks, our guns are no good against that baby. I'm cutting off;
radio positions back to the heavy artillery. Put the railroad guns on."

Murray glanced through the side peep-hole again--one, two, three, four,
five--all the American tanks seemed undamaged. The monster had confined
its attention to the whippets, apparently imagining they were doing the
shooting. He pulled his throttle back, shot the speed up, rumbling down
the hill, toward the village. As he looked back, darkness had closed in;
the brow of the hill, its rows of trees torn and broken by the
light-beam stood between him and the enemy. Before him amid the flaring
light of the enemy shells was a stir of movement, the troops seemed to
be pulling out also.

The tanks rumbled through the streets of Waterford and came to a halt on
a corner behind a stone church which held three machine-gun nests.
Murray could see one of the gunners making some adjustment by the light
of a pocket torch and a wave of pity for the brave man whose weapon was
as useless as a stick swept over him.

A messenger dashed down the street, delivered his missive to someone,
and out of the shadows a file of infantry suddenly popped up and began
to stream back, getting out of range. Then, surrounded by bursts of
artillery fire, illumined by the glare of half a dozen searchlights that
flickered restlessly on and off, the strange thing came over the brow of
the hill.

It halted for a moment, its snout moving about uneasily as though it
were smelling out the way, and as it did so, it was joined by a second.
Neither of them seemed to be in the least disturbed by the shells all
the way from light artillery to six-inch, that were bursting about them,
filling the air with singing fragments. For a moment they stood at ease,
then the left-hand one, the one that had led the advance, pointed its
snout at the village and discharged one of its flaming bolts. It struck
squarely in the center of an old brick house, whose cellar had been
turned into a machine-gun nest. With a roar, the building collapsed, a
bright flicker of flames springing out of the ruins. As though it were a
signal every machine-gun, every rifle in the village opened fire on the
impassive shapes at the crest of the hill. The uproar was terrific; even
in his steel cage Murray could hardly hear himself think.

The shining monster paid no more attention to it than to the rain. One
of them slid gently forward a few yards, turned its trunk toward the
spouting trenches, and in short bursts, loosed five quick bolts; there
were as many spurts of flame, a few puffs of earth and the trenches
became silent, save for one agonized cry, "First aid, for God's sake!"

Ben Ruby's voice came through the microphone. "Retreat everybody.
Atlantic City if you can make it."

       *       *       *       *       *

With a great, round fear gripping at his heart, Murray Lee threw in the
clutch of his machine and headed in the direction he remembered as that
of the main road through the town toward Atlantic City. The night had
become inky-black; the town was in a valley and the shadow of trees and
houses made the darkness even more Stygian. Only by an occasional match
or flashlight glare could the way be seen, but such light as there was
showed the road already filled with fugitives. Some of them were
helmetless, gunless, men in the last extremity of terror, running
anywhere to escape from they knew not what.

But through the rout there plowed a little company of infantry, revealed
in a shell-burst, keeping tight ranks as though at drill, officers at
the head, not flying, but retreating from a lost battle with good heart
and confidence, ready to fight again the next day. The dancing beam of a
searchlight picked them out for a moment; Murray Lee looked at them and
the fear died within him. He slowed up his machine, ran it off the road
and out to the left where there seemed to be a clearing that opened in
the direction of the town. After all, he could at least observe the
progress of the monsters and report on them.

He was astonished to find that he had come nearly a mile from the center
of the disturbance. Down there, the glittering monsters, still brightly
illumined by searchlight and flare, seemed to be standing still amid the
outer houses of the town, perhaps examining the trench system the
Australians had dug that afternoon. The gunfire on them had ceased. From
time to time one of the things, perhaps annoyed at the pointlessness of
what it saw, would swing its trunk around and discharge a light-bolt at
house, barn or other object. The object promptly caved in, and if it
were wood, began to burn. A little train of the blazing remains of
buildings marked the progress of the shining giants, and threw a weird
red light over the scene.

[Illustration: One of the things would swing its trunk around and
discharge a light-bolt at a house or other object.]

Now that he could see them clearly, Murray noted that they were all of
fifty or sixty feet long. Their polished sides seemed one huge mirror,
bright as glass, and a phosphorescent glow hung about their tails. Along
either side was a slender projection like the bilge-keel of a ship,
terminating about three quarters of the way along, and with a small dot
of the phosphorescence at its tip. They seemed machines rather than
animate objects. Murray wondered whether they were, or (remembering his
own evolution into a metal man) whether they were actually metal
creatures of some unheard-of breed.

As he watched, a battery out beyond the town that had somehow gotten
left behind, opened fire. He could see the red flash-flash-flash of the
guns as they spoke; hear the explosions of the shells as they rent the
ground around the giants. One of them swung impassively toward the
battery; there were three quick stabs of living flame, and the guns
ceased firing. Murray Lee shuddered--were all man's resources, was all
of man, to disappear from the earth? All his high hopes and aspirations,
all the centuries of bitter struggle toward culture to be wiped out by
these impervious beasts?

He was recalled from his dream by the flash of light at his control
board and a voice from the radiophone "... to all units," came the
message. "Railroad battery 14 about to fire on enemy tanks in Waterford.
Request observation for corrections ... General Stanhope to all units.
Railroad battery 14, twelve-inch guns, about to fire on enemy tanks in
Waterford. Request observation for correction...."

"Lieut. Lee, American Tank Corps, to General Stanhope," he called into
the phone. "Go ahead with railroad battery 14. Am observing fire from
east of town."

Even before he had finished speaking there was a dull rumble in the air
and a tremendous heave of earth behind and to one side of the shining
enemy, not two hundred yards away. "Lieut. Lee to railroad battery 14,"
he called, delightedly, "two hundred yards over, ten yards right."
Berrrroum! Another of the twelve-inch shells fell somewhere ahead of the
giants in the village. As Murray shouted the correction one of the metal
creatures lifted its snout toward the source of the explosion curiously
and as if it had not quite understood its meaning, fired a light-beam at
it. Another shell fell, just to one side. A wild hope surging in him, he
called the corrections--these were heavier guns than any that had yet
taken a hand.

"Lieut. Lee, American Tank Corps, to railroad battery 14--Suggest you
use armor-piercing shell. Enemy tanks appear to be armored," he called
and had the comforting reply. "Check, Lieut. Lee. We are using
armor-piercers." Slam! Another of the twelve-inch shells struck, not ten
yards behind the enemy. The ground around them rocked; one of them
turned as though to examine the burst, the other lifted its snout
skyward and released a long, thin beam of blue light, not in the least
like the light-ray. It did not seem to occur to either of them that
these shells might be dangerous. They seemed merely interested.

And then--the breathless watchers in the thickets around the doomed town
saw a huge red explosion, a great flower of flame that leaped to the
heavens, covered with a cloud of thick smoke, pink in the light of the
burning houses, and as it cleared away, there lay one of the monsters on
its side, gaping and rent, the mirrored surface scarred across, the
phosphorescent glow extinguished, the prehensile snout drooping
lifelessly. Murray Lee was conscious of whooping wildly, of dancing out
of his tank and joining someone else in an embrace of delight. They were
not invincible then. They could be hurt--killed!

"Hooray!" he cried, "Hooray!"

"That and twelve times over," said his companion.

The phrase struck him as familiar; for the first time he looked at his
fellow celebrant. It was Gloria.

"Why, where in the world did you come from?" he asked.

"Where did you? I've been here all the time, ever since Ben ordered us
home. Didn't think I'd run out on all the fun, did you? Are those things
alive?"

"How do I know? They look it but you never can tell with all the junk
that comet left around the earth. They might be just some new kind of
tank full of dodos."

"Yeh, but--" The buzzing roar of one of the light-rays crashing into a
clump of trees not a hundred yards away, recalled them to themselves.
Gloria looked up, startled. The other monster was moving slowly forward,
systematically searching the hillside with its weapon.

"Say, boy friend," she said, "I think it's time to go away from here.
See you at high mass."

       *       *       *       *       *

But the conference at headquarters in Hammonton that night was anything
but cheerful.

"It comes to this, then," said General Grierson, the commander-in-chief
of the expedition. "We have nothing that is effective against these dodo
tanks but the twelve-inch railroad artillery, using armor-piercing shell
and securing a direct hit. Our infantry is worse than useless; the tanks
are useless, the artillery cannot get through the armor of these things,
although it damages the enemy artillery in the back areas."

Ben Ruby rubbed a metal chin. "Well, that isn't quite all, sir. One of
the American tanks was hit and came through--damaged I will admit. The
lightning, or light-ray these dodos threw, penetrated the outer skin but
