as a pirate. The famous Henry Morgan had never been anything but a
pirate and a super-pirate; as admiral of a private fleet he executed a
brilliant amphibious operation and sacked the city of Panama. He was
knighted, made governor of a fair-sized English island in the West
Indies and died loved and respected by all.

Charles Orsino found himself a member of a pirate band that called
itself the North American Government.

More difficult to learn were the ins and outs of pirate politics, which
were hampered with an archaic, structurally-inappropriate nomenclature
and body of tradition. Commander Grinnel was a Sociocrat, which meant
that he was in the same gang as President Loman. The late sub commander
had been a Constitutionist, which meant that he was allied with the
currently-out "southern bloc." The southern bloc did not consist of
southerners at this stage of the North American Government's history but
of a clique that tended to include the engineers and maintenance men of
the Government. That had been the reason for the sub commander's
erasure.

The Constitutionists traditionally commanded pigboats and aircraft while
surface vessels and the shore establishments were in the hands of the
Sociocrats--the fruit of some long-forgotten compromise.

Commander Grinnel cheerfully explained to Charles that there was a
crypto-Sociocrat naval officer primed and waiting to be appointed to the
command of the sub. The Constitutionist gang would back him to the hilt
and the Sociocrats would growl and finally assent. If, thereafter, the
Constitutionists ever counted on the sub in a coup, they would be
quickly disillusioned.

There wasn't much voting. Forty years before there had been a bad
deadlock following the death by natural causes of President Powell after
seventeen years in office. An ad hoc bipartisan conference called a
session of the Senate and the Senate elected a new president.

It was little information to be equipped with when you walked out into
the brawling streets of New Portsmouth on shore leave.

       *       *       *       *       *

The town had an improvised look which was strange to Orsino. There was a
sanitation reactor every hundred yards or so, but he mistrusted the look
of the ground-level mains that led to it from, the houses. There were
house flies from which he shied violently. Every other shack on the
waterfront was a bar or a notch joint. He sampled the goods at one of
the former and was shocked by the quality and price. He rolled out, his
ears still ringing from the belt of raw booze; as half a dozen sweatered
Guards rolled in, singing some esoteric song about their high morale and
even higher venereal rate. A couple of them looked at him appraisingly,
as though they wondered what kind of a noise he'd make if they jumped on
his stomach real hard, and he hurried away from them.

The other entertainment facilities of the waterfront were flatly ruled
out by a quick inspection of the wares. He didn't know what to make of
them. Joints back in Syndic Territory if you were a man, made sense. You
went to learn the ropes, or because you were afraid of getting mixed up
in something intense when you didn't want to, or because you wanted a
change, or because you were too busy, lazy or shy to chase skirts on
your own. If you were a woman and not too particular, a couple of years
in a joint left you with a considerable amount of money and some
interesting memories which you were under no obligation to discuss with
your husbands or husband.

But the sloppy beasts who called to him from the windows of the joints
here on the waterfront, left him puzzled and disgusted. He reflected,
strolling up Washington Street with eyes straight ahead, that women must
be in short supply if they could make a living--or that the male
citizens of the Government had no taste.

A whiff from one of those questionable sewer mains sent him reeling. He
ducked into another saloon in self-defense and leaned groggily against
the bar. A pretty brunette demanded: "What'll you have?"

"Gin, please." He peeled a ten off the roll Grinnel had given him. When
the girl poured his gin he looked at her and found her fair. In all
innocence, he asked her a question, as he might have asked a barmaid
back home. She could have answered, "Yes," "No," "Maybe," or "What's in
it for me?"

Instead she called him a lousy bastard, picked up a beer mug and was
about to shatter it on his head when a hand caught her and a voice
warned: "Hold it, Mabel! This guy's off my ship.

"He's just out of the States; he doesn't know any better. You know what
it's like over there."

Mabel snarled: "You better wise him up, then, friend. He can't go around
talking like that to decent women." She slapped down another glass,
poured gin and flounced down the bar.

Charles gulped his gin and turned shakily to his deliverer, a little
reactor specialist he had seen on the sub once or twice. "Thanks," he
said feeling inadequate. "Maybe you better wise me up. All I said was,
'Darling, do you--'"

The reactor man held up his hand. "That's enough," he said. "You don't
talk that way over here unless you want your scalp parted."

Charles, buzzing a little with the gin, protested hotly: "But what's the
harm? All she had to say was no; I wasn't going to throw her down on the
floor!"

It was all very confusing.

A shrug. "I heard about things in the States--Wyman, isn't it? I guess I
didn't really believe it. You mean I could go up to any woman and just
ask her how's about it?"

"Within reason, yes."

"And _do_ they?"

"Some do, some don't--like here."

"Like hell, like here! Last liberty--" and the reactor man told him a
long, confusing story about how he had picked up this pig, how she had
dangled it in front of him for one solid week while he managed to spend
three hundred and eighty-six dollars on her, and how finally she had
bawled that she couldn't, she just hated herself but she couldn't do
anything like _that_ and bang went the door in his face, leaving him to
finish out the evening in a notch joint.

"Good God!" Charles said, appalled. "Was she out of her mind?"

"No," the reactor man said glumly, "but I must have been. I should of
got her drunk and raped her the first night."

Charles was fully conscious that values were different here. Choking
down something like nausea, he asked carefully: "Is there much rape?"

The little man signalled for another gin and downed it. "I guess so.
Once when I was a kid a dame gave me this line about her cousin raped
her when she was little so she was frigid. I had more ambition then, so
I said: 'Then this won't be anything new to you, baby,' I popped her on
the button--"

"I've got to go now," Charles said, walking straight out of the saloon.
He was beginning to understand the sloppy beasts in the windows of the
notch joint and why men could bring themselves to settle for nothing
better. He was also overwhelmed by a great wave of home sickness.

The ugly pattern was beginning to emerge. Prudery, rape, frigidity,
intrigue for power--and assassination? Beyond the one hint, Grinnel had
said nothing that affected Syndic Territory.

But nothing would be more logical than for this band of brigands to lust
after the riches of the continent.

Back of the waterfront were shipfitting shops and living quarters. Work
was being done by a puzzling combination of mechanization and
musclepower. In one open shed he saw a lathe-hand turning a gunbarrel
out of a forging; the lathe was driven by one of those standard 18-inch
ehrenhaft rotors Max Wyman knew so well. But a vertical drillpress next
to it--Orsino blinked. Two men, sweating and panting, were turning a
stubborn vertical drum as tall as they were, and a belt drive from the
drum whirled the drill bit as it sank into a hunk of bronze. The men
were in rags, dirty rags. And it came to Orsino with a stunning shock
when he realized what the dull, clanking things were that swung from
their wrists. They were chained to the handles of the wheel.

He walked on, almost dazed, comprehending now some cryptic remarks that
had been passed aboard the sub.

"No Frog has staying power. Give a Limey his beef once a day and he'll
outsweat a Frog."

"Yeah, but you can't whip a Limey. They just go bad when you whip a
Limey."

"They just get sullen for awhile. But let me tell you, friend, don't
ever whip a Spig. You whip a Spig, he'll wait twenty years if he has to
but he'll _get_ you, right between the ribs."

"If a Spig wants to be boiled, I should worry."

It had been broken up in laughter.

_Boiled!_ Could such things be?

Sixteen ragged, filth-crusted sub-humans were creeping down the road,
each straining at a rope. An inch at a time, they were dragging a skid
loaded with one huge turbine gear whose tiny herringbone teeth caught
the afternoon sun.

The Government had reactors, the Government had vehicles--why this? He
slowly realized that the Government's metal and machinery and atomic
power went into its warships; that there was none left over for
consumers, and the uses of peace. The Government had degenerated into a
dawn-age monster, specialized all to teeth and claws and muscles to
drive them with. The Government was now, whatever it had been, a
graceless, humorless incarnate ferocity. Whatever lightness or joy
survived was the meaningless vestigial twitching of an obsolete organ.

Somewhere a child began to bawl and Charles was surprised to feel a
profound pity welling up in him. Like a sedentary man who after a
workout aches in muscles he never knew he owned, Charles was discovering
that he had emotions which had never been poignantly evoked by the bland
passage of the hours in Syndic Territory.

Poor little bastard, he thought, growing up in this hellhole. I don't
know what having slaves to kick around will do to you, but I don't see
how you can grow up a human being. I don't know what fear of love will
do to you--make you a cheat? Or a graceful rutting animal with a choice
only between graceless rutting violence and a stinking scuffle with a
flabby and abstracted stranger in a strange unloved room? We have our
guns to play with and they're good toys, but I don't know what kind of
monster you'll become when they give you a gun to live with and violence
for a god.

_Reiner was right_, he thought unhappily. _We've got to do something
about this mess._

A man and a woman were struggling in an alley as he passed. Old habit
almost made him walk on, but this wasn't the playful business of ripping
clothes as practiced during hilarious moments in Mob Territory. It was a
grim and silent struggle--

The man wore the sweater of the Guards. Nevertheless, Charles walked
into the alley and tore him away from the woman; or rather, he yanked at
the man's rock-like arm and the man, in surprise, let go of the woman
and spun to face him.

"Beat it," Charles said to the woman, not looking around. He saw from
the corner of his eye that she was staying right there.

The man's hand was on his sheath knife. He told Charles: "Get lost. Now.
You don't mess with the Guards."

Charles felt his knees quivering, which was good. He knew from many a
chukker of polo that it meant that he was strung to the breaking point,
ready to explode into action. "Pull that knife," he said, "and the next
thing you know you'll be eating it."

The man's face went dead calm and he pulled the knife and came in low,
very fast. The knife was supposed to catch Charles in the middle. If
Charles stepped inside it, the man would grab him in a bear hug and
knife him in the back.

There was only one answer.

He caught the thick wrist from above with his left hand as the knife
flashed toward his middle and shoved out. He felt the point catch and
slice his cuff. The Guardsman tried a furious and ill-advised kick at
his crotch; with his grip on the knife-hand, Charles toppled him into
the filthy alley as he stood one-legged and off balance. He fell on his
back, floundering, and for a black moment, Charles thought his weight
was about to tear the wrist loose from his grip. The moment passed, and
Charles put his right foot in the socket of the Guardsman's elbow,
reinforced his tiring left hand with his right and leaned, doubling the
man's forearm over the fulcrum of his boot. The man roared and dropped
the knife. It had taken perhaps five seconds.

Charles said, panting: "I don't want to break your arm or kick your head
in or anything like that. I just want you to go away and leave the woman
alone." He was conscious of her, vaguely hovering in the background. He
thought angrily: _She might at least get his knife._

The Guardsman said thickly: "You give me the boot and I swear to God
I'll find you and cut you to ribbons if it takes me the rest of my
life."

_Good_, Charles thought. _Now he can tell himself he scared me. Good._
He let go of the forearm, straightened and took his foot from the man's
elbow, stepping back. The Guardsman got up stiffly, flexing his arm, and
stooped to pick up and sheath his knife without taking his eyes off
Charles. Then he spat in the dust at Charles' feet. "Yellow crud," he
said. "If the goddam crow was worth it, I'd cut your heart out." He
walked off down the alley and Charles followed him with his eyes until
he turned the corner into the street.

Then he turned, irritated that the woman had not spoken.

She was Lee Falcaro.

"Lee!" he said, thunderstruck. "What are you doing here?" It was the
same face, feature for feature, and between her brows appeared the same
double groove he had seen before. But she didn't know him.

"You know me?" she asked blankly. "Is that why you pulled that ape off
me? I ought to thank you. But I can't place you at all. I don't know
many people here. I've been ill, you know."

There was a difference apparent now. The voice was a little querulous.
And Charles would have staked his life that never could Lee Falcaro
have said in that slightly smug, slightly proprietary, slightly
aren't-I-interesting tone: "I've been ill, you know."

"But what are you _doing_ here? Damn it, don't you know me? I'm Charles
Orsino!"

He realized then that he had made a horrible mistake.

"Orsino," she said. And then she spat: "_Orsino!_ Of the _Syndic_!"
There was black hatred in her eyes.

She turned and raced down the alley. He stood there stupidly, for almost
a minute, and then ran after her, as far as the alley's mouth. She was
gone. You could run almost anywhere in New Portsmouth in almost a
minute.

A weedy little seaman wearing crossed quills on his cap was lounging
against a building. He snickered at Charles. "Don't chase that one,
sailor," he said. "She is the property of O.N.I."

"You know who she is?"

The yeoman happily spilled his inside dope to the fleet gob: "Lee
Bennet. Smuggled over here couple months ago by D.A.R. The hottest thing
that ever hit Naval Intelligence. Very small potato in the Syndic--knows
all the families, who does what, who's a figurehead and who's a worker.
Terrific! Inside stuff! Hates the Syndic. A gang of big-timers did her
dirt."

"Thanks," Charles said, and wandered off down the street.

It wasn't surprising. He should have _expected_ it.

_Noblesse oblige._

Pride of the Falcaro line. She wouldn't send anybody into deadly peril
unless she were ready to go herself.

Only somehow the trigger that would have snapped neurotic, synthetic Lee
Bennet into Lee Falcaro hadn't worked.

He wandered on aimlessly, wondering whether it would be minutes or hours
before he'd be picked up and executed as a spy.
