'And do the people thrive under his benevolent rule?' asked Conan with
angry irony.

'He lives like a foreign prince in the midst of a conquered land,'
answered Servius bitterly. 'His court is filled with Nemedians, the
palace troops are of the same breed, and a large garrison of them occupy
the citadel. Aye, the hour of the Dragon has come at last.

'Nemedians swagger like lords through the streets. Women are outraged
and merchants plundered daily, and Valerius either can, or will, make no
attempt to curb them. Nay, he is but their puppet, their figurehead. Men
of sense knew he would be, and the people are beginning to find it out.

'Amalric has ridden forth with a strong army to reduce the outlying
provinces where some of the barons have defied him. But there is no
unity among them. Their jealousy of each other is stronger than their
fear of Amalric. He will crush them one by one. Many castles and cities,
realizing that, have sent in their submission. Those who resist fare
miserably. The Nemedians are glutting their long hatred. And their ranks
are swelled by Aquilonians whom fear, gold, or necessity of occupation
are forcing into their armies. It is a natural consequence.'

Conan nodded somberly, staring at the red reflections of the firelight
on the richly carved oaken panels.

'Aquilonia has a king instead of the anarchy they feared,' said Servius
at last. 'Valerius does not protect his subjects against his allies.
Hundreds who could not pay the ransom imposed upon them have been sold
to the Kothic slave-traders.'

Conan's head jerked up and a lethal flame lit his blue eyes. He swore
gustily, his mighty hands knotting into iron hammers.

'Aye, white men sell white men and white women, as it was in the feudal
days. In the palaces of Shem and of Turan they will live out the lives
of slaves. Valerius is king, but the unity for which the people looked,
even though of the sword, is not complete.

'Gunderland in the north and Poitain in the south are yet unconquered,
and there are unsubdued provinces in the west, where the border barons
have the backing of the Bossonian bowmen. Yet these outlying provinces
are no real menace to Valerius. They must remain on the defensive, and
will be lucky if they are able to keep their independence. Here Valerius
and his foreign knights are supreme.'

'Let him make the best of it then,' said Conan grimly. 'His time is
short. The people will rise when they learn that I'm alive. We'll take
Tarantia back before Amalric can return with his army. Then we'll sweep
these dogs from the kingdom.'

Servius was silent. The crackle of the fire was loud in the stillness.

'Well,' exclaimed Conan impatiently, 'why do you sit with your head
bent, staring at the hearth? Do you doubt what I have said?'

Servius avoided the king's eye.

'What mortal man can do, you will do, your Majesty,' he answered. 'I
have ridden behind you in battle, and I know that no mortal being can
stand before your sword.'

'What, then?'

Servius drew his fur-trimmed jupon closer about him, and shivered in
spite of the flame.

'Men say your fall was occasioned by sorcery,' he said presently.

'What then?'

'What mortal can fight against sorcery? Who is this veiled man who
communes at midnight with Valerius and his allies, as men say, who
appears and disappears so mysteriously? Men say in whispers that he is a
great magician who died thousands of years ago, but has returned from
death's gray lands to overthrow the king of Aquilonia and restore the
dynasty of which Valerius is heir.'

'What matter?' exclaimed Conan angrily. 'I escaped from the
devil-haunted pits of Belverus, and from diabolism in the mountains. If
the people rise----'

Servius shook his head.

'Your staunchest supporters in the eastern and central provinces are
dead, fled or imprisoned. Gunderland is far to the north, Poitain far
to the south. The Bossonians have retired to their marches far to the
west. It would take weeks to gather and concentrate these forces, and
before that could be done, each levy would be attacked separately by
Amalric and destroyed.'

'But an uprising in the central provinces would tip the scales for us!'
exclaimed Conan. 'We could seize Tarantia and hold it against Amalric
until the Gundermen and Poitanians could get here.'

Servius hesitated, and his voice sank to a whisper.

'Men say you died accursed. Men say this veiled stranger cast a spell
upon you to slay you and break your army. The great bell has tolled your
dirge. Men believe you to be dead. And the central provinces would not
rise, even if they knew you lived. They would not dare. Sorcery defeated
you at Valkia. Sorcery brought the news to Tarantia, for that very night
men were shouting of it in the streets.

'A Nemedian priest loosed black magic again in the streets of Tarantia
to slay men who still were loyal to your memory. I myself saw it. Armed
men dropped like flies and died in the streets in a manner no man could
understand. And the lean priest laughed and said: 'I am only Altaro,
only an acolyte of Orastes, who is but an acolyte of him who wears the
veil; not mine is the power; the power but works through me.'

'Well,' said Conan harshly, 'is it not better to die honorably than to
live in infamy? Is death worse than oppression, slavery and ultimate
destruction?'

'When the fear of sorcery is in, reason is out,' replied Servius. 'The
fear of the central provinces is too great to allow them to rise for
you. The outlying provinces would fight for you--but the same sorcery
that smote your army at Valkia would smite you again. The Nemedians hold
the broadest, richest and most thickly populated sections of Aquilonia,
and they cannot be defeated by the forces which might still be at your
command. You would be sacrificing your loyal subjects uselessly. In
sorrow I say it, but it is true: King Conan, you are a king without a
kingdom.'

Conan stared into the fire without replying. A smoldering log crashed
down among the flames without a bursting shower of sparks. It might have
been the crashing ruin of his kingdom.

Again Conan felt the presence of a grim reality behind the veil of
material illusion. He sensed again the inexorable drive of a ruthless
fate. A feeling of furious panic tugged at his soul, a sense of being
trapped, and a red rage that burned to destroy and kill.

'Where are the officials of my court?' he demanded at last.

'Pallantides was sorely wounded at Valkia, was ransomed by his family,
and now lies in his castle in Attalus. He will be fortunate if he ever
rides again. Publius, the chancellor, has fled the kingdom in disguise,
no man knows whither. The council has been disbanded. Some were
imprisoned, some banished. Many of your loyal subjects have been put to
death. Tonight, for instance, the Countess Albiona dies under the
headsman's ax.'

Conan started and stared at Servius with such anger smoldering in his
blue eyes that the patrician shrank back.

'Why?'

'Because she would not become the mistress of Valerius. Her lands are
forfeit, her henchmen sold into slavery, and at midnight, in the Iron
Tower, her head must fall. Be advised, my king--to me you will ever be
my king--and flee before you are discovered. In these days none is safe.
Spies and informers creep among us, betraying the slightest deed or word
of discontent as treason and rebellion. If you make yourself known to
your subjects it will only end in your capture and death.

'My horses and all the men that I can trust are at your disposal. Before
dawn we can be far from Tarantia, and well on our way toward the border.
If I cannot aid you to recover your kingdom, I can at least follow you
into exile.'

Conan shook his head. Servius glanced uneasily at him as he sat staring
into the fire, his chin propped on his mighty fist. The firelight
gleamed redly on his steel mail, on his baleful eyes. They burned in the
firelight like the eyes of a wolf. Servius was again aware, as in the
past, and now more strongly than ever, of something alien about the
king. That great frame under the mail mesh was too hard and supple for a
civilized man; the elemental fire of the primitive burned in those
smoldering eyes. Now the barbaric suggestion about the king was more
pronounced, as if in his extremity the outward aspects of civilization
were stripped away, to reveal the primordial core. Conan was reverting
to his pristine type. He did not act as a civilized man would act under
the same conditions, nor did his thoughts run in the same channels. He
was unpredictable. It was only a stride from the king of Aquilonia to
the skin-clad slayer of the Cimmerian hills.

'I'll ride to Poitain, if it may be,' Conan said at last. 'But I'll ride
alone. And I have one last duty to perform as king of Aquilonia.'

'What do you mean, your Majesty?' asked Servius, shaken by a
premonition.

'I'm going into Tarantia after Albiona tonight,' answered the king.
'I've failed all my other loyal subjects, it seems--if they take her
head, they can have mine too.'

'This is madness!' cried Servius, staggering up and clutching his
throat, as if he already felt the noose closing about it.

'There are secrets to the Tower which few know,' said Conan. 'Anyway,
I'd be a dog to leave Albiona to die because of her loyalty to me. I may
be a king without a kingdom, but I'm not a man without honor.'

'It will ruin us all!' whispered Servius.

'It will ruin no one but me if I fail. You've risked enough. I ride
alone tonight. This is all I want you to do: procure me a patch for my
eye, a staff for my hand, and garments such as travelers wear.'




9

'It is the King or His Ghost!'


Many men passed through the great arched gates of Tarantia between
sunset and midnight--belated travelers, merchants from afar with heavily
laden mules, free workmen from the surrounding farms and vineyards. Now
that Valerius was supreme in the central provinces, there was no rigid
scrutiny of the folk who flowed in a steady stream through the wide
gates. Discipline had been relaxed. The Nemedian soldiers who stood on
guard were half drunk, and much too busy watching for handsome peasant
girls and rich merchants who could be bullied to notice workmen or dusty
travelers, even one tall wayfarer whose worn cloak could not conceal the
hard lines of his powerful frame.

This man carried himself with an erect, aggressive bearing that was too
natural for him to realize it himself, much less dissemble it. A great
patch covered one eye, and his leather coif, drawn low over his brows,
shadowed his features. With a long thick staff in his muscular brown
hand, he strode leisurely through the arch where the torches flared and
guttered, and, ignored by the tipsy guardsmen, emerged upon the wide
streets of Tarantia.

Upon these well-lighted thoroughfares the usual throngs went about their
business, and shops and stalls stood open, with their wares displayed.
One thread ran a constant theme through the pattern. Nemedian soldiers,
singly or in clumps, swaggered through the throngs, shouldering their
way with studied arrogance. Women scurried from their path, and men
stepped aside with darkened brows and clenched fists. The Aquilonians
were a proud race, and these were their hereditary enemies.

The knuckles of the tall traveler knotted on his staff, but, like the
others, he stepped aside to let the men in armor have the way. Among the
motley and varied crowd he did not attract much attention in his drab,
dusty garments. But once, as he passed a sword-seller's stall and the
light that streamed from its wide door fell full upon him, he thought
he felt an intense stare upon him, and turning quickly, saw a man in the
brown jerkin of a free workman regarding him fixedly. This man turned
away with undue haste, and vanished in the shifting throng. But Conan
turned into a narrow by-street and quickened his pace. It might have
been mere idle curiosity; but he could take no chances.

The grim Iron Tower stood apart from the citadel, amid a maze of narrow
streets and crowding houses where the meaner structures, appropriating a
space from which the more fastidious shrank, had invaded a portion of
the city ordinarily alien to them. The Tower was in reality a castle, an
ancient, formidable pile of heavy stone and black iron, which had itself
served as the citadel in an earlier, ruder century.

Not a long distance from it, lost in a tangle of partly deserted
tenements and warehouses, stood an ancient watchtower, so old and
forgotten that it did not appear on the maps of the city for a hundred
years back. Its original purpose had been forgotten, and nobody, of such
as saw it at all, noticed that the apparently ancient lock which kept it
from being appropriated as sleeping-quarters by beggars and thieves, was
in reality comparatively new and extremely powerful, cunningly disguised
into an appearance of rusty antiquity. Not half a dozen men in the
kingdom had ever known the secret of that tower.

No keyhole showed in the massive, green-crusted lock. But Conan's
practised fingers, stealing over it, pressed here and there knobs
invisible to the casual eye. The door silently opened inward and he
entered solid blackness, pushing the door shut behind him. A light would
have showed the tower empty, a bare, cylindrical shaft of massive stone.

Groping in a corner with the sureness of familiarity, he found the
projections for which he was feeling on a slab of the stone that
composed the floor. Quickly he lifted it, and without hesitation lowered
himself into the aperture beneath. His feet felt stone steps leading
downward into what he knew was a narrow tunnel that ran straight toward
the foundations of the Iron Tower, three streets away.

The bell on the citadel, which tolled only at the midnight hour or for
the death of a king, boomed suddenly. In a dimly lighted chamber in the
Iron Tower a door opened and a form emerged into a corridor. The
interior of the Tower was as forbidding as its external appearance. Its
massive stone walls were rough, unadorned. The flags of the floor were
worn deep by generations of faltering feet, and the vault of the ceiling
was gloomy in the dim light of torches set in niches.

The man who trudged down that grim corridor was in appearance in keeping
with his surroundings. He was a tall, powerfully built man, clad in
close-fitting black silk. Over his head was drawn a black hood which
fell about his shoulders, having two holes for his eyes. From his
shoulders hung a loose black cloak, and over one shoulder he bore a
heavy ax, the shape of which was that of neither tool nor weapon.

As he went down the corridor, a figure came hobbling up it, a bent,
surly old man, stooping under the weight of his pike and a lantern he
bore in one hand.

'You are not as prompt as your predecessor, master headsman,' he
grumbled. 'Midnight has just struck, and masked men have gone to
milady's cell. They await you.'

'The tones of the bell still echo among the towers,' answered the
executioner. 'If I am not so quick to leap and run at the beck of
Aquilonians as was the dog who held this office before me, they shall
find my arm no less ready. Get you to your duties, old watchman, and
leave me to mine. I think mine is the sweeter trade, by Mitra, for you
tramp cold corridors and peer at rusty dungeon doors, while I lop off
the fairest head in Tarantia this night.'

The watchman limped on down the corridor, still grumbling, and the
headsman resumed his leisurely way. A few strides carried him around a
turn in the corridor, and he absently noted that at his left a door
stood partly open. If he had thought, he would have known that that door
had been opened since the watchman passed; but thinking was not his
trade. He was passing the unlocked door before he realized that aught
was amiss, and then it was too late.

A soft tigerish step and the rustle of a cloak warned him, but before he
could turn, a heavy arm hooked about his throat from behind, crushing
the cry before it could reach his lips. In the brief instant that was
allowed him he realized with a surge of panic the strength of his
attacker, against which his own brawny thews were helpless. He sensed
without seeing the poised dagger.

'Nemedian dog!' muttered a voice thick with passion in his ear. 'You've
cut off your last Aquilonian head!'

And that was the last thing he ever heard.

       *       *       *       *       *

In a dank dungeon, lighted only by a guttering torch, three men stood
about a young woman who knelt on the rush-strewn flags staring wildly up
at them. She was clad only in a scanty shift; her golden hair fell in
lustrous ripples about her white shoulders, and her wrists were bound
behind her. Even in the uncertain torchlight, and in spite of her
disheveled condition and pallor of fear, her beauty was striking. She
knelt mutely, staring with wide eyes up at her tormenters. The men were
closely masked and cloaked. Such a deed as this needed masks, even in a
conquered land. She knew them all nevertheless; but what she knew would
harm no one--after that night.

'Our merciful sovereign offers you one more chance, Countess,' said the
tallest of the three, and he spoke Aquilonian without an accent. 'He
bids me say that if you soften your proud, rebellious spirit, he will
still open his arms to you. If not--' he gestured toward a grim wooden
block in the center of the cell. It was blackly stained, and showed many
deep nicks as if a keen edge, cutting through some yielding substance,
had sunk into the wood.

Albiona shuddered and turned pale, shrinking back. Every fiber in her
vigorous young body quivered with the urge of life. Valerius was young,
too, and handsome. Many women loved him, she told herself, fighting with
herself for life. But she could not speak the word that would ransom her
soft young body from the block and the dripping ax. She could not reason
the matter. She only knew that when she thought of the clasp of
Valerius' arms, her flesh crawled with an abhorrence greater than the
fear of death. She shook her head helplessly, compelled by an impulsion
more irresistible than the instinct to live.

'Then there is no more to be said!' exclaimed one of the others
impatiently, and he spoke with a Nemedian accent. 'Where is the
headsman?'

As if summoned by the word, the dungeon door opened silently, and a
great figure stood framed in it, like a black shadow from the
underworld.

Albiona voiced a low, involuntary cry at the sight of that grim shape,
and the others stared silently for a moment, perhaps themselves daunted
with superstitious awe at the silent, hooded figure. Through the coif
the eyes blazed like coals of blue fire, and as these eyes rested on
each man in turn, he felt a curious chill travel down his spine.

Then the tall Aquilonian roughly seized the girl and dragged her to the
block. She screamed uncontrollably and fought hopelessly against him,
frantic with terror, but he ruthlessly forced her to her knees, and bent
her yellow head down to the bloody block.

'Why do you delay, headsman?' he exclaimed angrily. 'Perform your task!'

He was answered by a short, gusty boom of laughter that was
indescribably menacing. All in the dungeon froze in their places,
staring at the hooded shape--the two cloaked figures, the masked man
bending over the girl, the girl herself on her knees, twisting her
imprisoned head to look upward.

'What means this unseemly mirth, dog?' demanded the Aquilonian uneasily.

The man in the black garb tore his hood from his head and flung it to
the ground; he set his back to the closed door and lifted the headsman's
ax.

'Do you know me, dogs?' he rumbled. 'Do you know me?'

The breathless silence was broken by a scream.

'The king!' shrieked Albiona, wrenching herself free from the slackened
grasp of her captor. 'Oh, Mitra, the king!'

The three men stood like statues, and then the Aquilonian started and
spoke, like a man who doubts his own senses.

'Conan!' he ejaculated. 'It is the king, or his ghost! What devil's work
is this?'

'Devil's work to match devils!' mocked Conan, his lips laughing but hell
flaming in his eyes. 'Come, fall to, my gentlemen. You have your swords,
and I this cleaver. Nay, I think this butcher's tool fits the work at
hand, my fair lords!'

'At him!' muttered the Aquilonian, drawing his sword. 'It is Conan and
we must kill or be killed!'

And like men waking from a trance, the Nemedians drew their blades and
rushed on the king.

The headsman's ax was not made for such work, but the king wielded the
heavy, clumsy weapon as lightly as a hatchet, and his quickness of foot,
as he constantly shifted his position, defeated their purpose of
engaging him all three at once.

He caught the sword of the first man on his ax-head and crushed in the
wielder's breast with a murderous counterstroke before he could step
back or parry. The remaining Nemedian, missing a savage swipe, had his
brains dashed out before he could recover his balance, and an instant
later the Aquilonian was backed into a corner, desperately parrying the
crashing strokes that rained about him, lacking opportunity even to
scream for help.

Suddenly Conan's long left arm shot out and ripped the mask from the
man's head, disclosing the pallid features.

'Dog!' grated the king. 'I thought I knew you. Traitor! Damned renegade!
