going to the interior of the earth? That some beast had slipped aboard
was out of the question. Mark was much puzzled, but finally, deciding
the matter did not concern him a great deal, gave up trying to solve the
mystery, at least for a time.

The ship was now in the neighborhood of the equator and the climate had
become much warmer. So hot indeed were some nights that they slept out
on deck, with the _Mermaid_ flying through the air at a moderate pace,
for it was deemed best not to go at any great speed after dark.

One night the professor, after consulting various charts and maps, and
making calculations which covered several sheets of paper announced:

"We should sight the mysterious island to-morrow."

"That's good news!" exclaimed Jack. "I'm anxious to see what's below
inside of that big hole."

"Everybody git ready for their funerals!" exclaimed Washington in a deep
voice. "I ain't got many----"

"Cheer up," interrupted Jack, poking Washington in the ribs. The colored
man was very ticklish, and he began to laugh heartily, though, perhaps,
he did not feel like it.

Suddenly, above the sound of his shouts, there came a crashing, grinding
noise from the engine room.




                              CHAPTER XII

                              THE BIG HOLE


"Something has gone wrong!" exclaimed the professor as he jumped up. He
reached the engine room ahead of any one else, and when the two boys got
there they found him busy twisting wheels and shifting levers.

"Anything serious?" asked Jack.

"It's the gas machine again," Mr. Henderson replied. "It broke where we
fixed it. However it doesn't matter. I was going to lower the ship
anyhow, as I want to approach the island from the water. We will go down
a little sooner than I counted on."

The disabling of the gas machine caused the vapor to escape slowly from
the tank, and this made the ship sink gradually. By means of the
emergency stop-cock the descent could be controlled almost as well as
though the machinery was in working order. Half an hour later the
_Mermaid_ rested on the water.

It was a little rough, as there was quite a swell on, and not so
pleasant as floating in the air on an even keel, but they made the best
of it.

On account of the little accident, and not being certain of its extent,
it was deemed best not to send the ship ahead. So they laid to until
morning.

For the better part of two days all those on board the _Mermaid_ had
their hands full mending the break and making other repairs found
necessary. In that time they lay to, floating idly with the currents, or
blown by the wind, for the professor would not start any of the engines
or apparatus until the ship was in good condition.

In this time Mark had several times recalled the curious happenings in
regard to the disappearing food, and the mystery of the storeroom. But
there were no further manifestations, and no other signs that there
might be a strange visitor aboard.

"I couldn't have imagined it all," said Mark, "but I guess what did
happen may have been caused by natural means, only I can't discover
them."

It was about two days after this, the ship having sailed scores of miles
on the surface of the water, that Mark, who was in the conning tower
exclaimed:

"That looks like a waterspout ahead of us."

"That's what it is!" Jack agreed. "What shall we do?"

"Call the professor!" said Mark. "He'll know."

When Mr. Henderson came, he looked for a long time at a cloud of black
vapor which hung low in the east.

"It may be a waterspout," he said. "We'll rise in the air and see if we
can avoid it."

The ship was sent up into the air. As it rose higher and higher, the
professor, making frequent observations from his conning tower, cried
out:

"That is no waterspout!"

"What is it?" asked Mark.

"It is the steam and vapor rising from the big hole in the earth! Boys,
we are almost there!"

"Are you sure that's it?" asked Mark.

"Almost positive," Mr. Henderson replied. "You can see how much warmer
it has become of late, as we approached the equator. We are almost due
at the island, and I have no doubt we have reached it."

As the ship flew forward the mass of dark vapor became more pronounced.
Through the glasses it could be noticed to consist of rolling masses of
clouds. What lay beneath them no one knew. The adventurers were going to
try to find out.

Now that they had arrived at the beginning of the main part of their
journey, the travelers felt their spirits sink a little. It was one
thing to plan to go down into the depths of the earth, but it was quite
another to make the actual attempt. Still, they were not going to give
up the project. The professor had confidence in his ship and believed it
could safely make the trip. Still it was with no little apprehension
that Mr. Henderson watched the nearer approach of the craft to that
strange island.

"Perfesser, are yo' really an' truly goin' t' depress this elongated
spheroid an' its human consignment int' that conglomerous convoluted
mass of gaseous vapor regardless of th' consequences?" asked Washington,
as he gazed with wide opened eyes at the sight before him.

"If you mean am I going to let the _Mermaid_ go down into that hole you
are perfectly correct," the scientist answered, "though you could have
said it in fewer words, Washington."

"I--I guess I'll get out an' walk," the colored man made reply.

"This isn't any trolley car," observed Mark. "Don't lose your nerve,
Wash. Stay with us, and we'll discover a gold or diamond mine, maybe."

"Is there diamonds down there?" asked the colored man, his fright
seeming to leave him.

"There are all sorts of things inside the earth," the professor
answered.

"Then I'm goin' along!" Washington declared. "I always did want a
diamond ring, an' I knows a little colored gal that wants one, too. I'm
goin' all right! This suttenly am th' most kloslosterous conjunctivity
of combativeness that I ever sagaciated!" and he began to do a sort of
impromptu cake-walk.




                              CHAPTER XIII

                          DOWN INTO THE EARTH


It was now noon, but the adventurers did not think of dinner in the
excitement of approaching the mysterious island. The speed of the ship
was increased that they might the more quickly come to it. As they
approached they could see the masses of vapor more plainly, and it
appeared that some great commotion must be going on inside the big hole,
since clouds of steam arose.

"I only hope it doesn't prove too hot for us," observed the professor.
"However, I provided a water jacket for the ship, and we may need it, as
well as the vacuum chambers to keep the heat from us."

It was about three o'clock when the flying ship reached the edge of the
island. From there it was about a mile to the rim of the big hole, over
one side of which the waters of the ocean poured with a roar that could
be heard over half a mile off.

"I think we had better halt and see that everything is in good shape
before proceeding," said Mr. Henderson. "Jack, you and Mark make a
thorough inspection of the engine room, and see that all the apparatus
is in working order."

The two boys prepared to do as they were told. Mark, who was walking a
little ahead of Jack, entered the apartment from which the storeroom
opened. As he did so he saw, or thought he saw, the door of the place
where the extra supplies were kept, close. Without saying anything to
Jack he hurried forward, and tried the knob. It would not turn.

"That's funny," said Mark to himself. "I could almost swear I saw some
one go into that room. Yet I know the professor did not enter, for I
just left him. And none of the others would dare to. I wonder if I will
ever solve the mystery."

But he had too much to do to allow him to dwell on that matter. Several
of the dynamos needed adjusting and for two hours he and Jack had all
they could do.

In the meanwhile the professor had gone over the other parts of the
ship, and gotten everything in readiness for the descent. The _Mermaid_
was lowered to within a few hundred feet of the sea, and, through a hose
that was let down, the compartments, provided for this emergency were
filled with water. These compartments were between the outer and inner
hulls of the lower part of the craft, and were designed to prevent the
interior becoming heated in case the travelers found they had to pass
close to fire. There were also vacuum chambers, and from these the air
was exhausted, as of course every schoolboy knows a vacuum is a
non-conductor of either heat or cold.

"Now I think we are ready," the professor announced at length.

"Everything's all right in the engine room," announced Jack.

"Yes, an' everything's all right in th' kitchen," put in Washington.
"I've got a good meal ready as soon as any one wants to eat."

"It will have to wait a while," Mr. Henderson remarked. "We are going to
start to make the descent before we dine."

The hose was reeled up, and the ship was sent a few hundred feet higher
into the air, as Mr. Henderson wanted to take a last good observation
before he went down into the hole.

But having risen some distance above the masses of rolling vapors he
found he was at no advantage, since the strongest telescope he could
bring to bear could not pierce the cloud masses.

"We'll just have to trust to luck," the scientist said. "I judge we're
about over the centre of the opening. Lower away Mark!"

The boy, who, under the watchful eye of the professor, was manipulating
the levers and wheels in the conning tower, shifted some handles. The
gas was expelled from the holder, the negative gravity apparatus ceased
to work, and the _Flying Mermaid_ sank lower and lower, toward the
mysterious hole that yawned beneath her.

The hearts of all beat strangely, if not with fear, at least with
apprehension, for they did not know what they might encounter. Perhaps
death in some terrible form awaited them. But the desire to discover
something new and strange had gripped all of them, and not one would
have voted to turn back.

Even old Andy, who seldom got excited, was in unusual spirits. He took
down his gun and remarked:

"Maybe I can kill some new kind of animal, and write a book about its
habits, for surely we will see strange beasts in the under-world."

Lower and lower sank the ship. Now it was amid the first thin masses of
vapors, those that floated highest and were more like a light fog, than
anything else. By means of a window in the bottom of the craft, which
window was closed by a thick piece of plate glass, Professor Henderson
could look down and see what was beneath them.

"The clouds seem to be getting thicker," he said, as he peered through
the small casement. "If they would only clear away we could see
something."

But instead of doing this the vapors accumulated more thickly about the
ship. It was so dark inside the _Mermaid_ now that the electric lights
had to be switched on. In the room with the floor-window the lights were
not used, as had they shone one could not have seen down below.

The professor maintained his position. The descent was a perilous one,
and he wanted to be on the watch to check it at once if the _Mermaid_
was liable to dash upon some pointed rock or fall into some fiery pit.
His hand was on the signal levers.

Suddenly he looked up and glanced at a gage on the wall. The hand of it
was slowly revolving.

"We are at the earth's surface," the scientist said. "Now we are below
it. Now we are fairly within the big hole! Boys, we may be on the verge
of a great discovery!"

An instant later it seemed as if a hot wave had struck the _Mermaid_, or
as if the craft had been plunged into boiling water.

"It's going to be hot!" cried the professor. "Lucky I provided the water
jackets!"

Then the lights in the interior of the ship went out, leaving the whole
craft in darkness.

"What has happened?" cried Mark.




                              CHAPTER XIV

                            MANY MILES BELOW


"Don't be alarmed," spoke the calm voice of the professor. "I have only
turned off the electrics. I want to switch on the search lights, to see
if we can learn anything about our position."

As he spoke he turned a switch, and, the gloom below the ship, as the
boys could see by glimpses from the floor-window, was pierced by a
dazzling glare. In the bottom of the _Mermaid_ were set a number of
powerful electric arc lights with reflectors, constructed to throw the
beams downward. The professor had built them in for just this emergency,
as he thought that at some time they might want to illuminate what was
below the craft.

Not that it was of much avail on this occasion, for, though the lights
were powerful, they could not pierce the miles of gloom that lay below
them. The beams only served to accentuate the darkness.

"I guess we'll have to trust to luck," the professor said, after a vain
attempt, by means of powerful glasses, to distinguish something. "There
is too much fog and vapor."

"What makes it so warm?" asked Mark, removing his coat.

"Well, you must remember you are approaching the interior of the earth,"
the professor answered. "It has been calculated that the heat increases
one degree for every fifty-five feet you descend. We have come down
several hundred feet and of course it is getting warmer."

"Then if we go down very far it will get so hot we will not be able to
stand it," Jack put in.

"I do not believe we will suffer any great inconvenience," Mr. Henderson
went on. "I believe that after we pass a certain point it will become
cooler. I think the inner fires of the earth are more or less heated gas
in a sort of inner chamber between two shells. If we can pass the second
shell, we will be all right."

"But aren't we liable to hit something, going down into the dark this
way?" asked Mark.

"We will guard ourselves as far as possible," the scientist answered.

The _Mermaid_ seemed to be going down on a side of the immense shaft a
good way distant from the strange waterfall. When they had first dropped
into the hole the travelers could hear the rush of waters, but now the
noise was not audible.

"I think the hole must widen out the farther down we go," the professor
said. "We are probably many miles from the fall now."

"I'm sure I hope so," put in Jack. "It would be no fun to have to take a
shower bath in this place."

After a meal, the boys and the professor took some more observations,
but with all their efforts nothing could be seen below the ship but a
vast black void, into which they were steadily descending.

"I wonder when we're going to stop," asked Mark. "It's like playing the
game 'Going to Jerusalem,' you keep wondering when the music will cease
and you will have a chance to grab a chair. I only hope we have a chair
