after 24 h. 40 m. radicle clearly deflected from the card. This slow action
was probably due to a portion of the goldbeaters' skin having curled round
and lightly touched the opposite side of the tip and thus irritated it.

(13.) A radicle of considerable length had a small square of card fixed
with shellac to its apex laterally: after only 7 h. 15 m. a length of .4 of
an inch from the apex, measured along the middle, was considerably curved
from the side bearing the card.

(14.) Case like the last in all respects, except that a length of only .25
of an inch of the radicle was thus deflected.

(15.) A small square of card fixed with shellac to the apex of a young
radicle; after 9 h. 15 m. deflected through 90o from the perpendicular and
from the card. After 24 h. deflection much decreased, and after an
additional day, reduced to 23o from the perpendicular.

(16.) Square of card fixed with shellac behind the apex of a radicle, which
from its position having been changed during growth had become very
crooked; but the terminal portion was straight, and this became deflected
to about 45o from the perpendicular and from the card, in opposition to
Sachs' curvature.

(17.) Square of card affixed with shellac: after 8 h. radicle curved at
right angles from the perpendicular and from the card. After 15 additional
hours curvature much decreased.

(18.) Square of card affixed with shellac: after 8 h. no effect; after 23
h. 3 m. from time of affixing, radicle much curved from the square. (19.)
Square of card affixed with shellac: after 24 h. no effect, but the radicle
had not grown well and seemed sickly.

(20.) Square of card affixed with shellac: after 24 h. no effect.

(21, 22.) Squares of card affixed with shellac: after 24 h. radicles of
both curved at about 45o from the perpendicular and from the cards.

(23.) Square of card fixed with shellac to young radicle: after
[page 138]
9 h. very slightly curved from the card; after 24 h. tip curved towards
card. Refixed new square laterally, after 9 h. distinctly curved from the
card, and after 24 h. curved at right angles from the perpendicular and
from the card.

(24.) A rather large oblong piece of card fixed with shellac to apex: after
24 h. no effect, but the card was found not to be touching the apex. A
small square was now refixed with shellac; after 16 h. slight deflection
from the perpendicular and from the card. After an additional day the
radicle became almost straight.

(25.) Square of card fixed laterally to apex of young radicle; after 9 h.
deflection from the perpendicular considerable; after 24 h. deflection
reduced. Refixed a fresh square with shellac: after 24 h. deflection about
40o from the perpendicular and from the card.

(26.) A very small square of card fixed with shellac to apex of young
radicle: after 9 h. the deflection from the perpendicular and from the card
amounted to nearly a right angle; after 24 h. deflection much reduced;
after an additional 24 h. radicle almost straight.

(27.) Square of card fixed with shellac to apex of young radicle: after 9
h. deflection from the card and from the perpendicular a right angle; next
morning quite straight. Refixed a square laterally with shellac; after 9 h.
a little deflection, which after 24 h. increased to nearly 20o from the
perpendicular and from the card.

(28.) Square of card fixed with shellac; after 9 h. some deflection; next
morning the card dropped off; refixed it with shellac; it again became
loose and was refixed; and now on the third trial the radicle was deflected
after 14 h. at right angles from the card.

(29.) A small square of card was first fixed with thick gum-water to the
apex. It produced a slight effect but soon fell off. A similar square was
now affixed laterally with shellac: after 9 h. the radicle was deflected
nearly 45o from the perpendicular and from the card. After 36 additional
hours angle of deflection reduced to about 30o.

(30.) A very small piece, less than 1/20th of an inch square, of thin
tin-foil fixed with shellac to the apex of a young radicle; after 24 h. no
effect. Tin-foil removed, and a small square of sanded card fixed with
shellac; after 9 h. deflection at nearly right angles from the
perpendicular and from the card. Next
[page 139]
morning deflection reduced to about 40o from the perpendicular.

(31.) A splinter of thin glass gummed to apex, after 9 h. no effect, but it
was then found not to be touching the apex of the radicle. Next morning a
square of card was fixed with shellac to it, and after 9 h. radicle greatly
deflected from the card. After two additional days the deflection had
decreased and was only 35o from the perpendicular.

(32.) Small square of sanded card, attached with thick gum-water laterally
to the apex of a long straight radicle: after 9 h. greatly deflected from
the perpendicular and from the card. Curvature extended for a length of .22
of an inch from the apex. After 3 additional hours terminal portion
deflected at right angles from the perpendicular. Next morning the curved
portion was .36 in length.

(33.) Square of card gummed to apex: after 15 h. deflected at nearly 90o
from the perpendicular and from the card.

(34.) Small oblong of sanded card gummed to apex: after 15 h. deflected 90o
from the perpendicular and from the card: in the course of the three
following days the terminal portion became much contorted and ultimately
coiled into a helix.

(35.) Square of card gummed to apex: after 9 h. deflected from card: after
24 h. from time of attachment greatly deflected obliquely and partly in
opposition to Sachs' curvature.

(36.) Small piece of card, rather less than 1/20th of an inch square,
gummed to apex: in 9 h. considerably deflected from card and in opposition
to Sachs' curvature; after 24 h. greatly deflected in the same direction.
After an additional day the extreme tip was curved towards the card.

(37.) Square of card, gummed to apex in front, caused after 8 h. 30 m.
hardly any effect; refixed fresh square laterally, after 15 h. deflected
almost 90o from the perpendicular and from the card. After 2 additional
days deflection much reduced.

(38.) Square of card gummed to apex: after 9 h. much deflection, which
after 24 h. from time of fixing increased to nearly 90o. After an
additional day terminal portion was curled into a loop, and on the
following day into a helix.

(39.) Small oblong piece of card gummed to apex, nearly in front, but a
little to one side; in 9 h. slightly deflected in the direction of Sachs'
curvature, but rather obliquely, and to side opposite to card. Next day
more curved in the same direction, and after 2 additional days coiled into
a ring.
[page 140]

(40.) Square of card gummed to apex: after 9 h. slightly curved from card;
next morning radicle straight, and apex had grown beyond the card. Refixed
another square laterally with shellac; in 9 h. deflected laterally, but
also in the direction of Sachs' curvature. After 2 additional days'
curvature considerably increased in the same direction.

(41.) Little square of tin-foil fixed with gum to one side of apex of a
young and short radicle: after 15 h. no effect, but tin-foil had become
displaced. A little square of card was now gummed to one side of apex,
which after 8 h. 40 m. was slightly deflected; in 24 h. from the time of
attachment deflected at 90o from the perpendicular and from the card; after
9 additional hours became hooked, with the apex pointing to the zenith. In
3 days from the time of attachment the terminal portion of the radicle
formed a ring or circle.

(42.) A little square of thick letter-paper gummed to the apex of a
radicle, which after 9 h. was deflected from it. In 24 h. from time when
the paper was affixed the deflection much increased, and after 2 additional
days it amounted to 50o from the perpendicular and from the paper.

(43.) A narrow chip of a quill was fixed with shellac to the apex of a
radicle. After 9 h. no effect; after 24 h. moderate deflection, but now the
quill had ceased to touch the apex. Removed quill and gummed a little
square of card to apex, which after 8 h. caused slight deflection. On the
fourth day from the first attachment of any object, the extreme tip was
curved towards the card.

(44.) A rather long and narrow splinter of extremely thin glass, fixed with
shellac to apex, it caused in 9 h. slight deflection, which disappeared in
24 h.; the splinter was then found not touching the apex. It was twice
refixed, with nearly similar results, that is, it caused slight deflection,
which soon disappeared. On the fourth day from the time of first attachment
the tip was bent towards the splinter.]

From these experiments it is clear that the apex of the radicle of the bean
is sensitive to contact, and that it causes the upper part to bend away
from the touching object. But before giving a summary of the results, it
will be convenient briefly to give a few other observations. Bits of very
thin glass and little squares
[page 141]
of common card were affixed with thick gum-water to the tips of the
radicles of seven beans, as a preliminary trial. Six of these were plainly
acted on, and in two cases the radicles became coiled up into complete
loops. One radicle was curved into a semi-circle in so short a period as 6
h. 10 m. The seventh radicle which was not affected was apparently sickly,
as it became brown on the following day; so that it formed no real
exception. Some of these trials were made in the early spring during cold
weather in a sitting-room, and others in a greenhouse, but the temperature
was not recorded. These six striking cases almost convinced us that the
apex was sensitive, but of course we determined to make many more trials.
As we had noticed that the radicles grew much more quickly when subjected
to considerable heat, and as we imagined that heat would increase their
sensitiveness, vessels with germinating beans suspended in damp air were
placed on a chimney-piece, where they were subjected during the greater
part of the day to a temperature of between 69o and 72o F.; some, however,
were placed in the hot-house where the temperature was rather higher. Above
two dozen beans were thus tried; and when a square of glass or card did not
act, it was removed, and a fresh one affixed, this being often done thrice
to the same radicle. Therefore between five and six dozen trials were
altogether made. But there was moderately distinct deflection from the
perpendicular and from the attached object in only one radicle out of this
large number of cases. In five other cases there was very slight and
doubtful deflection. We were astonished at this result, and concluded that
we had made some inexplicable mistake in the first six experiments. But
before finally relinquishing the subject, we resolved to make one
[page 142]
other trial for it occurred to us that sensitiveness is easily affected by
external conditions, and that radicles growing naturally in the earth in
the early spring would not be subjected to a temperature nearly so high as
70o F. We therefore allowed the radicles of 12 beans to grow at a
temperature of between 55o and 60o F. The result was that in every one of
these cases (included in the above-described experiments) the radicle was
deflected in the course of a few hours from the attached object. All the
above recorded successful trials, and some others presently to be given,
were made in a sitting-room at the temperatures just specified. It
therefore appears that a temperature of about, or rather above, 70o F.
destroys the sensitiveness of the radicles, either directly, or indirectly
through abnormally accelerated growth; and this curious fact probably
explains why Sachs, who expressly states that his beans were kept at a high
temperature, failed to detect the sensitiveness of the apex of the radicle.

But other causes interfere with this sensibility. Eighteen radicles were
tried with little squares of sanded card, some affixed with shellac and
some with gum-water, during the few last days of 1878, and few first days
of the next year. They were kept in a room at the proper temperature during
the day, but were probably too cold at night, as there was a hard frost at
the time. The radicles looked healthy but grew very slowly. The result was
that only 6 out of the 18 were deflected from the attached cards, and this
only to a slight degree and at a very slow rate. These radicles therefore
presented a striking contrast with the 44 above described. On March 6th and
7th, when the temperature of the room varied between 53o and 59o F., eleven
germinating beans were tried in the
[page 143]
same manner, and now every one of the radicles became curved away from the
cards, though one was only slightly deflected. Some horticulturists believe
that certain kinds of seeds will not germinate properly in the middle of
the winter, although kept at a right temperature. If there really is any
proper period for the germination of the bean, the feeble degree of
sensibility of the above radicles may have resulted from the trial having
been made in the middle of the winter, and not simply from the nights being
too cold. Lastly, the radicles of four beans, which from some innate cause
germinated later than all the others of the same lot, and which grew slowly
though appearing healthy, were similarly tried, and even after 24 h. they
were hardly at all deflected from the attached cards. We may therefore
infer that any cause which renders the growth of the radicles either slower
or more rapid than the normal rate, lessens or annuls the sensibility of
their tips to contact. It deserves particular attention that when the
attached objects failed to act, there was no bending of any kind, excepting
Sachs' curvature. The force of our evidence would have been greatly
weakened if occasionally, though rarely, the radicles had become curved in
any direction independently of the attached objects. In the foregoing
numbered paragraphs, however, it may be observed that the extreme tip
sometimes becomes, after a considerable interval of time, abruptly curved
towards the bit of card; but this is a totally distinct phenomenon, as will
presently be explained.

Summary of the Results of the foregoing Experiments on the Radicles of
Vicia faba.--Altogether little squares (about 1/20th of an inch), generally
of sanded paper as stiff as thin card (between .15 and .20 mm. in
thickness), sometimes of ordinary card, or little frag-
[page 144]
ments of very thin glass etc., were affixed at different times to one side
of the conical tips of 55 radicles. The 11 last-mentioned cases, but not
the preliminary ones, are here included. The squares, etc., were most
commonly affixed with shellac, but in 19 cases with thick gum-water. When
the latter was used, the squares were sometimes found, as previously
stated, to be separated from the apex by a layer of thick fluid, so that
there was no contact, and consequently no bending of the radicle; and such
few cases were not recorded. But in every instance in which shellac was
employed, unless the square fell off very soon, the result was recorded. In
several instances when the squares became displaced, so as to stand
parallel to the radicle, or were separated by fluid from the apex, or soon
fell off, fresh squares were attached, and these cases (described under the
numbered paragraphs) are here included. Out of 55 radicles experimented on
under the proper temperature, 52 became bent, generally to a considerable
extent from the perpendicular, and away from the side to which the object
was attached. Of the three failures, one can be accounted for, as the
radicle became sickly on the following day; and a second was observed only
during 11 h. 30 m. As in several cases the terminal growing part of the
radicle continued for some time to bend from the attached object, it formed
itself into a hook, with the apex pointing to the zenith, or even into a
ring, and occasionally into a spire or helix. It is remarkable that these
latter cases occurred more frequently when objects were attached with thick
gum-water, which never became dry, than when shellac was employed. The
curvature was often well-marked in from 7 h. to 11 h.; and in one instance
a semicircle was formed in 6 h. 10 m, from the time
[page 145]
of attachment. But in order to see the phenomenon as well displayed as in
the above described cases, it is indispensable that the bits of card, etc.,
should be made to adhere closely to one side of the conical apex; that
healthy radicles should be selected and kept at not too high or too low a
temperature, and apparently that the trials should not be made in the
middle of the winter.

In ten instances, radicles which had curved away from a square of card or
other object attached to their tips, straightened themselves to a certain
extent, or even completely, in the course of from one to two days from the
time of attachment. This was more especially apt to occur when the
curvature was slight. But in one instance (No. 27) a radicle which in 9 h.
had been deflected about 90o from the perpendicular, became quite straight
in 24 h. from the period of attachment. With No. 26, the radicle was almost
straight in 48 h. We at first attributed the straightening process to the
radicles becoming accustomed to a slight stimulus, in the same manner as a
tendril or sensitive petiole becomes accustomed to a very light loop of
thread, and unbends itself though the loop remains still suspended; but
Sachs states* that radicles of the bean placed horizontally in damp air
after curving downwards through geotropism, straighten themselves a little
by growth along their lower or concave sides. Why this should occur is not
clear: but perhaps it likewise occurred in the above ten cases. There is
another occasional movement which must not be passed over: the tip of the
radicle, for a length of from 2 to 3 mm., was found in six instances,

* 'Arbeiten Bot. Instit., Würzburg,' Heft iii. p. 456.
[page 146]

after an interval of about 24 or more hours, bent towards the bit of still
attached card,--that is, in a direction exactly opposite to the previously
induced curvature of the whole growing part for a length of from 7 to 8 mm.
This occurred chiefly when the first curvature was small, and when an
object had been affixed more than once to the apex of the same radicle. The
attachment of a bit of card by shellac to one side of the tender apex may
sometimes mechanically prevent its growth; or the application of thick
gum-water more than once to the same side may injure it; and then checked
growth on this side with continued growth on the opposite and unaffected
side would account for the reversed curvature of the apex.

Various trials were made for ascertaining, as far as we could, the nature
and degree of irritation to which the apex must be subjected, in order that
the terminal growing part should bend away, as if to avoid the cause of
irritation. We have seen in the numbered experiments, that a little square
of rather thick letter-paper gummed to the apex induced, though slowly,
considerable deflection. Judging from several cases in which various
objects had been affixed with gum, and had soon become separated from the
apex by a layer of fluid, as well as from some trials in which drops of
thick gum-water alone had been applied, this fluid never causes bending. We
have also seen in the numbered experiments that narrow splinters of quill
and of very thin glass, affixed with shellac, caused only a slight degree
of deflection, and this may perhaps have been due to the shellac itself.
Little squares of goldbeaters' skin, which is excessively thin, were
damped, and thus made to adhere to one side of the tips of two radicles;
one of these, after 24 h., produced no effect; nor did the
[page 147]
other in 8 h., within which time squares of card usually act; but after 24
h. there was slight deflection.

An oval bead, or rather cake, of dried shellac, 1.01 mm. in length and 0.63
in breadth, caused a radicle to become deflected at nearly right angles in
the course of only 6 h.; but after 23 h. it had nearly straightened itself.
A very small quantity of dissolved shellac was spread over a bit of card,
and the tips of 9 radicles were touched laterally with it; only two of them
became slightly deflected to the side opposite to that bearing the speck of
dried shellac, and they afterwards straightened themselves. These specks
were removed, and both together weighed less than 1/100th of a grain; so
that a weight of rather less than 1/200th of a grain (0.32 mg.) sufficed to
excite movement in two out of the nine radicles. Here then we have
apparently reached nearly the minimum weight which will act.

A moderately thick bristle (which on measurement was found rather
flattened, being 0.33 mm. in one diameter, and 0.20 mm. in the other) was
cut into lengths of about 1/20th of an inch. These after being touched with
thick gum-water, were placed on the tips of eleven radicles. Three of them
were affected; one being deflected in 8 h. 15 m. to an angle of about 90o
from the perpendicular; a second to the same amount when looked at after 9
h.; but after 24 h. from the time of first attachment the deflection had
decreased to only 19o; the third was only slightly deflected after 9 h.,
and the bit of bristle was then found not touching the apex; it was
replaced, and after 15 additional hours the deflection amounted to 26o from
the perpendicular. The remaining eight radicles were not at all acted on by
the bits of bristle, so that we here appear to have nearly reached the
minimum
[page 148]
of size of an object which will act on the radicle of the bean. But it is
remarkable that when the bits of bristle did act, that they should have
acted so quickly and efficiently.

As the apex of a radicle in penetrating the ground must be pressed on all
sides, we wished to learn whether it could distinguish between harder or
more resisting, and softer substances. A square of the sanded paper, almost
as stiff as card, and a square of extremely thin paper (too thin for
writing on), of exactly the same size (about 1/20th of an inch), were fixed
with shellac on opposite sides of the apices of 12 suspended radicles. The
sanded card was between 0.15 and 0.20 mm. (or between 0.0059 and 0.0079 of
an inch), and the thin paper only 0.045 mm. (or 0.00176 of an inch) in
thickness. In 8 out of the 12 cases there could be no doubt that the
radicle was deflected from the side to which the card-like paper was
attached, and towards the opposite side, bearing the very thin paper. This
occurred in some instances in 9 h., but in others not until 24 h. had
elapsed. Moreover, some of the four failures can hardly be considered as
really failures: thus, in one of them, in which the radicle remained quite
straight, the square of thin paper was found, when both were removed from
the apex, to have been so thickly coated with shellac that it was almost as
stiff as the card: in the second case, the radicle was bent upwards into a
semicircle, but the deflection was not directly from the side bearing the
card, and this was explained by the two squares having become cemented
laterally together, forming a sort of stiff gable, from which the radicle
was deflected: in the third case, the square of card had been fixed by
mistake in front, and though there was deflection from it, this might have
been due to Sachs' curvature:
[page 149]
in the fourth case alone no reason could be assigned why the radicle had
not been at all deflected. These experiments suffice to prove that the apex
of the radicle possesses the extraordinary power of discriminating between
thin card and very thin paper, and is deflected from the side pressed by
the more resisting or harder substance.

Some trials were next made by irritating the tips without any object being
left in contact with them. Nine radicles, suspended over water, had their
tips rubbed, each six times with a needle, with sufficient force to shake
the whole bean; the temperature was favourable, viz. about 63o F. In 7 out
of these cases no effect whatever was produced; in the eighth case the
radicle became slightly deflected from, and in the ninth case slightly
deflected towards, the rubbed side; but these two latter opposed curvatures
were probably accidental, as radicles do not always grow perfectly straight
downwards. The tips of two other radicles were rubbed in the same manner
for 15 seconds with a little round twig, two others for 30 seconds, and two
others for 1 minute, but without any effect being produced. We may
therefore conclude from these 15 trials that the radicles are not sensitive
to temporary contact, but are acted on only by prolonged, though very
slight, pressure.

We then tried the effects of cutting off a very thin slice parallel to one
of the sloping sides of the apex, as we thought that the wound would cause
prolonged irritation, which might induce bending towards the opposite side,
as in the case of an attached object. Two preliminary trials were made:
firstly, slices were cut from the radicles of 6 beans suspended in damp
air, with a pair of scissors, which, though sharp, probably caused
considerable crushing, and no curva-
[page 150]
ture followed. Secondly, thin slices were cut with a razor obliquely off
the tips of three radicles similarly suspended; and after 44 h. two were
found plainly bent from the sliced surface; and the third, the whole apex
of which had been cut off obliquely by accident, was curled upwards over
the bean, but it was not clearly ascertained whether the curvature had been
at first directed from the cut surface. These results led us to pursue the
experiment, and 18 radicles, which had grown vertically downwards in damp
air, had one side of their conical tips sliced off with a razor. The tips
were allowed just to enter the water in the jars, and they were exposed to
a temperature 14o - 16o C. (57o - 61o F.). The observations were made at
different times. Three were examined 12 h. after being sliced, and were all
slightly curved from the cut surface; and the curvature increased
considerably after an additional 12 h. Eight were examined after 19 h.;
four after 22 h. 30 m.; and three after 25 h. The final result was that out
of the 18 radicles thus tried, 13 were plainly bent from the cut surface
after the above intervals of time; and one other became so after an
additional interval of 13 h. 30 m. So that only 4 out of the 18 radicles
were not acted on. To these 18 cases the 3 previously mentioned ones should
be added. It may, therefore, be concluded that a thin slice removed by a
razor from one side of the conical apex of the radicle causes irritation,
like that from an attached object, and induces curvature from the injured
surface.

Lastly, dry caustic (nitrate of silver) was employed to irritate one side
of the apex. If one side of the apex or of the whole terminal growing part
of a radicle, is by any means killed or badly injured, the other side
continues to grow; and this causes the part
[page 151]
to bend over towards the injured side.* But in the following experiments we
endeavoured, generally with success, to irritate the tips on one side,
without badly injuring them. This was effected by first drying the tip as
far as possible with blotting-paper, though it still remained somewhat
damp, and then touching it once with quite dry caustic. Seventeen radicles
were thus treated, and were suspended in moist air over water at a
temperature of 58o F. They were examined after an interval of 21 h. or 24h.
The tips of two were found blackened equally all round, so that they could
tell nothing and were rejected, 15 being left. Of these, 10 were curved
from the side which had been touched, where there was a minute brown or
blackish mark. Five of these radicles, three of which were already slightly
deflected, were allowed to enter the water in the jar, and were re-examined
after an additional interval of 27 h. (i.e. in 48 h. after the application
of the caustic), and now four of them had become hooked, being bent from
the discoloured side, with their points directed to the zenith; the fifth
remained unaffected and straight. Thus 11 radicles out of the 15 were acted
on. But the curvature of the four just described was so plain, that they
alone would have sufficed to show that the radicles of the bean bend away
from that side of the apex which has been slightly irritated by caustic.

The Power of an Irritant on the apex of the Radicle

* Ciesielski found this to be the case ('Untersuchungen über die
Abwartskrümmung der Wurzel,' 1871, p. 28) after burning with heated
platinum one side of a radicle. So did we when we painted longitudinally
half of the whole length of 7 radicles, suspended over water, with a thick
layer of grease, which is very injurious or even fatal to growing parts;
for after 48 hours five of these radicles were curved towards the greased
side, two remaining straight.
[page 152]

of the Bean, compared with that of Geotropism.--We know that when a little
square of card or other object is fixed to one side of the tip of a
vertically dependent radicle, the growing part bends from it often into a
semicircle, in opposition to geotropism, which force is conquered by the
effect of the irritation from the attached object. Radicles were therefore
extended horizontally in damp air, kept at the proper low temperature for
full sensitiveness, and squares of card were affixed with shellac on the
lower sides of their tips, so that if the squares acted, the terminal
growing part would curve upwards. Firstly, eight beans were so placed that
their short, young, horizontally extended radicles would be simultaneously
acted on both by geotropism and by Sachs' curvature, if the latter came
into play; and they all eight became bowed downwards to the centre of the
earth in 20 h., excepting one which was only slightly acted on. Two of them
were a little bowed downwards in only 5 h.! Therefore the cards, affixed to
the lower sides of their tips, seemed to produce no effect; and geotropism
easily conquered the effects of the irritation thus caused. Secondly, 5
oldish radicles, 1 ½ inch in length, and therefore less sensitive than the
above-mentioned young ones, were similarly placed and similarly treated.
From what has been seen on many other occasions, it may be safely inferred
that if they had been suspended vertically they would have bent away from
the cards; and if they had been extended horizontally, without cards
attached to them, they would have quickly bent vertically downwards through
geotropism; but the result was that two of these radicles were still
horizontal after 23 h.; two were curved only slightly, and the fifth as
much as 40o beneath the horizon. Thirdly, 5 beans were fastened
[page 153]
with their flat surfaces parallel to the cork-lid, so that Sachs' curvature
would not tend to make the horizontally extended radicles turn either
upwards or downwards, and little squares of card were affixed as before, to
the lower sides of their tips. The result was that all five radicles were
bent down, or towards the centre of the earth, after only 8 h. 20 m. At the
same time and within the same jars, 3 radicles of the same age, with
squares affixed to one side, were suspended vertically; and after 8 h. 20
m. they were considerably deflected from the cards, and therefore curved
upwards in opposition to geotropism. In these latter cases the irritation
from the squares had over-powered geotropism; whilst in the former cases,
in which the radicles were extended horizontally, geotropism had
overpowered the irritation. Thus within the same jars, some of the radicles
were curving upwards and others downwards at the same time--these opposite
movements depending on whether the radicles, when the squares were first
attached to them, projected vertically down, or were extended horizontally.
This difference in their behaviour seems at first inexplicable, but can, we
believe, be simply explained by the difference between the initial power of
the two forces under the above circumstances, combined with the well-known
principle of the after-effects of a stimulus. When a young and sensitive
radicle is extended horizontally, with a square attached to the lower side
of the tip, geotropism acts on it at right angles, and, as we have seen, is
then evidently more efficient than the irritation from the square; and the
power of geotropism will be strengthened at each successive period by its
previous action--that is, by its after-effects. On the other hand, when a
square is affixed to a vertically dependent radicle, and the apex begins to
[page 154]
curve upwards, this movement will be opposed by geotropism acting only at a
very oblique angle, and the irritation from the card will be strengthened
by its previous action. We may therefore conclude that the initial power of
an irritant on the apex of the radicle of the bean, is less than that of
geotropism when acting at right angles, but greater than that of geotropism
when acting obliquely on it.

Sensitiveness of the tips of the Secondary Radicles of the Bean to
contact.--All the previous observations relate to the main or primary
radicle. Some beans suspended to cork-lids, with their radicles dipping
into water, had developed secondary or lateral radicles, which were
afterwards kept in very damp air, at the proper low temperature for full
sensitiveness. They projected, as usual, almost horizontally, with only a
slight downward curvature, and retained this position during several days.
Sachs has shown* that these secondary roots are acted on in a peculiar
manner by geotropism, so that if displaced they reassume their former
sub-horizontal position, and do not bend vertically downwards like the
primary radicle. Minute squares of the stiff sanded paper were affixed by
means of shellac (but in some instances with thick gum-water) to the tips
of 39 secondary radicles of different ages, generally the uppermost ones.
Most of the squares were fixed to the lower sides of the apex, so that if
they acted the radicle would bend upwards; but some were fixed laterally,
and a few on the upper side. Owing to the extreme tenuity of these
radicles, it was very difficult to attach the square to the actual apex.
Whether owing to this or some other circumstance, only nine of the squares
induced any
* 'Arbeiten Bot. Inst., Würzburg,' Heft iv. 1874, p. 605-617.
[page 155]

curvature. The curvature amounted in some cases to about 45o above the
horizon, in others to 90o, and then the tip pointed to the zenith. In one
instance a distinct upward curvature was observed in 8 h. 15 m., but
usually not until 24 h. had elapsed. Although only 9 out of 39 radicles
were affected, yet the curvature was so distinct in several of them, that
there could be no doubt that the tip is sensitive to slight contact, and
that the growing part bends away from the touching object. It is possible
that some secondary radicles are more sensitive than others; for Sachs has
proved* the interesting fact that each individual secondary radicle
possesses its own peculiar constitution.

Sensitiveness to contact of the Primary Radicle, a little above the apex,
in the Bean (Vicia faba) and Pea (Pisum sativum).--The sensitiveness of the
apex of the radicle in the previously described cases, and the consequent
curvature of the upper part from the touching object or other source of
irritation, is the more remarkable, because Sachs** has shown that pressure
at the distance of a few millimeters above the apex causes the radicle to
bend, like a tendril, towards the touching object. By fixing pins so that
they pressed against the radicles of beans suspended vertically in damp
air, we saw this kind of curvature; but rubbing the part with a twig or
needle for a few minutes produced no effect. Haberlandt remarks,*** that
these radicles in breaking through the seed-coats often rub and press
against the ruptured edges, and consequently bend round them. As little
squares of the card-like paper affixed with shellac to the tips were highly
efficient in causing the radicles to bend away from them, similar pieces
(of about 1/20th

* 'Arbeiten Bot. Instit., Würzburg,' Heft, iv. 1874, p. 620.

** Ibid. Heft iii. 1873, p. 437.

*** 'Die Schutzeinrichtungen der Keimpflanze,' 1877, p. 25.
[page 156]

inch square, or rather less) were attached in the same manner to one side
of the radicle at a distance of 3 or 4 mm. above the apex. In our first
trial on 15 radicles no effect was produced. In a second trial on the same
number, three became abruptly curved (but only one strongly) towards the
card within 24 h. From these cases we may infer that the pressure from a
bit of card affixed with shellac to one side above the apex, is hardly a
sufficient irritant; but that it occasionally causes the radicle to bend
like a tendril towards this side.

We next tried the effect of rubbing several radicles at a distance of 4 mm.
from the apex for a few seconds with lunar caustic (nitrate of silver); and
although the radicles had been wiped dry and the stick of caustic was dry,
yet the part rubbed was much injured and a slight permanent depression was
left. In such cases the opposite side continues to grow, and the radicle
necessarily becomes bent towards the injured side. But when a point 4 mm.
from the apex was momentarily touched with dry caustic, it was only faintly
discoloured, and no permanent injury was caused. This was shown by several
radicles thus treated straightening themselves after one or two days; yet
at first they became curved towards the touched side, as if they had been
there subjected to slight continued pressure. These cases deserve notice,
because when one side of the apex was just touched with caustic, the
radicle, as we have seen, curved itself in an opposite direction, that is,
away from the touched side.

The radicle of the common pea at a point a little above the apex is rather
more sensitive to continued pressure than that of the bean, and bends
towards the pressed side.* We experimented on a variety (York-

* Sachs, 'Arbeiten Bot. Institut., Würzburg,' Heft iii. p. 438.
[page 157]

shire Hero) which has a much wrinkled tough skin, too large for the
included cotyledons; so that out of 30 peas which had been soaked for 24 h.
and allowed to germinate on damp sand, the radicles of three were unable to
escape, and were crumpled up in a strange manner within the skin; four
other radicles were abruptly bent round the edges of the ruptured skin
against which they had pressed. Such abnormalities would probably never, or
very rarely, occur with forms developed in a state of nature and subjected
to natural selection. One of the four radicles just mentioned in doubling
backwards came into contact with the pin by which the pea was fixed to the
cork-lid; and now it bent at right angles round the pin, in a direction
quite different from that of the first curvature due to contact with the
ruptured skin; and it thus afforded a good illustration of the tendril-like
sensitiveness of the radicle a little above the apex.

Little squares of the card-like paper were next affixed to radicles of the
pea at 4 mm. above the apex, in the same manner as with the bean.
Twenty-eight radicles suspended vertically over water were thus treated on
different occasions, and 13 of them became curved towards the cards. The
greatest degree of curvature amounted to 62o from the perpendicular; but so
large an angle was only once formed. On one occasion a slight curvature was
perceptible after 5 h. 45 m., and it was generally well-marked after 14 h.
There can therefore be no doubt that with the pea, irritation from a bit of
card attached to one side of the radicle above the apex suffices to induce
curvature.

Squares of card were attached to one side of the tips of 11 radicles within
the same jars in which the above trials were made, and five of them became
plainly, and one slightly, curved away from this side. Other
[page 158]
analogous cases will be immediately described. The fact is here mentioned
because it was a striking spectacle, showing the difference in the
sensitiveness of the radicle in different parts, to behold in the same jar
one set of radicles curved away from the squares on their tips, and another
