bald people at all. On the other hand, there were no beards or mustaches
in the whole crowd; every face was bare!

"Like a lot of Chinamen," said Van Emmon in an undertone; "can't tell
one from another." But Billie pointed out that this was not strictly
true; a close inspection of the faces showed an extremely wide range of
distinction. No two chins in the crowd were exactly alike, although not
one of them showed any of the resolute firmness which is admired on the
Earth. All were weak, yet different.

Neither were there any prominent noses, although there were none that
could have been called insignificant. And while every pair of eyes in
the place was large, as large as Estra's, yet there was every desirable
color and expression.

To sum it all up, and to use the doctor's words: "They've developed a
standard type, all right, just as the characteristic American face is
the standard Earth type; but--did you ever see such variations?"

Nevertheless, the most striking thing about these people to the eyes of
the visitors was their mutual resemblance. For one thing, there seemed
to be no nervous people present. There were many children in the crowd,
too; yet all sat very still, and only an occasional movement of the
hands served to indicate consciousness. In this sense, they were all
remarkably well bred.

In another, they were remarkably rude. At any given moment a good half
of the people were eating, or, rather, sipping liquids of various sorts
from small tumblers. Probably every person in the house, before the
affair was over, had imbibed two or three ounces of fluid; but not once
was the matter apologized for, nor the four invited to partake.

"So this may be the outcome of our outrageous habit of eating sweetmeats
at theaters," muttered the doctor. And again noting the hairless faces:
"Just what I said when men first began using those depilatories instead
of shaving--no more beards!"

But it was Billie who explained the invariable crop of hair. "No use to
look for baldness; they don't wear hats! Why should they, since there's
neither sun nor rain to protect their heads from?"

Mainly, however, the architect was interested in the building itself. To
her, the most striking feature was not the tremendously arched dome, nor
yet the remarkable system of bracing which dispensed with any columns in
all that vast space. It was something simpler--there were no aisles.

"Now, what do you make of that?" the girl asked Van Emmon. "How do they
ever get to their places?" But he could not suggest anything more than
to recall an individual elevator scheme once proposed.

To Smith, one object of interest was the telephone system. Remarkably
like those used on the Earth, one was located in each of the tiny glass
cages. He was likewise puzzled to account for the ventilation system;
each cage was apparently air-tight, yet no Venusian showed any
discomfort.

But the geologist, for want of anything strictly within his professional
range, interested himself in trying to fathom the moral attitude of
these people. He was still suspicious of them, notwithstanding a growing
tendency to like every one of their pleasant, really agreeable faces.
There was neither solemnity, sourness, nor bitterness to be seen
anywhere; at the same time, there was no sign of levity. In every
countenance was the same inexplicable mixture of wisdom and benevolence
that distinguished Estra. Nowhere was there hostility, and nowhere was
there crudity. Somehow, the big geologist would have felt more at home
had he seen something antagonistic. Essentially, Van Emmon was a
fighter.

At last the four felt their attention lagging. Novelties always pall
quickly, no matter how striking. Estra sensed the feeling and inquired:

"Which of you will do the honors?"

Instinctively the three younger folk turned to the doctor. He made no
protest, but stepped at once to one of the microphones, put on his most
impressive professional face, and began:

"My friends"--and Van Emmon noted a pleased look come into every face
about them--"my friends, I do not need to state how significant this
meeting is to us all. From what Estra has said, I gather that you have
informed yourselves regarding us, in some manner which he has promised
to make clear. At all events, I am exceedingly anxious to see your
astronomical apparatus."

At this a broad smile came to many of the faces before him; but he went
on, unnoticing: "Certainly there is not much I could tell you which you
do not already know; Estra's use of our language proves this. I only
need to assure you that we will be glad to answer any questions that may
occur to you. It goes without saying that we, of course, are filled with
delight to find your planet so wondrously and happily populated,
especially after our experience on Mercury, of which, I presume, you are
informed."

Apparently they were. The doctor went on: "You may be sure that we are
fairly bursting with questions. However, we are content to become
informed as Estra sees fit to guide us.

"There is just one thing, more than any other, which I would like to
know at this time. Why is it that, although you all show a great lack of
exercise, and are continually eating, you never appear to be healthy?"

Instantly a Venusian in the fifth row, to the doctor's right, touched
his phone and replied: "It is a matter of diet. We have nothing but
'absolute' foods; if you understand what that means."

And from that time on, despite the fact that the explorers asked
questions which, at home, would have found hundreds ready and able to
answer, on Venus only one person answered any given question, and always
without any apparent prearrangement. For a long time they could not
account for this.

The doctor motioned for Smith to take his place. The engineer looked a
little embarrassed, but cleared his throat noisily and said:

"I am especially struck with the fact that each of you sits in a
separate glass pew, or case. Why is this?"

The reply came from one of the few people present who showed any signs
of age. He was, perhaps, sixty, and his hair was fast whitening. He
said:

"For reasons of sanitation. It is not wise to breathe the breath of
another."

"Also," supplemented someone from the other side of that vast pit--
"also, each is thereby enabled to surround himself with the electrical
influences which suit him best."

Smith stepped back, pondering. The doctor looked to the geologist to
take his place, but Van Emmon made way for Billie. At any other time she
would have resented his "woman-first" attitude; now she quickly found
voice.

"How are you able to get along without aisles? It may seem a foolish
question, to you; but on earth we would consider a hall without aisles
about as convenient as a room without a door."

Immediately a Venusian directly in front of her, and on a level with her
eyes, called out: "Watch me, madam." And quite without an effort beyond
touching a button or two, the fellow rose straight into the air, glass
and all, and then floated gently over toward the middle of the hall.

"It probably appears complicated to you," explained the Venusian whose
side he had just left. "We make use of elements not found on your
earth."

Billie's sang froid was not shaken. Instantly she came back
energetically: "Apparently your method overcomes gravitation. Why
haven't you tried to travel away from your planet?"

And she looked around with the air of one who has uttered a poser, only
to have another of the satin-clad people reply, from a point which she
was not able to locate:

"Because enough such power cannot be safely concentrated."

As Billie retired, Van Emmon noted with growing irritation that the
continuously affable aspect of the Venusians had not altered in any way,
unless it was to become even more genial and sure. The big man strode
energetically to the microphone, and the other three noted a general
movement of interest and admiration as the people inspected him.

"Why," demanded he, "do we see no signs of contention? If you are
familiar with conditions on the earth, you surely know that rivalry, in
one form or another, is the accepted basis of life. But all of you,
here, appear to be perfectly happy, and at the same time entirely sure
of yourselves.

"We have just come from a planet where we have seen the principle of
combat, of competition, carried so far that it seems to have wrecked the
race; so you will pardon my curiosity, I am sure. From your faces, one
would conclude that you had abolished self-interest altogether. Just why
are you so--well, extraordinarily self-complacent?" And he thrust out
his aggressive jaw as though to make up for the lack of chins about him.

"Because there is nothing for us to combat, save within ourselves." This
from a wide-faced chap in a bluish-white suit.

"But surely you have rivalry of some sort?"

"No." Another voice added: "Rivalry is the outgrowth of getting a
livelihood; on earth it is inevitable, because men do the work. Here,
everything is done by machines." Still another put in: "Discontent is
the mother of ambition, but we are all content, because each possesses
all he desires."

But the geologist was far from satisfied. "Then," said he vigorously,
"if you have eliminated all contention, you have nullified the great law
of contrasts. You say you are all rich. How do you know, if you have no
poverty to contrast it with?

"On earth, we appreciate warmth because we have experienced cold;
pleasure, because we know pain; happiness, because we have always had
misery with us. If we have not had the one, we cannot value the other.

"If you have never been discontented, how do you know that you are
content?"



VIII

THE KEY-NOTE


For a minute or two it looked as though Van Emmon had raised an
unanswerable question. There was no immediate reply. Even Estra looked
around, as though in wonder at the silence, and seemed on the point of
answering of his own accord when a voice came from a man far up on the
left. He said:

"A little explanation may be wise. To begin with, you will agree that
black is black because white is white; but it doesn't follow that blue
is blue because green is green, or red is red. Blue is blue because it
is neither green nor red nor any other color. It is blue, not because it
contrasts with these other colors, but because it merely differs from
them.

"Now, we on Venus do not need poverty, in order to appreciate wealth.
Instead, each of us is blessed with his own particular choice of wealth.
Each is blessed in a different way; some with children, some with
intellect, some with other matters; and the question of mere quantity
never enters."

"We do not need pain or misery," spoke up someone else, "any more than
you people on the earth require an additional color, in order to
appreciate the variety you already have." And then, from a Venusian with
an especially strong voice:

"That we are really content, we know absolutely. For each of us, in his
own distinctive way, is wholly and peculiarly satisfied."

And it only added to the geologist's irritation to have these striking
statements made in a good-humored, impersonal fashion which totally
disarmed all opposition. That the Venusians were perfectly sure of their
ground, was undeniable; but they had such a cheerful way of looking at
it, as though they didn't care a rap whether Van Emmon agreed or not,
that--If they'd only have shown some spirit! Van Emmon would have liked
it infinitely better if one of them had only become hot about it.

At this point Estra rose in his chair. "I think you had best approach us
from a fresh viewpoint," said he in his unfailingly agreeable manner.
The doctor nodded vigorously, and again Estra closed his eyes in that
odd, hesitating way. Immediately every one in the place, with the
exception of a single person in the lowest row, took flight in his or
her little glass pew. In a moment the great vault overhead was fairly
swarming with people; and in less than a minute the last of them had
floated out through one of the arches in the walls.

Estra opened a panel in the central cage, and admitted the Venusian who
had stayed behind. She--for it appeared to be a young woman--walked with
about the same facility as Estra; but as soon as she had entered the
space, took the seat Estra had vacated, and waited.

The action rather disappointed the doctor. He removed the interpreting
telephone from his head, and asked:

"I rather thought we were going to meet one of your officials, Estra.
We'd hate to go back home without having met your president, or whatever
you call your chief executive."

The two Venusians exchanged smiles, and to the surprise of the explorers
the woman gave the reply, in language as good as Estra's, but an even
sweeter expression: "There is no such thing as a chief executive on
Venus, friends."

"I meant," explained the doctor, rattled, "the chairman of your cabinet,
or council, or whatever it is that regulates your affairs. Perhaps,"
with an inspiration, "I should have said, the speaker of your congress."

The Venusian shook her head, still smiling. She hesitated while
selecting the best words; and the four noted that, while her features
were quite as delicate as Estra's, her face was proportionately larger,
and her whole figure better filled out. No one would have said that she
was pretty, much less beautiful; but none would deny that she was very
good-looking, in a wholesome, intelligent, capable sort of a way. Her
name, Estra told them later, was Myrin; and he explained that he and she
were associated solely because of their mutual interest in the same
planet--the Earth.

Said Myrin: "You are accustomed to the idea of government. We, however,
have outgrown it.

"If you stop to think, you will agree that the purpose of government is
to maintain peace, on the one hand, and to wage war, on the other. Now,
as to war--we haven't even separate nations, any more. So we have no
wars. And as for internal conflict--why should we ever quarrel, when
each of us is assured all that he can possibly want?"

"So you have abolished government?"

"A very long time ago. You on the earth will do the same, as soon as
your people have been educated up to the point of trusting each other."

"You haven't even a congress, then?"

Myrin shook her head. "All questions such as a congress would deal with,
were settled ages ago. You must remember that the material features of
our civilization have not changed for thousands of generations. The only
questions that come up now are purely personal ones, which each must
settle for himself."

Van Emmon, as before, was not at all satisfied. "You say that machinery
does your work for you. I presume you do not mean that literally; there
must be some duties which cannot be performed without human direction,
at least. How do you get these duties accomplished, if you have no
government to compel your people to do them?"

Myrin looked at a loss, either for the answer itself or for the most
suitable words. Estra gave the reply: "Every device we possess is
absolutely automatic. There is not one item in the materials we use but
that was constructed, exactly as you see it now, many thousands of years
ago."

Smith was incredulous. "Do you mean to say that those little glass pews
have been in use all that time?"

Estra nodded, smiling gently at the engineer's amazement. "Like
everything else, they were built to last. You must remember that we do
not have anything like an 'investment,' here; we do not have to consider
the question of 'getting our capital back.' So, if any further
improvements were to be made, they also would be done in a permanent
fashion."

Billie gave an exclamation of bewilderment. "I don't understand! You say
that nothing new has been built, or even replaced, for centuries. How do
you take care of your increase in population?" thinking of the great
crowd that had just left.

Myrin was the one who answered this. As she did so, she got slowly to
her feet; and speaking with the utmost care, watched to be sure that the
four understood her:

"Ever since the roof was put on, our increase of population has been
exactly balanced by our death rate!"

The four followed their guides in silence as they led the way into the
plaza. Now, the space was alive with Venusians. The little cages were
everywhere floating about in the air; some of the people were
laboriously shifting themselves into their aircraft; others were guiding
their "pews" direct to nearby houses. The visitors got plenty of curious
stares from these quiet miracle-workers, who seemed vastly more at home
in the air than on the ground. "As thick as flies," Van Emmon commented.

Estra and Myrin, walking very slowly, took them to a side street, where
two of the cigar-shaped cars were standing. Billie and Smith got in with
Estra, while Van Emmon and the doctor were given seats beside the
Venusian woman. The two cars were connected by telephone, so that in
effect the two parties were one.

By this time, the visitors had become so accustomed to the transparent
material that they felt no uneasiness as the ground receded below them.
Smith, especially, was tremendously impressed with Estra's declaration
that the glass was, except for appearance, nothing more nor less than an
extremely strong, steel alloy.

Propelled by the unexplained forces which the two drivers controlled by
means of buttons in black cases, the two cars began to thread their way
through the great roof-columns; and as they proceeded, the four grew
more and more amazed at the great extent of the city. For miles upon
miles that heterogeneous collection of buildings stretched, unbroken and
without system, until the eye tired of trying to make out the limits of
it.

"What is the name of this city?" asked Billie, secretly hoping that it
might bear some resemblance to "New York." It struck her fancy to assume
that this supermetropolis represented what Gotham, in time, might
become.

Estra did not take his attention from what he was doing, but answered as
readily as ever. "I do not blame you for mistaking this for a city. The
fact is, however, that we have no such thing."

Billie stared at him helplessly. "You've abolished cities, too?"

"Not exactly. In the same sense that we have abolished nations, yes.
Likewise we have abolished states, also counties. Neither have we such a
thing as 'the country,' now.

"My friends, Venus is simply one immense city."



IX

THE SURVIVAL OF ALL


Somehow all four were unwilling to press this question. It did not seem
possible that Estra was right, or, if he was, that they could possibly
understand his explanation, should he give it. The cars flew side by
side for perhaps a hundred miles, while the visitors put in the time in
examining the landscape with the never-ending interest of all aeronauts.

Here and there, in that closely-packed surface, a particularly large
building was to be noted every half mile or so. "Factories?" asked
Billie of Estra, but he shook his head.

"I'll show you factories later on," said he. "What you see are schools."
But most observers would have considered the structures severely plain
for their purpose.

After a long silence: "I'm still looking for streams," said Van Emmon to
Myrin. "Are your rivers as large as ours?"

"We have no rivers," was the calm reply. "Rivers are entirely too
wasteful of water. All our drainage is carried off through underground
canals."

"You haven't done away with your oceans, too, have you?" the geologist
asked, rather sarcastically. But he was scarcely prepared for the reply
he got.

"No; we couldn't get along without them, I am afraid. However, we did
the best we could in their case." And without signaling to Estra she
dove the machine towards the ground. Smith looked for the telephone
wires to snap, but Estra seemed to know, and instantly followed Myrin's
lead. The doctor noticed, and wondered all the more.

And then came another surprise. As the machines neared the surface, a
familiar odor floated in through the open windows of the air-craft; and
the four found themselves looking at each other for signs of
irrationality. A moment, and they saw that they were not mistaken.

For, although that kaleidoscopic expanse of buildings showed not the
slightest break, yet they were now located on the sea. The houses were
packed as closely together as anywhere; apparently all were floating,
yet not ten square yards of open sea could be seen in any one spot.

Van Emmon almost forgot his resentment in his growing wonder. "That gets
me, Myrin! Those houses seem to be merely floating, yet I see no motion
whatever! Why are there no waves?"

The doctor snorted. "Shame on you, Van! Don't let our friends think that
you're an absolute ignoramus." He added: "Venus has no moon, and no
wind, at least under the roof. Therefore, no waves."

Smith put in: "That being the case, there is no chance to start a wave-
motor industry here. Neither," as he thought further, "neither for
water-power. Having no rain in your mountains, Estra, where do you get
your power?"

But it was Myrin who answered. "I suppose you are all familiar with
radium? It is nothing more or less than condensed sunlight, which in
turn is simply electromagnetic waves; although it may take your
scientists a good many centuries to reach that conclusion.

"Well, every particle of the material which composes this planet,
contains radioactivity of some sort; and we long ago discovered a way to
release it and use it. One pound of solid granite yields enough energy
to--well, a great deal of power."

They had now been flying for two hours, and still no end to that
thickly-housed, ever different appearance of the ground. Also, although
they saw a great many birds, they noted no animals. Finally, Billie
could hold in no longer.

"Are we to understand," she demanded of Estra, "that the whole of this
planet is as densely populated as we see it?"

"Just that," replied the Venusian. "Why not? The roof makes our climate
uniform from pole to pole, while our buildings are such that, whether on
land or on sea, they are equally livable."

"But--Estra!" expostulated the girl. "Venus is nearly as big as the
earth. And it looks to be as thickly populated as--as Rhode Island! Why,
you must have a colossal population; let me see." And she scribbled away
in her memorandum book.

But both Smith and the doctor had already worked it out. They looked up,
blinking dazedly.

"Over three hundred billion," murmured the doctor, as though dizzy.

The Venusian checked Smith's correction with, "You dropped one cipher,
doctor. There are three and a half trillion of us!"

"Good lord!" whispered Van Emmon, all his antagonism gone for the
moment. And again the explorers were silent for a long time.

By and by, however--"We have just seen what it meant, there on Mercury,"
said the doctor, in a low voice, "for the principle of 'the survival of
the fit' to be carried to its logical end; for who is to decide what is
fitness, save the fittest? One man, apparently, outlived every one else
on the planet, and then he also died.

"But here you have gone the limit in the other direction. Of course, we
might have known that you long ago abolished poverty, unearned wealth,
pestilence, drunkenness and the other causes of premature death; but as
for three and a half trillion!"

"Nevertheless," remarked Myrin, "every last one of us, once born, lives
to die of old age; and in most cases this means several hundred of your
years."

Smith involuntarily rubbed his eyes; and they all laughed, a nervous
sort of a laugh which left the visitors still in doubt as to their
senses, and their guides' sanity. Van Emmon's suspicions came back with
a rush, and he burst out:

"Say--you'll excuse me, but I can't swallow this! Here you've shown us
houses as thick as leaves; not a sign of a farm, much less an orchard!
No vegetation at all, except for a few flowers!

"Three and a half trillion! All right; let it go at that!" Out came his
chin, and he brought one fist down upon the other as though he were
cracking rocks with a hammer, and with every blow he uttered a word:

"How--do--you--feed--them--all?"



X

LOAVES AND FISHES


Without a word Myrin drove her machine toward the ground, and, as
before, Estra followed despite the lack of any visible signal. Within a
minute the two machines had come to rest, softly and without
disturbance, on the roof of a handsome building, much like an apartment
house. There was the usual transparent elevator, and a minute later the
four were being introduced to the occupants of a typical Venusian house.

These two people, apparently man and wife, did not need to be told why
the explorers had been brought there. They led the way from the dimly
lighted hallway in which the elevator had stopped, into a group of
brightly decorated rooms. Here the four were given seats in the usual
saddellike chairs, and then Myrin answered Van Emmon's question:

"I knew that this point would arise soon, and you will pardon me if I
handle it in a prearranged fashion. I will admit that it is not an easy
question Mr. Van Emmon has put; not because the answer is at all
complicated but, on the contrary, extremely simple."

The four were listening unanimously. Despite himself, Van Emmon was
highly impressed by the Venusian woman's serious manner. Perhaps it was
because, in her earnestness, she was not quite so affable as before. She
went on:

"From where you are sitting, you can see all the rooms in this house.
You will look in vain for anything even remotely resembling a kitchen.
There is not even a dining-room.

"And yet you must not jump to the conclusion that we all use
restaurants. We have no such thing as a public eating place. Or rather,"
and here she spoke very carefully, "rather, every place is an eating
place."

The doctor looked Myrin over as though she were a patient with a new
kind of disease. "You do not mean that literally, of course," said he
kindly.

But she nodded gravely. "You must not misunderstand. Remember, even on
your own planet, the distribution of food is becoming more and more
extensive, until you can now buy something to eat at every crossroads.
We have merely carried the idea to its logical end, so that all
Venusians can obtain food at any time, and at any spot."

She turned in her chair--all the chairs on Venus were pivoted, Estra
said--and touched a button in the wall at her hand. A panel slid
noiselessly aside, and revealed a tiny buffet. At least, Billie labeled
it a buffet, for want of a more accurate term.

For it consisted of a silver bibb, something like the nozzle of a soda-
water fountain above which was a board containing a large number of
tiny, numbered push buttons. Below the bibb was a space in which a cup
might be set, and projecting from a tube at one side was a solid block
of telescoping, transparent cups.

"This," said Myrin, "is the Venusian Nutrition System. There is a
station like this in every room on the planet." And she proceeded to
take a cup from the tube, filling each from the silver faucet while she
pressed a variety of the buttons.

The four watched in silence, and eagerly took what was given to them. It
comprised liquids entirely; liquids of every degree of fluidity, from
some as thin as water to others as thick as gruel. They varied even more
as to color, ranging from actual transparency to a deep chocolate.

"Now, I warn you not to be shocked," said Myrin, "although I fully
expect that you will be. The fact is that we have no other kind of food
than what you see; there are thousands upon thousands of different kinds
and flavors, but they are all fluids. We have nothing whatever in solid
form.

"You see," she explained, "we have no teeth."

All they could do was to stare at her as, with a return of her smile,
she made a sudden gesture across the front of her mouth. Next instant a
