gained by remaining bottled up in Phutra for the rest of our lives.

It was true that Perry might do much with the contents of the
prospector, or iron mole, in which I had brought down the implements of
outer-world civilization; but Perry was a man of peace.  He could never
weld the warring factions of the disrupted federation.  He could never
win new tribes to the empire.  He would fiddle around manufacturing
gun-powder and trying to improve upon it until some one blew him up
with his own invention.  He wasn't practical.  He never would get
anywhere without a balance-wheel--without some one to direct his
energies.

Perry needed me and I needed him.  If we were going to do anything for
Pellucidar we must be free to do it together.

The outcome of it all was that I agreed to the Mahars' proposition.
They promised that Dian would be well treated and protected from every
indignity during my absence.  So I set out with a hundred Sagoths in
search of the little valley which I had stumbled upon by accident, and
which I might and might not find again.

We traveled directly toward Sari.  Stopping at the camp where I had
been captured I recovered my express rifle, for which I was very
thankful.  I found it lying where I had left it when I had been
overpowered in my sleep by the Sagoths who had captured me and slain my
Mezop companions.

On the way I added materially to my map, an occupation which did not
elicit from the Sagoths even a shadow of interest.  I felt that the
human race of Pellucidar had little to fear from these gorilla-men.
They were fighters--that was all.  We might even use them later
ourselves in this same capacity.  They had not sufficient brain power
to constitute a menace to the advancement of the human race.

As we neared the spot where I hoped to find the little valley I became
more and more confident of success.  Every landmark was familiar to me,
and I was sure now that I knew the exact location of the cave.

It was at about this time that I sighted a number of the half-naked
warriors of the human race of Pellucidar.  They were marching across
our front.  At sight of us they halted; that there would be a fight I
could not doubt.  These Sagoths would never permit an opportunity for
the capture of slaves for their Mahar masters to escape them.

I saw that the men were armed with bows and arrows, long lances and
swords, so I guessed that they must have been members of the
federation, for only my people had been thus equipped.  Before Perry
and I came the men of Pellucidar had only the crudest weapons wherewith
to slay one another.

The Sagoths, too, were evidently expecting battle.  With savage shouts
they rushed forward toward the human warriors.

Then a strange thing happened.  The leader of the human beings stepped
forward with upraised hands.  The Sagoths ceased their war-cries and
advanced slowly to meet him.  There was a long parley during which I
could see that I was often the subject of their discourse.  The
Sagoths' leader pointed in the direction in which I had told him the
valley lay.  Evidently he was explaining the nature of our expedition
to the leader of the warriors.  It was all a puzzle to me.

What human being could be upon such excellent terms with the
gorilla-men?

I couldn't imagine.  I tried to get a good look at the fellow, but the
Sagoths had left me in the rear with a guard when they had advanced to
battle, and the distance was too great for me to recognize the features
of any of the human beings.

Finally the parley was concluded and the men continued on their way
while the Sagoths returned to where I stood with my guard.  It was time
for eating, so we stopped where we were and made our meal.  The Sagoths
didn't tell me who it was they had met, and I did not ask, though I
must confess that I was quite curious.

They permitted me to sleep at this halt.  Afterward we took up the last
leg of our journey.  I found the valley without difficulty and led my
guard directly to the cave.  At its mouth the Sagoths halted and I
entered alone.

I noticed as I felt about the floor in the dim light that there was a
pile of fresh-turned rubble there.  Presently my hands came to the spot
where the great secret had been buried.  There was a cavity where I had
carefully smoothed the earth over the hiding-place of the document--the
manuscript was gone!

Frantically I searched the whole interior of the cave several times
over, but without other result than a complete confirmation of my worst
fears.  Someone had been here ahead of me and stolen the great secret.

The one thing within Pellucidar which might free Dian and me was gone,
nor was it likely that I should ever learn its whereabouts.  If a Mahar
had found it, which was quite improbable, the chances were that the
dominant race would never divulge the fact that they had recovered the
precious document.  If a cave man had happened upon it he would have no
conception of its meaning or value, and as a consequence it would be
lost or destroyed in short order.

With bowed head and broken hopes I came out of the cave and told the
Sagoth chieftain what I had discovered.  It didn't mean much to the
fellow, who doubt-less had but little better idea of the contents of
the document I had been sent to fetch to his masters than would the
cave man who in all probability had discovered it.

The Sagoth knew only that I had failed in my mission, so he took
advantage of the fact to make the return journey to Phutra as
disagreeable as possible.  I did not rebel, though I had with me the
means to destroy them all.  I did not dare rebel because of the
consequences to Dian.  I intended demanding her release on the grounds
that she was in no way guilty of the theft, and that my failure to
recover the document had not lessened the value of the good faith I had
had in offering to do so.  The Mahars might keep me in slavery if they
chose, but Dian should be returned safely to her people.

I was full of my scheme when we entered Phutra and I was conducted
directly to the great audience-chamber.  The Mahars listened to the
report of the Sagoth chieftain, and so difficult is it to judge their
emotions from their almost expressionless countenance, that I was at a
loss to know how terrible might be their wrath as they learned that
their great secret, upon which rested the fate of their race, might now
be irretrievably lost.

Presently I could see that she who presided was communicating something
to the Sagoth interpreter--doubt-less something to be transmitted to me
which might give me a forewarning of the fate which lay in store for
me. One thing I had decided definitely: If they would not free Dian I
should turn loose upon Phutra with my little arsenal.  Alone I might
even win to freedom, and if I could learn where Dian was imprisoned it
would be worth the attempt to free her.  My thoughts were interrupted
by the interpreter.

"The mighty Mahars," he said, "are unable to reconcile your statement
that the document is lost with your action in sending it to them by a
special messenger.  They wish to know if you have so soon forgotten the
truth or if you are merely ignoring it."

"I sent them no document," I cried.  "Ask them what they mean."

"They say," he went on after conversing with the Mahar for a moment,
"that just before your return to Phutra, Hooja the Sly One came,
bringing the great secret with him.  He said that you had sent him
ahead with it, asking him to deliver it and return to Sari where you
would await him, bringing the girl with him."

"Dian?" I gasped.  "The Mahars have given over Dian into the keeping of
Hooja."

"Surely," he replied.  "What of it? She is only a gilak," as you or I
would say, "She is only a cow."



CHAPTER VI

A PENDENT WORLD

The Mahars set me free as they had promised, but with strict
injunctions never to approach Phutra or any other Mahar city.  They
also made it perfectly plain that they considered me a dangerous
creature, and that having wiped the slate clean in so far as they were
under obligations to me, they now considered me fair prey.  Should I
again fall into their hands, they intimated it would go ill with me.

They would not tell me in which direction Hooja had set forth with
Dian, so I departed from Phutra, filled with bitterness against the
Mahars, and rage toward the Sly One who had once again robbed me of my
greatest treasure.

At first I was minded to go directly back to Anoroc; but upon second
thought turned my face toward Sari, as I felt that somewhere in that
direction Hooja would travel, his own country lying in that general
direction.

Of my journey to Sari it is only necessary to say that it was fraught
with the usual excitement and adventure, incident to all travel across
the face of savage Pellucidar.  The dangers, however, were greatly
reduced through the medium of my armament.  I often wondered how it had
happened that I had ever survived the first ten years of my life within
the inner world, when, naked and primitively armed, I had traversed
great areas of her beast-ridden surface.

With the aid of my map, which I had kept with great care during my
march with the Sagoths in search of the great secret, I arrived at Sari
at last.  As I topped the lofty plateau in whose rocky cliffs the
principal tribe of Sarians find their cave-homes, a great hue and cry
arose from those who first discovered me.

Like wasps from their nests the hairy warriors poured from their caves.
The bows with their poison-tipped arrows, which I had taught them to
fashion and to use, were raised against me.  Swords of hammered
iron--another of my innovations--menaced me, as with lusty shouts the
horde charged down.

It was a critical moment.  Before I should be recognized I might be
dead.  It was evident that all semblance of intertribal relationship
had ceased with my going, and that my people had reverted to their
former savage, suspicious hatred of all strangers.  My garb must have
puzzled them, too, for never before of course had they seen a man
clothed in khaki and puttees.

Leaning my express rifle against my body I raised both hands aloft.  It
was the peace-sign that is recognized everywhere upon the surface of
Pellucidar.  The charging warriors paused and surveyed me.  I looked
for my friend Ghak, the Hairy One, king of Sari, and presently I saw
him coming from a distance.  Ah, but it was good to see his mighty,
hairy form once more! A friend was Ghak--a friend well worth the
having; and it had been some time since I had seen a friend.

Shouldering his way through the throng of warriors, the mighty
chieftain advanced toward me.  There was an expression of puzzlement
upon his fine features.  He crossed the space between the warriors and
myself, halting before me.

I did not speak.  I did not even smile.  I wanted to see if Ghak, my
principal lieutenant, would recognize me.  For some time he stood there
looking me over carefully.  His eyes took in my large pith helmet, my
khaki jacket, and bandoleers of cartridges, the two revolvers swinging
at my hips, the large rifle resting against my body.  Still I stood
with my hands above my head.  He examined my puttees and my strong tan
shoes--a little the worse for wear now.  Then he glanced up once more
to my face.  As his gaze rested there quite steadily for some moments I
saw recognition tinged with awe creep across his countenance.

Presently without a word he took one of my hands in his and dropping to
one knee raised my fingers to his lips.  Perry had taught them this
trick, nor ever did the most polished courtier of all the grand courts
of Europe perform the little act of homage with greater grace and
dignity.

Quickly I raised Ghak to his feet, clasping both his hands in mine.  I
think there must have been tears in my eyes then--I know I felt too
full for words.  The king of Sari turned toward his warriors.

"Our emperor has come back," he announced.  "Come hither and--"

But he got no further, for the shouts that broke from those savage
throats would have drowned the voice of heaven itself.  I had never
guessed how much they thought of me.  As they clustered around, almost
fighting for the chance to kiss my hand, I saw again the vision of
empire which I had thought faded forever.

With such as these I could conquer a world.  With such as these I WOULD
conquer one! If the Sarians had remained loyal, so too would the
Amozites be loyal still, and the Kalians, and the Suvians, and all the
great tribes who had formed the federation that was to emancipate the
human race of Pellucidar.

Perry was safe with the Mezops; I was safe with the Sarians; now if
Dian were but safe with me the future would look bright indeed.

It did not take long to outline to Ghak all that had befallen me since
I had departed from Pellucidar, and to get down to the business of
finding Dian, which to me at that moment was of even greater importance
than the very empire itself.

When I told him that Hooja had stolen her, he stamped his foot in rage.

"It is always the Sly One!" he cried.  "It was Hooja who caused the
first trouble between you and the Beautiful One.

"It was Hooja who betrayed our trust, and all but caused our recapture
by the Sagoths that time we escaped from Phutra.

"It was Hooja who tricked you and substituted a Mahar for Dian when you
started upon your return journey to your own world.

"It was Hooja who schemed and lied until he had turned the kingdoms one
against another and destroyed the federation.

"When we had him in our power we were foolish to let him live.  Next
time--"

Ghak did not need to finish his sentence.

"He has become a very powerful enemy now," I replied.  "That he is
allied in some way with the Mahars is evidenced by the familiarity of
his relations with the Sagoths who were accompanying me in search of
the great secret, for it must have been Hooja whom I saw conversing
with them just before we reached the valley.  Doubtless they told him
of our quest and he hastened on ahead of us, discovered the cave and
stole the document.  Well does he deserve his appellation of the Sly
One."

With Ghak and his head men I held a number of consultations.  The
upshot of them was a decision to combine our search for Dian with an
attempt to rebuild the crumbled federation.  To this end twenty
warriors were despatched in pairs to ten of the leading kingdoms, with
instructions to make every effort to discover the whereabouts of Hooja
and Dian, while prosecuting their missions to the chieftains to whom
they were sent.

Ghak was to remain at home to receive the various delegations which we
invited to come to Sari on the business of the federation.  Four
hundred warriors were started for Anoroc to fetch Perry and the
contents of the prospector, to the capitol of the empire, which was
also the principal settlements of the Sarians.

At first it was intended that I remain at Sari, that I might be in
readiness to hasten forth at the first report of the discovery of Dian;
but I found the inaction in the face of my deep solicitude for the
welfare of my mate so galling that scarce had the several units
departed upon their missions before I, too, chafed to be actively
engaged upon the search.

It was after my second sleep, subsequent to the departure of the
warriors, as I recall, that I at last went to Ghak with the admission
that I could no longer support the intolerable longing to be personally
upon the trail of my lost love.

Ghak tried to dissuade me, though I could tell that his heart was with
me in my wish to be away and really doing something.  It was while we
were arguing upon the subject that a stranger, with hands above his
head, entered the village.  He was immediately surrounded by warriors
and conducted to Ghak's presence.

The fellow was a typical cave man-squat muscular, and hairy, and of a
type I had not seen before.  His features, like those of all the
primeval men of Pellucidar, were regular and fine.  His weapons
consisted of a stone ax and knife and a heavy knobbed bludgeon of wood.
His skin was very white.

"Who are you?" asked Ghak.  "And whence come you?"

"I am Kolk, son of Goork, who is chief of the Thurians," replied the
stranger.  "From Thuria I have come in search of the land of Amoz,
where dwells Dacor, the Strong One, who stole my sister, Canda, the
Grace-ful One, to be his mate.

"We of Thuria had heard of a great chieftain who has bound together
many tribes, and my father has sent me to Dacor to learn if there be
truth in these stories, and if so to offer the services of Thuria to
him whom we have heard called emperor."

"The stories are true," replied Ghak, "and here is the emperor of whom
you have heard.  You need travel no farther."

Kolk was delighted.  He told us much of the wonderful resources of
