
In order to examine the different rules that govern the question of
shutters, we shall take as an example the type styled the "Guillotine."

This apparatus, as every one knows, is a stiff plate containing an
aperture and passing over the line of the rays of light. Some place
it in front and others behind, while others again place it within the
objective. Let us examine and discuss what occurs in the three cases.
Suppose a rectilinear objective of the kind most usually employed in
instantaneous photography, and an object, A B, that we wish to reproduce
(Fig. 1), the objective being provided with any sort of diaphragm. The
point, A, sends a bundle of rays, a"b", to the first lens. Here they are
slightly refracted, and then go on parallel lines to the second lens,
where they are again refracted and form at A' an image of A. It is this
image that we see upon the ground glass, and which makes an impression
upon the sensitive film. The point, B, behaves in the same way and
gives an image at B', but, as will be at once seen, the image will be
reversed. In our figure, A corresponds to the sky and B to the earth.
If, then, the shutter passes in front of the objective, it will first
allow of the passage of the rays which come from the sky, then, on
continuing its travel, it will unveil the landscape, and lastly the
ground. As it is submitted to the law of the fall of bodies and has a
uniformly increasing velocity, it follows that the time of exposure will
uniformly decrease between A' and B', and that the sky will pose longer
than the foreground. Such a result is contrary to all photographic
rules, which require that objects shall pose so much the longer the
less they are lighted. This position of the "guillotine" shutter is
absolutely false, and must be altogether discarded. If the shutter be
placed behind the objective, it will follow, as a consequence of the
same demonstration, that the time of exposure will go diminishing from
B' to A', and that the foreground will be exposed longer than the sky.
The solution is logical, then, and will permit of obtaining excellent
negatives.

[Illustration: FIG. 1]

Let us now examine how the image, A'B', is formed. The point, A, appears
first, and becomes lighter and lighter up to the moment at which all the
rays that emanate from the point, A, are unveiled. The point, B', is not
yet visible. As the shutter continues its travel the point, B', appears
in its turn and becomes illuminated like the point, A'. At this moment
the objective is completely uncovered; the image, A'B', is perfect, and
possesses its maximum intensity. Then the point, A', gradually becomes
obscured and disappears; and the same is the case with all parts of
A'B'. The image is developed progressively from A' to B', and makes its
impression upon the sensitive plate successively--a fact which, as
may be conceived, may have its importance. If, for example, we are
photographing a ship that is being tossed about by the sea (and we
borrow this example from our colleague, Mr. Davanne), the image of the
top of the mast will not be formed at the same instant as that of the
base, and if the motion of the mast has sufficient extent it may take on
a curved form, due to the fact that it has effected a movement between
the moments during which its apex and base were being photographed.

Upon placing the guillotine shutter in the optical center of the
objective, what will occur? The shutter will permit the passage of an
equal fraction of the rays derived from A and B, that is to say, the
image will be complete from the first instant of the exposure. The
points, A' and B', will be illuminated precisely at the same moment. As
the shutter continues its travel, a fresh quantity of rays coming from A
and B will be admitted, and the image will be illuminated more and more
up to the moment at which all the rays can pass. It will then possess
its maximum intensity. Then a portion of the rays from A and B being
intercepted, the image will become darker and darker until complete
extinction. The image here, then, is not produced successively as in the
former case, but is entire from the beginning. In this case the image of
our mast cannot be misshapen, since it has been accurately photographed
at the same moment.

The true place for the guillotine shutter, then, from a theoretical
standpoint, is in the interior of the objective. Are there any other
advantages to be gained by so placing it? Yes; it is easy to understand
that for the same time of exposure, and consequently for the same
result, the aperture may be so much the smaller in proportion as the
optical center is approached.

The luminous rays, in fact, form in the objective a double truncated
cone whose upper base is equal to the diaphragm, and the lower one to
the diameter of the lenses. If the aperture be equal to any diameter
whatever of one of the cones, the result will be the same; but, for
the same period of exposure, it will evidently prove advantageous to
approach the diaphragm. The ratio of the apertures that give the same
results at the optical center or behind the objective is as that of the
diaphragm employed to that of the back lens. If the diaphragm is
one centimeter and the lenses four centimeters, an aperture of one
centimeter in one case and of four in the other will give the same
result.

We shall see further along that it is advantageous to employ apertures
equal to several times the diameter of the diaphragm or lens. Now, from
what we have just said, an aperture, equal for example to four times the
diaphragm, will be only 4 centimeters, while the corresponding aperture
behind the lens must be 16. The dimensions of the first will be
practical, and those of the second will give too cumbersome and too
fragile an apparatus. But why must the aperture be larger than the
diaphragm employed? This is what we are going to demonstrate. Let us
make the aperture equal to the diameter of the objective, and see
what occurs at the different periods of the exposure. For the sake of
clearness, we shall suppose the velocity uniform.

It is evident, _a priori_, that a perfect apparatus will be the one that
will allow the light to act during the entire exposure with a maximum of
intensity. Is it thus, when the aperture is equal to the diameter of the
objective? Evidently not. Let us consult Fig. 2. We here see the shutter
progressively uncovering the objective. The light will increase from A
to C up to the moment when the objective is entirely uncovered, and will
then immediately decrease up to B. The objective has operated with a
maximum of light for only a short time. We are far from the ideal result
in which the maximum of light, CD, should exist during the entire
exposure, and form the upper plane precisely equal to AB.

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

If we cannot obtain such a result in practice, we must nevertheless
aproximate to it. We shall do so by increasing the shutter. Up to C' the
apparatus will operate as before, but from C' to D' the aperture will be
complete, and from D' to B' will decrease as has been said.

Let us give A'B' the same value as AB, that is to say, let us increase
the velocity in the second case in order that the time of exposure shall
be the same; we shall at once see that in the first case the object will
be completely uncovered for only a very short time, while in the second
the exposure will be perfect for a very appreciable period.

The time of exposure which is absolutely active, we propose to call
effective time of exposure in contradistinction to the total time of the
same. The more we increase the value of C'D', that is to say, that of
the effective time, the more the ratio, C'D'/A'B', will approximate to
unity, and the nearer we shall reach perfection. The correlative of such
elongation of the aperture is an increase in velocity which will always
bring the total exposure to the same figure, whatever be the aperture
employed.

If the aperture be equal to two diameters, the effective time will be
equal to half the time of the total exposure; and if it is equal to
three diameters, the exposure will be good during 2/3 of the total time.
This amounts to saying that the effective time of exposure is equal to n
times the diameter--1, the velocity being supposed always uniform. If
we place the shutter within the objective, it is the diameter of the
diaphragm that it will be necessary to say. The effective time will be
equal then to n diaphragm--1.

From what precedes it results that in no case should the aperture be
inferior to the diaphragm, since the former would otherwise absolutely
suppress the effective time in giving a lower plane corresponding to
an insufficient quantity of light. Moreover, an aperature of this kind
would prove injurious to the quality of the image by successively
uncovering rays which do not form their image identically at the same
point. We are now, then, in presence of results that are absolutely
positive, and they are as follows:

1. The guillotine shutter should be placed in the interior of the
objective and as near as possible to optical center, that is to say,
behind the diaphragm, since the latter is precisely in the optical
center.

2. The aperture should be as wide as possible.

3. The velocity should be as great as possible.

In practice, an aperture from 4 to 5 times the diameter of diaphragm
employed will be more than sufficient, since we shall have, according to
circumstances, 3/4 or 4/5 of the effective time. Moreover, whatever be the
time of exposure, this ratio once established will be invariable, and
the apparatus will always operate identically.

A shutter combining these qualities will not yet be perfect. It is
necessary, according to the time and the light, that the time of
exposure shall be capable of being varied. In a word, it is necessary
that the apparatus shall be _graduated_ and permit of taking views more
or less quickly. The different velocities might be given to the
shutter by means of weights, rubber, or springs. The latter seem to be
preferable, since they permit in the first place of operating out of
the vertical; moreover, they are less fragile, and, through different
tensions, they permit of these graduations that we consider as
indispensable. For the current needs of practice 1/100 of a second is a
limit that seems to us sufficient as a maximum of rapidity. In order to
know the time of exposure obtained we employ the following method, which
permits of graduating an apparatus rapidly and with extreme precision:

A band of smoked paper is fixed upon the shutter, then a tuning-fork
provided with a small stylet resting against the paper is made to
vibrate. Better yet, a chronograph which vibrates synchronously with a
tuning-fork, whose motion is kept up by electricity, is put in the same
place. Fig. 3 shows the arrangement to be employed. We then let the
shutter fall, when the little stylet will inscribe a certain number of
vibrations. Knowing the number of vibrations of the tuning-fork, and
counting the number of those inscribed upon the paper, it is very simple
to deduce therefrom the amount of the time of exposure. The results of
one of these experiments we have reproduced in Fig. 4. The tuning-fork
gave 100 double vibrations per second. Six vibrations are included
between the opening and closing of the apparatus. Each vibration
estimated at 1/100 of a second. The exposure was 6/100 of a second in
round numbers. This is the amount of the total time of exposure. As
for that of the effective time, that is just as easily ascertained. It
suffices to know the number of vibrations comprised between the moment
at which one point of the objective has been completely uncovered and
that at which it has begun to be covered again. The time is equal to
2/100 in round numbers.

In the experiment in question, with an aperture equal to twice the
diameter of the diaphragm, we have, then, 1/3 of the half-open exposure;
and the amount of the effective time is 1/3. The difference that we
have in practice is due to the fact that the velocity is uniformly
accelerated. In order to increase the amount of the effective time, it
will be only necessary to increase the aperture of the shutter and apply
again the method that we have just pointed out.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

So much for the material part of the apparatus. It will be necessary
in addition to acquire sufficient individual experience to be able to
estimate the intensity of the light, and consequently to judge of the
diaphragm to be employed and the velocity to be obtained. It must not
be forgotten that such or such an object having a relatively slow speed
will not be sufficiently sharp on the negative if it is too near
the apparatus, while such or such another, much more rapid, might
nevertheless be caught if sufficient distance intervened. Here it is
that will appear the skill of the amateur, who will find it possible to
obtain the said object as large as possible and with a maximum degree of
sharpness.

We have seen what diverse qualities should be possessed by a good
guillotine shutter, and it is evident that the same should be found
in all apparatus of the kind. In our opinion the guillotine is a well
defined type that possesses one capital advantage, and that is that it
permits of the use of aperatures as wide as may be desired for the
same time of exposure. It is a question, as we have seen, of velocity.
Consequently, however short the exposure be, it will always be possible
to operate with a full amount of light during the greater part of the
exposure. It is necessary to dwell upon this point, since in another
kind of apparatus that possesses a closing and opening shutter the same
result cannot be reached. In the Boca apparatus, for instance, we remark
that at a given moment the time of exposure is reduced to nothing, as
the closing shutter covers the objective before the latter has been
unmasked by the opening one. In all exposures, in fact, the times of
opening and closing have a constant value. It follows that the shorter
the exposure is, the greater becomes such value, and to such a point
that, at a given moment, the apparatus no longer make an exposure.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.]

In the guillotine, on the contrary, the same space always intervenes
between the time of opening and closing, since it is fixed in an
unvarying manner by the diameter at the aperature. Then, the greater the
velocity, the more the time of opening and closing diminishes. If
the ratio of the effective to the total time of exposure is 3/4, for
example, it will be invariable, whatever be the velocity.

In concluding, we will remark that, without employing springs, we
may increase the aperture of the shutter without varying the time of
exposure. To effect this it is only necessary to raise the point of the
shutter's drop. In fact, as may be seen in Fig. 4, all the vibrations
of the stylet corresponding to 1/100 of a second always continue to
elongate, and it will consequently be possible for the same time of
exposure to considerably increase the aperture and, as a consequence,
the effective time, by causing the guillotine to drop from a greater
elevation. From this study, which has principally concerned the
guillotine shutter, can we draw the deduction that this type of
apparatus will become a definite one? We think not. In fact, along with
its decided advantages the guillotine has a few defects that cannot be
passed over in silence. The aperture, in measure as it is increased,
renders the apparatus delicate and subject to become bent. If, in order
to obviate this trouble, we employ plates of steels, we increase its
weight considerably, and the chamber becomes subject to vibration at the
moment the shutter drops. If rubber or springs are used for increasing
the velocity, it is still worse. Moreover, it is quite difficult to
obtain a graduation, and to our knowledge, and probably for this reason,
it has not yet been applied.

The reader will please excuse us for this perhaps somewhat dry
theoretical _expose_, but we have thought it well to give it in the
hope that it might well show the qualities that should be required of a
photographic shutter and particularly of the guillotine. Moreover, at
the point to which photography has arrived it is no longer permitted to
do things by halves.

After the memorable discoveries of Nicephore, Niepce, Daguerre, and
Talbot, photography remained for some time stationary, limited to the
production of portraits and landscapes. But for a few years past it has
taken a new impetus, and new processes have come to the surface. In the
graphic arts and in the sciences it has taken considerable place. Being
the daughter of chemistry and physics, it is not astonishing that we
require of it the precision of both. It is, moreover, through a profound
study of the reactions that gave it birth and through a knowledge of the
laws of optics that it has come into current use in laboratories. In
fact, it alone is capable of giving with an undoubted character of
truthfulness a durable vestige of certain fleeting phenomena.--

_A. Londe, in La Nature_.

       *       *       *       *       *




FALCONETTI'S CONTINUOUSLY PRIMED SIPHON.


To carry a watercourse over a canal, river, road, or railway, several
methods may be employed, as, for example, by aqueducts like those of
Arcueil and Buc near Versailles, and by upright and inverted siphons.
Of these three means, the first is the most imposing, but is also very
costly; and, besides, the declivities as well as the arrangement of the
ground are not always adapted thereto. The inverted siphon is subject
to obstruction and choking up in its most inaccessible parts, while
the upright siphon is easy of inspection, taking apart, etc. But, _per
contra_, the latter loses its priming very easily by reason of the
formation of air spaces.

[Illustration: FALCONETTI'S SIPHON.]

Mr. Falconetti, an inspector of bridges and roadways, has found a means
of rendering the latter occurrence impossible by an arrangement which
is both simple and practical, and which is illustrated herewith. In the
figure, a and b are the two vertical legs of the siphon, both of which
enter the liquid. These open into the receptacles, c and d, in which the
cocks, e and f, cut off or set up a communication with the pipes, a
and b. These latter are connected by a branch, g, which may be put in
communication with a reservoir, h, that is divided into two superposed
compartments by a partition, i. Such communication may be established
or cut off by a valve, j, maneuvered by a key, k, which traverses
an aperture in the partition, i. Another aperture, m, in this same
partition serves to put the two parts of the reservoir, h, in
communication, and, for this purpose, is provided with a cock, n, which
is easily maneuvered from the exterior.

The object of this arrangement of cocks and reservoir is to prevent the
siphon from losing its priming through the possible presence in the
transverse portion of a certain quantity of air or gas that might be
given off by the water and accumulate in this place.

The compartment, A, of the reservoir, h, is designed for receiving the
gases that collect in the top of the siphon, while the upper compartment
contains water for making a hydraulic joint, and consequently preventing
any re-entrance of air through the apertures in the partition, i.

To prime the siphon, we shut the cocks, e and f, open the valves, j and
m, and pour in water until the whole affair (siphon and reservoir) is
full; then we close the cock, m, and open the three others. The siphon
thus becomes primed, and begins to operate as soon as any water reaches
one or the other of the lower receptacles. As the cock, j, is constantly
turned on during the operation of the siphon, the air that has been able
to accumulate in the lower compartment, A, of the reservoir, h, would
finally unprime the siphon by intercepting communication between its two
legs. In order to prevent such a thing from occurring, it suffices to
expel the air, from time to time, that accumulates in the chamber,
A, this being done, without stopping the operation of the siphon, as
follows:

After closing the cock, j, water is poured into the reservoir, and,
running down to the lower compartment, drives out the air through the
cock, m. This operation once effected, it only remains to turn off the
cock, m, again, and open j in order to establish the normal operation.
As the chamber, A, is provided externally with a water gauge, N, it may
be seen at a glance when it is necessary to maneuver the cocks in order
to expel the air.

This system of siphon is evidently applicable to all sorts of liquids.
It may likewise undergo a few modifications in its construction; for
example, the valve, which in our engraving is placed over the siphon,
may be located at any distance from the apparatus, although it should,
in all cases, be in constant communication with it by means of a tube,
and be placed a little higher than the siphon. It may then be put under
cover and be kept constantly in sight, thus greatly facilitating its
surveillance.

As may be seen, the essential peculiarity of this improvement consists
in the very ingenious arrangement that permits of immersing the cocks in
the liquid to make them perfectly tight, it being necessary that they
should be hermetically closed in order to prevent the entrance of air
to the siphon. Everything leads to the belief, then, that if upright
siphons have never been able to operate regularly, it has been because
no means have been known of expelling the air from the interior without
letting air from the exterior enter at the same time. The arrangement
devised by Mr. Falconetti gets over the difficulty in a very elegant
manner. It seems as if it would be called upon to render great services
in the industries, and it well merits the attention of engineers
of roads and bridges, and of contractors on public works.--_Revue
Industrielle_.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE WEIBEL-PICCARD SYSTEM OF EVAPORATING LIQUIDS.


In the industries, there are often considerable quantities of liquid to
be evaporated in order to concentrate it. Such evaporation is very often
performed by burning fuel in sufficient quantity to furnish the liquid
the heat necessary to convert it into steam. This process is attended
with a consumption of fuel such as to form a very important factor in
the cost of the product to be obtained. In order to vaporize, at the
pressure of the atmosphere, 1 kilogramme of water at 0 deg., 637 heat units
are required, and of these, 100 are employed in raising the water from
0 deg. to 100 deg. and 537 in converting the water at 100 deg. into steam at 100 deg.
This second quantity is called the _latent heat_ of the steam at 100 deg.
The sum of the two quantities is called the _total heat_ of the steam at
100 deg. The total heat of the steam remains nearly constant, whatever be
the temperature at which the vaporization occurred.

[Illustration: THE WEIBEL-PICCARD EVAPORATION APPARATUS.]

In order to utilize the steam as a means of heating, it is necessary to
condense it, that is to say, to cause it to pass from the gaseous to a
liquid state. This conversion disengages as much heat as the passage
from the liquid to the gaseous state had absorbed.

It results from this that if we could condense the steam that is given
off by a liquid that we are vaporizing, in contact with another liquid
that it is also a question of vaporizing, we should utilize all the heat
contained in the steam that was being given off from the first.

This object can be practically attained by two means, viz., by (1)
putting the disengaged steam in contact with the sides of a vessel that
contains a liquid colder than the one that produced it; (2) by raising
the temperature and pressure of the disengaged steam in order to
condense it in contact with the sides of the vessel which contains the
very liquid that has produced it.

The first of these means is realized in the apparatus called multiple
acting, that are at present so generally employed in sugar works. The
second means, which permits of a greater saving in fuel being made than
the other does, is realized by compressing the disengaged steam. This
compression, which raises the temperature and pressure of the steam,
permits of condensing the latter in contact with the vessel wherein it
has been produced. By such condensation we continuously restore to the
liquid which is being vaporized the heat of the steam which it gives
off.

This solution of the question, which has been partially seen at
different epochs, has but recently made its way into the industries. It
is being operated at present with complete success at the salt works of
