propelled to a high speed or dropped from a high altitude to become
airborne. Since I had no way of propelling it, I needed to launch it
from the top of the tower, which provided plenty of altitude, but then
the problem of how to remove it from the tower arose. For a moment I was
stumped and almost admitted defeat, but then it came to me.

The tower's only weakness was in its lack of protection against a
deliberate rocking motion. If I was able to swing it back and forth fast
enough by slowly gaining speed and multiplying the momentum, it would be
possible to get it to lean far enough that the dome would snap off,
leaving the room open to the air. This was possible, though rather
unlikely. But I tried anyway.

Starting on one side I began to move from one edge to the other until a
faint rocking motion could be felt. Then I increased my speed in
proportion to the speed of the tower itself. It was a slow start, but
the momentum began to grow, and as it did each successive sway became
faster and faster. Soon it was going so fast that I began to have
unstable footing, the whole tower creaking like a tree that it is blown
by a heavy wind. The speed kept increasing until it reached its fastest,
swooshing to and fro with all of its accumulated force.

It was then that the break happened, for on one of the thrusts the top
snapped off and the upper dome was flung downwards to the ground. As
soon as it was off I shoved the hang-glider with all the force I could
muster towards the edge. At first it fell, but a few feet from the edge
its wings caught the wind and it was brought up to a stable soar, and
just at that instant I landed on it, for I had jumped right after it. I
hit with a thud and felt the craft bounce downwards a little as I hit,
but it soon regained its stability and sped on through the air as behind
me I heard a great crashing sound.

I pulled the left wing down and the glider began to turn in that
direction. Since I had launched into the opposite direction of the
mainland, I needed to wheel around completely, and as such I held the
wing down until I had done an about face towards the east. What I saw
was a striking picture: the sun had just begun to rise, and under the
influence of its soft textures the city of Nunami looked as it had
before: quaint, picturesque, and inviting. But there was a great
difference now, for the tower itself had completely collapsed under the
momentum, and its ruins had fallen down upon the Temple of Time,
demolishing it and leaving only ruins. It had also fallen on a strip of
the city, taking with it several buildings and leaving only rubble. The
King, Wagner, and Bernibus could just barely be seen amongst the crowds
that had dashed out of doors to see what was going on, and I could tell
that Bernibus was smiling at my escape as he looked at my wind sailor a
thousand feet in the air. A friend who rejoices in your advancement,
even at his own cost, is rare indeed.

Turning my gaze upwards, I left Nunami and its troubles behind me and
looked ahead to my promised land, and though it was barren and devoid of
any significant foliage, it still held something equally dear to me as
landscape: safety. The wind currents were strong and my speed was about
30 miles per hour. Great expanses of grassland sped by below me like the
memories of yesteryear, and within half an hour I found myself over the
ocean.

There is something very refreshing about the sunrise that correlated
very well with my present feeling of emancipation, for it is a symbol of
the new and fresh, and of the forgetting of the troubles of the past.
This was true in my case, at least, for I was soon carefree once more,
secure in my freedom. As the wind rushed across my body, I was relaxed
in my adopted element, air, though it was slightly difficult to keep
myself firmly on the glider, as I was lying unfastened to the tabletop.
Below me passed the ocean, looking generally the same as ever, though
paler and less alive, like a ghost of its former self, but still close
enough to bring the calm of reminiscing.

Soon even the ocean began to give way to the fast approaching mainland,
and I abandoned my restive meditations to solve the problem of how to
land. I had not made any contraptions for that purpose, having not
thought about it in the hurry to leave my prison. I decided to use a
traditional circling approach, in the same way scavenging birds descend
on their prey. When I was a mile or so inland, I began to circle about
in wide spirals, narrowing them as I drew closer to the ground. In this
way I had slowed down enough by the time I made contact with the ground
that neither I nor my craft was injured in the landing.

The terrain proved to be as desolate as it had appeared from the
distance, for the main vegetation was a weakly sprouting grass that was
only a few inches high, though not mowed or chewed down. Every few dozen
yards there was a single stunted shrub or small tree, or in some cases a
group of the same, and the spaces between these was littered with
scattered rocks and occasionally a smaller, flowering plant. The
topography of the land was mostly flat, though not in the sense of a
plain or savanna, instead it was merely a gentle slope, so that the
immediate area seemed flat, but in the distance it was seen to rise
considerably. There were also a few small hills that were no more than
twenty feet high across their whole length, but in the obtuse slopes of
the land, even that seemed to be almost mountainous. Brown was the
prevailing color of it all for as far as my eye could see, though I
cannot say if that condition prevailed inland further, since I had
forgotten the telescope, which would probably have proved a useful tool.


A slight wind blew from seaward, scattering the dry top soil about like
a cloud of gnats, though there were very few actual insects, and no
animals that I could see. The only sound that I could hear was that of
the wind howling gently past my ears. I had landed in a sort of valley,
which, though not at all deep, was surrounded on all sides by slight
hills that prevented me from getting an extensive look at the landscape
beyond. Before making any decisions as to which direction to set off, I
decided to climb to the top of one of these hills to ascertain my exact
situation, and although I was generally reluctant to start off into
unfamiliar territory, I also wanted to put as many miles between me and
the coast as possible, in case the Zards and Canitaurs came after me,
which was still a cause of great anxiety to me.

As I rounded the top of the hill that was directly east of my landing
point, I suddenly came face to face with two small people, gnomes by
appearance, one of whom I recognized as being Onan, the Lord of the
Past. He greeted me familiarly as 'My Dear Jehu', and introduced me to
his partner, who turned out to be Zimri, the Lord of the Future. Onan
was dressed the same as when I had last seen him, and Zimri was close in
appearance, though his hair was long and his beard short, while Onan's
were the opposite. Zimri wore a little blue-green frock that fit rather
snuggly but not enough to be considered tight. I started our ensuing
dialog by saying this:

"I am more than a little surprised to see you upon such good terms with
your rival, Onan," giving Zimri an inquisitive glance as I did. "I had
just assumed that you two would be bitter enemies, as your followers on
Daem seem to be, but I can tell now that that is not at all the case."

He laughed, as did Zimri, and replied, "We are brothers, and as such
there is always a strong rivalry, but at the same time there is the
closest bond. There is no real conflict between us, but only a trivial
and jovial mock conflict, the kind that means no harm and does none, to
those involved, but rubs off on others who are less informed, who take
it seriously and have a real conflict."

"What do you mean by that illustration?" I asked.

"Nothing. Nothing at all," he sighed, "I have said too much already, it
is against the rules, you know."

"Yes, yes, the rules. Tell me, though, how would you say I am doing so
far, am I at least doing fairly?"

"Of course, Jehu, you are doing excellently."

"Is it true about the revolutions of time and matter, then?"

"Yes, in fact, it goes even further than that... Say, Zimri, do you
think it is allowable to tell him about the physical and the spiritual
realms?"

Zimri said nothing, for he can say nothing, but he did nod his head in
the affirmative. Thus sanctioned by his brother, Onan continued to
speak, "Well, you know that physical existence is comprised of time and
matter, and that both of these are involved in a revolving motion, from
the minutest foundations to the largest additions. While they both are
revolving within themselves, they are also revolving together, around an
enigma which, as other of the centers, is completely devoid of the thing
which revolves around it, but is found plentifully in them. In the case
of matter, it revolves around a black hole, in which there is not found
any matter, but there are places of emptiness inside of the matter, in
fact, most of an atom is empty space. In the case of time, it revolves
around eternity, an enigma where there is no such thing as time, even as
there are certain areas where no time exists in physical existence, such
as a book. Likewise, physical existence, which is a combination of time
and matter, revolves around a place in which there is no physical
existence, namely, the spiritual realm. There is no physical in the
spiritual, but there is spiritual in the physical. Physical existence is
not whole without the spiritual, which binds it together in such a way
that gives it life, the ability to think and reason.

"There is spiritual matter in everything, but it cannot be seen or
sensed physically unless it is revealed to one by a force on the
spiritual side. Or rather, it cannot be understood unless revealed, for
it can always be seen through its effects. By this I mean that it leaves
a trace in the physical realm, like a jellyfish that leaves a glowing
trail in its wake. When the brain of a human thinks, it is not the
actual brain that is thinking, instead it is the spiritual matter that
exists in the brain, and this spiritual matter leaves a trail where it
goes of electric signals and such. When someone feels a certain emotion,
such as love or depression, it is felt in the spiritual realm, but its
traces are seen in the physical, such as certain chemicals, but these
are not the cause of the emotion, only the effect of them. It is
possible, through certain drugs, to induce varying emotions, such as
happiness or laughter, but these are not the actual emotions, only their
physical counterparts, so that while it appears to be happiness, it is
not, like the shadow of a man in a field: his form keeps the light from
striking the ground beside him, but the shadow is not him, only the
trace of him. Making a shadow like the man does not make the man, only
the appearance of the man. While the how of a situation may be inferred
through physical means, the why is an entirely spiritual matter, and any
attempt to observe life without taking into account the spiritual matter
behind it will end in the same result as evolution, as the scientists of
your day generally imagined it, but which was, in fact, devolution.

"The laws of the physical realm are called science, such as the fact
that energy and matter are neither created or destroyed in any natural
or artificial process, or that everything left to itself tends toward
disorder, or that life cannot come from non-life by natural or
artificial processes. The laws of the spiritual realm are called
morality. You have no doubt observed that when one does a certain thing,
the end result is always good, and when one does something else, the end
result is always bad. That is because there are spiritual laws that
govern life, and just as there is gravity on the earth that always pulls
things down to it, so there is a spiritual law that whenever someone
steals something, the result is suffering for both of the parties
involved. Just as it is a physical law that man must have oxygen to
live, so it is a spiritual law that when someone murders another the end
result is always suffering. Why is this, one may ask, but that is a
foolish question, or at least a pointless one, for the law of gravity
states that on the earth, all things fall downward towards the center of
gravity, there is no reason why, except that it is, for it is observed
continually to be the case.

"Since men cannot accept that there is a power over them, they deny it,
and in the process they misinterpret the various things of life as
physical things, not the spiritual things that they represent. For
instance, love: men in many "advanced," that is to say, self-obsessed,
civilizations, view it only in its physical materializations, but not in
its spiritual context. When they see the results of love, romance
especially, they do not understand that the romance is only the fruit of
the spiritual essence of love, but instead think that the romance is
love. There can be so-called romance on the physical level without its
spiritual counterpart, but it is only the shadow of love, which will
never fulfill and will never be complete, because, by definition, it is
only a mocking of the true force of love. On the other hand, true
romance is not, as some would seem to think, a certain action or set of
actions, such as the gift of a precious metal or some colorful piece of
foliage, instead it is whatever is the result of the spiritual love, for
the physical manifestation of the spiritual essence of love is not
confined to certain objects or actions, but to any that are sanctioned
with its blessings. The daily toil of a poor man shows far more love
than a lavish gift from a rich man."

When he had finished, I gave him a big grin and thanked him for his
lecture, and then asked him how it was that this did not break the
rules, but other things did. To this he replied that it affected my task
only indirectly, while the other things were all direct concomitants.
Then he asked me if I had any other questions for him, and I replied
that I did indeed have one. Which was as follows, "I know that there was
a great war directly after my departure from my native temporal zone,
and that it was very devastating in its reach and effect, and while I
know that the situation was very tense at the time, I was under the
impression that it was starting to cool down once more. What was it that
set it all off?"

"The disappearance of an American fighter jet off the coast of China,"
he replied straight-forwardly.

My interest was suddenly aroused, for that was the very section where my
squadron was stationed, and anyone who was lost would have been a close
friend of mine. "Go on," I told him.

"The Americans claimed that it was shot down by the Chinese, and
demanded an official apology. That the Chinese would not do, insisting
that they had done no such thing, and instead of the whole situation
diffusing, as you thought it would, both sides proceeded to war
stubbornly, each thinking itself in the moral superiority. But that is
as always."

"Do you have any idea whose ship it was that went down? They were all my
comrades," I said.

"Of course I know, Jehu, for it was your plane."

"But how? I wasn't shot down, I crash landed on an island."

"But you came to me and I sent you here, and since your radios went out,
they had no idea that you were safely landed."

"Still, they must have found the plane!"

"No, you know perfectly well that those islands are brought above and
below sea level at different times. After you left, the island was
brought below the water, and your plane was lost in the sea, no traces
were found."

I was confused, "Onan, does that mean that I was the cause of the war?"

"From a certain point of view, yes."

He was about to say something else to me when we saw in the distance a
group of about ten Munams coming toward us, being at that time a few
miles away. He then told me that he must leave me again for the present,
as he could not interfere directly with my mission. They bid me goodbye
and I did the same to them, and then they walked down the opposite side
of the hill that the Munams were approaching from. As they walked, they
slowly disappeared, until they were gone without a trace, for even their
footprints had faded to nothing.

During the time between Onan and Zimri's departure and the Munam's
arrival, I was left to myself for a period of inward meditation, an
activity that you have probably concluded that I am often given to,
which is entirely the case. This new revelation was very troubling to
me, that somehow I was the very cause of the destruction of humanity
during the great wars, while also the kinsman redeemer over 500 years
later, who was prophesied to be the one to bring humanity back into
balance with nature, or to thrust it forever off the edge of existence
into the damnation of the ice ages. As I told you in the beginning, I am
written in the pages of history as the destroyer of humanity, though if
it is just or not, I am not able to judge. The name of Jehu will forever
be a ripple on the surface of the waters of life, and when it is heard
or spoken, the only feeling that it will bring will be hatred and
disgust. If only mortals could see below the surface of the waters of
life, for just as the ocean can be deceiving on its surface, so can
life. Time is like an ocean, but when one looks upon it, what often
happens is that all one sees is the present reflected back in its
surface, and the eyes are shielded from what lies below, focusing
instead on the surface, which is so trivial compared to the abyss which
supports it. When one only sees the surface reflected back, then history
and its wisdom lose their meaning, and one sees not the past but only
the present. What I mean is this: if you look to the past to justify
your actions rather than to guide them, you will not see the truths
contained therein, but only what your presuppositions already were
before you looked, and your ignorance will be reinforced rather than
repudiated. Wisdom is the ability to see the past separate from the
present, but when one sees the destruction of humanity, he will see only
me, his vision being shielded from the true cause of it all, history.

The actions or inactions of one solitary soul cannot bring the end of
life, only the accumulation of the wrongs and injustices of a whole
race, the human race. Forever I will be eyed as the assassin of
humanity, and yet that is not the truth at all, for I am the father of
humanity, I am the beginning as well as the end. If you view me only as
one or the other, you do not see me at all, but only a pale shadow of my
true self. I am Jehu, past, present, and future, I am the concentration
of humanity in all its forms and reproductions, I am the creator and
destroyer of every age of this temporal maze. Why am I the defender and
executioner of the race of men? Why am I the protagonist and antagonist
of humanity? Why am I the father and the son, the beginning and the end?
Such a question is futile to ask in the physical realm, for here there
are no answers to the why's, they are only to be found in the spiritual
realm. The physical realm is left only with the how's, and it is those
which I am attempting to clarify.






Chapter 12: The White Eagle



It was only a few moments after Onan and Zimri left me that the Munams
arrived, for they had run, spurred on, apparently, by their great desire
to meet me. In appearance they were like I had seen from afar: hairy and
stooped, almost using their arms as legs, but not entirely. Their skulls
were large and oddly shaped and their mouths were pushed out from their
faces like an ape's. A limp, furry tail hung down from their lower
backs, and their hands had a tough, leathery appearance.

There were eight of them, and when they drew near, the foremost hailed
me with an eager gleam in his eyes, like one who has long hoped and long
been denied. His voice was low and gravelly, but not at all uncivilized
sounding, as one would have expected by his appearance, and his facial
expressions were equally as livid and distinctly humanoid. He began:

"Hail, the White Eagle, sent by the gods to deliver us! Hail the
redemption from paradise, coming to bring us home." With that he held
out his arms and embraced me in a very warm, heartfelt manner.

"Hello," I replied, somewhat embarrassed by my lack of authority.

"I am Ramma, leader of the Munams," he told me, "And I welcome you in
the name of us all."

"Greetings, Ramma," I replied, "I am Jehu."

"We are joyous at your arrival, oh Jehu of the White Eagle."

When he said this I had a flashback, a moment of memorial deja vu, when
the present and the past are morphed together by one thought, when one
idea from the past and the present exists in such a way as to connect
the two times around it, forming a nexus between the two moments. I was
brought back to two separate times, the first being my initial meeting
with Onan, when I saw the muraled dome, the genetics of history, and its
depiction of the events which were symbolically representative of Daem:
the deformed man, the warring races, the worshipers of the White Eagle.
The other was my arrival in the Temple of Time, when the King showed me
the altar to Temis, the God of Time, depicted as a great White Eagle,
wrought in diamond and grasping the altar in its talons. There was
something about the White Eagle that connected itself to me inseparably,
something that converged us into one form. I had a sense that it was
somehow a key to the mystery of the end times, but I could not make the
connection. I thought back to what Onan had said to me just a few
moments before, that he and Zimri were close friends, and not enemies at
all, while those on earth believed their rivalry was a serious conflict.
Yet while I had two separate memorial deja vu's, I could not make the
connection between them to figure out what they meant.

"Tell me," I asked of Ramma, "What do you mean when you call me the
White Eagle?"

"The prophecy said that our kinsman redeemer, who would bring us out of
the lands of desolation and into paradise, who would come to us like a
giant eagle, soaring high above the sea. Across the ocean there," he
said, pointing to Daem, "Is Daem, the paradise land, wherein dwell our
enemies the Zards and Canitaurs. They keep us off of the island and on
the mainland by force, and here we have suffered ever since the great
wars, in these desolate and barren wastelands, where there is neither
life nor death, but only a hazy in between. An ancient one with wings
like an eagle was to come and rescue us, the White Eagle, and under his
guidance we are to be led to victory against our enemies.

"To them he would be sent first, humbly he would come to redeem them
from the woes of their own causing, but they would receive him not.
Instead they cast him away, and he was to come to us, to bring us to the
promised land. What a blessed sight it was when we saw you soaring
through the sky on your white wings, and now you have come, my dear
Jehu, you have come at last, in the hour of our greatest need. Come, oh
White Eagle, and let us go to Kalr, our city. Tonight is the Feast of
the Hershonites, celebrating the night that the prophecy was received,
and on the same day shall it be fulfilled!"

With that he turned and set off with a step of exuberance to the
northwest, the other Munams and myself following him. He walked quickly,
and it was all that I could do to match his pace, so that I was left
without breath enough to ask any more questions. From what I saw on our
journey, the landscape was the same across the whole mainland that was
near to the coast, and there was neither change enough nor any landmark
conspicuous enough for me to take any bearings. Without the Munam's
company, I would have been lost.

Ramma led us on a straight course for about half an hour, there being
nothing to steer around, and when that time had elapsed, we found
ourselves in a small, battered city. There were no great buildings or
infrastructure like in Nunami, nor any complex labyrinths like the
Canitaur's military base. Instead there were only weak, unsound huts,
built with a framework of oddly shaped driftwood and covered with a
thick layer of insulating sod. A road ran through the center of the
city, only distinguishable because it was packed down by constant use,
and on either side were groupings of the huts in semi-circular patterns,
with no space between them left unfilled by soil. This created a wind
barrier, preventing the strong winds that whipped across the desert
lands from harassing the inhabitants as they worked and played in their
communal yards. Each such grouping had a field of a strange, potato-like
plant that spread across the back ends of the houses, where the fierce
winds piled up loads of nutrient rich top soil from miles and miles
around. In the center of the protected areas, each of the communities,
for such they were called, had a well that reached hundreds of feet
downwards, bringing them almost unlimited supplies of fresh water. Using
these two major systems, they were able to live in a comfortable manner,
not comfortable in a sense of comparison with the Zards or Canitaurs,
but comfortable in the sense that they had food to eat, clothes to wear,
and shelter to protect them. Under such conditions humanity can thrive,
for happiness is not found in the accumulation of excess comforts, but
in the accumulation of excess love. This the Munams had plenty of, and
from that point of view were more the evolutionary form of humanity than
the devolutionary.

The Munams all wore a sort of close fitting frock, a plain colored one
piece suit that displayed their practicality and modesty. It is a hobby
of mine to observe the clothing worn by different groups of people and
compare it to their characteristics. As I have said before, clothes do
not make the man, but the man certainly makes the clothes, and it is
possible to judge a person's character by the type of attire that they
wear, in that it is an expression of their tastes. The Munams were shown
by their clothing to be a very friendly people, for their frocks were
hung gently about the body in a manner that was at once both carefree
and conservative. This is perfectly analogous to their personalities.

When we came down through the center street, which was really the whole
city, for there were no other roads, the people rushed out to meet us,
and when they were told that it was the White Eagle, they began to dance
joyously about in the streets. There was laughter and play going on all
at once, and it was like a great burden lifted from my heart to see them
rejoicing, for it almost reconciled their sufferings with the Zard's and
Canitaur's ease of life, in that they seemed to be much more happy, in
spite of the circumstances.

Ramma gave a short speech to the people, in which he detailed the
prophecy and its fulfillment and, in general, encouraged everyone to
hope for what was to come. When it was over, he and I retired to his
home, which was rather larger than the others and formed its own
semi-circle, containing as it did both his private quarters and the
official offices of the government, which, while extremely limited in
number, were well outfitted. The door of this building opened into a
short hallway that had several doors adjacent to it. He led me down
one of these and it proved to be a dining hall, though it was not as
commodious as most, with only a round wooden table with a few chairs
around it and some cupboards and cabinets.

Pulling my chair out for me to sit in, Ramma went through all the normal
duties of host with great ease, and within a few moments we were eating
heartily from a great dish of boiled potatoes that had been brought in
by a servant, or rather, a deputy minister of state, for such was his
title. We did little talking before we ate, because I was greatly
famished and as such was ill-inclined to be jovial, not that I was
sullen, but I found it hard to be completely relaxed without a full
stomach. Yet when that was remedied and I found myself satisfied and
comfortable in a warm dwelling, I opened up to Ramma and we had a long
and entertaining discussion, some of which I will record here, as it
shines a little more light upon the mysteries of my story:

"So, my dear Jehu," Ramma began, "I trust your stay on Daem has so far
been enjoyable."

