little the world knows of meteorology and how few meteorologists
there are able, ready, and willing to rise and explain in face of the
opposition of the public, who seem to think that the explanation must
necessarily belong to astronomy. Astronomy proper deals with the
position of the earth in space and its relation to the other heavenly
bodies, whether suns, fixed stars, planets, satellites, comets, or other
bodies in the vast space about us. Meteorology deals with the atmosphere
of the globe, in all its forms. Astronomy could be studied in the early
ages; its grand facts were not wholly dependent upon the advanced
condition of the mechanic arts; it could be studied even without the aid
of telescopes, though telescopes have added much to its advancement.
Meteorology, on the contrary, depended on the advancement of the arts
and sciences; they must first be perfected ere we could know much about
this branch of science. To one unfamiliar with the advancement and
perfection of meteorology within the past ten years, this statement
may seem strange, yet it is an undisputable fact that, prior to the
establishment of the daily weather reports, the knowledge on this
subject amounted to very little, and was not even worthy of being
designated a science. Prior to the advent of the weather map the world
was in absolute ignorance of the laws governing the atmosphere. Sure, we
had had large volumes on the laws of storms, but the later revelations
leave them shelved high and dry on the shores and as useless as a wreck
in a similar condition; with the daily weather map before us we have no
need to even open these huge volumes; they are completely circumvented,
and only negative in value--to show how little was known of the subject
without the full and complete facts daily collected and spread before us
on the map published by the Weather Bureau.

In order to understand the color of our sky, we must understand the
subject which is so immediately connected with it and its creation.

The earth is a sphere in space; generally speaking, it is composed of
land and water. These are two factors; the heat that it derives from
the sun forms a third factor; the three--land, water, and heat--are
essential to life, at least the higher conditions of life which
culminate in man. The old physical geography taught us this much, but
it was not able to go further and tell us why it was cold or warm
independent of the seasons; it could not explain why it was at times as
warm, and even warmer, half-way to the pole than at the equator; why it
was at times very warm in the extreme northeast while very cold in
the Southern States; cold in the northwest when it was warm in the
northeast, and warm in the northwest when cold all along the upper
Atlantic seaboard; it could not forewarn us of storms. These and a
host of other facts, which the weather map makes as plain as astronomy
demonstrates that Jupiter is a planet, the new revelation, through the
instrumentality of the perfected telegraph system, makes exceedingly
plain to us if we will but seek the easily obtained information.

The principal revelations of the weather map are the facts in regard to
the areas of high and low barometer, and the influence they exert upon
the climate of the globe.

These conditions--high and low barometer--move on general lines from the
west towards the east, or towards the rising sun, and around the world
in irregular belts. The centers of low barometer are various distances
apart, from a thousand to two thousand and even more miles apart--call
the average about two thousand miles.

The clouds are formed from the moisture present by the action of the
sun's heat. The direction of the wind is from the area of high barometer
to that of low. The nearer the winds approach the center of "low" (low
barometer), the more they partake of the lines of the volute curve, or
curve of the sea shell or water in a whirlpool. High barometer is the
atmospheric hill; low barometer is the atmospheric valley. But time at
present will not permit more than these general statements; a close
study of the weather map for a season will reveal the beautiful minor
details.

To the reader it may seem a long way round, yet in order to fully
understand the nature of the atmosphere which surrounds our globe we
must pay due attention to these newly discovered physical laws.

The red sky which was so noticeable, in the fall of 1883, the
astronomers have told us was due to "meteoric dust" which was produced
by the volcanic eruption on the island of Java, August 27, 1883.

This "meteoric dust" they say combined with the atmosphere, followed it
around the earth, and caused the beautiful redness of the sky at morning
and evening. For one, I do not believe dust of any description in the
atmosphere would produce such an effect.

There is nothing luminous, transparent, or delicate about dust. Dust
would not remain in the atmosphere for months, it would settle in a very
short time, and if thick enough in the atmosphere to obstruct the light
of the sun it would be visible, discernible, to the eye, and manifest
on the face of nature. Years ago, before the age of the weather map, we
might have thought that the atmosphere followed the surface of the earth
like the water on a grindstone, but it does not. As already seen, the
wind is from the area of high barometer to that of low, and there are
many of these "low centers."

From the best calculation we can make at present, there would be at
least some six centers on an average between the center of the United
States and the island of Java. In addition to this there would also be
a number of belts of "low" centers, which would complicate the thing
threefold at least. At all these different centers the winds would be
blowing from all points of the compass at the same time. Such winds
would not be apt to bring the "meteoric dust" from Java to the United
States, either in an easterly or westerly direction. But, it is said,
"dust" has been gathered.

How high from the surface of the ground has this _dust_ been
gathered--at what elevation?

There is undoubtedly a little dust in the air most of the time, but I do
not think that it extends very high. Where it would be the highest and
most perceptible would be on the arid plans of Africa and Asia, when
the _simoom_ is passing, or in the track of a tornado. But from the
multiplicity of these storm centers and the varied winds they would
produce even this dust could not travel from Java to America.

Again, all clouds, no matter how high or how low, are affected by the
low centers, as the movement of clouds prove, and travel from the "high"
to the "low," from and to all points of the compass. High authority
gives the heights of the clouds as follows: lower clouds, 16,000 feet;
upper clouds, 23,000 feet.

As all clouds, from the highest to the lowest, are affected by the
centers as above referred to, it follows that if this "meteoric dust"
follows the earth around, as it would have to do in order to make good
this theory, it would have to travel suspended in the atmosphere above
the upper clouds, or at a height of more than 23,000 feet, or at an
elevation of over four miles!

Now, is it reasonable to believe that dust, however fine, will remain in
the atmosphere at that elevation for over six months?

As a side argument it is suggested that the smoke of the burning woods,
or few years ago in Michigan, caused as peculiar condition of the
atmosphere. This extensive fire was on a day when the area of low
barometer was on a high line of latitude and passing to the eastward.
This naturally took the smoke, which is far lighter than dust, along
with it. It mingled with the muggy condition of an extensive "low," and
produced a yellowness of the atmosphere. This however was of only a few
hours' duration, and was only visible in favorable localities.

Here again we see the advantage of the weather maps; but for this map we
would never have been able to have satisfactorily explained the peculiar
phenomenon produced by the great Michigan fire.

If the delicate redness of the sky is not caused by dust, what is it
caused by?

But for the weather map, I think we should still be in the dark in
regard to it.

In the first place, this redness is nothing new, only the conditions
are more favorable sometimes than at others. It has always existed and
always will exist, independent of earthquakes, volcanoes, etc. Nature
is ever changing; the movements of the atmosphere more resemble the
kaleidoscope than any thing else.

The summer and fall of 1883, the movements of "high" (high barometer)
over the United States were quite central and extensive, causing this
peculiar phenomenon over a wide extent of territory.

We have no information of the condition of the barometer over the other
part of the world; we speak move particularly of the United States; yet
if certain conditions produce certain effects here, it is quite safe to
say that the same effects are produced by the same cause elsewhere.

As now well established by the map, the surface wind is from the area
of high barometer to that of low--from the atmospheric hill to the
atmospheric valley.

The tendency of this is to free "high" of all clouds and moisture; but
then it is impossible to free "high" entirely of moisture; a little
will remain, and it is just this little, which is highly rarefied, that
produces the result. We look around us and above, we see little or no
evidence of evaporation, yet it is the while going on. When the sun is
immediately below the horizon, where it will shine horizontally through
the mass of light, suspended moisture, the delicate presence of vapor
heretofore unnoticed is revealed. The action of the sun's rays is the
same as when illuminating a well formed cloud--it is an embodiment
of the same principle, but the material is much more expanded. The
particles of suspended moisture are very fine, few and far between,
therefore the effect of the light upon it is more diffused and
transparent. It is much like looking through a piece of window glass
flatwise and endwise; flatwise we do not perceive any color; endwise,
from seeing through a greater mass, the glass has a very perceptible
green color.

We see the same idea also in the rising and setting sun and moon. On
a clear, cloudless night, when nothing seems to interfere with the
brightness of the stars, we cannot, by looking upward, perceive any
moisture present in the atmosphere; but if we cast our eyes to the
horizon, whereby we see through the mass of atmosphere endwise, as it
were, and note the appearance of the stars there, or the rising or
setting moon, we will see that the atmosphere there gives a redness
to the rising body, which it does not have when it has ascended to
mid-heaven. On a clear night, which is caused by the presence of the
area of high barometer, the moon when in mid-heaven is of a clear,
silver-white, and it is the same moon that at the horizon was a deep
red. The color of the moon has not changed; it is simply the medium
through which it is seen that produces the difference in color.

Occasionally, on a clear, bright ("high") night, when the moon is full,
prior to rising, when just below the horizon, it will so illuminate this
lower strata of atmosphere as to appear like a great fire; the moon
rises red, but its deep color gradually fades as it rises, and when well
up in the heavens we perceive that this deep coloring was an illusion
and merely the influence of its surroundings. I never, though, knew of
any one to attempt to account for this by "meteoric dust;" and yet it is
an embodiment of the same principle. Place the sun where the moon is,
and from its far superior abundance of light we have a much grander
display.

Under no other conditions or relations of the sun and earth is it
possible to have this phenomenon of the delicate red sky but when a
positive area of high barometer is passing and extends over us. In
order to produce this effect we must have the clear atmosphere of high
barometer, when there is a minimum of moisture present. The action of
the sun's rays upon this extensive area of slightly moist rarefied
air is unconfined by clouds, and reaches far and wide, and produces
a delicacy of color which from no other source or condition can be
realized.

ISAAC P. NOYES.

Washington, D. C., 1884.

       *       *       *       *       *




A THEORY OF COMETARY PHENOMENA.


_To the, Editor of the Scientific American_:

The following subject, substantially, was written more than a year ago
with a view to its publication. It was not, however, until January of
the present year that I sent a brief communication to the _Brooklyn
Eagle_, which was published Feb. 3, giving my views in relation to
cometary phenomena. With this I might remain satisfied, were it not
that the interesting paper by G. D. Hiscox, published in the SCIENTIFIC
AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT, Feb. 16, impressed me with the idea that the theory
I advanced might assist in explaining others, if brought to the notice
of those interested through the columns of your valuable journal.

The theory that I advance to account for the several phenomena relating
to comets' tails is, that comets are non-luminous, transparent bodies;
that they transmit the light of the sun; that the transmitted light
reflected by the particles of matter in space constitutes the tails of
comets. "Like causes produce like effects." By contraries, then, like
effects must be produced by similar causes; for, if an effect produced
by a cause which is known is similar to an effect produced by a cause
which is not known, the cause which is known must be similar to the
cause which is not known. This is true or not.

I submit the following experiments to substantiate the theory advanced.

Partially fill a vial or a tumbler with water, hold it by the rim,
and move it around a lighted candle placed upon a table. A shadow
surrounding the transmitted light will be cast upon the table. As the
tumbler approaches the light, the shadow follows the tumbler, and when
receding the tumbler follows the shadow; and as the tumbler is moved
around the light, the shadow will swing round from one side to the
other. If the tumbler be held so that a puff of smoke can be blown
into the transmitted rays, the particles of smoke will reflect the
transmitted light, and will illustrate my idea of what constitutes a
comet's tail. A dark band may be observed in this stream of light, as
also in the light cast upon the table.

In these experiments, we see the effects produced by a cause which is
known; the effects are similar to those observed in the tails of comets,
the cause of which we do not know; but is it not reasonable to assume
that the cause is similar?

Assuming now that comets are transparent, can any other phenomena
peculiar to comets be accounted for upon this hypothesis? Next to
the tail itself, the curve is the most noticeable feature, and if we
consider the extraordinary length of these appendages, the astounding
velocity at which comets move in their orbits, and the time that would
elapse before a ray of light, emitted from the nucleus, would reach the
end of the tail, perhaps the curve--which, if I am not deceived in my
observations, always dips toward its orbit--can be accounted for. If a
comet moved in a direct line toward the center of the sun, there would
be no curve to the tail. But taking Donati's comet of 1858 as an
example, the tail of which was said to be about 200,000,000 miles long,
a ray of light traveling at the rate of 192,000 miles per second would
be about twenty minutes in going from the nucleus to the end of the
tail.

But during that time the comet would move in its orbit, say, 50,000
miles, and as light moves in a straight line, and other rays are
constantly emerging from the nucleus as it moves along in its course,
the result is that the tail has a curved appearance.

I have no data at hand regarding this comet, but what I have said will
serve to illustrate my ideas. Again, referring to this comet, I remember
to have read the statement of an astronomer that, after passing round
the sun, a new tail was formed opposite the original one. Now, it seems
to me that that is just what would happen, for in moving round the sun
the comet would travel say 3,000,000 miles; the greater portion of the
tail then, would extend millions of miles upon one side of the sun,
while from the nucleus upon the opposite side of the sun a new tail
would appear to be formed.

Upon this hypothesis, the extraordinary length of their tails and the
fact that stars are visible through the densest portion of them is
explained; as also the fact that they so rapidly disappear from view
when moving from the sun, the light received by them from the sun
being in proportion to their distance from it, and but little of that
reflected.

JOHN M. HUGHES.

Brooklyn, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

[FOR THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN.]




ON COMETS.


When we see a comet approaching the sun with its tail following in the
orbit of the nucleus, we have no great difficulty in believing the
common theory that a comet consists of nucleus attracted toward the sun,
while the tail is repelled; and that we see the whole of it. But as it
approaches the sun, difficulties arise that make us doubt whether the
theory be true.

Let us suppose a comet with a tail 50,000,000 miles in length, and that
it will require two days to pass round the sun. Now the tail, being
always in a line drawn through the center of the sun and center of the
nucleus, will, when it reaches the long axis of the elliptical orbit,
stand perpendicularly to the orbit of the nucleus. That is, the
extremity of the tail farthest from the sun, in addition to its onward
motion, has acquired a lateral motion that has lifted it 50,000,000
miles in the first day of its perihelion. The velocity of the extremity
has been vastly accelerated over that of the nucleus, and it has
moreover a sheer lift above the orbit of the nucleus. Now this lift is
in opposition to gravity; neither is it in consequence of any previous
momentum, for its velocity is accelerated and its previous momentum
would be a hindrance; nor is the lift in consequence of any repelling
force from the sun, for such force would be diminished in proportion to
the square of the distance, and the far end would be acted on less than
the nucleus end of the tail, whereas the velocity of the former is
increased a hundred fold over that of the latter. A polar force in the
comet would merely draw the comet into the sun. We therefore find no
force adequate for such a lift, but on the contrary all the forces are
opposed to it.

But if the first day of the perihelion overwhelms us with difficulty,
the second day will prove disastrous to the common theory. For the
extremity of the tail farthest from the sun will be required to pass
with lateral motion from its perpendicular 100,000,000 miles, so that it
may be in advance of the nucleus and again rest on its orbit. This orbit
is an impassable line, and therefore instantly arrests the prodigious
lateral velocity of the tail. That impassable orbital line is to it
as solid and inflexible as a wall of adamant. The motion so instantly
arrested would be disastrous to any tail, whether composed of gas,
meteorites, or electricity, whatever that may be.

Having shown that the common theory of comets is filled with insuperable
difficulties, I will again call attention to a theory proposed about
eighteen months ago in the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN.

According to this theory, a comet consists of a nucleus and an
atmosphere, for the most part invisible, surrounding it on all sides to
an extent at least equal to the length of the tail. The rays of the sun
in passing through or near the nucleus are so modified as to become
visible in their further progress through the cometic atmosphere, while
all the rest remain invisible. What we call the tail is merely a radius
of the cometic atmosphere made visible, and as the comet moves through
space, only different portions of the atmosphere come in sight, in
obedience to the ordinary laws of light. There is no difficulty in
accounting for the rise and fall of the tail at perihelion, nor for the
tail preceding the nucleus afterward.

The spherical theory accounts easily for the different forms of tail
seen in different comets. The sword shaped tails, at variance with the
common theory, can be accounted for by supposing a slight difference in
density or material in the cometic atmosphere, which will deflect the
light as seen. The comet of 1823, which cannot be explained on the
common theory, is very easily explained on the spherical. That comet
showed two tails, apparently of equal length, which moved opposite to
each other, and perpendicularly to the orbit of the nucleus, and showing
no signs of repulsive force from the sun. On the spherical theory it is
only necessary to suppose such an arrangement of the nucleus as would
reflect the rays of the sun laterally; a slight modification of the
nucleus would give not only two but any number of tails pointing in
different directions.

It may be objected to the spherical theory that a tail 50,000,000 miles
long would call for a sphere 100,000,000 miles in diameter, and that
would be too vast for our solar system. But it is claimed for this
sphere that it consists of the same material as the so-called tail, and
that it has the same capability of moving among planets without manifest
disturbance to either.

The sphere at the perihelion would envelop the sun, and as a noticeable
reduction is sometimes found in its so-called tail, the cometic
atmosphere may impart to the sun at that time whatever is necessary to
its use.

That there is something in common between the sun's corona and cometary
matter was shown by the last solar eclipse observed in South Pacific
Ocean, where the spectrum of sun's corona was found to be the same as
that of a comet's tail. Are we to attribute in any degree the different
appearances of the sun's corona to the presence or absence of a comet
at its perihelion? At the eclipse of the sun seen in Upper Egypt two or
three years ago, a comet was seen close to the sun, but I have seen no
account of the appearance of the corona at that time.

FURMAN LEAMING, M.D.

Romney, Tippecanoe Co. Indiana.

       *       *       *       *       *




FORMS OF IVY.


It is scarcely possible for us to bee too emphatic in our praises of the
most distinct forms of ivy, since but few other hardy climbing plants
ever give to us a tithe of their freshness and variety. A good long
stretch of wall covered with a selection of the best green-leaved kind
