International Breeders' Foal stakes at Kempton Park, August; North Derby
at Newcastle, Summer; St. George stakes at Liverpool, July; Bickerstaffe
stakes and St. Leger at Liverpool, August; Midland Derby stakes at
Leicester, July; and Ebor St. Leger at York, August; in addition to the
following races in 1888: Champion stakes at Newmarket, Second October;
Rous Memorial and Hardwicke stakes at Ascot, and Eclipse stakes at
Sandown Park, Second Summer. Merry Hampton's name also appears in the
Kempton Park Royal stakes of 10,000 sovereigns at the Spring Meeting of
1889.--_Ill. London News_.

[Illustration: MERRY HAMPTON. THE WINNER OF THE DERBY, 1887.]

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FALLS OF GAIRSOPPA.


At the extreme south of the presidency of Bombay, separating the
district of Kanara from the territory of Mysore, are the too little
known Falls of Gairsoppa.

Far higher than Niagara, four distinct divisions of the river Shiravatti
(traditionally created by a cleft made by the arrow of the great god
Rama) fall over a precipice of gneiss rock into an abyss eight hundred
feet below. Each of these cataracts differs in type of flow.

The "Rajah," eight hundred and thirty feet, and at a breadth of
fifty-six, shoots silent and sheer over an uplifted lip of rock in the
bed of the stream, casting a dark shadow behind him when faced by the
sun; the "Roarer" makes noise enough in its headlong rush to vibrate the
strong, stone-built travelers' bungalow on the heights above; the
"Rocket" is straight in descent, and, as a commentator has already
remarked, as much like a rocket as anything else; and "La Dame Blanche,"
a triptych of rhythmical flow, spreads a dainty, silky, sheen of white,
whispering, glistening, softly falling water over a slightly shelving
width of rock, touched here and there with prismatic color and strong
light.

[Illustration: THE FALLS OF GAIRSOPPA, BETWEEN KANARA AND MYSORE, BOMBAY
PRESIDENCY, INDIA

The Falls From Below. The Falls From Above.]

At the bottom of the chasm, seven hundred feet across, and stretching
over a muddy, turbulent, seething cauldron of spray, a brilliantly
distinct rainbow in the full light of day may be seen with its scarcely
less glorious reflection, dazzlingly beautiful.

In these regions 210 inches of rain is an average downpour for the
monsoon between May and October, the heaviest fall being generally in
July. The cataracts then become frequently confluent, though not more
picturesque. They are then too difficult of access, and the whole
district is very malarious. December and January are the best months for
travelers, before the dry season fairly sets in again, during which
there is but little water, even insufficient to form four distinct
falls.

The best route to them is from Bombay to Honaurre by sea, _via_ Kawai,
and on to Old Gairsoppa by river boat and palanquin to the "Jog," as the
special points of interest (the "Falls") are called by the Kanarese.

To the enthusiastic shikari, however, the way from Hubli (on the
Southern Mahratta Railway, easily reached by G.I.P. line from Bombay),
taking him, as it does, through the very happiest hunting grounds of the
presidency, where all game, small and large, abounds, will have
attraction enough; and at Giddapur, the last stage, within twelve miles
of the Falls, there is a courteous English-speaking native magistrate,
willing and able to help the traveler on his way. Our engravings are
from drawings by Mr. J.E. Page, C.E.--_London Graphic_.

       *       *       *       *       *




SPONGES.


As the last of a course of lectures upon "Recent Scientific Researches
in Australasia," Dr. R. Von Ledenfeld lately delivered a lecture at the
Royal Institution, upon "Recent Additions to our Knowledge of Sponges."
The lecturer did not confine himself to the sponges of Australia alone,
but gave a _resume_ of the results of recent investigations on sponges,
together with several new interesting details observed more especially
in studying the growth of Australian sponges. With a passing reference
to some peculiarities of the lower marine animals of the Australian
coast, Dr. Ledenfeld remarked upon the preponderance of sponges over
other forms of marine life in that part of the world. It has long been a
point of discussion as to whether sponges belong to the vegetable or
animal kingdom, but naturalists are now generally agreed in regarding
them as animals, a conclusion, the lecturer remarked, that Aristotle had
also arrived at.

Sponges grow in a variety of more or less irregular shapes, but it has
been observed that the most regular structures occur in the calcareous
species. As to color, Dr. Ledenfeld remarked that some of the Australian
sponges are of exceptionally brilliant hues, while others range from the
black of the common sponge _(Euspongia officinalis)_ to a pure white.
Also, it may be remarked, the sponges growing in deep water are of less
decided color and more elastic in character than those living in shallow
water, and from the last named quality are more valuable in commerce.
The irregular honeycombed appearance of the sponge is due to a most
complicated canal system, consisting of a series of chambers through
which the water is drawn by the animal in always the same direction.

The inhalent pores are very minute, and open into small subdermal
cavities which communicate by means of interradial tubes with the
ciliated chambers, the latter being very small ramifications of the
interradial channels, and in them the movement causing the current of
water is maintained. From hence all faecal and other matter is
discharged through the oscula, the larger openings observed on the
surface of the sponge. Dr. Ledenfeld showed the different parts of
sponges by means of microscopic slides thrown on to a screen, and also
the shape and arrangement of the chambers in different species. The
ciliated chambers especially attracted attention. They are very small
and circular, and the interior is clothed with cells very similar to the
cilia cells in higher animal life.

These cells are arranged around the ciliated chambers in the form of a
collar, and from each cell flagella protrude, which are in continual
motion. These flagella, like bats' wings, are capable of being bent in
only one direction, so that, in the course of their pendulum-like
motion, in the movement one way the flagella are bent, while in the
return movement they remain stiff, thus causing a current of water
always flowing in one and the same direction. These ciliated chambers
are easily detected in the sponge by means of a microscope, as they
appear more highly colored. After the lecturer had thus given a general
outline of the structure of the sponge, he drew attention to the
character of its food and its method of digestion. It is not known
exactly what the sponge lives upon, but if upon other animals they must
be necessarily very small, owing to the size of its inhalent pores.

The sponge, like the tape-worm, has no stomach, but must absorb its food
through the outer skin from matter in a soluble state, similarly to the
roots of trees. This process of absorption is probably accomplished in
the interradial or ciliated chambers, more probably in the former, as
the latter are generally considered excretory in function. Lime or
silica must also be absorbed from the water by most sponges in order to
make up the skeleton. The skeleton of calcareous sponges consists of a
number of spicules composed of carbonate of lime. These spicules are of
very varied though regular shape, but ordinarily assume a rod-like
needle shape or else a stellate form. In silicious sponges the spicules
are composed of silica, and are generally deposited around axial rods in
concentric layers. The spicules are joined together and cemented by a
body that has been named "spongin," which has much the same chemical
composition as silk, and, like silk, is very elastic. In some varieties
of sponges, especially in the kinds which come into the market, the
skeleton is almost entirely composed of fibers of pure "spongin." These
fibers are so close together as to draw up water by capillary action,
and, indeed, a great deal in the value of a sponge depends upon the
fineness and tenuity of these fibers.

Dr. Ledenfeld again illustrated this stage of his lecture by means of a
number of microscopic slides in which the variety of shape and size of
these spicules and "spongin" fibers were shown. The spicules are some
crutch-like, others spined or echinated, while the deep-sea sponges
appear to grow long thick spicules, which attach the sponge to the
ground by means of grapnel-like ends. In some cases the skeleton seems
to be more or less replaced by sand, the small grains of which are
cemented together by the "spongin."

Dr. Ledenfeld then drew attention to the presence of more highly
developed organs in the sponge. Muscles pervade the whole tissue of the
sponge, but are found more particularly in the superficial parts. One
set of muscles affect the size of the inhalent pores, causing them to
contract or expand, while another set are able to close the pores
altogether, thus acting as a protection from the attack of an enemy. All
these muscles are composed of spindle shaped cells, which are capable of
spasmodic motion, but recently in an Australian sponge, the _Euspongia
canalicula_, the lecturer said he had observed muscles approaching very
nearly in character those of the human frame.

That sponges have nerves is a discovery of recent date by a member of
the Royal Microscopical Society. Dr. Ledenfeld also about the same time
found indications of the presence of a nervous system, but the form in
which he observed the nerves at first apparently differed from those
observed simultaneously. This difference, however, he afterward found to
be due to the manner in which the section had been prepared for
observation. The nerves consist of two cells at the base of a cone-like
projection on the epidermis, and from each cell a fiber runs to the
point of the cone, besides several others connecting them with the
interior of the sponge.

It is remarkable that here again Aristotle has predicted that sponges
have a nervous system, basing his statement on the fact that ancient
Greek mariners foretold storms by the alleged contraction of the sponge.
The reproductive organs of sponges are also very highly developed, and
both ova and spermatozoa are found throughout the sponge, though more
concentrated in the interior. The ova consist of spherical cells, while
the spermatozoa resemble an arrow-head in shape. It has not yet been
ascertained whether two sexes exist in sponges, or whether the ova and
spermatozoa are produced at different periods by the same sponge. When
the embryo has become partly developed, it detaches itself from the
parent sponge, and, issuing from the oscula, propels itself through the
water by means of a number of flagella.

Silicious spicules next appear in its structure, and it then attaches
itself to a rock and assumes its mature form. Sponges are most numerous
in the waters of the temperate and sub-tropical zones, and the
salt-water varieties are by far more numerous than the fresh water.
Thus, while there are not more than ten fresh-water species known, Dr.
Ledenfeld remarked that about one thousand species of salt-water sponges
had been recognized. Each species of the salt-water sponge is, however,
generally found only in limited areas, and very few, all of which
inhabit deep water, are cosmopolitan. This is the more remarkable as Dr.
Ledenfeld asserts that all the sponges inhabiting the rivers of
Australia are identical with the fresh-water sponges of Europe, and in
order to explain this fact he put forward a rather interesting theory.
He assumes that sponge life in rivers has been originally generated by
the introduction of a single, or at most two or three germs by means of
aquatic birds. The inbreeding consequent upon this paucity of sponge
life has produced a certain fixity of character in fresh-water sponges,
and is in direct opposition to the effects of hybridization in the
salt-water sponges, by which they have acquired the capacity of adapting
themselves to local circumstances.

       *       *       *       *       *




HERBET'S TEPID DOUCHE.


Keeping the body clean is indispensable for the preservation of good
health, through obtaining an operation of the skin and expelling matter
whose presence aids in the development of diseases. It is unfortunately
necessary to say that, considering the population as a whole, the
proportion of those who take baths is very small. This is due to the
fact that the habit of cleanliness, which should become a necessity, has
not been early inculcated in every individual; and the reason that this
complement to education is not realized is because the means of
satisfying its exigencies are usually wanting.

We shall not speak of the improved processes that are used solely by the
rich or well-to-do, as these become impracticable where it is a question
of the working classes or of large masses of individuals. It is, in
fact, the last named category that interests us, and we are convinced
that if we get young soldiers and children to hold dirtiness in horror,
we shall be sure that they will later on take care of their bodies
themselves.

The most tempting solution of this question of washing seems to be found
in the use of large pools of running tepid water; but such a process is
too costly for general use, and the most economical one, without doubt,
consists in giving tepid douches.

[Illustration: TEPID WATER DOUCHE]

To our knowledge, the only apparatus in this line that has been devised
was exhibited last year at the exhibition of hygiene in the Loban
barracks. It has been used daily for six years in several garrisons, and
therefore has the sanction of practice.

This apparatus, which is due to Mr. Herbet, consists of a steam boiler
and of an ejector fixed to a reservoir of water and provided with a
rubber tube to which a nozzle is attached. The steam generated in the
boiler passes into the ejector, sucks up the water and forces it out in
a tepid state.

The apparatus thus established did not sufficiently fulfill the purpose
for which it was designed. It was necessary to have a means of varying
the temperature of the water projected, according to the season and
temperature of the air, to have an instantaneous and simple method of
regulating the apparatus, that could be understood by any operator, and
to have the apparatus under the control of the person holding the
nozzle. These difficulties have been solved very simply by causing the
orifice of the nozzle to vary. This nozzle, from whence the jet escapes,
is formed of rings that screw together. When the nozzle is entire, the
jet escapes at a temperature of say 40 deg.. When the first ring is
unscrewed, the water will make its exit at a temperature of 38 deg.. In
order to lower the temperature still further, it is only necessary to
unscrew the other rings in succession, until the desired temperature has
been obtained.

As it is, the apparatus is rendering great services where it has been
introduced; for example, at Besancon and Belfort. It serves, in fact,
for an entire garrison, while that before, the washing was done in each
regiment, thus requiring the use of much space and causing much loss of
time.

Eight men are washed at once for five minutes, say 96 men per hour.
Every minute the men turn right about face, and when they are in file
each rubs the other's back.

Twenty-two pounds of coal and 260 gallons of water are consumed per
hour, and the boiler produces 130 lb. of steam.--_Le Genie Civil_.

       *       *       *       *       *




HOW TO MAKE A STAR FINDER.


Being all of wood, it is easily made by any one who can use a few tools,
the only bit of lathe work necessary being the turned shoulder, K, of
polar axis. A is the baseboard, 9 in. by 5 in., near each corner of
which is inserted an ordinary wood screw, S S, for the purpose of
leveling the base, to which two side pieces are nailed, having the
angle, _x_, equal to the co-latitude of the place. On to these side
pieces is fastened another board, on which is marked the hour circle, F.
Through this board passes the lower end of the polar axis, having a
shoulder turned up on it at K, and is secured by a wooden collar and pin
underneath. On to the upper part of the polar axis is fastened the
declination circle, C, 51/2 in. diameter, made of 1/4 in. baywood, having
the outer rim of a thin compass card divided into degrees pasted on to
it. The hour circle, F, is half of a similar card, with the hours
painted underneath, and divided to 20 minutes. G is the hour index. D is
a straight wooden pointer, 12 in. long, having a piece of brass tube, E,
attached, and a small opening at J, into which is fixed the point of a
common pin by which to set the pointer in declination. H is a nut to
clamp pointer in position. By this simple toy affair I have often picked
up the planet Venus at midday when visible to the naked eye.--_T.R.
Clapham in English Mechanic_.

[Illustration: A STAR FINDER.]

       *       *       *       *       *

The best mode of finding or tracing trichinae in pork by means of a
microscope is the following: Cut a very thin longitudinal slice of the
muscle by means of a very sharp knife or razor. Press it between two
glass slips, and examine by transmitted light, The coiled trichinae may
be readily distinguished from the muscle fiber.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT.

PUBLISHED WEEKLY.

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION, $5 A YEAR.


Sent by mail, postage prepaid, to subscribers in any part of the United
States or Canada. Six dollars a year, sent, prepaid, to any foreign
country.

All the back numbers of THE SUPPLEMENT, from the commencement, January
1, 1876, can be had. Price, 10 cents each.

All the back volumes of THE SUPPLEMENT can likewise be supplied. Two
volumes are issued yearly. Price of each volume, $2.50, stitched in
paper, or $3.50, bound in stiff covers.

COMBINED RATES--One copy of SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN and one copy of
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT, one year, postpaid, $7.00.

A liberal discount to booksellers, news agents, and canvassers.

MUNN & CO., PUBLISHERS,

361 BROADWAY, NEW YORK, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *




PATENTS.


In connection with the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, Messrs. MUNN & Co. are
Solicitors of American and Foreign Patents, have had 42 years'
experience, and now have the largest establishment in the world. Patents
are obtained on the best terms.

A special notice is made in the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN of all Inventions
patented through this Agency, with the name and residence of the
Patentee. By the immense circulation thus given, public attention is
directed to the merits of the new patent, and sales or introduction
often easily effected.

Any person who has made a new discovery or invention can ascertain, free
of charge, whether a patent can probably be obtained, by writing to MUNN
& Co.

We also send free our Hand Book about the Patent Laws, Patents, Caveats,
Trade Marks, their costs, and how procured. Address

MUNN & CO., 361 BROADWAY, NEW YORK.

Branch Office, 622 and 624 F St., Washington, D.C.


THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN

Architects and Builders Edition.

$2.50 a Year. Single Copies, 25 Cents.

This is a Special Edition of THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, issued monthly--on
the first day of the month. Each number contains about forty large
quarto pages, equal to about two hundred ordinary book pages, forming,
practically, a large and splendid MAGAZINE OF ARCHITECTURE, richly
adorned with _elegant plates in colors_ and with fine engravings;
illustrating the most interesting examples of modern Architectural
Construction and allied subjects.

A special feature is the presentation in each number of a variety of the
latest and best plans for private residences, city and country,
including those of very moderate cost as well as the more expensive.
Drawings in perspective and in color are given, together with full
Plans, Specifications, Costs, Bills of Estimate, and Sheets of Details.

No other building paper contains so many plans, details, and
specifications regularly presented as the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN. Hundreds
of dwellings have already been erected on the various plans we have
issued during the past year, and many others are in process of
construction.

Architects, Builders, and Owners will find this work valuable in
furnishing fresh and useful suggestions. All who contemplate building or
improving homes, or erecting structures of any kind, have before them in
this work an almost _endless series of the latest and best examples_
from which to make selections, thus saving time and money.

Many other subjects, including Sewerage, Piping, Lighting, Warming,
Ventilating, Decorating, Laying out of Grounds, etc., are illustrated.
An extensive Compendium of Manufacturers Announcements is also given, in
which the most reliable and approved Building Materials, Goods,
Machines, Tools, and Appliances are described and illustrated, with
addresses of the makers, etc.

The fullness, richness, cheapness, and convenience of this work have won
for it the LARGEST CIRCULATION OF any Architectural publication in the
