
       *       *       *       *       *

[NATURE.]




TO FIND THE DAY OF THE WEEK FOR ANY GIVEN DATE.


Having hit upon the following method of mentally computing the day of the
week for any given date, I send it you in the hope that it may interest
some of your readers. I am not a rapid computer myself, and as I find my
average time for doing any such question is about 20 seconds, I have little
doubt that a rapid computer would not need 15.

Take the given date in 4 portions, viz., the number of centuries, the
number of years over, the month, the day of the month.

Compute the following 4 items, adding each, when found, to the total of the
previous items. When an item or total exceeds 7, divide by 7, and keep the
remainder only.

_The Century Item_.--For old style (which ended September 2, 1752) subtract
from 18. For new style (which began September 14) divide by 4, take
overplus from 3, multiply remainder by 2.

_The Year Item_.--Add together the number of dozens, the overplus, and the
number of 4's in the overplus.

_The Month Item_.--If it begins or ends with a vowel, subtract the number
denoting its place in the year from 10. This, plus its number of days,
gives the item for the following month. The item for January is "0;" for
February or March (the 3d month), "3;" for December (the 12th month), "12."

_The Day Item_ is the day of the month.

The total thus reached must be corrected by deducting "1" (first adding 7,
if the total be "0"), if the date be January or February in a leap year;
remembering that every year divisible by 4 is a leap year, excepting only
the century years, in new style, when the number of centuries is _not_ so
divisible (e.g., 1800).

The final result gives the day of the week, "0" meaning Sunday, "1" Monday,
and so on.

EXAMPLES.

1783, _September_ 18.

17 divided by 4 leaves "1" over; 1 from 3 gives "2;" twice 2 is "4."

83 is 6 dozen and 11, giving 17; plus 2 gives 19, i.e. (dividing by 7),
"5." Total 9, i.e., "2."

The item for August is "8 from 10," i.e., "2;" so, for September, it is "2
plus 3," i.e., "5." Total 7, i.e., "0," which goes out.

18 gives "4." Answer, "_Thursday_."

1676, _February_ 23.

16 from 18 gives "2."

76 is 6 dozen and 4, giving 10; plus 1 gives 11, i.e., "4." Total "6."

The item for February is "3." Total 9, i.e., "2."

23 gives "2." Total "4."

Correction for leap year gives "3." Answer, "_Wednesday_."

LEWIS CARROLL.

       *       *       *       *       *




PRECIOUS STONES OF THE UNITED STATES.


To the recently distributed government report on the mineral resources of
the United States for 1885.[1] Mr. G.F. Kunz contributes an interesting
chapter in which is recorded the progress made during that year in the
discovery and utilization of precious stones.

[Footnote 1: Mineral Resources of the United States: Calendar Year 1885.
Washington: Government Printing Office. 1888.]

In the summer of 1885, a remarkably large pocket containing fine crystals
of muscovite, with brilliant crystals of rutile implanted on them, was
found at the Emerald and Hiddenite Mining Company's works, at Stony Point,
N.C., and was sold in the form of cabinet specimens for $750. While the
soil overlying the rock was being worked, nine crystals of emerald were
found, all of which were doubly terminated, and measured from 1 inch to
3-1/8 inches in length and 1-2/3 inch in width. One of these crystals is
very perfect as a specimen, being of a fine light green color, and weighing
83/4 ounces. It is held by the company at $1,500, and the nine crystals
together at $3,000. Another of these crystals, doubly terminated, measures
21/2 inches by 11/12 of an inch, and is filled with large rhombohedral
cavities, which formerly contained dolomite. The only crystal from this
collection that has been cut into a gem was found in a pocket at a depth of
over 43 feet. In color it is of a pleasing light green, and it weighs
4-22/32 carats. No crystal of a finer color has as yet been found in the
United States, and the gem is held by the company at $200.

During the recent mining, the largest fine crystal of lithia emerald ever
found was also brought to light. It measures 23/4 inches by 3/5 of an inch
by 1/3 of an inch. One end is of a very fine color, and would afford the
largest gem of this mineral yet found, and one which would probably weigh
51/2 carats. With this there was a number of superior crystals and some
ounces of common pieces of the same mineral. The company estimates the
value of this entire yield of hiddenite at about $2,500.

There was also found a quantity of quartz filled with white byssolite,
forming very attractive specimens and valued at $250.

A number of beryls of a fine blue color, resembling the Mourne Mountain
specimens, were found near Mount Antero, Chaffee County, Col. One of these
was 4 inches long and 3/8 of an inch across, with cutting material in it.
The other crystals measured from 1 to 11/4 inch in length, and from 1/5 to
1/3 inch in width.

The large beryl mentioned by Mr. Kunz in the Mineral Resources for 1883 and
1884 has afforded the finest aquamarine of American origin known. It is
brilliant as a cut gem, and, with the exception of a few internal hair-like
striae, is absolutely perfect. It weighs 1333/4 carats, measures 1-2/5 x 1-2/5
x 4/5 inch, and is of a deep bluish green, equal to that of gems from any
known locality.

Mr. G.F. Breed, manager of the Valencia Mica Company, has cut nearly one
hundred aquamarines, ranging from 1/2 carat to 4 carats in weight, and of a
light blue color, from white beryls found in the company's mica mine at
North Grafton, N.H.

A number of fine, deep golden-yellow, blue, and green beryls, equaling any
ever found, have been taken by Mr. M.W. Barse from his mica mine between
New Milford and Litchfield, Conn. Some fine blood-red garnets from this
same locality have been cut into gems.

The largest phenacite crystal ever found is owned by Mr. Whitman Cross. It
was discovered at Crystal Park, Col., weighs 59 pennyweights 6 grains, and
measures 1-4/5 inch in length and 1-1/5 inch in thickness.

Thousands of garnet crystals, found at Ruby Mountain, near Salides, Col.,
have been made into paperweights and sold to tourists. Those that weigh a
few ounces sell for about ten cents each. One was sold that weighed 14
pounds. Apropos of garnets, the discovery, in the heart of New York city,
of as fine a crystal as was ever found on this continent, and weighing 9
pounds 10 ounces, may be mentioned as a matter of peculiar interest.

Several thousand dollars' worth of the wood jasper of Arizona has been cut
into paper weights, charms, and other objects, or polished on one side for
cabinet specimens. Numbers of these articles are now being cut and sold to
tourists along the line of the Atchison, Topeka, and Santa Fe Railroad.

The compact quartzite of Sioux Falls, Dakota, is being quarried and
polished for ornamental purposes. It is known and sold as "Sioux Falls
jasper," and is really the stone referred to by Longfellow in his Hiawatha
as being used for arrow heads. This stone takes a very high polish, and is
found in a variety of pleasing tints, such as chocolate, brownish-red,
brick-red, and yellowish. For the two years previous to 1885, $15,000 worth
of it was sold.

A remarkable mass of rock crystal has been received by Messrs. Tiffany &
Co. from a locality near Cave City, Va. Although this mass weighs 51
pounds, it is but a fragment of the original crystal, which weighed 300
pounds, and which was broken in pieces by the ignorant mountain girl who
found it. The fragment, as it is, will furnish slabs 8 inches square and
from 1/3 to 1 inch thick. The original crystal would have furnished a ball
from 41/2 to 5 inches in diameter, and almost perfect. A number of fine
agates of various kinds were found by Mr. F.C. Yeomans at the same
locality.

The meccanite from Cumberland, R.I., is often spotted with white quartz. It
has been cut into oval stones several inches in length, which take a fine
polish. This quality, coupled with its hardness, makes it a desirable
ornamental gem stone.

Mr. Kunz records the discovery, by himself, in the largest mass of the
Glorieta Mountain (Santa Fe County, N.M.), of pieces of peridot of
sufficient transparency to afford gems one-fifth of an inch in length.

Large quantities of turquoise from Los Cevillos, N.M., have been sold, both
as cabinet specimens and gems; but, unfortunately, many of those of the
finest color have been found to be artificially colored.

Malachite in large masses has been found at the Copper Queen mine at
Bisbee, Oregon. One of these masses weighed 15 pounds and others were quite
as large. All were of good enough quality and large enough for table tops.

In conclusion, Mr. Kunz says that "the National Museum collection of gems,
formed by Prof. F.W. Clarke, is now one of the most complete, for species,
in the United States, and as many of the gems are of more than average
merit, and all can have access to them, this is one of the best
opportunities afforded the student in this country."

       *       *       *       *       *




THE BRAZIL NUT.


[Illustration: THE BRAZIL NUT.]

Every one is acquainted with the hard-shelled, triangular fruit called the
Brazil nut, but there are, perhaps, but few who know anything about the
tree that produces it, or its mode of growth. The Brazil nut tree belongs
to a genus of Lecythidaceae of which there is only one species,
_Bertholletia excelsa_. This tree is a native of Guiana, Venezuela, and
Brazil. It forms large forests on the banks of the Amazons and Rio Negro,
and likewise about Esmeraldas, on the Orinoco, where the natives call it
_juvia_. The natives of Brazil call the fruit _capucaya_, while to the
Portuguese it is known as _castana de maranon_.

The tree is one of the most majestic in the South American forests,
attaining a height of 100 or 150 feet. Its trunk is straight and
cylindrical, and measures about 3 or 4 feet in diameter. The bark is
grayish and very even. At a distance, the tree somewhat resembles a
chestnut. Its branches are alternate, open, very long, and droop toward the
earth. The leaves are alternate, oblong, short petioled, nearly coriaceous,
about 2 feet long by 6 inches wide, entire or undivided, and of a bright
green color. The flowers have a two-parted, deciduous calyx, six unequal
cream-colored petals, and numerous stamens united into a broad, hood-shaped
mass, those at the base being fertile, and the upper ones sterile.

The fruit is nearly orbicular, and about 6 inches in diameter, and has a
hard shell about half an inch thick, which contains from 18 to 24
triangular, wrinkled seeds that are so beautifully packed within the shell
that when once disturbed it is impossible to replace them. When these
fruits are ripe, they fall from the tree and are collected into heaps by
troops of Indians called _Castanhieros_, who visit the forests at the
proper season of the year expressly for this purpose. They are then split
open with an ax, and the seeds (the Brazil nuts of commerce) taken out and
packed in baskets for transportation to Para in the native canoes. The
"meat" that the Brazil nut contains consists of a white substance of the
same nature as that of the common almond, and which is good to eat when
fresh, but which, by reason of its very oily nature, soon gets rancid.
Besides its use as an article of dessert, a bland oil, used by watchmakers
and artists, is obtained from the nut by pressure. Brazil nuts form a
considerable article of export from the port of Para, whence they are
sometimes called Para nuts.

The Brazil nut tree remained for a long time unknown to European botanists,
although the fruit has been from a very remote epoch consumed in large
quantities in certain southern countries of the New World. The first
description of the tree we owe to Humboldt and Bonpland, who established
the genus and species in the botanical part of the account of their voyage.
The genus is dedicated to the illustrious Berthollet.

"We were very fortunate," say these authors, "to find some of these nuts in
our travels on the Orinoco. For three months we had been living on nothing
but poor chocolate and rice cooked in water, always without butter, and
often without salt, when we procured a large quantity of the fresh fruits
of the _Bertholletia_. It was along in June, and the natives had just
gathered them."

The formation of a large woody fruit, often in the shape of an urn, from
which the top spontaneously separates in the form of a lid, is one of the
characteristics of the order Lecythidaceae, which includes the _Couronpita
Guianensis_, or "cannon ball tree"; the gigantic _Lecythis ollaria_, or
"monkey-pot tree," whose great woody pericarps serve as drinking vessels;
and the _Lecythis Zabucajo_, whose fruit is known in the market as sapucaia
nuts, and is greatly superior to the closely allied Brazil nuts as regards
flavor and ease of digestion.

All the trees of this order are natives of South America, and especially of
Guiana.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE ACTION OF THE MAGNET IN HYPNOSIS.


Mr. Tamburini some time ago observed that, during a period of lethargy, the
approach of a magnet produced in persons affected with hysterical hypnosis
a series of modifications of the respiratory functions and of
contractility.

From some very careful experiments made by him and Mr. Righi in common,
upon the lady who was the principal subject of his observations, it results
that (1) it makes no difference whether the magnet be presented by its
poles or its neutral line; (2) that any mass of metal whatever acts like a
magnet; (3) that an electromagnet produces exactly the same effect whether
it be or be not excited by a current; and (4) that a glass tube filled with
cold or warm water likewise produces analogous effects, which disappear
when the water is raised to the temperature of the human body.

It seems, therefore, that the magnetic properties of the magnet count for
nothing in the phenomena observed.--_Journal de Physique_.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT.

PUBLISHED WEEKLY.

Terms of Subscription, $5 a Year.

Sent by mail, postage prepaid, to subscribers in any part of the United
States or Canada. Six dollars a year, sent, prepaid, to any foreign
country.

All the back numbers of THE SUPPLEMENT, from the commencement, January 1,
1876, can be had. Price, 10 cents each.

All the back volumes of THE SUPPLEMENT can likewise be supplied. Two
volumes are issued yearly. Price of each volume, $2.50, stitched in paper,
or $3.50, bound in stiff covers.

COMBINED RATES--One copy of SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN and one copy of SCIENTIFIC
AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT, one year, postpaid, $7.00.

A liberal discount to booksellers, news agents, and canvassers.


MUNN & CO., Publishers,

361 Broadway, New York, N.Y.


       *       *       *       *       *


PATENTS.

In connection with the Scientific American, Messrs. MUNN & Co. are
Solicitors of American and Foreign Patents, have had 39 years' experience,
and now have the largest establishment in the world. Patents are obtained
on the best terms.

A special notice is made in the Scientific American of all Inventions
patented through this Agency, with the name and residence of the Patentee.
By the immense circulation thus given, public attention is directed to the
merits of the new patent, and sales or introduction often easily effected.

Any person who has made a new discovery or invention can ascertain, free of
charge, whether a patent can probably be obtained, by writing to MUNN & Co.

We also send free our Hand Book about the Patent Laws, Patents, Caveats.
Trade Marks, their costs, and how procured. Address

MUNN & CO., 361 Broadway, New York.

Branch Office, 622 and 624 F St., Washington, D.C.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN

ARCHITECTS AND BUILDERS EDITION.

$2.50 a Year. Single Copies, 25 Cents.

This is a Special Edition of THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, issued monthly--on
the first day of the month. Each number contains about forty large quarto
pages, equal to about two hundred ordinary book pages, forming,
practically, a large and splendid Magazine of Architecture, richly
adorned with _elegant plates in colors_ and with fine engravings;
illustrating the most interesting examples of modern Architectural
Construction and allied subjects.

A special feature is the presentation in each number of a variety of the
latest and best plans for private residences, city and country, including
those of very moderate cost as well as the more expensive. Drawings in
perspective and in color are given, together with full Plans,
Specifications, Costs, Bills of Estimate, and Sheets of Details.

No other building paper contains so many plans, details, and specifications
regularly presented as the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN. Hundreds of dwellings have
already been erected on the various plans we have issued during the past
year, and many others are in process of construction.

Architects, Builders, and Owners will find this work valuable in furnishing
fresh and useful suggestions. All who contemplate building or improving
homes, or erecting structures of any kind, have before them in this work an
almost _endless series of the latest and best examples_ from which to make
selections, thus saving time and money.

Many other subjects, including Sewerage, Piping, Lighting, Warming,
Ventilating, Decorating, Laying out of Grounds, etc. are illustrated. An
extensive Compendium of Manufacturers' Announcements is also given, in
which the most reliable and approved Building Materials, Goods, Machines,
Tools, and Appliances are described, and illustrated, with addresses of the
makers, etc.

The fullness, richness, cheapness, and convenience of this work have won
for it the Largest Circulation of any Architectural publication in the
world.

MUNN & CO., Publishers, 361 Broadway, New York.

A Catalogue of valuable books on Architecture, Building, Carpentry,
Masonry, Heating, Warming, Lighting, Ventilation, and all branches of
industry pertaining to the art of Building, is supplied free of charge,
sent to any address.

       *       *       *       *       *

BUILDING PLANS and SPECIFICATIONS.

In connection with the publication of the BUILDING EDITION of the
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, Messrs. Munn & Co. furnish plans and specifications
for buildings of every kind, including Churches, Schools, Stores,
