velocity will exceed that of the acoustic ones. That is to say, if a
person fell into water from a great height, and all his senses were
sufficiently acute, he would first perceive a luminous sensation when
the first optical wave reached him, then he would perceive the sound
produced, and later still he would feel, through a slight tremor, the
mechanical wave.[1]

[Footnote 1: Certain persons, as well known, undergo an optical
impression under the action of certain sounds.]

[Illustration: I]

Under the action of the same mechanical energy there form, then, in a
mass of fluid, waves that vary in nature, intensity, and velocity of
propagation; and although but three modes appreciable to our senses have
been cited, it does not follow that these are the only ones possible.

We may remark, again, that if we produce a single wave upon water, it
will be propagated in a uniform motion, and will form in front of it
successive waves whose velocity of propagation is accelerated.

This may explain why sounds perceived at great distances are briefer
than at small ones. A detonation that gives a quick dead sound at a few
yards is of much longer duration, and softer at a great distance.

The laws that govern the system of wave propagation are, then, very
complex.

[Illustration: II]

II.--If an obstacle be in the way of the waves, there will occur in each
of them an _alteration_, a break, which it will carry along with it to a
greater or less distance. This succession of alterations forms a trace
behind the obstacle, and in opposition to the line of the centers.
Finally, if the obstacle itself emits waves in space that are of less
intensity then those which meet it, these little waves will extend in
the wake of the large ones, and will form a trace of parabolic form
situated upon the line of the centers.

[Illustration: III]

III.--Let us admit, then, that the sun, through the peculiar energy that
develops upon its surface or in its atmosphere, engenders in ethereal
space successive waves of varying nature and intensity, as has been said
above, and let us admit that its _mechanical_ waves are traversed
obliquely (Fig. 1) by any spherical body--by a comet, for example; then,
under the excitation of the waves that it is traversing, and through its
velocity, the comet will itself enter into action, and produce
mechanical waves in its turn. As the trace produced in the solar waves
consists of an agitation of the ether on such trace, it will become
apparent, if we admit that every luminous effect is produced by an
excitation--a setting of the ether in vibration. The mechanical waves
engender of themselves, then, an emission of optical waves that render
perceptible the alteration which they create in each other.

Let a be the position of the comet. The altered wave, a, will carry
along the mark of such alteration in the direction a b, while at the
same time extending transversely the waves emitted by the comet. During
this time the comet will advance to a', and the wave will be altered in
its turn, and carry such alteration in the direction, a' b'.

The succession of all these alterations will be found, then, upon a
curve a'' d' d, whose first elements, on coming from the comet, will be
upon the resultant of the comet's velocity, and of the propagation of
the solar waves. Consequently, the slower the motion of the comet, with
respect to the velocity of the solar waves, the closer will such
resultant approach the line of centers, and the more rectilinear will
appear the trace or tail of the comet.

[Illustration: IV]

IV.--If the comet have satellites, we shall see, according to the
relative position of these, several tails appear, and these will seem to
form at different epochs. If c and s be the positions of a comet and a
satellite, it will be seen that if, while the comet is proceeding to c',
the satellite, through its revolution around it, goes to s', the traces
formed at c and s will be extended to d and d', and that we shall have
two tails, c' d and s' d', which will be separated at d and d' and seem
to be confounded toward c' s'.

V.--When the comet recedes from the sun, the same effect will occur--the
tail will precede it, and will be so much the more in a line with the
sun in proportion as the velocity of the solar waves exceeds that of the
comet.

If we draw a complete diagram (Fig. 4), and admit that the alteration of
the solar waves persists indefinitely, we shall see (supposing the
phenomenon to begin at a) that when the comet is at a 1, the tail will
and be at a 1 b; when it is a 2 the tail will be at a 2 b'; and when it
is at a 4, the tail will have become an immense spiral, a 4 b'''. As in
reality the trace is extinguished in space, we never see but the origin
of it, which is the part of it that is constantly new--that is to say,
the part represented in the spirals of Fig. 4.

The comet of 1843 crossed the perihelion with a velocity of 50 leagues
per second; it would have only required the velocity of the solar waves'
propagation to have been 500 leagues per second to have put the tail in
a sensibly direct opposition with the sun.

Knowing the angle [gamma] (Fig. 5) that the tangent to the orbit makes
with the sun at a given point, and the angle [delta] of the track upon
such tangent, as well as the velocity v of the comet, we can deduce
therefrom the velocity V of the solar waves by the simple expression:

  V = v x (sinus [delta] / sinus([gamma] - [delta])) or (Fig. 1),

  V = da/t'',

t'' being the time taken to pass over aa''.

[Illustration: V]

VI.--The tail, then, is not a special matter which is transported in
space with the comet, but a disturbance in the solar waves, just as
sound is an atmospheric disturbance which is propagated with the
velocity of the sonorous wave, although the air is not transported. The
tail which we see in one position, then, is not that which we see in
another; it is constantly renewed. Consequently, it is easy to conceive
how, in as brief a time as it took the comet of 1843 to make a half
revolution round the sun, the tail which extended to so great a distance
appeared to sweep the 180 deg. of space, while at the same time remaining in
opposition to the great luminary.

[Illustration: VI]

The spiral under consideration may be represented practically. If to a
vertical pipe we adapt a horizontal one that revolves with a certain
velocity, and throws out water horizontally, it will be understood that,
from a bird's eye view, the jet will form a spiral. Each drop of water
will recede radially in space, the spiral will keep forming at the jet,
and if, through any reason, the latter alone be visible, we shall see a
nearly rectilinear jet that will seem to revolve with the pipe.

Finally, if the jet be made to describe a curve, m n (Fig. 4), while it
is kept directed toward the opposite of a point, c, the projected water
will mark the spiral indicated, and this will continue to widen, and
each drop will recede in the direction shown by the arrows.

[Illustration: VII]

VII.--It seems to result from this explanation that all the planets and
their satellites ought to produce identical effects, and have the
appearance of comets. In order to change the conditions, it suffices to
admit that the ethereal mass revolves in space around the sun with a
velocity which is in each place that of the planets there; and this is
very reasonable if, admitting the nebular hypothesis, we draw the
deduction that the cause that has communicated the velocity to the
successive rings has communicated it to the ethereal mass.

The planets, then, have no appreciable, relative velocity in space, and
for this reason do not produce mechanical waves; and, if they become
capable of doing so through a peculiar energy developed at their
surface, as in the case of the sun, they are still too weak to give very
perceptible effects. The satellites, likewise, have relatively too
feeble velocities.

The comet, on the contrary, directly penetrates the solar waves, and
sometimes has a relatively great velocity in space. If its proper
velocity be of directly opposite direction to that of the ethereal
mass's rotation, it will then be capable of producing sufficiently
intense mechanical effects to affect our vision.

VIII.--Finally, seeing the slight distances at which these stars pass
the sun, the attraction upon the comet and its satellites may be very
different, and the velocity of rotation of the latter, being added to or
deducted from that of the forward motion, there may occur (as in the
case shown in Fig. 6) a separation of a satellite from the principal
star. The comet then appears to separate into two, and each part follows
different routes in space; or, as in Fig. 7, one of the satellites may
either fall into the sun or pursue an elliptical orbit and become
periodical, while the principal star may preserve a parabolic orbit, and
make but one appearance.--_A. Goupil._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE DOUBLE ROLE OF THE STING OF THE HONEY BEE.

[Footnote: Translated from an article entitled "Ueber eine doppelrolle
des stachels der honigbienen" in _Deutschamerikanische Apotheker
Zeitung_, 15 Jan., 1885, Jahrg. 5, p. 664; there reprinted from _Ind.
Blatter_.]


Very important and highly interesting discoveries have recently been
made in regard to a double role played by the sting of the honey bee.
These discoveries explain some hitherto inexplicable phenomena in the
domestic economy of the ants. It is already known that the honey of our
honey bees, when mixed with a tincture of litmus, shows a distinct red
color, or, in other words, has an acid reaction. It manifests this
peculiarity because of the volatile formic acid which it contains. This
admixed acid confers upon crude honey its preservative power. Honey
which is purified by treatment with water under heat, or the so-called
honey-sirup, spoils sooner, because the formic acid is volatilized. The
honey of vicious swarms of bees is characterized by a tart taste and a
pungent odor. This effect is produced by the formic acid, which is
present in excess in the honey. Hitherto it has been entirely unknown in
what way the substratum of this peculiarity of honey, the formic acid in
the honey, could enter into this vomit from the honey stomach of the
workers. Only the most recent investigations have furnished us an
explanation of this process. The sting of the bees is used not only for
defense, but quite principally serves the important purpose of
contributing to the stored honey an antizymotic and antiseptic
substance.

The observation has recently been made that the bees in the hive, even
when they are undisturbed, wipe off on the combs the minute drops of bee
poison (formic acid) which from time to time exude from the tip of their
sting. And this excellent preservative medium is thus sooner or later
contributed to the stored honey. The more excitable and the more ready
to sting the bees are, the greater will be the quantity of formic acid
which is added to the honey, and the admixture of which good honey
needs. The praise which is so commonly lavished upon the Ligurian race
of our honey bees, which is indisposed to sting--and such praise is
still expressed at the peripatetic gatherings of German bee-masters--is
therefore from a practical point of view a false praise. Now we
understand also why the stingless honey bees of South America collect
little honey. It is well known that never more than a very small store
of honey is found in felled trees inhabited by stingless _Melipona_.
What should induce the _Melipona_ to accumulate stores which they could
not preserve? They lack formic acid. Only three of the eighteen
different known species of honey bees of northern Brazil have a sting. A
peculiar phenomenon in the life of certain ants has always been
problematical, but now it finds also its least forced explanation. It is
well known that there are different grain-gathering species of ants. The
seeds of grasses and other plants are often preserved for years in their
little magazines, without germinating. A very small red ant, which drags
grains of wheat and oats into its dwellings, lives in India. These ants
are so small that eight or twelve of them have to drag on one grain with
the greatest exertion. They travel in two separate ranks over smooth or
rough ground, just as it comes, and even up and down steps, at the same
regular pace. They have often to travel with their booty more than a
thousand meters, to reach their communal storehouse. The renowned
investigator Moggridge repeatedly observed that when the ants were
prevented from reaching their magazines of grain, the seeds begun to
sprout. The same was the case in abandoned magazines of grain. Hence the
ants know how to prevent the sprouting of the grains, but the capacity
for sprouting is not destroyed. The renowned English investigator John
Lubbock, who communicates this and similar facts in his work entitled
"Ants, Bees, and Wasps," adds that it is not yet known in what way the
ants prevent the sprouting of the collected grains. But now it is
demonstrated that here also it is only the formic acid, whose
preservative influence goes so far that it can make seed incapable of
germination for a determinate time or continuously.

It may be mentioned that we have also among us a species of ant which
lives on seeds, and stores these up. This is our _Lasius niger_, which
carries seeds of _Viola_ into its nests, and, as Wittmack has
communicated recently to the Sitzungsberichte der gesellschaft
naturforschender freunde zu Berlin, does the same with the seeds of
_Veronica hederaefolia_.

Syke states in his account of an Indian ant, _Pheidole providens_, that
this species collects a great store of grass-seeds. But he observed that
the ants brought their store of grain into the open air to dry it after
the monsoon storms. From this it appears that the preservative effect of
the formic acid is destroyed by great moisture, and hence this drying
process. So that among the bees the honey which is stored for winter
use, and among the ants the stores of grain which serve for food, are
preserved by one and the same fluid, formic acid.


EDITORIAL NOTE.

This same theory has been suggested many times by our most advanced
American bee-keepers. It has been hinted that this same formic acid was
what made honey a poison to many people, and that the sharp sting of
some honey, notably that from bass wood or linden, originated in this
acid from the poison sac. If this is the correct explanation, it seems
strange that the same kind of honey is always peculiar for greater or
less acidity as the case may be. We often see bees with sting extended
and tipped with a tiny drop of poison; but how do we know that this
poison is certainly mingled with the honey? Is this any more than a
guess?--_A.J. Cook, in Psyche_.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHLORIDES IN RAINFALL OF 1884.


We are apt to regard the rain solely as a product of distillation, and,
as such, very pure. A little reflection and a very slight amount of
experimental examination will quickly disabuse those who have this
mistaken and popular impression of their error. A great number of bodies
which arise from industrial processes, domestic combustion of coal,
natural changes in vegetable and animal matter, terrestrial disturbances
as tornadoes and volcanic eruptions, vital exhalations, etc., are
discharged into the atmosphere, and, whether by solution or mechanical
contact, descend to the surface of the earth in the rain, leaving upon
its evaporation in many instances the most incontestable evidences of
their presence. The acid precipitation around alkali and sulphuric acid
works is well known; the acid character of rains collected near and in
cities, and the remarkable ammoniacal strength of some local rainfalls,
have been fully discussed. The exhaustive experiments of Dr. Angus Smith
in Scotland, and the interesting reports of French examiners, have made
the scientific world familiar, not only qualitatively but
quantitatively, with the chemical nature of some rains, as well as with
their solid sedimentary contents.

Some years ago my attention was unpleasantly drawn to the fact that the
rain water in our use reacted for chlorine; and on finding this due
solely to the washing out from the atmosphere of suspended particles of
chloride of sodium or other chlorides or free chlorine, it appeared
interesting to determine the average amount of these salts in the rain
water of the sea coast. The results given in this paper refer to a
district on Staten Island, New York harbor, at a point four miles from
the ocean, slightly sheltered from the ocean's immediate influence by
the intervention of low ranges of hills. They were communicated to the
Natural Science Association of Staten Island, but the details of the
observations may prove of interest to the readers of the _Quarterly_,
and may there serve as a record more widely accessible.

It has long been recognized that the source of chlorine in rainfalls
near the sea was the sea itself, the amount of chlorides, putting aside
local exceptions arising from cities or manufactories, increasing with
the proximity of the point of observation to the ocean, and also showing
a marked relation to the exposure of the position chosen to violent
storms. Thus the west coast rainfalls of Ireland contain larger
quantities of chlorides than those of the east, and the table given by
Dr. Smith shows the variations in neighboring localities on the same
seafront. The chlorides of the English rains diminish as the observer
leaves the sea coast. In the following observations the waters of
thirty-two rains were collected, the chlorine determined by nitrate of
silver in amounts of the water varying from one liter to one-half a
liter, and in some instances less. While it is likely that some of the
chlorine was due to the presence of chlorides other than common salt, as
the position of the point of observation is not removed more than a mile
from oil distilleries and smelting and sulphuric acid works in New
Jersey, yet this could not even generally have been so, as the rain
storms came, for the greater number of instances, from the east, in an
opposite direction to the position of the factories alluded to. It has
also been noticed by Mr. A. Hollick, to whom these observations were of
interest, that in heavy storms a salt film often forms upon fruit
exposed to the easterly gales upon the shores of the island.

The yearly average for chlorine is 0.228 grain per gallon; for sodic
chloride, 0.376 grain. The total rainfall in our region for 1884, as
reported by Dr. Draper at Central Park, was 52.25 inches, somewhat
higher than usual, as the average for a series of years before gives 46
inches; but taking these former figures, we find that for that year
(1884) each acre of ground received, accepting the results obtained by
my examination, 76.24 avoirdupois pounds of common salt, if we regard
the entire chlorine contents of the rains as due to that body, or 46.23
pounds of chlorine alone.

In comparison with this result, we find that at Caen, in France, an
examination of the saline ingredients of the rain gave for one year
about 85 pounds of mineral matter per acre, of which 40 pounds were
regarded as common salt.

Although chlorine is almost constantly present in plant tissues, it is
not indispensable for most plants, and for those assimilating it in
small amounts, our rainfall would seem to offer an ample supply. These
facts open our eyes to the possible fertilizing influence of rains, and
they also suggest to what extent rains may exert a corrosive action when
they descend charged with acid vapors.--_L.P. Gratacap, in School of
Mines Quarterly_.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHROMATOSCOPE.


Some time ago Mr. J.D. Hardy devised an instrument, which he has named a
chromatoscope, so easily made by any one who has a spot lens that we
take the following description from the _Journal_ of the Royal
Microscopical Society: "Its chief purpose is that of illuminating and
defining objects which are nonpolarizable, in a similar manner to that
in which the polariscope defines polarizable objects. It can also be
applied to many polarizable objects. This quality, combined with the
transmission of a greater amount of light than is obtainable by the
polariscope, renders objects thus seen much more effective. It is
constructed as follows: Into the tube of the spot lens a short tube is
made to move freely and easily. This inner tube has a double flange, the
outer one, which is milled, for rotating, and the inner one for carrying
a glass plate. This plate is made of flat, clear glass, and upon it are
cemented by a very small quantity of balsam three pieces of colored
(stained) glass, blue, red, and green, in the proportion of about 8, 5,
and 3. The light from the lamp is allowed to pass to some extent through
the interspaces, and is by comparison a strong yellow, thus giving four
principal colors. Secondary colors are formed by a combination of the
rays in passing through the spot lens.

"The stained glass should be as rich in color and as good in quality as
possible, and a better effect is obtained by three pieces of stained
glass than by a number of small pieces. The application of the
chromatoscope is almost unlimited, as it can be used with all objectives
up to the 1/8. Transparent objects, particularly crystals which will not
polarize, diatoms, infusoria, palates of mollusks, etc., can not only be
seen to greater advantage, but their parts can be more easily studied.
As its cost is merely nominal, it can be applied to every instrument,
large or small; and when its merits and its utility by practice are
known, I am confident that it will be considered a valuable accessory to
the microscope."

       *       *       *       *       *

Prof. W.O. Atwater, as the results of a series of experiments, finds,
contrary to the general opinion of chemists, that plants assimilate
nitrogen from the atmosphere. They take up the greatest quantity when
supplied with abundant nourishment from the soil. Well fed plants
acquired fully one-half their total nitrogen from the air. It seems
probable that the free nitrogen of the air is in some way assimilated by
the plants.

       *       *       *       *       *

A catalogue, containing brief notices of many important scientific
papers heretofore published in the SUPPLEMENT, may be had gratis at this
office.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT.

PUBLISHED WEEKLY.

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION, $5 A YEAR.


Sent by mail, postage prepaid, to subscribers in any part of the United
States or Canada. Six dollars a year, sent, prepaid, to any foreign
country.

All the back numbers of THE SUPPLEMENT, from the commencement, January
1, 1876, can be had. Price, 10 cents each.

All the back volumes of THE SUPPLEMENT can likewise be supplied. Two
volumes are issued yearly. Price of each volume, $2.50, stitched in
