the rules and niceties which had guided earlier colonization grew thin
and wore away.  It was merely a question of how much aggression the
reigning superpowers would allow.  The Four were still a force to be
reckoned with.

2)  N-KB3

In the current balance the United Commonwealth held the greatest sway,
its advanced technology and more plentiful resources always keeping it
one step ahead of Soviet Space.   The Americans had been the first to
colonize, and first in deep-space exploration, the advantages of which
were still paying off.

N-QB3

The New Japanese Republic---Empire, in everything but name---was
strong, but surprisingly benevolent.  For the first time in its modern
history this serious, hard-working nation had the room and resources to
keep its naturally overachieving peoples busy and content.  There was
no longer any reason for the underlying brutality of earlier Japanese
culture, and in truth many of the more aggressive social and political
stances had begun to lose favor among the masses.  How long this
relative inner calm would last none could say, and few thought to cross
them.  In romanticized histories of the second World War the saying,
"Let sleeping dragons lie," had been used to refer to the United
States.  It now applied with equal and ironic aptness to the Japanese.

3)  B-N5

But the fastest growing, and to many the most frightening of the Space
giants, was the metal-churning monster known simply as 'The German
States'.  Their technology and industrial determination once more
bringing them to the fore of the political arena, this born-again
superpower, in the eyes of many, was the card on which the growing
instability would turn.  And the Germans themselves, for reasons not
entirely clear, seemed to savor this new role, and to do everything
possible to enhance it.  Most had believed (not without cause) that it
was they who encouraged the Cantons, and therefore they who would soon
be making their presence felt in the outlying sectors.  But when the
time for such a move had come---the ruthless destruction by mercenaries
of half the Canton fleet at Centaurus (so read the propaganda
line)---they had shown no such inclination, choosing instead to remain
neutral.  True, their moneys and weapons were sometimes involved; but
by all legitimate intelligence not a single German squadron or military
adviser had been seen within the whole of Andersen sector during the
dispute.  There could be no denying, however, that their geological
fleets had moved in quietly after the destruction of the Laurian
ore-planet, recovering valuable mineral wastes that the Cantons could
not.  The mysterious 'gravity station' had also disappeared.

P-Q3

Historians and sociologists who studied the German peoples had found
themselves in sudden demand among the politicians and media of the
smaller, more skittish nations; and their separate conclusions had been
nothing if not ambiguous.  The general consensus among the most
respected, however, had been that history's "romantic Huns" were as
mysterious and unreadable a people as God ever put on the Earth.  No
one could know what the Germans were capable of, for good or ill, until
they did it.  In World War II they had played the part of heinous
villains (and done so with terrifying cruelty); in the reshaping of
Europe after the collapse of the Communist Bloc, they had acted as
generous unifiers, and staunch defenders of the lesser democracies.
That this latter posture had finally and decisively cut the political
binds and military restrictions imposed by the Allies after the fall of
the Third Reich, was a fact that some (though not all) tended to
overlook.  The one consistency throughout had been an aggressive and
self-righteous pursuit of nationalistic goals, based partly, but not
solely, on a continuing discomfort with Western humanitarian ideals.
"The Germans don't want freedom," the 20th Century author had declared.
 "They don't understand it.  What they want is a strong leader, and a
cause worth fighting for."  But here again, words could never quite
capture the stubborn fiber of the German spirit.

And, of course, those who did not fit the negative stereotype---there
were many---were human beings just like any other, complete with their
share of artists, dissidents, dreamers, idealists and alternative
politicians.  That those in power continued to be for the most part
conservative, flag waving nationalists (as indeed had become the case
in the United Commonwealth) did not mean that the Germans had no heart.
 Many quiet, everyday working people secretly hoped for the emergence
of a more moderate geopolitical stance; and few would deny that a truly
good German was as unselfish and compassionate an individual as one
could ever hope to find.  Unfortunately, fierce nationalism remained,
and the end result was always the same:  subtle but continuous
expansionism.

4)  P-Q4

But by all appearances this was not to be a (directly) German war.

B-Q2

Yet the shadow of her past, and continued arms build-up, bred little
trust among her neighbors.


  5)  N-B3

There was nothing particularly unique about the Belgian-Swiss
Alliance---the most integral of the 'intermediate' powers
involved---although to themselves it seemed a thing of great
importance, occupying countless hours of thought and preparation.
Formed out of mutual colonial interest scarcely a dozen years before,
it had since made substantial (if in the eyes of the affluent, still
modest) gains in and around the Berlioz Quadrant, and was currently
exploring the regions that lay beyond---the limits of man's domain in
that direction.

Left behind by the sweeping, mechanized changes of the past two
centuries, these proud and businesslike peoples, not wholly dissimilar,
now seemed resolutely determined to improve their lot, to gain
respectability, and to leave their mark on future histories of the era.
 Whatever that might mean.

P x P

The Belgian Empire of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries had
long since past into dust like the ruins of Ozymandias, leaving it a
diminutive, unimportant nation of temporal and unstable affluence,
subject to the whims and power-plays of its larger, more industrialized
neighbors.  Like the Germans of the late 1930's, their aggression began
with a legitimate (if distorted) complaint.  Glorious, upright Mother
Belgium had been raped again and again.  That these feelings of injury
and lost wealth has survived for so many generations, provided a rather
grim example of the dangers inherent in an inbred culture which shuts
out change, clinging instead to a proud and class-conscious society.

In fairness, the pattern of outside domination and disrespect had
continued until the all too recent past.  Their bitterness was not
wholly unjustified.  That their own oppression of the Africans during
the days of the ivory trade had been a major source of their one-time
wealth, was not (like the skeletons in so many national closets)
something they tended to weigh into the balance.

6)  N x P


The descendants of Switzerland had reasons and motives that were more
subtle, if equally implacable.  Europe's perennial pacifist and bastion
of neutrality had been left behind for purely economic reasons.  Its
stable and rigidly controlled economy was no longer needed by the rich
and powerful as a safe deposit box for (often unscrupulously)
accumulated wealth.  Concurrently, its self-contained, standoffish
political posture had become obsolete, almost laughable in the face of
the growing opportunities of Space.  Like so many other nations without
an early Space program, the inhabitable and exploitable regions close
at hand had been divided up without them.  The modern-day Swiss
accepted the consequences of this flux without bitterness, outwardly at
least, but were now inexorably committed to improving upon Fate.

Still, the Swiss view of the coming campaign was somewhat different
than their ally's, less zealous, and their actual dislike of their
enemies and desire for battle were much less vehement.  In their view
the Belgians were to provide the fire, they the cool edge of
professionalism.  Between them they formed a somewhat inexperienced,
but sullenly determined foe, not to be taken lightly by the smaller, or
similarly stationed powers of the region.

THUS THE ATTACKERS, AND THOSE WHO WERE TO REMAIN NEUTRAL, IN THE DRAMA
ABOUT TO BE PLAYED.  HERE NOW THE DEFENDERS.

P-KN3

The former Eastern Bloc nations of Europe had remained closely linked
economically after the collapse of the Soviet Union, and surprisingly,
as often as not, politically allied with their former oppressor.

The great "Decade of Change" which shook the Kremlin in the late
twentieth century had forever changed the face of Marxism, and for
nearly half a century the Russians had abandoned all thought of
communism.  But decades of poverty, organized crime and ever dwindling
national importance, had brought about a socialist
resurgence---non-violently, through elections this time---and the
creation of the new Soviet States.

With the dismantling of the Eastern bloc, conditional at first, then
with fewer and fewer strings, many had predicted a defiant break with
the grim, iron-fisted oppressor---a label which unfortunately contained
a good deal of truth---and a wild swing back to the West.

But in large part it had not occurred.  Possible explanations for this
'non-schism' ranged from political and cultural isolation during the
Cold War, to the eventual success of numbing Marxist propaganda.  Even
East Germany, which reunified with the West, had since divided into two
groups, its easternmost peoples falling back on the old alliances.

For if there was a common thread in the weave of East Europeans, it was
a quiet dedication to hard work, and a genuine, even natural
unselfishness---a combination of qualities not highly valued in the
Americanized west.  And though to brand one half of a continent more
concerned with the common good than the other is preposterous, there
could be no denying that the two sides of the now extinct Iron Curtain
remained stiffly uncomfortable with one another's professed doctrines
and system of values.  Fifty years under vastly divergent philosophies
and spheres of influence could not be broken down in the years
immediately following.  And with the subsequent exodus into Space,
learning to live with and understand each other had become largely
unnecessary.  In the purest sense of the analogy, Eastern Europe had
taken one road, and the West another.  The distances that separated
their lives were now literal.

The nations and alliances resulting from the East-West split remained
estranged, if no longer sharply opposed.   And in a war that like so
many others seemed to be drawing boundaries along lines of ideology,
the possibility loomed of their coming together again not with
overtures of peace and understanding, but on the battlefield.

AND FINALLY, THE WATCHERS ON THE MARGINS.

7)  B-K3

The two major superpowers, still militarily head and shoulders above
the rest, hardly added to the stability of the situation.

The politics of the United Commonwealth, formerly the United States of
America, remained the politics of a child.   The 'new Americans'
continued to claim God, family, and self-righteous free enterprise (to
their Republicans a god in itself) as the sole and irreproachable
motive for all their actions.   Thus everything they did in the realm
of foreign affairs, usually only half understanding it themselves, must
(in their eyes) inevitably be right, and for the good of all who
followed the true path of capitalism and democracy---in that order.

Soviet Space, meanwhile, had become equally intransigent.  The Soviets,
in their turn, hailed as their banner the liberation, equality, and
self-rule of the working classes.  These, so the Party line claimed,
had built civilization, but been denied the fruits of their achievement
by the corrupt upper classes, who, like Narcissus, were blind and
self-serving, inherently evil and doomed to fail, but not before
sucking the blood of true humanity and preventing the dreams of Marx
and Trotsky.....  And so on, disturbingly similar to the old communist
propaganda.  And of course they made no mention of Stalin, the purges,
and the brutal repression of the KGB.
 
B-N2

That these two irreconcilably opposed powers, directly or indirectly,
held the lives of countless millions in their hands (whether through
action or non-action) was disheartening, but not at all atypical.
Contending governments and heads of state had managed to keep their
peoples at odds, away from any sense of shared humanity and mutual
need, from the beginning of history.  In this sense at least, those who
knew something of the nature of war could prepare themselves, if only
for the worst.

"For as you lean," spoke the prophet, "so shall you fall."

8)  Q-Q2

The United Commonwealth, under its present leadership, could best be
compared to a wealthy adolescent, raised with the notion that the world
owed it something, angry and sulking because the expected happiness had
not yet been delivered.

It seemed that every time the Commonwealth's economy threatened to
bring its standard of living closer to the rest of humanity, angry,
illusioned people came forward, organized, made aggressive, patriotic
noises, and persuaded the middle class (the real power in the
electorate) to abandon the floundering liberals and elect a
conservative, Republican President.  Then, before hard-line
conservative dogmas could be re-exposed for what they were---a pleasant
excuse for big business to run wild---the ax was put to social
programs, health and environmental concerns were put on the shelf, and
'survival of the fittest' became the unspoken ethic.  Large stores of
weapons were amassed (with the money saved by being less sensitive),
some kept, others shipped throughout the galaxy to areas of instability
where "freedom and self-determination" were threatened, meaning that
the governments there already were, or showed signs of becoming,
socialist.  And all such militaristic actions taken with the expressed
purpose of preventing bloodshed, and similar aggression on the part of
Soviet Space (which required little prodding to respond in kind),
resulted in quite the opposite result:  endless carnage and civil war.

That this same pattern of mutual confrontation had brought the Earth to
the brink of nuclear holocaust many times in the past, was apparently
all but forgotten by a bulk society with a historical attention span of
roughly five years.  And every time, this cycle was repeated as if it
were something new, unique, and wholly necessary, by a people who
professed to be, and probably should have been, the most enlightened in
the galaxy.

N-B3

Not that anyone really expected the Americans to fight.  They were for
the most part (deep down) morally opposed to violence, had not the
stomach for it.  And blind, self-serving sheep that they were, the
middle class could only be deceived for so long.

Because this same, slow-thinking blob of humanity which elected and
gave the presidents their power, also set the limits for its use.  In a
nation literally ruled by public opinion, they were like an anchor
unsoundly planted.  The ship was free to drift a certain distance to
either side, but could never move too far in any one direction before
the anchor finally caught on some solid objection, and the movement was
brought to a halt.  True, the angry seemed angrier this time, the
aggressive less easily pacified, and the Christian right-wing (a
contradiction of terms, for anyone the least familiar with Jesus'
teachings) more implacable.  But it had been nearly a hundred years
since the Commonwealth had been directly involved in any kind of
offensive (military) war.  Most observers had come to think of this
naive superpower as a big dog that liked to bark and throw its weight
around, but wasn't really looking for a fight.  The damage it did was
more subtle and indirect---like stepping on flowers not yet open, and
crushing creatures too small for it to see.

But as the saying went, "When you sleep in the same bed with a giant,
you had better sleep lightly."  The United Commonwealth was the most
powerful nation-state in the history of mankind, the more so because it
did not know its own strength.

9)  P-B3

These are, of course, the bare facts, and like all generalization,
subject to flaw.  There were West Germans who loathed and rebelled
against every hint of the Nazi mentality, Japanese who had never been
violent, Belgians and Swiss who opposed the coming war, members of the
Soviet leadership who cared, and Americans who saw the world clearly.

Unfortunately, as all too many times in the past, there did not seem
enough who broke the mold, nor did they play an active enough role, to
keep the wheels of ignorance and violence from churning.  Because the
study of war is the study of people in power and the masses they are
able to persuade---of strife, twisted dreams and ambitions, and of
human nature set in its darkest surroundings.  For this reason the
small and destructive characteristics of a people (of the aggressors,
at the least) tend to surface, often riding on the back of what is
truest and noblest in them, and individuals silently opposed to the
politics of carnage don't seem to count for much.

The sad and simple truth remains that, to be prevented, nationalistic
aggression must be resisted from within, either by large numbers of the
population, or by those in positions of power who are willing and able
to stop it.  And so far throughout history, with very few exceptions
and during wars uncounted, it had not been.


*                         *                         *


0-0

The battle room aboard the armed space station Mongoose was quietly
tense and alert.  The Czech and East German officers attended their
various stations with well-drilled efficiency and outer calm,
intermittently reading off coordinates and running hands across
pulsating fingerboards, making adjustments and speaking by headset to
the various squadron commanders of the close-hovering fleet.  The
defense grids---interlocking walls of energy which prevented the free
and rapid movement of attacking ships---were in place and activated.

In the center of the room, behind a spherical plexiglass screen, a
three-dimensional monitor projected tiny wavering shapes among the
static lines of the grid, marking the approach of the Belgian-Swiss
forces.  A young lieutenant of average height and wiry build, with
intelligent eyes and features, studied the projection and corresponding
console before him with fascination and growing apprehension.  He felt
foolish and out of place:  his first battle.

A taller man in his late fifties, stern and brown-eyed, a classic Czech
soldier to the last detail, came up behind and put a hand on his
shoulder.

"Courage, Brunner," he said in low harsh tones.  "I need your judgment
today."  It was the closet thing to a compliment he had ever paid his
young protege.

"I'm sorry, Colonel.  It's beginning to look very real."

Dubcek's dark features bored in on him in the familiar
expression---down-thrust head and knitted brows, eyes looking up
through them like a boxer's.  It was a hard and intimidating face,
though with a gleam of sharp and illusionless intelligence.  Only
Brunner seemed to suspect a deeper humanity beneath the facade, and he
was far from certain.

"It is real, but not something to be feared.  Real men will die this
day, as all men must.  It is the only way to stop them."  At that
moment the voice of the executive officer broke in on them.

10)  B x N

"Colonel, enemy light cruiser 'red' engaging destroyer group B."

Dubcek nodded in acknowledgment.  Brunner quickly adjusted and replaced
his ear-piece, and the sounds of actual combat came to him for the
first time.  He heard:  ships signaling one another, attacking, being
attacked, some voices calm, others tense and on the verge of
panic---explosions and bursts of pain within bridge compartments,
engineers crying damage reports, men dying and signals going blank.
The older man heard them too, studied the projection without haste,
made several marks on the glass.  Again the voice of the exec:

"Destroyer group B has succumbed---no surviving ships."

Brunner watched his commander's face, half expecting to see no change.
But a change did come, if only for an instant:  a cloud of pain and
uncertainty flashed across it.  The dark countenance grew darker still,
