put it permanently out of shape. However hard be the blow, the elastic
material, although flattened for an instant, will always resume its
original form. If the object be thrown on the floor with all one's might,
the result will be the same; its elasticity will always cause it to
spring back to its original form. The experiment will only succeed when
the bread that is used is very fresh and soft.

       *       *       *       *       *




SCIENTIFIC AMUSEMENTS.


_The Dance of the Electrified Puppets_.--We have already pointed out a
means of obtaining electrical manifestations without recourse to a
machine, and shall now describe a very easily performed experiment--the
dance of the electrified puppets.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--DANCE OF THE ELECTRIFIED PUPPETS.]

Procure a pane of glass about 10 inches in width and 14 in length, and
support it between two large books, as shown in Fig. 1. The glass must be
inserted in the books in such a way that it shall be an inch and a
fraction above the surface of the table. Then, with a pair of scissors,
cut out of a piece of tissue-paper a number of figures, such as men,
women, clowns, frogs, etc. These little figures must not exceed
three-quarters of an inch in length. We show some of actual size in Fig.
1. They may be cut out of papers of different colors, so as to give
variety to the scene. After they are prepared they are to be placed in
the ball-room, that is to say, in the space between the books, glass, and
table. They should be laid flat upon the table, and alongside of one
another. Now rub the upper surface of the glass vigorously with a piece
of silk or woolen, and, in a few instants, the figures will be attracted
by the electricity, and suddenly stand up straight and jump up to the
transparent ceiling of their ball-room. Then they will be repelled, and
again attracted, and thus keep up a lively dance. When the rubbing is
stopped, the dance continues spontaneously for some little time, and even
the contact of the hand suffices to animate the figures. In order that
this experiment shall prove a success, the glass used must be very dry,
as well as the fabric with which it is rubbed. If the latter be warmed,
the manifestation will be more rapid and energetic. Silk answers better
than woolen.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--SILHOUETTE PORTRAITS.]

_Silhouette Portraits_.--Take a large sheet of paper, black on one side
and white on the other, and affix it to the wall, white surface outward,
by means of pins or tacks. Place a very bright light upon the table, at a
proper distance, and allow the person whose portrait it is desired to
form to stand between it and the wall (Fig. 2). Then, with a pencil, draw
the outlines of the shadow projected. While this is being done, it is
very necessary that the subject shall keep perfectly immovable. When the
outlines are sketched, remove the paper from the wall and cut out the
portrait. After this, all that remains to be done is to turn the portrait
over and paste it to a sheet of white paper. The silhouette is profiled
in black, and if the operation be skillfully performed, the resemblance
will be perfect.--_La Nature_.

       *       *       *       *       *




HOW TO BREAK A CORD WITH THE HANDS.


Our readers have often seen grocers' clerks or employes of business
houses break the string with which they had tied up a package, by seizing
it with the hands, bringing the latter close together, and then suddenly
separating them with a quick movement. If it be thought that this quick
motion is sufficient, let any one try it, and he will merely cut his
hands without breaking the string, provided the latter has some little
strength. In order to succeed, the cord must be arranged in a certain
manner, as we shall explain.

[Illustration: MODE OF BREAKING A CORD WITH THE HANDS.]

The cord to be broken is placed upon the left hand, and one of its ends
is passed over the other in such a way as to form a cross, and the end
forming the shorter part of the cross is wound around the fingers (it
should be left long enough to make several turns). The other end is then
turned back and wound around the right hand, so as to leave a space of
about eighteen inches between the latter and the left hand. If these
directions are properly followed, the string should have the form of a Y
in the middle of the hand, as shown in the lower figure of the
accompanying engraving.

It is only necessary after this to close the hand, after seeing that the
Y is very taut, and to seize the cord with the other hand, as shown in
the upper figure. This done, the two hands are brought together and then
suddenly separated so as to give a quick pull on the point of junction of
the Y-shaped branches, which form a true knife. It will be readily seen
that as the cord is broken suddenly the shock does not have time to
transmit itself to the hands. This is an interesting demonstration of the
principle of inertia.

       *       *       *       *       *




AN AQUATIC VELOCIPEDE FOR DUCK HUNTING.


The curious apparatus that we represent in Fig. 1, from an old English
engraving of 1823, is an aquatic velocipede which was utilized with
success during the entire winter of 1822. An amateur employed it for
hunting ducks upon the numerous streams of Lincolnshire, and, as it
appears, obtained very good results from it. The device is very
ingenious. It consists of three floats of from 1,800 to 2,000 cubic
inches capacity, made of copper or tin plate. These are full of air, and
must be perfectly tight. They are held together by arched iron rods, as
shown in the cut, so as to form the three angles of an isosceles
triangle. These rods are provided in the center with a saddle for the
velocipedist to sit upon. The apparatus floats upon the water and
sustains the hunter, whose feet are provided with quite short paddles, by
means of which he navigates, and steers himself.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--AN AQUATIC VELOCIPEDE OF 1822.]

The amusing engraving of this velocipede, which is mentioned under the
name of the _aquatic tripod_, puts us in mind of another document of the
same kind that we have seen in the gallery of prints of the National
Library. It is a naively drawn lithograph representing a trial of
velocipedes in the Luxembourg Garden, at Paris, in 1818. In Fig. 2 we
give a reduced copy of it. It will be seen that in 1818 velocipedes were
made of wood and were provided with two wheels--one in front, and the
other behind. The propelling was done by alternately placing the feet on
the ground.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--A TRIAL OF VELOCIPEDES IN 1818.]

       *       *       *       *       *




A SUNSHINE RECORDER.


The apparatus is of simple construction. It consists of a glass sphere
silvered inside and placed before the lens of a camera, the axis of the
instrument being placed parallel to the polar axis of the earth. The
whole arrangement will be readily understood by an inspection of Fig. 1.
The light from the sun is reflected from the globe, and some of it,
passing through the lens, forms an image on a piece of prepared paper
within the camera. In consequence of the rotation of the earth, the image
describes an arc of a circle on the paper, and when the sun is obscured,
this arc is necessarily discontinuous. The image is not a point, but a
line, and in certain relative positions of the sphere, lens, and paper,
the line is radial and very thin, so that the obscuration of the sun for
only one minute is indicated by a weakening of the image.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

In the actual apparatus the sphere is an ordinary round-bottomed flask
about 95 mm. in diameter, and the lens a simple double convex lens of
about 90 mm. focal length. The sensitive paper employed is the ordinary
ferro-prussiate now so much used by engineers for copying tracings. This
was selected in consequence of the ease with which the impression is
fixed, for the paper merely requires to be washed in a stream of water
for six minutes, no chemicals being necessary. When the paper is dry,
radial lines containing between them angles of 15 deg. are drawn from the
center of the circular impression, and thus give the hour scale, the time
of apparent noon being of course given by a line passing through the plan
of the meridian. Fig. 2 is a copy of the record of June 27, 1884; in the
morning the sun shone brightly, toward noon clouds began to form, and in
the afternoon the sky was hazy. The field in which the instrument is
placed is surrounded by trees, so the ends of the trace are cut off
sharply by shadows.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

With the alteration of declination of the sun, the light entering the
camera is reflected from different portions of the sphere, and an
alteration of the position of the focus results. This may be corrected in
three ways; by moving (1) the paper, (2) the lens, or (3) the sphere. In
the present apparatus the first method has been adopted, and now the
camera is about twice as long as it was in June. As a consequence, the
circular image is enlarged, and the light therefore weakened, and that at
a time of year when it can least be spared. If the focus is altered by
moving the lens, the winter circle is small and the summer circle is much
larger. This would perhaps be too much to the advantage of the winter
sun. If, however, the lens and paper are maintained at a constant
distance, and the sphere alone moved, the circles are more nearly of the
same diameter throughout the year, the winter one still remaining the
smallest. This seems, therefore, to be the most advantageous arrangement,
and the one that will be adopted in future. It may be possible also to
find positions for the sphere, lens, and paper such that the intensity of
the image is a true measure of the intensity of the sun's light; at
present, however, this has not been done, the want of sunlight and the
press of official work having prevented the carrying out of the necessary
experiments. A more sensitive paper might also be used with advantage,
and in observatories where photographic processes are carried on daily
there would be no difficulty on this score, but my principal object was
to devise some economical instrument requiring only easy manipulation, so
that at a considerable number of places the instruments might be set up,
giving a more useful average of the duration of sunshine than can be
obtained from only a few stations. The instrument also gives a record
when the sun is shining through light clouds; in this case the image is
somewhat blurred and naturally weakened, and it may be difficult or
impossible to employ any scale for measuring the intensity under such
conditions, but it must be remembered that, even when the sun is shining
in this imperfect manner, it is really doing work on the vegetation of
the earth, and deserves to be recorded.

It may be well to say that the instrument is in no way protected. Some
friends, whose opinion I highly value, urged me to patent it; but as I
strongly hold the view that the work of all students of science should be
given freely to the world, the apparatus was described at the Physical
Society a few hours after the advice was given, lest the greed of filthy
lucre should, on further deliberation, cause me to act contrary to my
principles.--_Herbert McLeod, Nature_.

       *       *       *       *       *




SKELETON OF A BEAR FOUND IN A CAVE IN STYRIA, AUSTRIA.


In the limestone mountains of the Austrian Alpine countries, numerous
large caverns and caves are found, some of which are several miles long.
They have been formed by the raising, lowering, and sliding of the layers
of sand, or washed out by the stream.

In one of these caverns near Peggau, in Styria, Austria, the skeleton of
a bear (_Ursus Spelaeus_) and the skull of another bear of the same kind
were found, both of which are shown in the annexed cut taken from the
_Illustrirte Zeitung_, the detached skull being placed on a board. The
place in which these bones were found had never been reached before, as
the skeleton was covered by a layer, from four to six inches thick, of
stalagmites, which in turn rested on a layer of pieces or chips of bones
and carbonate of lime, sand, etc. The bones of the skeleton were
scattered over a space about eight square yards, and it required several
days' work to remove the layers from the bones by means of a mallet and
chisel and to give the bones, etc., a presentable appearance.

[Illustration: SKELETON OF A BEAR FOUND IN A CAVE IN STYRIA,
AUSTRIA.]

The skull on the board is of especial interest on account of the
beautiful crystals of calcareous spar, which are from 1/10 to 1/4 of an
inch long, and are formed on the inner sides of the skull. The skull is
5-1/2 in. wide between the fangs and 6-3/5 in. wide at the forehead,
whereas the skull of the skeleton is only 3-9/10 in. wide at the fangs
and 5-1/10 in. wide at the forehead. The skull of the skeleton is 22 in.
long. The small white object on the board supporting the detached skull
represents the skull of an ordinary cat, thus giving an idea of the
enormous size of the bear's skull. The skeleton is 9 ft. 8 in. high, and
is one of the largest and most complete that has been found.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE HARDNESS OF METALS.


The German _Verein zur Bedfoerderung des Gewerbefleisses_ offers the
following, among other prizes, for essays on technical subjects: One
thousand marks _(L50)_ for a comparative examination of the various
methods hitherto used for determination of the hardness of metals, with
an exposition of their sources of error and limits of accuracy. It is
stated, as a reason for offering the prize, that the methods for making
the required tests are but yet little developed, and that no thorough
comparison has yet been made of the various methods. The hardness of
metals and alloys being a very important factor in several processes, a
really good method of determination is highly desirable. Three thousand
marks (L150) for the best essay on the resistance to pressure of iron
work in buildings, at increased temperatures. It appears that after a
certain fire in a manufactory at Berlin, the police authorities issued
notices concerning the use of cast-iron columns in high buildings, and
that these notices encountered great opposition in many quarters, as it
was considered that neither practice nor theory had yet shown any proof
that cast iron is less trustworthy than wrought iron in cases of fire.

       *       *       *       *       *

A brilliant black varnish for iron, stone, or wood can be made by
thoroughly incorporating ivory black with common shellac varnish. The
mixture should be laid on very thin. But ordinary coal tar varnish will
serve the same purpose in most cases quite as well, and it is not nearly
so expensive.

       *       *       *       *       *




STEAM YACHTS.


Although the racing of steam yachts as a recognized sport has not made
the progress that was at one time expected, yet the owner and crew of a
crack vessel will take as much interest in her performance as those
belonging to a sailing yacht, and hate to be passed quite as badly. In
this way many informal matches come off, and some of these are for
considerable distances. The _Field_ contains a notice of a run recently
made from Plymouth Breakwater to Gibraltar, by the Juno, owned by Mr.
Frank Millan, and the Queen of Palmyra, in which the former beat the
latter by only five minutes. The time occupied was four days twenty
hours, a fair, though not extraordinary, performance for vessels of this
size. The Juno has always been considered a slow boat, but has been much
improved lately by new machinery, which has been put in her by Messrs.
Day, Summers & Co. Her best performance on the run was 235 knots in 213/4
hours. The Marchesa, Mr. C.T. Kettlewell, started from Plymouth on the
23d of last December, and made the run to Gibraltar in four days
seventeen hours; while the Amy, starting on December 12, was four days
thirteen hours from Cowes to Gibraltar.

       *       *       *       *       *


A catalogue, containing brief notices of many important scientific papers
heretofore published in the SUPPLEMENT, may be had gratis at this office.


       *       *       *       *       *




THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT.

PUBLISHED WEEKLY.

Terms of Subscription, $5 a Year.

Sent by mail, postage prepaid, to subscribers in any part of the United
States or Canada. Six dollars a year, sent, prepaid, to any foreign
country.

All the back numbers of THE SUPPLEMENT, from the commencement, January 1,
1876, can be had. Price, 10 cents each.

All the back volumes of THE SUPPLEMENT can likewise be supplied. Two
volumes are issued yearly. Price of each volume, $2.50, stitched in
paper, or $3.50, bound in stiff covers.

COMBINED RATES--One copy of SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN and one copy of
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT, one year, postpaid, $7.00.

A liberal discount to booksellers, news agents, and canvassers.


MUNN & CO., Publishers,

361 Broadway, New York, N.Y.


       *       *       *       *       *


PATENTS.

In connection with the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, Messrs. MUNN & Co. are
Solicitors of American and Foreign Patents, have had 40 years'
experience, and now have the largest establishment in the world. Patents
are obtained on the best terms.

A special notice is made in the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN of all
Inventions patented through this Agency, with the name and residence of
the Patentee. By the immense circulation thus given, public attention is
directed to the merits of the new patent, and sales or introduction often
easily effected.

