of its preparation in a state of tolerable purity was that employed by
Wohler and Deville. These chemists prepared it by allowing dry
sulphureted hydrogen gas to stream over amorphous boron heated to
redness. Subsequently a method of obtaining boron sulphide was
proposed by Fremy, according to which a mixture of boron trioxide,
soot, and oil is heated in a stream of the vapor of carbon bisulphide.
M. Sabatier finds that the best results are obtained by employing the
method of Wohler and Deville. The reaction between boron and
sulphureted hydrogen only commences at red heat, near the temperature
of the softening of glass. When, however, the tube containing the
boron becomes raised to the temperature, boron sulphide condenses in
the portion of the tube adjacent to the heated portion; at first it is
deposited in a state of fusion, and the globules on cooling present an
opaline aspect. Further along the tube it is slowly deposited in a
porcelain like form, while further still the sublimate of sulphide
takes the form of brilliant acicular crystals. The crystals consist of
pure B_{2}S_{3}; the vitreous modification, however, is usually
contaminated with a little free sulphur. Very fine crystals of the
trisulphide may be obtained by heating a quantity of the
porcelain-like form to 300 deg. at the bottom of a closed tube whose upper
portion is cooled by water. The crystals are violently decomposed by
water, yielding a clear solution of boric acid, sulphureted hydrogen
being evolved. On examining the porcelain boat in which the boron had
been placed, a non-volatile black substance is found, which appears to
consist of a lower sulphide of the composition B_{4}S. The same
substance is obtained when the trisulphide is heated in a current of
hydrogen; a portion volatilizes, and is deposited again further along
the tube, while the residue fuses, and becomes reduced to the
unalterable subsulphide B_{4}S, sulphureted hydrogen passing away in
the stream of gas.

Two selenides of boron, B_{2}Se_{3} and B_{4}Se, corresponding to the
above described sulphides, have also been prepared by M. Sabatier, by
heating amorphous boron in a stream of hydrogen selenide, H_{2}Se. The
triselenide is less volatile than the trisulphide, and is pale green
in color. It is energetically decomposed by water, with formation of
boric acid and liberation of hydrogen selenide. The liquid rapidly
deposits free selenium, owing to the oxidation of the hydrogen
selenide retained in solution. Light appears to decompose the
triselenide into free selenium and the subselenide B_{4}Se.

Silicon selenide, SiSe_{3}, has likewise been obtained by M. Sabatier
by heating crystalline silicon to redness in a current of hydrogen
selenide. It presents the appearance of a fused hard metallic mass
incapable of volatilization. Water reacts most vigorously with it,
producing silicic acid, and liberating hydrogen selenide. Potash
decomposes it with formation of a clear solution, the silica being
liberated in a form in which it is readily dissolved by alkalies.
Silicon selenide emits a very irritating odor, due to the hydrogen
selenide which is formed by its reaction with the moisture of the
atmosphere. When heated to redness in the air it becomes converted
into silicon dioxide and free selenium.

       *       *       *       *       *




NATURAL SULPHIDE OF GOLD.

By T.W.T. ATHERTON.


The existence of gold in the form of a natural sulphide in conjunction
with pyrites has often been advanced theoretically as a possible
occurrence, but up to the present time this occurrence has, I believe,
never been established as an actual fact.

During my investigations on the ore of the Deep Creek Mines, I have
found in them what I believe to be gold existing as a natural
sulphide. The description of this ore will, no doubt, be of interest
to your readers.

The lode is a large irregular one of pure arsenical pyrites, existing
in a felsite dike near the sea coast. Surrounding it on all sides are
micaceous schists, and in the neighborhood is a large hill of granite
about 800 ft. high. In the lode and the rock immediately adjoining it
are large quantities of pyrophylite, and in some places of the mine
are deposits of this pure white, translucent mineral, but in the ore
itself it is a yellow and pale olive green color, and is never absent
from the pyrites.

From the first I was much struck with the exceedingly fine state of
division in which the gold existed in the ore. After roasting and very
carefully grinding down in an agate mortar, I have never been able to
get any pieces of gold exceeding the one-thousandth of an inch in
diameter, and the greater quantity is very much finer than this.
Careful dissolving of the pyrites and gangue, so as to leave the gold
intact, failed to find it in any larger diameter. As this was a very
unusual experience in investigations on many other kinds of pyrites, I
was led further into the matter. Ultimately, after a number of
experiments, there was nothing left but to test for gold as a
sulphide.

Taking 200 grammes of pyrites from a sample assaying 17 ounces fine
gold per ton, grinding it finely, and; heating for some hours with a
solution of sodium sulphide (Na_{2}S_{2}), on decomposing the filtrate
and treating it for gold I got a result at the rate of 12 ounces gold
per ton. This was repeated several times with the same result.

This sample came from the lode at the 140 ft. level, while samples
from the higher levels where the ore is more oxidized, although
carrying the gold in the same degree of fineness, do not give as high
a percentage of auric sulphide.

It would appear that all the gold in the pyrites (and I have never
found any apart from it) has originally taken its place there as a
sulphide.

The sulphide is an analysis of a general sample of the ore:

  Silica        13.940 p.c.
  Alumina        6.592  "
  Lime           0.9025 "
  Sulphur       16.584  "
  Arsenic       33.267  "
  Iron          27.720  "
  Cobalt         0.964  "

                                 Per Ton.
  Nickel                    Traces.
  Gold                      5 ozs. 3 dwts. 8 grs.
  Silver                    0 "    16 "    0 "
                -------
                99.969

Nambucca Head's Gold Mining Company, Deep Creek, N.S. Wales, Oct. 9,
1891.--_Chemical News_.

       *       *       *       *       *




SOME MEANS OF PURIFYING WATER.


There are several methods extant for the purpose of purifying and
softening water, and in the following brief account some of the chief
features of these methods are summarized. The Slack and Brownlow
apparatus we will deal with first. This purifier is one which is
intended to remove the matter in suspension in the water to be treated
by subsidence and not by filtration. The apparatus consists of a
vertical iron tank or cylinder, inside which are a series of plates
arranged in a spiral direction around a fixed center, and sloping at
an angle of 45 deg. on both sides outward. The water to be dealt with
flows through a large inlet tube fixed to the bottom of the cylinder,
rises to the top by passing spirally round the whole circumference,
and depositing on the plates or shelves all solids and impurities at
the outer edges of the plates. Mud cocks are placed to remove the
solids deposited during the flow of the water upward to the outlet
pipe, placed close to the top of the cylinder. One of these tanks, a
square one, is at work purifying the Medlock water at Manchester, and
on drawing samples of water from nearly every plate, that from the
lower mud cock showed considerable deposit, which decreased in bulk
until the top mud cock was reached, when the water was quite free from
deposit. It is stated that one man would be sufficient to attend to 20
of these purifiers.

To filter or purify 2,000,000 gallons per 24 hours would require 40
tanks, 10 ft. by 7 ft. diameter, each doing 2,000 gallons per hour,
and would cost, with their fittings, L6,400, including all patent
rights, but exclusive of lime mixing tanks, agitators, lime water and
softening tanks, engine and boiler, and suitable buildings, the cost
of which would not be far short of L5,000, or a total of L11,400 to
soften 2,000,000 gallons per 24 hours. The labor and other working
expenses in connection with this plant would not be less than that
necessary to work the Porter-Clark process, which is given as O.55d.
per 1,000 gallons.

The Brock and Minton filter press system is another method. This
patent press is made of steel, perforated with 1/2 inch holes. On the
inside of the shell there is first laid a layer of fine wire netting,
then a layer of cloth, and lastly another layer of wire netting of a
larger mesh than the other. The matter treated is pumped into the body
of the cylinder, the liquid passing through the filtering material to
the outside, the solids being retained inside, and are got rid of by
partially revolving the upper half to relieve it from the knuckle
joint, and, after being raised, the lower half is turned over by
machinery, and the solid matter is simply allowed to fall out into
wagons or trucks run underneath for that purpose. Such, in brief, is
the manner of using this filter press for chemical works' purposes.
The cost of each filter press, including royalties, is from L250 to
L300, the size being 8 ft. by 4 ft. diameter. Having a filtering area
of 100 square feet, it would require 32 of these applied to softening
water to effectually deal with 2,000,000 gallons per 24 hours; this,
at the lowest estimate for filters alone, would be L8,000, and, using
the same figures, L5,000 for lime mixing tanks, etc., as referred to
in the "Slack and Brownlow" purifier, would bring the total cost up to
L13,000, and the working expense would not be less than that required
to work the Porter-Clark process, and would probably be very much
greater. This filter press is not in use anywhere for dealing with
large quantities of water in connection with a town water supply.

A process which has been working for a long time at Southampton is the
Atkins system, which also includes the use of filter presses. The
pumping station and softening works are situated at Otterbourne, eight
miles from Southampton, and were built together as one scheme. The
mixing room has two slaking lime tanks, with agitators driven by steam
power. The mixture is then run as cream of lime into a tank 20 ft.
square and is then pumped into the lower ends of two lime water
producing cylinders. The agitation is here obtained by pressure from a
small cistern placed above them with a 12 ft. head, the pipe from
which is attached to the lower ends of the cylinders. This has been
found by experiment to be the most satisfactory means of obtaining the
proper degree of agitation necessary; the clear lime water is then
drawn off at the top of the cylinders, and flows by gravity into a
mixer, where it comes in contact with the hard water. Both flow
together into a distributing trough, from which it overflows into a
small softening reservoir, having a capacity of one hour's supply, a
weir being placed along the lower end, over which the water flows to
13 filter presses. The clear water from the filters is then conveyed
to a small well, from which the permanent engines raise it to the
first of a series of high level covered service reservoirs.

In the filter press there are 20 hollow disks representing a filtering
area of 250 square feet, or a total of 3,250 square feet. The water to
be filtered passes into the body of the filter and then through a
filtering medium of cloth laid on a thin perforated zinc plate, into
the inner side of the disks, from whence it is conveyed through the
hollow shaft, to which the disks are attached, to the high level
pumps.

The filter cloths are cleaned three times every 24 hours, without
removal, by jets of softened water from the main, having a pressure of
60 pounds to the square inch. During cleaning operations the disks are
made to revolve slowly; this only occupies a space of five minutes for
each cleaning. The cloths last from six to eight months without being
renewed. They also occasionally use for further cleaning the cloths a
jet of steam injected upon the center of the disks in order to remove
by partial boiling the insoluble particles engrained in the cloths.
This has been found to make the cloths last longer. This cloth is
obtained from Porritt Bros. and Austen, Stubbing Vale, Ramsbottom, and
costs 131/2d. per lineal yard of a width to suit the disks.

The quantity softened is 21/4 million gallons per 24 hours, but the
present plant can deal with 21/2 million gallons, and the buildings are
erected for 31/2 million gallons, additional filters and lime producing
tanks being only required to deal with the increased quantity. The
costs of the softening works was L10,394, of which L7,844 was for the
softening machinery and plant and L2,550 for the reservoir, buildings,
etc.

The working expenses, including lime, labor, cloths, general repairs,
and steam, is stated to be 0.225d. per 1,000 gallons, the labor
required being only two men, one on the day and the other on the night
shift, with an occasional man to assist.

The hardness of the Southampton water on Clark's scale is 18 deg. of total
hardness, and this is reduced down to 6 deg. or 8 deg. by this process.--_Chem.
Tr. Jour._

       *       *       *       *       *




A NEW LABORATORY PROCESS FOR PREPARING HYDROBROMIC ACID.

By G.S. NEWTH.


This method is a synthetical one, and consists in passing a stream of
hydrogen and bromine vapor over a spiral of platinum wire heated to
bright redness by means of an electric current. A glass tube, about 7
inches long and 5/8 of an inch bore, is fitted at each end with a cork
carrying a short straight piece of small tube; through each cork is
also fixed a stout wire, and these two wires are joined by means of a
short spiral of platinum wire, the spiral being about 1 inch long. One
end of this apparatus is connected to a small wash bottle containing
bromine, through which a stream of hydrogen can be bubbled. The other
end is attached to a tube dipping into a vessel of water for the
absorption of the gas, or, if a large quantity of the solution is
required, to a series of Woulf's bottles containing water. Hydrogen is
first slowly passed through the tube until the air is displaced, when
the platinum spiral is heated to bright redness by the passage of a
suitable electric current. Complete combination takes place in contact
with the hot wire, and the color imparted to the ingoing gases by the
bromine vapor is entirely removed, and the contents of the tube beyond
the platinum are perfectly colorless. The vessel containing the
bromine may be heated to a temperature of about 60 deg. C. in a water
bath, at which temperature the hydrogen will be mixed with nearly the
requisite amount of bromine to combine with the whole of it. So long
as even a slight excess of hydrogen is passing, which is readily seen
by the escape of bubbles through the water in the absorbing vessels,
the issuing hydrobromic acid will remain perfectly colorless, and
therefore free from bromine; so that it is not necessary to adopt any
of the usual methods for scrubbing the gas through vessels containing
phosphorus. When the operation is proceeding very rapidly a lambent
flame occasionally appears in the tube just before the platinum wire,
but this flame is never propagated back through the narrow tube into
the bromine bottle. The precaution may be taken, however, of plugging
this narrow tube with a little glass wool, which renders any
inconvenience from this cause quite impossible. By this method a large
quantity of bromine may be rapidly converted into hydrobromic acid
without any loss of bromine, and the operation when once started can
be allowed to proceed without any further attention.--_Chemical News._

       *       *       *       *       *




SAPOTIN: A NEW GLUCOSIDE.

By GUSTAVE MICHAUD.


_Achras Sapota, L._, is a large tree scattered through the forests of
Central America and the West Indies; its fruit is often seen upon the
Creole dinner table. This fruit is a berry, the size of an orange, the
taste of which suggests the flavor of melon, as well as that of
hydrocyanic acid. The fruit contains one or two seeds like large
chestnuts, which, if broken, let fall a white almond. This last
contains the glucoside which I call _sapotin_.

I obtained sapotin for the first time by heating dry raspings of the
almond with 90 per cent. alcohol. While cooling, the filtered liquid
deposited a good deal of the compound. Since that time I have
advantageously modified the process and increased the amount of
product. I prepare sapotin in the following way: The almonds are
rasped, dried at 100 deg. C. and washed with benzene, which takes away an
enormous quantity of fatty matter. The benzene which remains in the
almond is driven put first by compression, afterward by heating. Then
the raspings are exhausted with boiling 90 per cent. alcohol. The
solution is filtered as rapidly as possible, in order to avoid its
cooling and depositing the sapotin in the filter. As soon as the
temperature of the filtered liquid begins to fall, a voluminous
precipitate is seen to form, which is the sapotin.

In order to purify it, the precipitate is collected in a filter and
expressed between sheets of filter paper. When dry it is washed with
ether, which takes away the last particles of fatty and resinous
matter. The purification is completed by two crystallizations from 90
per cent. alcohol. At last the substance is dried at 100 deg..

The sapotin separates from its alcohol solution in the form of
microscopic crystals. When dry, it is a white, inodorous powder. Its
taste is extremely acrid and burning. If the powder penetrate into the
nostrils or the eyes, it produces a persistent burning sensation which
brings about sneezing and flow of tears. It melts at 240 deg. C., growing
brown at the same time.

It has a laevo-rotatory power of [a]_{j} = -32.11, which was
determined with an alcoholic solution, the aqueous solution not being
sufficiently transparent.

It is very soluble in water, easily soluble in boiling alcohol, much
less in cold alcohol, and insoluble in ether, chloroform and benzene.
Its alcoholic solution is precipitated by ether.

Tannin has no action on it, but basic acetate of lead produces a
gelatinous precipitate in its aqueous solution. Strange enough, this
precipitate is entirely soluble in a small excess of basic acetate of
lead. If thrown into concentrated sulphuric acid, sapotin colors it
with a garnet red tint. It does not reduce Fehling's solution. Its
analysis gave the following results:

         Calculated for                     Found.
         C_{29}H_{52}O_{20}.         I.               II.

  C          48.33                 48.69             48.31
  H           7.23                  7.33              7.45

When heated with water and a little sulphuric acid, sapotin is
decomposed and yields glucose and an insoluble matter which I call
_sapotiretin_. One hundred parts of sapotin produce 51.58 parts of
glucose and 49.67 of sapotiretin. The equation which represents this
reaction is:

C_{29}H_{52}O_{20} + 2H_{2}O = 2C_{6}H_{12}O_{6} + C_{17}H_{32}O_{10}

and requires 50 per cent. of glucose and 55 per cent. of sapotiretin.

Sapotiretin is an amorphous compound, insoluble in water, very soluble
in alcohol, less soluble in chloroform, insoluble in ether. Below is
the result of its analysis:

         Calculated for                      Found.
         C_{17}H_{32}O_{10}.         I.                  II.

  C          51.52                 51.51                51.20
  H           8.08                  8.19                 8.34

--_Amer. Chem. Jour._

       *       *       *       *       *




DETECTION OF PEANUT OIL IN OLIVE OIL.


Holde, after a careful trial of the various processes for detecting
the above adulteration, gives the preference to Renard's, which he
describes as follows:

Ten grms. of the suspected oil, after being saponified, and the fatty
acids separated by hydrochloric acid, are dissolved in 90 per cent.
alcohol, and precipitated by sugar of lead. The oleate of lead is
separated by ether, and the residuum, consisting of palmitic and
arachic acids, is decomposed by hydrochloric acid. The fatty acids are
dissolved, with the aid of heat, in 50 c.c. of 90 per cent. alcohol.
The arachic acid which separates after cooling is filtered out and
washed, first with 90 per cent. and afterward with 70 per cent.
alcohol. It is then dissolved in hot alcohol, and the solution
evaporated in a weighed saucer. The weight of the residuum, after
taking into account the acid dissolved in the alcohol, equals the
whole amount of arachic acid contained in the oil; the melting point
of this residuum should be 70 deg. to 71 deg. C. With this process the author
has always been successful; but when the olive oil contains not more
than 5 to 10 per cent. of peanut oil, it is necessary to make the test
with 40 grms. of the former, otherwise the melting point of the
arachic acid cannot be estimated. Furthermore, the acids which are
separated from the lead salt by hydrochloric acid must be
recrystallized repeatedly with 90 per cent. alcohol, until the melting
point ceases to rise, in case the latter is not found to exceed 70 deg. C.
at the first estimation. When peanut oil is present, the melting point
will always be above 70 deg..--_Chem. Zeit._

       *       *       *       *       *




HYDROXYLAMINE.


Free hydroxylamine, NH_{2}OH, has been isolated by M. Lobry de Bruyn,
and a preliminary account of its mode of preparation and properties is
published by him in the current number of the _Recueil des travaux
chimiques des Pays-Bas_ (1891, 10, 101). The manner in which the free
base was obtained was briefly as follows. About a hundred grammes of
hydroxylamine hydrochloride, NH_{2}OH.HCl, were dissolved in six
hundred cubic centimeters of warm methyl alcohol. To this solution a
quantity of sodium dissolved in methyl alcohol was added, in such
proportion that the hydrochloride of hydroxylamine was present in
slight excess over and above that required to convert it to sodium
chloride. After deposition of the separated sodium chloride the
solution was decanted and filtered.

The greater portion of the methyl alcohol was next removed by
distillation under the reduced pressure of 160-200 mm. The remainder
was then treated with anhydrous ether, in order to completely
precipitate the last traces of dissolved sodium chloride. The liquid
eventually separated into two layers, an upper ethereal layer
containing about 5 per cent. of hydroxylamine, and a lower layer
containing over 50 per cent. of hydroxylamine, the remainder of the
methyl alcohol, and a little dissolved salt. By subjecting this lower
layer to fractional distillation under 60 mm. pressure, it was
separated into three fractions, of which the first contained 27 per
cent. of hydroxylamine, the second 60 per cent., and the third
crystallized in the ice-cooled receiver in long needles. This third
fraction consisted of free solid NH_{2}OH. Hydroxylamine as thus
isolated in the free state is a very hygroscopic substance, which
rapidly liquefies when exposed to air, owing to the absorption of
water.

The crystals melt at 33 deg., and the fused substance appears to possess
the capability of readily dissolving metallic salts. Sodium chloride
is very largely soluble in the liquid; powdered niter melts at once in
contact with it, and the two liquids then mix. Free hydroxylamine is
without odor. It is heavier than water. When rapidly heated upon
platinum foil it suddenly decomposes in a most violent manner, with
production of a large sheet of bright yellow flame. It is only very
slightly soluble in liquid carbon compounds, such as chloroform,
benzene, ether, acetic ether, and carbon bisulphide. The vapor attacks
corks, so that the solid requires to be preserved in glass-stoppered
bottles. The free base appears also to act upon cellulose, for, upon
placing a few drops of the melted substance upon filter paper, a
considerable amount of heat is evolved. The pure crystals are very
stable, the base in the free state appearing to possess much greater
stability than when dissolved in water. The instability of the
solution appears, however, to be influenced to a considerable extent
by the alkalinity of the glass of the containing vessel, for
concentrated solutions free from dissolved alkali are found to be
perfectly stable. Bromine and iodine react in a remarkable manner with
free hydroxylamine.

Crystals of iodine dissolve instantly in contact with it, with
evolution of a gas and considerable rise of temperature. Bromine
reacts with violence, a gas again being explosively evolved and
hydrobromic acid formed. The nature of the gas evolved is now
undergoing investigation. A letter from M. Lobry de Bruyn appears in
the number of the _Chemiker Zeitung_ for October 31, warning those who
may attempt to prepare free hydroxylamine by the above method that it
is a dangerously explosive substance when warmed to a temperature of
80 deg.-100 deg.. Upon warming a flask containing the free solid base upon a
water bath a most violent explosion occurs. A spontaneous
decomposition appears to set in about 80 deg., and even in open vessels
the explosion is very violent. Care must also be taken during the
fractional distillation of the concentrated solution in methyl alcohol
to cool the apparatus before changing the receiver, as if air is
admitted while the retort is heated the experiment ends with an
explosion.--_Nature_.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN

ARCHITECTS AND BUILDERS EDITION

$2.50 a Year. Single Copies, 25 cts.

This is a Special Edition of the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, issued
monthly--on the first day of the month. Each number contains about
forty large quarto pages, equal to about two hundred ordinary book
pages, forming, practically, a large and splendid MAGAZINE OF
ARCHITECTURE, richly adorned with _elegant plates in colors_ and with
fine engravings, illustrating the most interesting examples of modern
Architectural Construction and allied subjects.

A special feature is the presentation in each number of a variety of
the latest and best plans for private residences, city and country,
including those of very moderate cost as well as the more expensive.
Drawings in perspective and in color are given, together with full
Plans, Specifications, Costs, Bills of Estimate, and Sheets of
Details.

No other building paper contains so many plans, details, and
specifications regularly presented as the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN.
Hundreds of dwellings have already been erected on the various plans
we have issued during the past year, and many others are in process of
