says that there is often alcohol in ginger-beer. He told of a case known to
him of a reformed man who, after drinking some, felt strongly drawn to the
bar-room, where he drank until he brought on delirium tremens. The beer
will sometimes ferment enough in a few hours to produce alcohol--if it
answers the conditions--a sweet liquid and a ferment.

DANGER TO THE REFORMED.--A lady who had become a drunkard through taking
alcoholic drinks as medicines, at length, after many efforts, succeeded in
breaking away from the power of the appetite, and for a long time she
seemed to be saved. At length she went to visit her mother, and that mother
put brandy peaches on the table for tea. They aroused the slumbering
appetite, the victim fell again, became worse than ever, and died a
miserable drunkard.

[6] From _Juvenile Temperance Manual_, by Julia Colman.

       *       *       *       *       *

STORIES ABOUT THE RIGHT WAY TO TREAT ALE, BEER, Etc.

THE RIGHT SIDE.--"Boys, which is the right side of the public house? Can
you tell me?"--"Yes, sir, the outside."

THE GOAT AND THE ALE.--Many years ago, when everybody drank freely, a Welsh
minister named Rees Pritchard was at the ale-house drinking, when he took
it into his head to offer some ale to a large tame goat. The animal drank
till he fell down drunk, and the minister drank on till he was carried home
drunk. The next day he was sick all day, but on the third day he went again
to the ale-house, and began to drink. The goat was there, and he offered
him more ale, but the animal would not touch it. The minister, seeing the
animal wiser than himself, was ashamed, and gave up drinking, and became a
worthy minister.

HOW THE MONKEY WAS CURED.--A monkey named Kees had been taught to drink
brandy. At dinner every day he had his share like his more manly (?)
neighbors, only that his was given to him in a plate. One day, as he was
about to drink it, his master set it on fire, and he ran off frightened and
chattering. No inducement could afterward make him drink brandy. We have
many stories of animals who would never drink again after they had once
experienced its effects.

THE KEEN MARKSMAN does not poison his nerves and brain with alcohol. Angus
Cameron, a Highlander, at the age of twenty, took the Queen's prize for the
best marksmanship, and when he was twenty-two (in 1869), he won in the same
way a cup worth $1000. He made the best shot each time that ever had been
made in the contest, and neither of them has been beaten by anyone else.
Angus is a slight, modest, unassuming young man, who had been a Band of
Hope boy. When he was announced as the winner, and all the friends made an
ado over him, and offered him a generous glass of champagne, he quietly
refused their mistaken kindness, and kept his pledge.

BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, when a printer boy in London, would drink no beer, and
his companions called him the water American, and wondered that he was
stronger than they who drank beer. His companion at the press drank six
pints of beer every day, and had it to pay for. He was not only saved the
expense, but he was stronger than they, and better off in every way. If he
had gone to drinking beer at that time, like the other printer boys, it is
likely we should never have heard of him.

OATMEAL DRINK.--"In Boulton and Watts' factory we saw an immense workman at
the hottest and heaviest work, wielding a ponderous hammer, and asked him
what liquor he drank. He replied by pointing to an immense vessel filled
with water and oatmeal, to which the men went and drank as much as they
liked." This is made by adding one pound fine oatmeal to each gallon of
water, and is much used in factories and at heavy work of all kinds in
Government works, instead of the old rations of alcoholic liquors. Iron
puddlers, glass blowers, and athletic trainers, all do their work now
better without alcoholic liquors.

A CHANGE IN AFFAIRS.--A poor boy was once put as an apprentice to a
mechanic; and, as he was the youngest, he was obliged to go for beer for
the older apprentices, though he never drank it. In vain they teased and
taunted him to induce him to drink; he never touched it. Now there is a
great change. Every one of those older apprentices became a drunkard, while
this temperance boy has become a master, and has more than a hundred men in
his employ. So much for total abstinence.

BOOKS BETTER THAN BEER.--An intelligent young mechanic stood up in a
temperance meeting and said: "I have a rich treat every night among my
books. I saved my beer money and spent it in books. They cost me, with my
book-case, nearly $100. They furnish enjoyment for my winter evenings, and
have enabled me, by God's blessing, to gain much useful knowledge, such as
pots and pipes could never have given me."

A LITTLE DRUMMER-BOY was a favorite among the officers, who one day offered
him a glass of strong drink. He refused it, saying that he was a Cadet of
Temperance. They accused him of being afraid; but that did not move him.
Then the major commanded him to drink, saying: "You know it is death to
disobey orders." The little fellow stood up at his full height, and fixing
his clear blue eyes on the face of the officer, he said: "When I entered
the army I promised my mother on bended knees that, by the help of God, I
would not taste a drop of rum, and I mean to keep my promise. I am sorry to
disobey orders, sir, but I would rather suffer than disgrace my mother, and
break my temperance pledge." He was excused from drinking.

       *       *       *       *       *

TOBACCO.

INTRODUCTORY LESSON.

You have been learning about the poison alcohol, and what mischief is done
by it; we will now study about another poison which thousands of persons
are using every day. It is rolled in cigars and cigarettes, and hidden in
snuff and pieces of tobacco, and does more harm to children and young
people who use these things than to grown persons.

Perhaps you know how a person feels who takes tobacco or smokes a cigar for
the first time; if not, we will tell you. He begins to be dizzy, to
tremble, to become faint, and to vomit; his head aches, and he is so sick
for hours, often for several days, that he scarcely knows what to do. Why
is he so sick? Because tobacco poison has been taken into his lungs; also,
some has mixed with the saliva and gone down into his stomach; and each
part it has reached is striving to drive it out, and is saying, by the pain
it causes, "You have given me poison; do not give me any more." If he had
taken enough it would have killed him.

He recovers from this sickness and tries chewing or smoking again and
again, until he becomes accustomed to the poison and can chew or smoke and
it does not hurt him; so he thinks, but he is very much mistaken.

Tobacco is a poison, and hurts everybody who uses it every time they do so,
although it does its evil work very slowly, unless taken in large
quantities. To understand more about this we will try to learn how tobacco
is obtained, what poison is in it, and in what way it harms people.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE STORY ABOUT TOBACCO.

_HOW IT CAME TO BE USED._--Tobacco is the leaves of the tobacco plant, a
native of America. It was used by the Indians of this country before
Columbus came here in 1492. Some of the Spaniards who were with him on his
second visit took some of it back with them to Portugal, and told the
people they had discovered a wonderful medicine. From Spain tobacco seed
was sent to France by Jean Nicot, in 1560. It is said that Sir Walter
Raleigh carried it to England in 1586, when Elizabeth was queen.

In a few years many civilized people were snuffing, chewing, and smoking
tobacco, like the wild Indians, although it cost them a great deal of money
to do so. King James does not seem to have liked it very much, for he said,
"It is a custome loathsome to the eye, hateful to the nose, harmful to the
brain, and dangerous to the lungs." He called the smoke "stinking fumes."

_THE TOBACCO PLANT._ This plant belongs to the same family as the deadly
nightshade, henbane, belladonna, thorn-apple, Jerusalem cherry, potato,
tomato, egg-plant, cayenne pepper, bitter-sweet, and petunia. Most of the
plants of this Nightshade family have more or less poison in their leaves
or fruit. Tobacco is supposed to have been named from the pipe used by the
Indians in smoking its leaves.

The common tobacco plant grows from three to six feet high, and has large,
almost lance-shaped, leaves growing down the stems; its flowers are
funnel-shaped and of a purplish color. When fresh the leaves have very
little odor or taste.

_HOW TOBACCO IS USED._--When the plants are ripe, they are cut off above
the roots and placed where they will become dry, sometimes in a building
made for this purpose, called "a tobacco house." After a short time they
begin to smell strong and taste bitter. They are then stripped from the
stems very carefully and sorted. The leaves nearest the root are considered
the poorest, those at the top generally the best.

The different sorts are packed in separate hogsheads, and sent away to be
sold to manufacturers of cigars, snuff, etc.

The manufacturer has some leaves rolled into cigars, some pressed into
cakes for chewing, or into little pieces to be smoked in a pipe; while some
are ground for snuff. While the dried leaves are being rolled, pressed, or
ground, various substances are mixed with them to give them an agreeable
odor and pleasant taste.

Yet, however pleasant the manufacturer may make them as he rolls, presses,
or grinds, he cannot take the poison out of them. It remains in its brown
covering to do much harm to those who may smoke the cigars, use the snuff,
or chew the tobacco.

BLACKBOARD OUTLINE.

                          THE TOBACCO PLANT.
NATIVE OF           FOUND BY           TAKEN TO           GROWS IN THE
America.            Columbus, 1492.    Portugal,          Torrid and
                                       1496.              temperate zones.
                                       France, 1560.
(About 50 species.)                    England, 1586.

           DESCRIPTION.                               FAMILY
_Height_, 3 to 6 feet.                 _The same as the_  Jerusalem Cherry,
_Leaves,_ lance-ovate, and running                        Petunia,
down the stem.                                            Potato,
_Stem,_ hairy and sticky.                                 Tomato,
_Flowers,_ funnel-shaped and                              Egg-plant,
purplish.                                                 Red pepper, etc.

                        HOW MADE READY FOR USE.
       (1)                                    (2)
Cut-off above the roots.               Flavored and scented.
Dried.                                 Rolled for cigars.
Stripped; sorted.                      Pressed for chewing.
Packed, and sold to the                Ground for snuff.
manufacturers.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE POISON IN TOBACCO AND THE HARM IT DOES.

_THE POISON._--What is the poison in fermented liquors?--"Alcohol." In
distilled liquors?--"Alcohol" True; and the strongest poison in tobacco is
_nicotine_, named from the man who first sent it to France, Jean Nicot.
Beside this it contains several others, some of which we shall tell you
about when we make up our blackboard outline.

Tobacco, like alcohol, is a narcotic; that is, it soothes pain and produces
sleep. Alcohol acts first upon the nerves; tobacco upon the muscles, which
it weakens and causes to tremble. It often causes palpitation of the heart.

If the skin is scratched or punctured, and tobacco poison put into the
wound, it will do the same harm as if it were taken into the stomach.
Tobacco is so dangerous that physicians do not use it much as a medicine.

_HARM DONE IN THE STOMACH._--You remember that after alcohol has been
swallowed, the little mouths of the stomach take it up and carry it to the
liver, which sends it with the blood to different parts of the body.

Tobacco, as we have already told you, poisons more slowly. People do not
swallow it purposely, yet some of it goes down, accidentally, into the
stomach with the saliva, and makes trouble there, causing nausea and
vomiting when taken for the first time. By and by the stomach seems to take
the poison without being hurt, but it really suffers from dyspepsia or
other diseases, and often loses its appetite for wholesome food.

_HARM DONE IN THE MOUTH, THROAT, AND LUNGS._--The mouth takes in some of
the poison through the pores of the membrane, or skin, which lines it;
those who smoke, sometimes have what is called "smokers' sore throat";
besides this, the senses of taste and smell arc more or less injured by
nicotine and the other poisons in tobacco.

The fumes, or smoke, from the weed fills the air with poisonous vapor which
irritates the lungs, not only of the smoker, but of all who are where they
must breathe the same atmosphere. Lungs thus irritated are liable to become
diseased.

Cigarettes are still more injurious than cigars because of the smoke from
their paper coverings; also, because from the way they are made, more of
the tobacco poison goes into the lungs. The cheap cigarette which boys use
is made from cast-away cigar stumps and other filthy things.

_HARM DONE IN THE BRAIN AND NERVES._--The smoker feels so rested and
comfortable, after his cigar, and his brain is so rested, that he does not
think about the mischief that is going on among its blood-vessels and
nerves; perhaps he has never heard that tobacco, snuffed, chewed, or smoked
hurts the brain, and does not learn about it until he finds he is losing
his memory, that his mind is not so strong to think as it should be, and
his will too weak to help him conquer his love for the snuff, tobacco, or
cigar, when he wishes to stop using it. He has become the slave of tobacco,
and it is not easy to get free from his cruel enemy.

The nerves also lose their power, or become more or less paralyzed by
nicotine and the other tobacco poisons.

_MORE ABOUT THE HARM DONE BY TOBACCO._--Some persons who continue to use
tobacco are strong enough to throw off the poison through the lungs, the
skin, and in other ways; but how much better it would be if they were not
obliged to employ their strength in getting rid of that which does them no
good, which only gives a little pleasure to nobody but themselves, and
often makes those suffer who are compelled to remain where they are having
"a good smoke." Beside, their breath and clothing have the tobacco odor,
which not only makes the air impure, but is disagreeable to most people.

If this be true of smoking, what shall we say about the filthy habit of
chewing, and the utterly useless and disgusting practice of taking snuff,
which injures the voice as well as the senses of taste and smell?

And what about spitting tobacco juice on the floors of cars, steamboats,
churches,--any place where it is convenient for the man or boy who has lost
his common politeness in his love for tobacco?

We must not forget that cigars, etc., cost money. No one who smokes, chews,
or snuffs would throw away dollars and cents which might be put into the
savings bank, or used in buying something worth having for himself or
somebody else.

Lastly, we would have you know that tobacco causes thirst, and this often
leads to drinking alcoholic liquors. Some one who has studied this subject,
says that "nine out of ten of the boys and young men who become drunkards
have first learned to smoke or chew tobacco." A New York daily paper gave a
list of 294 cases of insanity caused by drinking, in 246 of which the
whiskey drinking followed tobacco chewing.

Tobacco and alcohol make thousands of wretched homes, and send a great many
people to prison or to the insane asylum; so we entreat you to turn from
beer, wine, and all alcoholic liquors as you would from a serpent, and say
No, when tempted to smoke a cigar or use tobacco in any form.

Do this all the more decidedly because, as we have told you before, alcohol
and tobacco hurt children and young persons in every way more than they
injure any one else. If you have begun to use these poisons, give them up
this very day, before the habit of using them becomes too strong for you to
break.

       *       *       *       *       *

QUESTIONS ON THE USE OF TOBACCO.

Of what poison beside alcohol have you been studying?--"Tobacco."

How is tobacco used?--"Some take it in snuff; some chew it; some smoke it
in a pipe; some smoke it in cigars or cigarettes."

What is the name of the strongest poison in tobacco?--"Nicotine."

What harm does tobacco poison do to the body?--See Blackboard Outline.

What harm does it do to the mind?--See Blackboard Outline.

Whom does it harm most?--"Those who begin to use it when they are children
or very young."

What happens to children or young people if they use tobacco in any
way?--"They are not healthy; they are not strong; they do not grow fast;
they look pale and sickly."

How does the tobacco poison hurt their minds?--"They cannot learn fast;
they often forget what they have learned."

What often makes tobacco-chewers, snuffers, and smokers disagreeable to
clean people?--"Their breath smells of tobacco; their clothes smell of
tobacco; they poison the air with tobacco-fumes; some have the filthy habit
of spitting tobacco-juice wherever they happen to be."

What other harm does the use of tobacco do to people?--"It makes them waste
time and money; it leads some to drink alcoholic liquors and to go with bad
company."

If you are wise how will you treat tobacco?--"I will let it alone."

If you have begun to use it what had you better do?--"Give it up to-day."

Why to-day?--"Because the longer I use it the harder it will be for me to
give it up."

If you keep on using it what will you be?--"A tobacco slave."

       *       *       *       *       *

BLACKBOARD OUTLINE.

                               TOBACCO.
POISONS IN TOBACCO SMOKE.            EFFECTS OF THE POISONS.
Carbonic acid                        Causes sleepiness and headache.
Carbonic oxide                       Causes trembling of the muscles and
                                     heart.
Ammonia                              Bites the tongue; makes too much
                                     work for the salivary glands.
Nicotine                             See below.



                               NICOTINE
IS                                   CAUSES
Odorous,                             Weakness,
Pungent,                             Nervousness,
Emetic,                              Dizziness,
Poisonous,                           Nausea,
Pain-soothing,                       Faintness,
Sleep-producing, _i.e._ Narcotic.    Loss of strength,
                                     Stupor,
     _If taken in large quantities_  Convulsions and Death.



                   SOME OF THE HARM DONE BY TOBACCO
           TO THE BODY.                       TO THE MIND, ETC.
Poisons the saliva.                  Makes the memory poor.
Injures the sense of smell, taste,   Lessens the power to think.
sight, and hearing.                  Weakens the will.
Causes "smokers' sore-throat."       Makes people grow in selfishness
Injures the stomach, causing         and impoliteness.
dyspepsia, etc.                      Makes people waste time and
Often takes away the appetite for    money.
wholesome food.                      Often leads to drunkenness and bad
Irritates the air-cells of the       company.
lungs.                               Sometimes causes insanity.
Causes palpitation of the heart.
Weakens the muscles, causing
trembling.
Injures the eyes.
Excites, then stupefies and
paralyzes the brain and the nerves.

       *       *       *       *       *

OPIUM AND OTHER NARCOTICS.

_OPIUM._--Opium is the juice obtained from the seed-vessels of the white
poppy before they are ripe; this is dried, and smoked in a pipe or chewed.
It makes a person feel very pleasant and happy for a little while, then so
horribly wretched that he takes more of the poison to forget his misery. So
he keeps on until mind and body are a complete wreck. Now and then an opium
slave gets free from the dreadful habit which has mastered him, but usually
the slavery ends only in death.

_LAUDANUM AND MORPHINE._--These soothe pain and cause sleep; but beware of
them; they are made from opium, and like it, though more slowly, hurt mind
and body.

Beware also of _chloral hydrate_ and _chloroform_, which physicians give to
ease suffering and produce sleep. _Endure pain_ rather than form the habit
of using these narcotics.

_HASHISH, ETC._--This is prepared from the hemp plant growing in hot
countries, and is a terribly exciting poison.

The _areca nut_, the seed from a kind of palm, pear-shaped, and resembling
a nutmeg, is mixed with quick-lime and wrapped in a betel-leaf, which grows
on a vine belonging to the pepper family. This mixture reddens the saliva
and lips, and blackens the teeth. It is chewed by millions of people in
India.

The leaves of the _coca_, also of the _thorn apple_, are smoked or chewed
by the South American Indian.

ALL these poisons mean the same thing,--

  _A little pleasure_, DISEASE, and DEATH.

       *       *       *       *       *


Practical Work in the School-Room.

BY SARAH F. BUCKELEW & MARGARET W. LEWIS.
