order. When the commands are uttered in a quick, loud voice, the
jumper repeats the order. When told to strike he strikes, when told to
throw he throws whatever he may happen to have in his hand. Dr. Beard
tried this power of repetition with the first part of the first line
of Virgil's "AEneid" and the first part of the first line of Homer's
"Iliad," and out-of-the-way words of the English language with which
the jumper could not be familiar, and he repeated or echoed the sound
of the word as it came to him in a quick, sharp voice, at the same
time he jumped, or struck, or threw, or raised his shoulders, or made
some other violent muscular motion. They could not help repeating the
word or sound that came from the person that ordered them, any more
than they could help striking, dropping, throwing, jumping, or
starting; all of these phenomena were indeed but parts of the general
condition known as jumping. It was not necessary that the sound should
come from a human being; any sudden or unexpected noise, as the
explosion of a gun or pistol, the falling of a window, or the slamming
of a door--provided it was unexpected and loud enough--would cause
these jumpers to exhibit some one or all of these phenomena. One of
these jumpers came very near cutting his throat, while shaving, on
hearing a door slam. They had been known to strike their fists against a
red-hot stove, to jump into the fire and into water. They could not
help striking their best friend if near them when ordered. The noise
of a steam whistle was especially obnoxious to them. One of these
jumpers, when taking some bromide of sodium in a tumbler, was told to
throw it, and he dashed the tumbler upon the floor. It was dangerous
to startle them in any way when they had an ax or an knife in their
hands. All of the jumpers agreed that it tired them to be jumped, and
they dreaded it, but they were constantly annoyed by their companions.

From this description it will at once, I think, be perceived that
there are striking analogies between "miryachit" and this disorder of
the "Jumping Frenchmen" of Maine. Indeed, it appears to me that, if
the two affections were carefully studied, it would be found that they
were identical, or that, at any rate, the phenomena of the one could
readily be developed into those of the others. It is not stated that
the subjects of miryachit do what they are told to do. They require an
example to reach their brains through the sense of sight or that of
hearing, whereas the "Jumpers" do not apparently perform an act which
is executed before them, but they require a command. It seems,
however, that a "Jumper" starts whenever any sudden noise reaches his
ears.

In both classes of cases a suggestion of some kind is required, and
then the act takes place independently of the will. There is another
analogous condition known by the Germans as _Schlaftrunkenheit_, and
to English and American neurologists as somnolentia, or
sleep-drunkenness. In this state an individual, on being suddenly
awakened, commits some incongruous act of violence, ofttimes a murder.
Sometimes this appears to be excited by a dream, but in others no such
cause could be discovered.

Thus, a sentry fell asleep during his watch, and, being suddenly
aroused by the officer in command, attacked the latter with his sword,
and would have killed him but for the interposition of the bystanders.
The result of the medical examination was that the act was
involuntary, being the result of a violent confusion of mind
consequent upon the sudden awaking from a profound sleep. Other cases
are cited by Wharton and Stille in their work on medical
jurisprudence, by Hoffbauer, and by myself in "Sleep and its
Derangements."

The following cases among others have occurred in my own experience:

A gentleman was roused one night by his wife, who heard the
street-door bell ring. He got up, and, without paying attention to
what she said, dragged the sheets off of the bed, tore them hurriedly
into strips, and proceeded to tie the pieces together. She finally
succeeded in bringing him to himself, when he said he had thought the
house was on fire, and he was providing means for their escape. He did
not recollect having had any dream of the kind, but was under the
impression that the idea had occurred to him at the instant of his
awaking.

Another was suddenly aroused from a sound sleep by the slamming of a
window-shutter by the wind. He sprang instantly from his bed, and,
seizing a chair that was near, hurled it with all his strength against
the window. The noise of the breaking of glass fully awakened him. He
explained that he imagined some one was trying to get into the room
and had let his pistol fall on the floor, thereby producing the noise
which had startled him.

In another case a man dreamed that he heard a voice telling him to
jump out of the window. He at once arose, threw open the sash, and
jumped to the ground below, fortunately only a distance of about ten
feet, so that he was not injured beyond receiving a violent shock.
Such a case as this appears to me to be very similar to those
described by Dr. Beard in all its essential aspects.

A few years ago I had a gentleman under my charge who would attempt to
execute any order given him while he was asleep by a person
whispering into his ear. Thus, if told in this way to shout, he
shouted as loud as he could; if ordered to get up, he at once jumped
from the bed; if directed to repeat certain words, he said them, and
so on.

I am not able to give any certain explanation of the phenomena of
miryachit or of the "Jumpers," or of certain of those cases of
sleep-drunkenness which seem to be of like character. But they all
appear to be due to the fact a motor impulse is excited by perceptions
without the necessary concurrence of the volition of the individual to
cause the discharge. They are, therefore, analogous to reflex actions,
and especially to certain epileptic paroxysms due to reflex
irritations. It would seem as though the nerve cells were very much in
the condition of a package of dynamite or nitro glycerin, in which a
very slight impression is sufficient to effect a discharge of nerve
force. They differ, however, from the epileptic paroxysm in the fact
that the discharge is consonant with the perception--which is in these
cases an irritation--and is hence an apparently logical act, whereas
in epilepsy the discharge is more violent, is illogical, and does not
cease with the cessation of the irritation.

Certainly the whole subject is of sufficient importance to demand the
careful study of competent observers.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE GUM DISEASE IN TREES.[1]

  [Footnote 1: Communicated to the _Medical Times_ by Sir James Paget.]


An essay by Dr. Beijerinck, on the contagion of the gum disease in
plants, lately published by the Royal Academy of Sciences at
Amsterdam, contains some useful facts. The gum disease (_gummosis,
gum-flux)_ is only too well known to all who grow peaches, apricots,
plums, cherries, or other stone fruits. A similar disease produces gum
arabic, gum tragacanth, and probably many resins and gum resins. It
shows itself openly in the exudation of thick and sticky or hard and
dry lumps of gum, which cling on branches of any of these trees where
they have been cracked or wounded through the bark. Dr. Beijerinck was
induced to make experimental inoculations of the gum disease by
suspicions that, like some others observed in plants, it was due to
bacteria. He ascertained that it is in a high degree contagious, and
can easily be produced by inserting the gum under the edge of a wound
through the bark of any of the trees above named. The observation that
heated or long boiled pieces of gum lose their contagious property
made it most probable that a living organism was concerned in the
contagions; and he then found that only those pieces of the gum
conveyed contagion in which, whether with or without bacteria, there
were spores of a relatively highly organized fungus, belonging to the
class of Ascomycetes; and that these spores, inserted by themselves
under the bark, produced the same pathological changes as did the
pieces of gum. The fungus thus detected, was examined by Professor
Oudemans, who ascertained it to be a new species of Coryneum, and has
named it _Coryneum Beijerincki_. The inoculation experiments are best
made by means of incisions through the bark of young branches of
healthy peach trees or cherry trees, and by slightly raising the cut
edge of the bark and putting under it little bits of gum from a
diseased tree of the same kind. In nearly every instance these wounds
become the seats of acute gum disease, while similar wounds in the
same or other branches of the same tree, into which no gum is
inserted, remain healthy, unless, by chance, gum be washed into them
during rain. The inoculation fails only when the inserted pieces of
gum contain no Coryneum. By similar inoculations similar diseases can
be produced in plum, almond, and apricot trees, and with the gum of
any one of these trees any other can be infected; but of many other
substances which Beijerinck tried, not one produced any similar
disease. The inoculation with the gum is commonly followed by the
death of more or less of the adjacent structures; first of the bark,
then of the wood. Small branches or leaf stalks thus infected in
winter, or in many places at the same time, may be completely killed;
but, in the more instructive experiments the first symptom of the gum
disease is the appearance of a beautiful red color around the wound.
It comes out in spots like those which often appear spontaneously on
the green young branches of peach trees that have the gum disease; and
in these spots it is usual to find Coryneum stromata or mycelium
filaments. The color is due to the formation of a red pigment in one
or more of the layers of the cells of the bark. But in its further
progress the disease extends beyond the parts at which the Coryneum or
any structures derived from it can be found; and this extension,
Beijerinck believes, is due to the production of a fluid of the nature
of a ferment, produced by the Coryneum, and penetrating the adjacent
structures. This, acting on the cell walls, the starch granules, and
other constituents of the cells, transforms them into gum, and even
changes into gum the Coryneum itself, reminding the observer of the
self-digestion of a stomach.

In the cells of the cambium, the same fluid penetrating unites with
the protoplasm, and so alters it that the cells produced from it form,
not good normal wood, but a morbid parenchymatous structure. The cells
of this parenchyma, well known among the features of gum disease, are
cubical or polyhedral, thin walled, and rich in protoplasm. This, in
its turn, is transformed into gum, such as fills the gum channels and
other cavities found in wood, and sometimes regarded as gum glands.
And from this also the new ferment fluid constantly produced, and
tracking along the tissues of the branches, conveys the Coryneum
infection beyond the places in which its mycelium can be found.

       *       *       *       *       *




DRINKSTONE PARK.


Drinkstone has long been distinguished on account of the successful
cultivation of remarkable plants. It lies some eight miles southeast
from Bury St. Edmund's, and is the seat of T.H. Powell, Esq. The
mansion or hall is a large old-fashioned edifice, a large portion of
its south front being covered by a magnificent specimen of the
Magnolia grandiflora, not less than 40 feet in height, while other
portions of its walls are covered with the finest varieties of
climbing roses and other suitable plants. The surrounding country,
although somewhat flat, is well wooded, and the soil is a rich loam
upon a substratum of gravel, and is consequently admirably suited to
the development of the finer kinds of coniferous and other ornamental
trees and shrubs, so that the park and grounds contain a fine and well
selected assortment of such plants.

[Illustration: THE SNOWFLAKE, LEUCOJUM VERNUM, AT DRINKSTONE
PARK.]

Coniferous trees are sometimes considered as out of place in park
scenery; this, however, does not hold good at Drinkstone, where Mr.
Powell has been displayed excellent taste in the way of improving the
landscape and creating a really charming effect by so skillfully
blending the dressed grounds with the rich greensward of the park
that it is not easy to tell where the one terminates or the other
commences.

The park, which covers some 200 acres, including a fine lake over
eight acres in extent, contains also various large groups or clumps of
such species as the Sequoia gigantea, Taxodium sempervirens, Cedres
deodora, Picea douglasii, Pinsapo, etc., interspersed with groups of
ornamental deciduous trees, producing a warm and very pleasing effect
at all seasons of the year. Among species which are conspicuous in the
grounds are fine, well-grown examples of Araucaria imbricata, some 30
feet high; Cedrus deodara, 60 feet in height; Abies pinsapo, 40 feet;
and fine specimens of Abies grandis, A. nobilis, and A. nordmanniana,
etc., together with Abies albertiana or mertensiana, a fine,
free-growing species; also Libocedrus gigantea, Thuiopsis borealis,
Thuia lobbii, Juniperus recurva, Taxas adpressa, fine plants; with
fine golden yews and equally fine examples of the various kinds of
variegated hollies, etc.

[Illustration: ODONTOGLOSSUM ROSSI MAJOR VAR. RUBESCENS, AT DRINKSTONE
PARK.]

Particular attention is here paid to early spring flowers. Drinkstone
is also celebrated as a fruit growing establishment, more particularly
as regards the grape vine; the weight and quality of the crops of
grapes which are annually produced here are very remarkable.--_The
Gardeners' Chronicle._

       *       *       *       *       *




ON THE CHANGES WHICH TAKE PLACE IN THE CONVERSION OF HAY INTO
ENSILAGE.

By FREDK. JAS. LLOYD, F.C.S., Lecturer on Agriculture, King's
College.


The recently published number of the _Royal Agricultural Society's
Journal_ contains some information upon the subject of silage which
appears to me of considerable interest to those chemists who are at
present investigating the changes which take place in the conversion
of grass into silage. The data[1] are, so far as I know, unique, and
though the analytical work is not my own, yet it is that of an
agricultural chemist, Mr. A. Smetham, of Liverpool, whose work I know
from personal experience to be thoroughly careful and reliable. I have
therefore no hesitation in basing my remarks upon it.

   [Footnote 1: _Royal Agricultural Society's Journal_, vol. xx.,
   part i., pp. 175 and 380.]

We have here for the first time an accurate account of the quantity of
grass put into a silo, of the quantity of silage taken out, and of the
exact composition both of the grass and resulting silage. I desire
merely to place myself in the position of, so to speak, a "chemical
accountant."

The ensilage has been analyzed at three depths, or rather in three
layers, the first being 1 foot, the second 1 ft. to 1 ft. 6 in., and
the third 1 ft. 6 in. to 2 ft. from the bottom of the silo. By
doubling the figures of the bottom layer analysis, adding these to the
second and third layer analysis, and dividing by 4, we obtain a fair
representation of the average composition of the silage taken
throughout the silo, for by so doing we obtain the average of the
analyses of each 6-inch layer of silage. The results of the analyses
are as follows, calculated on the dry matter. The moisture was
practically the same, being 70.48 per cent, in the grass and 72.97 in
the silage.


         _Composition of Grass and Silage (dried at 100 deg.C.)._

                                         Grass.       Ensilage.
 Fat (ether extract)                       2.80            5.38
 Soluble albuminous compounds              3.06            5.98
 Insoluble albuminous compounds            6.94            3.77
 Mucilage, sugar, and extractives, etc.   11.65            4.98
 Digestible fiber                         36.24           33.37
 Indigestible woody fiber                 32.33           31.79
                                         -------         -------
                                          93.02           85.27
 Soluble mineral matters                   5.24           12.62
 Insoluble mineral matters                 1.74            2.11
                                         -------         -------
                                         100.00          100.00

The striking difference in the mineral matter of the grass and silage
I will merely draw attention to; it is not due to the salt added to
the silage. I may say, however, that other analysts and I myself have
found similar striking differences. For instance, Prof. Kinch[2]
found in grass 8.50 per cent. mineral matter, in silage 10.10 per
cent., which, as be points out, is equivalent, to a "loss of about 18
per cent. of combustible constituents"--a loss which we have no proof
of having taken place. In Mr. Smetham's sample the loss would have to
be 50 per cent., which did not occur, and in fact is not possible.
What is the explanation?

  [Footnote 2: _Journ. Chem. Society_, March, 1884, p. 124.]

I am, however, considering now the organic constituents. Calculating
the percentages of these in the grass and silage, we obtain the
following figures:

          _Percentage Composition of Organic Compounds._

                                 Grass.           Ensilage.
  Fat (ether extract)               3.01               6.31
  Soluble albuminous compounds      8.29}             {7.01
                                        }10.75   11.43{
  Insoluble "            "          7.46}             {4.42

  Mucilage, sugar, and extractives 12.52               5.84
  Digestible fiber                 38.96              39.14
  Indigestible woody fiber         34.76              37.28
                                 -------            -------
                                  100.00             100.00

The difference in the total nitrogen in the grass and silage is equal
to 0.68 per cent. of albuminoids. Practically it is a matter of
impossibility that the nitrogen could have increased in the silo, and
it will be a very safe premise upon which to base any further
calculations that the total amount of nitrogen in the silage was
identical with that in the grass. There may have been a loss, but
that is not yet proved. Arguing then upon the first hypothesis, it is
evident that 100 parts of the organic matters of silage represent more
than 100 parts of the organic matter of grass, and by the equation we
obtain 10.75:11.43 :: 100:106 approximately. If now we calculate the
composition of 106 parts organic matter of grass, it will represent
exactly the organic matter which has gone to form 100 parts of that
present in silage.

The following table gives these results, and also the loss or gain in
the various constitutents arising from the conversion into silage:

                 _Organic Matter_.

                               In 106 pts. In 100 pts. Loss or
                                  Grass.     Silage.     Gain.

Fat (ether extract)               3.19        6.31      +3.12
Soluble albuminous compounds      3.49        7.01      +3.52
Insoluble "           "           7.91        4.42      -3.49
Mucilage                         13.27        5.84      -7.43
Digestible Fiber                 41.30       39.14      -2.16
Indigestible woody fiber         36.84       37.28      +0.44
                                -------     -------
                                106.00      100.00

These calculations show, provided my reasoning be correct, that the
chief changes which take place are in the albuminous compounds, which
has already been pointed out by Professors Voelcker, Kinch, and
others; and in the starch, gum, mucilage, sugar, and those numerous
bodies termed extractives, which was to be expected. But they show
most conclusively that the "decrease in the amount of indigestible
fiber and increase in digestible" so much spoken of is, so far as our
present very imperfect methods of analyzing these compounds permit us
to judge, a myth; and I have not yet found any sufficient evidence to
support this statement. A loss, then, of 6 parts of organic matter out
of every 106 parts put into the silo has in this instance taken place,
due chiefly to the decomposition of starch, sugar, and mucilage, etc.
And as the grass contained 70 parts of water when put into the silo,
the total loss would only be 1.7 per cent. of the total weight. This
theoretical deduction was found by practical experience correct, for
Mr. Smith, agent to Lord Egerton, upon whose estate this silage was
made, in his report to Mr. Jenkins says the "actual weight out of the
silo corresponds exactly with the weight we put into the same."

In my judgment these figures are of interest to the agricultural
chemist for many reasons. First, they will clear the ground for future
workers and eliminate from their researches what would have greatly
complicated them--changes in the cellulose bodies.

Secondly, they are of interest because our present methods of
distinguishing between and estimating digestible and indigestible
fiber is most rough, and probably inaccurate, and may not in the least
represent the power of an animal--say a cow--to digest these various
substances; and most of us know that when a new method of analysis
becomes a necessity, a new method is generally discovered. Lastly,
they are of interest to the agriculturist, for they point out, I
believe for the first time, the exact amount of loss which grass--or
at least one sample--has undergone in conversion into silage, and also
that much of the nitrogenous matter is changed, and so far as we know
at present, lost its nutritive value. This, however, is only comparing
silage with grass. What is wanted is to compare silage with hay--both
made out of the same grass. Then, and then only, will it be possible
to sum up the relative advantages or disadvantages of the two methods
of preserving grass as food for cattle.--_Chem. News_.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE ILLUMINATING POWER OF ETHYLENE.


Dr. Percy Frankland has obtained results which may be thus briefly
summarized: (1.) That pure ethylene, when burnt at the rate of 5 cubic
feet per hour from a Referee's Argand burner, emits a light of 68.5
standard candles. (2.) That the illuminating power of equal volumes of
mixtures of ethylene with either hydrogen carbonic oxide or
marsh-gas is less than that of pure ethylene. (3.) That when the
proportion of ethylene in such mixtures is above 63 per cent. the
illuminating power of the mixture is but slightly affected by the
nature of the diluent. When, on the other hand, the proportion of
ethylene in such mixtures is low, the illuminating power of the
mixture is considerably the highest when marsh-gas is the diluent, and
the lowest when the ethylene is mixed with carbonic oxide. (4.) That
if 5 cubic feet of ethylene be uniformly consumed irrespectively of
the composition of the mixture, the calculated illuminating power is
in every case equal to or actually greater than that of pure ethylene
until a certain degree of dilution is attained. This intrinsic
luminosity of ethylene remains almost constant when the latter is
diluted with carbonic oxide, until the ethylene forms only 40 per
cent. of the mixture, after which it rapidly diminishes to zero when
the ethylene forms only 20 per cent. of the mixture. When the ethylene
is diluted with hydrogen, its intrinsic luminosity rises to 81 candles
when the ethylene constitutes 30 per cent. of the mixture, after which
it rapidly falls to zero when the ethylene amounts to only 10 per
cent. In the case of mixtures of ethylene and marsh-gas, the intrinsic
luminosity of the former is augmented with increasing rapidity as the
proportion of marsh gas rises, the intrinsic luminosity of ethylene,
in a mixture containing 10 per cent. of the latter, being between 170
and 180 candles.

       *       *       *       *       *




DIFFRACTION PHENOMENA DURING TOTAL SOLAR ECLIPSES.[1]

   [Footnote 1: A paper read before the American Astronomical
   Society, May 5, 1884.]

By G.D. Hiscox.


The reality of the sun's corona having been cast in doubt by a leading
observer of the last total eclipse, who, from the erratic display
observed in the spectroscope, has declared it a subjective phenomenon
of diffraction, has led me to an examination and inquiry as to the
bearing of an obscurely considered and heretofore only casually
observed phenomenon seen to take place during total solar eclipses.
This phenomenon, it seems to me, ought to account for, and will
possibly satisfy, the spectroscopic conditions observed just before,
during, and after totality; which has probably led to the epithet used
by some leading observers--"the fickle corona." The peculiar
phenomenon observed in the spectroscope, the flickering bands or lines
of the solar spectrum flashing upon and across the coronal spectrum,
has caused no little speculation among observers.

The diffraction or interference bands projected by the passage of a
strong beam of light by a solid body, as discovered long since by
Grimaldi, and investigated later by Newton, Fresnel, and Fraunhofer,
are explained and illustrated in our text books; but the grand display
of this phenomenon in a total solar eclipse, where the sun is the
source of light and the moon the intercepting body, has as yet
received but little attention from observers, and is not mentioned to
my knowledge in our text books.

In the instructions issued from the United States Naval Observatory
and the Signal Office at Washington for the observation of the eclipse
of July 29, 1878, attention was casually directed to this phenomenon,
and a few of the observers at Pike's Peak, Central City, Denver, and
other places have given lucid and interesting descriptions of the
flight of the diffraction bands as seen coursing over the face of the
earth at the speed of the moon's shadow, at the apparent enormous
velocity of thirty-three miles per minute, or fifty times the speed of
a fast railway train.

From a known optical illusion derived from interference or fits of
perception, as illustrated in quick moving shadows, this great speed
was not realized to the eye, as the observed motion of these shadows
was apparently far less rapid than their reality.

The ultra or diffraction bands outside of the shadow were distinctly
seen and described by Mr. J.E. Keeler at Central City, both before and
after totality. He estimates the shadow bands at 8 inches wide and 4
feet apart.

Professor E.S. Holden, also at Central City, estimated the dark bands
