be seen from what follows. In its synthesis 1,000 grammes of picoline
were first converted into alphapicoline, 380 grammes being obtained.
This was heated with paraldehyde, whereby it was converted into
allylpyridine (48 grammes), and this by reduction with sodium yielded
alpha-propylpyridine, a body in almost every respect identical with
coniine. The more important difference was its optical inactivity, but
he succeeded in splitting up a solution of the acid tartrate of the
base by means of _Penicillium glaucum_. Crystals separated which had a
dextro-rotatory power of [_a_]_{D} = 31 deg. 87' as compared with the
[_a_]_{D} = 13 deg. 79' of natural coniine. This brief account conveys but
a faint idea of the difficulties which were encountered in these
researches. Optical methods of examination have proved of great value,
and are destined to play an important part in such work.

Among the most complex alkaloids are those of the quinine group. As
yet chemists have got no further with these than the oxidation
products; but the study has afforded us several new antipyretics and
many interesting facts. It has been found, for example, that
artificial quinine-like bodies, which fluoresce and give the green
color with chlorine water and ammonia, have antipyretic properties
like quinine, but their secondary effects are so pernicious as to
prevent their use. If, however, such bodies are hydrogenized or
methylated they lose their fluorescing property, do not give the green
color, and their secondary effects are removed. Knowledge of these
facts led to the discovery of thalline. It is prepared from
paraquinanisol, one of the objectionable bodies, by reduction with tin
and hydrochloric acid. The following formulae show the constitutional
relationship of these compounds:

               CH   CH                  CH   CH_{2}
              /  \ /  \                /  \ /  \
    (CH_{3}O)C    C    CH    (CH_{3}O)C    C    CH_{2}
             |    |    |              |    |    |
            HC    C    CH            HC    C    CH_{2}
              \  / \  /                \  / \  /
               CH   N                   CH   NH

            Paraquinanisol              Thalline
          C_{9}H_{6}.CH_{3}.NO.     C_{9}H_{10}.CH_{3}.NO.

It is evident from the difficulties which have been encountered in
this department of chemistry, and more especially from the costly
nature of the work, that it will be many years before it will
influence the manufacture of alkaloids from the drugs which yield
them. Ladenburg has synthetized coniine, but he has not yet ventured
to assert that his product will replace the natural alkaloid.--_Chem.
and Druggist._

       *       *       *       *       *


The _Southern California Advocate_ reports another magnificent
donation of lands to the University of Southern California by Mr. D.
Freeman, the owner of the Centinella ranch near Los Angeles--six
hundred thousand dollars in all given to found a school of applied
sciences, $100,000 for building and apparatus and $500,000 for
endowment. The buildings will be in the vicinity of Inglewood, the new
and beautiful town on the Ballona branch of the California Central.

       *       *       *       *       *




A GROUP OF HAMPSHIRE DOWNS.


[Illustration]

The Hampshire Down breed of sheep originated about 80 years ago by a
cross of South Downs on the horned, white-faced sheep which had for
ages been native of the open, untilled, hilly stretch of land known as
the Hampshire Downs, in the county of that name bordering on the
English Channel, in the South of England. From time immemorial the
South Downs had dark brown or black legs, matured early, produced the
best of mutton and a fine quality of medium wool. The original
Hampshire was larger, coarser, but hardier, slower to mature, with
inferior flesh, and a longer but coarser wool. The South Down has
always been remarkable for its power of transmitting its special
characteristics to its progeny by other kinds of sheep, and hence it
soon impressed its own characteristics on its progeny by the
Hampshire. The horns of the original breed have disappeared; the face
and legs have become dark, the frame has become more compact, the
bones smaller, the back broader and straighter, the legs shorter, and
the flesh and wool of better quality, while the superior hardiness and
greater size, as well as the large head and Roman nose of the old
breed, still remain. The Hampshires of to-day mature early and fatten
readily. They clip from six to seven pounds of wool, suitable for
combing, which is longer than South Down wool, but less fine. The
mutton has a desirable proportion of fat and lean, and is juicy and
fine flavored. The lambs are of large size and are usually dropped
early and fed for market. Indeed, the Hampshire may be considered a
larger and trifle coarser and hardier South Down. The breed is
occasionally crossed with Cotswolds, when it produces a wool more
valuable for worsted manufacturers than the pure Cotswold. Indeed,
there is little doubt that in addition to South Down, the Hampshire
has a dash of Cotswold blood in its composition. Considerable
importations of the breed have been made into this country, but it has
not become so popular as the South Down and some other English breeds.
The excellent group shown is owned by Mr. James Wood, of Mount Kisco,
New York.--_Rural New-Yorker._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE YALE COLLEGE MEASUREMENT OF THE PLEIADES.[1]

  [Footnote 1: "Determination of the Relative Positions of the
  Principal Stars in the Group of the Pleiades." By William L.
  Elkin. Transactions of the Astronomical Observatory of Yale
  University, Vol. I., Part I. (New Haven: 1887.)]


The Messrs. Repsold have established, and for the present seem likely
to maintain, a practical monopoly in the construction of heliometers.
That completed by them for the observatory of Yale College in 1882
leaves so little to be desired as to show excellence not to be the
exclusive result of competition. In mere size it does not indeed take
the highest rank. Its aperture is of only six inches, while that of
the Oxford heliometer is of seven and a half; but the perfection of
the arrangements adapting it to the twofold function of equatorial and
micrometer stamps it as a model not easy to be surpassed. Steel has
been almost exclusively used in the mounting. Recommended as the
material for the objective cell by its quality of changing volume
under variations of temperature nearly _paripassu_ with glass, its
employment was extended to the telescope tube and other portions of
the mechanism. The optical part of the work was done by Merz, Alvan
Clark having declined the responsibility of dividing the object lens.
Its segments are separable to the extent of 2 deg., and through the
contrivance of cylindrical slides (originally suggested by Bessel)
perfect definition is preserved in all positions, giving a range of
accurate measurement just six times that with a filar micrometer.
(Gill, "Encyc. Brit.," vol. xvi., p. 253; Fischer, _Sirius_, vol.
xvii., p. 145.)

This beautiful engine of research was in 1883 placed in the already
practiced and skillful hands of Dr. Elkin. He lost no time in fixing
upon a task suited both to test the powers of the new instrument and
to employ them to the highest advantage.

The stars of the Pleiades have, from the earliest times, attracted the
special notice of observers, whether savage or civilized. Hence, on
the one hand, their prominence in stellar mythology all over the
world; on the other, their unique interest for purposes of scientific
study and comparison. They constitute an undoubted cluster; that is to
say, they are really, and not simply in appearance, grouped together
in space, so as to fall under the sway of prevailing mutual
influences. And since there is, perhaps, no other stellar cluster so
near the sun, the chance of perceptible displacements among them in a
moderate lapse of time is greater than in any other similar case.
Authentic data regarding them, besides, have now been so long garnered
that their fruit may confidently be expected at least to begin to
ripen.

Dr. Elkin determined, accordingly, to repeat the survey of the
Pleiades executed by Bessel at Konigsberg during about twelve years
previous to 1841. Wolf and Pritchard had, it is true, been beforehand
with him; but the wide scattering of the grouped stars puts the filar
micrometer at a disadvantage in measuring them, producing minute
errors which the arduous conditions of the problem render of serious
account. The heliometer, there can be no doubt, is the special
instrument for the purpose, and it was, moreover, that employed by
Bessel; so that the Konigsberg and Yale results are comparable in a
stricter sense than any others so far obtained.

One of Bessel's fifty-three stars was omitted by Dr. Elkin as too
faint for accurate determination. He added, however, seventeen stars
from the Bonn _Durchmusterung_, so that his list comprised sixty-nine,
down to 9.2 magnitude. Two independent triangulations were executed by
him in 1884-85. For the first, four stars situated near the outskirts
of the group, and marking the angles of quadrilateral by which it was
inclosed, were chosen as reference points. The second rested upon
measures of distance and position angle outward from Alcyone ([eta]
Tauri). Thus, two wholly unconnected sets of positions were secured,
the close accordance of which testified strongly to the high quality
of the entire work. They were combined, with nearly equal weights, in
the final results. A fresh reduction of the Konigsberg observations,
necessitated by recent improvements in the value of some of the
corrections employed, was the preliminary to their comparison with
those made, after an interval of forty-five years, at Yale College.
The conclusions thus laboriously arrived at are not devoid of
significance, and appear perfectly secure, so far as they go.

It has been known for some time that the stars of the Pleiades possess
a small identical proper motion. Its direction, as ascertained by
Newcomb in 1878, is about south-southeast; its amount is somewhat less
than six seconds of arc in a century. The double star 61 Cygni, in
fact, is displaced very nearly as much in one year as Alcyone with its
train in one hundred. Nor is there much probability that this slow
secular shifting is other than apparent; since it pretty accurately
reverses the course of the sun's translation through space, it may be
presumed that the _backward_ current of movement in which the Pleiades
seem to float is purely an effect of our own _onward_ traveling.

Now the curious fact emerges from Dr. Elkin's inquiries that six of
Bessel's stars are exempt from the general drift of the group. They
are being progressively left behind. The inference is obvious that
they do not in reality belong to, but are merely accidentally
projected upon, it; or, rather, that it is projected upon them; for
their apparent immobility (which, in two of the six, may be called
absolute) shows them with tolerable certainty to be indefinitely more
remote--so remote that the path, moderately estimated at
21,000,000,000 miles in length, traversed by the solar system during
the forty-five years elapsed since the Konigsberg measures dwindles
into visual insensibility when beheld from them. The brightest of
these six far-off stars is just above the eighth (7.9) magnitude; the
others range from 8.5 down to below the ninth.

A chart of the relative displacements indicated for Bessel's stars by
the differences in their inter-mutual positions as determined at
Konigsberg and Yale accompanies the paper before us. Divergences
exceeding 0.40" (taken as the limit of probable error) are regarded as
due to real motion; and this is the case with twenty-six stars besides
the half dozen already mentioned as destined deserters from the group.
With these last may be associated two stars surmised, for an opposite
reason, to stand aloof from it. Instead of tarrying behind, they are
hurrying on in front.

An excess of the proper movement of their companions belongs to them;
and since that movement is presumably an effect of secular parallax,
we are justified in inferring their possession of an extra share of it
to signify their greater proximity to the sun. Hence, of all the stars
in the Pleiades these are the most likely to have a measurable annual
parallax. One is a star a little above the seventh magnitude,
distinguished as _s_ Pleiadum; the other, of about the eighth, is
numbered 25 in Bessel's list. Dr. Elkin has not omitted to remark that
the conjecture of their disconnection from the cluster is confirmed by
the circumstance that its typical spectrum (as shown on Prof.
Pickering's plates) is varied in _s_ by the marked character of the K
line. The spectrum of its fellow traveler (No. 25) is still
undetermined.

It is improbable, however, that even these nearer stars are
practicable subjects for the direct determination of annual parallax.
By indirect means, however, we can obtain some idea of their distance.
All that we want to know for the purpose is the _rate_ of the sun's
motion; its _direction_ we may consider as given with approximate
accuracy by Airy's investigation. Now, spectroscopic measurements of
stellar movements of approach and recession will eventually afford
ample materials from which to deduce the solar, velocity; though they
are as yet not accurate or numerous enough to found any definitive
conclusion upon. Nevertheless, M. Homann's preliminary result of
fifteen miles a second as the speed with which our system travels in
its vast orbit inspires confidence both from the trustworthiness of
the determinations (Mr. Seabroke's) serving as its basis and from its
intrinsic probability. Accepting it provisionally, we find the
parallax of Alcyone = about 0.02', implying a distance of
954,000,000,000,000 miles and a light journey of 163 years. It is
assumed that the whole of its proper motion of 2.61' in forty-five
years is the visual projection of oar own movement toward a point in
R.A. 261 deg., Decl. +25 deg..

Thus the parallax of the two stars which we suspect to lie between us
and the stars forming the genuine group of the Pleiades, at perhaps
two-thirds of their distance, can hardly exceed 0.03'. This is just
half that found by Dr. Gill for [xi] Toucani, which may be regarded
as, up to this, the smallest annual displacement at all satisfactorily
determined. And the error of the present estimate is more likely to be
on the side of excess than of defect. That is, the stars in question
can hardly be much nearer to us than is implied by an annual parallax
of 0.03", and they may be considerably more remote.

Dr. Elkin concludes, from the minuteness of the detected changes of
position among the Pleiades, that "the hopes of obtaining any clew to
the internal mechanism of this cluster seem not likely to be realized
in an immediate future;" remarking further: "The bright stars in
especial seem to form an almost rigid system, as for only one is there
really much evidence of motion, and in this case the total amount is
barely 1 per century." This one mobile member of the naked eye group
is Electra; and it is noticeable that the apparent direction of its
displacement favors the hypothesis of leisurely orbital circulation
round the leading star. The larger movements, however, ascribed to
some of the fainter associated stars are far from harmonizing with
this preconceived notion of what they ought to be.

On the contrary, so far as they are known at present, they force upon
our minds the idea that the cluster may be undergoing some slow
process of disintegration. M. Wolf's impression of incipient
centrifugal tendencies among its components certainly derives some
confirmation from Dr. Elkin's chart. Divergent movements are the most
strongly marked; and the region round Alcyone suggests, at the first
glance, rather a very confused area of radiation for a flight of
meteors than the central seat of attraction of a revolving throng of
suns.

There are many signs, however, that adjacent stars in the cluster do
not pursue independent courses. "Community of drift" is visible in
many distinct sets; while there is as yet no perceptible evidence,
from orbital motion, of association into subordinate systems. The
three eighth-magnitude stars, for instance, arranged in a small
isosceles triangle near Alcyone, do not, as might have been expected
_a priori_, constitute a real ternary group. They are all apparently
traveling directly away from the large star close by them, in straight
lines which may, of course, be the projections of closed curves; but
their rates of travel are so different as to involve certain
progressive separation. Obviously, the order and method of such
movements as are just beginning to develop to our apprehension among
the Pleiades will not prove easy to divine.--_A.M. Clerke, in Nature._

       *       *       *       *       *




DEEP SEA DREDGINGS: EXAMINATION OF SEA BOTTOMS.

By THOMAS T.P. BRUCE WARREN.


I believe Prof. Ehrenberg was one of the first to examine,
microscopically, deep sea dredgings, some of which were undertaken for
the Atlantic cable expedition, 1857.

I propose to deal with the bottoms brought up from tropical waters of
the Atlantic, a few years ago, during certain telegraph cable
operations. These soundings were made for survey purposes, and not for
any biological or chemical investigations. Still I think that this
imperfect record may be a useful contribution to chemical science,
bearing especially on marine operations.

Although there is little to be added to the chemistry of this subject,
still I think there are few chemists who could successfully make an
analysis of a deep sea "bottom" without some sacrifice of time and
patience, to say nothing of the risk of wasting a valuable specimen.

The muds, clays, oozes, etc., from deep water are so very fine that
they pass readily through the best kinds of filters, and it is
necessary to wash out all traces of sea water as a preliminary. The
specimen must be _repeatedly_ washed by decantation, until the
washings are perfectly free from chlorine, when the whole may be
thrown onto a filter _merely_ to drain. The turbid water which passes
through is allowed to stand so that the suspended matter may settle,
and after decanting the clear supernatant water, the residuum is again
thrown on to the filter.

The washing and getting ready for the drying oven will, in some cases,
require days to carry out, if we wish to avoid losing anything.

So far the proceeding is exactly the same, except draining on a
filter, which would be adopted for preparing for the microscope. On no
account should the opportunity be missed of mounting several slides
permanently for microscopic examination. Drawings or photographic
enlargements will render us independent of direct microscopic appeal,
which is not at all times convenient.

The substance, if drained and allowed to dry on the filter, will
adhere most tenaciously to it, so that it is better to complete the
drying in a porcelain or platinum capsule, either by swilling the
filter with a jet of water or by carefully removing with a spatula.
The most strenuous care must be used not to contaminate the specimen
with loose fibers from the filter.

The perfectly dried matter is best treated in exactly the same way as a
residuum in water analysis. It is a common thing to ignite the residuum,
and to put the loss down, if any, to water. This ought not to satisfy an
accurate observer, since organic matter, carbonates--especially in
presence of silica--will easily add to the loss. The best plan is to
heat a small portion very cautiously, and note if any smell or
alteration in color, due to carbon, etc., is perceptible, and to proceed
accordingly.

I have seen some very satisfactory analyses made on board ship by a
skillful use of the blowpipe, where liquid reagents would be very
inconvenient to employ.

It will be necessary to say a few words as to the way in which
soundings are made at sea. When the bottom consists of sand, mud, or
other loose matter, it is easy enough to bring specimens to the
surface, and, of course, we know in such a case that the bottom has
been reached, but, in the event of the bottom being hard and rocky, it
is not easy to say that our sounding has been successful: and here we
meet with a difficulty which unfortunately is most unsatisfactorily
provided for.

The lead is "cast," as the saying goes, "armed" for this emergency. An
iron sinker is made with a hollow recess in the bottom; this is filled
in with tallow, and on striking the bottom any loose matter may adhere
by being pressed into the tallow. If the bottom is rocky or hard we
get simply an imprint in the arming, and when such a result is
obtained the usual construction is that "the bottom is rocky" or hard.

Now, this seems to me a point on which chemistry may give some very
valuable help, for I am convinced that no sounding should be accepted
unless evidence of the bottom itself is obtained. A few considerations
will show that when we are working in very deep water, where there is
a difficulty of knowing for certain that we have an "up and down"
sounding, and the hardening of the "arming" by the cold and pressure,
unless we bring up something we cannot be sure that we have touched
the bottom; leaving the doubt on this point on one side, unless we use
a very heavy sinker, so as to get an indication of the released strain
when it touches the bottom, we encounter another complication.

Sir William Thomson's sounding wire has added the element of
reliability to our soundings in this latter case. The note given out
by the wire when the bottom is reached is perceptibly different when
under strain, even if the dynamometer should give an unreliable
indication.

It has been found that when a "bottom" has been recovered by the
arming with tallow, the adherent grease seriously detracts from the
value of the specimen for scientific purposes. Washing with perfectly
pure bisulphide carbon will save the sounding, but of course any
living organism is destroyed. As we have plenty of contrivances for
bringing up loose "bottoms" without arming, we have nothing to fear on
this score.

There is a great difficulty to explain the vast accumulations of clay
deposits on the ocean bed, and it has been suggested that some minute
organisms may produce these deposits, as others give us carbonate of
lime. Is there not a very great probability of some of the apparently
insoluble rocky formations being answerable for these accumulations?

We must not forget the peculiar changes which such an apparently
stable substance as feldspar undergoes when disintegrated and exposed
to the chemical action of sea water. As these deposits contain both
sodium and potassium, our chemical operations must provide for the
analytical results; in other respects the analysis can be proceeded
with according to the operator's analytical knowledge.

Few operators are aware of the usefulness of an ordinary deep sea
grapnel rope, as used for cable work, in recovering specimens of the
fauna of any locality. The grapnel rope should be left down for a few
months, so that the denizens of the deep may get used to it and make
it their place of residence and _attachment_. The stench caused by
their decomposition, unless the rope be kept in water, when hauled up
will be in a few days intolerable, even to an individual with a
sea-going stomach. I tried several chemical solutions for preserving
specimens thus recovered, but nothing answered so well as the water
itself drawn up from the same depth as the rope was recovered
from.--_Chem. News._

       *       *       *       *       *


THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN

ARCHITECTS AND BUILDERS EDITION

$2.50 a Year. Single Copies, 25 cts.

This is a Special Edition of the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, issued
monthly--on the first day of the month. Each number contains about
forty large quarto pages, equal to about two hundred ordinary book
pages, forming, practically, a large and splendid MAGAZINE OF
ARCHITECTURE, richly adorned with _elegant plates in colors_ and with
fine engravings, illustrating the most interesting examples of modern
Architectural Construction and allied subjects.

A special feature is the presentation in each number of a variety of
the latest and best plans for private residences, city and country,
including those of very moderate cost as well as the more expensive.
Drawings in perspective and in color are given, together with full
Plans, Specifications, Costs, Bills of Estimate, and Sheets of
Details.

No other building paper contains so many plans, details, and
specifications regularly presented as the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN.
Hundreds of dwellings have already been erected on the various plans
we have issued during the past year, and many others are in process of
construction.

Architects, Builders, and Owners will find this work valuable in
furnishing fresh and useful suggestions. All who contemplate building
or improving homes, or erecting structures of any kind, have before
them in this work an almost _endless series of the latest and best
examples_ from which to make selections, thus saving time and money.
