ventilation should be the introduction of atmospheric air for the
purpose of diluting and oxidizing the air of the sewers, and the
creation of a current to some exit, which shall, if possible, either
be above the roofs of the houses, or, still better, to some point
where the sewer gas can be cremated. The most recent contribution to
this subject, in direct opposition to these views, is to be found in
the address of Professor Attfield to the Hertfordshire Natural History
Society and Field Club, in which it is laid down that all that is
necessary is a vent at an elevation above the ground, and that,
therefore, the surface ventilators, or other openings for the
introduction of fresh air, are not only not necessary, but are, on the
contrary, injurious, even when acting as downcast shafts.

These aims and objects are beset with difficulties, and the most
scientific minds of the country have failed so far to devise a method
of ventilation which shall at the same time be within the range of
practical application as regards cost and universally satisfactory.

The report of last year of a committee of the metropolitan board of
works is worth attention, as showing the opinion of metropolitan
surveyors. Out of forty districts, the opinions of whose surveyors
were taken, thirty-five were in favor of open ventilation, two were
doubtful, two against, and one had no experience in this matter. The
average distances of the ventilators were from 30 to 200 yards, and
the committee came to the conclusion that "pipe ventilators of large
section can be used with great advantage in addition to, and not in
substitution for, surface ventilators." To supplement the street
openings as much as possible with vertical cast iron or other shafts
up the house sides would seem to be the first thing to do, for there
can be no doubt that the more this is done, the more perfect will be
the ventilation of the sewers. It must also not be forgotten that the
anxiety, of late years, of English sanitarians to protect each house
from the possible dangers of sewer gas from the street sewer has led
to a system of so-called disconnection of the house drains by a water
seal or siphon trap, and that, consequently, the soil pipes of the
houses, which, when carried through the roofs, acted as ventilators to
the public sewers, have been lost for this purpose, and thus the
difficulty of sewer ventilation has been greatly increased.

In Leicester we have been fortunate enough to secure the co-operation
of factory owners, who have allowed us to connect no fewer than
fifty-two chimneys; while we have already carried out, at a cost of
about L1,250, 146 special shafts up the house sides, with a locked
opening upon a large number of them, by means of which we can test the
velocity of the current as well as the temperature of the outflowing
air. The connections with the high factory chimneys are all of too
small a caliber to be of great use, being generally only six inches,
with a few exceptionally of nine inches in diameter.

The radius of effect of specially erected chimneys, as shown by the
experiments of Sir Joseph Bazalgette, and as experienced with the
special ventilating towers erected at Frankfurt, is disappointing and
discouraging when the cost is taken into consideration. It can not be
expected, however, that manufacturers will admit larger connections to
be made with their chimney; otherwise, of course, much more
satisfactory results would be obtained. To fall back upon special
shafts up the house sides means, in my opinion, that there should be
probably as many in number as are represented by the soil pipes of the
houses, for in this we have a tested example at Frankfurt, which, so
far as I know, has up to the present moment proved eminently
satisfactory.

The distance apart of such shafts would largely depend on the size of
them, but as a rule it will be found that house owners object to large
pipes, in which case the number must be increased, and if we take a
distance of about 30 yards, we should require about 5,000 such shafts
in Leicester. Whether some artificial means of inducing currents in
sewers by drawing down fresh air from shafts above the eaves of the
houses, and sending forth the diluted sewer gas to still higher
levels, or burning it in an outcast shaft, will take the place of
natural ventilation, and prove to be less costly and more certain in
its action, remains to be seen. But it is quite certain that
notwithstanding the patents which have already been taken out and
failed, and those now before the public, there is still a wide field
of research before this question is satisfactorily solved, so that no
cause whatever shall remain of complaint on the part of the most
fastidious.

One other important question common to all towns is that of the
collection and disposal of the ashes and refuse of the households. It
is one which is becoming daily more difficult to deal with, especially
in those large communities where the old privy and ashpit system has
not been entirely abolished. The removal of such ashes is at all times
a source of nuisance, and if they cannot be disposed of to the
agriculturists of the district, they become a source of difficulty. In
purely water-closeted towns the so-called dry ashpits cannot be kept
in such a condition as to be entirely free from nuisance, especially
in the summer months, inasmuch as the refuse of vegetable and animal
matter finds its way into them, and they are, in close and inhabited
districts, necessarily too close to the living apartments of the
dwellings. The tendency therefore now is rather to discourage the
establishment of ashpits by the substitution of ashbins, to be
collected daily or weekly as the case may be, and I think there can be
no doubt that from a sanitary point of view this is by far the best
system, harmonizing as it does with the general principle applicable
to town sanitation of removing all refuse, likely by decomposition to
become dangerous to health, as quickly as possible from the precincts
of human habitations.

The difficulty of disposing of the ashes, mixed as they must
necessarily be with animal and vegetable matter, is one that is
forcing itself upon the attention of all town authorities, and the
days of the rich dust contractors of the metropolis are practically
numbered. Destruction by fire seems to be the ultimate end to be aimed
at, and in this respect several towns have led the way. But as this is
a subject which will be fully dealt with by a paper to be read during
the meeting, I will not anticipate the information which will be
brought before you, further than to say that the great end to be aimed
at in this method of disposing of the ashes and refuse of towns is
greater economy in cost of construction of destructors, as well as in
cost of working them.

The progress in sanitation on the Continent, America, and the colonies
has not been coincident with the progress in England, but these
countries have largely benefited by the experience of the United
Kingdom, and in some respects their specialists take more extreme
views than those of this country in matters of detail. This is,
perhaps, more particularly the case with the Americans, who have
devised all sorts of exceptional details in connection with private
drainage, in order to protect the interior of the houses from sewer
gas, and to perfect its ventilation. In plumbing matters they seem
also to be very advanced, and to have established examinations for
plumbers and far-reaching regulations for house drainage.

Time will not permit me to examine into the works of a sanitary
character which have been undertaken in the several countries after
the example of England, but they have been attended with similar
beneficial results and saving in life and sickness as in this country,
although the Continental towns which have led the way with such works
cannot as yet point to the low rates of mortality for large towns
which have been attained in England, with the exception of the German
towns of Carlsruhe, Frankfurt, Wiesbaden, and Stuttgart, which show
death rates of 20.55, 20.64, 22, and 21.4 respectively. The greatest
reduction of the mortality by the execution of proper sewerage and
water works took place in Danzig, on the Baltic, and Linz, on the
Danube, where after the execution of the works the mortality was
reduced by 7.85 and 10.17 per 1,000 respectively, and in the case of
Danzig this reduction is almost exclusively in zymotic diseases.
Berlin is also a remarkable example of the enterprise of German
sanitarians, for there they are demonstrating to the world the
practicability of dealing with the sewage from a population of over 11/4
million upon 16,000 acres of land, of which about 10,000 acres are
already under irrigation.

In taking this chair, it has been usual, when meetings have been held
out of London, for your president to give some account of the works of
his own town. In the present instance I feel that I can dispense with
this course, in so far as that I need not do more than generally
indicate what has been the course of events since I read to a largely
attended district meeting in May, 1884, a paper on "The Public Works
of Leicester." At that time large flood prevention works were in
course of construction, under an act obtained in 1881, for continuing
the river improvement works executed under previous acts. The works
then under contract extended from the North Mill Lock and the North
Bridge on the north to the West Bridge and Bramstone Gate Bridge on
the south, along the river and canal, and included bridges, weirs,
retaining walls, and some heavy underpinning works in connection with
the widening and deepening of the river and canal. These works were
duly completed, as well as a further length of works on the River Soar
up to what is known as the old grass weir, including the Braunstone
Gate Bridge, added to one of the then running contracts, at a total
cost, excluding land and compensation, of L77,000. At this point a
halt was made in consequence of the incompleteness of the negotiations
with the land owners on the upper reach of the river, and this,
together with various other circumstances, has contributed to greater
delay in again resuming the works. In the interval, a question of
whether there should be only one channel for both river and canal
instead of two, as authorized by the act, has necessarily added
considerably to the delay. But as that has now been settled in favor
of the original parliamentary scheme, the authority of the council has
been given to proceed with the whole of the works.

One contract, now in progress, which members will have an opportunity
of inspecting, was let to Mr. Evans, of Birmingham, in March last, for
about L18,000. It consists of a stone and concrete weir, 500 feet in
length, with a lock of 7 feet 6 inches lift and large flood basins,
retaining and towing path walls, including a sunk weir parallel with
the Midland Railway viaduct. This contract is to be completed by March
next. The remainder of the works about to be entered upon include a
new canal and flood channel about 1,447 yards long, and the deepening
and widening of the River Soar for a length of about 920 yards, with
two or three bridges.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CHEMISTRY OF THE COTTON FIBER.

By Dr. BOWMAN.


Every chemist knows that cotton is chiefly composed of cellulose,
C_{6}H_{10}O_{5}, with some other substances in smaller quantities.
This, although the usual opinion, is only true in a partial sense, as
the author found on investigating samples of cotton from various
sources. Thus, while mere cellulose contains carbon 44.44 per cent.
and hydrogen 6.173, he found in Surat cotton 7.6 per cent. of
hydrogen, in American cotton 6.3 per cent., and in Egyptian cotton 7.2
per cent. The fact is that along with cellulose in ordinary cotton
there are a number of celluloid bodies derived from the inspissated
juices of the cotton plant.

In order to gain information on this subject, the author has grown
cotton under glass, and analyzed it at various stages of its life
history. In the early stage of unripeness he has found an astringent
substance in the fiber. This substance disappears as the plant ripens,
and seems to closely resemble some forms of tannin. Doubtless the
presence of this body in cotton put upon the market in an unripe
condition may account for certain dark stains sometimes appearing in
the finished calicoes. The tannin matter forms dark stains with any
compound or salt of iron, and is a great bugbear to the manufacturer.
Some years ago there was quite a panic because of the prevalence of
these stains, and people in Yorkshire began to think the spinners were
using some new or inferior kind of oil. Dr. Bowman made inquiries, and
found that in Egypt during that year the season had been very foggy
and unfavorable to the ripening of the cotton, and it seemed probable
that these tannin-like matters were present in the fiber, and led to
the disastrous results.

Although the hydrogen and oxygen present in pure cellulose are in the
same relative proportions as in water, they do not exist as water in
the compound. There is, however, in cotton a certain amount of water
present in a state of loose combination with the cellulose, and the
celluloid bodies previously referred to appear to contain water
similarly combined, but in greater proportion. Oxycellulose is another
body present in the cotton fiber. It is a triple cellulose, in which
four atoms of hydrogen are replaced by one atom of oxygen, and like
cellulose forms nitro compounds analogous to nitro glycerine. It is
probable that the presence of this oxycellulose has a marked influence
upon the behavior of cotton, especially with dye matters. The earthy
substances in cotton are also of importance. These are potassium
carbonate, chloride, and sulphate, with similar sodium salts, and
these vary in different samples of cotton, and possibly influence its
properties to some extent. Then there are oily matters in the young
fiber which, upon its ripening, become the waxy matter which Dr.
Schunk has investigated. Resin also is present, and having a high
melting point is not removed by the manipulative processes that cotton
is subjected to. When this is in excessive amount, it comes to the
surface of the goods after dyeing.

       *       *       *       *       *




SYNTHESIS OF STYROLENE.


MM. Vabet and Vienne, in a recent number of _Comptes Rendus_, state
that by passing a current of acetylene through 200 grammes of benzene
containing 50 grammes of aluminum chloride for 30 hours the oily
liquid remaining after removal of the unaltered aluminum chloride by
washing was found to yield, on fractional distillation, three distinct
products. The first, which came over between 143 deg. and 145 deg., and which
amounted to 80 per cent. of the whole, consisted of pure cinnamene or
styrolene (C_{6}H_{5}.CH.CH_{2}), which is one of the principal
constituents of liquid storax, and was synthetized by M. Berthelot by
passing acetylene and benzene vapor through a tube heated to redness.
The second fraction, coming over at 265 deg.-270 deg., consisted of diphenyl
ethane ((C_{6}H_{5})_{2} CH.CH_{3}); and the third fraction, boiling
at 280 deg.-286 deg., was found to consist entirely of dibenzyl
(C_{6}H_{5}.CH_{2}.CH_{2}.C_{6}H_{5}), a solid substance isomeric with
diphenyl ethane. These syntheses afford another instance of the
singular action of aluminum chloride in attacking the benzene nucleus.

       *       *       *       *       *




NOTES ON SACCHARIN.

By EDWARD D. GRAVILL, F.C.S., F.R.M.S.


Now that a supply of this reputed substitute for sugar has been placed
upon the London market, it will doubtless have attracted the attention
of many pharmacists, and as information having reference to its
characters and properties is as yet somewhat scarce, the following
notes may be of interest.

The sample to which these notes refer represents, I believe, a portion
of the first supply that has been offered to us as a commercial
article, and may therefore be taken to represent the same as it at
present occurs in commerce. I think it desirable to call attention to
this fact, because of the wide difference I have seen in other samples
obtained, I think, by special request some weeks ago, and which do not
favorably correspond with the sample under consideration, being much
more highly colored, and in comparison having a very strong odor.
Saccharin now occurs as a very pale yellow, nearly white, amorphous
powder, free from grittiness, but giving a distinct sensation of
roughness when rubbed between the fingers. It is not entirely free
from odor, but this is very slight, and not at all objectionable,
reminding one of a very slight flavor of essential oils of almonds.
Its taste is intensely sweet and persistent, which in the raw state is
followed by a slight harshness upon the tongue and palate. The
sweetness is very distinct when diluted to 1 in 10,000. Under the
microscope it presents no definite form of crystallization.

A temperature of 100 deg. C, even if continued for some time, has no
perceptible effect upon saccharin; it loses no weight, and undergoes
no physical change. It fuses at a temperature of from 118 deg. to 120 deg. C.,
and at 150 deg. C. forms a clear light yellow liquid, which boils a few
degrees higher. At the latter temperature dense white fumes appear,
and a condensation of tufts of acicular crystals (some well defined)
is found upon the cool surface of the apparatus. These crystals,
except for a slight sweetness of taste, correspond in characters and
tests to benzoic acid. The sweet flavor, I think, may be due to the
presence of a very small quantity of undecomposed saccharin, carried
mechanically with the fumes. The escaping vapors, which are very
irritable, and give a more decided odor of hydride of benzole than the
powder itself, also communicate a very distinct sensation of sweetness
to the back part of the palate. Heated over the flame, with free
access of air, saccharin carbonizes and burns with a dull yellow smoky
flame, leaving a residue amounting to 0.65 per cent. of sodium salts.
It does not reduce an alkaline copper solution, but, like glycerine,
liberates boracic acid from borax, the latter salt dissolving
saccharin readily in aqueous solution, due no doubt to a displacement
of the boracic acid.

The strong acids, either hot or cold, show no characteristic color
reaction; the compound enters solution at the boiling point of the
acid, and in the case of hydrochloric shows a white granular
separation on cooling. Sulphuric acid develops an uncharacteristic
light brown color.

The compound, like most of the organic acids, shows a characteristic
reaction with ferro and ferrid cyanide of potassium. In the former
case no change is perceptible until boiled when a greenish white
turbidity appears, with the liberation of small quantities of
hydrocyanic acid. In the latter case a trace also of this acid is set
free, with the formation of a very distinct green solution, the latter
reaction being very perceptible with a few drops of a 1 in 1,000
solution of saccharin in water. Heated with lime, very distinct odors
of benzoic aldehyde are developed.

Saccharin possesses very decided acid properties, and combines readily
with alkalies or alkaline carbonates, forming anhydro-ortho
sulphamine-benzoates of the same, in the latter case at the expense of
the carbonic anhydride, causing strong effervescence. These
combinations are very soluble in water, the alkaline carbonate thus
forming a ready medium for the solution of this acid, which alone is
so sparingly soluble. Another advantage of some importance is that,
while the harshness of flavor perceptible in a simple solution of the
acid is destroyed, the great sweetness appears to be distinctly
intensified and refined.

The following shows the solubility of saccharin in the various liquids
quoted, all, with the exception of the boiling water, being taken at
60 deg. F.:

    Boiling water            0.60 parts per 100 by volume.
    Cold water               0.20   "        "       "
    Alcohol 0.800            4.25   "        "       "
    Rectified spirit 0.838   3.20   "        "       "
    Ether 0.717              1.00   "        "       "
    Chloroform 1.49          0.20   "        "       "
    Benzene                  0.40   "        "       "
    Petroleum ether insoluble.

It is also sparingly soluble in glycerin and fixed oils, and to a
greater or less extent in volatile oils. Benzoic aldehyde dissolves
saccharin in large quantities.

I was somewhat disappointed at the slight solubility of saccharin in
ether, as it has been repeatedly stated to be very soluble in that
liquid.

The quantity of saccharin required to communicate an agreeable degree
of sweetness, like sugar, differs with the material to be sweetened;
but from half to one and half grains, according to taste, will be
found sufficient for an ordinary breakfast cup full of tea or coffee
infusion.--_Pharm. Jour._

       *       *       *       *       *




ALCOHOL AND TURPENTINE.


In a paper entitled "The Oxidation of Ethyl Alcohol in the Presence of
Turpentine," communicated to the Chemical Society by Mr. C.E.
Steedman, Williamstown, Victoria, the author states that dilute ethyl
alcohol in the presence of air and turpentine becomes oxidized to
acetic acid. He placed in a clear glass 16 oz. bottle a mixture of 2
drachms of alcohol, 1 drachm of turpentine, and 1 oz. of water. The
bottle was securely corked and left exposed to a varying temperature
averaging about 80 deg. F. for three months. At the end of that time the
liquid was strongly acid from the presence of acetic acid. One curious
fact appears to have light thrown upon it by this observation.

Mr. McAlpine, Professor of Biology at Ormond College, Melbourne
University, has a method of preserving biological specimens by
abstracting their moisture with alcohol after hardening in chromic
acid, and then placing the specimen in turpentine for some time; great
discrepancies arise, however, according as the alcohol is allowed or
not to evaporate from the specimen before dipping it into turpentine.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN

ARCHITECTS AND BUILDERS EDITION.

$2.50 a Year. Single Copies, 25 cts.

This is a Special Edition of the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, issued
monthly--on the first day of the month. Each number contains about
forty large quarto pages, equal to about two hundred ordinary book
pages, forming, practically, a large and splendid MAGAZINE OF
ARCHITECTURE, richly adorned with _elegant plates in colors_ and with
fine engravings, illustrating the most interesting examples of modern
Architectural Construction and allied subjects.

A special feature is the presentation in each number of a variety of
the latest and best plans for private residences, city and country,
including those of very moderate cost as well as the more expensive.
Drawings in perspective and in color are given, together with full
Plans, Specifications, Costs, Bills of Estimate, and Sheets of
Details.

No other building paper contains so many plans, details, and
specifications regularly presented as the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN.
Hundreds of dwellings have already been erected on the various plans
we have issued during the past year, and many others are in process of
construction.

Architects, Builders, and Owners will find this work valuable in
furnishing fresh and useful suggestions. All who contemplate building
or improving homes, or erecting structures of any kind, have before
them in this work an almost _endless series of the latest and best
examples_ from which to make selections, thus saving time and money.

Many other subjects, including Sewerage, Piping, Lighting, Warming,
Ventilating, Decorating, Laying out of Grounds, etc., are illustrated.
An extensive Compendium of Manufacturers' Announcements is also given,
in which the most reliable and approved Building Materials, Goods,
Machines, Tools, and Appliances are described and illustrated, with
addresses of the makers, etc.

The fullness, richness, cheapness, and convenience of this work have
won for it the LARGEST CIRCULATION of any Architectural publication
in the world.

MUNN & CO., PUBLISHERS,
361 BROADWAY, NEW YORK.

