stairway, X (Fig. 2), leads to one of these halls. Communication was
formerly had with its counterpart by a stone bridge which is now
broken. There still exist two (P) which lead from the floor of the
central temple to the first story of the detached pavilion or
_mantapa_, D, and to that of the entrance pavilion or _gopura_, C. At
G we still see two sorts of obelisks ornamented with arabesques and
designed for holding the fires during religious fetes. At E are seen
two colossal elephants carved out of the rock. These structures, made
upon a general plan of remarkable character, are truly without an
equal in the entire world.

We may thus see how much art feeling the architects of these remote
epochs possessed, and express our wonder at the extreme taste that
presided over all these marvelous subterranean structures.--_A.
Tissandier, in La Nature._

       *       *       *       *       *

[NATURE.]





TIMBER, AND SOME OF ITS DISEASES.[1]

   [Footnote 1: Continued from SUPPLEMENT, No, 640, p. 10222.]

By H. MARSHALL WARD.


IV.

Before proceeding further it will be of advantage to describe another
tree-killing fungus, which has long been well known to mycologists as
one of the commonest of our toadstools growing from rotten stumps and
decaying wood-work such as old water pipes, bridges, etc. This is
_Agaricus melleus_ (Fig. 15), a tawny yellow toadstool with a ring
round its stem, and its gills running down on the stem and bearing
white spores, and which springs in tufts from the base of dead and
dying trees during September and October. It is very common in this
country, and I have often found it on beeches and other trees in
Surrey, but it has been regarded as simply springing from the dead
rotten wood, etc., at the base of the tree. As a matter of fact,
however, this toadstool is traced to a series of dark shining strings,
looking almost like the purple-black leaf stalks of the maidenhair
fern, and these strings branch and meander in the wood of the tree,
and in the soil, and may attain even great lengths--several feet, for
instance. The interest of all this is enhanced when we know that until
the last few years these long black cords were supposed to be a
peculiar form of fungus, and were known as _Rhizomorpha_. They are,
however, the subterranean vegetative parts (mycelium) of the agaric we
are concerned with, and they can be traced without break of continuity
from the base of the toadstool into the soil and tree (Fig. 16). I
have several times followed these dark mycelial cords into the timber
of old beeches and spruce fir stumps, but they are also to be found in
oaks, plums, various conifers, and probably may occur in most of our
timber trees if opportunity offers.

The most important point in this connection is that _Agaricus melleus_
becomes in these cases a true parasite, producing fatal disease in the
attacked timber trees, and, as Hartig has conclusively proved,
spreading from one tree to another by means of the rhizomorphs under
ground. Only the last summer I had an opportunity of witnessing, on a
large scale, the damage that can be done to timber by this fungus.
Hundreds of spruce firs with fine tall stems, growing on the hillsides
of a valley in the Bavarian Alps, were shown to me as "victims to a
kind of rot." In most cases the trees (which at first sight appeared
only slightly unhealthy) gave a hollow sound when struck, and the
foresters told me that nearly every tree was rotten at the core. I had
found the mycelium of _Agaricus melleus_ in the rotting stumps of
previously felled trees all up and down the same valley, but it was
not satisfactory to simply assume that the "rot" was the same in both
cases, though the foresters assured me it was so.

[Illustration: FIG. 15.--A small group of _Agaricus (Armillaria)
melleus_. The toadstool is tawny yellow, and produces white spores;
the gills are decurrent, and the stem bears a ring. The fine hair-like
appendages on the pileus should be bolder.]

By the kindness of the forest manager I was allowed to fell one of
these trees. It was chosen at hazard, after the men had struck a large
number, to show me how easily the hollow trees could be detected by
the sound. The tree was felled by sawing close to the roots; the
interior was hollow for several feet up the stem, and two of the main
roots were hollow as far as we could poke canes, and no doubt further.
The dark-colored rotting mass around the hollow was wet and spongy,
and consisted of disintegrated wood held together by a mesh work of
the rhizomorphs. Further outward the wood was yellow, with white
patches scattered in the yellow matrix, and, again, the rhizomorph
strands were seen running in all directions through the mass.

[Illustration: FIG. 16.--Sketch of the base of a young tree (s) killed
by _Agaricus melleus_, which has attacked the roots, and developed
rhizomorphs at r, and fructifications. To the right the
fructifications have been traced by dissection to the rhizomorph
strands which produced them.]

Not to follow this particular case further--since we are concerned
with the general features of the diseases of timber--I may pass to the
consideration of the diagnosis of this disease caused by _Agaricus
melleus_, as contrasted with that due to _Trametes radiciperda_.

Of course no botanist would confound the fructification of the
_Trametes_ with that of the _Agaricus_; but the fructifications of
such fungi only appear at certain seasons, and that of _Trametes
radiciperda_ may be underground, and it is important to be able to
distinguish such forms in the absence of the fructifications.

The external symptoms of the disease, where young trees are concerned,
are similar in both cases. In a plantation at Freising, in Bavaria,
Prof. Hartig showed me young Weymouth pines (_P. Strobus_) attacked
and killed by _Agaricus melleus_. The leaves turn pale and yellow, and
the lower part of the stem--the so-called "collar"--begins to die and
rot, the cortex above still looking healthy. So far the symptoms might
be those due to the destructive action of other forms of tree-killing
fungi.

On uprooting a young pine, killed or badly attacked by the agaric, the
roots are found to be matted together with a ball of earth permeated
by the resin which has flowed out; this is very pronounced in the case
of some pines, less so in others. On lifting up the scales of the
bark, there will be found, not the silky white, delicate mycelium of
the _Trametes_, but probably the dark cord-like rhizomorphs; there may
also be flat white rhizomorphs in the young stages, but they are
easily distinguished. These dark rhizomorphs may also be found
spreading around into the soil from the roots, and they look so much
like thin roots indeed that we can at once understand their
name--rhizomorph. The presence of the rhizomorphs and (in the case of
the resinous pines) the outflow of resin and sticking together of soil
and roots are good distinctive features. No less evident are the
differences to be found on examining the diseased timber, as
exemplified by Prof. Hartig's magnificent specimens. The wood attacked
assumes brown and bright yellow colors, and is marked by sharp brown
or nearly black lines, bounding areas of one color and separating them
from areas of another color. In some cases the yellow color is quite
bright--canary yellow, or nearly so. The white areas scattered in this
yellow matrix have no black specks in them, and can thus be
distinguished from those due to the _Trametes_. In advanced stages the
purple-black rhizomorphs will be found in the soft, spongy wood.

The great danger of _Agaricus melleus_ is its power of extending
itself beneath the soil by means of the spreading rhizomorphs; these
are known to reach lengths of several feet, and to pass from root to
root, keeping a more or less horizontal course at a depth of six or
eight inches or so in the ground. On reaching the root of another
tree, the tips of the branched rhizomorph penetrate the living cortex,
and grow forward in the plane of the cambium, sending off smaller
ramifications into the medullary rays and (in the case of the pines,
etc.) into the resin passages. The hyphae of the ultimate twigs enter
the tracheides, vessels, etc., of the wood, and delignify them, with
changes of color and substance as described. Reference must be made to
Prof. Hartig's publications for the details which serve to distinguish
histologically between timber attacked by _Agaricus melleus_ and by
_Trametes_ or other fungi. Enough has been said to show that diagnosis
is possible, and indeed to an expert not difficult.

It is at least clear from the above sketch that we can distinguish
these two kinds of diseases of timber, and it will be seen on
reflection that this depends on knowledge of the structure and
functions of the timber and cambium on the one hand and proper
acquaintance with the biology of the fungi on the other. It is the
victory of the fungus over the timber in the struggle for existence
which brings about the disease; and one who is ignorant of these
points will be apt to go astray in any reasoning which concerns the
whole question. Any one knowing the facts and understanding their
bearings, on the contrary, possesses the key to a reasonable treatment
of the timber; and this is important, because the two diseases
referred to can be eradicated from young plantations and the areas of
their ravages limited in older forests.

Suppose, for example, a plantation presents the following case. A tree
is found to turn sickly and die, with the symptoms described, and
trees immediately surrounding it are turning yellow. The first tree is
at once cut down, and its roots and timber examined, and the diagnosis
shows the presence of _Agaricus melleus_ or of _Trametes radiciperda_,
as the case may be. Knowing this, the expert also knows more. If the
timber is being destroyed by the _Trametes_, he knows that the
ravaging agent can travel from tree to tree by means of roots in
contact, and he at once cuts a ditch around the diseased area, taking
care to include the recently infected and neighboring trees. Then the
diseased timber is cut, because it will get worse the longer it
stands, and the diseased parts burnt. If _Agaricus melleus_ is the
destroying agent, a similar procedure is necessary; but regard must be
had to the much more extensive wanderings of the rhizomorphs in the
soil, and it may be imperative to cut the moat round more of the
neighboring trees. Nevertheless, it has also to be remembered that the
rhizomorphs run not far below the surface. However, my purpose here is
not to treat this subject in detail, but to indicate the lines along
which practical application of the truths of botanical science may be
looked for. The reader who wishes to go further into the subject may
consult special works. Of course the spores are a source of danger,
but need be by no means so much so where knowledge is intelligently
applied in removing young fructifications.

I will now pass on to a few remarks on a class of disease-producing
timber fungi which present certain peculiarities in their biology. The
two fungi which have been described are true parasites, attacking the
roots of living trees, and causing disease in the timber by traveling
up the cambium, etc., into the stem; the fungi I am about to refer to
are termed wound parasites, because they attack the timber of trees at
the surfaces of wounds, such as cut branches, torn bark, frost cracks,
etc., and spread from thence into the sound timber. When we are
reminded how many sources of danger are here open in the shape of
wounds, there is no room for wonder that such fungi as these are so
widely spread. Squirrels, rats, cattle, etc., nibble or rub off bark;
snow and dew break branches; insects bore into stems; wind, hail,
etc., injure young parts of trees, and in fact small wounds are formed
in such quantities that if the fructifications of such fungi as those
referred to are permitted to ripen indiscriminately, the wonder is not
that access to the timber is gained, but rather that a tree of any
considerable age escapes at all.

One of the commonest of these is _Polyporus sulphureus_, which does
great injury to all kinds of standing timber, especially the oak,
poplar, willow, hazel, pear, larch, and others. It is probably well
known to all foresters, as its fructification projects horizontally
from the diseased trunks as tiers of bracket-shaped bodies of a
cheese-like consistency; bright yellow below, where the numerous
minute pores are, and orange or somewhat vermilion above, giving the
substance a coral-like appearance. I have often seen it in the
neighborhood of Englefield Green and Windsor, and it is very common in
England generally.

If the spore of this _Polyporus_ lodges on a wound which exposes the
cambium and young wood, the filaments grow into the medullary rays and
the vessels and soon spread in all directions in the timber,
especially longitudinally, causing the latter to assume a warm brown
color and to undergo decay. In the infested timber are to observed
radial and other crevices filled with the dense felt-like mycelium
formed by the common growth of the innumerable branched filaments. In
bad cases it is possible to strip sheets of this yellowish white felt
work out of the cracks, and on looking at the timber more closely (of
the oak, for instance), the vessels are found to be filled with the
fungus filaments, and look like long white streaks in longitudinal
sections of the wood--showing as white dots in transverse sections.

It is not necessary to dwell on the details of the histology of the
diseased timber; the ultimate filaments of the fungus penetrate the
walls of all the cells and vessels, dissolve and destroy the starch in
the medullary rays, and convert the lignified walls of the wood
elements back again into cellulose. This evidently occurs by some
solvent action, and is due to a ferment excreted from the fungus
filaments, and the destroyed timber becomes reduced to a brown mass of
powder.

I cannot leave this subject without referring to a remarkably
interesting museum specimen which Prof. Hartig showed and explained to
me last summer. This is a block of wood containing an enormous
irregularly spheroidal mass of the white felted mycelium of this
fungus, _Polyporus sulphureus_. The mass had been cut clean across,
and the section exposed a number of thin brown ovoid bodies embedded
in the closely woven felt; these bodies were of the size and shape of
acorns, but were simply hollow shells filled with the same felt-like
mycelium as that in which they were embedded. They were cut in all
directions, and so appeared as circles in some cases. These bodies
are, in fact, the outer shells of so many acorns, embedded in and
hollowed out by the mycelium of _Polyporus sulphureus_. Hartig's
ingenious explanation of their presence speaks for itself. A squirrel
had stored up the acorns in a hollow in the timber, and had not
returned to them--what tragedy intervenes must be left to the
imagination. The _Polyporus_ had then invaded the hollow, and the
acorns, and had dissolved and destroyed the cellular and starchy
contents of the latter, leaving only the cuticularized and corky
shells, looking exactly like fossil eggs in the matrix. I hardly think
geology can beat this for a true story.

The three diseases so far described serve very well as types of a
number of others known to be due to the invasion of timber and the
dissolution of the walls of its cells, fibers, and vessels by
hymenomycetous fungi, i.e., by fungi allied to the toadstools and
polypores. They all "rot" the timber by destroying its structure and
substance, starting from the cambium and medullary rays.

To mention one or two additional forms, _Trametes Pini_ is common on
pines, but, unlike its truly parasitic ally, _Tr. radiciperda_, which
attacks sound roots, it is a wound parasite, and seems able to gain
access to the timber only if the spores germinate on exposed surfaces.
The disease it produces is very like that caused by its ally; probably
none but an expert could distinguish between them, though the
differences are clear when the histology is understood.

_Polyporus fulvus_ is remarkable because its hyphae destroy the middle
lamella, and thus isolate the tracheides in the timber of firs;
_Polyporus borealis_ also produces disease in the timber of standing
conifers; _Polyporus igniarius_ is one of the commonest parasites on
trees such as the oak, etc., and produces in them a disease not unlike
that due to the last form mentioned; _Polyporus dryadeus_ also
destroys oaks, and is again remarkable because its hyphae destroy the
middle lamella.

With reference to the two fungi last mentioned I cannot avoid
describing a specimen in the Museum of Forest Botany in Munich, since
it seems to have a possible bearing on a very important question of
biology, viz., the action of soluble ferments.

It has already been stated that some of these tree-killing fungi
excrete ferments which attack and dissolve starch grains, and it is
well known that starch grains are stored up in the cells of the
medullary rays found in timber. Now, _Polyporus dryadeus_ and _P.
igniarius_ are such fungi; their hyphae excrete a ferment which
completely destroys the starch grains in the cells of the medullary
rays of the oak, a tree very apt to be attacked by these two
parasites, though _P. igniarius_, at any rate, attacks many other
dicotyledonous trees as well. It occasionally happens that an oak is
attacked by both of these polyporei, and their mycelia become
intermingled in the timber; when this is the case, the _starch grains
remain intact in those cells which are invaded simultaneously by the
hyphae of both fungi_. Prof. Hartig lately showed me longitudinal
radial sections of oak timber thus attacked, and the medullary rays
showed up as glistening white plates. These plates consist of nearly
pure starch; the hyphae have destroyed the cell walls, but left the
starch intact. It is easy to suggest that the two ferments acting
together exert (with respect to the starch) a sort of inhibitory
action one on the other; but it is also obvious that this is not the
ultimate explanation, and one feels that the matter deserves
investigation.

It now becomes a question--What other types of timber diseases shall
be described? Of course the limits of a popular article are too narrow
for anything approaching an exhaustive treatment of such a subject,
and nothing has as yet been said of several other diseases due to
crust-like fungi often found on decaying stems, or of others due to
certain minute fungi which attack healthy roots. Then there is a class
of diseases which commence in the bark or cortex of trees, and extend
thence into the cambium and timber: some of these "cankers," as they
are often called, are proved to be due to the ravages of fungi, though
there is another series of apparently similar "cankers" which are
caused by variations in the environment--the atmosphere and weather
generally.

It would need a long article to place the reader _au courant_ with the
chief results of what is known of these diseases, and I must be
content here with the bare statement that these "cankers" are in the
main due to local injury or destruction of the cambium. If the normal
cylindrical sheet of cambium is locally irritated or destroyed, no one
can wonder that the thickening layers of wood are not continued
normally at the locality in question; the uninjured cells are also
influenced, and abnormal cushions of tissue formed, which vary in
different cases. Now, in "cankers" this is--put shortly--what happens:
it may be, and often is, due to the local action of a parasitic
fungus; or it may be, and, again, often is, owing to injuries produced
by the weather, in the broad sense, and saprophytic organisms may
subsequently invade the wounds.

The details as to how the injury thus set up is propagated to other
parts--how the "canker" spreads into the bark and wood around--_are_
details, and would require considerable space for their description:
the chief point here is again the destructive action of mycelia of
various fungi, which by means of their powers of pervading the cells
and vessels of the wood, and of secreting soluble ferments which break
down the structure of the timber, render the latter diseased and unfit
for use. The only too well known larch disease is a case in point; but
since this is a subject which needs a chapter to itself, I may pass on
to more general remarks on what we have learned so far.

It will be noticed that, whereas such fungi as _Trametes radiciperda_
and _Agaricus melleus_ are true parasites which can attack the living
roots of trees, the other fungi referred to can only reach the
interior of the timber from the exposed surfaces of wounds. It has
been pointed out along what lines the special treatment of the former
diseases must be followed, and it only remains to say of the latter:
take care of the cortex and cambium of the tree, and the timber will
take care of itself. It is unquestionably true that the diseases due
to wound parasites can be avoided if no open wounds are allowed to
exist. Many a fine oak and beech perishes before its time, or its
timber becomes diseased and a high wind blows the tree down, because
the spores of one of these fungi alight on the cut or torn surface of
a pruned or broken branch. Of course it is not always possible to
carry out the surgical operations, so to speak, which are necessary to
protect a tree which has lost a limb, and in other cases no doubt
those responsible have to discuss whether it costs more to perform the
operations on a large scale than to risk the timber. With these
matters I have nothing to do here, but the fact remains that by
properly closing over open wounds, and allowing the surrounding
cambium to cover them up, as it will naturally do, the term of life of
many a valuable tree can be prolonged, and its timber not only
prevented from becoming diseased and deteriorating, but actually
increased in value.

There is no need probably for me to repeat that, although the present
essay deals with certain diseases of timber due to fungi, there are
other diseases brought about entirely by inorganic agencies. Some of
these were touched upon in the last article, and I have already put
before the readers of _Nature_ some remarks as to how trees and their
timber may suffer from the roots being in an unsuitable medium.

In the next paper it is proposed to deal with the so-called "dry rot"
in timber which has been felled and cut up--a disease which has
produced much distress at various times and in various countries.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN

ARCHITECTS AND BUILDERS EDITION

$2.50 a Year. Single Copies, 25 cts.

This is a Special Edition of the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, issued
monthly--on the first day of the month. Each number contains about
forty large quarto pages, equal to about two hundred ordinary book
pages, forming, practically, a large and splendid MAGAZINE OF
ARCHITECTURE, richly adorned with _elegant plates in colors_ and with,
fine engravings, illustrating the most interesting examples of modern
Architectural Construction and allied subjects.

A special feature is the presentation in each number of a variety of
the latest and best plans for private residences, city and country,
including those of very moderate cost as well as the more expensive.
Drawings in perspective and in color are given, together with full
Plans, Specifications, Costs, Bills of Estimate, and Sheets of
Details.

No other building paper contains so many plans, details, and
specifications regularly presented as the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN.
Hundreds of dwellings have already been erected on the various plans
we have issued during the past year, and many others are in process of
construction.

Architects, Builders, and Owners will find this work valuable in
furnishing fresh and useful suggestions. All who contemplate building
or improving homes, or erecting structures of any kind, have before
them in this work an almost _endless series of the latest and best
examples_ from which to make selections, thus saving time and money.

Many other subjects, including Sewerage, Piping, Lighting, Warming,
Ventilating, Decorating, Laying out of Grounds, etc., are illustrated.
An extensive Compendium of Manufacturers' Announcements is also given,
in which the most reliable and approved Building Materials, Goods,
Machines, Tools, and Appliances are described and illustrated, with
addresses of the makers, etc.

The fullness, richness, cheapness, and convenience of this work have
won for it the LARGEST CIRCULATION of any Architectural publication in
the world.

MUNN & CO., PUBLISHERS, 361 BROADWAY, NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *


A Catalogue of valuable books on Architecture, Building, Carpentry,
Masonry, Heating, Warming, Lighting, Ventilation, and all branches of
industry pertaining to the art of Building, is supplied free of
