have to be raised above the absolute zero (-273 deg. C. or -459 deg. F.) in
order that they might throw off into space as much heat in a second as
they would get from the sun in a second. But Professor Langley's
observations, made on Mount Whitney at an elevation of fifteen
thousand feet, when the barometer stood at seventeen inches
(indicating that about fifty-seven per cent. of the air was still
above him), showed that rocks exposed to the perpendicular rays of the
sun were not heated to any such extent as those at the base of the
mountain similarly exposed; and the difference was so great as to make
it almost certain that a mass of rock not covered by a reasonably
dense atmosphere could never attain a temperature of even 200 deg. or 300 deg.
F. under solar radiation, however long continued.

It must, in fact, be considered at present extremely doubtful whether
any portion of the moon's surface ever reaches a temperature as high
as -100 deg..

The subject, undoubtedly, needs further investigation, and it is now
receiving it. Professor Langley is at work upon it with new and
specially constructed apparatus, including a "bolometer" so sensitive
that, whereas previous experimenters have thought themselves fortunate
if they could get deflections of ten or twelve galvanometric divisions
to work with, he easily obtains three or four hundred. We have no time
or space here to describe Professor Langley's "bolometer;" it must
suffice to say that it seems to stand to the thermopile much as that
does to the thermometer. There is good reason to believe that its
inventor will be able to advance our knowledge of the subject by a
long and important step; and it is no breach of confidence to add that
so far, although the research is not near completion yet, everything
seems to confirm the belief that the radiated heat of the moon,
instead of forming the principal part of the heat we get from her, is
relatively almost insignificant, and that the lunar surface now never
experiences a _thaw_ under any circumstances.

Since the superstition as to the moon's influence upon the wind and
weather is so widespread and deep seated, a word on that subject may
be in order. In the first place, since the total heat received from
the moon, even according to the highest determination (that of Smyth),
is not so much as 0.00001 of that received from the sun, and since the
only hold the moon has on the earth's weather is through the heat she
sends us (I ignore here the utterly insignificant atmospheric _tide_),
it follows necessarily that her influence _must_ be very trifling. In
the next place, all carefully collated observations show that it _is_
so, and not only trifling, but generally absolutely insensible.

For example, different investigators have examined the question of
nocturnal cloudiness at the time of full moon, there being a prevalent
belief that the full moon "eats up" light clouds. On comparing thirty
or forty years' observations at each of several stations (Greenwich.
Paris, etc.), it is found that there is no ground for the belief. And
so in almost every case of imagined lunar meteorological influence. As
to the coincidence of weather changes with changes of the moon, it is
enough to say that the idea is absolutely inconsistent with that
progressive movement of the "weather" across the country from west to
east, with which the Signal Service has now made us all so familiar.

Princeton, April 12, 1884.

       *       *       *       *       *




APPLE TREE BORERS.


The apple tree borers have destroyed thousands of trees in New
England, and are likely to destroy thousands more. There are three
kinds of borers which assail the apple tree. The round headed or two
striped apple tree borer, _Saperda candida_, is a native of this
country, infesting the native crabs, thorn bushes, and June berry. It
was first described by Thomas Say, in 1824, but was probably widely
distributed before that. In his "Insects Injurious to Fruit," Prof.
Saunders thus describes the borer:

"In its perfect state it is a very handsome beetle, about
three-quarters of an inch long, cylindrical in form, of a pale brown
color, with two broad, creamy white stripes running the whole length
of its body; the face and under surface are hoary white, the antennae
and legs gray. The females are larger than the males, and have shorter
antennae. The beetle makes its appearance during the months of June and
July, usually remaining in concealment during the day, and becoming
active at dusk. The eggs are deposited late in June and during July,
one in a place, on the bark of the tree, near its base. Within two
weeks the young worms are hatched, and at once commence with their
sharp mandibles to gnaw their way through the outer bark to the
interior. It is generally conceded that the larvae are three years in
reaching maturity. The young ones lie for the first year in the
sapwood and the inner bark, excavating flat, shallow cavities, about
the size of a silver dollar, which are filled with their sawdust-like
castings. The holes by which they enter being small are soon filled
up, though not until a few grains of castings have fallen from them.
Their presence may, however, often be detected in young trees from the
bark becoming dark colored, and sometimes dry and dead enough to
crack."

On the approach of winter, it descends to the lower part of its
burrow, where it remains inactive until spring. The second season it
continues its work in the sapwood, and in case two or three are at
work in the same tree may completely girdle it, thus destroying it.
The third year it penetrates to the heart of the tree, makes an
excavation, and awaits its transformation. The fourth spring it comes
forth a perfect beetle, and lays its eggs for another generation.


THE FLAT-HEADED BORER.

The flat-headed apple tree borer, _Chrysobothris femorata_, is also a
native of this country. It is a very active insect, delights to bask
in the hot sunshine; runs up and down the tree with great rapidity,
but flies away when molested. It is about half an inch in length. "It
is of a flattish, oblong form, and of a shining, greenish black color,
each of its wing cases having three raised lines, the outer two
interrupted by two impressed transverse spots of brassy color dividing
each wing cover into three nearly equal portions. The under side of
the body and legs shine like burnished copper; the feet are shining
green." This beetle appears in June and July, and does not confine its
work to the base of the tree, but attacks the trunk in any part, and
sometimes the larger branches. The eggs are deposited in cracks or
crevices of the bark, and soon hatch. The young larva eats its way
through the bark and sapwood, where it bores broad and flat channels,
sometimes girdling and killing the tree. As it approaches maturity, it
bores deeper into the tree, working upward, then eats out to the bark,
but not quite through the bark, where it changes into a beetle, and
then cuts through the bark and emerges to propagate its kind. This
insect is sought out when just beneath the bark, and devoured by
woodpeckers and insect enemies.

Another borer, the long-horned borer, _Leptostylus aculifer_, is
widely distributed, but is not a common insect, and does not cause
much annoyance to the fruit grower. It appears in August, and deposits
its eggs upon the trunks of apple trees. The larvae soon hatch, eat
through the bark, and burrow in the outer surface of the wood just
under the bark.


PROTECTION AGAINST BORERS.

The practical point is, What remedies can be used to prevent the
ravages of the borers? The usual means of fighting the borers is, to
seek after them in the burrows, and try to kill them by digging them
out, or by reaching them with a wire. This seems to be the most
effectual method of dealing with them after they have once entered the
tree, but the orchardist should endeavor to prevent the insects from
entering the tree. For this purpose, various washes have been
recommended for applying to the tree, either for destroying the young
larvae before they enter the bark, or for preventing the beetles
depositing their eggs. It has been found that trees which have been
coated with alkaline washes are avoided by beetles when laying their
eggs. Prof. Saunders recommends that soft soap be reduced to the
consistency of a thick paint, by the addition of a strong solution of
washing soda in water, and be applied to the bark of the tree,
especially about the base or collar, and also extended upward to the
crotches where the main branches have their origin. It should be
applied in the evening of a warm day, so that it may dry and form a
coating not easily dissolved by the rain. This affords a protection
against all three kinds of borers. It should be applied early in June,
before the beetles begin to lay their eggs, and again in July, so as
to keep the tree well protected.

Hon. T.S. Gold, of Connecticut, at a meeting of the Massachusetts
State Board of Agriculture, in regard to preventing the ravages of the
borer, said:

"A wash made of soap, tobacco water, and fresh cow manure mingled to
the consistency of cream, and put on early with an old broom, and
allowed to trickle down about the roots of the tree, has proved with
me a very excellent preventive of the ravages of the borer, and a
healthful wash for the trunk of the tree, much to be preferred to the
application of lime or whitewash, which I have often seen applied, but
which I am inclined to think is not as desirable an application as the
potash, or the soda, as this mixture of soft soap and manure."

J.B. Moore, of Concord, Mass., at the same meeting said, in regard to
the destruction of the borer:

"I have found, I think, that whale oil soap can be used successfully
for the destruction of that insect. It is a very simple thing; it will
not hurt the tree if you put it on its full strength. You can take
whale oil soap and dilute until it is about as thick as paint, and put
a coating of it on the tree where the holes are, and I will bet you
will never see a borer on that tree until the new crop comes. I feel
certain of it, because I have done it."

For borers, tarred paper 1 or 2 feet wide has been recommended to be
wrapped about the base of the trunk of the tree, the lower edge being
1 or 2 inches below the surface of the soil. This prevents the
two-striped borer from laying its eggs in the tree, but would not be
entirely effectual against the flat-headed borer, which attacks any
part of the trunk and the branches. By the general use of these means
for the prevention of the ravages of the borers, the damages done by
these insects could be brought within very narrow limits, and hundreds
of valuable apple trees saved.

H. REYNOLDS, M.D.

Livermore Falls, Me.

       *       *       *       *       *




KEFFEL'S GERMINATING APPARATUS.


The apparatus represented in the annexed cut is designed to show the
quality of various commercial seeds, and make known any fraudulent
adulterations that they may have undergone. It is based upon a direct
observation, of the germination of the seeds to be studied.

[Illustration: KEFFEL'S GERMINATING APPARATUS.]

The apparatus consists of a cylindrical vessel containing water to the
height of 0.07 m. Above the water is a germinating disk containing 100
apertures for the insertion of the seeds to be studied, the
germinating end of the latter being directed toward the water. After
the seeds are in place the disk is filled with damp sand up to the top
of its rim, and the apparatus is closed with a cover which carries in
its center a thermometer whose bulb nearly reaches the surface of the
water.

The apparatus is then set in a place where the temperature is about
18 deg., and where there are no currents of air. An accurate result is
reached at the end of about twenty or twenty-four hours. As the
germinating disk contains 100 apertures for as many seeds, it is only
necessary to count the number of seeds that have germinated in order
to get the percentage of fresh and stale ones.

The aqueous vapor that continuously moistens all the seeds, under
absolutely identical conditions for each, brings about their
germination under good conditions for accuracy and comparison. If it
be desired to observe the starting of the leaves, it is only necessary
to remove the cover after the seeds have germinated.

This ingenious device is certainly capable of rendering services to
brewers, distillers, seedsmen, millers, farmers, and gardeners, and it
may prove useful to those who have horses to feed, and to amateur
gardeners, since it permits of ascertaining the value and quality of
seeds of every nature.--_La Nature._

       *       *       *       *       *




MILLET.


The season is now at hand when farmers who have light lands, and who
may possibly find themselves short of fodder for next winter feeding,
should prepare for a crop of millet. This is a plant that rivals corn
for enduring a drought, and for rapid growth. There are three popular
varieties now before the public, besides others not yet sufficiently
tested for full indorsement--the coarse, light colored millet, with a
rough head, Hungarian millet, with a smooth, dark brown head, yielding
seeds nearly black, and a newer, light colored, round seeded, and
later variety, known as the golden millet.

Hungarian millet has been the popular variety with us for many years,
although the light seeded, common millet is but slightly different in
appearance or value for cultivation. They grow in a short time, eight
weeks being amply sufficient for producing a forage crop, though a
couple of weeks more would be required for maturing the seed. Millet
should not be sown in early spring, when the weather and ground are
both cold. It requires the hot weather of June and July to do well;
then it will keep ahead of most weeds, while if sown in April the
weeds on foul land would smother it.

Millet needs about two months to grow in, but if sowed late in July it
will seem to "hurry up," and make a very respectable showing in less
time. We have sown it in August, and obtained a paying crop, but do
not recommend it for such late seeding, as there are other plants that
will give better satisfaction. Golden millet has been cultivated but a
few years in this country, and as yet is but little known, but from a
few trials we have been quite favorably impressed with it. It is
coarser than the other varieties, but cattle appear to be very fond of
it nevertheless. It resembles corn in its growth nearly as much as
grass, and, compared with the former, it is fine and soft, and it
cures readily, like grass, and may be packed away in hay mows with
perfect safety. It is about two weeks later than the other millets,
and consequently cannot be grown in quite so short a time, although it
may produce as much weight to the acre, in a given period, as either
of the other more common varieties. A bushel of seed per acre is not
too much for either variety of millet.--_N.E. Farmer._

       *       *       *       *       *


A CATALOGUE containing brief notices of many important scientific
papers heretofore published in the SUPPLEMENT, may be had gratis at
this office.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT.

PUBLISHED WEEKLY.

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION, $5 A YEAR.

Sent by mail, postage prepaid, to subscribers in any part of the
United States or Canada. Six dollars a year, sent, prepaid, to any
foreign country.

       *       *       *       *       *

All the back numbers of THE SUPPLEMENT, from the commencement, January
1, 1876, can be had. Price, 10 cents each.

       *       *       *       *       *


All the back volumes of THE SUPPLEMENT can likewise be supplied. Two
volumes are issued yearly. Price of each volume, $2.50, stitched in
paper, or $3.50 bound in stiff covers.

       *       *       *       *       *


COMBINED RATES--One copy of SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN and one copy of
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT, one year, postpaid, $7.00.

A liberal discount to booksellers, news agents, and canvassers.

MUNN & CO., PUBLISHERS,
  361 Broadway, New York, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *


PATENTS.

In connection with the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, Messrs MUNN & Co. are
Solicitors of American and Foreign Patents, have had 39 years'
experience, and now have the largest establishment in the world.
Patents are obtained on the best terms.

A special notice is made in the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN of all
Inventions patented through this Agency, with the name and residence
of the Patentee. By the immense circulation thus given, public
attention is directed to the merits of the new patent, and sales or
introduction often easily effected.

Any person who has made a new discovery or invention can ascertain,
free of charge, whether a patent can probably be obtained, by writing
to MUNN & Co.

We also send free our Hand Book about the Patent Laws, Patents,
Caveats, Trade Marks, their costs, and how procured. Address

MUNN & CO.,
  361 BROADWAY, NEW YORK.
Branch Office, cor. F and 7th Sts., Washington, D.C.



