stimulants and narcotics, such as tea, coffee, tobacco, and alcohol,
is, in the vast majority of cases, really an abuse, is a proposition
that I think should be admitted by all who have given the subject an
unbiased study.

The idea that the user of tobacco and other injurious substances will
be cognizant of the injury inflicted by habitual use in moderate or
even excessive amounts is an undoubted fallacy. The daily, weekly, or
monthly injurious effect may be entirely unobservable to even trained
physicians, and yet the ultimate cumulative effect may be fatal. I can
instance numerous cases of physicians directly fatally injured by the
use of alcohol, who have never had the slightest cognizance of the
fact; and I can also instance cases of grave disease from the use of
tobacco where the patients never have believed that tobacco has been
the cause of their troubles, even after a unanimous opinion to that
effect has been expressed by a number of competent medical advisers.
The habitual consumption of opium, in doses of any amount, is
generally admitted by most people to be physically injurious outside
of its strict medicinal application. Moderate indulgence in alcohol as
a beverage is beginning to acquire a very widespread evil reputation.
But how about tobacco? Tea and coffee we can confidently leave to the
consideration of a somewhat remote posterity of a considerably
advanced intelligence and elevated hygienic ideals.

The relation of tobacco to the physical welfare of man can only be
fairly estimated by viewing the subject in its broadest aspect; by
considering its effects upon the race as a whole rather than in
individual cases; by taking into consideration economical and other
social conditions that at first sight might be considered as having
little relevancy to the medical side of the subject. But there can be
no just consideration of the matter otherwise. The direct deleterious
effects of the immoderate use of tobacco are readily observable; but
the great bulk of the evil physical effects due to the moderate use of
this plant are of an intermediate nature and not directly noticeable;
nevertheless, they are real, and worthy of medical attention. The
plainly marked results following the use of tobacco in relatively
large amounts seem to be due to quick and extreme interference with
nutrition, and a diminution of function of all kinds, which may be
represented by anything from a slight decrease of appetite and
digestive ability up to a complete loss of function of almost any
important organ. Tobacco has stimulating as well narcotic properties,
but as ordinarily used its stimulating effect appears to be slight as
compared with its narcotic influence. In this respect it differs from
alcohol, the use of which, owing to the usual method of introduction
in large amounts through the stomach, produces directly, by
stimulation, readily noticeable structural changes. But with tobacco
the direct evil results are mostly of a functional character, and are
more generally diffused, owing to the usual slow manner of
introduction into the body. These two properties have an effect upon
the body in moderate use as well as in immoderate use, the effect
being simply in proportion to the quantity used, though the effects of
moderate use may not be measurable by ordinary means. It is easy to
see the effects of large amounts of tobacco in the stunted growth of
adolescents; in functional cardiac disorders; in intellectual
sluggishness, loss of memory, and color blindness; in loss of
appetite, and other neuroses of motion, and marked blunting of various
functions of sensation, and in degeneracy of descendants; but that
lesser evils are produced must be proved mostly by inference,
circumstantial collateral evidence, and analogy.

The greater evils that are the outcome of a moderate use of tobacco
are probably due to prolonged slight interference with nutrition, and
consequent general decrease of vitality, which renders the individual
more susceptible through indirect influence to the invasion of
disease, and which lessens the capacity for productive effort.

It is of course difficult, and perhaps even impossible, to accurately
estimate the value of tobacco to the race; but let us glance at the
pros and cons, and then each one can roughly estimate for himself.
Tobacco may be used medicinally, but it is a dangerous and uncertain
remedy, and it probably has not one medicinal use that cannot be more
suitably met by other remedies. One can readily imagine easier
digestion as the result of the sedative influence of the after-dinner
cigar upon a disquieted nervous system, especially if the coincident
irritation of alcohol and coffee have need of correction; but it can
also be imagined that in most of such cases the remedy has been the
cause of and will further increase the disordered condition, and that
nutrition of deficiently nourished nerve tissue is rationally
indicated rather than partial narcotization. There then remains, so
far as I can see, the solace of moderate anaesthesia and, occasionally,
of occupation for idlers, as the only items that can be placed to the
credit of tobacco. There certainly are individual cases where such
usage may be more provocative of physical benefit than evil, but,
before judging for the race as a whole, compute the other side of the
question.

Tobacco injures the general health of the public through the economic
loss caused by its consumption. The people of our country spend
annually over seven hundred millions of dollars for tobacco--twenty
per cent. more than is spent for bread. This sum represents only a
minor part of the cost of the tobacco habit to the country. The crop
is immensely exhaustive to the soil. Its culture has blighted whole
sections of fertile territory. In the time consumed by the producer
and the trader in its production, manufacture, and sale, and by the
consumer in its use, and by the general interference with vital
activity and consequent decreased productive capacity, there is
represented an almost unimaginable sum of money. Certainly the people
at large are not so well fed both as to quantity and quality, or so
thoroughly clothed, or so hygienically housed that they can afford
this gigantic economic waste.

There can be little doubt that if the people had sufficient
intelligence and moral strength to taboo tobacco, this comparatively
senseless outgo would be largely devoted to supplying these and other
necessities of an exalted health status.

Tobacco injures health through its moral effects. The tobacco habit is
certainly a dirty and frequently a disgusting habit, and encourages
other dirty practices. Its use tends to make men cowardly, irritable
in temper, and low in spirits. It blunts ideas of purity and courtesy,
leading to invasion of the rights of others. It is presumed that few
medical men would visit a delicate, sensitive patient after saturation
with the "fragrant" effluvia of onions, but thousands whose systems
are saturated with nicotine and who reek with nauseating odor do not
hesitate to inflict their presence on sick or well. The time will come
when the tobacco user will not be allowed to poison the atmosphere
that is the common property of the public--will not be allowed to
force the inhalation of nicotine upon the general public, to say
nothing of being allowed to poison the infants and women in his own
family. What would be said of a man who introduced poison in any
degree into the food or drink of his child? Is the poisoning of the
household atmosphere by the ignorant, thoughtless, or selfish smoker
morally more defensible? Tobacco injures health through hereditary
influence. The tobacco user begets, more certainly than the non-user,
puny children with disordered nervous conditions. Luckily for our
race, the women, who have the most important prenatal influence in
guarding its physical well-being, are practically non-users of the
plant. The general health status of the race is improving, not because
the use of tobacco or the indulgence in other questionable practices
is harmless, but because, among other things, of the great advance in
general intelligence and knowledge of hygienic law.

A person, or the public in general, may practice an injurious habit,
and yet more than counteract its influence by opposing beneficial
practices.

Horace Greeley said, "Show me a drunkard who does not use tobacco, and
I will show you a white blackbird." In this country, where dietetic
drinking habits are not common in the family, the weakening of moral
fiber by indulgence in tobacco is usually the introduction into the
round of vicious indulgences, and thus directly or indirectly affects
health. Smoking induces dryness of the mucous membrane of the mouth
and consequent thirst. The partially paralyzed nerve terminals want
something more stimulating than water to afford relief. Furthermore,
blunted appetite induces deficient nutrition, and consequently there
is a call for some "pick-me-up;" hence we find that the use of tobacco
tends to the habitual use of alcoholic beverages, and there are very
few habitual users of alcohol who escape without structural injuries
to the body as well as perversion of its functions. Decrease of vital
activity in all the tissues of the body marks the use of tobacco. The
tendency is toward functional paralysis, though occasional signs of
stimulative irritation are to be noticed, especially in the
respiratory passages. The interference with intellectual activity is
marked. It is said that during a period of fifty years no tobacco user
stood at the head of his class in Harvard. The accumulated testimony
of investigating observers is conclusive that, other things being
equal, users of tobacco, in schools of all grades, never do so well in
their studies as non-users.

One head of a public school said he could always tell when a boy
commenced to use tobacco by the record of his recitations. Professor
Oliver, of the Annapolis Academy, said he could indicate the boy who
used tobacco by his absolute inability to draw a clean, straight line.
The deleterious effects of tobacco have become so clearly apparent
that we find its sale to minors is prohibited in France, Germany, and
various sections of this country. It is somewhat a question if, at the
present time, the race is not doing itself more injury by its use of
tobacco than it is with alcohol, because of its more universal use,
particularly by youth, and because of the respectability of the habit,
which comes of its use by a certain intelligent part of the race,
including teachers of morals and physics, and even temperance
reformers. There is a widespread sentiment in existence that it is not
a respectable thing to be even partly paralyzed by alcohol, but how
few there are who consider narcosis as in any way connected with the
use of tobacco. Its effect is more diffused and masked, and is not so
acutely serious in individual cases, but through its interference with
vital activity, tobacco is probably more generally injurious to the
race than alcohol.

The editorial fiat of "too long" prevents a full exposition of the
subject, but, in closing, let me say I hear millions of tobacco users
ask, "Why, then, was this plant given to man, if its general effects
are so decidedly evil?" The question presupposes design in creation.
Without subscribing to this theory, or pretending to have solved the
mystery of the presence of evil in the world, the answer may be
suggested that the overcoming of many seductive evils becomes to man a
means of his progressive higher development. Of one thing I am
convinced, that the physical development and welfare of man is
interfered with in strict sequence to his consumption of substances
that are unnecessary for his nutrition--stimulants and narcotics
inclusive.--_Medical Record._

       *       *       *       *       *




ACETIC ACID AS A DISINFECTANT.


Dr. F. Engelmann, in _Cent. f. Gyn._, claims that acetic acid
possesses equally as good antiseptic properties as carbolic acid; in
fact, that it is to be preferred, as it is completely harmless, even
if used in concentrated solutions, and that it is a valuable
haemostatic, an advantageous addition particularly in obstetrics.
Another important property is its ease of transition into the tissues,
which, according to Engelmann's experiments, is by far greater than
that of all the other antiseptics. Of bichloride it is well known that
it forms an insoluble combination with albumen, and can therefore act
only on the surface, while acetic acid extends into the deeper tissues
with ease.

Acetic acid also affects the metal of the instruments, but not as
severely as the bichloride; the forceps, for instance, may be placed
for a quarter of an hour in an irrigator filled with a three per cent.
solution of acetic acid without being injured.

A pleasant effect of acetic acid is that it softens and lubricates the
skin. The author generally used a three per cent. solution; at times
he has made use of a five per cent. solution, which would easily cause
a painful burning at sore places, so that he only used the latter
strength in septic cases, as the three per cent. solution proved to be
a satisfactory antiseptic for general purposes.

       *       *       *       *       *




COUNTER-IRRITATION IN WHOOPING COUGH.

By G.F. INGLOTT, M.D.


To combat this often distressing disease I have tried the
administration of several medicines, namely, bromide of potassium,
asafoetida, valerian, morphine, belladonna, etc., and I have very
closely watched their effects, but none of them proved of much use.
Having observed, however, that during the late cholera epidemic some
of the patients admitted into the hospital under my medical charge
slept well, had their anxiety improved, and some of them ultimately
recovered, after the application of a strong counter-irritation of the
pneumogastric nerves in the neck, namely, between the mastoid process
and the angle of the lower jaw, I tried the same treatment on whooping
patients, and I have no hesitation in stating that the result was very
satisfactory. I may quote one single case of the many I have had under
treatment.

A boy, aged twelve years, of weak constitution, was suffering from
frequent and intense attacks of whooping cough. At a time the fits
were so vehement that blood came out of his eyes and mouth. The case
was a severe one, and I thought it would very likely end fatally. I
prescribed several medicines, and even subcutaneous injections of
morphine, but without any avail. I then tried for the first time the
counter-irritation on both sides of the neck, and this means acted
like magic. In four or five days the patient recovered, and was able
to go to school. Since that time I have been applying the same
treatment, either on the right side only or on both, with the greatest
benefit.--_Br. Med. Jour._

       *       *       *       *       *




DEVELOPMENT OF THE EMBRYO.


At a recent meeting of the Physical Society, Berlin, Prof. Preyer
spoke on reflexes in the embryo. His researches extended over many
classes of animals. As representing mammals, guinea pigs were chiefly
used; and for reptiles, snakes; while in addition the embryos of
fishes, frogs, mollusks, and other lower animals were also employed.
But of all animals birds are most suitable for embryological
observations, inasmuch as with due precautions the development of one
and the same individual can be followed for a considerable time.
Birds' eggs can be incubated in a warm chamber, and by removing a
portion of the shell and replacing it by an unbroken piece from
another egg, it becomes possible to follow the daily development of
the chick and to experiment upon it. As early as the ninetieth hour of
incubation, spontaneous "impulsive" movements may be observed, taking
place apparently without any external stimulus as a cause, and at a
time when no muscles or nerves have as yet been developed. After the
occurrence of these spontaneous movements, and at the earliest on the
fifth day of incubation, movements are observed to result from the
application of mechanical, chemical, and electrical stimuli. In order
to observe these the eggs must be allowed to cool down until all
spontaneous movements have ceased. From the tenth to the thirteenth
day more complicated and reflex actions occur on the application of
stimuli, as, for instance, movements of the eyelids, beak, and limbs;
and if the stimuli are strong, reflex respiratory movements. These
reflexes make their appearance before any ganglia have become
differentiated. Prof. Preyer considered himself justified in
concluding from this that ganglia are not essential for the liberation
of reflex actions. He intends, on some future occasion, to give a more
detailed account of these experiments, and of the conclusions which
may be drawn from them. In the discussion which ensued the conclusions
of the speaker were contested from many sides.

       *       *       *       *       *




IRIDESCENT CRYSTALS.[1]

   [Footnote 1: Abstract of the Friday evening lecture delivered by
   Lord Rayleigh, F.R.S., at the Royal Institution, on April 12,
   1889.]

By LORD RAYLEIGH.


The principal subject of the lecture is the peculiar colored
reflection observed in certain specimens of chlorate of potash.
Reflection implies a high degree of discontinuity. In some cases, as
in decomposed glass, and probably in opals, the discontinuity is due
to the interposition of layers of air; but, as was proved by Stokes,
in the case of chlorate crystals the discontinuity is that known as
twinning. The seat of the color is a very thin layer in the interior
of the crystal and parallel to its faces.

The following laws were discovered by Stokes:

    (1) If one of the crystalline plates be turned round in its own
    plane, without alteration of the angle of incidence, the
    peculiar reflection vanishes twice in a revolution, viz., when
    the plane of incidence coincides with the plane of symmetry of
    the crystal. [Shown.]

    (2) As the angle of incidence is increased, the reflected light
    becomes brighter and rises in refrangibility. [Shown.]

    (3) The colors are not due to absorption, the transmitted light
    being strictly complementary to the reflected.

    (4) The colored light is not polarized. It is produced
    indifferently, whether the incident light be common light or
    light polarized in any plane, and is seen whether the reflected
    light be viewed directly or through a Nicol's prism turned in
    any way. [Shown.]

    (5) The spectrum of the reflected light is frequently found to
    consist almost entirely of a comparatively narrow band. When the
    angle of incidence is increased, the band moves in the direction
    of increasing refrangibility, and at the same time increases
    rapidly in width. In many cases the reflection appears to be
    almost total.

[Illustration: FIG. 1 GENERAL SCHEME
               FIG. 2 DETAIL OF LAZY-TONGS]

In order to project these phenomena a crystal is prepared by cementing
a smooth face to a strip of glass whose sides are not quite parallel.
The white reflection from the anterior face of the glass can then be
separated from the real subject of the experiment.

A very remarkable feature in the reflected light remains to be
noticed. If the angle of incidence be small, and if the incident light
be polarized in or perpendicularly to the plane of incidence, the
reflected light is polarized in the _opposite_ manner. [Shown.]

Similar phenomena, except that the reflection is white, are exhibited
by crystals prepared in a manner described by Madan. If the crystal be
heated beyond a certain point the peculiar reflection disappears, but
returns upon cooling. [Shown.]

In all these cases there can be little doubt that the reflection takes
place at twin surfaces, the theory of such reflection (_Phil. Mag._,
Sept., 1888) reproducing with remarkable exactness most of the
features above described. In order to explain the vigor and purity of
the color reflected in certain crystals, it is necessary to suppose
that there are a considerable number of twin surfaces disposed at
approximate equal intervals. At each angle of incidence there would be
a particular wave length for which the phases of the several
reflections are in agreement. The selection of light of a particular
wave length would thus take place upon the same principle as in
diffraction spectra, and might reach a high degree of perfection.

In illustration of this explanation an acoustical analogue is
exhibited. The successive twin planes are imitated by parallel and
equidistant disks of muslin (Figs. 1 and 2) stretched upon brass rings
and mounted (with the aid of three lazy-tongs arrangements) so that
there is but one degree of freedom to move, and that of such a
character as to vary the interval between the disks without disturbing
their equidistance and parallelism.

The source of sound is a bird call, giving a pure tone of high pitch
(inaudible), and the percipient is a high-pressure flame issuing from
a burner so oriented that the direct waves are without influence upon
the flame (see _Nature_, xxxviii., 208; Proc. Roy. Inst., January,
1888). But the waves reflected from the muslin arrive in the effective
direction, and if of sufficient intensity induce flaring. The
experiment consists in showing that the action depends upon the
distance between the disks. If the distance be such that the waves
reflected from the several disks co-operate,[2] the flame flares, but
for intermediate adjustments recovers its equilibrium. For full
success it is necessary that the reflective power of a single disk be
neither too great nor too small. A somewhat open fabric appears
suitable.

   [Footnote 2: If the reflection were perpendicular, the interval
   between successive disks would be equal to the half wave-length,
   or to some multiple of this.]

It was shown by Brewster that certain natural specimens of Iceland
spar are traversed by thin twin strata. A convergent beam, reflected
at a nearly grazing incidence from the twin planes, depicts upon the
screen an arc of light, which is interrupted by a dark spot
corresponding to the plane of symmetry. [Shown.] A similar experiment
may be made with small rhombs in which twin layers have been developed
by mechanical force after the manner of Reusch.

The light reflected from fiery opals has been shown by Crookes to
possess in many cases a high degree of purity, rivaling in this
respect the reflection from chlorate of potash.

The explanation is to be sought in a periodic stratified structure.
But the other features differ widely in the two cases. There is here
no semicircular evanescence, as the specimen is rotated in azimuth. On
the contrary, the colored light transmitted perpendicularly through a
thin plate of opal undergoes no change when the gem is turned round in
its own plane. This appears to prove that the alternate states are not
related to one another as twin crystals. More probably the alternate
strata are of air, as in decomposed glass. The brilliancy of opals is
said to be readily affected by atmospheric conditions.

       *       *       *       *       *


A NEW CATALOGUE OF VALUABLE PAPERS

Contained in SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT during the past
ten years, sent _free of charge_ to any address. MUNN & CO., 361
Broadway, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN

ARCHITECTS AND BUILDERS EDITION.

$2.50 a Year. Single Copies, 25 cts.

This is a Special Edition of the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, issued
monthly--on the first day of the month. Each number contains about
forty large quarto pages, equal to about two hundred ordinary book
pages, forming, practically, a large and splendid MAGAZINE OF
ARCHITECTURE, richly adorned with _elegant plates in colors_ and with
fine engravings, illustrating the most interesting examples of modern
Architectural Construction and allied subjects.

A special feature is the presentation in each number of a variety of
the latest and best plans for private residences, city and country,
including those of very moderate cost as well as the more expensive.
Drawings in perspective and in color are given, together with full
Plans, Specifications, Costs, Bills of Estimate, and Sheets of
Details.

No other building paper contains so many plans, details, and
specifications regularly presented as the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN.
Hundreds of dwellings have already been erected on the various plans
we have issued during the past year, and many others are in process of
construction.

Architects, Builders, and Owners will find this work valuable in
furnishing fresh and useful suggestions. All who contemplate building
or improving homes, or erecting structures of any kind, have before
them in this work an almost _endless series of the latest and best
examples_ from which to make selections, thus saving time and money.

Many other subjects, including Sewerage, Piping, Lighting, Warming,
Ventilating, Decorating, Laying out of Grounds, etc., are illustrated.
An extensive Compendium of Manufacturers' Announcements is also given,
in which the most reliable and approved Building Materials, Goods,
Machines, Tools, and Appliances are described and illustrated, with
