it now." He glanced at his watch. "The Salgath telecast is over, on
Home Time Line, and in a little while, a transcript will be on this
time line. Want to watch it here, sir?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The telecast screen in the living room of Tortha Karf's town apartment
was still on; in it, a girl with bright red hair danced slowly to soft
music against a background of shifting color. The four men who sat in
a semicircle facing it sipped their drinks and watched idly.

"Ought to be getting some sort of public reaction soon," Tortha Karf
said, glancing at his watch.

"Well, I'll have to admit, it was done convincingly," Zostha Olv, the
Chief Interoffice Cooerdinator, admitted grudgingly. "I'd have believed
it, if I hadn't known the real facts."

"Shooting it against the background of those wide windows was smart,"
Lovranth Rolk said. "Every schoolchild would recognize that view of
the rocketport as being on Police Terminal. And including that girl
Zinganna; that was a real masterpiece!"

"I've met her, a few times," Elbraz Vark, the Political Liaison
Assistant, said. "Isn't she lovely!"

"Good actress, too," Tortha Karf said. "It's not easy to impersonate
yourself."

"Well, Kostran Galth did a fine job of acting, too," Lovranth Rolk
said. "That was done to perfection--the distinguished politician,
supported by his loyal mistress, bravely facing the disgraceful end of
his public career."

"You know, I believe I could get that girl a booking with one of the
big theatrical companies. Now that Salgath's dead, she'll need
somebody to look after her."

"What sharp, furry ears you have, Mr. Elbraz!" Zostha Olv grunted.

The music stopped as though cut off with a knife, and the slim girl
with the red hair vanished in a shatter of many colors. When the
screen cleared, one of the announcers was looking out of it.

"We interrupt the program for an important newscast of a sensational
development in the Salgath affair," he said. "Your next speaker will
be Yandar Yadd--"

"I thought you'd managed to get that blabbermouth transposed to
PolTerm," Zostha said.

"He wouldn't go." Tortha Karf replied. "Said it was just a trick to
get him off Home Time Line during the Council crisis."

Yandar Yadd had appeared on the screen as the pickup swung about.

"... Recording ostensibly made by Councilman Salgath on Police
Terminal Time Line, and telecast on Home Time Line an hour ago. Well,
I don't know who he was, but I now have positive proof that he
definitely was not Salgath Trod!"

"We're sunk!" Zostha Olv grunted. "He'd never make a statement like
that unless he could prove it."

"... Something suspicious about the whole thing, from the beginning,"
the newsman was saying. "So I checked. If you recall, the actor
impersonating Salgath gestured rather freely with his hands, in
imitation of a well-known mannerism of the real Salgath Trod; at one
point, the ball of his right thumb was presented directly to the
pickup. Here's a still of that scene."

He stepped aside, revealing a viewscreen behind him; when he pressed a
button, the screen lighted; on it was a stationary picture of Kostran
Galth as Salgath Trod, his right hand raised in front of him.

"Now watch this. I'm going to step up the magnification, slowly, so
that you can be sure there's no substitution. Camera a little closer,
Trath!"

The screen in the background seemed to advance, until it filled the
entire screen. Yandar Yadd was still talking, out of the picture; a
metal-tipped pointer came into the picture, touching the right thumb,
which grew larger and larger until it was the only thing visible.

"Now here," Yandar Yadd's voice continued. "Any of you who are
familiar with the ancient science of dactyloscopy will recognize this
thumb as having the ridge-pattern known as a 'twin loop.' Even with
the high degree of magnification possible with the microgrid screen,
we can't bring out the individual ridges, but the pattern is
unmistakable. I ask you to memorize that image, while I show you
another right thumb print, this time a certified photo-copy of the
thumb print of the real Salgath Trod." The magnification was reduced a
little, a card was moved into the picture, and it was stepped up
again. "See, this thumb print is of the type known as a 'tented arch.'
Observe the difference."

"That does it!" Zostha Olv cried. "Karf, for the first and last time,
let me remind you that I opposed this lunacy from the beginning. Now,
what are we going to do next?"

"I suggest that we get to Headquarters as soon as we can," Tortha Karf
said. "If we wait too long, we may not be able to get in."

Yandar Yadd was back on the screen, denouncing Tortha Karf
passionately. Tortha went over and snapped it off.

"I suggest we transpose to PolTerm," Lovranth Rolk said. "It won't be
so easy for them to serve a summons on us there."

"You can go to PolTerm if you want to," Tortha Karf retorted. "I'm
going to stay here and fight back, and if they try to serve me with a
summons, they'd better send a robot for a process server."

"Fight back!" Zostha Olv echoed. "You can't fight the Council and the
whole Management! They'll tear you into inch bits!"

"I can hold them off till Vall's able to raid those Abzar Sector
bases," Tortha Karf said. He thought for a moment. "Maybe this is all
for the best, after all. If it distracts the Organization's
attention--"

       *       *       *       *       *

"I wish we could have made a boomerang-ball reconnaissance," Ranthar
Jard was saying, watching one of the viewscreens, in which a film,
taken from an airboat transposed to an adjoining Abzar sector time
line, was being shown. The boat had circled over the Ganges, a mere
trickle between wide, deeply cut banks, and was crossing a gullied
plain, sparsely grown with thornbush. "The base ought to be about
there, but we have no idea what sort of changes this gang has made."

"Well, we couldn't: we didn't dare take the chance of it being
spotted. This has to be a complete surprise. It'll be about like the
other place, the one the slaves described. There won't be any
permanent buildings. This operation only started a few months ago,
with the Croutha invasion; it may go on for four or five months, till
the Croutha have all their surplus captives sold off. That country,"
he added, gesturing at the screen, "will be flooded out when the rains
come. See how it's suffered from flood-erosion. There won't be a thing
there that can't be knocked down and transposed out in a day or so."

"I wish you'd let me go along," Ranthar Jard worried.

"We can't do that, either," Vall said. "Somebody's got to be in charge
here, and you know your own people better than I do. Beside, this
won't be the last operation like this. Next time, I'll have to stay on
Police Terminal and command from a desk; I want first-hand experience
with the outtime end of the job, and this is the only way I can get
it."

He watched the four police-girls who were working at the big terrain
board showing the area of the Police Terminal time line around them.
They had covered the miniature buildings and platforms and towers with
a fine mesh, at a scale-equivalent of fifty feet; each intersection
marked the location of a three-foot conveyer ball, loaded with a
sleep-gas bomb and rigged with an automatic detonator which would
explode it and release the gas as soon as it rematerialized on the
Abzar Sector. Higher, on stiff wires that raised them to what
represented three thousand feet, were the disks that stood for ten
hundred-foot conveyers; they would carry squads of Paratime Police in
aircars and thirty-foot air boats. There was a ring of big
two-hundred-foot conveyers a mile out; they would carry the armor and
the airborne infantry and the little two-man scooters of the
air-cavalry, from the Service and Industrial Sectors. Directly over
the spatial equivalent of the Kholghoor Sector Wizard Traders'
conveyers was the single disk of Verkan Vall's command conveyer, at a
represented five thousand feet, and in a half-mile circle around it
were the five news service conveyers.

"Where's the ship-conveyer?" he asked.

"Actually it's on antigrav about five miles north of here," one of the
girls said. "Representationally, about where Subchief Ranthar's
standing."

Another girl added a few more bits to the network that represented the
sleep-gas bombs and stepped back, taking off her earphones.

"Everything's in place, now, Assistant Verkan," she told him.

"Good. I'm going aboard, now," he said. "You can have it, Jard."

He shook hands with Ranthar Jard, who moved to the switch which would
activate all the conveyers simultaneously, and accepted the good
wishes of the girls at the terrain board. Then he walked to the
mesh-covered dome of the hundred-foot conveyer, with the five news
service conveyers surrounding it in as regular a circle as the
buildings and towers of the regular conveyer heads would permit. The
members of his own detail, smoking and chatting outside, saw him and
started moving inside; so did the news people. A public-address
speaker began yelping, in a hundred voices all over the area, warning
those who were going with the conveyers to get aboard. He went in
through a door, between two aircars, and on to the central
control-desks, going up to a visiscreen over which somebody had
crayoned "Novilan EQ." It gave him a view, over the shoulder of a man
in the uniform of a field agent third class, of the interior of a
conveyer like his own.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Hello, Assistant Verkan," a voice came out of the speaker under the
screen, as the man moved his lips. "Deputy Skordran! Here's Chief's
Assistant Verkan, now!"

Skordran Kirv moved in front of the screen as the operator got up from
his stool.

"Hello, Vall; we're all set to move out as soon as you give the word,"
he said. "We're all in position on antigrav."

"That's smart work. We've just finished our gas-bomb net," Vall said.
"Going on antigrav now," he added, as he felt the dome lift. "I hope
you won't be too disappointed if you draw a blank on your end."

"We realize that they've closed out the whole Esaron Sector," Skordran
Kirv, eight thousand odd miles away, replied. "We're taking in a
couple of ships; we're going to make a survey all up the coast. There
are a lot of other sectors where slaves can be sold in this area."

In the outside viewscreen, tuned to a slowly rotating pickup on the
top of a tower spatially equivalent with a room in a tall building on
Second Level Triplanetary Empire Sector, he could see his own conveyer
rising vertically, with the news conveyers following, and the troop
conveyers, several miles away, coming into position. Finally, they
were all placed; he reported the fact to Skordran Kirv and then picked
up a hand-phone.

"Everybody ready for transposition?" he called. "On my count. Thirty
seconds ... Twenty seconds ... Fifteen seconds ... Five seconds ...
Four seconds ... Three seconds ... Two seconds ... One second, _out!_"

All the screens went gray. The inside of the dome passed into another
space-time continuum, even into another kind of space-time. The
transposition would take half an hour; that seemed to be the time
needed to build up and collapse the transposition field, regardless of
the paratemporal distance covered. The dome above and around them
vanished; the bare, tower-forested, building-dotted world of Police
Terminal vanished, too, into the uniform green of the uninhabited
Fifth Level. A planet could take pretty good care of itself, he
thought, if people would only leave it alone. Then he began to see the
fields and villages of Fourth Level. Cities appeared and vanished,
growing higher and vaster as they went across the more civilized Third
Level. One was under air attack--there was almost never a paratemporal
transposition which did not run through some scene of battle.

He unbuckled his belt and took off his boots and tunic; all around
him, the others were doing the same. Sleep-gas didn't have to be
breathed; it could enter the nervous system by any orifice or lesion,
even a pore or a scratch. A spacesuit was the only protection. One of
the detectives helped him on with his metal and plastic armor; before
sealing his gauntlets, he reciprocated the assistance, then checked
the needler and blaster and the long batonlike ultrasonic paralyzer on
his belt and made sure that the radio and sound-phones in his helmet
were working. He hoped that the frantic efforts to gather several
thousand spacesuits onto Police Terminal from the Industrial and
Commercial and Interplanetary Sectors hadn't started rumors which had
gotten to the ears of some of the Organization's ubiquitous agents.

       *       *       *       *       *

The country below was already turning to the parched browns and
yellows of the Abzar Sector. There was not another of the conveyers in
sight, but electronic and mechanical lag in the individual controls
and even the distance-difference between them and the central radio
control would have prevented them from going into transposition at the
same fractional microsecond. The recon-details began piling into their
cars. Then the red light overhead winked to green, and the dome
flickered and solidified into cold, inert metal. The screens lighted
up again, and Vall could see Skordran Kirv, across Asia and the
Pacific, getting into his helmet. A dot of light in the center of the
underview screen widened as the mesh under the conveyer irised open
around the pickup.

Below, the Organization base--big rectangles of fenced slave pens,
with metal barracks inside; the huge circle of the Kholghoor Sector
conveyer-head building, and a smaller structure that must house
conveyers to other Abzar Sector time lines; the work-shops and living
quarters and hangars and warehouses and docks--was wreathed in
white-green mist. The ring of conveyers at three thousand feet were
opening and spewing out aircars and airboats, farther away, the
greater ring of heavy conveyers were unloading armored and shielded
combat-craft. An aircar which must have been above the reach of the
gas was streaking away toward the west, with three police cars after
it. As he watched, the air around it fairly sizzled blue with the rays
of neutron disruption blasters, and then it blew apart. The three
police cars turned and came back more slowly. The three-thousand-ton
passenger ship which had been hastily fitted with armament was
circling about; the great dock conveyer which had brought it was gone,
transposed back to Police Terminal to pick up another ship.

He recorded a message announcing the arrival of the task-force, pulled
out the tape and sealed it in a capsule, and put the capsule in a mesh
message ball, attaching it to a couple of wires and flipping a switch.
The ball flashed and vanished, leaving the wires cleanly sheared off.
When it got back to Police Terminal, half an hour later, it would
rematerialize, eject a parachute, and turn on a whistle to call
attention to itself. Then he sealed on his helmet, climbed into an
aircar, and turned on his helmet-radio to speak to the driver. The car
lifted a few inches, floated out an open port, and dived downward.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration:]

He landed at the big conveyer-head building. There were spaces for
fifty conveyers around it, and all but eight of them were in place.
One must have arrived since the gas bombs burst; it was crammed with
senseless Kharanda slaves. A couple of Paratime Police officers were
towing a tank of sleep-gas around on an antigrav-lifter, maintaining
the proper concentration in case any more came in. At the smaller
conveyer building, there were no conveyers, only a number of red-lined
fifty-foot circles around a central two-hundred-foot circle. The
Organization personnel there had been dragged outside, and a group of
paracops were sealing it up, installing robot watchmen, and preparing
to flood it with gas. At the slave pens, a string of two-hundred-foot
conveyers, having unloaded soldiers and fighting-gear, were coming in
to take on unconscious slaves for transposition to Police Terminal.
Aircars and airboats were bringing in gassed slavers; they were being
shackled and dumped into the slave barracks; as soon as the gas
cleared and they could be brought back to consciousness, they would be
narco-hypnotized and questioned.

He had finished a tour of the warehouses, looking at the kegs of
gunpowder and the casks of brandy, the piles of pig lead, the stacks
of cases containing muskets. These must have all come from some
low-order handcraft time line. Then there were swords and hatchets
and knives that had been made on Industrial Sector--the Organization
must be getting them through some legitimate trading company--and
mirrors and perfumes and synthetic fiber textiles and cheap jewelry,
of similar provenance. It looked as though this stuff had been brought
in by ship from somewhere else on this time line; the warehouses were
too far from the conveyers and right beside the ship dock--

There was a tremendous explosion somewhere. Vall and the men with him
ran outside, looking about, the sound-phones of their helmets giving
them no idea of the source of the sound. One of the policemen pointed,
and Vall's eyes followed his arm. The ship that had been transposed in
in the big conveyer was falling, blown in half; as he looked, both
sections hit the ground several miles away. A strange ship, a
freighter, was coming in fast, and as he watched, a blue spark winked
from her bow as a heavy-duty blaster was activated. There was another
explosion, overhead; they all ran for shelter as Vall's
command-conveyer disintegrated into falling scrap-metal. At once, all
the other conveyers which were on antigrav began flashing and
vanishing. That was the right, the only, thing to do, he knew. But it
was leaving him and his men isolated and under attack.

       *       *       *       *       *

"So that was it," Dalgroth Sorn, the Paratime Commissioner for
Security said, relieved when Tortha Karf had finished.

"Yes, and I'll repeat it under narco-hyp, too," Tortha Karf added.

"Oh, don't talk that way, Karf," Dalgroth Sorn scolded. He was at
least a century Tortha Karf's senior; he had the face of an elderly
and sore-toothed lion. "You wanted to keep this prisoner under wraps
till you could mind-pump him, and you wanted the Organization to think
Salgath was alive and talking. I approve both. But--"

He gestured to the viewscreen across the room, tuned to a pickup back
of the Speaker's chair in the Council Chamber. Tortha Karf turned a
knob to bring the sound volume up.

"Well. I'm raising this point," a member from the Management seats in
the center was saying, "because these earlier charges of illegal
arrest and illegal detention are part and parcel with the charges
growing out of the telecast last evening."

"Well, that telecast was a fake; that's been established," somebody on
the left heckled.

"Councilman Salgath's confession on the evening of One-Six-Two Day
wasn't a fake, the Management supporter, Nanthav Skov, retorted.

"Well, then why was it necessary to fake the second one?"

A light began winking on the big panel in front of the Speaker, Asthar
Varn.

"I recognize Councilman Hasthor Flan," Asthar said.

"I believe I can construct a theory that will explain that," Hasthor
Flan said. "I suggest that when the Paratime Police were questioning
Councilman Salgath under narco-hypnosis, he made statements
incriminating either the Paratime Police as a whole or some member of
the Paratime Police whom Tortha Karf had to protect--say somebody like
Assistant Verkan. So they just killed him, and made up this
impostor--"

Tortha Karf began, alphabetically, to blaspheme every god he had ever
heard of. He had only gotten as far as a Fourth Level deity named
Allah when a red light began flashing in front of Asthar Varn, and the
voice of a page-robot, amplified, roared:

"Point of special urgency! Point of special urgency! It has been
requested that the news telecast screen be activated at once, with
playback to 1107. An important bulletin has just come in from
Nagorabar, Home Time Line, on the Indian subcontinent--"

"You can stop swearing, now, Karf," Dalgroth Sorn grinned. "I think
this is it."

       *       *       *       *       *

Kostran Galth sat on the edge of the couch, with one arm around
Zinganna's waist; on the other side of him, Hadron Dalla lay at full
length, her elbows propped and her chin in her hands. The screen in
front of them showed a fading sunset, although it was only a little
past noon at Dhergabar Equivalent. A dark ship was coming slowly in
against the red sky; in the center of a wire-fenced compound a
hundred-foot conveyer hung on antigrav twenty feet from the ground,
and beyond, a long metal prefab-shed was spilling light from open
doors and windows.

"That crowd that was just taken in won't be finished for a couple of
hours," a voice was saying. "I don't know how much they'll be able to
tell; the psychists say they're all telling about the same stories.
What those stories are, of course, I'm not able to repeat. After the
trouble caused by a certain news commentator who shall be
nameless--he's not connected with this news service, I'm happy to
say--we're all leaning over backward to keep from breaking Paratime
Police security.

"One thing; shortly after the arrival of the second ship from Police
Terminal--and believe me, that ship came in just in the nick of
time!--the dead Abzar city which the criminals were using as their
main base for this time line, and from which they launched the air
attack against us, was located, and now word has come in that it is
entirely in the hands of the Paratime Police. Personally, I doubt if a
great deal of information has been gotten from any prisoners taken
there. The lengths to which this Organization went to keep their own
people in ignorance is simply unbelievable."

A man appeared for a moment in the lighted doorway of the shed, then
stepped outside.

"Look!" Dalla cried. "There's Vall!"

"There's Assistant Verkan, now," the commentator agreed. "Chief's
Assistant, would you mind saying a few words, here? I know you're a
busy man, sir, but you are also the public hero of Home Time Line, and
everybody will be glad if you say something to them--"

       *       *       *       *       *

Tortha Karf sealed the door of the apartment behind them, then
activated one of the robot servants and sent it gliding out of the
room for drinks. Verkan Vall took off his belt and holster and laid
them aside, then dropped into a deep chair with a sigh of relief.
Dalla advanced to the middle of the room and stood looking about in
surprised delight.

"Didn't expect this, from the mess outside?" Vall asked. "You know,
you really are on the paracops, now. Nobody off the Force knows about
this hideout of the Chief's."

"You'd better find a place like this, too," Tortha Karf advised. "From
now on, you'll have about as much privacy at that apartment in
Turquoise Towers as you'd enjoy on the stage of Dhergabar Opera
House."

"Just what is my new position?" Vall asked, hunting his cigarette case
out of his tunic. "Duplicate Chief of Paratime Police?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The robot came back with three tall glasses and a refrigerated
decanter on its top. It stopped in front of Tortha Karf and slewed
around on its treads; he filled a glass and sent it to the chair where
Dalla had seated herself; when she got a drink, she sent it to Vall.
Vall sent if back to Tortha Karf, who turned it off.

"No; you have the modifier in the wrong place. You're Chief of
Duplicate Paratime Police. You take the setup you have now, and expand
it; continue the present lines of investigation, and be ready to
exploit anything new that comes up. You won't bother with any of this
routine flying-saucer-scare stuff; just handle the Organization
business. That'll keep you busy for a long time, I'm afraid."

"I notice you slammed down on the first Council member who began
shouting about how you'd wiped out the Great Paratemporal Crime-Ring,"
Vall said.

"Yes. It isn't wiped out, and it won't be wiped out for a long time. I
shall be unspeakably delighted if, when I turn my job over to you, you
have it wiped out. And even then, there'll be a loose end to pick up
