To take the boiled pudding out of the cloth without breaking it, dip
it into cold water for a minute or two, then place it in a round
bottomed basin that will just hold it, untie the cloth and lay bare
the pudding down to the edge of the basin; then place upon it, upside
down, the dish on which it is to be served, and invert the whole so
that the pudding may rest on the dish; lastly, lift off the basin and
remove the cloth. The use of the cold water is to chill and solidify
the surface, so that it may part from the cloth smoothly.

Plum pudding may also be baked in a mould or pan, which must be well
buttered inside before pouring the pudding into it. Two hours' boiling
suffices.


PLUM-PUDDING SAUCE.

Put into a saucepan two ounces of best butter and a tablespoonful of
flour; mix these well together with a wooden spoon, and stir in half a
pint of cold water and a little salt and pepper. Set this on the fire
and stir constantly till nearly boiling; then add half a tumbler of
Madeira wine, brandy, or Jamaica rum, fine sugar to the taste, and a
little ground cinnamon or grated nutmeg. Make the sauce very hot, and
serve over each portion of the pudding.


NATIONAL PLUM PUDDING.

An excellent plum pudding is made as follows: Half a pound of flour,
half a pound of grated bread crumbs, a pound of Zante currants, washed
and picked; a pound of raisins, stoned; an ounce of mixed spices, such
as cinnamon, mace, cloves, and nutmeg; an ounce of butter, two ounces
of blanched almonds, cut small; six ounces of preserved citron and
preserved orange peel, cut into small pieces; four eggs, a little
salt, four ounces of fine sugar, and half a pint of brandy. Mix all
these well together, adding sufficient milk to bring the mixture to a
proper consistency. Boil in a floured cloth or mould for eight hours.


THE SAUCE FOR THE ABOVE.

Into a gill of melted butter put an ounce of powdered sugar, a little
grated nutmeg, two wine glasses of Madeira wine and one of Curacoa.
Stir all well together, make very hot, and pour it over the pudding.


EGG-NOG, OR AULD MAN'S MILK.

Separate the whites and yolks of a dozen fresh eggs. Put the yolks
into a basin and beat them to a smooth cream with half a pound of
finely pulverized sugar. Into this stir half a pint of brandy, and the
same quantity of Jamaica rum; mix all well together and add three
quarts of milk or cream, half a nutmeg (grated), and stir together.
Beat the whites of the eggs to a stiff froth; stir lightly into them
two or three ounces of the finest sugar powder, add this to the
mixture, and dust powdered cinnamon over the top.


EGG FLIP.

Beat up in a bowl half a dozen fresh eggs; add half a pound of
pulverized sugar; stir well together, and pour in one quart or more of
boiling water, about half a pint at a time, mixing well as you pour it
in; when all is in, add two tumblers of best brandy and one of Jamaica
rum.


ROAST TURKEY.

The turkey is without doubt the most savory and finest flavored of all
our domestic fowls, and is justly held in the highest estimation by
the good livers in all countries where it is known. Singe, draw, and
truss the turkey in the same manner as other fowls; then fill with a
stuffing made of bread crumbs, butter, sweet herbs rubbed fine,
moistened with eggs and seasoned with pepper, salt, and grated nutmeg.
Sausage meat or a forced meat, made of boiled chicken meat, boiled ham
grated fine, chopped oysters, roasted or boiled chestnuts rubbed fine,
stewed mushrooms, or last but not the least in estimation, a dozen
fine truffles cut into pieces and sauted in the best of butter, and
added part to the stuffing and part to the sauce which is made from
the drippings (made into a good brown gravy by the addition of a
capful of cold water thickened with a little flour, with the giblets
boiled and chopped fine in it). A turkey of ten pounds will require
two and a half hours' roasting and frequent basting. Currant jelly,
cranberry jelly, or cranberry sauce should always be on the table with
roast turkey.


WOODCOCKS AND SNIPE.

Some epicures say that the woodcock should never be drawn, but that
they should be fastened to a small bird spit, and should be put to
roast before a clear fire; a slice of toast, put in a pan below each
bird, in order to catch the trail; baste them with melted butter; lay
the toast on a hot dish, and the birds on the toast. They require from
fifteen to twenty minutes to roast. Snipe are dressed in the same
manner, but require less time to cook. My pet plan to cook woodcock is
to draw the bird and split it down the back, and then to broil it,
basting it with butter; chop up the intestines, season them with
pepper and salt, and saute them on a frying pan with butter; lay the
birds on toast upon a hot dish and pour the saute over them.


CANVAS-BACK DUCKS.

Select young fat ducks; pick them nicely, singe, and draw them
carefully without washing them so as to preserve the blood and
consequently the full flavor of the bird; then truss it and place it
on the spit before a brisk fire, or in a pan in a hot oven for at
least fifteen or twenty minutes; then serve it hot with its own gravy,
which is formed by its own blood and juices, on a hot dish. It may
also be a little less cooked, and then carved and placed on a chafing
dish with red currant jelly, port wine, and a little butter.



PHEASANTS.

A pheasant should have a clear, steady fire, but not a fierce one. The
pheasant, being a rather dry bird, requires to be larded, or put a
piece of beef or a rump steak into the inside of it before roasting.



WILD DUCKS.

In order to serve these birds in their most succulent state and finest
flavor, let them hang in their feathers for a few days after being
shot; then pluck, clean, and draw, and roast them in a quick oven or
before a brisk fire; dredge and baste them well, and allow them twenty
minutes to roast; serve them with gravy sauce and red currant jelly,
or with a gravy sauce to which a chopped shallot and the juice of an
orange has been added.


WILD FOWL SAUCE.

The following exquisite sauce is applicable to all wild fowl: Take one
saltspoon of salt, half to two-thirds salt spoon of Cayenne, one
dessert spoon lemon juice, one dessert spoon powdered sugar, two
dessert spoons Harvey sauce, three dessert spoons port wine, well
mixed and heated; score the bird and pour the sauce over it.


BROWN FRICASSEE OF RABBITS.

Cut a couple of rabbits into joints, fry these in a little fresh
butter till they are of a light brown color; then put them into a
stewpan, with a pint of water, two tablespoonfuls of lemon juice, the
same of mushroom catchup, one of Worcester sauce, and a couple of
burnt onions, a little Cayenne and salt; stew over a slow fire till
perfectly done; then take out the meat, strain the gravy, and thicken
it with a little flour if necessary; make it quite hot, and pour it
over the rabbits.


ORANGE PUDDING.

Beat up the yolks of eight eggs, grate the yellow rinds from two
oranges, add these to a quarter of a pound of finely powdered sugar,
the same weight of fresh butter, three teaspoonfuls of orange-flower
water, two glasses of sherry wine, two or three stale Naples biscuits
or lady fingers, and a teacupful of cream. Line a dish with puff
paste, pour in the ingredients, and bake for half an hour in a good
oven.


VENISON PASTRY.

A neck or breast of venison is rendered very savory by treating it as
follows: Take off the skin and cut the meat off the bones into pieces
of about an inch square; put these, with the bones, into a stewpan,
cover them with veal or mutton broth, add two thirds of a teaspoon of
powdered mace, half a dozen allspice, three shallots chopped fine, a
teaspoonful of salt, a saltspoon of Cayenne, and a tumbler of port
wine; stew over a slow fire until the meat is half done, then take it
out and let the gravy remain on the fire ten or fifteen minutes
longer. Line a good sized dish with pastry, arrange your meat on it,
pour the gravy upon it through a sieve, adding the juice of a lemon;
put on the top crust, and bake for a couple of hours in a slow oven.


CHRISTMAS RED ROUND.

Rub well into a round of beef a half pound of saltpeter, finely
powdered. Next day mix half an ounce of cloves, half an ounce of black
pepper, the same quantity of ground allspice, with half a pound of
salt; wash and rub the beef in the brine for a fortnight, adding every
other day a tablespoonful of salt. At the expiration of the fortnight,
wipe the beef quite free from the brine, and stuff every interstice
that you can find with equal portions of chopped parsley, and mixed
sweet herbs in powder, seasoned with ground allspice, mace, salt, and
Cayenne. Do not be sparing of this mixture. Put the round into a deep
earthen pan, fill it with strong ale, and bake it in a very slow oven
for eight hours, turning it in the liquor every two hours, and adding
more ale if necessary. This is an excellent preparation to assist in
the "keeping of the Christmas season."


PLUM PORRIDGE FOR CHRISTMAS FESTIVITIES.

Make a good strong broth from four pounds of veal and an equal
quantity of shin of beef. Strain and skim off the fat when cold. Wash
and stone three pounds and a half of raisins; wash and well dry the
same weight of best Zante currants; take out the stones from two and a
half pounds of French prunes; grate up the crumbs of two small loaves
of wheat bread; squeeze the juice of eight oranges and four lemons;
put these, with a teaspoonful of powdered cinnamon, a grated nutmeg,
half a dozen cloves, and five pounds of sugar into your broth; stir
well together, and then pour in three quarts of sherry. Set the vessel
containing the mixture on a slow fire. When the ingredients are soft
add six bottles of hock; stir the porridge well, and as soon as it
boils it is fit for use.


SUGARED PEARS.

Half a dozen of those fine pears called the "Bartlett" will make a
small dish worthy the attention of any good Christian who has a sweet
tooth in his head. Pare the fruit, cut out the cores, squeeze lemon
juice over them, which will prevent their discoloration. Boil them
gently in enough sirup to cover them till they become tender. Serve
them cold, with Naples biscuit round the dish.


TABLE BEER.

Table beer of a superior quality may be brewed in the following
manner, a process well worth the attention of the gentleman, the
mechanic, and the farmer, whereby the beer is altogether prevented
from working out of the cask, and the fermentation conducted without
any apparent admission of the external air. I have made the scale for
one barrel, in order to make it more generally useful to the community
at large; however the same proportions will answer for a greater or
less quantity, only proportioning the materials and utensils. Take one
peck of good malt, ground, one pound of hops, put them in twenty
gallons of water, and boil them for half an hour; then run them into a
hair-cloth bag or sieve, so as to keep back the hops and malt from the
wort, which when cooled down to sixty-five degrees by Fahrenheit's
thermometer, add to it two gallons of molasses, with one pint, or a
little less, of good yeast. Mix these with your wort, and put the
whole into a clean barrel, and fill it up with cold water to within
six inches of the bung hole (this space is requisite to leave room for
fermentation), bung down tight. If brewed for family use, would
recommend putting in the cock at the same time, as it will prevent the
necessity of disturbing the cask afterward. In one fortnight this beer
may be drawn and will be found to improve to the last.


MINCE MEAT.

This inevitable Christmas luxury is vastly improved by being mixed
some days before it is required for use; this gives the various
ingredients time to amalgamate and blend.

Peel, core, and chop fine a pound of pippin apples, wash and clean a
pound of Zante currants, stone one pound of bloom raisins, cut into
small pieces a pound of citron, remove the skin and gristle from a
pound and a half of cold roast or boiled beef, and carefully pick a
pound of beef suet; chop these well together. Cut into small bits
three-quarters of a pound of mixed candied orange and lemon peel; mix
all these ingredients well together in a large earthen pan. Grate one
nutmeg, half an ounce of powdered ginger, quarter of an ounce of
ground cloves, quarter of an ounce of ground allspice and coriander
seed mixed, and half an ounce of salt. Grate the yellow rind of three
lemons, and squeeze the juice over two pounds of fine sugar. Put the
grated yellow rind and all the other ingredients in a pan; mix well
together, and over all pour one pint of brandy, one pint of sherry,
and one pint of hard cider; stir well together, cover the pan closely,
and when about to use the mince meat, take it from the bottom of the
pan.


PUMPKIN PIE.

  "What moistens the lip, and what brightens the eye?
   What calls back the past like the rich pumpkin pie?"

Stew about two pounds of pumpkins, then add to it three-quarters of a
pound of sugar, and the same quantity of butter, well worked together;
stir these into the pumpkin and add a teaspoonful of powdered mace and
grated nutmeg, and a little ground cinnamon; then add a gill of
brandy, beat them well together, and stir in the yolks of eight
well-beaten eggs. Line the pie plates with puff paste, fill them with
the pumpkin mixture, grate a little nutmeg over the top, and bake.


BRANDY PUNCH.

Take three dozen lemons, chip off the yellow rinds, taking care that
none of the white underlying pith is taken, as that would make the
punch bitter, whereas the yellow portion of the rinds is that in which
the flavor resides and in which the cells are placed containing the
essential oil. Put this yellow rind into a punch bowl, add to it two
pounds of lump sugar; stir the sugar and peel together with a wooden
spoon or spatula for nearly half an hour, thereby extracting a greater
quantity of the essential oil. Now add boiling water, and stir until
the sugar is completely dissolved. Squeeze and strain the juice from
the lemons and add it to the mixture; stir together and taste it; add
more acid or more sugar, as required, and take care not to render it
too watery. "Rich of the fruit and plenty of sweetness," is the maxim.
Now measure the sherbet, and to every three quarts add a pint of
cognac brandy and a pint of old Jamaica rum, the spirit being well
stirred as poured in. This punch may be bottled and kept in a cool
cellar; it will be found to improve with age.


BOEUF A LA MODE (FAMILY STYLE).

The rump is the most applicable for this savory dish. Take six or
eight pounds of it, and cut it into bits of a quarter of a pound each;
chop a couple of onions very fine; grate one or two carrots; put these
into a large stewpan with a quarter of a pound of fresh butter, or
fresh and well clarified beef drippings; while this is warming, cover
the pieces of beef with flour; put them into the pan and stir them for
ten minutes, adding a little more flour by slow degrees, and taking
great care that the meat does not burn. Pour in, a little at a time, a
gallon of boiling water; then add a couple of drachms of ground
allspice, one of black pepper, a couple of bay leaves, a pinch each of
ground cloves and mace. Let all this stew on a slow fire, and very
gently, for three hours and a quarter; ascertain with a fork if the
meat be tender; if so, you may serve it in a tureen or deep dish. A
well-dressed salad is the proper accompaniment of boeuf a la mode.


PUNCH JELLY.

Make a bowl of punch according to the directions for brandy punch,
only a _little_ stronger. To every pint of punch add an ounce of
gelatine dissolved in half a pint of water; pour this into the punch
while quite hot, and then fill your moulds, taking care not to disturb
it until the jelly is completely set. This preparation is a very
agreeable refreshment, but should be used in moderation. The strength
of the punch is so artfully concealed by its admixture with the
gelatine that many persons, particularly of the softer sex, have been
tempted to partake so plentifully of it as to render them somewhat
unfit for waltzing or quadrilling after supper.


ORANGE SALAD.

This somewhat inappropriately-named dish is made by removing the rind
and cutting the fruit in slices crosswise and adding equal quantities
of brandy and Madeira, in proportion to the quantity of fruit thus
dressed, strewing a liberal allowance of finely-powdered sugar over
all.


CRANBERRY JELLY.

Put two quarts of cranberries into a large earthen pipkin, and cover
them with water; place them on a moderate fire, and boil them until
they are reduced to a soft pulp; then strain and press them through a
hair sieve into an earthen or stone ware pan, and for each pint of
liquid pulp allow one pound of pulverized sugar; mix the pulp and
sugar together in a bright copper basin and boil, stirring constantly
for ten or fifteen minutes, or until the mixture begins to coagulate
upon the spatula; then remove it from the fire and fill your moulds;
let them stand in a cool place to set. When wanted for use, turn it
out of the mould in the same manner as other jellies.


JOVE'S NECTAR.

For three gallons, peel the yellow rind from one and a half dozen
fresh lemons, very thin, and steep the peelings for forty-eight hours
in a gallon of brandy; then add the juice of the lemons, with five
quarts of water, three pounds of loaf sugar, and two nutmegs grated;
stir it till the sugar is completely dissolved, then pour in three
quarts of new milk, _boiling hot_, and let it stand two hours, after
which run it through a jelly bag till it is fine. This is fit for
immediate use, but may be kept for years in bottles, and will be
improved by age.


PLUM, OR BLACK CAKE.

For this Christmas luxury take one pound of butter and one pound of
pulverized sugar; beat them together to a cream, stir in one dozen
eggs beaten to a froth, beat well together, and add one pound of
sifted flour; continue the beating for ten minutes, then add and stir
in three pounds of stoned raisins, three pounds of Zante currants,
washed, cleaned, and dried, a pound and a half of citron sliced and
cut into small pieces, three grated nutmegs, quarter of an ounce of
powdered mace, half an ounce of powdered cinnamon, and half a
teaspoonful of ground cloves; mix all well together; bake in a
well-buttered pan in a slow oven for four hours and a half.


BLACK CAKE (PARKINSON'S OWN).

  "If you have lips, prepare to smack them now."
                     --_Shakspeare, slightly altered._

Take one and a half pounds of the best butter, and the same weight of
pulverized sugar; beat them together to a cream; stir into this two
dozen eggs, beaten to a froth; add one gill of old Jamaica rum; then
add one and a half pounds of sifted flour. Stir and beat all well
together, and add two pounds of finest bloom raisins, stoned; two
pounds of Zante currants, washed, cleaned, and dried; one pound of
preserved citron, sliced thinly and cut into small pieces; one pound
of preserved French cherries, in halves; one pound of green gages, and
one pound of preserved apricots, stoned and cut into small pieces;
half a pound of preserved orange and lemon peel, mixed, and cut into
small pieces; three grated nutmegs, half an ounce of ground mace, half
an ounce of powdered cinnamon, and a quarter ounce of ground cloves.
Mix all the ingredients well together, and bake in a well-buttered
mould or pan, in a _slow oven_, for five and a half hours.

This cake is vastly improved by age. Those intended for the Christmas
festivities should be made at or about the first of October; then put
the cake into a round tin box, half an inch larger in diameter than
the cake; then pour over it a bottle of the best brandy mixed with
half a pint of pure lemon, raspberry, strawberry, or simple sirup, and
one or more bottles of champagne. Now put on the lid of the box, and
have it carefully soldered on, so as to make all perfectly air-tight.
Put it away in your store-room, and let stand till Christmas, only
reversing the box occasionally, in order that the liquors may permeate
the cake thoroughly.

This heroic treatment causes the ingredients to amalgamate, and the
flavors to harmonize and blend more freely; and when, on Christmas
day, you bring out this hermit, after doing a three months' penance in
a dark cell, it will come out rich, succulent, and unctuous; you will
not only have a luxury, "fit to set before a king," or before the
Empress of India, but fit to crown a feast of the very gods
themselves, on high Olympus' top.


POTATOES (PARKINSON STYLE).

Take two or three fine white potatoes, raw; peel and chop them up
_very, very fine_. Then chop up just as fine the breast of a
good-sized boiled fowl; they should be chopped as fine as unboiled
rice; mix the meat and the potatoes together, and dust a _very little_
flour over them and a pinch or two of salt. Now put an ounce or so of
the best butter into a frying pan, and when it is hot, put in the
mixture, and stir constantly with a wooden spatula until they are
fried to a nice golden color, then immediately serve on a hot plate.

Cold boiled ham grated fine, or boiled beef tongue chopped very fine,
may be used instead of chicken, omitting the salt. A dozen or two of
prime oysters, parboiled, drained, and chopped fine, mixed with the
potatoes prepared as above, and fried, makes a most delicious lunch or
supper dish. Try any of the above styles, and say no, if you can.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE BAYEUX TAPESTRY COMET.


Professor Hind, of the British Nautical Almanac Office, recently sent
an interesting letter to the London _Times_ on the comet depicted in
that famous piece of embroidery known as the Bayeux Tapestry. Probably
no one of the great comets recorded in history has occasioned a more
profound impression upon mankind in the superstitious ages than the
celebrated body which appeared in the spring of the year 1066, and was
regarded as the precursor of the invasion of England by William the
Norman. As Pingre, the eminent cometographer, remarks, it forms the
subject of an infinite number of relations in the European chronicles.
The comet was first seen in China on April 2, 1066. It appeared in
England about Easter Sunday, April 16, and disappeared about June 8.
Professor Hind finds in ancient British and Chinese records abundant
grounds for believing that this visitant was only an earlier
appearance of Halley's great comet, and he traces back the appearances
of this comet at its several perihelion passages to B.C. 12. The last
