He pushed the key back toward Hanlon, who pocketed it thankfully. His
bluff had worked. This was the key to his own box, of course; his master
key was in a hidden pocket in the cuff of his trousers.

The leader sank back into his chair and was silent for long minutes,
thinking deeply, while Hanlon waited patiently, still trying to get some
glimmering of thought from that unreadable mind, still frustrated almost
to the point of despair that he couldn't.

Finally the man spoke, but not to Hanlon. "Panek, you and the others go
find Rellos and bring him here."

When they were alone, the leader leaned forward and spoke earnestly
to Hanlon, yet watching him carefully as he did so. "I like you,
Hanlon, and I'm going to test you out. I am not too sure of you, yet,
but if I become so, you can go far--very, very far with me. This
Rellos I sent for is the man who was shadowing you today. I cannot--I
_will not_!" he spat venomously, "abide failure or incompetence. I am
assigning you the pleasant little task of seeing that some sort of
an ... uh ... accident happens to Rellos. And as I think about it, it
might as well be a ... uh ... permanent one."

Hanlon's stomach curled up so tightly it hurt, but he strove manfully
not to let his feelings show in his face. He'd had an instant's inkling
of what the proposal was going to be, and it was a measure of his
stability that he succeeded in keeping his mask up.

He knew starkly that this time he would have to go through with a
killing, or else give up this line of research. For he knew that if he
did not kill this man, this way was closed to him. And if he dropped
out, but gave the tip to some other SS man, that one would eventually
face the same sort of a task. So, much as it sickened him even to
contemplate it, it now became a _must_! He would have to think of
himself as a soldier in war, and Rellos an enemy.

Outwardly calm, he shrugged indifferently. "Any guy that can't produce
isn't worth keeping," he said. "Any special way you want it done?"

"No ... I think I would like to see how you work. Plan it yourself. But
if it isn't done, you had better not let me or my men see you again."

"Fair enough. If I can't do a simple job like that I sure can't be of
enough value to you to do myself any real good."

They were silent again, but Hanlon's mind was bleak with what was to
come. He wasn't the killer type--he believed in the sacredness of human
life. Yet he knew he would have to steel himself to go through with it.
The job was more important than one man's life. But to kill in cold
blood--a deliberate, planned-out murder!

Just then Panek returned with a slender, middle-aged man.

"Ah, Rellos," the leader greeted him. "I want you to meet a new member
of our group, George Hanlon. He has just come from Terra, and has never
been on Simonides before. I would like you to take him out and show him
New Athens and what it contains in the way of pleasures. You can turn in
an account of your expenses tomorrow."

And _that_, thought Hanlon, was just about as low and slimy a trick as
he had ever heard, and the thought came and would not be denied, that if
it was this leader he was to kill he could do it cheerfully and with a
clear conscience.

He rose, though, and smiled as he held out his hand. "Glad to know you,
Rellos. It'll be fun comparing your amusements with those of Terra."

The man was somewhat sullen, although it was plain he did not dare show
it too much before their boss. Hanlon could read enough from the new
man's mind to know how deathly afraid he was of the leader, and how he
hated him.

"Wonder why he's in this, feeling that way?" Hanlon thought swiftly, and
during the evening tried to find out, but without success--the man
steered clear of any such thoughts.

As the two went outside, the Simonidean asked curtly, "Wine, women or
song?"

"Why not some of all three?" Hanlon laughed lightly. "Anything you think
would be a lively evening, and that you'd enjoy."

The other unbent a little. "We'll go to the Phobos first, then. They
have good liquor and a nice floor show. Good looking wenches who don't
wear too much."

He hailed a ground-cab, which the two entered.

Hanlon couldn't enjoy that evening. In the first place, he couldn't
ditch all his drinks--and he hated alcohol--yet had to remain as sober
as possible. Second, and most disturbing, was that horrible thing he had
to do, and he knew it must be carefully planned. A gun, knife or poison
couldn't be used now--it must look so much like an accident that no
possible blame could be attached to him; so that the police could not
hold him even for a short time.

He thought of and discarded one plan after another, then remembered
something seen during his wanderings--a pedestrian bridge crossing a
high-speed truckway where the inter-city freighters were so numerous
they ran almost bumper to bumper. "I'll lead him up there, then throw
him over and down. He's sure to be run over and killed."

The nakedness of the girls at the Phobos, the coarse jokes of the
so-called comedians, the raucous, ribald laughter of the drunken patrons
disgusted Hanlon, and he was glad when they left.

"Let's walk a bit and see the sights," he suggested, and Rellos agreed
after some argument--he wanted to visit more night clubs.

They had walked a couple of blocks along a residential street when a
little, roly-poly puppy waddled out onto the sidewalk to greet them.

"What a cute ..." Hanlon began, but with an oath, Rellos savagely and
viciously kicked the little mite, sending it howling with pain across
the low hedge.

A growl of anguish broke out, and Hanlon sent his mind searching for
that deeper note. He found it, the mother dog, and was instantly inside
that mind, controlling it.

With a leap the huge shepherd was over the hedge, straight at Rellos.
The dog's weight bore the man backward, fighting for his life, trying to
hold back those gleaming fangs straining for his throat.

Hanlon threw himself into the melee, but while ostensibly trying to drag
the dog away, delayed the few seconds it took for those slashing fangs
to rip out Rellos' throat.

People came running up, and as the first reached the spot they saw
Hanlon struggling to hold back the snarling, blood-flecked dog, while
Rellos lay dead in a pool of blood.

The dog's owner rushed up and snapped a leash on the dog.

"I'm terribly sorry, sir," Hanlon said. "My companion was drunk and
kicked her puppy. She merely avenged it."

"I wondered," the man was shaken. "Kaiserina never was vicious before."

"I don't think she will be again," Hanlon said soothingly. "Is the puppy
all right?" he asked the small boy who came up with the little animal
cradled in his arms.

"No," the boy sobbed, "Fluffy's dead."

"What's going on here?" an authoritative voice said, and two policemen
pushed their way through the quickly-gathered crowd.

The dog's owner explained in swift words, and completely exonerated
Hanlon. "This man tried to stop my dog; he was holding her back when I
got here," and others corroborated his statement.

"You'd better have the dog killed," the policeman said, but Hanlon
intervened.

"No, she was just striking back at the man who killed her puppy. She
wasn't to blame, and I'm sure she isn't vicious."

The police were finally satisfied, and while they were calling the
dead-wagon Hanlon walked slowly back to his hotel, his heart still sick
but consoled a bit.

"He had it coming to him," his thought was bitter. "The rotten
beast--kicking a little puppy like that!"




Chapter 12


The next evening Hanlon went back to the Bacchus. Instead of stopping at
the bar he went directly to the back room and knocked on the door.

When the peephole opened he asked, "The Boss in?"

"Nope."

"I've got a report to make."

"Wait at the bar. I'll get in touch."

A quarter hour later the man summoned him, and upon entering that
now-familiar room Hanlon saw a closet door was standing open, disclosing
a visiphone screen, on which the leader's face was visible.

"Well?"

"Yep."

"Ah!" There was a quick intake of breath, and a feral gleam in those
greenish eyes. A moment's silence, then "Do you still want that
overseer's job?"

"For a thousand a month and keep? Definitely!"

"Very well, we'll try you. Zeller will give you a list of things you'll
need there--special clothing and such. Uh ... got any money to buy those
you don't have?"

"I will have when you pay me Rellos' expense money for last night."

The leader's eyes narrowed in sudden anger. "Don't try my patience too
far, Hanlon."

"Okay," Hanlon shrugged indifferently. "But I never figured you for a
cheapskate."

There was a gasp, as though the leader was amazed at Hanlon's temerity.
But he quickly gained control of himself, and an instant later began
smiling, then grinning and finally laughing aloud ... at himself.

"By Zeus, Hanlon, I like you! Nobody else ever dared talk up to me like
that. You win. Tell Zeller ... no, put him on, I'll tell him ... Zeller,
give Hanlon the list of things needed for the mine-guard job, and pay
him a hundred credits, charged to the 'accident fund'. Tell him to be
here, all packed to go, at thirteen o'clock." He started to turn the set
off, then, as he heard Hanlon ask "Anything else now?" faced the screen
again.

"Not unless you want to make rounds with the boys again. It will be some
time before you can have any night-life."

Hanlon made a sign of distaste and shook his head. "Unh-uh, thanks. Two
big-heads in a row will last me for plenty time. I'll go get some
shut-eye."

The leader smiled companionably. "The rest might be best, for you'll
have a rather rough trip. You'll ride a freighter, not a luxury liner."

"Do I ask where I'm going?"

"Does it matter?"

Hanlon shrugged. "Not especially. Just curiosity."

"Then it won't particularly bother you if we ... uh ... keep your
destination a secret for a while?"

"Not in the least, if you want it that way," he yawned indifferently.
But his mind was so anxious he had trouble not letting it show in his
face or eyes. How was he to get that location? He thought swiftly, and
conceived a possibility.

"Your bar here serve Cola?"

"What is that?"

"A soft drink very popular on Terra and many other planets. I'd like to
take a case with me, if it's allowed."

"I see no reason against it. I never heard of it, but you might ask the
bargirls."

"I can get it at the Golden Web if you don't have it here. I had some
there the other night."

He watched carefully but there was no sign of suspicion; the leader did
not even seem interested.

Hanlon blanked the screen, got the list and money from Zeller, and
walked out. The Bacchus did not stock Cola, so he took a ground-cab to
the Golden Web.

Pretending half-drunkenness, he walked in and ordered the case of drink
from his colleague. While drinking a glass of it, he talked in more or
less garrulous tones. In between unimportant words he informed the SS
man bartender that he was leaving the next noon for another planet whose
name and location he hadn't yet been able to learn.

"Got a good boss, though," he mumbled thickly. "Very good boss--sure he
knows a lot. Headquarters at the Bacchus."

Hooper, quick of understanding as all SS men have to be, merely said
aloud the conventional "Safe Flights," but Hanlon knew he would do
everything he could to get that planetary information.

And Hanlon was well content as he went to the hotel and to bed. What
could be done, had been done.

As soon as he had breakfasted the next morning, Hanlon checked out of
his hotel, then went out and purchased the special clothing and other
items on his list. With everything packed in traveling cases, he
presented himself at the Bacchus just before thirteen o'clock.

As he got out of the cab, and gave orders to the doorman about keeping
his luggage until he was ready to leave, Hanlon was heartened to see
Hooper, apparently reading a newsheet, leaning against the
terrace-facade nearby.

In the back room the leader and three others, including the ubiquitous
Panek, were waiting for him. He was handed an envelope.

"When you arrive, give these credentials to Peter Philander, the
superintendent. He will be your boss there. Just do as he says, don't
get nosey about what is going on, and you will do all right."

"Don't worry about my keeping my nose clean. I'm taking along a dozen
extra hankies."

His last doubts about leaving Simonides to go to the unknown planet were
now at rest. He was sure that there he would find the leads he so
desperately needed--and probably only there could he get them.

They picked up his luggage, then all got into a large, black ground-car,
and as it started the men lowered curtains over the windows. And while
Hanlon was wondering about that, one of them pinned his arms suddenly to
his side while another slapped a piece of adhesive across his eyes,
smoothing it tightly into place.

Hanlon gasped, but did not struggle.

"That's right, don't fight it," the leader's voice was almost kind. "We
just don't want you knowing where we are going ... yet."

       *       *       *       *       *

The car travelled some miles, then stopped and they all got out. The men
helped Hanlon down, led him a few dozen steps, then helped him climb
into another machine. In a moment he realized they were now in an aircar
that had taken off, and he frowned. Assuming that Hooper had followed,
he'd be out of it now. He was on his own.

For several moments Hanlon tried in vain to read from the others' minds
where they were going. He had almost given up hope when he heard the
unmistakable panting of a small dog, and realized that one of the air
crew must have brought a pet.

Quickly his mind contacted that of the dog, and instantly was inside it,
looking out through the dog's eyes. He controlled its mind so that it
climbed up in the man's lap and, with its forepaws on the fellow's
shoulder, looked out of the aircar's window. No one seemed to find
anything peculiar in the dog's actions, its owner merely patting it as
it stood there, as Hanlon could feel through the dog's senses.

Now Hanlon could see they were nearing some mountains, and took
particular notice of everything that might be remembered as a landmark.
Soon they were settling down into a little hidden valley, where there
was a fairly large space-freighter.

They led him into this ship, and he lost the dog, so could not see just
where they were taking him. Finally he sensed they were in a small room,
and the adhesive was ripped from his face.

The leader and Panek stood in the small cabin with Hanlon.

"This is to be your cabin. Sorry for the precautions, but you can see
why, I am sure. But if you behave, and make a good record, you won't
have to ... uh ... worry about them any more. Take-off almost
immediately, so we have to leave. Safe flights, and I hope you make out
all right."

He looked fixedly at Hanlon for a long, long minute, and the young man,
returned his gaze as steadily.

"I'll do my job," Hanlon said honestly after that moment--but it was his
job for the Secret Service he meant. "Good-bye, and thanks. Thank you,
too, Panek, for your help."

"Glad to've done it, Pal, glad to."

"See you in four months, then," and the two left.

Hanlon stored his luggage in the racks made for it, then started to go
outside and see what was going on. But the door was locked.

"They sure don't want me to know where we're going," he grinned ruefully
as he sat down on the edge of his bunk. "That makes me know it's
important, and I'll get it some day--they can't keep it from me
forever."

Sirens screamed "take-off," and he strapped himself into his bunk. When
he felt the pressure subside and knew they were in space he unstrapped
and relaxed. But there was nothing he could do.

Later there was the sound of a key in the lock. When the door opened a
heavy-set man carrying a blaster stepped inside.

"Stand back, Bud, and keep your hands in sight."

Hanlon raised his hands while the messcook brought in a tray and set it
on his bunk. As they were going out Hanlon spoke. "You got any books on
board? I don't mind being locked in and won't make any trouble, but
please give me something to do."

They made no answer, but when they returned for the empty dishes they
left a couple of dog-eared magazines.

Late the following afternoon the siren warned of landing, and Hanlon
strapped himself down again. After he had felt the landing, one of the
ship's officers came and unlocked the door.

He was very apologetic. "Sorry, sir, about this, but we had our orders."

"It's okay with me," Hanlon said cheerfully. "Don't make a bit of
difference with me where I am, long's I get well paid."

"I see you've put on your light clothing. That's good--this is a hot
planet. These your bags?"

Hanlon nodded, and each carrying one, the officer led the way to the
airlock and they climbed down onto this new world.

The air was thick and muggy--at least 110 deg. Fahrenheit, Hanlon guessed.
There was a great bustle of activity on the landing field. Automatic
machinery was unloading cargo, and loading it into trucks. There were
several men, with their luggage, standing about.

One was a huge, brutish-looking man, another a slender young chap about
Hanlon's own age, apparently well-educated, from his manner, but with a
certain shiftiness in his eyes; the others common-place laborers.

"Any of you been here before?" the officer asked.

Two of the others nodded, and started away from the field. Hanlon saw
that just beyond the edge of it there were heavy forests--almost a
jungle, but strange and alien.

As they drew nearer and finally entered it, the young SS man saw that
this was, indeed, unlike any jungle or forest he had ever seen or heard
about. Tall trees whose branches writhed as though alive, yet never
attacked one. Underbrush so thick it seemed impassable, yet which
twisted away from their approach as though afraid of a contaminating
touch, only to swish back into place as soon as the men passed.

Hanlon, walking along and taking it all in, seemed to catch faint
whispers of thought, but could make nothing of it. He wondered what it
was--perhaps some alien animal-life very low in the scale?

The ground was soft and mucky. The young checker cautioned the others,
"Don't step off the path; some of this stuff's almost like quicksand."

"There's a road to the mine," he answered Hanlon's further question,
"but it's winding and about five miles, where this path's only a half
