their leader and mortally wounded the creature next beyond him. Though
surprised, they were not to be frightened off, but with wild, shrill
screams rushed to the attack. Stevens had no ammunition to waste, and
every time that mighty bow twanged a yard-long arrow transfixed at least
one of the red horde--and a body through which had torn one of those
ghastly, hand-forged arrow-heads was of very little use thereafter.
Accurately-sped arrows splintered harmlessly against the re-enforced
windows of his helmet and against the steel guards protecting his hands.
He was almost deafened by the din as the stone missiles of the slingers
rebounded from his reverberating shell of steel, but he fired carefully,
steadily, and powerfully until his last arrow had been loosed. Then,
the wicked dirk in his left hand and the long and heavy saber weaving
a circular path of brilliance in the sun, he stepped forward a couple
of paces to meet the attackers. For a few moments nothing could stand
before that fiercely driven blade--severed heads, limbs, and fragments
of torsos literally filled the air, but sheer weight of numbers
bore him down. As he fell, he saw the white shaft of one of Nadia's
hunting-arrows flash past his helmet and bury itself to the flock in
the body of one of the horde above him. Nadia knew that her arrows could
not harm her lover, and through a chink between two boulders she was
shooting into the thickest of the mob speeding her light arrows with
the full power of her bow.

Though down, the savages soon discovered that Stevens was not out. In
such close quarters he could not use his sword, but the fourteen-inch
blade of the dirk, needle-pointed as it was and with two razor-sharp,
serrated cutting edges, was itself no mean weapon, and time after time
he drove it deep, taking life at every thrust. Four more red monsters
threw themselves upon the prostrate man, but not sufficiently versed in
armor to seek out its joints, their fierce short spear thrusts did no
damage. Presently four more corpses lay still and Stevens, with his,
to them incredible, earthly strength, was once more upon his feet in
spite of their utmost efforts to pinion his mighty limbs, and was again
swinging his devastating weapon. Half their force lying upon the field,
wiped out by a small, but invincible and apparently invulnerable being,
the remainder broke and ran, pursued by Stevens to the point where the
red monsters had first halted. He recovered his arrows and returned to
the cave, opening his face-plate as he came.

"All x, sweetheart?" he asked, rolling away the boulders. "Didn't get
anything through to you, did they?"

"No, they didn't even realize that I was taking part in the battle, I
guess. Did they hurt you while they had you down? I was scared to death
for a minute."

"No, the old armor held. One of them must have gnawed on my ankle
some, between the greave and the heel-plate, but he couldn't quite get
through. 'Sa darn small opening there, too--must have bent my foot
'way around to get in at all. Have to tighten that joint up a little,
I guess. I'll bet I've got a black spot and blue spot there the size of
my hand--maybe it's only the size of yours, though."

"You won't die of that, probably. Heavens, Steve, that cleaver of yours
is a frightful thing in action! Suppose it's safe for us to go home?"

"Absolutely--right now is the best chance we'll ever have, and something
tells me that we'd better make it snappy. They'll be back, and next time
they won't be so easy to take."

"All x, then--hold me, Steve, I can't stand the sight of that---let
alone wade through it. I'm going to faint or something, sure."

"As you were!" he snapped. "You aren't going to pass out now that it's
all over! It's a pretty ghastly mess, I know, but shut your eyes and
I'll carry you out of sight."

"Aren't we out of sight of that place yet?" she demanded after a time.

"I have been for quite a while," he confessed, "but you're sitting
pretty, aren't you? And you aren't very heavy--not here on Ganymede,
anyway!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Put me down!" she commanded. "After that crack I won't play with you
any more at all--I'll pick up my marbles and go home!"

He released her and they hurried hack toward their waterfall, keeping
wary eyes sharp-set for danger in any form, animal or vegetable. On the
way back across the foothills Stevens shot another hexaped, and upon the
plateau above the river Nadia bagged several birds and small animals,
but it was not until they were actually in their own little canyon that
their rapid pace slackened and their vigilance relaxed.

"After this, ace, we hunt together and we go back to wearing armor while
we're hunting. It scared me out of a year's growth when you checked
up missing."

"We sure do, Steve," she concurred emphatically. "I'm not going to get
more than a meter away from you from now on. What do you suppose those
horrible things are?"

"Which?"

"Both."

"Those flowers aren't like anything Tellus ever saw, so we have no basis
of comparison. They may be a development of a flycatching plant, or they
may be a link between the animal and the vegetable kingdom. However,
we don't intend to study 'em, so let's forget 'em. Those animals were
undoubtedly intelligent beings; they probably are a race of savages of
this satellite."

"Then the really civilized races are probably...."

"Not necessarily--there may well be different types, each struggling
toward civilization. They certainly are on Venus, and they once were on
Mars."

"Why haven't we seen anything like that before, in all these months?
Things have been so calm and peaceful that we thought we had the whole
world to ourselves, as far as danger or men were concerned."

"We never saw them before because we never went where they lived--you
were a long ways from your usual stamping-grounds, you know. That
animal-vegetable flower is probably a high-altitude organism, living
in the mountains and never coming as low as we are down here. As for
the savages--whatever they are--they probably never come within five
kilometers of the falls. Many primitive peoples think that waterfalls
are inhabited by demons, and maybe these folks are afflicted the same
way."

"We don't know much about our new world yet, do we?"

"We sure don't--and I'm not particularly keen on finding out much more
about it until we get organized for trouble, either. Well, here we
are--just like getting back home to see the 'Hope,' isn't it?"

"It _is_ home, and will be until we get one of our own on earth," and
after Stevens had read his meters, learning with satisfaction that the
full current was still flowing into the accumulators, he began to cut
up the meat.

"Now that you've got the power-plant running at last, what next?" asked
Nadia, piling the cuts in the freezer.

"Brandon's ultra-radio comes next, but it's got more angles to it than
a cubist's picture of a set of prisms; so many that I don't know where
to begin. There, that job's done--let's sit down and I'll talk at you
awhile. Maybe between us we can figure out where to start. I've got
everything to build it lined up except for the tube, but that's got me
stopped cold. You see, fields of force are all right in most places, but
I've got to have one tube, and it's got to have the hardest possible
vacuum. That means a mercury-vapor super pump. Mercury is absolutely
the only thing that will do the trick and the mercury is one thing
that is conspicuous by it's absence in these parts. So are tungsten for
filaments, tantalum for plates, and platinum for leads; and I haven't
found anything that I can use as a getter, either--a metal, you know, to
flash inside the tube to clean up the last traces of atmosphere in it."

"I didn't suppose that such a simple thing as a radio tube could hold
you up, after the perfectly unbelievable things that you have done
already--but I see now how it could. Of course, the tubes in our
receiver over there are too small?"

"Yes, they are only receiver and communicator tubes, and I need a
high-power transmitting tube--a fifty-kilowatter, at least. I'd give
my left leg to the knee joint for one of those big water-cooled,
sixty-kilowatt ten-nineteens right now--it would save us a lot of
grief."

"Maybe you could break up those tubes and use the plates and so on?"

"I thought of that, but it won't work--there isn't half enough metal
in the lot, and the filaments in particular are so tiny that I couldn't
possibly work them over into a big one. Then, too, we haven't got
many spare tubes, and if I smash the ones we're using, I put our
communicators out of business for good, so that we can't yell for help
if we have to drift home--and I still don't get any mercury."

"Do you mean to tell me there's no mercury on this whole planet?"

"Not exactly; but I do mean that I haven't been able to find any, and
that it's probably darned scarce. And since all the other metals I want
worst are also very dense and of high atomic weight, they're probably
mighty scarce here, too. Why? Because we're on a satellite, and no
matter what hypothesis you accept for the origin of satellites, you come
to the same conclusion--that heavy metals are either absent or most
awfully scarce and buried deep down toward the center. There are lots of
heavy metals in Jupiter somewhere, but we probably couldn't find them.
Jupiter's atmosphere is one mass of fog, and we couldn't see, since we
haven't got an infra-red transformer. I could build one, in time, but
it would take quite a while--and we couldn't work on Jupiter, anyway,
because of its gravity and probably because of its atmosphere. And even
if we could work there, we don't want to spend the rest of our lives
prospecting for mercury." Stevens fell silent, brow wrinkled in thought.

"You mean, dear, that we're..." Nadia broke off, the sentence
unfinished.

"Gosh, no! There's lots of things not tried yet, and we can always set
out to drift it. I was thinking only of building the tube. And I'm
trying to think ... say, Nadia, what do you know about Cantrell's
Comet?"

"Not a thing, except that I remember reading in the newspapers that it
was peculiar for something or other. But what has Cantrell's Comet got
to do with the high cost of living--or with radio tubes? Have you gone
cuckoo all of a sudden?"

"You'll be surprised!" Stevens grinned at her puzzled expression.
"Cantrell's Comet is one of Jupiter's comet family and is peculiar in
being the most massive one known to science. It was hardly known until
after they built those thousand-foot reflectors on the Moon, where the
seeing is always perfect, but it has been studied a lot since then.
Its nucleus is small, but extremely heavy--it seems to have an average
density of somewhere around sixteen. There's platinum and everything
else that's heavy there, girl! They ought to be there in such quantity
that even such a volunteer chemist as I am could find them!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Heavens, Steve!" A look of alarm flashed over Nadia's face, then
disappeared as rapidly as it had come into being. "But of course, comets
aren't really dangerous."

"Sure not. A comet's tail, which so many people are afraid of as being
poison gas, is almost a perfect vacuum, even at its thickest, and we'd
have to wear space-suits anyway. And speaking of vacuum ... whoopee!
We don't need mercury any more than a goldfish needs a gas-mask. When
we get Mr. Tube done, we'll take him out into space, leaving his mouth
open, and very shortly he'll be as empty as a flapper's skull. Then
we'll seal him up, flash him out, come back here, and start spilling
our troubles into Brandon's shell-like ear!"

"Wonderful, Steve! You do get an idea occasionally, don't you? But how
do we get out there? Where is this Cantrell's Comet?"

"I don't know, exactly--there's one rub. Another is that I haven't
even started the transmitter and receptor units. But we've got some
field-generators here on board that I can use, so it won't be so bad.
And our comet is in this part of the solar system somewhere fairly
close. Wish we had an Ephemeris, a couple of I-P solar charts, and
a real telescope."

"You can't do much without an Ephemeris, I should think. It's a good
thing you kept the chronometers going. You know the I-P time, day, and
dates, anyway."

"I'll have to do without some things, that's all," and the man stared
absently at the steel wall. "I remember something about its orbit, since
it is one thing that all I-P vessels have to steer clear of. Think I can
figure it close enough so that we'll be able to find it in our little
telescope, or even on our plate, since we'll be out of this atmosphere.
And it might not be a bad idea for us to get away, anyway. I'm afraid of
those folks on that space-ship, whoever they were, and they must live
around here somewhere. Cantrell's Comet swings about fifty million
kilometers outside Jupiter's orbit at aphelion--close enough for us to
reach, and yet probably too far for them to find us easily. By the time
we get back here, they probably will have quit looking for us, if they
look at all. Then too, I expect these savages to follow us up. What say,
little ace--do we try it or do we stay here?"

"You know best, Steve. As I said before, I'm with you from now on, in
whatever you think best to do. I know that you think it best to go out
there. Therefore, so do I."

"Well," he said, finally, "I'd better get busy, then--there's a lot to
do before we can start. The radio doesn't come next, after all--the
transmitter and receptor units come ahead of it. They won't mean
wasted labor, in any event, since we'll have to have them in case the
radio fails. You'd better lay in a lot of supplies while I'm working
on that stuff, but don't go out of sight, and yell like fury if
you see anything. We'd both better wear full armor every time we go
out-of-doors--unless I'm all out of control we aren't done with those
savages yet. Even though they may be afraid of the demons of the falls,
I think they'll have at least one more try at us."

While Nadia brought in meat and vegetables and stored them away,
Stevens attacked the problem of constructing the pair of tight-beam,
auto-dirigible transmitter and receptor units which would connect his
great turbo-alternator to the accumulators of their craft, wherever it
might be in space. From the force-field generators of the "Forlorn Hope"
he selected the two most suitable for his purpose, tuned them to the
exact frequency he required, and around them built a complex system of
condensers and coils.

Day after day passed. Their larder was full, the receptor was finished,
and the beam transmitter was almost ready to attach to the
turbo-alternator before the calm was broken.

"Steve!" Nadia shrieked. Glancing idly into the communicator plate, she
had been perfunctorily surveying the surrounding territory. "They're
coming! Thousands of them! They're all over the bench up there, and just
simply pouring down the hills and up the valley!"

"Wish they'd waited a few hours longer--we'd have been gone. However,
we're just about ready for them," he commented grimly, as he stared over
her shoulder into the communicator plate. "We'll make a lot of those
Indians wish that they had stayed at home with their papooses."

"Have you got all those rays and things fixed up?"

"Not as many as I'd like to have. You see, I don't know the composition
of the I-P ray, since it is outlawed to everybody except the police.
Of course I could have found out from Brandon, but never paid any
attention to it. I've got some nice ultra-violet, though, and a short-wave
oscillatory that'll cook an elephant to a cinder in about eight seconds.
We'll keep them amused, no fooling! Glad we had time to cover our open
sides, and it looks as though that meteorite armor we put over the
projectors may be mighty useful, too."

On and on the savages came, massed in formations showing some signs of
rude discipline. This time there was neither shrieking nor yelling; the
weird creatures advanced silently and methodically. Here and there were
massed groups of hundreds, dragging behind them engines which Stevens
studied with interest.

"Hm ... m ... m. Catapults," he mused. "You were right, girl of my
dreams--armor and bows and arrows wouldn't help us much right now.
They're going to throw rocks at us that'll have both mass and momentum.
With those things they can cave in our side-armor, and might even dent
our roof. When one of those projectiles hits, we want to know where it
ain't, that's all."

Stevens cast off the heavily-insulated plug connecting the power plant
leads to his now almost fully charged accumulators, strapped himself and
Nadia into place at the controls, and waited, staring into the plate.
Catapult after catapult was dragged to the lip of the little canyon,
until six of them bore upon the target. The huge stranded springs of
hair, fiber, and sinew were wound up to the limit, and enormous masses
of rock were toilsomely rolled upon the platforms. Each "gunner" seized
his trip, and as the leader shrieked his signal the six ponderous masses
of metalliferous rock heaved into the air as one. But they did not
strike their objective, for as the signal was given, Stevens shot
power into his projectors. The "Forlorn Hope" leaped out of the canyon
and high into the air over the open meadow, just as the six great
projectiles crashed into the ground upon the spot which, an instant
before, she had occupied.

       *       *       *       *       *
