are prepared for trouble afterward, of course?"

"Certainly, but I don't think there will be much trouble. They can't
possibly link the three of us together. They aren't wise to you, are
they, Doctor?"

"Not a chance!" sneered DuQuesne. "They ran themselves ragged trying to
get something on me, but they couldn't do it. They have given me up as a
bad job. I am still as careful as ever, though--I am merely a pure
scientist in the Bureau of Chemistry!"

All three laughed, and Perkins left the room. The talk then turned to
the construction of the space-car. It was decided to rush the work on
it, so that DuQuesne could familiarize himself with its operation, but
not to take any steps in the actual abduction until such time as Seaton
and Crane were nearly ready to take their first flight, so that they
could pursue the abductors in case Seaton was still obdurate after a few
days of his fiancee's absence. DuQuesne insisted that the car should
mount a couple of heavy guns, to destroy the pursuing car if the faulty
members should happen to hold together long enough to carry it out into
space.

After a long discussion, in which every detail of the plan was carefully
considered, the two men left the restaurant, by different exits.




CHAPTER VII

The Trial Voyage


The great steel forgings which were to form the framework of the Skylark
finally arrived and were hauled into the testing shed. There, behind
closed doors, Crane inspected every square inch of the massive members
with a lens, but could find nothing wrong. Still unsatisfied, he fitted
up an electrical testing apparatus in order to search out flaws which
might be hidden beneath the surface. This device revealed flaws in every
piece, and after thoroughly testing each one and mapping out the
imperfections he turned to Seaton with a grave face.

"Worse than useless, every one of them. They are barely strong enough to
stand shipment. They figured that we would go slowly until we were well
out of the atmosphere, then put on power--then something would give way
and we would never come back."

"That's about the right dope, I guess. But now what'll we do? We can't
cancel without letting them know we're onto them, and we certainly can't
use this stuff."

"No, but we will go ahead and build this ship, anyway, so that they will
think that we are going ahead with it. At the same time we will build
another one, about four times this size, in absolute secrecy, and...."

"What d'you mean, absolute secrecy? How can you keep steel castings and
forgings of that size secret from Steel?"

"I know a chap who owns and operates a small steel plant, so
insignificant, relatively, that he has not yet been bought out or frozen
out by Steel. I was able to do him a small favor once, and I am sure
that he will be glad to return it. We will not be able to oversee the
work, that is a drawback. We can get MacDougall to do it for us,
however, and with him doing the work we can rest assured that there will
be nothing off color. Even Steel couldn't buy _him_."

"MacDougall! The man who installed the Intercontinental plant? He
wouldn't touch a little job like this with a pole!"

"I think he would. He and I are rather friendly, and after I tell him
all about it he will be glad to take it. It means building the first
interplanetary vessel, you know."

"Wouldn't Steel follow him up if he should go to work on a mysterious
project? He's too big to hide."

"No. He will go camping--he often does. I have gone with him several
times when we were completely out of touch with civilization for two
months at a time. Now, about the ship we want. Have you any ideas?"

"It will cost more than our entire capital."

"That is easily arranged. We do not care how much it costs."

Seaton began to object to drawing so heavily upon the resources of his
friend, but was promptly silenced.

"I told you when we started," Crane said flatly, "that your solution and
your idea are worth far more than half a million. In fact, they are
worth more than everything I have. No more talk of the money end of it,
Dick."

"All right. We'll build a regular go-getter. Four times the size--she'll
be a bear-cat, Mart. I'm glad this one is on the fritz. She'll carry a
two-hundred-pound bar--Zowie! Watch our smoke! And say, why wouldn't it
be a good idea to build an attractor--a thing like an object-compass,
but mounting a ten-pound bar instead of a needle, so that if they chase
us in space we can reach out and grab 'em? We might mount a machine-gun
in each quadrant, shooting X-plosive bullets, through pressure gaskets
in the walls. We should have something for defense--I don't like the
possibility of having that gang of pirates after us, and nothing to
fight back with except thought-waves."

"Right. We will do both those things. But we should make the power-plant
big enough to avert any possible contingency--say four hundred
pounds--and we should have everything in duplicate, from power-plant to
push-buttons."

"I don't think that's necessary, Mart. Don't you think that's carrying
caution to extremes?"

"Possibly--but I would rather be a live coward than a dead hero,
wouldn't you?"

"You chirped it, old scout, I sure would. I never did like the looks of
that old guy with the scythe, and I would hate to let DuQuesne feel that
he had slipped something over on me at my own game. Besides, I've
developed a lot of caution myself, lately. Double she is, with a skin of
four-foot Norwegian armor. Let's get busy!"

       *       *       *       *       *

They made the necessary alteration in the plans, and in a few days work
was begun upon the huge steel shell in the little mountain steel-plant.
The work was done under the constant supervision of the great
MacDougall, by men who had been in his employ for years and who were
all above suspicion. While it was being built Seaton and Crane employed
a force of men and went ahead with the construction of the space-car in
the testing shed. While they did not openly slight the work nearly all
their time was spent in the house, perfecting the many essential things
which were to go into the real Skylark. There was the attractor, for
which they had to perfect a special sighting apparatus so that it could
act in any direction, and yet would not focus upon the ship itself nor
anything it contained. There were many other things.

It was in this work that the strikingly different temperaments and
abilities of the two men were most clearly revealed. Seaton strode up
and down the room, puffing great volumes of smoke from his hot and
reeking briar, suggesting methods and ideas, his keen mind finding the
way over, around, or through the apparently insuperable obstacles which
beset their path. Crane, seated calmly at the drafting-table,
occasionally inhaling a mouthful of smoke from one of his specially-made
cigarettes, mercilessly tore Seaton's suggestions to shreds--pointing
out their weaknesses, proving his points with his cold, incisive
reasoning and his slide-rule calculations of factors, stresses, and
strains. Seaton in turn would find a remedy for every defect, and
finally, the idea complete and perfect, Crane would impale it upon the
point of his drafting pencil and spread it in every detail upon the
paper before him, while Seaton's active mind leaped to the next problem.

Not being vitally interested in the thing being built in the shed, they
did not know that to the flawed members were being attached faulty
plates, by imperfect welding. Even if they had been interested they
could not have found the poor workmanship by any ordinary inspection,
for it was being done by a picked crew of experts picked by Perkins. But
to make things even, Perkins' crew did not know that the peculiar
instruments installed by Seaton and Crane, of which their foreman took
many photographs, were not real instruments, and were made only nearly
enough like them to pass inspection. They were utterly useless, in
design and function far different from the real instruments intended for
the Skylark.

Finally, the last dummy instrument was installed in the worthless
space-car, which the friends referred to between themselves as "The
Cripple," a name which Seaton soon changed to "Old Crip." The
construction crew was dismissed after Crane had let the foreman overhear
a talk between Seaton and himself in which they decided not to start for
a few days as they had some final experiments to make. Prescott reported
that Steel had relaxed its vigilance and was apparently waiting for the
first flight. About the same time word was received from MacDougall that
the real Skylark was ready for the finishing touches. A huge triplane
descended upon Crane Field and was loaded to its capacity with strange
looking equipment. When it left Seaton and Crane went with it, "to make
the final tests before the first flight," leaving a heavy guard over the
house and the testing shed.

A few nights later, in inky blackness, a huge shape descended rapidly in
front of the shed, whose ponderous doors opened to receive it and closed
quickly after it. The Skylark moved lightly and easily as a wafted
feather, betraying its thousands of tons of weight only by the hole it
made in the hard-beaten earth of the floor as it settled to rest.
Opening one of the heavy doors, Seaton and Crane sprang out into the
darkness.

Dorothy and her father, who had been informed that the Skylark was to be
brought home that night, were waiting. Seaton caught up his sweetheart
in one mighty arm and extended his hand past her to Vaneman, who seized
it in both his own. Upon the young man's face was the look of a
victorious king returning from conquest. For a few minutes disconnected
exclamations were all that any of the party could utter. Then Seaton,
loosening slightly his bear's hold upon Dorothy, spoke.

"She flies!" he cried exultantly. "She flies, dearest, like a ray of
light for speed and like a bit of thistledown for lightness. We've been
around the moon!"

"Around the moon!" cried the two amazed visitors. "So soon?" asked
Vaneman. "When did you start?"

"Almost an hour ago," replied Crane readily; he had already taken out
his watch. His voice was calm, his face quiet, but to those who knew him
best a deeper resonance in his voice and a deeper blue sparkle in his
eyes betrayed his emotion. Both inventors were moved more than they
could have told by their achievement, by the complete success of the
great space-cruiser upon which they had labored for months with all the
power of their marvelous intellects. Seaton stood now at the summit of
his pride. No recognition by the masses, no applause by the multitudes,
no praise even from the upper ten of his own profession could equal for
him the silent adulation of the two before him. Dorothy's exquisite face
was glorified as she looked at her lover. Her eyes wonderful as they
told him how high he stood above all others in her world, how much she
loved him. Seeing that look; that sweet face, more beautiful than ever
in this, his hour of triumph; that perfect, adorable body, Seaton forgot
the others and a more profound exaltation than that brought by his
flight filled his being--humble thankfulness that he was the man to
receive the untold treasure of her great giving.

"Every bit of mechanism we had occasion to use worked perfectly," Crane
stated proudly. "We did not find it necessary to change any of our
apparatus and we hope to make a longer flight soon. The hour we took on
this trip might easily have been only a few minutes, for the Lark did
not even begin to pick up speed."

       *       *       *       *       *

Shiro looked at Crane with an air of utter devotion and bowed until his
head approached the floor.

"Sir," he said in his stilted English. "Honorable Skylark shall be
marvelous wonder. If permitting, I shall luxuriate in preparing suitable
refreshment."

The permission granted, he trotted away into the house, and the
travelers invited their visitors to inspect the new craft. Crane and the
older man climbed through the circular doorway, which was at an
elevation of several feet above the ground. Seaton and Dorothy
exchanged a brief but enthusiastic caress before he lifted her lightly
up to the opening and followed her up a short flight of stairs. Although
she knew what to expect, from her lover's descriptions and from her own
knowledge of "Old Crip," which she had seen many times, she caught her
breath in amazement as she stood up and looked about the
brilliantly-lighted interior of the great sky-rover. It was a sight such
as had never before been seen upon earth.

[Illustration: In the exact center of the huge shell was a spherical
network of enormous steel beams. Inside this structure could be seen a
similar network which, mounted upon universal bearings, was free to
revolve in any direction.]

She saw a spherical shell of hardened steel armor-plate, fully forty
feet in diameter; though its true shape was not readily apparent from
the inside, as it was divided into several compartments by horizontal
floors or decks. In the exact center of the huge shell was a spherical
network of enormous steel beams. Inside this structure could be seen a
similar network which, mounted upon universal bearings, was free to
revolve in any direction. This inner network was filled with machinery,
surrounding a shining copper cylinder. From the outer network radiated
six mighty supporting columns. These, branching as they neared the hull
of the vessel, supported the power-plant and steering apparatus in the
center and so strengthened the shell that the whole structure was nearly
as strong as a solid steel ball. She noticed that the floor, perhaps
eight feet below the center, was heavily upholstered in leather and did
not seem solid; and that the same was true of the dozen or more
seats--she could not call them chairs--which were built in various
places. She gazed with interest at the two instrument boards, upon which
flashed tiny lights and the highly-polished plate glass, condensite, and
metal of many instruments, the use of which she could not guess.

After a few minutes of silence both visitors began to ask questions, and
Seaton showed them the principal features of the novel craft. Crane
accompanied them in silence, enjoying their pleasure, glorying in the
mighty vessel. Seaton called attention to the great size and strength of
the lateral supporting columns, one of which was immediately above their
heads, and then led them over to the vertical column which pierced the
middle of the floor. Enormous as the lateral had seemed, it appeared
puny in comparison with this monster of fabricated steel. Seaton
explained that the two verticals were many times stronger than the four
laterals, as the center of gravity of the ship had been made lower than
its geometrical center, so that the apparent motion of the vessel and
therefore the power of the bar, would usually be merely vertical.
Resting one hand caressingly upon the huge column, he exultantly
explained that these members were "the last word in strength, made up of
many separate I-beams and angles of the strongest known special steel,
latticed and braced until no conceivable force could make them yield a
millimeter."

"But why such strength?" asked the lawyer doubtfully. "This column alone
would hold up Brooklyn Bridge."

"To hold down the power-plant, so that the bar won't tear through the
ship when we cut her loose," replied Seaton. "Have you any idea how fast
this bird can fly?"

"Well, I have heard you speak of traveling with the velocity of light,
but that is overdrawn, isn't it?"

"Not very much. Our figures show that with this four-hundred-pound
bar"--pointing to the copper cylinder in the exact center of the inner
sphere--"we could develop not only the velocity of light, but an
acceleration equal to that velocity, were it not for the increase in
mass at high velocities, as shown by Einstein and others. We can't go
very fast near the earth, of course, as the friction of the air would
melt the whole works in a few minutes. Until we get out of the
atmosphere our speed will be limited by the ability of steel to
withstand melting by the friction of the air to somewhere in the
neighborhood of four or five thousand miles per hour, but out in space
we can develop any speed we wish, up to that of light as a limit."

"I studied physics a little in my youth. Wouldn't the mere force of such
an acceleration as you mention flatten you on the floor and hold you
there? And any sudden jar would certainly kill you."

       *       *       *       *       *

"There can't be any sudden jar. This is a special floor, you notice. It
is mounted on long, extremely heavy springs, to take up any possible
jar. Also, whenever we are putting on power we won't try to stand up,
our legs would crimple up like strings. We will ride securely strapped
into those special seats, which are mounted the same as the floor, only
a whole lot more so. As to the acceleration...."

"That word means picking up speed, doesn't it?" interrupted Dorothy.

"The rate of picking up speed," corrected Seaton. "That is, if you were
going forty miles per hour one minute, and fifty the next minute, your
acceleration would be ten miles per hour per minute. See? It's
acceleration that makes you feel funny when you start up or down in an
elevator."

"Then riding in this thing will be like starting up in an elevator so
that your heart sinks into your boots and you can't breathe?"

"Yes, only worse. We will pick up speed faster and keep on doing it...."

"Seriously," interrupted the lawyer, "do you think that the human body
can stand any such acceleration as that?"

"I don't know. We are going to find out, by starting out slowly and
increasing our acceleration to as much as we can stand."

"I see," Vaneman replied. "But how are you going to steer her? How do
you keep permanent reference points, since there are no directions in
space?"

"That was our hardest problem," explained Seaton, "but Martin solved it
