Something had. Arcot was sound asleep in the middle of the
library--exactly in the middle, floating in the room ten feet from each
wall.

Morey called out to him, and Arcot awoke with a guilty start. "A fine
sentry you make," said Morey caustically. "Can't even keep awake when
all you have to do is sit here and see that we don't run into anything.
We've gone more than our million light years already, and we're still
going strong. Come on--snap out of it!"

"I'm sorry--I apologize--I know I shouldn't have slept, but it was so
perfectly quiet here except for your deep-toned, musical snores that I
couldn't help it," grinned Arcot. "Get me down from here and we'll
stop."

"Get you down, nothing!" Morey snapped. "You stay right there while I
call the others and we decide what's to be done with a sleeping sentry."

Morey turned and left to wake the others.

He had awakened Wade and told him what had happened, and they were on
their way to wake up Fuller, when suddenly the air of the ship crackled
around them! The space was changing! They were coming out of hyperspace!

In amazement, Morey and Wade looked at each other. They knew that Arcot
was still floating helplessly in the middle of the room, but--

"Hold on, you brainless apes! We're turning around!" came Arcot's voice,
full of suppressed mirth.

Suddenly they were both plastered against the wall of the ship under
four gravities of acceleration! Unable to walk, they could only crawl
laboriously toward the control room, calling to Arcot to shut off the
power.

When Morey had left him stranded in the library, Arcot had decided it
was high time he got to the floor. Quickly, he looked around for a means
of doing so. Near him, floating in the air, was the book he had been
reading, but it was out of reach. He had taken off his boots when he
started to read, so the Fuller rocket method was out. It seemed
hopeless.

Then, suddenly, came the inspiration! Quickly, he slipped off his shirt
and began waving it violently in the air. He developed a velocity of
about two inches a second--not very fast, but fast enough. By the time
he had put his shirt back on, he had reached the wall.

After that, it was easy to shoot himself over to the door, out into the
corridor and into the control room without being seen by Morey, who was
in Wade's room.

Just as Wade and Morey reached the doorway to the control room, Arcot
decided it was time to shut the power off. Both of the men, laboring
under more than eight hundred pounds of weight, were suddenly
weightless. All the strength of their powerful muscles were expended in
hurling them against the far wall.

The complaints were loud, but they finally simmered down to an earnest
demand to know how in the devil Arcot had managed to get off dead
center.

"Why, that was easy," he said airily. "I just turned on a little power;
I fell under the influence of the weight and then it was easy to get to
the control room."

"Come on," Wade demanded. "The truth! How did you get here?"

"Why, I just pushed myself here."

"Yes; no doubt. But how did you get hold of anything to push?"

"I just took a handful of air and threw it away and reached the wall."

"Oh, of course--and how did you hold the air?"

"I just took some air and threw it away and reached the wall."

Which was all they could learn. Arcot was going to keep his system
secret, it seemed.

"At any rate," Arcot continued, "I am back in the control room, where I
belong, and you are not in the observatory where you belong. Now get out
of my territory!"

Morey pushed himself back to the observatory, and after a few minutes,
his voice came over the intercom. "Let's move on a bit more, Arcot. We
still can't get both galaxies on the same plate. Let's go on for another
hour and take our pictures from that point."

Fuller had awakened and come in in the meantime, and he wanted to know
why they didn't take some pictures from this spot.

"No point in it," said Morey. "We have the ones we took coming in; what
we want is a wide-angle shot."

Arcot threw on the space-strain drive once more, and they headed on at
top speed.

They were all in the control room, watching the instruments and
joking--principally the latter--when it happened. One instant they were
moving smoothly, weightlessly along. The next instant, the ship rocked
as though it had been struck violently! The air was a snapping inferno
of shooting sparks, and there came the sharp crash of the suddenly
volatilized silver bar that was their main power fuse. Simultaneously,
they were hurled forward with terrific force; the straps that held them
in place creaked with the sudden strain, and the men felt weak and
faint.

Consciousness nearly left them; they had been burned in a dozen places
by the leaping sparks.

Then it was over. Except that the ghost ships no longer followed them,
the _Ancient Mariner_ seemed unchanged. Around them, they could see the
dim glowing of the galaxies.

"Brother! We came near something!" Arcot cried. "It may be a wandering
star! Take a look around, quick!"

But the dark of space seemed utterly empty around them as they coasted
weightless through space. Then Arcot snapped off the lights of the
control room, and in a moment his eyes had become accustomed to the dim
lights.

It was dead ahead of them. It was a dull red glow, so dim it was
scarcely visible. Arcot realized it was a dead star.

"There it is, Morey!" he said. "A dead star, directly ahead of us! Good
God, how close are we?"

They were falling straight toward the dim red bulk.

"How far are we from it?" Fuller asked.

"At least several million--" Morey began. Then he looked at the distance
recorded on the meteor detector. "ARCOT! FOR HEAVEN'S SAKE DO SOMETHING!
THAT THING IS ONLY A FEW HUNDRED MILES AWAY!"

"There's only one thing to do," Arcot said tightly. "We can never hope
to avoid that thing; we haven't got the power. I'm going to try for an
orbit around it. We'll fall toward it and give the ship all the
acceleration she'll take. There's no time to calculate--I'll just pile
on the speed until we don't fall into it."

The others, strapped into the control chairs, prepared themselves for
the acceleration to come.

If the _Ancient Mariner_ had dropped toward the star from an infinite
distance, Arcot could have applied enough power to put the ship in a
hyperbolic orbit which would have carried them past the star. But they
had come in on the space drive, and had gotten fairly close before the
gravitational field had drained the power from the main coil, and it was
not until the space field had broken that they had started to accelerate
toward the star. Their velocity would not be great enough to form an
escape orbit.

Even now, they would fall far short of enough velocity to get into an
elliptical orbit unless they used the molecular drive.

Arcot headed toward one edge of the star, and poured power into the
molecular drive. The ship shot forward under an additional five and a
half gravities of acceleration. Their velocity had been five thousand
miles per second when they entered hyperspace, and they were swiftly
adding to their original velocity.

They did not, of course, feel the pull of the sun, since they were in
free fall in its field; they could only feel the five and a half
gravities of the molecular drive. Had they been able to experience the
pull of the star, they would have been crushed by their own weight.

Their speed was mounting as they drew nearer to the star, and Arcot was
forcing the ship on with all the additional power he could get. But he
knew that the only hope they had was to get the ship in a closed ellipse
around the star, and a closed ellipse meant that they would be forever
bound to the star as a planet! Helpless, for not even the titanic power
of the _Ancient Mariner_ could enable them to escape!

As the dull red of the dead sun ballooned toward them, Arcot said: "I
think we'll make an orbit, all right, but we're going to be awfully
close to the surface of that thing!"

The others were quiet; they merely watched Arcot and the star as Arcot
made swift movements with the controls, doing all he could to establish
them in an orbit that would be fairly safe.

It seemed like an eternity--five and a half gravities of acceleration
held the men in their chairs almost as well as the straps of the
antiacceleration units that bound them. When a man weighs better than
half a ton, he doesn't feel like moving much.

Fuller whispered to Morey out of the corner of his sagging mouth. "What
on Earth--I mean, what in Space is that thing? We're within only a few
hundred miles, you said, so it must be pretty small. How could it pull
us around like this?"

"It's a dead white dwarf--a 'black dwarf', you might say," Morey
replied. "As the density of such matter increases, the volume of the
star depends less and less on its temperature. In a dwarf with the mass
of the sun, the temperature effect is negligible; it's the action of the
forces within the electron-nucleon gas which makes up the star that
reigns supreme.

"It's been shown that if a white dwarf--or a black one--is increased in
mass, it begins to decrease sharply in volume after a certain point is
reached. In fact, no _cold_ star can exist with a volume greater than
about one and a half times the mass of the sun--as the mass increases
and the pressure goes up, the star shrinks in volume because of the
degenerate matter in it. At a little better than 1.4 times the mass of
the sun--our sun, I mean: Old Sol--the star would theoretically collapse
to a point.

"That has almost happened in this case. The actual limit is when the
star has reached the density of a neutron, and this star hasn't
collapsed that far by a long shot.

"But that star is only forty kilometers--_or less than twenty-five
miles_ in diameter!"

It took nearly two hours of careful juggling to get an orbit which
Arcot considered reasonably circular.

And when they finally did, Wade looked at the sky above them and
shouted: "Say, look! What are all those streaks?"

Arcing up from the surface of the dull red plain below them and going
over the ship, were several dim streaks of light across the sky. One of
them was brighter than the rest, a bright white streak. The streaks
didn't move; they seemed to have been painted on the sky overhead,
glowing bands of unwavering light.

"Those," said Arcot, "are the nebulae. That wide streak is the one we
just left. The bright streak must be a nearby star.

"They look like streaks because we're moving so fast in so small an
orbit." He pointed to the red star beneath them. "We're less than twenty
miles from the center of that thing! We're almost exactly thirty
kilometers from its center, or about ten kilometers from its surface!
But, because of it's great mass, our orbital velocity is something
terrific!

"We're going around that thing better than three hundred times every
second; our 'year' is three milliseconds long! Our orbital velocity is
_seven hundred thousand kilometers per second_!

"We're moving along at about a fifth of the speed of light!"

"Are we safe in this orbit?" Fuller asked.

"Safe enough," said Arcot bitterly. "So damned safe that I don't see how
we'll ever break free. We can't pull away with all the power on this
ship. We're trapped!

"Well, I'm worn out from working under all that gravity; let's eat and
get some sleep."

"I don't feel like sleeping," said Fuller. "You may call this safe, but
it would only take an instant to fall down to the surface of that thing
there." He looked down at their inert, but titanically powerful enemy
whose baleful glow seemed even now to be burning their funeral pyre.

"Well," said Arcot, "falling into it and flying off into space are two
things you don't have to worry about. If we started toward it, we'd be
falling, and our velocity would increase; as a result, we'd bounce right
back out again. The magnitude of the force required to make us fall into
that sun is appalling! The gravitational pull on us now amounts to about
five _billion_ tons, which is equalized by the centrifugal force of our
orbital velocity. Any tendency to change it would be like trying to bend
a spring with that much resistance.

"We'd require a tremendous force to make us either fall into that
star--or get away from it.

"To escape, we have to lift this ship out against gravity. That means
we'd have to lift about five million tons of mass. As we get farther
out, our weight will decrease as the gravitational attraction drops off,
but we would need such vast amounts of energy that they are beyond human
conception.

"We have burned up two tons of matter recharging the coils, and are now
using another two tons to recharge them again. We need at least four
tons to spare, and we only started out with twenty. We simply haven't
got fuel enough to break loose from this star's gravitational hold, vast
as the energy of matter is. Let's eat, and then we can sleep on the
problem."

Wade cooked a meal for them, and they ate in silence, trying to think of
some way out of their dilemma. Then they tried to sleep on the problem,
as Arcot had suggested, but it was difficult to relax. They were
physically tired; they had gone through such great strains, even in the
short time that they had been maneuvering, that they were very tired.

Under a pull five times greater than normal gravity, they had tired in
one-fifth the time they would have at one gravity, but their brains were
still wide awake, trying to think of some way--_any way_--to get away
from the dark sun.

But at last sleep came.




XI


Morey thought he was the first to waken when, seven hours later, he
dressed and dove lightly, noiselessly, out into the library. Suddenly,
he noticed that the telectroscope was in operation--he heard the low hum
of its smoothly working director motors.

He turned and headed back toward the observatory. Arcot was busy with
the telectroscope.

"What's up, Arcot?" he demanded.

Arcot looked up at him and dusted off his hands. "I've just been
gimmicking up the telectroscope. We're going around this dead dwarf once
every three milliseconds, which makes it awfully hard to see the stars
around us. So I put in a cutoff which will shut the telectroscope off
most of the time; it only looks at the sky once every three
milliseconds. As a result, we can get a picture of what's going on
around us very easily. It won't be a steady picture, but since we're
getting a still picture three hundred times a second, it will be better
than any moving picture film ever projected as far as accuracy is
concerned.

"I did it because I want to take a look at that bright streak in the
sky. I think it'll be the means to our salvation--if there is any."

Morey nodded. "I see what you mean; if that's another white dwarf--which
it most likely is--we can use it to escape. I think I see what you're
driving at."

"If it doesn't work," Arcot said coolly, "we can profit by the example
of the people we left back there. Suicide is preferable to dying of
cold."

Morey nodded. "The question is: How helpless are we?"

"Depends entirely on that star; let's see if we can get a focus on it."

At the orbital velocity of the ship, focussing on the star was indeed a
difficult thing to do. It took them well over an hour to get the image
centered in the screen without its drifting off toward one edge; it took
even longer to get the focus close enough to a sphere to give them a
definite reading on the instruments. The image had started out as a
streak, but by taking smaller and smaller sections of the streak at the
proper times, they managed to get a good, solid image. But to get it
bright enough was another problem; they were only picking up a fraction
of the light, and it had to be amplified greatly to make a visible
image.

When they finally got what they were looking for, Morey gazed steadily
at the image. "Now the job is to figure the distance. And we haven't got
much parallax to work with."

"If we compute in the timing in our blinker system at opposite sides of
the orbit, I think we can do it," Arcot said.

They went to work on the problem. When Fuller and Wade showed up, they
were given work to do--Morey gave them equations to solve without
telling them to what the figures applied.

Finally Arcot said: "Their period about the common center of gravity is
thirty-nine hours, as I figure it."

Morey nodded. "Check. And that gives us a distance of two million miles
apart."

"Just what are you two up to?" asked Fuller. "What good is another star?
The one we're interested in is this freak underneath us."

"No," Arcot corrected, "we're interested in getting _away_ from the one
beneath us, which is an entirely different matter. If we were midway
between this star and that one, the gravitational effects of the two
would be cancelled out, since we would be pulled as hard in one
direction as the other. Then we'd be free of both pulls and could
escape!

"If we could get into that neutral area long enough to turn on our space
strain drive, we could get away between them fast. Of course, a lot of
our energy would be eaten up, but we'd get away.

"That's our only hope," Arcot concluded.

"Yes, and what a whale of a hope it is," Wade snorted sarcastically.
"How are you going to get out to a point halfway between these two stars
when you don't have enough power to lift this ship a few miles?"

"If Mahomet can not go to the mountain," misquoted Arcot, "then the
mountain must come to Mahomet."

"What are you going to do?" Wade asked in exasperation. "Beat Joshua? He
made the sun stand still, but this is a job of throwing them around!"

"It is," agreed Arcot quietly, "and I intend to throw that star in such
a way that we can escape between the twin fields! We can escape between
the hammer and the anvil as millions of millions of millions of tons of
matter crash into each other."

"And you intend to swing that?" asked Wade in awe as he thought of the
spectacle there would be when two suns fell into each other. "Well, I
don't want to be around."

"You haven't any choice," Arcot grinned. Then his face grew serious.
"What I want to do is simple. We have the molecular ray. Those stars are
hot. They don't fall into each other because they are rotating about
