crop of new potatoes.

On the other hand, I have had an oak-leaved geranium overlooked in a
corner of the greenhouse until it was almost dried up for lack of water.
When its branches were pruned back and it was started into growth only
one branch showed the almost black center of the leaf, all the rest were
clear green. This was an evident case of diminished root power, but the
plant grew as thriftily as ever. The lack of the dark marking in the
leaves was equivalent to the variegation in other varieties, only in a
reverse direction.

In practice, when gardeners wish to produce an abnormal condition in a
tree or plant, they will, if they wish to dwarf it, graft it on a
species or variety of diminished root power, and contrariwise, if they
wish to increase its growth, will graft it upon a stock of strong root
power. But in neither case can the graft be said to be diseased by the
action of the roots of the stock.

When this root power is so far diminished as to produce complete
albinism, the shoots from such roots appear to partake of this
diminished power, and to lose the power of making roots, and thus become
very difficult to propagate. It is sometimes said that albino cuttings
cannot be rooted at all, but this is a mistake, for I have succeeded in
striking such cuttings from the variegated leaved _Hydrangea_. It
required much care to do it; they did not, however, retain their albino
character after they rooted and started into growth.

Albinism and white variegation in leaves appear to be due to the
chlorophyl in such leaves being able to resist the action of the three
(red, yellow, and blue) rays of light. What we call color in any
substance or thing is due to its reflecting these different rays in
various proportions of combination and absorbing the rest of them, the
various proportions giving the various shades of color. White is due to
the reflection of all of them, and black to the absorption of them. In
some plants with variegated foliage we have the curious fact that the
cells containing chlorophyl reflecting one color produce cells which
reflect an entirely different color. In the coleus "Lady Burrill," for
instance, the lower half of the leaf is of a deep violet-crimson color,
and the upper half is golden yellow. In other varieties of coleus, in
_Perilla nankiensis_, and other plants, we have foliage without a
particle of green in it, and yet they are perfectly healthy. This shows
that green leaves are not absolutely necessary to the health of a plant.

As a proof of leaf variegation being a disease, the speaker alluded to
cited a case in which a green leaved abutilon, upon which a variegated
leaved variety had been grafted, threw out a variegated leaved shoot
below the graft. This can easily be explained. The growth of the trunk
or stem of all exogenous plants, or those which increase in size on the
outside of the stem, is brought about by the descent of certain
formative tissue called cambium, elaborated by the leaves and descending
between the old wood and the bark, where it is formed into alburnum or
woody matter. Some think that it is also formed by the roots and ascends
from them as well as descending from the leaves. Be this as it may,
there is no doubt about its descent. In such comparatively soft-wooded,
free growing plants as the abutilon the descent of the cambium is very
free and in considerable quantity, so that the stock would soon be
inclosed in a layer of it descending from the graft. When being
converted into woody matter it also forms adventitious buds which under
certain favorable circumstances will emit shoots of the same character
as the graft from which it was derived. The graft is such cases may be
said to inclose the stock in a tube of its own substance, leaving the
stock unaffected otherwise. The variegated shoot in this case was in
reality derived from the downward growth of the graft and not from the
original stock, which was not therefore contaminated by the graft. In
cases where the stock is of much slower growth than the graft, or the
graft is inserted upon a stock of some other species, the descending
cambium does not inclose the stock, but makes layers of wood on the stem
of the graft, which thus, as is frequently seen, overgrows the stock,
sometimes to such an extent as to make it unsightly. Nobody ever saw an
apple shoot from a crab stock, a pear from a quince stock, or a peach
shoot from a plum stock. This is one of the arguments in favor of the
view that cambium also rises from the roots.

Again, to show that the stock is not affected by the graft, or the graft
by the stock, except as to root power, let any person graft a white beet
upon a red beet, or contrariwise, when about the size of a goosequill,
and when they have attained their full growth, by dividing the beet
lengthwise he will find the line of demarkation between the colors
perfectly distinct, neither of them running into the other.

The theory that leaf variegation is a disease has been held by many
distinguished botanists and is in nowise new. But this theory has been
controverted, and we think successfully, by other botanists, and it is
not now accepted by the more advanced vegetable physiologists. There are
now so many acute and industrious students and observers in every
department of science, and the accumulation of facts is so rapid and so
great, that very many of the older theories are being set aside as not
in accord with the newly discovered facts. A student brought up in
institutions where the old theories are inculcated has afterward to
spend half his time in unlearning what he had been previously taught,
and the other half in studying the new facts brought to his notice and
testing the theories promulgated by men of science. Botanical science
does not wholly consist in the classification and nomenclature of
plants, but largely consists in a knowledge of vegetable anatomy and
physiology, and these require much study and some knowledge of other
sciences, such as chemistry, meteorology, geology, etc. Without such
general knowledge it is difficult to form a harmonious theory in regard
to any of the phenomena of plant life.

       *       *       *       *       *




VANILLA, CINNAMON, COCOANUT.


The following interesting facts concerning the cultivation of the above
products in the island of Ceylon, were given in Mr. H. B. Brady's recent
address before the British Pharmaceutical Conference at Swansea:

The vanilla plant is trained on poles placed about twelve or eighteen
inches apart--one planter has a line of plants about three miles in
length. Like the cardamom, it yields fruit after three years, and then
continues producing its pods for an indefinite period.

The cinnamon (_Cinnamomum zeylanicum_) is, as its name indicates, a
native of Ceylon. It is cultivated on a light sandy soil about three
miles from the sea, on the southwest coast of the island, from Negumbo
to Matura. In its cultivated state it becomes really productive after
the sixth year, and continues from forty to sixty years. The
superintendent of the largest estate in this neighborhood stated that
there were not less than fifteen varieties of cinnamon, sufficiently
distinct in flavor to be easily recognized. The production of the best
so injures the plants that it does not pay to cut this at any price
under 4s. 6d. to 5s. per lb. The estate alluded to above yields from
30,000 to 40,000 lb. per annum; a uniform rate of 41/2 d. per lb. of
finished bark is paid for the labor. Cinnamon oil is produced from this
bark by distillation; the mode is very primitive and wasteful. About 40
lb. of bark, previously macerated in water, form one charge for the
still, which is heated over a fire made of the spent bark of a previous
distillation. Each charge of bark yields about three ounces of oil, and
two charges are worked daily in each still.

The cultivation of the cocoanut tree and the production of the valuable
cocoanut oil are two important Cingalese occupations. These trees, it
appears, do not grow with any luxuriance at a distance from human
dwellings, a fact which may perhaps be accounted for by the benefit they
derive from the smoke inseparable from the fires in human habitations.
The cultivation of cocoanuts would seem to be decidedly profitable, as
some 4,000 nuts per year are yielded by each acre, the selling price
being L3 per thousand, while the cost of cultivation is about L2 per
acre. In extracting the oil, the white pulp is removed and dried,
roughly powdered, and pressed in similar machinery to the linseed oil
crushing mills of this country. The dried pulp yields about 63 per cent
by weight of limpid, colorless oil, which in our climate forms the white
mass so well known in pharmacy.

       *       *       *       *       *




LEARNING TO TIE KNOTS.


A correspondent suggests that it would be a handy accomplishment for
schoolboys to be proficient in the handling, splicing, hitching, and
knotting of ropes. He suggests the propriety of having the art taught in
our public schools. A common jackknife and a few pieces of clothes line
are the main appliances needed to impart the instruction with. He
concludes it would not only be of use in ordinary daily life, but
especially to those who handle merchandise and machinery. Any one, he
adds, who has noticed the clumsy haphazard manner in which boxes and
goods are tied for hoisting or for loading upon trucks, will appreciate
the advantage of practical instruction in this direction. Probably a
good plan, he further suggests, would be to have one schoolboy taught
first by the master, and then let the pupil teach the other boys. Our
correspondent thinks most boys would consider it a nice pastime to
practice during recess and at the dinner hour, so that no time would be
taken from study or recitation time.

       *       *       *       *       *




DECISIONS RELATING TO PATENTS.


Supreme Court of the United States

PEARCE _vs._ MULFORD _et al._

Appeal from the Circuit Court of the United States for the Southern
District of New York.

1. Reissued patent No. 5,774 to Shubael Cottle, February 24, 1874, for
improvement in chains for necklaces, declared void, the first claim, if
not for want of novelty, for want of patentability, and the second for
want of novelty.

2. Neither the tubing, nor the open spiral link formed of tubing, nor
the process of making either the open or the closed link, nor the
junction of closed and open spiral links in a chain, was invented by the
patentee.

3. All improvement is not invention and entitled to protection as such.
Thus to entitle it it must be the product of some exercise of the
inventive faculties, and it must involve something more than what is
obvious to persons skilled in the art to which it relates.

The decree of the circuit court is therefore reversed, and it is ordered
that the bill be dismissed.


BY THE COMMISSIONER OF PATENTS.

DICKSON vs. KINSMAN.--INTERFERENCE.--TELEPHONE.

The subject matter of the interference is defined in the preliminary
declaration thereof as follows:

The combination in one instrument of a transmitting telephone and a
receiving telephone, so arranged that when the mouthpiece of the
speaking or transmitting telephone is applied to the mouth of a person,
the orifice of the receiving telephone will be applied to his ear.

1. While it is true that the unsupported allegations of an inventor,
that he conceived an invention at a certain date, are not sufficient to
establish such fact, the testimony of a party that he constructed and
used a device at a certain time is admissible.

2. Abandonment is an ill-favored finding, which cannot be presumed, but
must be conclusively proven.

The decision of the Board of Examiners-in-Chief is reversed, and
priority awarded to Dickson.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHARACTERISTICS OF ARCTIC WINTER.


Lieutenant Schwatka, whose recent return from a successful expedition in
search of the remains of Sir John Fanklin's ill-fated company, combats
the prevalent opinion that the Arctic winter, especially in the higher
latitudes, is a period of dreary darkness.

In latitude 83 deg. 20' 20" N., the highest point ever reached by man, there
are four hours and forty-two minutes of twilight on December 22, the
shortest day in the year, in the northern hemisphere. In latitude 82 deg.
27' N., the highest point where white men have wintered, there are six
hours and two minutes in the shortest day; and latitude 84 deg. 32' N., 172
geographical miles nearer the North Pole than Markham reached, and 328
geographical miles from that point, must yet be attained before the true
Plutonic zone, or that one in which there is no twilight whatsoever,
even upon the shortest day of the year, can be said to have been entered
by man. Of course, about the beginning and ending of this twilight, it
is very feeble and easily extinguished by even the slightest mists, but
nevertheless it exists, and is quite appreciable on clear cold days, or
nights, properly speaking. The North Pole itself is only shrouded in
perfect blackness from November 13 to January 29, a period of
seventy-seven days. Supposing that the sun has set (supposing a
circumpolar sea or body of water unlimited to vision) on September 24,
not to rise until March 18, for that particular point, giving a period
of about fifty days of uniformly varying twilight, the pole has about
188 days of continuous daylight, 100 days of varying twilight, and 77 of
perfect inky darkness (save when the moon has a northern declination) in
the period of a typical year. During the period of a little over four
days, the sun shines continuously on both the North and South Poles at
the same time, owing to refraction parallax, semi-diameter, and dip of
the horizon.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE COLLINS LINE OF STEAMERS.


The breaking up of the Baltic, the last of the famous Collins line of
steamships, calls out a number of interesting facts with regard to the
history of the several vessels of that fleet. There were five in all,
the Adriatic, Atlantic, Pacific, Arctic, and Baltic. They were built and
equipped in New York. Their dimensions were: Length, 290 feet; beam, 45
feet; depth of hold, 311/2 feet; capacity, 2,860 tons; machinery, 1,000
horse power. In size, speed, and appointments they surpassed any
steamers then afloat, and they obtained a fair share of the passenger
traffic. A fortune was expended in decorating the saloons. The entire
cost of each steamer was not less than $600,000, and notwithstanding
their quick passages, the subsidy received, and the high rates of
freight paid, the steamers ran for six years at great loss, and finally
the company became bankrupt.

The Atlantic was the pioneer steamship of the line. She sailed from New
York April 27, 1849, and arrived in the Mersey May 10, thus making the
passage in about thirteen days, two of which were lost in repairing the
machinery; the speed was reduced in order to prevent the floats from
being torn from the paddle-wheels. The average time of the forty-two
westward trips in the early days of the line was 11 days 10 hours and 26
minutes, against the average of the then so called fastest line of
steamers, 12 days 19 hours and 26 minutes. In February, 1852, the Arctic
made the passage from New York to Liverpool in 9 days and 17 hours.

The Arctic was afterward run into by a French vessel at sea and only a
