
"Well, Paul," said the father, "have I got down here before you after
all, and in spite of your running away last night?"

"No," the son responded, "I was the first to arrive this
morning--luckily."

"Luckily?" echoed his father. "I suppose that means that you have been
able to accomplish your purpose--whatever it was. You didn't tell me,
you know."

"I'm ready to tell you now, father," said Paul, "since I have
succeeded."

Walking down the store together, they came to the private office.

As the old book-keeper saw them he started up, and made as if to leave
the office.

"Keep your seat, Major," cried Mr. Wheatcroft, sternly, but not
unkindly. "Keep your seat, please."

Then he turned to Mr. Whittier. "I have something to tell you both,"
he said, "and I want the Major here while I tell you. Paul, may I
trouble you to see that the door is closed so that we are out of
hearing?"

"Certainly," Paul responded, as he closed the door.

"Well, Wheatcroft," Mr. Whittier said, "what is all this mystery of
yours now?"

The junior partner swung around in his chair and faced Mr. Whittier.

"My mystery?" he cried. "It's the mystery that puzzled us all, and I've
solved it."

"What do you mean?" asked the senior partner.

"What I mean is, that somebody has been opening that safe there in the
corner, and reading our private letter-book, and finding out what we
were bidding on important contracts. What I mean is, that this man has
taken this information, filched from us, and sold it to our
competitors, who were not too scrupulous to buy stolen goods!"

"We all suspected this, as you know," the elder Whittier said; "have
you anything new to add to it now?"

"Haven't I?" returned Mr. Wheatcroft. "I've found the man! That's all!"

"You, too?" ejaculated Paul.

"Who is he?" asked the senior partner.

"Wait a minute," Mr. Wheatcroft begged. "Don't be in a hurry and I'll
tell you. Yesterday afternoon, I don't know what possessed me, but I
felt drawn down-town for some reason. I wanted to see if anything was
going on down here. I knew we had made that bid Saturday, and I
wondered if anybody would try to get it on Sunday. So I came down about
four o'clock, and I saw a man sneak out of the front door of this
office. I followed him as swiftly as I could and as quietly, for I
didn't want to give the alarm until I knew more. The man did not see me
as he turned to go up the steps of the elevated railroad station. At
the corner I saw his face."

"Did you recognize him?" asked Mr. Whittier.

"Yes," was the answer. "And he did not see me. There were tears rolling
down his cheeks, perhaps that's the reason. This morning I called him
in here, and he has finally confessed the whole thing."

"Who--who is it?" asked Mr. Whittier, dreading to look at the old
book-keeper, who had been in the employ of the firm for thirty years
and more.

"It is Major Van Zandt!" Mr. Wheatcroft declared.

There was a moment of silence; then the voice of Paul Whittier was
heard, saying, "I think there is some mistake!"

"A mistake!" cried Mr. Wheatcroft. "What kind of a mistake?"

"A mistake as to the guilty man," responded Paul.

"Do you mean that the Major isn't guilty?" asked Mr. Wheatcroft.

"That's what I mean," Paul returned.

"But he has confessed," Mr. Wheatcroft retorted.

"I can't help that," was the response. "He isn't the man who opened
that safe yesterday afternoon at half-past three and took out the
letter-book."

The old book-keeper looked at the young man in frightened amazement.

"I have confessed it," he said, piteously--"I have confessed it."

"I know you have, Major," Paul declared, not unkindly. "And I don't
know why you have, for you were not the man."

"And if the man who confesses is not the man who did it, who is?" asked
Wheatcroft, sarcastically.

"I don't know who is, although I have my suspicions," said Paul; "but I
have his photograph--taken in the act!"


V

When Paul Whittier said he had a photograph of the mysterious enemy of
the Ramapo Steel and Iron Works in the very act of opening the safe,
Mr. Whittier and Mr. Wheatcroft looked at each other in amazement.
Major Van Zandt stared at the young man with fear and shame struggling
together in his face.

Without waiting to enjoy his triumph, Paul put his hand in his pocket
and took out two squares of bluish paper.

"There," he said, as he handed one to his father, "there is a blue
print of the man taken in this office at ten minutes past three
yesterday afternoon, just as he was about to open the safe in the
corner. You see he is kneeling with his hand on the lock, but
apparently just then something alarmed him and he cast a hasty glance
over his shoulder. At that second the photograph was taken, and so we
have a full-face portrait of the man."

Mr. Whittier had looked at the photograph, and he now passed it to the
impatient hand of the junior partner.

"You see, Mr. Wheatcroft," Paul continued, "that although the face in
the photograph bears a certain family likeness to Major Van Zandt's,
all the same that is not a portrait of the Major. The man who was here
yesterday was a young man, a man young enough to be the Major's son!"

The old book-keeper looked at the speaker.

"Mr. Paul," he began, "you won't be hard on the----" then he paused
abruptly.

"I confess I don't understand this at all!" declared Mr. Wheatcroft,
irascibly.

"I am afraid that I do understand it," Mr. Whittier said, with a glance
of compassion at the Major.

"There," Paul continued, handing his father a second azure square,
"there is a photograph taken here ten minutes after the first, at 3.20
yesterday afternoon. That shows the safe open and the young man
standing before it with the private letter-book in his hand. As his
head is bent over the pages of the book, the view of the face is not so
good. But there can be no doubt that it is the same man. You see that,
don't you, Mr. Wheatcroft?"

"I see that, of course," returned Mr. Wheatcroft, forcibly. "What I
don't see is why the Major here should confess if he isn't guilty!"

"I think I know the reason for that," said Mr. Whittier, gently.

"There haven't been two men at our books, have there?" asked Mr.
Wheatcroft--"the Major, and also the fellow who has been photographed?"

Mr. Whittier looked at the book-keeper for a moment.

"Major," he said, with compassion in his voice, "you won't tell me that
it was you who sold our secrets to our rivals? And you might confess it
again and again, I should never believe it. I know you better. I have
known you too long to believe any charge against your honesty, even if
you bring it yourself. The real culprit, the man who is photographed
here, is your son, isn't he? There is no use in your trying to conceal
the truth now, and there is no need to attempt it, because we shall be
lenient with him for your sake, Major."

There was a moment's silence, broken by Wheatcroft suddenly saying:

"The Major's son? Why, he's dead, isn't he? He was shot in a brawl
after a spree somewhere out West two or three years ago--at least,
that's what I understood at the time."

"It is what I wanted everybody to understand at the time," said the
book-keeper, breaking silence at last. "But it wasn't so. The boy was
shot, but he wasn't killed. I hoped that it would be a warning to him,
and he would make a fresh start. Friends of mine got him a place in
Mexico, but luck was against him--so he wrote me--and he lost that.
Then an old comrade of mine gave him another chance out in Denver, and
for a while he kept straight and did his work well. Then he broke down
once more and he was discharged. For six months I did not know what had
become of him. I've found out since that he was a tramp for weeks, and
that he walked most of the way from Colorado to New York. This fall he
turned up in the city, ragged, worn out, sick. I wanted to order him
away, but I couldn't. I took him back and got him decent clothes and
took him to look for a place, for I knew that hard work was the only
thing that would keep him out of mischief. He did not find a place,
perhaps he did not look for one. But all at once I discovered that he
had money. He would not tell me how he got it. I knew he could not have
come by it honestly, and so I watched him. I spied after him, and at
last I found that he was selling you to the Tuxedo Company."

"But how could he open the safe?" cried Mr. Wheatcroft. "You didn't
know the new combination."

"I did not tell him the combination I did know," said the old
book-keeper, with pathetic dignity. "And I didn't have to tell him. He
can open almost any safe without knowing the combination. How he does
it, I don't know; it is his gift. He listens to the wheels as they
turn, and he sets first one and then the other; and in ten minutes the
safe is open."

"How could he get into the store?" Mr. Whittier inquired.

"He knew I had a key," responded the old book-keeper, "and he stole it
from me. He used to watch on Sunday afternoons till Mike went for a
walk, and then he unlocked the store, and slipped in and opened the
safe. Two weeks ago Mike came back unexpectedly, and he had just time
to get out of one of the rear windows of this office."

"Yes," Paul remarked, as the Major paused, "Mike told me that he found
a window unfastened."

"I heard you asking about it," Major Van Zandt explained, "and I knew
that if you were suspicious he was sure to be caught sooner or later.
So I begged him not to try to injure you again. I offered him money to
go away. But he refused my money; he said he could get it for himself
now, and I might keep mine until he needed it. He gave me the slip
yesterday afternoon. When I found he was gone I came here straight. The
front door was unlocked; I walked in and found him just closing the
safe here. I talked to him, and he refused to listen to me. I tried to
get him to give up his idea, and he struck me. Then I left him, and I
went out, seeing no one as I hurried home. That's when Mr. Wheatcroft
followed me, I suppose. The boy never came back all night. I haven't
seen him since; I don't know where he is, but he is my son, after
all--my only son! And when Mr. Wheatcroft accused me, I confessed at
last, thinking you might be easier on me than you would be on the boy."

"My poor friend," said Mr. Whittier, sympathetically, holding out his
hand, which the Major clasped gratefully for a moment.

"Now that we know who was selling us to the Tuxedo people, we can
protect ourselves hereafter," declared Mr. Wheatcroft. "And in spite of
your trying to humbug me into believing you guilty, Major, I'm willing
to let your son off easy."

"I think I can get him a place where he will be out of temptation,
because he will be kept hard at work always," said Paul.

The old book-keeper looked up as though about to thank the young man,
but there seemed to be a lump in his throat which prevented him from
speaking.

Suddenly Mr. Wheatcroft began, explosively, "That's all very well! but
what I still don't understand is how Paul got those photographs!"

Mr. Whittier looked at his son and smiled. "That is a little
mysterious, Paul," he said, "and I confess I'd like to know how you did
it."

"Were you concealed here yourself?" asked Mr. Wheatcroft.

"No," Paul answered. "If you will look round this room you will see
that there isn't a dark corner in which anybody could tuck himself."

"Then where was the photographer hidden?" Mr. Wheatcroft inquired, with
increasing curiosity.

"In the clock," responded Paul.

"In the clock?" echoed Mr. Wheatcroft, greatly amazed. "Why, there
isn't room in the case of that clock for a thin midget, let alone a
man!"

Paul enjoyed puzzling his father's partner. "I didn't say I had a man
there or a midget either," he explained. "I said that the photographer
was in the clock--and I might have said that the clock itself was the
photographer."

Mr. Wheatcroft threw up his hands in disgust. "Well," he cried, "if you
want to go on mystifying us in this absurd way, go on as long as you
like! But your father and I are entitled to some consideration, I
think."

"I'm not mystifying you at all; the clock took the pictures
automatically. I'll show you how," Paul returned, getting up from his
chair and going to the corner of the office.

Taking a key from his pocket he opened the case of the clock and
revealed a small photographic apparatus inside, with the tube of the
objective opposite the round glass panel in the door of the case. At
the bottom of the case was a small electrical battery, and on a small
shelf over this was an electro-magnet.

"I begin to see how you did it," Mr. Whittier remarked. "I am not an
expert in photography, Paul, and I'd like a full explanation. And make
it as simple as you can."

"It's a very simple thing indeed," said the son. "One day while I was
wondering how we could best catch the man who was getting at the books,
that clock happened to strike, and somehow it reminded me that in our
photographic society at college we had once suggested that it would be
amusing to attach a detective camera to a timepiece and take snapshots
every few minutes all through the day. I saw that this clock of ours
faced the safe, and that it couldn't be better placed for the purpose.
So when I had thought out my plan, I came over here and pretended that
the clock was wrong, and in setting it right I broke off the
minute-hand. Then I had a man I know send for it for repairs; he is
both an electrician and an expert photographer. Together we worked out
this device. Here is a small snap-shot camera loaded with a hundred and
fifty films; and here is the electrical attachment which connects with
the clock so as to take a photograph every ten minutes from eight in
the morning to six at night. We arranged that the magnet should turn
the spool of film after every snap-shot."

"Well!" cried Mr. Wheatcroft. "I don't know much about these things,
but I read the papers, and I suppose you mean that the clock 'pressed
the button,' and the electricity pulled the string."

"That's it precisely," the young man responded. "Of course I wasn't
quite sure how it would work, so I thought I would try it first on a
week-day when we were all here. It did work all right, and I made
several interesting discoveries. I found that Mike smoked a pipe in
this office--and that Bob played leap-frog in the store and stood on
his head in the corner there up against the safe!"

"The confounded young rascal!" interrupted Mr. Wheatcroft.

Paul smiled as he continued. "I found also that Mr. Wheatcroft was
captivated by a pretty book-agent and bought two bulky volumes he
didn't want."

Mr. Wheatcroft looked sheepish for a moment.

"Oh, that's how you knew, is it?" he growled, running his hands
impatiently through his shock of hair.

"That's how I knew," Paul replied. "I told you I had an eye on you. It
was the lone eye of the camera. And on Sunday it kept watch for us
here, winking every ten minutes. From eight o'clock in the morning to
three in the afternoon it winked forty-two times, and all it saw was
the same scene, the empty corner of the room here, with the safe in the
shadow at first and at last in the full light that poured down from the
glass roof over us. But a little after three a man came into the office
and made ready to open the safe. At ten minutes past three the clock
and the camera took his photograph--in the twinkling of an eye. At
twenty minutes past three a second record was made. Before half-past
three the man was gone, and the camera winked every ten minutes until
six o'clock quite in vain. I came down early this morning and got the
roll of negatives. One after another I developed them, disappointed
that I had almost counted fifty of them without reward. But the
forty-third and the forty-fourth paid for all my trouble."

Mr. Whittier gave his son a look of pride. "That was very ingeniously
worked out, Paul; very ingeniously indeed," he said. "If it had not
been for your clock here I might have found it difficult to prove that
the Major was innocent--especially since he declared himself guilty."

Mr. Wheatcroft rose to his feet, to close the conversation.

"I'm glad we know the truth, anyhow," he asserted, emphatically. And
then, as though to relieve the strain on the old book-keeper, he added,
with a loud laugh at his own joke, "That clock had its hands before its
face all the time--but it kept its eyes open for all that!"

"Don't forget that it had only one eye," said Whittier, joining in the
laugh; "it had an eye single to its duty."

"You know the French saying, father," added Paul, "'In the realm of the
blind the one-eyed man is king.'"

(1895.)




A CONFIDENTIAL POSTSCRIPT


It was pithily said by one of old that a bore is a man who insists upon
talking about himself when you want to talk about yourself. There is
some truth in the saying, no doubt; but surely it should not apply to
the relation of an author to his readers. So long, at least, as they
are holding his book in their hands, it is a fair inference that they
do not wish to talk about themselves just that moment; indeed, it is
not a violent hypothesis to suggest that perhaps they are then willing
enough to have him talk about himself. For the egotistic garrulity of
the author there is, in fact, no more fit occasion than in the final
pages of his book. At that stage of the game he may fairly enough count
on the good humor of his readers, since those who might be dissatisfied
with him would all have yielded to discouragement long before the
postscript was reached.

The customary preface is not so pleasant a place for a confidential
chat as the unconventional postscript. The real value and the true
purpose of the preface is to serve as a telephone for the writer of the
book and to bear his message to the professional book-reviewers. On the
other hand, only truly devoted readers will track the author to his
lair in a distant postscript. While it might be presumptuous for him to
talk about himself before the unknown and anonymous book-reviewers, he
cannot but be rejoiced at the chance of a gossip with his old friends,
the gentle readers.

Perhaps the present author cannot drop into conversation more easily
than by here venturing upon the expression of a purely personal
feeling--his own enjoyment in the weaving of the unsubstantial webs of
improbable adventure that fill the preceding pages. With an ironic
satisfaction was it that a writer who is not unaccustomed to be called
a mere realist here attempted fantasy, even though the results of his
effort may reveal invention only and not imagination. It may even be
that it was memory (mother of the muses) rather than invention
(daughter of necessity) which inspired the 'Primer of Imaginary
Geography.' I have an uneasy wonder whether I should ever have gone on
this voyage of discovery with Mynheer Vanderdecken, past the Bohemia
which is a desert country by the sea, if I had not in my youth been
allowed to visit 'A Virtuoso's Collection'; and yet, to the best of my
recollection, it was no recalling of Hawthorne's tale, but a casual
glance at the Carte du Pays de Tendre in a volume of Moliere, which
first set me upon collecting the material for an imaginary geography.

In the second of these little fantasies the midnight wanderer saw
certain combats famous in all literature and certain dances. Where it
was possible use was made of the actual words of the great authors who
had described these combats and these dances, the descriptions being
condensed sometimes and sometimes their rhythm being a little modified
so that they should not be out of keeping with the more pedestrian
prose by which they were accompanied. Thus, as it happens, the dances
of little Pearl and of Topsy could be set forth, fortunately, almost in
the very phrases of Hawthorne and of Mrs. Stowe, while I was forced to
describe as best I could myself the gyrations of the wife who lived in
'A Doll's House' and of her remote predecessor as a "new woman," the
daughter of Herodias. The same method was followed in the writing of
the third of these tales, although the authors then drawn upon were
most of them less well known; and the only quotation of any length was
the one from Irving describing the mysterious deeds of the headless
horseman.

Now it chanced that the 'Dream-Gown of the Japanese Ambassador,'
instead of appearing complete in one number of a magazine, as the two
earlier tales had done, was published in various daily newspapers in
three instalments. In the first of these divisions the returned
traveller fell asleep and saw himself in the crystal ball; in the
second he went through the rest of his borrowed adventures; and in the
third his friend awakened him and unravelled the mystery. When the
second part appeared a clergyman who had read the 'Sketch-Book' (even
though he had never heard of the 'Forty Seven Ronins,' or the
'Shah-Nameh,' or the 'Custom of the Country') took his pen and sat down
and wrote swiftly to a newspaper, declaring that this instalment of my
tale had been "cribbed bodily, and almost _verbatim et literatim_,
in one-third of its entire length, from the familiar 'Legend of Sleepy
Hollow.'" He asked sarcastically if the copyright notice printed at the
head of my story was meant to apply also to the passages plagiarized
from Irving. He declared also that "it is unfortunate for literary
persons of the stamp of the author of 'Vignettes of Manhattan' that
there still exist readers who do not forget what they have read that is
worth remembering. Such readers are not to be imposed on by the most
skilful bunglers (_sic_) who endeavor to pass off as their own the
work of greater men."

The writer of this letter had given his address, Christ Church Rectory,
----, N.J. (I suppress the name of the village for the sake of his
parishioners as I suppress the name of the man for the sake of his
family). Therefore I wrote to him at once, telling him that if he had
read the third and final instalment of my story with the same attention
he had given to the second part he would understand why I was expecting
