Sensation. One of the experts who had been waiting patiently to testify,
folded his arms and said in a loud voice, "This is what comes of
tolerating women in the professions." Another muttered, "Charlatan ...
ridiculous ... dangerous thing ... shameful ... sex ..." Two elderly
ladies in broadcloth coats with fur collars, later identified as
crusaders for antivivisection, cheered feebly and were promptly ejected.

Senator Jones took off his spectacles, polished them exhaustively, tried
to put them on upside down, gave up and stated gravely, "This is an
extraordinary admission, Miss, um, Francis."

"It is not an admission at all; it is a statement of fact. As for its
irregularity, I take the liberty of believing we unlettered ones are in
the majority rather than minority."

Judge Robinson warned, "Could be cited for contempt, Miss Harrumph."

Dr Johnson said sharply, "Nonsense, madam, even a--even a tree surgeon
has more respect for learning."

Mr Miller leaned slightly over the table. "Do you realize that in your
ignorant dabbling you have ruined hundreds of propertyowners and
taxpayers?"

"I thought there was some law against practicing without a license,"
speculated Assemblyman Brown.

"There is apparently no law applying intelligence qualifications for
members of the legislature," remarked Miss Francis pleasantly.

Senator Jones lifted his gavel, idle until now, and banged it on the
table, smashing his spectacles thoughtlessly placed in front of him a
moment before. This did nothing to appease his rising choler. "Silence,
madam! We have perhaps been too lenient in deference to your, um, sex.
I'll remind you that this body is vested with all the dignity of the
state of California. Unless you apologize instantly I shall cite you for
contempt."

"I beg the committee's pardon."

The investigators held a whispered conference among themselves,
evidently to determine whether this equivocal apology was to be
accepted. Apparently it was, for Dr Johnson now asked loftily and with
an abstracted air, as though he already knew the answer and considered
it beneath notice, "What was this magic formula you caused to be put on
the grass?"

Malicious spirits averred that Dickie Johnson had flunked out of
agricultural school, had an obscure European diploma, and that his fame
as a professor at Creighton University was based on the gleaming granite
and stainless steel building dedicated to research in agronomy which
bore the legend "Johnson Foundation" over the entrance. No one hearing
him pronounce "magic formula" putting into the word all the contempt of
the scientist for the quack, could ever put credence in the base
slander. "What was this 'magic formula' you caused to be put on the
grass?" he repeated.

Miss Francis reeled off a list of elements so swiftly I'm sure no one
but the stenographer caught them all. I know I didnt get more than half,
though I was sitting less than five feet from her. "Magnesium," she
stated, "iodine, carbon, nitrogen, hydrogen, helium, potash, sulphur,
oxygen ..."

Dr Johnson seemed to have known its composition since grammarschool
days. Senator Jones asked, "And what effect did you expect this
extraordinary conglomeration to have?"

She repeated what she had told me at first and the deductions she had
made since. Dr Johnson smiled. "A true Man of Science," he stated, "one
who has labored for years to acquire those degrees you affect to
despise, would have been trained in selfless devotion to the service of
mankind, would never have made whatever gross error your ignorance,
heightened by projection into a sphere for which you are probably
biologically unfitted--though this is perhaps controversial--has
betrayed you into. For had you freely shared your work with colleagues
they would have been able to correct your mistakes and this catastrophe
brought on by selfish greed--a catastrophe which has already cost
millions--would not have occurred."

The entire committee, including Dr Johnson himself, seemed pleased with
this indictment. Attorney General Smith looked inquiringly at the
witness as though inviting her to answer _that_ if she could. Miss
Francis evidently took the invitation literally, for she addressed
herself directly to Dr Johnson.

"I do not know, Doctor, where these beautiful and eminently sensible
ideals you have so eloquently outlined are practiced, where scientists,
regardless of biological fitness, share with each other their advances
from moment to moment and so add to the security of civilization from
day to day. Is it in the great research foundations whose unlimited
funds are used to lure promising young men to their staffs, much as
athletes used to be given scholarships by universities anxious to
improve the physical qualities of American youth? Is it in the
experimental laboratories of great industries where technological
advances are daily suppressed, locked away in safes, so profits may not
be diminished by the expensive retooling necessary to put these advances
into effect? Or is it in a field closer to my own, in chemical
research--pure science, if you like--where truly secrets are shared on
an international scale in order to build up the cartels which choke
production by increasing prices and promote those industries which
thrive on international illwill?"

Assemblyman Brown rose to his feet and said in measured tones, "This
woman is a paid agent of the Communist International. I have heard such
rantings from demagogues on streetcorners. I demand the committee listen
to no more of this propaganda."

Mr Miller gave a polite wave of his hand toward the assemblyman,
indicating at once full agreement with what the legislator said and
apology for pursuing his questioning of Miss Francis. He then asked the
witness sternly, "What is your real name?"

"I'm afraid I don't quite understand. The only name I have is Josephine
Spencer Francis and so far as I know it is thus written on my birth
certificate."

"Birth certificate, ay? Where were you born? Speak up, don't mumble."

"Russia, without a doubt," muttered Assemblyman Brown.

"Youre sure it isnt Franciski or Franciscovitch? Or say, Finklestein?"

"My name is not Finkelstein, although I do not find myself terrified of
that combination of syllables. I was born in Moscow--"

Another sensation. "I thought so!" screamed Judge Robinson triumphantly.

"Aha!" exclaimed Senator Jones profoundly.

"The leopard doesnt change his spots or the Red his (or her) color,"
asserted Assemblyman Brown.

"A sabatoor," yelled several of the spectators. Only Dr Johnson seemed
unimpressed with the revelation; he smiled contentedly.

"--in Moscow, Idaho," concluded Miss Francis, picking her teeth with a
flourish.

Judge Robinson screeched, "Ay? Ay? What's all this hubbub?" Assemblyman
Brown sneered, "A very unlikely story." Attorney General Smith wanted it
proven in blackandwhite while Senator Jones remarked Miss Francis' taste
was on a level with her scholarship.

She waved the toothpick toward the chairman and politely waited for
either further questions or dismissal. All the while her intense
interest in each gesture of the inquisitors and every facet of the
investigation had not diminished at all. As she sat there patiently, her
eyes darted from one to the other as they consulted and only came to
rest on Senator Jones when he spoke directly to her again.

"And what steps can you take to undo, hum, this?"

"So far, none," admitted Miss Francis, "but since this thing has
happened I have given all my time to experiment hoping in some manner to
reverse the action of the Metamorphizer and evolve a formula whereby the
growth it induced will be inhibited. I cannot say I am even on the right
road yet, for you must recall I have spent my adult life going, as it
were, in one direction and it is now not a matter of merely retracing my
steps, but of starting out for an entirely different destination in a
field where there are no highwaymaps and few compasspoints. I cannot say
I am even optimistic of success, but it is not for want of trying--be
assured of that."

Another semisilence while the committee conferred once more. Finally
Senator Jones spoke in grave and measured tones: "It is a customary
politeness in hearings of this nature to thank the witness for his
helpfulness and cooperation. This courtesy I cannot with any sincerity
extend to you, madam. It seems to me you have proven yourself the
opposite of a good citizen, that you have set yourself up, in your
arrogance, against all logical authority and have presumed to look down
upon the work and methods of men whose standing and ways of procedure
are recognized by all sound people. By your conceit, madam, you have
caused the death of young men, the flower of our state's manhood, who
gave their lives in a vain attempt to destroy what your ignorance
created. If I may be permitted a rather daring and perhaps harsh aside,
I think this should strike you doubly, as a woman who has not brought
forth offspring to carry on the work of our forefathers and as one
who--with doubtful taste--boasts of that sterility. I think the results
of your socalled experiments should chasten you and make you heed the
words of men properly qualified in a field where you are clearly not
so."

Someone in the back of the room applauded the senator's eloquence.

"Senator Jones," said Miss Francis, turning her eyes on him with the
attention I knew so well, the look which meant she had found an interest
for the moment excluding all others, "you accuse me of what amounts to
crime or at least criminal folly and I must answer that your accusations
are at once both true and false. I have been foolish, but it was not in
despising the constrictions and falsity of the academic world. I _have_
flouted authority, but it was not the authority of the movingpicture
heroes, whose comic errors are perpetuated for generations, like those
of Pasteur, or so quietly repudiated their repudiation passes unnoticed,
like those of Lister, in order to protect a vested interest. The
authority I have flouted, in my arrogance as you call it, is that
authority all scientists recognized in the days when science was
scientific and called itself, not boastfully by the name of all
knowledge, but more humbly and decently, natural philosophy. That
authority is what theologians term the Will of God; others, the life
force, the immaterial principle, the common unconscious, or whatever you
will. When I, along with all the academic robots whom you admire, denied
that authority, we did not make ourselves, as we thought, men of pure
science, but, on the contrary, by deposing one master we invited in a
horde of others. Since we could not submit to moral force we submitted
in our blind stupidity--we called it the rejection of metaphysical
concepts--to financial force, to political force, to social force; and
finally, since there was no longer any reward in itself for our
speculations, we submitted to the lust for personal aggrandizement in
fortune, in notoriety, in castebound irresponsibility, and even for the
hypocritical backslapping of our fellows.

"In the counterrevolution known as the nineteenth century we even
repudiated the name of speculation and it became a term of disrepute,
like metaphysical. We went further than a mere disavowal of the name; we
disavowed the whole process and turned with disgust from the using of
our minds to the use of our hands in a manner which would have revolted
the most illiterate of Carpathian peasants. We extirpated the salivary
glands of dogs in order to find out if they would slobber without them.
We cut off the tails of mice to discover if the operation affected their
greatgrandchildren. We decapitated, emasculated, malnourished, and
poisoned rodents against whom we had no personal animus for no other
reason than to keep an elaborate apparatus in use.

"Even these pastimes failed to satisfy our undiscriminating appetite.
Someone a little stupider, a little less imaginative--though such
conditions must have been difficult indeed to achieve--invented what is
called the Control Experiment whereby, if theory tested be correct, half
the subjects are condemned without trial to execution.

"These are my sins: that in despising academic ends I did not despise
academic means, that in repudiating the brainlessness of the
professorial mind I did not attempt to use my own. Because I was proud
of the integrity which made me choose not to do the will of a research
foundation or industrial empire, I overlooked the vital fact that I had
also chosen not to do God's Will, but what I stupidly thought to be my
own. It was not. It was faintheartedness, sloth, placation, doubt,
vagueness and romantical misconception. In a word, it was the
aimlessness and falsity of the nineteenth century coming back in the
window after having been booted out the door; my folly was the failure
to recognize it. I have deluded myself, I have taken halfmeasures, I
have followed false paths. Condemn me for these crimes. I am guilty."

Attorney General Smith said acidly, "This is neither a psychiatrist's
consulting room, a confessional, nor a court of law. I suggest the
witness be excused and her last hysterical remarks expunged from the
record."

"It is so ordered," ruled Senator Jones. "And now, gentlemen, we shall
recess until tomorrow."




THREE

_Man Triumphant ... I_


_21._ The hearings of the Committee to Investigate Dangerous Vegetation
went on for five days and Mr Le ffacase was increasingly delighted as
the proceedings went down, properly edited and embellished to excite
reader interest, in the columns of the _Daily Intelligencer_. He even
unbent so far as to call me a fool without any adjectival modification,
which was for him the height of geniality.

I don't want to give the impression the committee stole the show, as the
saying goes. The show essentially and primarily was still the grass
itself. It grew while the honorable body inquired and it grew while the
honorable body, tired by its labors, slept. It increased during the
speeches of Senator Jones, through the interjections of Judge Robinson,
and as Dr Johnson added his wisdom to the deliberations.

While the committee probed, listened and digested, the grass finally
pushed its way across Hollywood Boulevard, resisting frantic efforts by
the National Guard, the fire and police departments, and a volunteer
brigade of local merchants, to stem its course. It defied alike
sharpened steel, fire, chemicals and explosives. Even the smallest
runner could now be severed only with the greatest difficulty, for in
its advance the weed had toughened--some said because of its omnivorous
diet, others, its ability to absorb nitrogen from the air--and its
rubbery quality caused it to yield to onslaught only to bound back,
apparently uninjured, after each blow.

One of the most disquieting aspects of the advance was its variability
and unpredictability. To the west, it had hardly gone five blocks from
the Dinkman house, while southward it had crossed Santa Monica Boulevard
and was nosing toward Melrose. Its growth had been measured and checked,
over and over again, but the figures were never constant. Some days it
traveled a foot an hour; on others it leapt nearly a city block between
sunrise and nightfall.

It is simple to put down "the grass crossed Hollywood Boulevard"; as
simple as saying, "our troops advanced" or "the man was hanged at dawn."
But when I write these words less than a generation later, surrounded by
rolling hills, gentle brooks, and vast lawns sedate and tame, I can
close my eyes and see again the green glacier crawling down the
sidestreets and over the low roofs of the shops to pour like a cascade
upon the busy artery.

Once more I can feel the crawling of my skin as I looked upon the
methodical obliteration of men's work. I can see the tendrils splaying
out over the sidewalks, choking the roadways, climbing walls, finding
vulnerable chinks in masonry, bunching themselves inside apertures and
bursting out, carrying with them fragments of their momentary prison as
they pursued their ruthless course.

Now the uproar and clamor of a disturbed public swelled to giant volume.
All the disruption and distress going before had been news; this was
disaster. "All same Glauman's Chinese, all same Pa'thenon," remarked
Gootes, and indeed I have heard far less outcry over the destruction of
historic landmarks than was raised when the grass obscured the
celebrated footprints.

Recall of the mayor was demanded and councilmen's official limousines
were frequently overturned. Meetings denounced the inaction of the
authorities; a gigantic parade bearing placards calling for an end to
procrastination marched past the cityhall. Democrats blamed Republicans
for inefficiency and Republicans retorted that Miss Francis had done her
research during a Democratic administration.

Every means previously tried and found wanting was tried again as though
it were impossible for human minds to acknowledge defeat by an insensate
plant. The axes, the scythes, weedburners and reapers were brought out
again, only to prove their inability to cope with the relentless flow of
the grass. Robot tanks loaded with explosives disappeared as had those
containing the soldiers, and only the stifled sound of their explosion
registered the fact that they had fulfilled their design if not their
purpose.

It was difficult for the man on the street to understand how the weapons
successful in Normandy and Tarawa could be balked by vegetation. Like
the Investigating Committee's pursuit of the question of the crudeoil's
adulteration, they wanted to know if the tanks were firstline vehicles
or some surplus palmed off by the War Department; if the weedburners
were properly accredited graminicides or just a bunch of bums taken from
the reliefrolls. The necessary reverse of this picture was the jubilant
hailing of each new instrument of attack, the brief but hysterical
enthusiasm for each in turn as the ultimate savior.

Because of my unique position I witnessed the trial of them all. I saw
tanks dragging rotary plows and others equipped with devices like
electricfans but with blades of hardened steel sharpened to razor
keenness. The only thing this latter gadget did was to scatter more
potential nuclei to the accommodating wind.

I saw the Flammenwerfer, the dreadful flamethrowers which had scorched
the bodies of men like burnt toast in an instant, direct their
concentrated fire upon the advancing runners. I smelled the sweetly sick
smell of steaming sap and saw the runners shrivel and curl back as they
had done on other occasions, until nothing was presented to the
flamethrowers except the tangled mass of interwoven stems denuded of all
foliage. Upon this involved wall the fire had no effect, the stems did
not wilt, the hard membranes did not collapse, the steely network did
not retreat. It seemed a drawn battle in one small sector, yet in that
very part where the grass paused on the ground it rose higher into the
air like a poising tidalwave. Higher and higher, until its crest,
unbalanced, toppled forward to engulf its tormentors.

Then the unruffled advance resumed, again some resource was interposed
against it, again it was checked for an instant and again it overcame
its adversary, careless of obstacles, impartially taking to itself gouty
roominghouses and pimping frenchprovincial ("17 master bedrooms")
chateaus, hotdogstand and Brown Derby, cornergrocery and pyramidal
foodmart; undeterred by anything in its path.

When you say a clump of weed attacked a city you utter an absurdity. I
think everyone was aware of the fantastic discrepancy between statement
of the event and the event itself. So innocent and ridiculous the grass
looked as it made its first tentative thrust at the urban nerves; the
green blades sloped forward like some prettily arranged but
unimaginative corsage upon the concrete bosom of the street. You could
not believe those fragile seeming strands would resist the impress of a
careless boot, much less the entire arsenal of military and agricultural
implements. It must have been this deceptive fragility which broke the
spirit of so many people.

From an item in the _Intelligencer_ I recalled the existence of one of
Mrs Dinkman's neighbors who had rudely refused the opportunity to have
his lawn treated with the Metamorphizer. He had left an incoherent
suicidenote: "Pigeons in the grass alas. Too many pigeons, too much
grass. Pigeons are doves, but Noah expressed a raven. Contradiction
lies. Roses are red, violets are blue. The grass is green and I am thru.
Too too too. Darling kiddies." He then, in full view of the helpless
weedfighters, marched on into the grass and was lost to sight.

In the days following, so many selfdestructions succeeded this one that
the grass became known in the papers as the Green Horror. Perhaps a
peculiar sidelight on human oddity was revealed in most of these
suicides choosing to immolate themselves, not in the main body of the
grass, but in one of the many smaller nuclei springing up in close
proximity.

It was my fortune to witness the confluence of two of these descendant
bodies. They had come into being only a few blocks apart; understandably
their true character was unrecognized until they were out of control and
had enveloped the neighborhoods of their origin. They crept toward each
other with a sort of incestuous attraction until mere yards separated
them; they paused skittishly, the runners crawled forward speculatively,
the green fronds began overlapping like clasping fingers, then with
accelerating speed came together much as a pack of cards in the hands of
a deft shuffler slides edge under edge to make a compact and indivisible
whole. The line of division disappeared, the two became one, and where
before there had been left a narrow path for men to tread, now only a
serene line of vegetation outlined itself against the unblinking sky.


_22._ I have said Mr Le ffacase had softened his brutality toward me,
but his favor did not extend--so pervasive is literary jealousy--to
printing my own reports. He continued to subject me to the indignity of
being "ghosted," a thoroughly expressive term, which by a combination of
bad conjugation and the suggestion of insubstantiality defines the sort
of prose produced, by Jacson Gootes. This arrangement, instead of giving
me some freedom, shackled me to the reporter, who dashed from celebrity
to celebrity, grass to nuclei, office to point of momentary interest,
with unflagging energy and infuriating jocosity. I knew his repertory of
tricks and accents down to the last yawn.

Most of all I resented his irregular habits. He never arrived at the
_Intelligencer_ office on time or quit after a proper day's work. He
thought nothing of getting me out of bed before I'd had my eight hours'
sleep to accompany him on some ridiculous errand. "Bertie, old dormouse,
the grass is knocking at the doors of NBC."

"All right," I answered, annoyed. "It started down Vine Street
yesterday. It would be more surprising if it obligingly paused before
the studios."

"Cynic," he said, pulling the bedclothes away from my face. I consider
this the lowest form of horseplay I know of. "How quickly your ideals
have been tarnished by contact with the vulgar world of newspaperdom.
Front and center, Bertie lad, we must catch the grass making its own
soundeffects before they jerk out the microphones."

Protests having no effect I reluctantly went with him, but the scene was
merely a repetition of hundreds of previous ones, the grass being no
more or less spectacular for NBC than for Watanabe's Nursery and Cut
Flower Shop a halfmile away. Its aftereffects, however, were immediate.
The governor declared martial law in Los Angeles County and ordered the
evacuation of an area five miles wide on the perimeter of the grass.

Furious cries of anguish went up from those affected by the arbitrary
order. What authority had any official to dispossess honest people from
their homes in times of peace? The right to hold their property
unmolested was a prerogative vested in the humblest American and who was
the governor to abrogate the Constitution, the Declaration of
Independence, and manifold decisions of the Supreme Court? In embittered
fury Henry Miller resigned from the Investigating Committee, now defunct
anyway, its voluminous and inconclusive report buried in the state
archives. Injunctions issued from local courts like ashes from a
stirring volcano, but the militia were impervious and hustled the
freeholders from their homes with callous disregard for the sacred dues
of property.

When the reason behind this evacuation order leaked out a still greater
lamentation was evoked, for the National Guard was planning nothing less
than a saturation incendiary bombing of the entire area. The bludgeon
which reduced the cities of Europe to mere shells must surely destroy
this new invader. Even the stoutest defenders of property conceded this
must be so--but what was the point of annihilating the enemy if their
holdings were to be sacrificed in the process? No, no, let the governor
take whatever means he pleased to dispatch the weed so long as the
method involved left them homes to enjoy when things were--as they
inevitably must be--restored to normal. So frantic were their efforts
