with the steel produced you build two more mills the following year,
which in turn gives you the material for four the next year."

Buchwald grunted his disbelief.

Watson looked up and down the line of Genoese, the Earthmen as well as
the natives. "On Texcoco we have now reached that point. We have a
trained, eager population of over one billion persons. Our universities
are turning out highly trained effectives at the rate of more than
twenty million a year. We have located all the raw materials we will
need. We are now under way." He looked at them in heavy amusement. "By
the end of the next decade we will bury you."

Martin Gunther said calmly, "Are you through?"

"Yes. For the time," Watson nodded.

"Very well. Then this is _our_ progress report. In the past forty years
we have eliminated feudalism in all the more advanced countries. Even in
the remote areas the pressures of our changing world are bringing them
around. The populace of these countries will no longer stand to one side
while the standard of living on the rest of Genoa grows so rapidly. On
most of our planet, already the average family not only enjoys freedom
but a way of life far in advance of that of Texcoco. Already modern
housing and household appliances are everywhere. Already both land cars
and aircraft are available to the majority. The nations have formed an
Inter-Continental League of governments so that it is unlikely that war
will ever touch us again. And this is merely a beginning. In ten years,
continuing our freely competitive way of developing, all will be living
on a scale that only the wealthy can afford today."

He came to an end and stared antagonistically at the Texcocans.

Taller said, "There seems to be no agreement."

Across the table from him the ancient Honorable Russ said, "It is
difficult to measure. We seem to count refrigerators and privately owned
automobiles. You seem to ignore personal standards and concentrate on
steel tonnage."

The Texcocan scientist, Wiss, said easily, "Given the steel mills, and
eventually automobiles and refrigerators will run off our assembly lines
like water, and will be available for everyone, not just those who can
afford to buy them."

"Hm-m-m, eventually," Peter MacDonald laughed nastily.

The atmosphere was suddenly hostile. Hostile beyond anything that had
gone before in earlier conferences.

And then Martin Gunther said without inflection, "I note that you have
removed from the _Pedagogue's_ library the information dealing with
nuclear fission."

"For the purpose of study," Dick Hawkins said smoothly.

"Of course," Gunther said. "Did you plan to return it in the immediate
future?"

"I'm afraid our studies will take some time," Watson said flatly.

"I was afraid so," Gunther said. "Happily, I took the precaution of
making microfilms of the material involved more than a year ago."

Barry Watson pushed his chair back. "We seem to have accomplished what
was possible by this conference," he said. "If anything." He looked to
right and left at his cohorts. "Let's go."

They came stiffly erect. Watson turned on his heel and started for the
door.

As they left, Natt Roberts turned for a moment and said to Gunther, "One
thing, Martin. During this next ten years you might consider whether or
not half a century has been enough to accomplish our task. Should we
consider staying on? I would think the Co-ordinator would accept any
recommendation along this line that we might make."

The Genoese contingent looked after him, long after he was gone.

Finally Martin Gunther said, "Baron Leonar, I think it might be a good
idea if you began putting some of your men to work on making steel
alloys suitable for spacecraft. The way things are developing, perhaps
we'll be needing them."

Buchwald and MacDonald looked at him unblinkingly.




XII.


It was fifty years to a day since the _Pedagogue_ had first gone into
orbit about Rigel. Five decades have passed. Half a century.

Of the original crew of the _Pedagogue_, six now gathered in the lounge
of the spaceship. All of them had changed physically. Some of them
softer to the point of flabbiness; some harder both of body and soul.

Barry Watson, Natt Roberts, Dick Hawkins, of the Texcocan team.

Martin Gunther, Peter MacDonald, Fredric Buchwald, of the Genoese.

The gathering wasn't so large as the one before. Only Taller and the
scientist Wiss attended from Texcoco; only Baron Leonar and the son of
Honorable Russ from Genoa.

From the beginning they stared with hostility across the conference
table. Even the pretense of amiability was gone.

Watson rapped finally, "I am not going to dwell upon the measures you
have been taking that can only be construed as military ones aimed
eventually at the Texcocan State."

Martin Gunther laughed nastily. "Is your implication that your own
people have not taken the same measures, in fact, inaugurated them?"

Watson said, "As I say, I have no intention of even discussing this.
Surely we can arrive at no agreement. There is one point, however that
we should consider on this occasion."

The corpulent Peter MacDonald wheezed, "Well, out with it!"

Natt Roberts said, "I mentioned the matter to you at the last meeting."

"Ah, yes," Gunther nodded. "Just as you left. We have considered it."

The Texcocans waited for him to go on.

"If I understand you," Gunther said, "you think we should reconsider
returning to Terra City at this time."

"It should be discussed," Watson nodded. "Whatever the ... ah ...
temporary difficulties between us, the original project of the
_Pedagogue_ is still our duty."

The three of the Genoese team nodded their agreement.

"And the problem becomes, have we accomplished completely what we set
out to do? And, further, is it necessary, or at least preferable, for us
to stay on and continue administration of the progress of the Rigel
planets?"

They thought about it.

Buchwald said hesitantly, "It has been my own belief that Genoa is not
quite ready for us to let loose the ... ah, reins. If we left now, I am
not sure--"

Roberts said, "Same applies to Texcoco. The State has made fabulous
strides, but I am not sure what would happen if we leaders were to
leave. There might be a complete collapse."

Watson said, "We seem to be in basic agreement. Is a suggestion in order
that we extend, for another twenty-five years, at least, this
expedition's work?"

Dick Hawkins said, "The Office of Galactic Colonization--"

MacDonald said smoothly, "Will undoubtedly send out a ship to
investigate. We shall simply inform them that things are not as yet
propitious to our leaving, that another twenty-five years is in order.
Since we are on the scene, undoubtedly our recommendation will be
heeded."

Watson looked from one Earthman to the next. "We are in agreement?"

Each in turn nodded.

Peter MacDonald said, "And do you all realize that here we have a unique
situation that might be exploited for the benefit of the whole race?"

They looked to him, questioningly.

"The dynamic we find in Genoa--and Texcoco, too, for that matter, though
we disagree on so many fundamentals--is beyond that in the Solar System.
These are new planets, new ambitions are alive. We have at our
fingertips man's highest developments, evolved on Earth. But with this
new dynamic, this freshness, might we not in time push even beyond old
Earth?"

"You mean--" Natt Roberts said.

MacDonald nodded. "What particular of value is gained by our uniting
Genoa and Texcoco with the so-called Galactic Commonwealth? Why not
press ahead on our own? With the vigor of these new races we might well
leave Earth far behind."

Watson mused, "Carrying your suggestion to the ultimate, who is to say
that one day Rigel might not become the new center of the human race,
rather than Sol?"

"A point well taken," Gunther agreed.

"No," Taller said softly.

The six Earthmen turned hostile eyes to him.

"This particular matter does not concern you, Generalissimo," Watson
rapped at him.

Taller smiled his amusement at that and came to his feet.

"No," he said. "I am afraid that hard though it might be for you to give
up the powers you have held so long, you Earthlings are going to have to
return to Terra City, from whence you came."

Baron Leonar said in gentle agreement, "Obviously."

"What is this?" Watson rapped. "I'm not at all amused."

The Honorable Russ stood also. "There is no use prolonging this. I have
heard you Earthlings say, more than once, that man adapts to preserve
himself. Very well, we of Genoa and Texcoco are adapting to the present
situation. We are of the belief that if you are allowed to remain in
power we of the Rigel planets will be destroyed, probably in an atomic
holocaust. In self-protection we have found it necessary to unite, we
Genoese and Texcocans. We bear you no ill will, far to the contrary.
However, it is necessary that you all return to Earth. You have
impressed upon us the aforementioned truism that _man adapts_ but in the
_Pedagogue's_ library I have found another that also applies. Power
corrupts, and absolute power corrupts absolutely."

There were heavy automatics in the hands of Natt Roberts and Dick
Hawkins. Barry Watson leaned back in his chair, his eyes narrow. "How'd
you ever expect to get away with this sort of treason, Taller?"

Martin Gunther blurted, "Or you, Russ?"

Wiss, the Texcocan scientist, held his wrist radio to his mouth and
said, "Come in now."

Dick Hawkins thumbed back the hammer of his hand gun.

"Hold it a minute, Dick," Barry Watson said. "I don't like this." To
Taller he rapped, "What goes on here? Talk up, you're just about a dead
man."

And it was then that they heard the scraping on the outer hull.

The six Earthmen looked at the overhead, dumfounded.

"I suggest you put up your weapons," Taller said quietly. "At this late
stage I would hate to see further bloodshed."

In moments they heard the opening and closing of locks and footsteps
along the corridor. The door opened and in stepped,

Joe Chessman, Amschel Mayer, Mike Dean, Louis Rosetti, and an emaciated
Jerry Kennedy. Their expressions ran the gamut from sheepishness to
blank haughtiness.

MacDonald bug-eyed. "Dean ... Rosetti ... the Temple priests burned you
at the stake!"

They grinned at him, shamefaced. "Guess not," Dean said. "We were
kidnaped. We've been teaching basic science, in some phony monastery."

Watson's face was white. "Joe," he said.

"Yeah," Joe Chessman growled. "You sold me out. But Taller and the
Texcocans thought I was still of some use."

Amschel Mayer snapped, bitterly, "And now if you fools will put down
your stupid guns, we'll make the final arrangements for returning this
expedition to Terra City. Personally, I'll be glad to get away!"

Behind the five resurrected Earthmen were a sea of faces representing
the foremost figures of both Texcoco and Genoa in every field of
endeavor. At least fifty of them in all.

As though protectively, the eleven Earthmen ganged together at the far
side of the messtable they'd met over so often.

Martin Gunther, his expression dazed, said, "I ... I don't--"

Taller resumed his spokesmanship. "From the first the most progressive
elements on both Texcoco and Genoa realized the value of your expedition
and have been in fundamental sympathy with the aims the _Pedagogue_
originally had. Primitive life is not idyllic. Until man is free from
nature's tyranny and has solved the basic problems of sufficient food,
clothing, shelter, medical care and education for all, he is unable to
realize himself. So we co-operated with you to the extent we found
possible."

His smile was grim. "I am afraid that almost from the beginning, and on
both planets, your very actions developed an ... underground, I believe
you call it. Not an overt one, since we needed your assistance to build
the new industrialized culture you showed us was possible. We even
protected you against yourselves, since it soon became obvious that if
left alone you'd destroy each other in your addiction to power."

Baron Leonar broke in, "Don't misunderstand. It wasn't until the past
couple of decades that this _underground_ which had sprung up
independently on both planets, amalgamated."

Barry Watson blurted, "But Joe ... Chessman--" he refused to meet the
eye of the man he'd condemned.

Taller said, "From the first you made no effort to study our customs. If
you had, you'd have realized why my father allied himself to you after
you'd killed Taller First. And why I did not take my revenge on Chessman
after he'd killed Reif. A Khan's first training is that no personal
emotion must interfere with the needs of the People. When you turned Joe
Chessman over to me, I realized his education, his abilities were too
great to destroy. We sent him to a mountain university and have used him
profitably all these years. In fact, it was Chessman who finally brought
us to space travel."

"That's right," Buchwald blurted. "You've got a spaceship out there. How
could you possibly--?"

Taller said mildly, "There are but a handful of you, you could hardly
keep track of two whole planets and all that went on upon them."

Amschel Mayer said bitingly, "All this can be gone over on our return to
Terra City. We'll have a full year to explain to ourselves and each
other why we became such complete idiots. I was originally head of this
expedition--before my supposed friends railroaded me to prison--does
anyone object if I take over again?"

"No," Joe Chessman growled.

The others shook their heads.

Taller said, "There is but one other thing. In spite of how you may feel
at this moment of embarrassment, basically you have succeeded in your
task. That is, you have brought Texcoco and Genoa to an industrialized
culture. We hold various reservations about how you accomplished this.
However, when you return to your Co-ordinator of Galactic Colonization,
please inform him that we are anxious to receive his ambassadors. The
term is _ambassadors_ and we will expect to meet on a basis of equality.
Surely in all Earth's millennia of social evolution man has worked out
something better than either of your teams have built here. We should
like to be instructed."

Dick Hawkins said stiffly, "We can instruct you on Earth's present
socio-economic system."

"I am afraid we no longer trust you, Richard Hawkins. Send
others--uncorrupted by power, privilege or great wealth."

       *       *       *       *       *

When they had gone and the sound of their departing spacecraft had
faded, Amschel Mayer snapped, "We might as well get underway. And cheer
up, confound it, we have lots of time to contrive a reasonable report
for the Co-ordinator."

Jerry Kennedy managed a thin grin, almost reminiscent of the younger
Kennedy of the first years on Genoa. "Say," he said, "I wonder if we'll
be granted a good long vacation before being sent on another
assignment."


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Astounding Science Fiction_ August
