great geological forces, have been again disintegrated to yield
different soils. Thus, then, all soils are directly or indirectly
derived from the crystalline rocks, those overlying them being formed
immediately by their decomposition, while those found above the
sedimentary rocks may be traced back through them to the crystalline
rocks from which they were originally formed.

Such being the case, the composition of different soils must manifestly
depend on that of the crystalline rocks from which they have been
derived. Their number is by no means large, and they all consist of
mixtures in variable proportions of quartz, felspar, mica, hornblende,
augite, and zeolites. With the exception of quartz and augite, these
names are, however, representatives of different classes of minerals.
There are, for instance, several different minerals commonly classified
under the name of felspar, which have been distinguished by
mineralogists by the names of orthoclase, albite, oligoclase, and
labradorite; and there are at least two sorts of mica, two of
hornblende, and many varieties of zeolites.

Quartz consists of pure silica, and when in large masses is one of the
most indestructible rocks. It occurs, however, intermixed with other
minerals in small crystals, or irregular fragments, and forms the entire
mass of pure sand.

The four kinds of felspar which have been already named are compounds of
silica with alumina, and another base which is either potash, soda, or
lime. Their composition is as follows, two examples of each being
given--

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  |  Orthoclase. |    Albite.  | Oligoclase. | Labradorite. |
------------------|--------------|-------------|-------------|--------------|
Silica            |  65.72| 65.00| 67.99| 68.23| 62.70| 63.51| 54.66|  54.67|
Alumina           |  18.57| 18.64| 19.61| 18.30| 23.80| 23.09| 27.87|  27.89|
Peroxide of iron  | traces|  0.83|  0.70|  1.01|  0.62|   -- |  --  |   0.31|
Oxide of manganese| traces|  0.13|  --  |   -- |   -- |   -- |  --  |    -- |
Lime              |   0.34|  1.23|  0.66|  1.26|  4.60|  2.44| 12.01|  10.60|
Magnesia          |   0.10|  1.03|  --  |  0.51|  0.02|  0.77|  --  |   0.18|
Potash            |  14.02|  9.12|  --  |  2.53|  1.05|  2.19|  --  |   0.49|
Soda              |   1.25|  3.49| 11.12|  7.99|  8.00|  9.37|  5.46|   5.05|
----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
                  | 100.00| 99.47|100.08| 99.83|100.79|101.37|100.00| 99.19 |
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

It is obvious that soils produced by the disintegration of these
minerals must differ materially in quality. Those yielded by orthoclase
must generally abound in potash, while albite and labradorite,
containing little or none of that element, must produce soils in which
it is deficient. The quality of the soil they yield is not however
entirely dependent on the nature of the particular felspar which yields
it, but is also intimately connected with the extent to which the
decomposition has advanced. It is observed that different felspars
undergo decomposition with different degrees of rapidity but after a
certain time they all begin to lose their peculiar lustre, acquire a
dull and earthy appearance, and at length fall into a more or less white
and soft powder. During this change water is absorbed, and, by the
decomposing action of the air, the alkaline silicate is gradually
rendered soluble, and at length entirely washed away, leaving a
substance which, when mixed with water, becomes plastic, and has all the
characters of common clay. The nature of this change will be best seen
by the following analysis of the clay produced during this composition,
which is employed in the manufacture of porcelain under the name of
kaolin, or china clay--

     Silica             46.80
     Alumina            36.83
     Peroxide of iron    3.11
     Carbonate of lime   0.55
     Potash              0.27
     Water              12.44
                         ----
                       100.00

In this instance the decomposition of the felspar had reached its limit,
a mere trace of potash being left, but if taken at different stages of
the process, variable proportions of that alkali are met with. This
decomposition of felspar is the source of the great deposits of clay
which are so abundantly distributed over the globe, and it takes place
with nearly equal rapidity with potash and soda felspar. It is rarely
complete, and the soils produced from it frequently contain a
considerable proportion of the undecomposed mineral, which continues for
a long period to yield a supply of alkalies to the plants which grow on
them.

Mica is a very widely distributed mineral, and two varieties of it are
distinguished by mineralogists, one of which is characterised by the
large quantity of magnesia it contains. Different specimens are found to
vary very greatly in composition, but the following analyses may
represent their most usual composition:

                                 MICA.
                           |----------------|
                           Potash.  Magnesia.
     Silica                46.36    42.65
     Alumina               36.80    12.96
     Peroxide of iron       4.53      ---
     Protoxide of iron       ---     7.11
     Oxide of manganese     0.02     1.06
     Magnesia                ---    25.75
     Potash                 9.22     6.03
     Hydrofluoric acid      0.70     0.62
     Water                  1.84     3.17
                            ----     ----
                           99.47    99.35

Mica undergoes decomposition with extreme slowness, as is at once
illustrated by the fact that its shining scales may frequently be met
with entirely unchanged in the soil. Its persistence is dependent on the
small quantity of alkaline constituents which it contains; and for this
reason it is observed that the magnesian micas undergo decomposition
less rapidly than those containing the larger quantity of potash.
Eventually, however, both varieties become converted into clay, their
magnesia and potash passing gradually into soluble forms.

Hornblende and augite are two widely distributed minerals, which are so
similar in composition and properties that they may be considered
together. Of the former two varieties, basaltic and common have been
distinguished, and their composition is given below:--

                      Hornblende.
                  |----------------|
                  Common.  Basaltic.    Augite.

Silica             41.50     42.24      50.12
Alumina            15.75     13.92       4.20
Protoxide of iron   7.75     14.59      11.60
Oxide of manganese  0.25      0.33        --
Lime               14.09     12.24      20.55
Magnesia           19.40     13.74      13.70
Water               0.50       --         --
                    ----      ----       ----
                   99.24     97.05      99.67

In these minerals alkalies are entirely absent, and their decomposition
is due to the presence of protoxide of iron, which readily absorbs
oxygen from the air, when the magnesia is separated and a ferruginous
clay left.

The minerals just referred to, constitute the great bulk of the mountain
masses, but they are associated with many others which take part in the
formation of the soil. Of these the most important are the zeolites
which do not occur in large masses but are disseminated through the
other rocks in small quantity. They form a large class of minerals of
which Thomsonite and natrolite may be selected as examples--

        Thomsonite.  Natrolite.

Silica     38.73       48.68
Alumina    30.84       26.36
Lime       13.43         --
Potash      0.54        0.23
Soda        3.85       16.00
Water      13.09        9.55
            ----        ----
          100.48      100.83

They are chiefly characterized by containing their silica in a soluble
state, and hence may yield that substance to the plants in a condition
particularly favourable for absorption.

It is obvious from what has been stated that all these minerals are
capable, by their decomposition, of yielding soft porous masses having
the physical properties of soils, but most of them would be devoid of
many essential ingredients, while not one of them would yield either
phosphoric acid, sulphuric acid, or chlorine. It has, however, been
recently ascertained that certain of these minerals, or at least the
rocks formed from them, contain minute, but distinctly appreciable
traces of phosphoric acid, although in too small quantity to be detected
by ordinary analysis; and small quantities of chlorine and sulphuric
acid may also in most instances be found.

Still it will be observed that most of these minerals would yield a soil
containing only two or three of those substances, which, as we have
already learned, are essential to the plant. Thus, potash felspar, while
it would give abundance of potash, would be but an inefficient source
of lime and magnesia; and labradorite, which contains abundance of lime,
is altogether deficient in magnesia and potash.

Nature has, however, provided against this difficulty, for she has so
arranged it that these minerals rarely occur alone, the rocks which form
our great mountain masses being composed of intimate mixtures of two or
more of them, and that in such a manner that the deficiencies of the one
compensate those of the other. We shall shortly mention the composition
of these rocks.

Granite is a mixture of quartz, felspar, and mica in variable
proportions, and the quality of the soil it yields depends on whether
the variety of felspar present be orthoclase or albite. When the former
is the constituent, granite yields soils of tolerable fertility,
provided their climatic conditions be favourable; but it frequently
occurs in high and exposed situations which are unfavourable to the
growth of plants. Gneiss is a similar mixture, but characterised by the
predominance of mica, and by its banded structure. Owing to the small
quantity of felspar which it contains, and the abundance of the
difficulty decomposable mica, the soils formed by its disintegration are
generally inferior. Mica slate is also a mixture of quartz, felspar, and
mica, but consisting almost entirely of the latter ingredient, and
consequently presenting an extreme infertility. The position of the
granite, gneiss, and mica slate soils in this country is such that very
few of them are of much value; but in warm climates they not
unfrequently produce abundant crops of grain. Syenite is a rock similar
in composition to granite, but having the mica replaced by hornblende,
which by its decomposition yields supplies of lime and magnesia more
readily than they can be obtained from the less easily disintegrated
mica. For this reason soils produced from the syenitic rocks are
frequently possessed of considerable fertility.

The series of rocks of which greenstone and trap are types, and which
are very widely distributed, differ greatly in composition from those
already mentioned. They are divisible into two great classes, which have
received the names of diorite and dolerite, the former a mixture of
albite and hornblende, the latter of augite and labradorite, sometimes
with considerable quantities of a sort of oligoclase containing both
soda and lime, and of different kinds of zeolitic minerals. Generally
speaking, the soils produced from diorite are superior to those from
dolerite. The albite which the former contains undergoes a rapid
decomposition, and yields abundance of soda along with some potash,
which is seldom altogether wanting, while the hornblende supplies both
lime and magnesia. Dolerite, when composed entirely of augite and
labradorite, produces rather inferior soils; but when it contains
oligoclase and zeolites, and comes under the head of basalt, its
disintegration is the source of soils remarkable for their fertility;
for these latter substances undergoing rapid decomposition furnish the
plants with abundant supplies of alkalies and lime, while the more
slowly decomposing hornblende affords the necessary quantity of
magnesia. In addition to these, the basaltic rocks are found to contain
appreciable quantities of phosphoric acid, so that they are in a
condition to yield to the plant almost all its necessary constituents.

The different rocks now mentioned, with a few others of less general
distribution, constitute the whole of our great mountain masses; and
while their general composition is such as has been stated, they
frequently contain disseminated through them quantities of other
minerals which, though in trifling quantity, nevertheless add their
quota of valuable constituents to the soils. Moreover, the exact
composition of the minerals of which the great masses of rocks are
composed is liable to some variety. Those which we have taken as
illustrations have been selected as typical of the minerals; but it is
not uncommon to find albite containing 2 or 3 per cent of potash,
labradorite with a considerable proportion of soda, and zeolitic
minerals containing several per cent of potash, the presence of which
must of course considerably modify the properties of the soils produced
from them. They are also greatly affected by the mechanical influences
to which the rocks are exposed; and being situated for the most part in
elevated positions, they are no sooner disintegrated than they are
washed down by the rains. A granite, for instance, as the result of
disintegration, has its felspar reduced to an impalpable powder, while
its quartz and mica remain, the former entirely, the latter in great
part, in the crystalline grains which existed originally in the granite.
If such a disintegrated granite remains on the spot, it is easy to see
what its composition must be; but if exposed to the action of running
water, by which it is washed away from its original site, a process of
separation takes place, the heavy grains of quartz are first deposited,
then the lighter mica, and lastly the felspar. Thus there may be
produced from the same granite, soils of very different nature and
composition, from a pure and barren sand to a rich clay formed entirely
of felspathic debris.

The sedimentary or stratified rocks are formed of particles carried down
by water and deposited at the bottom of the primeval seas from which
they have been upheaved in the course of geological changes. The
process of their formation may be watched at the present day at the
mouths of all great rivers, where a delta composed of the suspended
matters carried down by the waters is slowly formed. The nature of these
rocks must therefore depend entirely on that of the country through
which the river flows. If its course runs through a country in which
lime is abundant, calcareous rocks will be deposited, and if it passes
through districts of different geological characters the deposit must
necessarily consist of a mixture of the disintegrated particles of the
different rocks the river has encountered. For this reason it is
impossible to enter upon a detailed account of their composition. It is
to be observed, however, that the particles of which they are composed,
though originally derived from the crystalline rocks, have generally
undergone a complex series of changes, geology teaching that, after
deposition, they may in their turn undergo disintegration and be carried
away by water, to be again deposited. Their composition must therefore
vary not merely according to the nature of the rock from which they have
been formed, but also according to the extent to which the decomposition
has gone, and the successive changes to which they have been exposed.
They may be reduced to the three great classes of clays, including the
different kinds of clay slates, shales, etc., sandstone and limestone.
It must be added also, that many of them contain carbonaceous matters
produced by the decomposition of early races of plants and animals, and
that mixtures of two or more of the different classes are frequent.

The purest clays are produced by the decomposition of felspar, but
almost all the crystalline rocks may produce them by the removal of
their alkalies, iron, lime, etc. Where circumstances have been
favourable, the whole of these substances are removed, and the clay
which remains consists almost entirely of silica and alumina, and yields
a soil which is almost barren, not merely on account of the deficiency
of many of the necessary elements of plants, but because it is so stiff
and impenetrable that the roots find their way into it with difficulty.
It rarely happens, however, that decomposition has advanced so far as to
remove the whole of the alkalies, which is exemplified by the following
analyses of the fire clay of the coal formation, and of transition clay
slate:--

                  Transition   Fire Clay.
                  Clay Slate.

Silica              60.03        54.77
Alumina             14.91        28.61
Peroxide of iron     8.94         4.92
Lime                 2.08         0.58
Magnesia             4.22         1.14
Potash               3.87         1.00
Soda                  --          0.24
Carbonic acid }      5.67         8.24
Water         }
                     ----         ----
                    99.72        99.50

The sandstones are derived from the siliceous particles of granite and
other rocks, and consist in many cases of nearly pure silica, in which
case their disintegration produces a barren sand, but they more
frequently contain an admixture of clay and micaceous scales, which
sometimes form a by no means inconsiderable portion of them. Such
sandstones yield soils of better quality, but they are always light and
poor. Where they occur interstratified with clays, still better soils
are produced, the mutual admixture of the disintegrated rocks affording
a substance of intermediate properties, in which the heaviness of the
clay is tempered by the lightness of the sandstone.

Limestone is one of the most widely distributed of the stratified rocks,
and in different localities occurs of very different composition.
Limestones are divided into two classes, common and magnesian; the
former a nearly pure carbonate of lime, the latter a mixture of that
substance with carbonate of magnesia. But while these are the principal
constituents, it is not uncommon to find small quantities of phosphate
and sulphate of lime, which, however trifling their proportions, are not
unimportant in an agricultural point of view. The following analyses
will serve to illustrate the general composition of these two sorts of
limestone as they occur in the early geological formations:--

                          COMMON.                     MAGNESIAN.
                 |-------------------------|   |----------------------|
                  Mid-Lothian.   Sutherland.   Sutherland.   Dumfries.

Silica                2.00          7.42           6.00        2.31
Peroxide of iron }    0.45          0.76           1.57        2.00
  and alumina    }
Carbonate of lime    93.61         84.11          50.21       58.81
Carbonate of }        1.62          7.45          41.22       36.41
  magnesia   }
Phosphate of lime     0.56          ...            ...         ...
Sulphate of lime      0.92          ...            ...         0.10
Organic matter        0.20          ...            ...         ...
Water                 0.50          ...            0.69        ...
                      ----          ----           ----        ----
                     99.86         99.74          99.69       99.63

These limestones are hard and possess to a greater or less extent a
crystalline texture. They are replaced in later geological periods by
others which are much softer, and often purer, of which the oolitic
limestones, so called from their resemblance to the roe of a fish, and
chalk are the most important. Other limestones are also known which
contain an admixture of clay. The soils produced by the disintegration
of limestone and chalk are generally light and porous, but when mixed
with clay, possess a very high degree of fertility, and this is
particularly the case with chalk, which yields some of the most valuable
of all soils. But it is true only of the common limestones, for
experience has shown that those which contain magnesia in large quantity
are often prejudicial to vegetation, and sometimes yield barren or
inferior soils.

Such are the general characters of the three great classes of stratified
rocks; any attempt to particularise the numerous varieties of each would
lead us far beyond the limits of the present work. It is necessary,
however, to remark, that in many instances one variety passes into the
other, or, more correctly speaking, sedimentary rocks occur, which are
mixtures of two or more of the three great classes. In fact, the name
given to each really expresses only the preponderating ingredient, and
many sandstones contain much clay, shales and clay slates abound in
lime, and limestones in sand or clay, so that it may sometimes be a
matter of some difficulty to decide to which class they belong. Such
mixtures usually produce better soils than either of their constituents
separately, and accordingly, in those geological formations in which
they occur, the soils are generally of excellent quality. The same
effect is produced where numerous thin beds of members of the different
classes are interstratified, the disintegrated portions being gradually
intermixed, and valuable soils formed.

The fertility of the soils formed from the stratified rocks is also
increased by the presence of organic remains which afford a supply of
phosphoric acid, and which are sometimes so abundant as to form a by no
means unimportant part of their mass. They do not occur in the oldest
sedimentary rocks, but as we ascend to the more recent geological
epochs, they increase in abundance, until, in the greensands and other
recent formations, whole beds of coprolites and other organic remains
