as the diameter of our Earth; that is, relatively to the size of
Jupiter, as are the dimensions of Australia in proportion to our globe.
The discussion of a larger number of observations leads us to see in it
a sort of continent in the making, a scoria recently ejected from the
mobile and still liquid and heated surface of the giant Jupiter. The
patch, however, oscillates perceptibly, and appears to be a floating
island.

We must add that this vast world, like the Sun, _does not rotate all in
one period_. Eight different currents can be perceived upon its surface.
The most rapid is that of the equatorial zone, which accomplishes its
revolution in 9 hours, 50 minutes, 29 seconds. A point situated on the
equator is therefore carried forward at a speed of 12,500 meters (7
miles) per second, and it is this giddy velocity of Jupiter that has
produced the flattening of the poles. From the equator to the poles, the
swiftness of the currents diminishes irregularly, and the difference
amounts to about five minutes between the movement of the equatorial
stream, and that of the northern and southern currents. But what is more
curious still is that the velocity of one and the same stream is subject
to certain fluctuations; thus, in the last quarter of a century, the
speed of the equatorial current has progressively diminished. In 1879,
the velocity was 9 hours, 49 minutes, 59 seconds, and now it is, as we
have already seen, 9 hours, 50 minutes, 29 seconds, which represents a
substantial reduction. The rotation of the red patch, at 25 degrees of
the southern latitude, is effected in 9 hours, 55 minutes, 40 seconds.

We are confronted with a strange and mysterious world. It is the world
of the future.

This giant gravitates in space accompanied by a suite of five
satellites. These are:

       Names.   Distance from surface of Jupiter.    Time of revolution.
                     Kilometers.     Miles.            Days.   Hours.
  5.                  200,000       124,000                      11
  1. Io               430,000       266,000              1       18
  2. Europa           682,000       422,840              3       13
  3. Ganymede       1,088,000       674,560              7        4
  4. Callisto       1,914,000     1,186,680             16       16

The four principal satellites of Jupiter were discovered at the same
time, on the same evenings (January 7 and 8, 1610), by the two
astronomers who were pointing their telescopes at Jupiter: Galileo in
Italy, and Simon Marius in Germany.

On September 9, 1892, Mr. Barnard, astronomer of the Lick Observatory,
California, discovered a new satellite, extremely minute, and very near
the enormous planet. It has so far received no name, and is known as the
fifth, although the four principal are numbered in the order of their
distances.

[Illustration: FIG. 46.--Jupiter and his four principal satellites.]

The four classical satellites are visible in the smallest instruments
(Fig. 46): the third is the most voluminous.

Such is the splendid system of the mighty Jupiter. Once, doubtless, this
fine planet illuminated the troop of worlds that derived their treasure
of vitality from him with his intrinsic light: to-day, however, these
moons in their turn shed upon the extinct central globe the pale soft
light which they receive from our solar focus, illuminating the brief
Jovian nights (which last less than five hours, on account of the
twilight) with their variable brilliancy.

At the distance of the first satellite, Jupiter exhibits a disk
_fourteen hundred times_ vaster than that of the Full Moon! What a
dazzling spectacle, what a fairy scene must the enormous star afford to
the inhabitants of that tiny world! And what a shabby figure must our
Earth and Moon present in the face of such a body, a real miniature of
the great solar system!

Our ancestors were well inspired when they attributed the sovereignty of
Olympus to this majestic planet. His brilliancy corresponds with his
real grandeur. His dominion in the midnight Heavens is unique. Here
again, as for Venus, Mars, and Mercury, astronomy has created the legend
of the fables of mythology.

Let us repeat in conclusion that our Earth becomes practically invisible
for the inhabitants of the other worlds beyond the distance of Jupiter.


SATURN

Turn back now for a moment to the plan of the Solar System.

We had to cross 775 million kilometers (480,000,000 miles) when we left
the Sun, in order to reach the immense orb of Jupiter, which courses in
space at 626 million kilometers (388,000,000 miles) from the terrestrial
orbit. From Jupiter we had to traverse a distance of 646 million
kilometers (400,000,000 miles) in order to reach the marvelous system of
Saturn, where our eyes and thoughts must next alight.

Son of Uranus and Vesta, Saturn was the God of Time and Fate. He is
generally represented as an aged man bearing a scythe. His mythological
character is only the expression of his celestial aspect, as we have
seen for the brilliant Jupiter, for the pale Venus, the ruddy Mars, and
the agile Mercury. The revolution of Saturn is the slowest of any among
the planets known to the ancients. It takes almost thirty years for its
accomplishment, and at that distance the Saturnian world, though it
still shines with the brilliancy of a star of the first magnitude,
exhibits to our eyes a pale and leaden hue. Here is, indeed, the god of
Time, with slow and almost funereal gait.

Poor Saturn won no favor with the poets and astrologers. He bore the
horrid reputation of being the inexhaustible source of misfortune and
evil fates,--whereof he is wholly innocent, troubling himself not at all
with our world nor its inhabitants.

This world travels in the vastness of the Heavens at a distance of 1,421
million kilometers (881,000,000 miles) from the Sun. Hence it is ten
times farther from the orb of day than the Earth, though still
illuminated and governed by the Sun-God. Its gigantic orbit is ten times
larger than our own.

Its revolution round the Sun is accomplished in 10,759 days, _i.e._, 29
years, 167 days, and as this strange planet rotates upon itself with
great rapidity in 10 hours, 15 minutes, its year comprises no less than
25,217 days. What a calendar! The Saturnians must needs have a
prodigious memory not to get hopelessly involved in this interminable
number of days. A curious world, where each year stands for almost
thirty of our own, and where the day is more than half as short again as
ours. But we shall presently find other and more extraordinary
differences on this planet.

In the first place it is nearly nine and a half times larger than our
world. It is a globe, not spherical, but spheroidal, and the flattening
of its poles, which is one-tenth, exceeds that of all the other planets,
even Jupiter. It follows that its equatorial diameter is 112,500
kilometers (69,750 miles), while its polar diameter measures only
110,000 kilometers (68,200).

In volume, Saturn is 719 times larger than the Earth, but its density is
only 128/1000 of our own; _i.e._, the materials of which it is composed
are much less heavy, so that it weighs only 92 times more than our
Earth. Its surface is 85 times vaster than that of the Earth, no
insignificant proportion.

[Illustration: FIG. 47.--Saturn.]

The dipping of Saturn's axis of rotation is much the same as our own.
Hence we conclude that the seasons of this planet are analogous to ours
in relative intensity. Only upon this far-off world each season lasts
for seven years. At the distance at which it gravitates in space, the
heat and light which it receives from the Sun are 90 times less active
than such as reach our selves; but it apparently possesses an atmosphere
of great density, which may be constituted so that the heat is
preserved, and the planet maintained in a calorific condition but little
inferior to our own.

In the telescope, the disk of Saturn exhibits large belts that recall
those of Jupiter, though they are broader and less accentuated (Fig.
47). There are doubtless zones of clouds or rapid currents circulating
in the atmosphere. Spots are also visible whose displacement assists in
calculating the diurnal motions of this globe.

The most extraordinary characteristic of this strange world is, however,
the existence of a vast _ring_, which is almost flat and very large, and
entirely envelops the body of the planet. It is suspended in the
Saturnian sky, like a gigantic triumphal arch, at a height of some
20,000 kilometers (12,400 miles) above the equator. This splendid arch
is circular, like an immense crown illuminated by the Sun. From here we
only see it obliquely, and it appears to us elliptical; a part of the
ring seems to pass in front of Saturn, and its shadow is visible on the
planet, while the opposite part passes behind.

This ring, which measures 284,000 kilometers (176,080 miles) in
diameter, and less than 100 kilometers (62 miles) in breadth, is divided
into three distinct zones: the exterior is less luminous than the
center, which is always brighter than the planet itself; the interior is
very dark, and spreads out like a dusky and faintly transparent veil,
through which Saturn can be distinguished.

What is the nature of these vast concentric circles that surround the
planet with a luminous halo? They are composed of an innumerable number
of particles, of a quantity of cosmic fragments, which are swept off in
a rapid revolution, and gravitate round the planet at variable speed and
distance. The nearer particles must accomplish their revolution in 5
hours, 50 minutes, and the most distant in about 12 hours, 5 minutes, to
prevent them from being merged in the surface of Saturn: their own
centrifugal force sustains them in space.

[Illustration: FIG. 48. Varying perspective of Saturn's Rings, as seen
from the Earth.]

With a good glass the effect of these rings is most striking, and one
can not refrain from emotion on contemplating this marvel, whereby one
of the brothers of our terrestrial country is crowned with a golden
diadem. Its aspects vary with its perspective relative to the Earth, as
may be seen from the subjoined figure (Fig. 48).

We must not quit the Saturnian province without mentioning the eight
satellites that form his splendid suite:

  Names.        Distance from the planet.      Time of revolution.
                Kilometers.       Miles.      Days.   Hours.    Minutes.
  1. Mimas         207,000       128,340                22         37
  2. Enceladus     257,600       159,712        1        8         53
  3. Tethys        328,800       203,856        1       21         18
  4. Dione         421,200       261,144        2       17         41
  5. Rhea          588,400       364,808        4       12         25
  6. Titan       1,364,000       845,680       15       22         41
  7. Hyperion    1,650,000     1,023,000       21        6         39
  8. Japhet      3,964,000     2,457,680       79        7         54

Here is a marvelous system, with, what is more, eight different kinds of
months for the inhabitants of Saturn; eight moons with constantly
varying phases juggling above the rings!

Now we shall cross at a bound the 1,400 million kilometers (868,000,000
miles) that separate us from the last station but one of the immense
solar system.


URANUS

On March 13, 1781, William Herschel, a Hanoverian astronomer who had
emigrated to England, having abandoned the study of music to devote
himself to the sublime science of the Heavens, was observing the vast
fields with their constellations of golden stars, when he perceived a
luminous point that appeared to him to exceed that of the other
celestial luminaries in diameter. He replaced the magnification of his
telescope by more powerful eye-pieces, and found that the apparent
diameter of the orb increased proportionately with the amplification of
the power, which does not happen in the case of stars at infinite
distance. His observations on the following evenings enabled him to note
the slow and imperceptible movement of this star upon the celestial
sphere, and left him in no further doubt: there was no star, but some
much nearer orb, in all probability a comet, for the great astronomer
dared not predict the discovery of a new planet. And it was thus, under
the name of cometary orb, that the seventh child of the Sun was
announced. The astronomers sought to determine the motions of the new
arrival, to discover for it an elliptical orbit such as most comets
have. But their efforts were vain, and after several months' study the
conclusion was reached that here was a new planet, throwing back the
limits of the solar system to a point far beyond that of the Saturnian
frontier, as admitted from antiquity.

This new world received the name of Uranus, father of Saturn, his
nearest neighbor in the solar empire. Uranus shines in the firmament as
a small star of sixth magnitude, invisible to the unaided eye for
normal sight, at a distance of 2,831,000,000 kilometers (1,755,000,000
miles) from the Sun. Smaller than Jupiter and Saturn, this planet is yet
larger than Mercury, Venus, Mars, and the Earth together, thus
presenting proportions that claim our respect and admiration.

His diameter may be taken at about 55,000 kilometers (34,200 miles),
that is, rather more than four times the breadth of the terrestrial
diameter. Sixty-nine times more voluminous than the Earth, and seventeen
times more extensive in surface, this new world is much less than our
own in density. The matter of which it is composed is nearly five times
lighter than that of our globe.

Spectral analysis shows that this distant planet is surrounded with an
atmosphere very different from that which we breathe, enclosing gases
that do not exist in ours.

The Uranian globe courses over the fields of infinity in a vast orbit
seventeen times larger than our own, and its revolution lasts 36,688
days, _i.e._, 84 years, 8 days. It travels slowly and sadly under the
pale and languishing rays of the Sun, which sends it nearly three
hundred times less of light and heat than we receive. At this distance
the solar disk would present a diameter seventeen times smaller than
that which we admire, and a surface three hundred times less vast. A
dull world indeed! And what an interminable year! The idle people who
are in the habit of being bored must find time even longer upon Uranus
than upon our little Earth, where the days pass so rapidly. And if
matters are arranged there as here, a babe of a year old, beginning to
babble in its nurse's arms, would already have lived as long as an old
man of eighty-four in this world.

But what most seriously complicates the Calendar of the Uranians is the
fact that the four moons which accompany the planet accomplish their
revolution in four different kinds of months, in two, four, eight, and
thirteen days, as is shown in the following table:

                Distance from the planet.      Time of revolution.
                 Kilometers.      Miles.      Days. Hours. Minutes.

  1. Ariel         196,000       121,520        2     12     29
  2. Umbriel       276,000       171,120        4      3     27
  3. Titania       450,000       279,000        8     16     56
  4. Oberon        600,000       372,000       13     11      7

The most curious fact is that these satellites do not rotate like those
of the other planets. While the moons of the Earth, Mars, Jupiter, and
Saturn accomplish their revolution from east to west, the satellites of
Uranus rotate in a plane almost perpendicular to the ecliptic, and it is
doubtless the same for the rotation of the planet.

If we had to quit the Earth, and fixate ourselves upon another world,
we should prefer Mars to Uranus, where everything must be so different
from terrestrial arrangements? But who knows? Perhaps, after all, this
planet might afford us some agreeable surprises. _Il ne faut jurer de
rien._


NEPTUNE

And here we reach the frontier of the Solar System, as actually known to
us. In landing on the world of Neptune, which circles through the
Heavens in eternal twilight at a distance of more than four milliard
kilometers (2,480,000,000 miles) from the common center of attraction of
the planetary orbs, we once again admire the prodigies of science.

Uranus was discovered with the telescope, Neptune by calculation. In
addition to the solar influence, the worlds exert a mutual attraction
upon each other that slightly deranges the harmony ordered by the Sun.
The stronger act upon the weaker, and the colossal Jupiter alone causes
many of the perturbations in our great solar family. Now during regular
observations of the position of Uranus in space, some inexplicable
irregularities were soon perceived. The astronomers having full faith in
the universality of the law of attraction, could not do otherwise than
attribute these irregularities to the influence of some unknown planet
situated even farther off. But at what distance?

A very simple proportion, known as Bode's law, has been observed, which
indicates approximately the relative distances of the planets from the
Sun. It is as follows: Starting from 0, write the number 3, and double
successively,

          0  3  6  12  24  48  96  192  384.

Then, add the number 4 to each of the preceding figures, which gives the
following series:

          4  7  10  16  28  52  100  196  388.

Now it is a very curious fact that if the distance between the Earth and
the Sun be represented by 10, the figure 4 represents the orbit of
Mercury, 7 that of Venus, 16 of Mars; the figure 28 stands for the
medium distance of the minor planets; the distances of Jupiter, Saturn,
and Uranus agree with 52, 100, and 196.

The immortal French mathematician Le Verrier, who pursued the solution
of the Uranian problem, supposed naturally that the disturbing planet
must be at the distance of 388, and made his calculations accordingly.
Its direction in the Heavens was indicated by the form of the
disturbances; the orbit of Uranus bulging, as it were, on the side of
the disturbing factor.

On August 31, 1846, Le Verrier announced the position of the
ultra-Uranian planet, and on September 23d following, a German
astronomer, Galle, at the Observatory of Berlin, who had just received
this intelligence, pointed his telescope toward the quarter of the
Heavens designated, and, in fact, attested the presence of the new orb.
Without quitting his study table, Le Verrier, by the sole use of
mathematics, had detected, and, as it were, touched at pen's point the
mysterious stranger.

Only, it is proved by observation and calculation that it is less remote
than was expected from the preceding law, for it gravitates at a
distance of 300, given that from the Earth to the Sun as 10.

This planet was called Neptune, god of the seas, son of Saturn, brother
of Jupiter. The name is well chosen, since the King of the Ocean lives
in darkness in the depths of the sea, and Le Verrier's orb is also
plunged in the semi-obscurity of the depths of the celestial element.
But it was primarily selected to do justice to an English astronomer,
Adams, who had simultaneously made the same calculations as Le Verrier,
and obtained the same results--without publishing them. His work
remained in the records of the Greenwich Observatory.

The English command the seas, and wherever they dip their finger into
the water and find it salt, they feel themselves "at home," and know
that "Neptune's trident is the scepter of the world," hence this
complimentary nomenclature.

Neptune is separated by a distance of four milliards, four hundred
million kilometers from the solar center.

At such a distance, thirty times greater than that which exists between
the Sun and our world, Neptune receives nine hundred times less light
and heat than ourselves; _i.e._, Spitzbergen and the polar regions of
our globe are furnaces compared with what must be the Neptunian
temperature. Absolutely invisible to the unaided eye, this world
presents in the telescope the aspect of a star of the eighth magnitude.
With powerful magnifications it is possible to measure its disk, which
appears to be slightly tinged with blue. Its diameter is four times
larger than our own, and measures about 48,000 kilometers (29,900
miles), its surface is sixteen times vaster than that of the Earth, and
to attain its volume we should have to put together fifty-five globes
similar to our own. Weight at its surface must be about the same as
here, but its medium density is only 1/3 that of the Earth.

It gravitates slowly, dragging itself along an orbit thirty times vaster
than that of our globe, and its revolution takes 164 years, 281 days,
_i.e._, 164 years, 9 months. A single year of Neptune thus covers
several generations of terrestrial life. Existence must, indeed, be
strange in that tortoise-footed world!

While in their rotation period, Mercury accomplishes 47 kilometers
(29-3/8 miles) per second, and the Earth 29-1/2 (18-1/8 miles), Neptune
rolls along his immense orbit at a rate of only 5-1/2 kilometers (about
3-1/4 miles) per second.

The vast distance that separates us prevents our distinguishing any
details of his surface, but spectral analysis reveals the presence of an
absorbent atmosphere in which are gases unknown to the air of our
planet, and of which the chemical composition resembles that of the
atmosphere of Uranus.

One satellite has been discovered for Neptune. It has a considerable
inclination, and rotates from east to west.

       *       *       *       *       *

And here we have reached the goal of our interplanetary journey. After
visiting the vast provinces of the solar republic, we feel yet greater
admiration and gratitude toward the luminary that governs, warms, and
illuminates the worlds of his system.

In conclusion, let us again insist that the Earth,--a splendid orb as
viewed from Mercury, Venus, and Mars,--begins to disappear from Jupiter,
where she becomes no more than a tiny spark oscillating from side to
side of the Sun, and occasionally passing in front of him as a small
black dot. From Saturn the visibility of our planet is even more
reduced. As to Uranus and Neptune, we are invisible there, at least to
eyes constructed like our own. We do not possess in the Universe the
importance with which we would endow ourselves.
