to do so, and to tune in instantly on new ones. That we wrecked most of
these new cities I now know, but of course at the time we were in the
dark as to how much damage we caused, since our viewplates naturally
went dead when we detonated our projectiles.




CHAPTER XV

The Counter-Attack


The news which caused me to change my plans was grave enough. As I have
explained, the American lines lay roughly to the east and the south of
the city in the mountains. My own Gang held the northern flank of the
east line. To the south of us was the Colorado Union, a force of 5,000
men and about 2,000 girls recruited from about fifteen Gangs. They were
a splendid organization, well disciplined and equipped. Their posts,
rather widely distributed, occupied the mountain tops and other points
of advantage to a distance of about a hundred and fifty miles to the
south. There the line turned east, and was held by the Gangs which had
come up from the south. Now, simultaneously with the reports from my
scouts that a large Han land force was working its way down on us from
the north, and threatening to outflank us, came word from Jim Hallwell,
Big Boss of the Colorado Union and the commander in chief of our army,
that another large Han force was to the southwest of our western flank.
And in addition, it seemed, most of the Han military forces at Lo-Tan
had been moved out of the city and advanced toward our lines before our
air-ball attack.

The situation would not have been in the least alarming if the Hans had
had no better arms to fight with than their disintegrator rays, which
naturally revealed the locations of their generators the second the
visible beams went into play, and their airships, which we had learned
how to bring down, first from the air, and now from the ground, through
ultrono-controlled projectiles.

But the Hans had learned their lesson from us by this time. Their
electrono-chemists had devised atomic projectiles, rocket-propelled,
very much like our own, which could be launched in a terrific barrage
without revealing the locations of their batteries, and they had
equipped their infantry with rocket guns not dissimilar to ours. This
division of their army had been expanded by general conscription. So far
as ordnance was concerned, we had little advantage over them; although
tactically we were still far superior, for our jumping belts enabled our
men and girls to scale otherwise inaccessible heights, conceal
themselves readily in the upper branches of the giant trees, and gave
them a general all around mobility, the enemy could not hope to equal.

We had the advantage too, in our ultronophones and scopes, in a field of
energy which the Hans could not penetrate, while we could cut in on
their electrono or (as I would have called it in the Twentieth Century)
radio broadcasts.

       *       *       *       *       *

Later reports showed that there were no less than 10,000 Hans in the
force to our north, which evidently was equipped with a portable power
broadcast, sufficient for communication purposes and the local operation
of small scoutships, painted a green which made them difficult to
distinguish against the mountain and forest backgrounds. These ships
just skimmed the surface of the terrain, hardly ever outlining
themselves against the sky. Moreover, the Han commanders wisely had
refrained from massing their forces. They had developed over a very wide
and deep front, in small units, well scattered, which were driving down
the parallel valleys and canyons like spearheads. Their communications
were working well too, for our scouts reported their advance as well
restrained, and maintaining a perfect front as between valley and
valley, with a secondary line of heavy batteries, moved by small
airships from peak to peak, following along the ridges somewhat behind
the valley forces.

Hallwell had determined to withdraw our southern wing, pivoting it back
to face the outflanking Han force on that side, which had already worked
its way well down in back of our line.

In the ultronophone council which we held at once, each Boss tuning in
on Hallwell's band, though remaining with his unit, Wilma and I pleaded
for a vigorous attack rather than a defensive maneuver. Our suggestion
was to divide the American forces into three divisions, with all the
swoopers forming a special reserve, and to advance with a rush on the
three Han forces behind a rolling barrage.

But the best we could do was to secure permission to make such an attack
with our Wyomings, if we wished, to serve as a diversion while the lines
were reforming. And two of the southern Gangs on the west flank, which
were eager to get at the enemy, received the same permission.

The rest of the army fumed at the caution of the council, but it spoke
well for their discipline that they did not take things in their own
hands, for in the eyes of those forest men who had been hounded for
centuries, the chance to spring at the throats of the Hans outweighed
all other considerations.

So, as the council signed off, Wilma and I turned to the eager faces
that surrounded us, and issued our orders.

       *       *       *       *       *

In a moment the air was filled with leaping figures as the men and girls
shot away over the tree tops and up the mountain sides in the deployment
movement.

A group of our engineers threw themselves headlong toward a cave across
the valley, where they had rigged out a powerful electrono plant
operating from atomic energy. And a few moments later the little
portable receiver, the Intelligence Boss used to pick up the enemy
messages, began to emit such ear-splitting squeals and howls that he
shut it off. Our heterodyne or "radio-scrambling" broadcast had gone
into operation, emitting impulses of constantly varying wave-length over
the full broadcast range and heterodyning the Han communications into
futility.

In a little while our scouts came leaping down the valley from the
north, and our air balls now were hovering above the Han lines,
operators at the control boards near-by painstakingly picking up the
pictures of the Han squads struggling down the valleys with their
comparatively clumsy weapons.

As fast as the air-ball scopes picked out these squads, their operators,
each of whom was in ultronophone communication with a girl long-gunner
at some spot in our line, would inform her of the location of the enemy
unit, and the latter, after a bit of mathematical calculation, would
send a rocket into the air which would come roaring down on, or very
near that unit, and wipe it out.

But for all of that, the number of the Han squads were too much for us.
And for every squad we destroyed, fifty advanced.

And though the lines were still several miles apart, in most places, and
in some cases with mountain ridges intervening, the Han fire control
began to sense the general location of our posts, and things became more
serious as their rockets too began to hiss down and explode here and
there in our lines, not infrequently killing or maiming one or more of
our girls.

The men, our bayonet-gunners, had not as yet suffered, for they were
well in advance of the girls, under strict orders to shoot no rockets
nor in any way reveal their positions; so the Han rockets were going
over their heads.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Hans in the valleys now were shooting diagonal barrages up the
slopes toward the ridges, where they suspected we would be most strongly
posted, thus making a cross-fire up the two sides of a ridge, while
their heavy batteries, somewhat in the rear, shot straight along the
tops of the ridges. But their valley forces were getting out of
alignment a bit by now, owing to our heterodyne operations.

I ordered our swoopers, of which we had five, to sweep along above these
ridges and destroy the Han batteries.

Up in the higher levels where they were located, the Hans had little
cover. A few of their small rep-ray ships rose to meet our swoopers, but
were battered down. One swooper they brought to earth with a
disintegrator ray beam, by creating a vacuum beneath it, but they did it
no serious damage, for its fall was a light one. Subsequently it did
tremendous damage, cleaning off an entire ridge.

Another swooper ran into a catastrophe that had one chance in a million
of occurring. It hit a heavy Han rocket nose to nose. Inertron sheathing
and all, it was blown into powder.

But the others accomplished their jobs excellently. Small, two-man
ships, streaking straight at the Hans at between 600 and 700 miles an
hour, they could not be hit except by sheer amazing luck, and they
showered their tiny but powerful bombs everywhere as they went.

At the same instant I ordered the girls to cease sharp-shooting, and lay
their barrages down in the valleys, with their long-guns set for maximum
automatic advance, and to feed the reservoirs as fast as possible, while
the bayonet-gunners leaped along close behind this barrage.

Then, with a Twentieth Century urge to see with my own eyes rather than
through a viewplate, and to take part in the action, I turned command
over to Wilma and leaped away, fifty feet a jump, up the valley, toward
the distant flashes and rolling thunder.




CHAPTER XVI

Victory


I had gone five miles, and had paused for a moment, half way up the
slope of the valley to get my bearings, when a figure came hurtling
through the air from behind, and landed lightly at my side. It was
Wilma.

"I put Bill Hearn in command and followed, Tony. I won't let you go into
that alone. If you die, I do, too. Now don't argue, dear. I'm
determined."

So together we leaped northward again toward the battle. And after a bit
we pulled up close behind the barrage.

Great, blinding flashes, like a continuous wall of gigantic fireworks,
receded up the valley ahead of us, sweeping ahead of it a seething,
tossing mass of debris that seemed composed of all nature, tons of
earth, rocks and trees. Ever and anon vast sections of the mountain
sides would loosen and slide into the valley.

And, leaping close behind this barrage, with a reckless skill and
courage that amazed me, our bayonet-gunners appeared in a continuous
series of flashing pictures, outlined in midleap against the wall of
fire.

I would not have believed it possible for such a barrage to pass over
any of the enemy and leave them unscathed. But it did. For the Hans,
operating small disintegrator beams from local or field broadcasts,
frantically bored deep, slanting holes in the earth as the fiery tides
of explosions rolled up the valleys toward them, and into these probably
half of their units were able to throw themselves and escape
destruction.

But dazed and staggering they came forth again only to meet death from
the terrible, ripping, slashing, cleaving weapons in the hands of our
leaping bayonet-gunners.

Thrust! Cut! Crunch! Slice! Thrust! Up and down with vicious, tireless,
flashing speed, swung the bayonets and ax-bladed butts of the American
gunners as they leaped and dodged, ever forward, toward new opponents.

Weakly and ineffectually the red-coated Han soldiery thrust at them with
spears, flailing with their short-swords and knives, or whipping about
their ray pistols. The forest men were too powerful, too fast in their
remorselessly efficient movement.

With a shout of unholy joy, I gripped a bayonet-gun from the hands of a
gunner whose leg had been whisked out of existence beneath him by a
pistol ray, and leaped forward into the fight, launching myself at a
red-coated officer who was just stepping out of a "worm hole."

Like a shriek of the Valkyrie, Wilma's battle cry rang in my ear as she,
too, shot herself like a rocket at a red-coated figure.

I thrust with every ounce of my strength. The Han officer, grinning
wickedly as he tried to raise the muzzle of his pistol, threw himself
backward as my bayonet ripped the air under his nose. But his grin
turned instantly to sickened surprise as the up-cleaving ax-blade on the
butt of my weapon caught him in the groin, half bisecting him.

And from the corner of my eye I saw Wilma bury her bayonet in her
opponent, screaming in ecstatic joy.

       *       *       *       *       *

And so, in a matter of seconds, we found ourselves in the front rank,
thrusting, cutting, dodging, leaping along behind that blinding and
deafening barrage in a veritable whirlwind of fury, until it seemed to
me that we were exulting in a consciousness of excelling even that tide
of destruction in our merciless efficiency.

At last we became aware, in but a vague sort of way at first, that no
more red-coats were rising up out of the ground to go down again before
our whirling, swinging weapons. Gradually we paused, looking about in
wonder. Then the barrage ceased, and the sudden absence of the deafening
roll, and the wall of light, in themselves, deafened and blinded us.

I leaped weakly toward the spot where hazily I spied Wilma, now drooping
and swaying on her feet, supported as she was by her jumping belt, and
caught her in my arms, just as she was sinking gently to the ground.

All around us the weary warriors, crimsoned now with the blood of the
enemy, were sinking to the ground in exhaustion. And as I too, sank
down, clutching in my arms the unconscious form of my warrior wife, I
began to hear, through my helmet phones, the exultant report of
headquarters.

Our attack had swept straight through the enemy's sector, completely
annihilating everything except a few hundred of his troops on either
flank. And these, in panic and terror, had scattered wildly in flight.
We had wiped out a force more than ten times our own number. The right
flank of the American army was saved. And already the Colorado Union,
from behind us, was leaping around in a great circling movement, closing
in on the Han force that was advancing from the ruins of Lo-Tan.

Far away, to the southwest, the southern Gangs, reinforced in the end
by the bulk of our left wing, had struck straight at the enveloping Han
force shattering it like a thunderbolt, and at present were busily
hunting down and destroying its scattered remnants.

But before the Colorado Union could complete the destruction of the
central division of the enemy, the despairing Hans saved them the
trouble. Company after company of them, knowing no escape was possible,
lined up in the forest glades and valleys, while their officers swept
them out of existence by the hundreds with their ray pistols, which they
then turned on themselves.

And so the fall of Lo-Tan was accomplished. Somewhere in the seething
activities of these few days, San-Lan, the "Heaven-Born," Emperor of the
Hans in America, perished, for he was heard of never again, and the
unified action of the Hans vanished with him, though it was several
years before one by one their remaining cities were destroyed and their
populations hunted down, thus completing the reclamation of America and
inaugurating the most glorious and noble era of scientific civilization
in the history of the American race.

       *       *       *       *       *

As I look back on those emotional and violent years from my present
vantage point of declining existence in an age of peace and good will
toward all mankind, they do seem savage and repellent.

Then there flashes into my memory the picture of Wilma (now long since
gone to her rest) as, screaming in an utter abandon of merciless fury,
she threw herself recklessly, exultantly into the thick of that wild,
relentless slaughter; and my mind can find nothing savage nor repellent
about her.

If I, product of the relatively peaceful Twentieth Century, was so
completely carried away by the fury of that war, intensified by
centuries of unspeakable cruelty on the part of the yellow men who were
mentally gods and morally beasts, shall I be shocked at the
"bloodthirstiness" of a mate who was, after all, but a normal girl of
that day, and who, girl as she was, never for a moment faltered in the
high courage with which she threw herself into that combat, responding
to the passionate urge for freedom in her blood that not five centuries
of inhuman persecution could subdue?

Had the Hans been raging tigers, or slimy, loathsome reptiles, would we
have spared them? And when in their centuries of degradation they had
destroyed the souls within themselves, were they in any way superior to
tigers or snakes? To have extended mercy would have been suicide.

In the years that followed, Wilma and I travelled nearly every nation on
the earth which had succeeded in throwing off the Han domination,
spurred on by our success in America, and I never knew her to show to
the men or women of any race anything but the utmost of sympathetic
courtesy and consideration, whether they were the noble brown-skinned
Caucasians of India, the sturdy Balkanites of Southern Europe, or the
simple, spiritual Blacks of Africa, today one of the leading races of
the world, although in the Twentieth Century we regarded them as
inferior. This charity and gentleness of hers did not fail even in our
contacts with the non-Han Mongolians of Japan and the coast provinces of
China.

But that monstrosity among the races of men which originated as a hybrid
somewhere in the dark fastnesses of interior Asia, and spread itself
like an inhuman yellow blight over the face of the globe--for that race,
like all of us, she felt nothing but horror and the irresistible urge to
extermination.

       *       *       *       *       *

Latterly, our historians and anthropologists find much support for the
theory that the Hans sprang from a genus of human-like creatures that
may have arrived on this earth with a small planet (or large meteor)
which is known to have crashed in interior Asia late in the Twentieth
Century, causing certain permanent changes in the earth's orbit and
climate.

Geological convulsions blocked this section off from the rest of the
world for many years. And it is a historical fact that Chinese
scientists, driving their explorations into it at a somewhat later
period, met the first wave of the on-coming Hans.

The theory is that these creatures (and certain queer skeletons have
been found in the "Asiatic Bowl") with a mental superdevelopment, but a
vacuum in place of that intangible something we call a soul, mated
forcibly with the Tibetans, thereby strengthening their physical
structure to almost the human normal, adapting themselves to earthly
speech and habits, and in some strange manner intensifying even further
their mental powers.

Or, to put it the other way around. These Tibetans, through the
injection of this unearthly blood, deteriorated slightly physically,
lost the "soul" parts of their nature entirely, and developed abnormally
efficient intellects.

However, through the centuries that followed, as the Hans spread over
the face of the earth, this unearthly strain in them not only became
more dilute, but lost its potency; and in the end, the poison of it
submerged the power of it, and earth's mankind came again into
possession of its inheritance.

How all this may be, I do not know. It is merely a hypothesis over which
the learned men of today quarrel.

       *       *       *       *       *

But I do know that there was something inhuman about these Hans. And I
had many months of intimate contact with them, and with their Emperor in
