if the entire country had sunk into semi-barbarism. No use
anticipating such problems now. Wait until fall came; then they'd
reconnoitre and find out. Wait until fall--

It was a wise decision, but one which ignored a single, important
fact. The Naturalists didn't wait until fall to conduct their
reconnaissance.

They came over the canyon that very night; a large group of them in a
large jetter.

And they dropped a large bomb....




11. Jesse Pringle--2039


They were after him. The whole world was in flames, and the buildings
were falling, the mighty were fallen, the Day of Judgment was at hand.

He ran through the flames, blindly. Blind Samson. Eyeless in Gaza,
treading at the mill. The mills of the gods grind slowly, but they
grind exceedingly small.

Small. They were all small, but that didn't matter. They had the guns
and they were hunting him down to his doom. Day of doom. Doomsday. The
great red dragon with seven heads and ten horns was abroad in the
land.

They had unleashed the dragon and his breath was a fire that seared,
and his tail was a thunder that toppled towers. The dragon was
searching him out for his sins; he would be captured and set to labor
in the mill.

But he would escape, he must escape! He was afraid of them, small as
they were, and great oaks from little acorns grow, it's the little
things that count, and he dare not go a-hunting for fear of little
men.

Jesse crouched against the dock, watching the grain-elevators burn.
The whole city was burning, Babylon the mighty, the whole world was
burning in God's final wrath of judgment.

Nobody believed in God any more, nobody read the Bible, and that's why
they didn't know these things. Jesse knew, because he was an old man
and he remembered how it had been when he was a little boy. A little
boy who learned of the Word of God and the Wrath of God.

He could see the reflection of the flames in the water, now, and the
reflection was shimmery and broken because of the black clusters
floating past. Large clusters and small clusters. There were bodies in
the water, the bodies of the slain.

Thunder boomed from the city behind him. Explosions. That's how it had
started, when the Naturalists began blowing up the buildings. And then
the Yardsticks had come with their weapons, hunting down the
Naturalists. Or had it been that way, really? It didn't matter, now.
That was in another country and besides, the wench was dead.

The wench _is_ dead. His wench, Jesse's wench. She wasn't so old. Only
seventy-two. But they killed her, they blew off the top of her head
and he could feel it when they did. It was as if something had
happened in _his_ head, and then he ran at them and screamed, and
there was great slaughter amongst the heathen, the forces of
unrighteousness.

And Jesse had fled, and smote evil in the name of the Lord, for he
perceived now that the time was at hand.

_How the mighty are fallen._

Jesse blinked at the water, wishing it would clear, wishing his
thoughts would clear. Sometimes for a moment he could remember back to
the way things _really_ were. When it was still a real world, with
real people in it. When he was just a little boy and everybody else
was big.

Strange. Now he was an old man, a big old man, and almost everybody
else was little.

He tried to think what it had been like, so long ago. It was too long.
All he could remember about being small was that he had been afraid.
Afraid of the bigger people.

And now he was big, and afraid of the smaller people.

Of course they weren't real. It was just part of the prophecy, they
were the locusts sent to consume and destroy. He kept telling himself
there was nothing to fear; the righteous need not fear when the day of
judgment is at hand.

Only somewhere inside of him was this little boy, crying, "Mama, Mama,
Mama!" And somewhere else was this old man, just staring down into the
water and waiting for them to find him.

Another explosion sounded.

This one was closer. They must be bombing the entire city. Or else it
was the dragon, lashing his tail.

Somebody ran past Jesse, carrying a torch. No, it wasn't a torch--his
hair was on fire. He jumped into the water, screaming, "They're
coming! They're coming!"

Jesse turned and blinked. They were coming, all right. He could see
them pouring out of the alleyway like rats. Rats with gleaming eyes,
gleaming claws.

Suddenly, his head cleared. He realized that he was going to die. He
had, perhaps, one minute of life left. One minute out of eighty years.
And he couldn't fool himself any longer. He was not delirious. Day of
judgment--that was nonsense. And there was no dragon, and these were
not rats. They were merely men. Puny little men who killed because
they were afraid.

Jesse was a big man, but he was afraid, too. Six feet three inches
tall he was, when he stood up straight as he did now, watching them
come--but he knew fear.

And he resolved that he must not take that fear with him into death.
He wanted to die with something better than that. Wasn't there
something he could find and cling to, perhaps some memory--?

A minute is so short, and eighty years is so long. Jesse stood there,
swaying, watching them draw nearer, watching them as they caught sight
of him and raised their weapons.

He scanned rapidly into the past. Into the past, before the time the
wench was dead, back to when you and I were young, Maggie, back still
earlier, and earlier, seeking the high point, the high school, that
was it, the high school, the highlight, the moment of triumph, the
game with Lincoln. Yes, that was it. He hadn't been ashamed of being
six feet three inches then, he'd been proud of it, proud as he raised
his arms and--

_Splashed down into the water as the bullets struck._

And that was the end of Jesse Pringle. Jesse Pringle, champion
basketball center of the Class of '79....




12. Littlejohn--2065


The helicopter landed on the roof, and the attendants wheeled it over
to one side. They propped the ladder up, and Littlejohn descended
slowly, panting.

They had a coasterchair waiting and he sank into it, grateful for the
rest. Hardy fellows, these attendants, but then they were almost three
feet tall. More stamina, that was the secret. Common stock, of course,
but they served a purpose. Somebody had to carry out orders.

When they wheeled the coasterchair into the elevator, Littlejohn
descended. The elevator halted on the first floor and he breathed a
sigh of relief. Great heights always made him faint and dizzy, and
even a short helicopter trip took its toll--the mere thought of
soaring two hundred feet above the ground was enough to paralyze him.

But this journey was vital. Thurmon was waiting for him.

Yes, Thurmon was waiting for him here in the council chamber. The
coasterchair rolled forward into the room and again Littlejohn felt a
twinge of apprehension. The room was vast--too big for comfort. It
must be all of fifty feet long, and over ten feet in height. How could
Thurmon stand it, working here?

But he had to endure it, Littlejohn reminded himself. He was head of
the council.

Thurmon was lying on the couch when Littlejohn rolled in, but he sat
up and smiled.

"I greet you," he said.

"I greet you," Littlejohn answered. "No, don't bother to stay seated.
Surely we don't need to be ceremonious."

Thurmon pricked up his ears at the sound of the unfamiliar word. He
wasn't the scholarly type, like Littlejohn. But he appreciated
Littlejohn's learning and knew he was important to the council. They
needed scholars these days, and antiquarians too. One has to look to
the past when rebuilding a world.

"You sent for me?" Littlejohn asked. The question was purely
rhetorical, but he wanted to break the silence. Thurmon looked
troubled as he replied.

"Yes. It is a matter of confidence between us."

"So be it. You may speak in trust."

Thurmon eyed the door. "Come nearer," he said.

Littlejohn pressed a lever and rolled up to the couchside. Thurmon's
eyes peered at him through the thick contact lenses. Littlejohn noted
the deep wrinkles around his mouth, but without surprise. After all,
Thurmon was an old man--he must be over thirty.

"I have been thinking," Thurmon said, abruptly. "We have failed."

"Failed?"

Thurmon nodded. "Need I explain? You have been close to the council
for many years. You have seen what we've attempted, ever since the
close of the Naturalist wars."

"A magnificent effort," Littlejohn answered politely. "In less than
thirty years an entire new world has risen from the ruins of the old.
Civilization has been restored, snatched from the very brink of a
barbarism that threatened to engulf us."

"Nonsense," Thurmon murmured.

"What?"

"Sheer nonsense, Littlejohn. You're talking like a pedant."

"But I _am_ a pedant." Littlejohn nodded. "And it's true. When the
Naturalists were exterminated, this nation and other nations were
literally destroyed. Worse than physical destruction was the threat of
mental and moral collapse. But the Yardstick councils arose to take
over. The concept of small government came into being and saved us. We
began to rebuild on a sensible scale, with local, limited control. The
little community arose--"

"Spare me the history lesson," said Thurmon, dryly. "We rebuilt, yes.
We survived. In a sense, perhaps, we even made certain advances. There
is no longer any economic rivalry, no social distinctions, no external
pressure. I think I can safely assume that the danger of future
warfare is forever banished. The balance of power is no longer a
factor. The balance of Nature has been partially restored. And only
one problem remains to plague mankind."

"What is that?"

"We face extinction," Thurmon said.

"But that's not true," Littlejohn interrupted. "Look at history and--"

"Look at us." Thurmon sighed. "You needn't bother with history. The
answer is written in our faces, in our own bodies. I've searched the
past very little, compared to your scholarship, but enough to know
that things were different in the old days. The Naturalists, whatever
else they might have been, were strong men. They walked freely in the
land, they lived lustily and long.

"Do you know what our average life-expectancy is today, Littlejohn? A
shade under forty years. And that only if one is fortunate enough to
lead a sheltered existence, as we do. In the mines, in the fields, in
the radioactive areas, they die before the age of thirty."

Littlejohn leaned forward. "Schuyler touches on just that point in his
_Psychology of Time_," he said, eagerly. "He posits the relationship
between size and duration. Time is relative, you know. Our lives,
short as they may be in terms of comparative chronology, nevertheless
have a subjective span equal to that of the Naturalists in their
heyday."

"Nonsense," Thurman said, again. "Did you think that is what concerns
me--whether or not we feel that our lives are long or short?"

"What then?"

"I'm talking about the basic elements essential to survival. I'm
talking about strength, stamina, endurance, the ability to function.
That's what we're losing, along with the normal span of years. The
world is soft and flabby. Yardstick children, they tell us, were
healthy at first. But _their_ children are weaker. And their
grandchildren, weaker still. The effect of the wars, the ravages of
radiation and malnutrition, have taken a terrible toll. The world is
soft and flabby today. People can't walk any more, let alone run. We
find it difficult to lift and bend and work--"

"But we won't have to worry about such matters for long," Littlejohn
hazarded. "Think of what's being done in robotics. Those recent
experiments seem to prove--"

"I know." Thurmon nodded. "We can create robots, no doubt. We have a
limited amount of raw materials to allocate to the project, and if we
can perfect automatons they'll function quite adequately. Virtually
indestructible, too, I understand. I imagine they'll still be able to
operate efficiently a hundred or more years from now--if only they
learn to oil and repair one another. Because by that time, the human
race will be gone."

"Come now, it isn't that serious--"

"Oh, but it is!" Thurmon raised himself again, with an effort. "Your
study of history should have taught you one thing, if nothing else.
The tempo is quickening. While it took mankind thousands of years to
move from the bow and arrow to the rifle, it took only a few hundred
to move from the rifle to the thermonuclear weapon. It took ages
before men mastered flight, and then in two generations they developed
satellites; in three, they reached the moon and Mars."

"But we're talking about _physical_ development."

"I know. And physically, the human race altered just as drastically in
an equally short span of time. As recently as the nineteenth century,
the incidence of disease was a thousandfold greater than it is now.
Life was short then. In the twentieth century disease lessened and
life-expectancy doubled, in certain areas. Height and weight increased
perceptibly with every passing decade. Then came Leffingwell and his
injections. Height, weight, life-expectancy have fallen perceptibly
every decade since then. The war merely hastened the process."

"You appear to have devoted a great deal of time to this question,"
Littlejohn observed.

"I have," answered the older man. "And it is not a question. It is a
fact. The one fact that confronts us all. If we proceed along our
present path, we face certain extinction in a very short time. The
strain is weakening constantly, the vitality is draining away. We
sought to defeat Nature--but the Naturalists were right, in their
way."

"And the solution?"

Thurmon was silent for a long moment. Then, "I have none," he said.

"You have consulted the medical authorities?"

"Naturally. And experiments have been made. Physical conditioning,
systems of exercise, experimentation in chemotherapy are still being
undertaken. There's no lack of volunteers, but a great lack of
results. No, the answer does not lie in that direction."

"But what else is there?"

"That is what I had hoped you might tell me," Thurmon said. "You are a
scholar. You know the past. You speak often of the lessons of
history--"

Littlejohn was nodding, but not in agreement. He was trying to
comprehend. For suddenly the conviction came to him clearly; Thurmon
was right. It was happening, had happened, right under their smug
noses. The world was weakening. It was slowing down, and the race is
only to the swift.

He cursed himself for his habit of thinking in platitudes and
quotations, but long years of study had unfitted him for less prosaic
phraseology. If he could only be practical.

_Practical._

"Thurmon," he said. "There is a way. A way so obvious, we've all
overlooked it--passed right over it."

"And that is--?"

"Stop the Leffingwell injections!"

"But--"

"I know what you'll say. There have been genetic mutations. Very true,
but such mutations can't be universal. A certain percentage of
offspring will be sound, capable of attaining full growth. And we
don't have the population-problem to cope with any more. There's room
for people again. So why not try it? Stop the injections and allow
babies to be born as they were before." Littlejohn hesitated before
adding a final word, but he knew he had to add it; he knew it now.
"Normally," he said.

Thurmon nodded. "So that is your answer."

"Yes. I--I think it will work."

"So do the biologists," Thurmon told him. "A generation of normal
infants, reared to maturity, would restore mankind to its former
stature, in every sense of the word. And now, knowing the lessons of
the past, we could prepare for the change to come. We could rebuild
the world for them to live in, rebuild it psychically as well as
physically. We'd plan to eliminate the rivalry between the large and
the small, the strong and the weak. It wouldn't be difficult because
there's plenty for all. There'd be no trouble as there was in the old
days. We've learned to be psychologically flexible."

Littlejohn smiled. "Then that _is_ the solution?" he asked.

"Yes. Eliminating the Leffingwell injections will give us a good
proportion of normal children again. _But where do we find the normal
women to bear them?_"

"Normal women?"

Thurmon sighed, then reached over and placed a scroll in the scanner.
"I have already gone into that question with research technicians," he
said. "And I have the figures here." He switched on the scanner and
began to read.

"The average nubile female, aged thirteen to twenty-one, is two feet,
ten inches high and weighs forty-eight pounds." Thurmon flicked the
switch again and peered up. "I don't think I'll bother with pelvic
measurements," he said. "You can already see that giving birth to a
six or seven-pound infant is a physical impossibility under the
circumstances. It cannot be done."

"But surely there must be _some_ larger females! Perhaps a system of
selective breeding, on a gradual basis--"

"You're talking in terms of generations. We haven't got that much
time." Thurmon shook his head. "No, we're stopped right here. We can't
get normal babies without normal women, and the only normal women are
those who began life as normal babies."

"Which comes first?" Littlejohn murmured. "The chicken or the egg?"

"What's that?"

"Nothing. Just an old saying. From history."

Thurmon frowned. "Apparently, then, that's all you can offer in your
professional capacity as an historian. Just some old sayings." He
sighed. "Too bad you don't know some old prayers. Because we need them
now."

He bowed his head, signifying the end of the interview.

Littlejohn rolled out of the room.

His 'copter took him back to his own dwelling, back across the
rooftops of New Chicagee. Ordinarily, Littlejohn avoided looking down.
He dreaded heights, and the immensity of the city itself was somehow
appalling. But now he gazed upon the capital and center of
civilization with a certain morbid affection.

New Chicagee had risen on the ashes of the old, after the war's end.
Use of thermo-nucs had been limited, fortunately, so radioactivity did
not linger, and the vast craters hollowed out by ordinary warheads had
been partially filled by rubble and debris. Artificial fill had done
the rest of the job, so that now New Chicagee was merely a flat
prairie as it must have been hundreds of years ago--a flat prairie on
which the city had been resurrected. There were almost fifty thousand
people here in the capital; the largest congregation of population on
the entire continent. They had built well and surely this time, built
for the security and certainty of centuries to come.

Littlejohn sighed. It was hard to accept the fact that they had been
wrong; that all this would end in nothingness. They had eliminated
war, eliminated disease, eliminated famine, eliminated social
inequality, injustice, disorders external and internal--and in so
doing, they had eliminated themselves.

The sun was setting in the west, and long shadows crept over the city
below. Yes, the sun was setting and the shadows were gathering, the
night was coming to claim its own. Darkness was falling, eternal
darkness.

It was quite dark by the time Littlejohn's 'copter landed on the
rooftop of his own dwelling; so dark, in fact, that for a moment he
didn't see the strange vehicle already standing there. Not until he
had settled into his coasterchair did he notice the presence of the
other 'copter, and then it was too late. Too late to do anything
except sit and stare as the gigantic shadow loomed out of the night,
silhouetted against the sky.

The shadow shambled forward, and Littlejohn gaped, gaped in terror at
the titanic figure. He opened his mouth to speak, but words did not
form; there were no words to form, for how does one address an
apparition?

Instead, it was the apparition which spoke.

"I have been waiting for you," it said.

"Y-yes--"

"I want to talk to you." The voice was deep, menacing.

Littlejohn shifted in his coasterchair. There was nowhere to go, no
escape. He gazed up at the shadow. Finally he summoned a response.
"Shall we go inside?" he asked.

The figure shook its head. "Where? Down into that dollhouse of yours?
It isn't big enough. I've already been there. What I have to say can
be said right here."

"W-who are you?"

The figure stepped forward, so that its face was illuminated by the
fluorescence streaming from the open door which led to the inclined
chairway descending to Littlejohn's dwelling.

Littlejohn could see the face, now--the gigantic, wrinkled face,
scarred and seared and seamed. It was a human face, but utterly alien
to the humanity Littlejohn knew. Faces such as this one had
disappeared from the earth a lifetime ago. At least, history had
taught him that. History had not prepared him for the actual living
presence of a--

"Naturalist!" Littlejohn gasped. "You're a Naturalist! Yes, that's
what you are!"

The apparition scowled.

"I am not a Naturalist. I am a man."

"But you can't be! The war--"

"I am very old. I lived through your war. I have lived through your
peace. Soon I shall die. But before I do, there is something else
which must be done."

"You've come here to kill me?"

"Perhaps." The looming figure moved closer and stared down. "No, don't
try to summon help. When your servants saw me, they fled. You're alone
now, Littlejohn."

"You know my name."

"Yes, I know your name. I know the names of everyone on the council.
Each of them has a visitor tonight."

"Then it is a plot, a conspiracy?"

"We have planned this very carefully, through the long years. It's all
we lived for, those few of us who survived the war."

"But the council wasn't responsible for the war! Most of us weren't
even alive, then. Believe me, we weren't to blame--"

"I know." The gigantic face creased in senile simulation of a smile.
