injury....

Again and again the swirling horror of my brain slowed, almost stopped.
My eyes almost opened into the painful light, and the deep interior
vibrating sensation swelled into overpowering violence. I sank again
into darkness. Over and over I struggled almost to the doors of
consciousness, only to be shoved back by the consciously controlled
exterior force.

At last the sickness passed, and my mind quieted. I struggled into
wakefulness. As I opened my eyes, the face of the old Jivro gaped with
its noseless, bulging eyes not a foot away, the thin, wide lips and
mouth hanging open like a trap, the ridges across the mouth like a fish,
white and horrible.

I retched at the repellent sight, and the mouth moved, the words came
out so strangely, like a mechanical voice:

"Tell me, earthman, how is the weapon with which you shot my men on the
roof made? What are the details of its construction, and the formula for
its explosive?"

I almost laughed.

"You are ridiculous, old insect! Such things are known only to
technicians in factories, not to mining men like myself."

Again the blinding light struck at me, the sickening shaking of the
vibrance welled through me. I sank and was raised again to
consciousness.

Still the same foolish old insect face, the same bulging ignorant eyes.
The words:

"Tell, then, how this Croen and the forces of Prince Genner may be
overcome? Speak, earthman."

The compulsion moved me, and I answered:

"There is no way you can overcome them, Jivro. You are doomed, and there
is no hope for your tyranny over the Schrees to continue. They have
tired of the Jivros, and you deserve what you are going to get."

Again the sickening application of force and again the exterior
compulsion to speak. I said:

"Your only chance to get back power is to get forces from your home in
space, wherever that may be. You cannot overcome these fighting men and
their weapons, which are as good as your weapons, for you Jivros have
relied for too long upon the Schrees and Shinros for your fighting, and
for your thinking too, by the questions you ask. Have you not done any
thinking in your life, that you ask me such silly questions?"

A change came over the old creature. I knew he was wounded, for I had
seen the glistening milky fluid pouring from the wound in his breast. He
leaned weakly against the table to which I was strapped, his eyes on
mine glazing over with death. The wide lips at the very bottom of the
flat face, moved:

"The Jivro Empire is ending, I think, earthman. We dug our own grave
when we relegated all unpleasant duties to our conquered races. For an
age the Jivro has been a creature shunning all work and effort, even
thinking. We were bound to lose our grip. I see now that I am really
foolish, and not a strong being of intellect. Our doom is written, and
the day of the writing was that day when we conquered and enslaved the
Schrees."

"Now you are talking sense, Old One. You see what is plain to all
others; at last it becomes clear to you. But you are dying, and it is
too late for wisdom to come to the Jivros. Once you set your feet on the
path to greatness; but when you did evil, your feet naturally turned to
the downward path of decadence. Evil is not a way of life, it is a way
of death."

The bulging eyes on mine flickered with a fierce inner fire for an
instant, then the head bent lower. For an instant he tottered there
beside me, then crashed to the floor with a sound like a bundle of dry
sticks.


I turned my head, saw that I was in the chamber of my first
interrogation, and the sound of feet about me was the Jivro "doctors,"
moving to carry away their ruler. I saw the sleek body of Carna on a
table but a dozen feet away. Three of the tall white-robed insects bent
over her, one moving a control in a great lamp device, another
scribbling on a pad, and the third was speaking. Evidently the Zoorph
was getting the third degree, too. I lay back weakly. I felt as if I had
been through a washing machine and some of my buttons left in the
wringer.

As I closed my eyes, a vast _boom_ crashed into my ears, the table
jumped beneath me, pieces of masonry fell bounding on the floor and I
raised my head, staring wildly. Evidently the prince and the Croen were
still bombing the place.

I tugged at the straps on my wrists and ankles. They gave a little. I
kept on tugging, turning my head as far as I could to see how the insect
men were taking their bombardment. They stood, near fifty of them, in a
group by the door. Evidently they had started to run out when the crash
came, but had stopped when it was evident the roof was going to remain
intact. If those things had any sense they would be in the deepest
sub-basement they could find, I figured. The Schrees must have been
carrying them as helpless parasites for too many centuries to realize
they could do without them, for them to be so inept.

Straining my neck, I watched the grotesque high-breasted white figures
about the doorway, they were tittering to each other in some tongue I
did not know, a strange sound like the rasping of corn husks under
squeaking wagon wheels. Suddenly the whole palace shook terribly, the
floor seemed to reel, an unbearable sound raged at my ears. I cringed
from the pain of the sound. When I opened my eyes, the whole mass of the
Jivro medicals was jammed in the doorway, struggling to get over each
other, and the squeaking and rasping increased into a bedlam of sound. I
laughed, a deep "ha ha," and from the neighboring table Carna cried:

"See what wonderful creatures are the tyrants when things are not going
their way. If I had known they were like that in war, I would have
killed them all myself long, long, ago. I would have poisoned them, and
when they asked me who did it, I would have said, _boo_ and they would
all have run away and hid!"

As the last of them got through the door, I gave my loosened straps one
mighty pull, and the heavy leather tore. I could hear it part in the
sudden silence. Again and again I strained, and at last the leather
parted entirely. My right hand was free. Feverishly I tore at the other
fastenings. There could be but little time left us before that bombing
struck dead center and brought the whole palace down. We had to get out.
I knew it quite as well as those fleeing insect men.

Free at last, I rolled off the table, landed on all fours, leaped to
Carna's side, and released the buckles of the straps. As she sat up, her
face level with mine, she pursed her lips, and I gave her a hearty
smack. As her arms went about my neck, I picked her up, raced through
the doorway, along the passage, down the ramps. I was weaponless, but I
had no longer any fear of the Jivros. I saw a group of them busy in a
big chamber as I passed, but I raced on, spinning around the next
corner, down the ramps and on ... on ... until I felt the coolness of
fresh air ahead, ran out beneath the stars again, and along the shadowed
street.

Putting my Zoorph back on her feet, we raced toward that breach in the
wall. Over our heads the great blasting explosions went on, and I saw
but three of the circling disks left to the defense of the city.

Outside the city wall we stopped to catch our breath, leaning against
the wall in the shadow.

Carna said, musingly: "It is all over for the ancient Empire of the
Jivros, if help does not come for them tonight. For, now that they are
seen to be so helpless without their slaves and their fighting men, the
news will spread. Planet after planet will rise against them. This is
their finish!"

"They expected to conquer earth, Carna. They could never have done it.
For a little while, perhaps, but not for long."

"They might have! They are like ants; they have a highly developed
pattern of activity. But when that pattern is disrupted, they are lost.
They do not think--they remember."


"We've got to make contact with the queen and with Genner and the Croen.
We will be left out of things." I was wondering what Carna's future
plans were.

"You are interested in the beautiful sister of the Prince?" asked Carna.

"You are interested in the so handsome Prince?" I answered in the same
tone of voice.

"Of course, what woman would not be! But I am more interested in you,
for I fell in love with you. But I can fall out again, and maybe--who
knows...." she laughed.

"What's more to the point, Carna, is she interested in me?"

"I could tell you," said Carna, her eyes mysterious on my own, luminous
and huge in the darkness.

"Well, perhaps you had better tell me, then."

"Why? I love you!"

"You mean she _is_ interested in me!"

"Very much, and she is a very smart woman who has ways of getting what
she wants. I am very much afraid she will take you with her to space
when they go, and leave poor Carna in her ruined city, with no one but
the wild beasts and the dead bodies. This will be the end of this
place."

"You are wrong!" I smiled, thinking the girl was flattering me.

"No, not wrong, dear earthman. I am very much afraid of the future, for
I am to lose you, but I have a way of avoiding that."

"And what is that way?"

"You will find out when the time comes, and you may like it very much!"

"Let's get away from this wall where we can see what's going on...."

We plodded across the level, grassy valley floor, walking backward some
of the time, watching the great circling ships above the city's center,
and the lancing blue paths of their rays stabbing at some darting
adversary high above them.

Then from the western sky came a series of round low shapes, speeding so
rapidly the eye could hardly distinguish them from the darkly glowing
horizon. After their passage, in a close series, came the air-scream of
falling missiles, high-pitched, then came a terrific cannonading of
explosions. Fountains of fire sprang up in exact sequence, one after the
other. The ground shook and shook underfoot, each shock seeming greater,
to add its strength to the one preceding it. I knew that this was for
the Jivros the end of their plans on earth.

Simultaneous with the arrow-swift flight, two great blazing lances of
blue fire shot downward from the ships far overhead, transfixed the
circling spheres one after the other. They tilted, plunged slowly,
faster and faster--ended in great splashes of fire and sound somewhere
in the city below.

I mopped my face. The night was hot, and relief flooded me.

"We got out of there just in time, Miss Mystic!"

She nodded, her white smile in the night a beautiful thing.

"What is this Miss Mystic word you use?"

"It means Zoorph, Carna. It is U.S.A. speech."

"U.S.A. speech," she parroted. "Some day I will talk U.S.A. speech, too,
like you!"

"I hope so. This tongue of yours gives me cramps in the jaws."

We plodded on across the grass, heading for the cliff ledge where we had
met. I knew no where else to go.

Quite suddenly came a soft sussuration overhead, a light-beam lanced
down, pinning us there. I tossed Carna aside, rolled myself out of the
path of light. But mercilessly the light beam spread, until we were
again within the circle of illumination.

But no blue death ray followed. The dark shape settled to the earth
beside us, and the door in the side opened.

I sprang to my feet in glad surprise to see Holaf in the round doorway,
motioning us to enter. He cried:

"Come, the day of the Jivro has ended, there is work now for men to do!"


Carna laughed happily, ran to the doorway, and as Holaf caught her waist
and swung her up, she kissed him on the cheek, still laughing in
abandoned joy to know that finally the centuries-long nightmare fastened
on her people was ended. I followed more sedately, wondering what now? I
thought of poor cross-eyed Jake Barto, and of the three fortune-hunters
who had gone the same path--and as I shook Holaf's hand, questioned the
ecstatic confidence of release upon his face.

"Suppose the Empire sends ships here, will they not destroy all you
have gained? Why do you feel so sure their power is broken? They were
but few here?"

"They will not send ships, for no messenger got away. What do you think
the ships of the prince have been doing? This is the beginning of their
end!"

"How did you get out of the palace? The last I saw you, you were
storming the place, gun in hand, and cheering...."

"When the bombs began to burst against the very roof, I got out. I
killed a few Jivros first, though! It has been a good time; the best of
my life!"

"Were you picked up as you picked us up?"

"Of course. Look there who it is that has done us the honor...."

My eyes followed his finger pointing through the far arched doorway to
the control room. At the bank of levers and dials, her face intent upon
the scene through the circular plastic dome, sat Wananda. Inadvertently
my eyes went to Carna's face; she nodded once, vigorously. I knew she
meant:

"See, I have told you the truth. She knew where you were, her heart told
her, who else would descend to pick you up while the fighting was still
going on?"

I went to her, and stood for a moment beside her, watching her swift
hands, the light on her midnight hair, the delicate superb chiseling of
her forehead and nose, the exquisite aura of womanhood about her--she
was every inch a queen.

She turned, startled to find me there, then smiled, and a warm flush
spread slowly from her neck upward to her temples. She knew that I knew!
She laughed a little quiet sound to herself.

"That is why the Zoorphs are hated, earthman. One can never keep a
secret!"

"You must have the powers of Carna yourself, to know that she told me."
I answered.

"I have studied their methods. One comes by such talents hereditarily.
The Zoorph is only an organization which concentrates on taking in and
teaching such gifted children. I, as a princess, had a tutor of their
sect. I know that you love her, too, you know."

"And not yourself. But she confesses that I love her only because of her
skill at hypnosis, or something of the kind. To me that seems unfair,
but I cannot help it. I love her, though I am drawn to you. But why
should we concern ourselves with these matters? You will go back to
space with your ships to carry rebellion to the other Jivro strongholds.
I will be left behind to mourn you both."

"Why should you be left behind? Do you find the Schree or the Zerv
company so repellent?"

"Not at all. I should desire nothing more than to see the worlds of
other suns, other places in the far paths of space. Yet...."

"Yet what? Have you a wife here, children?"

"No, not that. But I have possessions it cost me many years of effort to
acquire."

Carna came silently into the room, stood on the other side of the queen.
For an instant Wananda closed her eyes, and some subtle sense of my own
told me they were talking with each other in a way I could not hear.
Wananda opened her eyes, turned to me, smiling whimsically.

"Carna suggests that she will give your love to me in return for a
certain favor."

"Do you want my love, Wananda?" I asked softly.

She did not stop smiling secretly to some sound she heard and I did
not.

"You see, earthman, our race has never developed the morals and
inhibitions which your people find so necessary. We are polygamous, and
not apt to be jealous. She offers to give you to me as a royal husband
in return for the privilege of being your slave, your housekeeper, your
body-servant as it were. What do you say?"


I was stunned. So openly to be bargained over; frankly to be invited to
marriage, to two women at the same time! Weakly I countered:

"Your people would object to an alien consort!"

"The word is strange to me. Among us you would be a ruler if you married
me. Among us all men have several wives. But women have but one
husband."

"You are offering me the rule of the Schrees?"

"Yes, and if our coming war with the Jivro creatures turns out well, it
will mean not one planet, but many. I cannot say how many, as some of
those never allied with the Schrees before will naturally gravitate to
us in gratitude for our releasing them from the Jivros. I am agreeable
mainly because I know that we need your earth science, your different
culture--as wedded to our own science we would be invincible. We will
need everything finally to conquer the ancient ingrown tyranny of the
Jivros. I am not offering you exactly any bed of roses. Besides, I like
and trust Carna. I can understand why she loves you, and why she
bargains for any part of you. She knows I have but to exert my own
wisdom of Zoorph to release you from her hold on you."

"I see. Let me get this straight. You love me; it is agreeable to you
that I continue to love Carna; but I will love you too. Two wives who
love me, a kingdom, and the chance of knocking over a whole empire of
insects who have parasitized human races in space and meant to do it
here. There is no way I can refuse!"

Carna laughed.

"With two of us working your mind for you, how could you refuse?"

Wananda frowned at Carna's frankness.

"It is stated in the nineteenth law of Zoorph code that no victim is
ever to be told of his enslavement openly, Carna. Why do you break the
law?"

"I don't know, Wananda Highest. I think it is because I want to be fair
to him, and give him a chance to do his own thinking, too."

I grinned.

"Our race has long been familiar with your so-called magic, dear ones.
We call it hypnotism, and if you think I cannot resist it, remember that
I shot the Old One with his eyes upon me."

Wananda suddenly set the big lever she held into a notch, turned to me,
her face full of a charming surprise which I yet knew was an act.

"So you think you can resist your wives' wills, do you, earthman? Come,
Carna, let us humble his boasts once and, for all!"

Their two lovely faces pressed cheek to cheek, the two pair of eyes
bored into my own, and four quick slim hands gestured about my chin. A
dizzy enervation swam into me as though I were bleeding to death, as
though honey and whiskey were being poured down my throat, as though I
had fallen suddenly onto a pink cloud of spun candy.
