They'd get a black mark, but after a while they'd get another job too.
Anyway, living on Earth couldn't be any worse for them than living here.

Half of them wanted to stay here permanently. The other half wanted to
leave right now. That was what the committee was going to decide today.
He'd done some checking around, and it looked like they were going to
vote to go. He'd also checked with them who wanted to stay permanently,
and it looked like, in a showdown, they'd come along. They were proud to
be men, too, men and women. Everybody would join. He'd been pretty sure
of it.

Even the dissenters who'd moved away across the ridge. That was the
trouble with them. There hadn't been enough hardship to bind the
community together. People forgot how to be kind to one another and get
along when there wasn't any hardship to share among themselves.

It would mean deserting the planet entirely. Even though his sympathies
were with the ones who wanted to go, Jed felt there was something wrong,
real bad, about deserting the planet. Still and all, if they voted to go
he couldn't stop them.

Maybe Earth would let the three-generation colonists come on out without
the total test period. But maybe not. Maybe E.H.Q. would decide that
Eden was too hard to colonize because it was too easy. Maybe they'd
abandon the planet entirely. There'd be no more humans here, and no more
coming.

That was when he hit the ground with a solid thump!

He first thought the hammock had somehow twisted out from under him, and
he looked up at it resentfully, the way a man blames something else for
his own fault. There wasn't any hammock.

At the same time, he heard Martha cry out. He craned his neck quickly in
the direction of the house. There wasn't any house. Martha was standing
there on bare ground, and there wasn't a dad-blamed thing else, not a
stove, nor a chair, a dish, nothing.

And Martha didn't have a stitch of clothes on her!

His first thought was that she ought to have more sense than to stand
right out in the yard plumb naked. What was the matter with her anyhow?
He peered quickly down toward the village to see if anybody was looking
up in this direction.

The whole thing hit him like a blow on top the head. There wasn't any
hammock. There wasn't any house.

There wasn't any village.

He saw a whole passel of people squirming around down there where the
village ought to be. They were standing, or crouched, or lying around as
if they'd fallen down.

And every one of the crazy galoots was plumb naked.

And so was he! He'd just realized it.

It had all happened so quietly that that fool bird up in the tree was
still singing. Hadn't missed a note. Funny how a thing like that stood
out above all the rest. Still singing.

Jed got up on his knees, scrambled to his feet, and dodged behind a
tree. Fine lot of authority he'd have as village mayor if anybody saw
him standing out in his front yard naked as a jay bird.

The reminder of his responsibility caused him to sweep his eyes beyond
the sight of the village to where their spaceship should be in its
hangar, always ready for instant escape if anything should go wrong,
real wrong, that is. This ship wasn't there. The hangar wasn't there.
Nothing.

For a little bit he thought he must be looking in the wrong direction.
He'd got turned around or something in the confusion, because there was
a grove of trees where the hangar ought to be. And it was the same grove
they'd cleared away over two years ago. He recognized one of the trees
because it had a peculiar shape.

And he remembered feeding the trunk of that very tree into the power saw
for lumber. It was twisted and gnarled, and Martha had asked him to save
the wood for furniture because it was real pretty. That was the tree,
there on the edge of the grove.

He felt drunk, in a daze. He turned the other direction and looked out
where the experimental fields ought to be. They'd cleared that whole
area of timber and brush because it was a good, flat land. Only they
hadn't, because that was virgin forest, too.

Maybe he'd gone insane? He felt a flood of relief. Sure, that was it.
He'd just gone insane, that was all. Everything else was all right.

"The calves have got loose to the cows and they're going to take all the
milk, Jed."

He turned around and looked at Martha. If he was crazy, so was she. Her
eyes showed it. Her words showed it, at a time like this to be worrying
about them fool calves getting out. It took all the comfort away from
him. Her face was white, her eyes were dazed.

"You got some dirt on your cheek, Martha," he heard himself saying. "And
for Pete's sake, woman, put on some clothes. The committee's coming
over, and you running around like that!"

He thought he had the solution then. He'd fallen asleep in the hammock
after all, while he was waiting for the committee, and he was dreaming.
Of course, he ought to have known all along. This was just the way
things happened in a dream--even him and Martha running around naked. He
even chuckled to himself. He must be a pretty moral kind of fellow after
all, because even in a dream it was his own wife that was next to him
there, naked--not some other man's.

The fool things a man can dream! Might as well make the most of it. He
took her into his arms, and she clung to him.

Must have got the sheet tangled around his throat to choke him, and he
was dreaming it was her arms. But there hadn't been any sheet in the
hammock when he went to sleep.

And he wasn't dreaming.

"What's happened, Jed?" she whispered. Even her whisper was shaking with
fear, and her arms were wound around his neck so tight now he could
hardly breathe.

"Now, now, Martha," he cautioned. "Don't you go getting hysterical."

"What has happened?" she asked again.

"I don't know," he said. They were both talking in low tones.

"It's some kind of a miracle," she whispered.

"Now there's a woman's thinking for you," he chided her fondly, joshing
her a little. "Nothing of the sort. It's just plain ... Well any
scientist would tell you that ..." And then he stopped. He was pretty
sure the frameworks of science, as he knew them, wouldn't be able to
tell you.

He guessed that while they stood there clinging to one another, they
both went a little nuts. It was sort of like drowning, he guessed. You'd
have the feeling of sinking down and down, and there'd be nothing but
blinding, swirling chaos all around you. Then you'd kind of come to for
a minute, and there'd be the trees, the sky, the farm animals, the sea
in the distance.

You'd look down toward the village, and make a mental note, almost
absently, that people were getting to their feet now, some of them
clinging together the way you and Martha were--and then back down into
mental chaos you'd go again.

That went on several times, he remembered, before he'd begun to snap out
of it a little.

"But the funniest thing of all," Jed said, and looked at Cal quickly,
penetratingly. "I had the feeling all the time that we were being
watched!"

Cal said nothing.

"You know," Jed explained. "Like catching an animal in a trap? Then
watching it, to see what it will do?"

Cal nodded, without speaking.

"It was just another crazy thought, I guess," Jed said deprecatingly.
"Plumb crazy."

But, clearly, he didn't believe it was.




14


At E.H.Q. on Earth communication had been working fine. The operator sat
back and listened with trained ear alert for flaw or fade. A glance at
the adjacent recording instrument told him it was taking down everything
said--had been for hours.

Nice deal about those naked colonists. Maybe the astronavigator on the E
cruiser had been right. Maybe they'd all just gone back to nature, all
the way back.

He wondered if there were any pretty young female colonists. And how far
did that word experimental take you? Some experiment! He realized his
interest was running deeper than that of a detached technician's concern
for well-operated equipment--mechanical, that is. Well, let it. Live a
little once in a while. At least dream.

The department supervisor hovered near the back of the operator's chair,
breathing down his neck. He gnawed at the knuckles of his hand, and
hoped nothing would go wrong this time. That astronavigator, Louie
LeBeau, was probably right. Those colonists had turned nudist, and were
afraid to report what they'd done back to Earth!

Well!

He looked around guiltily, wondering if he'd exclaimed it aloud. He
decided he hadn't.

If _he_ were out there, instead of that E, _he'd_ make them put their
clothes back on, on the double. Getting everything all upset, causing
all this trouble, getting everybody excited, all of E.H.Q. aroused,
taking up the time of an E--just because they wanted to frolic around
without any clothes on!

If they were going to act like irresponsible children, they should be
spanked like irresponsible children.

He wondered if there were any young pretty female colonists who ought to
be spanked.

"... E Gray has just stepped off the landing ramp," the pilot out there
was reporting. "He is walking toward the three colonists. Now they have
started walking toward him. They do not seem hostile. They seem glad to
see us. My crew and I are still at our stations, ready for ..."

Silence.

The set simply didn't register anything more except that faint sigh of
uncompleted force fields in space.

"What now? What now?" the supervisor pushed the operator to one side,
and barely restrained the impulse to cuff him on the side of the head.
"Now what did you do? Why did you meddle with it when it was coming in
so clear and strong? What's happened?"

"I didn't do anything. I didn't meddle with it. I don't know what's
happened," the operator flared back. "The signal just stopped. That's
all."

There was an imperative flashing of the signal light on the line that
had been rigged to give direct connection of the running report to
Hayes's office. The operator hesitated, then flipped open the key, as if
he were touching a rattlesnake.

"What's happened down there?" Hayes complained abruptly, without
diplomatic softness. "This is a very crucial point!"

"I don't know what happened. I don't know," the supervisor quarreled
back. "The signal just stopped coming. We weren't doing anything to the
equipment."

He looked up at the continuously changing tri-di star map which made
the far wall appear to be a view into a miniature universe. "There's no
reason for an occlusion," he said to Hayes. "And the set here is alive.
It must be at the other end."

He turned to the operator, and said loudly, "Bounce a beam on Eden's
surface. Just see if any booster has gone out between here and there."
Most of it was making a show of efficiency for Hayes.

"Here we go again," the operator mumbled to himself, and pressed down a
key. The returning pips showed the signal was getting through to Eden.

"Pilot Lynwood! Pilot Lynwood!" the supervisor nagged into the mike.
"Speak up! Do you hear me?"

The operator sighed deeply. His panel partner grimaced something halfway
between a grin and a sneer of disgust.

"They don't answer," the supervisor said at last to Hayes. "It's the
same as before."

"Here we go again," Hayes groaned, but not only to himself. "All right,"
he said wearily, after a moment's hesitation. "Keep the channel open.
Keep trying to contact them. Let me know if signal resumes."

But he already felt the conviction that it would do no good. It was too
much of the same pattern as before. What could have happened?

There'd have to be another review, he supposed. A longer and more
detailed one. There must be, had to be, something they'd overlooked in
the first one. Had he been right in freezing out so many who wanted to
speculate in that first one? But in the interests of time!

The scientists would grumble, even worse than before, because now each
one of them would be worried lest it was his own field of knowledge that
had failed. Hunting a needle in a haystack was easy. At least you knew
what a needle looked like, could recognize it when you saw it.

It would probably all end with nothing solved. E McGinnis would go out
in a rescue ship. He'd already told E Gray that he would be available
in an emergency, and this looked like an emergency. And that would leave
E.H.Q. without a single E in residence.

Why didn't General Administration get busy and qualify more E's? It
shouldn't be so difficult as all that to teach people to think! There
was something mighty wrong with the way kids were brought up if only one
in a million could still think by the time he was grown. Less than one
in a million could qualify as an E.

A boy had to be a natural rebel to start with, because if he believed
what people said he wouldn't get anywhere, no farther than the people
who said it. And if he didn't believe what they told him, they punished
him, outcast him, whipped him, violenced him into submission if they
could. If they couldn't they shut him up in a prison, labeled him
dangerous to society.

It was a wonder that any were able to walk the thin line between
rebelliousness and delinquency! And if a few were able, they were still
of no use unless they learned what science had to offer as a base. Ah,
there was the rub. How to keep alive the curiosity, the inquisitiveness,
the skepticism; and at the same time teach him the basics he must have
for constructive thought? For if he were not beaten into submission by
the punitive methods of society, he was persuaded into it by his
teachers, who were ever so sure of their facts and proofs.

Now you take this Eden problem. Probably wouldn't be tough at all if a
guy could just think. But what could have happened?

He understood there was an observer ship out there, sent out by the
attorney general's office. Why wasn't it reporting? Probably was--to the
attorney general's office. Fine lot of good E.H.Q. would get out of
that. He was no fool. He knew the attorney general would gladly
sacrifice the whole lot of colonists, if it would give him a weapon to
fight E.H.Q.

Why hadn't E.H.Q. sent along an observer ship also? These cocky E's!
Probably hadn't thought it necessary. Always ready to assume they could
handle the situation by themselves!

He wondered if he dared voice that criticism during the review, get it
on record. He thought about it, and decided in favor of playing it safe.
Maybe that was the trouble. Everybody was too concerned with his own
skin, too willing to play it safe. But an employee of E.H.Q. to make a
public criticism of an E! No, better play it safe.

He sighed heavily, and asked the operator to please see if E McGinnis
would talk to him.

He suspected that E McGinnis would just stand off from the planet and
wait for E Gray to get in touch. Nothing seemed to have happened while E
Gray's cruiser was out in space. It must be something connected with
landing, being on the surface of the planet.

But E Gray could signal to E McGinnis. Those pesky colonists! Why hadn't
they signaled to E Gray? Why hadn't they come out of their bushes and
signaled the danger? Surely they must know what it was. They were alive
and healthy, three of them at least. Why hadn't they used their stupid
heads?

But then, how could they have known E Gray was out in space, or even in
their stratosphere? Well, they had telescopes, didn't they? Or did they?
Sure they did. No matter what happened to the buildings, they must have
all sorts of equipment hidden under the trees, or in caves.

