consist of contagious miasmata. This kind of contagious matter only induces
fever, but does not produce other matter with properties similar to its
own; and in this respect it differs from the contagious miasmata of
small-pox or measles, but resembles those which have their origin in
crowded jails; for these produce fever only, which frequently destroys the
patient; but do not produce other matters similar to themselves; as appears
from none of those, who died of the jail-fever, caught at the famous black
assizes at Oxford, at the beginning of this century, having infected their
physicians or attendants.

If indeed the matter has continued so long as to become putrid, and thus to
have given out air from a part of it, it acquires the power of producing
fever; in the same manner as if the ulcer had been opened, and exposed to
the common air; instances of which are not unfrequent. And from these
circumstances it seems probable, that the matters secreted by the new
vessels formed in all kinds of phlegmons, or pustles, are not contagious,
till they have acquired something from the atmosphere, or from the gas
produced by putrefaction; which will account for some phenomena in the lues
venerea, cancer, and of other contagious secretions on the skin without
fever, to be mentioned hereafter. See Class II. 1. 4. 14.

The theory of contagion has been perplexed by comparing it with fermenting
liquors; but the contagious material is shewn in Section XXXIII. to be
produced like other secreted matters by certain animal motions of the
terminations of the vessels. Hence a new kind of gland is formed at the
terminations of the vessels in the eruptions of the small-pox; the animal
motions of which produce from the blood variolous matter; as other glands
produce bile or saliva. Now if some of this matter is introduced beneath
the cuticle of a healthy person, or enters the circulation, and excites the
extremities of the blood-vessels into those kinds of diseased motions, by
which it was itself produced, either by irritation or association, these
diseased motions of the extremities of the vessels will produce other
similar contagious matter. See Sect. XXXIII. 2. 5. and 9. Hence contagion
seems to be propagated two ways; one, by the stimulus of contagious matter
applied to the part, which by an unknown law of nature excites the
stimulated vessels to produce a similar matter; as in venereal ulcers,
which thus continue to spread; or as when variolous matter is inserted
beneath the cuticle; or when it is supposed to be absorbed, and diffused
over the body mixed with the blood, and applied in that manner to the
cutaneous glands. The other way, by which contagion seems to be diffused,
is by some distant parts sympathizing or imitating the motions of the part
first affected; as the stomach and skin in the eruptions of the inoculated
small-pox, or in the bite of a mad dog; as treated of in Sect. XXII. 3. 3.

In some of the diseases of this genus the pulse is strong, full, and hard,
constituting the sensitive irritated fever, as described in the preceding
genus; as in one kind of erysipelas, which requires repeated venesection.
In others the arterial action is sometimes moderate, so as to constitute
the sensitive fever, as in the inoculated small-pox; where the action of
the arteries is neither increased by the sensorial power of irritation, as
in the sensitive irritated fever; nor decreased by the defect of that
power, as in the sensitive inirritated fever. But in the greatest number of
the diseases of this genus the arterial action is greatly diminished in
respect to strength, and consequently the frequency of pulsation is
proportionally increased, as explained in Sect XXXII. 2. 1. Which is owing
to the deficiency of the sensorial power of irritation joined with the
increase of that of sensation, and thus constitutes the sensitive
inirritated fever; as in Scarlatina with gangrenous tonsils.

From this great debility of the action of the arteries, there appears to be
less of the coagulable lymph or mucus secreted on their internal surfaces;
whence there is not only a defect of that buff or size upon the blood,
which is seen on the surface of that, which is drawn in the sensitive
irritated fever; but the blood, as it cools, when it has been drawn into a
bason, scarcely coagulates; and is said to be dissolved, and is by some
supposed to be in a state of actual putrefaction. See Sect. XXXIII. 1. 3.
where the truth of this idea is controverted. But in the fevers of both
this genus and the preceding one great heat is produced from the chemical
combinations in the secretions of new vessels and fluids, and pain or
uneasiness from the distention of the old ones; till towards the
termination of the disease sensation ceases, as well as irritation, with
the mortification of the affected parts, and the death of the patient.

Dysenteria, as well as tonsillitis and aphtha, are enumerated amongst the
diseases of external membranes, because they are exposed either to the
atmospheric air, which is breathed, and swallowed with our food and saliva;
or they are exposed to the inflammable air; or hydrogen, which is generated
in the intestines; both which contribute to produce or promote the
contagious quality of these fluids; as mentioned in Class II. 1. 5.

It is not speaking accurate language, if we say, that in the diseases of
this genus the fever is contagious; since it is the material produced by
the external membranes, which is contagious, after it has been exposed to
air; while the fever is the consequence of this contagious matter, and not
the cause of it. As appears from the inoculated small-pox, in which the
fever does not commence, till after suppuration has taken place in the
inoculated arm, and from the diseases of the fifth genus of this order,
where contagion exists without fever. See Class II. 1. 5. and II. 1. 3. 18.

SPECIES.

1. _Febris sensitiva inirritata._ Sensitive inirritated fever. Typhus
gravior. Putrid malignant fever. Jail fever. The immediate cause of this
disease is the increase of the sensorial power of sensation, joined with
the decrease of the sensorial power of irritation; that is, it consists in
the febris sensitiva joined with the febris inirritativa of Class I. 2. 1.
1. as the febris sensitiva irritata of the preceding genus consists of the
febris sensitiva joined with the febris irritativa of Class I. 1. 1. 1. In
both which the word irritata, and inirritata, are designed to express more
or less irritation than the natural quantity; and the same when applied to
some of the diseases of this genus.

This fever is frequently accompanied with topical inflammation, which is
liable, if the arterial strength is not supported, to end in sphacelus; and
as mortified parts, such as sloughs of the throat, if they adhere to living
parts, soon become putrid from the warmth and moisture of their situation;
these fevers have been termed putrid, and have been thought to owe their
cause to what is only their consequence. In hot climates this fever is
frequently induced by the exhalations of stagnating lakes or marshes, which
abound with animal substances; but which in colder countries produce fevers
with debility only, as the quartan ague, without inflammation.

The sensitive inirritated, or malignant, fever is also frequently produced
by the putrid exhalations and stagnant air in prisons; but perhaps most
frequently by contact or near approach of the persons, who have resided in
them. These causes of malignant fevers contributed to produce, and to
support for a while, the septic and antiseptic theory of them; see Sect.
XXXIII. 1. 3. The vibices or bruises, and petechiae or purples, were
believed to be owing to the dissolved state of the blood by its incipient
putrefaction; but hydrostatical experiments have been made, which shew the
sizy blood of the patient in sensitive irritated or inflammatory fever,
with strong pulse, is more fluid, while it is warm, than this uncoagulable
blood taken in this sensitive inirritated, or malignant fever; from whence
it is inferred, that these petechiae, and vibices, are owing to the
deficient power of absorption in the terminations of the veins, See Class
I. 2. 1. 5.

This sensitive inirritated fever, or typhus gravior, is distinguished from
the inirritative fever, or typhus mitior, in the early stages of it, by the
colour of the skin; which in the latter is paler, with less heat, owing to
the less violent action of the capillaries; in this it is higher coloured,
and hotter, from the greater energy of the capillary action in the
production of new vessels. In the more advanced state petechiae, and the
production of contagious matter from inflamed membranes, as the aphthae of
the mouth, or ulcers of the throat, distinguishes this fever from the
former. Delirium, and dilated pupils of the eyes, are more frequent in
nervous fevers; and stupor with deafness more frequent attendants on
malignant fevers. See Class I. 2. 5. 6.

There is another criterion discernible by the touch of an experienced
finger; and that is, the coat of the artery in inflammatory fevers, both
those attended with strength of pulsation, and these with weak pulsation,
feels harder, or more like a cord; for the coats of the arteries in these
fevers are themselves inflamed, and are consequently turgid with blood, and
thence are less easily compressed, though their pulsations are nevertheless
weak: when the artery is large or full with an inflamed coat, it is called
hard; and when small or empty with an inflamed coat, it is called sharp, by
many writers.

M. M. The indications of cure consist, 1. In procuring a regurgitation of
any offensive material, which may be lodged in the long mouths of the
lacteals or lymphatics, or in their tumid glands. 2. To excite the system
into necessary action by the repeated exhibition of nutrientia, sorbentia,
and incitantia; and to preserve the due evacuation of the bowels. 3. To
prevent any unnecessary expenditure of sensorial power. 4. To prevent the
formation of ulcers, or to promote the absorption in them, for the purpose
of healing them.

1. One ounce of wine of ipecacuanha, or about ten grains of the powder,
should be given as an emetic. After a few hours three or four grains of
calomel should be given in a little mucilage, or conserve. Where something
swallowed into the stomach is the cause of the fever, it is liable to be
arrested by the lymphatic glands, as the matter of the small-pox inoculated
in the arm is liable to be stopped by the axillary lymphatic gland; in this
situation it may continue a day or two, or longer, and may be regurgitated
during the operation of an emetic or cathartic into the stomach or bowel,
as evidently happens on the exhibition of calomel, as explained in Sect.
XXIX. 7. 2. For this reason an emetic and cathartic, with venesection, if
indicated by the hardness and fulness of the pulse, will very frequently
remove fevers, if exhibited on the first, second, or even third day.

2. Wine and opium, in small doses repeated frequently, but so that not the
least degree of intoxication follows, for in that case a greater degree of
debility is produced from the expenditure of sensorial power in unnecessary
motions. Many weak patients have been thus stimulated to death. See Sect.
XII. 7. 8. The Peruvian bark should be given also in repeated doses in such
quantity only as may strengthen digestion, not impede it. For these
purposes two ounces of wine, or of ale, or cyder, should be given every six
hours; and two ounces of decoction of bark, with two drachms of the
tincture of bark, and six drops of tincture of opium, should be given also
every six hours alternately; that is, each of them four times in
twenty-four hours. As much rhubarb as may induce a daily evacuation, should
be given to remove the colluvies of indigested materials from the bowels;
which might otherwise increase the distress of the patient by the air it
gives out in putrefaction, or by producing a diarrhoea by its acrimony; the
putridity of the evacuations are in consequence of the total inability of
the digestive powers; and their delay in the intestines, to the inactivity
of that canal in respect to its peristaltic motions.

The quantities of wine or beer and opium, and bark, above mentioned, may be
increased by degrees, if the patient seems refreshed by them; and if the
pulse becomes slower on their exhibition; but this with caution, as I have
seen irrecoverable mischief done by greater quantities both of opium, wine,
and bark, in this kind of fever; in which their use is to strengthen the
digestion of the weak patient, rather than to stop the paroxysms of fever;
but when they are administered in intermittents, much larger quantities are
necessary.

The stimulus of small blisters applied in succession, one every three or
four days, when the patient becomes weak, is of great service by
strengthening digestion, and by preventing the coldness of the extremities,
owing to the sympathy of the skin with the stomach, and of one part of the
skin with another.

In respect to nutriment, the patient should be supplied with wine and
water, with toasted bread, and sugar or spice in it; or with sago with
wine; fresh broth with turnips, cellery, parsley; fruit; new milk. Tea with
cream and sugar; bread pudding, with lemon juice and sugar; chicken, fish,
or whatever is grateful to the palate of the sick person, in small quantity
repeated frequently; with small beer, cyder and water, or wine and water,
for drink, which may be acidulated with acid of vitriol in small
quantities.

3. All unnecessary motions are to be checked, or prevented. Hence
horizontal posture, obscure room, silence, cool air. All the parts of the
skin, which feel too hot to the hand, should be exposed to a current of
cool air, or bathed with cold water, whether there are eruptions on it or
not. Wash the patient twice a day with cold vinegar and water, or cold salt
and water, or cold water alone, by means of a sponge. If some parts are too
cold, as the extremities, while other parts are too hot, as the face or
breast, cover the cold parts with flannel, and cool the hot parts by a
current of cool air, or bathing them as above.

4. For the healing of ulcers, if in the mouth, solution of alum in water
about 40 grains to an ounce, or of blue vitriol in water, one grain or two
to an ounce may be used to touch them with three or four times a day. Of
these perhaps a solution of alum is to be preferred, as it instantly takes
away the stench from ulcers I suppose by combining with the volatile alcali
which attends it. For this purpose a solution of alum of an ounce to a pint
of water should be frequently injected by means of a syringe into the
mouth. If there are ulcers on the external skin, fine powder of bark seven
parts, and cerusia in fine powder one part, should be mixed, and applied
dry on the sore, and kept on by lint, and a bandage.

As sloughs in the mouth are frequently produced by the previous dryness of
the membranes, which line it, this dryness should be prevented by
frequently moistening them, which may be effected by injection with a
syringe, or by a moist sponge, or lastly in the following manner. Place a
glass of wine and water, or of milk and sugar, on a table by the bedside, a
little above the level of the mouth of the patient; then, having previously
moistened a long piece of narrow listing, or cloth, or flannel, with the
same liquor, leave one end of it in the glass, and introduce the other into
the mouth of the patient; which will thus be supplied with a constant
oozing of the fluid through the cloth, which acts as a capillary syphon.

The viscid phlegm, which adheres to the tongue, should be coagulated by
some austere acid, as by lemon-juice evaporated to half its quantity, or by
crab-juice; and then it may be scraped off by a knife, or rubbed off by
flannel, or a sage leaf dipped in vinegar, or in salt and water.

2. _Erysipelas_, St. Anthony's fire, may be divided into three kinds, which
differ in their method of cure, the irritated, the inirritated, and the
sensitive erysipelas.

_Erysipelas irritatum_ is attended with increase of irritation besides
increase of sensation; that is, with strong, hard, and full pulse, which
requires frequent venesection, like other inflammations with arterial
strength. It is distinguished from the phlegmonic inflammations of the last
genus by its situation on the external habit, and by the redness, heat, and
tumour not being distinctly circumscribed; so that the eye or finger cannot
exactly trace the extent of them.

When the external skin is the seat of inflammation, and produces sensitive
irritated fever, no collection of matter is formed, as when a phlegmon is
situated in the cellular membrane beneath the skin; but the cuticle rises
as beneath a blister-plaster, and becomes ruptured; and a yellow material
oozes out, and becomes inspissated, and lies upon its surface; as is seen
in this kind of erysipelas, and in the confluent small-pox; or if the new
vessels are reabsorbed the cuticle peels off in scales. This difference of
the termination of erysipelatous and phlegmonic inflammation seems to be
owing in part to the less distensibility of the cuticle than of the
cellular membrane, and in part to the ready exhalation of the thinner parts
of the secreted fluids through its pores.

This erysipelas is generally preceded by a fever for two or three days
before the eruption, which is liable to appear in some places, as it
declines in others; and seems frequently to arise from a previous scratch
or injury of the skin; and is attended sometimes with inflammation of the
cellular membrane beneath the skin; whence a real phlegmon and collection
of matter becomes joined to the erysipelas, and either occasions or
increases the irritated fever, which attends it.

There is a greater sympathy between the external skin and the meninges of
the brain, than between the cellular membrane and those meninges; whence
erysipelas is more liable to be preceded or attended, or succeeded, by
delirium than internal phlegmons. I except the mumps, or parotitis,
described below; which is properly an external gland, as its excretory duct
opens into the air. When pain of the head or delirium precedes the
cutaneous eruption of the face, there is some reason to believe, that the
primary disease is a torpor of the meninges of the brain; and that the
succeeding violent action is transferred to the skin of the face by
sensitive association; and that a similar sympathy occurs between some
internal membranes and the skin over them, when erysipelas appears on other
parts of the body. If this circumstance should be supported by further
evidence, this disease should be removed into Class IV. along with the
rheumatism and gout. See Class IV. 1. 2. 17.

This supposed retropulsion of erysipelas on the brain from the frequent
appearance of delirium, has prevented the free use of the lancet early in
this disease to the destruction of many; as it has prevented the subduing
of the general inflammation, and thus has in the end produced the
particular one on the brain. Mr. B----, a delicate gentleman about sixty,
had an erysipelas beginning near one ear, and extending by degrees over the
whole head, with hard, full, and strong pulse; blood was taken from him
four or five times in considerable quantity, with gentle cathartics, with
calomel, diluents, and cool air, and he recovered without any signs of
delirium, or inflammation of the meninges of the brain. Mr. W----, a strong
corpulent man of inferior life, had erysipelas over his whole head, with
strong hard pulse: he was not evacuated early in the disease through the
timidity of his apothecary, and died delirious. Mrs. F---- had erysipelas
on the face, without either strong or weak pulse; that is, with sensitive
fever alone, without superabundance or deficiency of irritation; and
recovered without any but natural evacuations. From these three cases of
erysipelas on the head it appears, that the evacuations by the lancet must
be used with courage, where the degree of inflammation requires it; but not
where this degree of inflammation is small, nor in the erysipelas attended
with inirritation, as described below.

M. M. Venesection repeated according to the degree of inflammation. An
emetic. Calomel three grains every other night. Cool air. Diluents, emetic
tartar in small doses, as a quarter of a grain every six hours. Tea, weak
broth, gruel, lemonade, neutral salts. See Sect. XII. 6.

Such external applications as carry away the heat of the skin may be of
service, as cold water, cold flour, snow, ether. Because these applications
impede the exertions of the secerning vessels, which are now in too great
action; but any applications of the stimulant kind, as solutions of lead,
iron, copper, or of alum, used early in the disease, must be injurious; as
they stimulate the secerning vessels, as well as the absorbent vessels,
into greater action; exactly as occurs when stimulant eye-waters are used
too soon in ophthalmy. See Class II. 1. 2. 2. But as the cuticle peels off
in this case after the inflammation ceases, it differs from ophthalmy; and
stimulant applications are not indicated at all, except where symptoms of
gangrene appear. For as a new cuticle is formed under the old one, as under
a blister, the serous fluid between them is a defence to the new cuticle,
and should dry into a scab by exhalation rather than be reabsorbed. Hence
we see how greasy or oily applications, and even how moist ones, are
injurious in erysipelas; because they prevent the exhalation of the serous
effusion between the old and new cuticle, and thus retard the formation of
the latter.

_Erysipelas inirritatum_ differs from the former in its being attended with
weak pulse, and other symptoms of sensitive inirritated fever. The feet and
legs are particularly liable to this erysipelas, which precedes or attends
the sphacelus or mortification of those parts. A great and long coldness
first affects the limb, and the erysipelas on the skin seems to occur in
consequence of the previous torpor of the interior membranes. As this
generally attends old age, it becomes more dangerous in proportion to the
age, and also to the habitual intemperance of the patient in respect to the
use of fermented or spirituous liquor.

When the former kind, or irritated erysipelas, continues long, the patient
becomes so weakened as to be liable to all the symptoms of this inirritated
erysipelas; especially where the meninges of the brain are primarily
affected. As in that case, after two or three efforts have been made to
remove the returning periods of torpor of the meninges to the external
skin, those meninges become inflamed themselves, and the patient sinks
under the disease; in a manner similar to that in old gouty patients, where
the torpor of the liver or stomach is relieved by association of the
inflammation of the membranes of the feet, and then of other joints, and
lastly the power of association ceasing to act, but the excess of sensation
continuing, the liver or stomach remains torpid, or become themselves
inflamed, and the patient is destroyed.

M. M. Where there exists a beginning gangrene of the extremities, the
Peruvian bark, and wine, and opium, are to be given in large quantities; so
as to strengthen the patient, but not to intoxicate, or to impede his
digestion of aliment, as mentioned in the first species of this genus.
Class II. 1. 2. 1. But where the brain is inflamed or oppressed, which is
known either by delirium, with quick pulse; or by stupor, and slow
respiration with slow pulse; other means must be applied. Such as, first, a
fomentation on the head with warm water, with or without aromatic herbs, or
salt in it, should be continued for an hour or two at a time, and
frequently repeated. A blister may also be applied on the head, and the
fomentation nevertheless occasionally repeated. Internally very gentle
stimulants, as camphor one grain or two in infusion of valerian. Wine and
water or small beer, weak broth. An enema. Six grains of rhubarb and one of
calomel. Afterwards five drops of tincture of opium, which may be repeated
every six hours, if it seems of service. Might the head be bathed for a
minute with cold water? or with ether? or vinegar?

_Erysipelas sensitivum_ is a third species, differing only in the kind of
fever which attends it, which is simply inflammatory, or sensitive, without
either excess of irritation, as in the first variety; or the defect of
irritation, as in the second variety: all these kinds of erysipelas are
liable to return by periods in some people, who have passed the middle of
life, as at periods of a lunation, or two lunations, or at the equinoxes.
When these periods of erysipelas happen to women, they seem to supply the
place of the receding catamenia; when to men, I have sometimes believed
them to be associated with a torpor of the liver; as they generally occur
in those who have drank vinous spirit excessively, though not
approbriously; and that hence they supply the place of periodical piles, or
gout, or gutta rosea.

M. M. As the fever requires no management, the disease takes its progress
safely, like a moderate paroxysm of the gout; but in this case, as in some
of the former, the erysipelas does not appear to be a primary disease, and
should perhaps be removed to the Class of Association.

3. _Tonsillitis._ Inflammation of the tonsils. The uncouth term Cynanche
has been used for diseases so dissimilar, that I have divided them into
Tonsillitis and Parotitis; and hope to be excused for adding a Greek
termination to a Latin word, as one of those languages may justly be
considered as a dialect of the other. By tonsillitis the inflammation of
the tonsils is principally to be understood; but as all inflammations
generally spread further than the part first affected; so, when the summit
of the windpipe is also much inflamed, it may be termed tonsillitis
trachealis, or croup. See Class I. 1. 3. 4. and II. 1. 2. 4.; and when the
summit of the gullet is much inflamed along with the tonsil, it may be
called tonsillitis pharyngea, as described in Dr. Cullen's Nosologia, Genus
X. p. 92. The inflammation of the tonsils may be divided into three kinds,
which require different methods of cure.

_Tonsillitis interna._ Inflammation of the internal tonsil. When the
swelling is so considerable as to produce difficulty of breathing, the size
of the tonsil should be diminished by cutting it with a proper lancet,
which may either give exit to the matter it contains, or may make it less
by discharging a part of the blood. This kind of angina is frequently
attended with irritated fever besides the sensitive one, which accompanies
all inflammation, and sometimes requires venesection. An emetic should be
given early in the disease, as by its inducing the retrograde action of the
vessels about the fauces during the nausea it occasions, it may eliminate
the very cause of the inflammation; which may have been taken up by the
absorbents, and still continue in the mouths of the lymphatics or their
glands. The patient should then be induced to swallow some aperient liquid,
an infusion of senna, so as to induce three or four evacuations. Gargles of
all kinds are rather hurtful, as the action of using them is liable to give
pain to the inflamed parts; but the patients find great relief from
frequently holding warm water in their mouths, and putting it out again, or
by syringing warm water into the mouth, as this acts like a warm bath or
fomentation to the inflamed part. Lastly, some mild stimulant, as a weak
solution of salt and water, or of white vitriol and water, may be used to
wash the fauces with in the decline of the disease, to expedite the
absorption of the new vessels, if necessary, as recommended in ophthalmy.

_Tonsillitis superficialis._ Inflammation of the surface of the tonsils. As
the tonsils and parts in their vicinity are covered with a membrane, which,
though exposed to currents of air, is nevertheless constantly kept moist by
mucus and saliva, and is liable to diseases of its surface like other
mucous membranes, as well as to suppuration of the internal substance of
the gland; the inflammation of its surface is succeeded by small elevated
pustules with matter in them, which soon disappears, and the parts either
readily heal, or ulcers covered with sloughs are left on the surface.

This disease is generally attended with only sensitive fever, and therefore
is of no danger, and may be distinguished with great certainty from the
dangerous inflammation or gangrene of the tonsils at the height of the
small-pox, or scarlet fever, by its not being attended with other symptoms
of those diseases. One emetic and a gentle cathartic is generally
sufficient; and the frequent swallowing of weak broth, or gruel, both
without salt in them, relieves the patient, and absolves the cure. When
these tumours of the tonsils frequently return I have sometimes suspected
them to originate from the absorption of putrid matter from decaying teeth.
See Class I. 2. 3. 21. and II. 2. 2. 1.

_Tonsillitis inirritata._ Inflammation of the tonsils with sensitive
inirritated fever is a symptom only of contagious fever, whether attended
with scarlet eruption, or with confluent small-pox, or otherwise. The
matter of contagion is generally diffused, not dissolved in the air; and as
this is breathed over the mucaginous surface of the tonsils, the contagious
atoms are liable to be arrested by the tonsil; which therefore becomes the
nest of the future disease, like the inflamed circle round the inoculated
puncture of the arm in supposititious small-pox. This swelling is liable to
suffocate the patient in small-pox, and to become gangrenous in scarlet
fever, and some other contagious fevers, which have been received in this
manner. The existence of inflammation of the tonsil previous to the scarlet
eruption, as the arm inflames in the inoculated small-pox, and suppurates
before the variolous eruption, should be a criterion of the scarlet fever
being taken in this manner.

M. M. All the means which strengthen the patient, as in the sensitive
inirritated fever, Class II. 1. 2. 1. As it is liable to continue a whole
lunation or more, great attention should be used to nourish the patient
with acidulous and vinous panada, broth with vegetables boiled in it,
sugar, cream, beer; all which given frequently will contribute much to
moisten, clean, and heal the ulcuscles, or sloughs, of the throat; warm
water and wine, or acid of lemon, should be frequently applied to the
tonsils by means of a syringe, or by means of a capillary syphon, as
described in Class II. 1. 3. 1. A slight solution of blue vitriol, as two
grains to an ounce, or a solution of sugar of lead of about six grains to
an ounce, may be of service; especially the latter, applied to the edges of
the sloughs, drop by drop by means of a small glass tube, or small
crow-quill with the end cut off, or by a camel's-hair pencil or sponge; to
the end of either of which a drop will conveniently hang by capillary
attraction; as solutions of lead evidently impede the progress of
erysipelas on the exterior skin, when it is attended with feeble pulse. Yet
a solution of alum injected frequently by a syringe is perhaps to be
preferred, as it immediately removes the fetor of the breath, which must
much injure the patient by its being perpetually received into the lungs by
respiration.

4. _Parotitis._ Mumps, or branks, is a contagious inflammation of the
parotis and maxillary glands, and has generally been classed under the word
Cynanche or Angina, to which it bears no analogy. It divides itself into
two kinds, which differ in the degree of fever which attends them, and in
the method of cure.

_Parotitis suppurans._ The suppurating mumps is to be distinguished by the
acuteness of the pain, and the sensitive, irritated, or inflammatory fever,
which attends it.

M. M. Venesection. Cathartic with calomel three or four grains repeatedly.
Cool air, diluents. This antiphlogistic treatment is to be continued no
longer than is necessary to relieve the violence of the pain, as the
disease is attended with contagion, and must run through a certain time,
like other fevers with contagion.

_Parotitis mutabilis._ Mutable parotitis. A sensitive fever only, or a
sensitive irritated fever, generally attends this kind. And when the tumor
of the parotis and maxillary glands subsides, a new swelling occurs in some
distant part of the system; as happens to the hands and feet, at the
commencement of the secondary fever of the small-pox, when the tumor of the
face subsides. This new swelling in the parotitis mutabilis is liable to
affect the testes in men, and form a painful tumor, which should be
prevented from suppuration by very cautious means, if the violence of the
pain threaten such a termination; as by bathing the part with coldish water
for a time, venesection, a cathartic; or by a blister on the perinaeum, or
scrotum, or a poultice.

When women are affected with this complaint, after the swelling of the
parotis and maxillary glands subsides, a tumor with pain is liable to
affect their breasts; which, however, I have never seen terminate in
suppuration.

On the retrocession of the tumor of the testes above described, and I
suppose of that of the breasts in women, a delirium of the calm kind is
very liable to occur; which in some cases has been the first symptom which
has alarmed the friends of the patient; and it has thence been difficult to
discover the cause of it without much inquiry; the previous symptoms having
been so slight as not to have occasioned any complaints. In this delirium,
if the pulse will bear it, venesection should be used, and three or four
grains of calomel, with fomentation of the head with warm water for an hour
together every three or four hours.

Though this disease generally terminates favourably, considering the
numbers attacked by it, when it is epidemic, yet it is dangerous at other
times in every part of its progress. Sometimes the parotis or maxillary
glands suppurate, producing ulcers which are difficult to cure, and
frequently destroy the patient, where there was a previous scrophulous
tendency. The testis in men is also liable to suppurate with great pain,
long confinement, and much danger; and lastly the affection of the brain is
fatal to many.

Mr. W. W. had a swelled throat, which after a few days subsided. He became
delirious or stupid, in which state he was dying when I saw him; and his
friends ascribed his death to a coup de soleil, which he was said to have
received some months before, when he was abroad.

Mr. A. B. had a swelling of the throat, which after a few days subsided.
When I saw him he had great stupor, with slow breathing, and partial
delirium. On fomenting his head with warm water for an hour these symptoms
of stupor were greatly lessened, and his oppressed breathing gradually
ceased, and he recovered in one day.

Mr. C. D. I found walking about the house in a calm delirium without
stupor; and not without much inquiry of his friends could get the previous
history of the disease; which had been attended with parotitis, and swelled
testis, previous to the delirium. A few ounces of blood were taken away, a
gentle cathartic was directed, and his head fomented with warm water for an
hour, with a small blister on the back, and he recovered in two or three
days.

Mr. D. D. came down from London in the coach alone, so that no previous
history could be obtained. He was walking about the house in a calm
delirium, but could give no sensible answers to any thing which was
proposed to him. His pulse was weak and quick. Cordials, a blister, the
bark, were in vain exhibited, and he died in two or three days.

Mr. F. F. came from London in the same manner in the coach. He was mildly
delirious with considerable stupor, and moderate pulse, and could give no
account of himself. He continued in a kind of cataleptic stupor, so that he
would remain for hours in any posture he was placed, either in his chair,
or in bed; and did not attempt to speak for about a fortnight; and then
gradually recovered. These two last cases are not related as being
certainly owing to parotitis, but as they might probably have that origin.

The parotitis suppurans, or mumps with irritated fever, is at times
epidemic among cats, and may be called _parotitis felina_; as I have reason
to believe from the swellings under the jaws, which frequently suppurate,
and are very fatal to those animals. In the village of Haywood, in
Staffordshire, I remember a whole breed of Persian cats, with long white
hair, was destroyed by this malady, along with almost all the common cats
of the neighbourhood; and as the parotitis or mumps had not long before
prevailed amongst human beings in that part of the country, I recollect
being inclined to believe, that the cats received the infection from
mankind; though in all other contagious diseases, except the rabies canina
can be so called, no different genera of animals naturally communicate
infection to each other; and I am informed, that vain efforts have been
made to communicate the small-pox and measles to some quadrupeds by
inoculation. A disease of the head and neck destroyed almost all the cats
in Westphalia. Savage, Nosol. Class X. Art. 30. 8.

5. _Catarrhus sensitivus_ consists of an inflammation of the membrane,
which lines the nostrils and fauces. It is attended with sensitive fever
alone, and is cured by the steam of warm water externally, and by diluents
internally, with moderate venesection and gentle cathartics. This may be
termed catarrhus sensitivus, to distinguish it from the catarrhus
contagiosus, and is in common language called a violent cold in the head;
it differs from the catarrhus calidus, or warm catarrh, of Class I. 1. 2.
7. in the production of new vessels, or inflammation of the membrane, and
the consequent more purulent appearance of the discharge.

Raucedo catarrhalis, or catarrhal hoarseness, is a frequent symptom of this
disease, and is occasioned by the pain or soreness which attends the
thickened and inflamed membranes of the larynx; which prevents the muscles
of vocallity from sufficiently contracting the aperture of it. It ceases
with the inflammation, or may be relieved by the steam of warm water alone,
or of water and vinegar, or of water and ether. See Paralytic Hoarseness,
Class III. 2. 1. 4.

6. _Catarrhus contagiosus._ This malady attacks so many at the same time,
and spreads gradually over so great an extent of country, that there can be
no doubt but that it is disseminated by the atmosphere. In the year 1782
the sun was for many weeks obscured by a dry fog, and appeared red as
through a common mist. The material, which thus rendered the air muddy,
probably caused the epidemic catarrh, which prevailed in that year, and
which began far in the north, and extended itself over all Europe. See
Botanic Garden, Vol. II. note on Chunda, and Vol. I. Canto IV, line 294,
note; and was supposed to have been thrown out of a volcano, which much
displaced the country of Iceland.

In many instances there was reason to believe, that this disease became
contagious, as well as epidemic; that is, that one person might receive it
from another, as well as by the general unsalutary influence of the
atmosphere. This is difficult to comprehend, but may be conceived by
considering the increase of contagious matter in the small-pox. In that
disease one particle of contagious matter stimulates the skin of the arm in
inoculation into morbid action so as to produce a thousand particles
similar to itself; the same thing occurs in catarrh, a few deleterious
atoms stimulate the mucous membrane of the nostrils into morbid actions,
which produce a thousand other particles similar to themselves. These
contagious particles diffused in the air must have consisted of animal
matter, otherwise how could an animal body by being stimulated by them
produce similar particles? Could they then have had a volcanic origin, or
must they not rather have been blown from putrid marshes full of animal
matter? But the greatest part of the solid earth has been made from animal
and vegetable recrements, which may be dispersed by volcanos.--Future
discoveries must answer these questions.

As the sensitive fever attending these epidemic catarrhs is seldom either
much irritated or inirritated, venesection is not always either clearly
indicated or forbid; but as those who have died of these catarrhs have
generally had inflamed livers, with consequent suppuration in them,
venesection is adviseable, wherever the cough and fever are greater than
common, so as to render the use of the lancet in the least dubious. And in
some cases a second bleeding was necessary, and a mild cathartic or two
with four grains of calomel; with mucilaginous subacid diluents; and warm
steam occasionally to alleviate the cough, finished the cure.

The catarrhus contagiosus is a frequent disease amongst horses and dogs; it
seems first to be disseminated amongst these animals by miasmata diffused
in the atmosphere, because so many of them receive it at the same time; and
afterwards to be communicable from one horse or dog to another by
contagion, as above described. These epidemic or contagious catarrhs more
frequently occur amongst dogs and horses than amongst men; which is
probably owing to the greater extension and sensibility of the mucous
membrane, which covers the organ of smell, and is diffused over their wide
nostrils, and their large maxillary and frontal cavities. And to this
circumstance may be ascribed the greater fatality of it to these animals.

In respect to horses, I suspect the fever at the beginning to be of the
sensitive, irritated, or inflammatory kind, because there is so great a
discharge of purulent mucus; and that therefore they will bear once
bleeding early in the disease; and also one mild purgative, consisting of
about half an ounce of aloe, and as much white hard soap, mixed together.
They should be turned out to grass both day and night for the benefit of
pure air, unless the weather be too cold (and in that case they should be
kept in an open airy stable, without being tied), that they may hang down
their heads to facilitate the discharge of the mucus from their nostrils.
Grass should be offered them, or other fresh vegetables, as carrots and
potatoes, with mashes of malt, or of oats, and with plenty of fresh warm or
cold water frequently in a day. When symptoms of debility appear, which may
be known by the coldness of the ears or other extremities, or when sloughs
can be seen on the membrane which lines the nostrils, a drink consisting of
a pint of ale with half an ounce of tincture of opium in it, given every
six hours, is likely to be of great utility.

In dogs I believe the catarrh is generally joined with symptoms of debility
early in the disease. These animals should be permitted to go about in the
open air, and should have constant access to fresh water. The use of being
as much as may be in the air is evident, because all the air which they
breathe passes twice over the putrid sloughs of the mortified parts of the
membrane which lines the nostrils, and the maxillary and frontal cavities;
that is, both during inspiration and expiration; and must therefore be
loaded with contagious particles. Fresh new milk, and fresh broth, should
be given them very frequently, and they should be suffered to go amongst
the grass, which they sometimes eat for the purpose of an emetic; and if
possible should have access to a running stream of water. As the contagious
mucus of the nostrils, both of these animals and of horses, generally drops
into the water they attempt to drink. Bits of raw flesh, if the dog will
eat them, are preferred to cooked meat; and from five to ten drops of
tincture of opium may be given with advantage, when symptoms of debility
are evident, according to the size of the dog, every six hours. If sloughs
can be seen in the nostrils, they should be moistened twice a day, both in
horses and dogs, with a solution of sugar of lead, or of alum, by means of
a sponge fixed on a bit of whale bone, or by a syringe. The lotion may be
made by dissolving half an ounce of sugar of lead in a pint of water.

Ancient philosophers seem to have believed, that the contagious miasmata in
their warm climates affected horses and dogs previous to mankind. If those
contagious particles were supposed to be diffused amongst the heavy
inflammable air, or carbonated hydrogen, of putrid marshes, as these
animals hold their heads down lower to the ground, they may be supposed to
have received them sooner than men. And though men and quadrupeds might
receive a disease from the same source of marsh-putrefaction, they might
not afterwards be able to infect each other, though they might infect other
animals of the same genus; as the new contagious matter generated in their
own bodies might not be precisely similar to that received; as happened in
the jail-fever at Oxford, where those who took the contagion and died, did
not infect others.

  On mules and dogs the infection first began,
  And, last, the vengeful arrows fix'd on man.
                          POPE'S Homer's Iliad, I.

7. _Peripneumonia superficialis._ The superficial or spurious peripneumony
consists in an inflammation of the membrane, which lines the bronchia, and
bears the same analogy to the true peripneumony, as the inflammations of
other membranes do to that of the parenchyma, or substantial parts of the
viscus, which they surround. It affects elderly people, and frequently
occasions their death; and exists at the end of the true peripneumony, or
along with it; when the lancet has not been used sufficiently to cure by
reabsorbing the inflamed parts, or what is termed by resolution.

M. M. Diluents, mucilage, antimonials, warmish air constantly changed,
venesection once, perhaps twice, if the pulse will bear it. Oily volatile
draughts. Balsams? Neutral salts increase the tendency to cough. Blisters
in succession about the chest. Warm bath. Mild purgatives. Very weak
chicken broth without salt in it. Boiled onions. One grain of calomel every
night for a week. From five drops to ten of tincture of opium at six every
night, when the patient becomes weak. Digitalis? See Class II. 1. 6. 7.

8. _Pertussis._ Tussis convulsiva. Chin-cough resembles peripneumonia
superficialis in its consisting in an inflammation of the membrane which
lines the air-vessels of the lungs; but differs in the circumstance of its
being contagious; and is on that account of very long duration; as the
whole of the lungs are probably not infected at the same time, but the
contagious inflammation continues gradually to creep on the membrane. It
may in this respect be compared to the ulcers in the pulmonary consumption;
but it differs in this, that in chin-cough some branches of the bronchia
heal, as others become inflamed.

This complaint is not usually classed amongst febrile disorders, but a
sensitive fever may generally be perceived to attend it during some part of
the day, especially in weak patients. And a peripneumony very frequently
supervenes, and destroys great numbers of children, except the lancet or
four or six leeches be immediately and repeatedly used. When the child has
permanent difficulty of breathing, which continues between the coughing
fits: unless blood be taken from it, it dies in two, three, or four days of
the inflammation of the lungs. During this permanent difficulty of
breathing the hooping-cough abates, or quite ceases, and returns again
after once or twice bleeding; which is then a good symptom, as the child
now possessing the power to cough shews the difficulty of breathing to be
abated. I dwell longer upon this, because many lose their lives from the
difficulty there is in bleeding young children; where the apothecary is old
or clumsy, or is not furnished with a very sharp and fine-pointed lancet.
In this distressing situation the application of four leeches to one of the
child's legs, the wounds made by which should continue to bleed an hour or
two, is a succedaneum; and saves the patient, if repeated once or twice
according to the difficulty of the respiration.

The chin-cough seems to resemble the gonorrhoea venerea in several
circumstances. They are both received by infection, are both diseases of
the mucous membrane, are both generally cured in four or six weeks without
medicine. If ulcers in the cellular membrane under the mucous membrane
occur, they are of a phagedenic kind, and destroy the patient in both
diseases, if no medicine be administered.

Hence the cure should be similar in both these diseases; first general
evacuations and diluents, then, after a week or two, I have believed the
following pills of great advantage. The dose for a child of about three
years old was one sixth part of a grain of calomel, one sixth part of a
grain of opium, and two grains of rhubarb, to be taken twice a day.

The opium promotes absorption from the mucous membrane, and hence
contributes to heal it. The mercury prevents ulcers from being formed under
the mucous membrane, or cures them, as in the lues venerea; and the rhubarb
is necessary to keep the bowels open.

M. M. Antimonial vomits frequently repeated. Mild cathartics. Cool air.
Tincture of cantharides, or repeated blisters; afterwards opiates in small
doses, and the bark. Warm bath frequently used. The steam of warm water
with a little vinegar in it may be inhaled twice a day. Could the breathing
of carbonic acid gas mixed with atmospheric air be of service? Copious
venesection, when a difficulty of breathing continues between the fits of
coughing; otherwise the cough and the expectoration cease, and the patient
is destroyed. Ulcers of the lungs sometimes supervene, and the phthisis
pulmonalis in a few weeks terminates in death. Where the cough continues
after some weeks without much of the hooping, and a sensitive fever daily
supervenes, so as to resemble hectic fever from ulcers of the lungs; change
of air for a week or fortnight acts as a charm, and restores the patient
beyond the hopes of the physician.

Young children should lie with their heads and shoulders raised; and should
be constantly watched day and night; that when the cough occurs, they may
be held up easily, so as to stand upon their feet bending a little
forwards; or nicely supported in that posture which they seem to put
themselves into. A bow of whalebone, about the size of the bow of a key, is
very useful to extract the phlegm out of the mouths of infants at the time
of their coughing; as an handkerchief, if applied at the time of their
quick inspirations after long holding their breath, is dangerous, and may
suffocate the patient in an instant, as I believe has sometimes happened.

9. _Variola discreta._ The small-pox is well divided by Sydenham into
distinct and confluent. The former consists of distinct pustules, which
appear on the fourth day of the fever, are circumscribed and turgid; the
fever ceasing when the eruption is complete. Head-ach, pain in the loins,
vomiting frequently, and convulsive fits sometimes, precede the eruption.

The distinct small-pox is attended with sensitive fever only, when very
mild, as in most inoculated patients; or with sensitive irritated fever,
when the disease is greater: the danger in this kind of small-pox is owing
either to the tumor and soreness of the throat about the height, or eighth
day of the eruption; or to the violence of the secondary fever. For, first,
as the natural disease is generally taken by particles of the dust of the
contagious matter dried and floating in the air, these are liable to be
arrested by the mucus about the throat and tonsils in their passage to the
lungs, or to the stomach, when they are previously mixed with saliva in the
mouth. Hence the throat inflames like the arm in inoculated patients; and
this increasing, as the disease advances, destroys the patient about the
height.

Secondly, all those upon the face and head come out about the same time,
namely, about one day before those on the hands, and two before those in
the trunk; and thence, when the head is very full, a danger arises from the
secondary fever, which is a purulent, not a variolous fever; for as the
matter from all these of the face and head is reabsorbed at the same time,
the patient is destroyed by the violence of this purulent fever; which in
the distinct small-pox can only be abated by venesection and cathartics;
but in the confluent small-pox requires cordials and opiates, as it is
attended with arterial debility. See Sect. XXXV. 1. and XXXIII. 2. 10.

When the pustules on the face recede, the face swells; and when those of
the hands recede, the hands swell; and the same of the feet in succession.
These swellings seem to be owing to the absorption of variolous matter,
which by its stimulus excites the cutaneous vessels to secrete more lymph,
or serum, or mucus, exactly as happens by the stimulus of a blister. Now,
as a blister sometimes produces strangury many hours after it has risen; it
is plain, that a part of the cantharides is absorbed, and carried to the
neck of the bladder; whether it enters the circulation, or is carried
thither by retrograde movements of the urinary branch of lymphatics; and by
parity of reasoning the variolous matter is absorbed, and swells the face
and hands by its stimulus.

_Variola confluens._ The confluent small-pox consists of numerous pustules,
which appear on the third day of the fever, flow together, are irregularly
circumscribed, flaccid, and little elevated; the fever continuing after the
eruption is complete; convulsions do not precede this kind of small-pox,
and are so far to be esteemed a favourable symptom.
