satisfactory than could be arrived at by the Ptolemaic theory.
Notwithstanding this, he selected the Ptolemaic cosmology as the
scientific basis upon which he constructed his 'Paradise Lost,' and in
its elaboration adhered with marked fidelity to this system. There were
many reasons why Milton, in the composition of an imaginative poem,
should have chosen the Ptolemaic system of the universe rather than the
Copernican. This form of astronomical belief was adopted by all the
authors whose works he perused and studied in his younger days,
including his favourite poet, Dante; and his own poetic imaginings, as
indicated by his early poems, were in harmony with the doctrines of this
astronomical creed, a long acquaintance with which had, without doubt,
influenced his mind in its favour. This system of revolving spheres,
with the steadfast Earth at its centre, and the whole enclosed by the
Primum Mobile, constituted a more attractive and picturesque object for
poetic description than the simple and uncircumscribed arrangement of
the universe expressed by the Copernican theory. It also afforded him an
opportunity of localising those regions of space in which the chief
incidents in his poem are described--viz. HEAVEN, or THE EMPYREAN,
CHAOS, HELL, and the MUNDANE UNIVERSE. Milton's Ptolemaism, with its
adjuncts, may be understood by the following:

All that portion of space above the newly created universe, and beyond
the Primum Mobile, was known as HEAVEN, or THE EMPYREAN--a region of
light, of glory, and of happiness; the dwelling-place of the Deity, Who,
though omnipresent, here visibly revealed Himself to all the multitude
of angels whom He created, and who surrounded his throne in adoration
and worship.

Underneath the universe there existed a vast region of similar
dimensions to the Empyrean, called CHAOS, which was occupied by the
embryo elements of matter, that with incessant turmoil and confusion
warred with each other for supremacy--a wild abyss--

    The womb of Nature and perhaps her grave.--ii. 911.

The lower portion of this region was divided off from the remainder, and
embraced the locality known as HELL--the place of torment, where the
rebellious angels were driven and shut in after their expulsion from
Heaven.

    As far removed from God and light of Heaven
    As from the centre thrice to the utmost pole.--i. 73-74.

The NEW UNIVERSE, which included the Earth and all the orbs of the
firmament known as the Starry Heavens, was created out of Chaos, and
hung, as if suspended by a golden chain, from the Empyrean above; and
although its magnitude and dimensions were inconceivable, yet, according
to the Ptolemaic theory, it was enclosed by the tenth sphere or Primum
Mobile.

By this partitioning of space Milton was able to contrive a system which
fulfilled the requirements of his great poem.

The annexed diagram explains the relative positions of the different
regions into which space was divided.

Though there are traces of Copernicanism found in 'Paradise Lost,' yet
Milton has very faithfully adhered to the Ptolemaic mechanism and
nomenclature throughout his poem.

In his description of the Creation, the Earth is formed first, then the
Sun, followed by the Moon, and afterwards the stars, all of which are
described as being in motion round the Earth. Allusion is also made to
this ancient system in several prominent passages, and in the following
lines there is a distinct reference to the various revolving spheres.

[Illustration: FIG. 2]

    They pass the planets seven, and pass the fixed,
    And that crystalline sphere whose balance weighs
    The trepidation talked, and that first moved.--iii. 481-83.

The seven planetary spheres are first mentioned; then the eighth sphere,
or that of the fixed stars; then the ninth, or crystalline, which was
believed to cause a shaking, or trepidation, to account for certain
irregularities in the motions of the stars; and, lastly, the tenth
sphere, or Primum Mobile, called the 'first moved' because it set the
other spheres in motion.

To an uninstructed observer, the apparent motion of the heavenly bodies
round the Earth would naturally lead him to conclude that, of the two
theories, the Ptolemaic was the correct one. We therefore find that
Milton adopted the system most in accord with the knowledge and
intelligence possessed by the persons portrayed by him in his poem; and
in describing the natural phenomena witnessed in the heavens by our
first parents, he adheres to the doctrines of the Ptolemaic system, as
being most in harmony with the simple and primitive conceptions of those
created beings.

To their upward gaze, the orbs of heaven appeared to be in ceaseless
motion; the solid Earth, upon which they stood, was alone immovable and
at rest. Day after day they observed the Sun pursue his steadfast course
with unerring regularity: his rising in the east, accompanied by the
rosy hues of morn; his meridian splendour, and his sinking in the west,
tinting in colours of purple and gold inimitable the fleecy clouds
floating in the azure sky, as he bids farewell for a time to scenes of
life and happiness, rejoicing in the light and warmth of his
all-cheering beams. With the advent of night they beheld the Moon, now
increasing, now waning, pursue her irregular path, also to disappear in
the west; whilst, like the bands of an army marshalled in loose array,
the constellations of glittering stars, with stately motion, traversed
their nocturnal arcs, circling the pole of the heavens.

By referring to Book viii., 15-175, we find an account of an interesting
scientific discussion, or conversation, between Adam and Raphael
regarding the merits of the Ptolemaic and Copernican systems, and of the
relative importance and size of the heavenly bodies. By it we are
afforded an opportunity of learning how accurate and precise a knowledge
Milton possessed of both theories, and in what clear and perspicuous
language he expresses his arguments in favour of or against the
doctrines associated with each.

We may, with good reason, regard the views expressed by Adam as
representing Milton's own opinions, which were in conformity with the
Copernican theory; and in the Angel's reply, though of an undecided
character, we are able to perceive how aptly Milton describes the
erroneous conclusions upon which the Ptolemaic theory was based.

In this scientific discussion, it would seem rather strange that Adam,
the first of men, should have been capable of such philosophic
reasoning, propounding, as if by intuition, a theory upon which was
founded a system that had not been discovered until many centuries after
the time that astronomy became a science. By attributing to Adam such a
degree of intelligence and wisdom, the poet has taken a liberty which
enabled him to carry on this discussion in a manner befitting the
importance of the subject.

In the following lines Adam expresses to his Angel-guest, in forcible
and convincing language, his reasons in support of the Copernican
theory:--

    When I behold this goodly frame, this World,
    Of Heaven and Earth consisting, and compute
    Their magnitudes--this Earth, a spot, a grain,
    An atom, with the Firmament compared
    And all her numbered stars, that seem to roll
    Spaces incomprehensible (for such
    Their distance argues, and their swift return
    Diurnal) merely to officiate light
    Round this opacous Earth, this punctual spot,
    One day and night, in all her vast survey
    Useless besides--reasoning, I oft admire,
    How Nature, wise and frugal could commit
    Such disproportions, with superfluous hand
    So many nobler bodies to create,
    Greater so manifold, to this one use,
    For aught appears, and on their Orbs impose
    Such restless revolution day by day
    Repeated, while the sedentary Earth,
    That better might with far less compass move,
    Served by more noble than herself, attains
    Her end without least motion, and receives,
    As tribute, such a sumless journey brought
    Of incorporeal speed, her warmth and light;
    Speed, to describe whose swiftness number fails.--viii. 15-38.

We are enabled to perceive that Milton had formed a correct conception
of the magnitude and proportions of the universe, and also of the
relative size and importance of the Earth, which he describes as 'a
spot, a grain, an atom,' when compared with the surrounding heavens. He
expresses his surprise that all the stars of the firmament, whose
distances are so remote, and whose dimensions so greatly exceed those of
this globe, should in their diurnal revolution have 'such a sumless
journey of incorporeal speed imposed upon them' merely to officiate
light to the Earth, 'this punctual spot;' and reasoning, wonders how
Nature, wise and frugal in her ways, should commit such disproportions,
by adopting means so great to accomplish a result so small, when motion
imparted to the sedentary Earth would with greater ease produce the same
effect.

The inconceivable velocity with which it would be necessary for those
orbs to travel in order to accomplish a daily revolution round the Earth
might be described as almost spiritual, and beyond the power of
calculation by numbers.

The Angel, after listening to Adam's argument, expresses approval of his
desire to obtain knowledge, but answers him dubiously, and at the same
time criticises in a severe and adverse manner the Ptolemaic theory.

    To ask or search I blame thee not; for Heaven
    Is as the Book of God before thee set,
    Wherein to read his wondrous works, and learn
    His seasons, hours, or days, or months, or years.
    This to attain, whether Heaven move or Earth,
    Imports not, if thou reckon right; the rest
    From Man or Angel the Great Architect
    Did wisely to conceal, and not divulge
    His secrets, to be scanned by them who ought
    Rather admire. Or, if they list to try
    Conjecture, he his fabric of the Heavens
    Hath left to their disputes, perhaps to move
    His laughter at their quaint opinions wide
    Hereafter, when they come to model Heaven,
    And calculate the stars; how they will wield
    The mighty frame; how build, unbuild, contrive
    To save appearances; how gird the Sphere
    With Centric and Eccentric scribbled o'er
    Cycle and Epicycle, Orb in Orb.--viii. 66-84.

When, with the advancement of science, astronomical observations were
made with greater accuracy, it was discovered that uniformity of motion
was not always maintained by those bodies which were believed to move in
circles round the Earth. It was observed that the Sun, when on one side
of his orbit, had an accelerated motion, as compared with the speed at
which he travelled when on the other side. The planets, also, appeared
to move with irregularity: sometimes a planet was observed to advance,
then become stationary, and afterwards affect a retrograde movement.
Those inequalities of motion could not be explained by means of the
revolution of crystalline spheres alone, but were accounted for by
imagining the existence of a small circle, or epicycle, whose centre
corresponded with a fixed point in the larger circle, or eccentric, as
it was called. This small circle revolved on its axis when carried round
with the larger one, and round it the planet also revolved, which when
situated in its outer portion would have a forward, and when in its
inner portion a retrograde, motion.

The theory of eccentrics and epicycles was sufficient for a time to
account for the inequalities of motion already described, and by this
means the Ptolemaic system was enabled to retain its ascendency for a
longer period than it otherwise would have done. But more recent
discoveries brought to light discrepancies and difficulties which were
explained away by adding epicycle to epicycle. This created a most
complicated entanglement, and hastened the downfall of a system which,
after an existence of many centuries, sank into oblivion, and is now
remembered as a belief of bygone ages.

The devices which the upholders of this system were compelled to adopt,
in order 'to save appearances,' with 'centric and eccentric,' cycle and
epicycle, 'orb in orb,' are in this manner appropriately described by
Milton, as indicating the confusion arising from a theory based upon
false hypotheses.

Continuing his reply, the Angel says:--

    Already by thy reasoning this I guess,
    Who art to lead thy offspring, and supposest
    That bodies bright and greater should not serve
    The less not bright, nor Heaven such journies run,
    Earth sitting still, when she alone receives
    The benefit. Consider, first, that great
    Or bright infers not excellence. The Earth,
    Though, in comparison of Heaven, so small,
    Nor glistering, may of solid good contain
    More plenty than the Sun that barren shines,
    Whose virtue on itself works no effect,
    But in the fruitful Earth; there first received,
    His beams, inactive else, their vigour find,
    Yet not to Earth are those bright luminaries
    Officious, but to thee, Earth's habitant.
    And, for the Heaven's wide circuit, let it speak
    The Maker's high magnificence, who built
    So spacious, and his line stretched out so far,
    That Man may know he dwells not in his own--
    An edifice too large for him to fill,
    Lodged in a small partition; and the rest
    Ordained for uses to his Lord best known,
    The swiftness of those Circles attribute,
    Though numberless, to his Omnipotence,
    That to corporeal substances could add
    Speed almost spiritual. Me thou think'st not slow,
    Who since the morning-hour set out from Heaven
    Where God resides, and ere midday arrived
    In Eden--distance inexpressible
    By numbers that have name. But this I urge,
    Admitting motion in the Heavens, to show
    Invalid that which thee to doubt it moved;
    Not that I so affirm, though so it seem
    To thee who hast thy dwelling here on Earth.
    God, to remove his ways from human sense,
    Placed Heaven from Earth so far, that earthly sight,
    If it presume, might err in things too high,
    And no advantage gain.--viii. 85-122.

Notwithstanding the Angel's severe criticism of the Ptolemaic system, he
does not unreservedly support the conclusions arrived at by Adam, but
endeavours to show that his reasoning may not be altogether correct. He
questions the validity of his argument that bodies of greater size and
brightness should not serve the smaller, though not bright, and that
heaven should move, while the Earth remained at rest. He argues that
great or bright infers not excellence, and that the Earth, though small,
may contain more virtue than the Sun, that 'barren shines,' whose beams
create no beneficial effect, except when directed on the fruitful
Earth. He reminds Adam that those bright luminaries minister not to the
Earth, but to himself, 'Earth's habitant,' and directs his attention to
the magnificence and extent of the surrounding universe, of which he
occupies but a small portion. The diurnal swiftness of the orbs that
move round the Earth he attributes to God's omnipotence, that to
material bodies 'could add speed almost spiritual.'

The Angel, after alluding to his rapid flight through space, suggests
that God placed heaven so far from Earth that man might not presume to
inquire into things which it would be of no advantage for him to know.
He then suddenly changes to the Copernican system, which he lucidly
describes in the following lines:--

                              What if the Sun
    Be centre to the World, and other stars
    By his attractive virtue and their own
    Incited, dance about him various rounds?
    Their wandering course, now high, now low, then hid,
    Progressive, retrograde, or standing still,
    In six thou seest; and what if, seventh to these
    The planet Earth, so steadfast though she seem,
    Insensibly three different motions move?
    Which else to several spheres thou must ascribe,
