
"I did twenty years back. I shall be able to pick my way."

"My lord must remember that the city is beleaguered," the fellow
persisted. "The people are hungry. They prowl in bands after nightfall,
and--I make no question that my lord would conquer in a fight against
whatever odds, but--"

"Quite right. I covet no street scuffle to-night. Lend me, I pray you,
a sufficiency of men. You will know best what are needed. For me, I am
accustomed to a city with quiet streets."

A score of sturdy fellows were detailed off for my escort, and with them
in a double file on either hand, I marched out from the close perfumed
air of the pyramid into the cool moonlight of the city. It was my
purpose to make a tour of the walls and to find out somewhat of the
disposition of these rebels.

But the Gods saw fit to give me another education first. The city, as I
saw it during that night walk, was no longer the old capital that I had
known, the just accretion of the ages, the due admixture of comfort and
splendour. The splendour was there, vastly increased. Whole wards had
been swept away to make space for new palaces, and new pyramids of the
wealthy, and I could not but have an admiration for the skill and the
brain which made possible such splendid monuments.

And, indeed, gazing at them there under the silver of the moonlight,
I could almost understand the emotions of the Europeans and other
barbarous savages which cause them to worship all such great buildings
as Gods, since they deem them too wonderful and majestic to be set up by
human hands unaided.

Still, if it was easy to admire, it was simple also to see plain
advertisement of the cost at which these great works had been reared.
From each grant of ground, where one of these stately piles earned
silver under the moon, a hundred families had been evicted and left to
harbour as they pleased in the open; and, as a consequence, now every
niche had its quota of sleepers, and every shadow its squad of fierce
wild creatures, ready to rush out and rob or slay all wayfarers of less
force than their own.

Myself, I am no pamperer of the common people. I say that, if a man be
left to hunger and shiver, he will work to gain him food and raiment;
and if not, why then he can die, and the State is well rid of a
worthless fellow. But here beside us, as we marched through many wards,
were marks of blind oppression; starved dead bodies, with the bones
starting through the lean skin, sprawled in the gutter; and indeed
it was plain that, save for the favoured few, the people of the great
capital were under a most heavy oppression.

But at this, though I might regret it abominably, I could make no strong
complaint. By the ancient law of the land all the people, great and
small, were the servants of the king, to be put without question to what
purposes he chose; and Phorenice stood in the place of the king. So I
tried to think no treason, but with a sigh passed on, keeping my eyes
above the miseries and the squalors of the roadway, and sending out my
thoughts to the stars which hung in the purple night above, and to
the High Gods which dwelt amongst them, seeking, if it might be, for
guidance for my future policies. And so in time the windings of the
streets brought us to the walls, and, coursing beside these and giving
fitting answer to the sentries who beat their drums as we passed, we
came in time to that great gate which was a charge to the captain of the
garrison.

Here it was plain there was some special commotion. A noise of laughter
went up into the still night air, and with it now and again the snarl
and roar of a great beast, and now and again the shriek of a hurt man.
But whatever might be afoot, it was not a scene to come upon suddenly.
The entrance gates of our great capital were designed by their ancient
builders to be no less strong than the walls themselves. Four pairs
of valves were there, each a monstrous block of stone two man-heights
square, and a man-height thick, and the wall was doubled to receive
them, enclosing an open circus between its two parts. The four gates
themselves were set one at the inner, one at the outer side of each of
these walls, and a hidden machinery so connected them, that of each set
one could not open till the other was closed; and as for forcing them
without war engines, one might as foolishly try to push down the royal
pyramid with the bare hand.

My escort made outcry with the horn which hung from the wall inviting
such a summons, and a warder came to an arrow-slit, and did inspection
of our persons and business. His survey was according to the ancient
form of words, which is long, and this was made still more tedious by
the noise from within, which ever and again drowned all speech between
us entirely.

But at last the formalities had been duly complied with, and he shot
back the massive bars and bolts of stone, and threw ajar one monstrous
stone valve of the door. Into the chamber within--a chamber made from
the thickness of the wall between the two doors--I and my fellows
crowded, and then the warder with his machines pulled to the valve which
had been opened, and came to me again through the press of my escort,
bowing low to the ground.

"I have no vail to give you," I said abruptly. "Get on with your duty.
Open me that other door."

"With respect, my lord, it would be better that I should first announce
my lord's presence. There is a baiting going forward in the circus, and
the tigers are as yet mere savages, and no respecters of persons."

"The what?"

"The tigers, if my lord will permit them the name. They are baiting a
batch of prisoners with the two great beasts which the Empress (whose
name be adored) has sent here to aid us keep the gate. But if my
lord will, there are the ward rooms leading off this passage, and the
galleries which run out from them commanding the circus, and from there
my lord can see the sport undisturbed."

Now, the mere lust for killing excites only disgust in me, but I
suspected the orders of the Empress in this matter, and had a curiosity
to see her scheme. So I stepped into the warder's lodge, and on into
the galleries which commanded the circus with their arrow-slits. The old
builders of the place had intended these for a second line of defence,
for, supposing the outer doors all forced, an enemy could be speedily
shot down in the circus, without being able to give a blow in return,
and so would only march into a death-trap. But as a gazing-place on a
spectacle they were no less useful.

The circus was bright lit by the moonlight, and the air which came in to
me from it was acrid with the reek of blood. There was no sport in
what was going forward: as I said, it was mere killing, and the sight
disgusted me. I am no prude about this matter. Give a prisoner his
weapons, put him in a pit with beasts of reasonable strength, and let
him fight to a finish if you choose, and I can look on there and applaud
the strokes. The war prisoner, being a prisoner, has earned death by
natural law, and prefers to get his last stroke in hot blood than to
be knocked down by the headsman's axe. And it is any brave man's luxury
either to help or watch a lusty fight. But this baiting in the circus
between the gates was no fair battle like that.

To begin with, the beasts were no fair antagonists for single men. In
fact, twenty men armed might well have fled from them. When the warder
said tigers, I supposed he meant the great cats of the woods. But here,
in the circus, I saw a pair of the most terrific of all the fur-bearing
land beasts, the great tigers of the caves--huge monsters, of such
ponderous strength that in hunger they will oftentimes drag down a
mammoth, if they can find him away from his herd.

How they had been brought captive I could not tell. Hunter of beasts
though I had been for all my days, I take no shame in saying that
I always approached the slaying of a cave-tiger with stratagem and
infinite caution. To entrap it alive and bring it to a city on a chain
was beyond my most daring schemes, and I have been accredited with more
new things than one. But here it was in fact, and I saw in these captive
beasts a new certificate for Phorenice's genius.

The purpose of these two cave-tigers was plain: whilst they were in
the circus, and loose, no living being could cross from one gate to
the other. They were a new and sturdy addition to the defences of the
capital. A collar of bronze was round the throat of each, and on the
collar was a massive chain which led to the wall, where it could be
payed out or hauled in by means of a windlass in one of the hidden
galleries. So that at ordinary moments the two huge beasts could be
tethered, one close to either end of the circus, as the litter of bones
and other messes showed, leaving free passage-way between the two sets
of doors.

But when I stood there by the arrow-slit, looking down into the
moonlight of the circus, these chains were slackened (though men stood
by the windlass of each), and the great striped brutes were prowling
about the circus with the links clanking and chinking in their wake.
Lying stark on the pavement were the bodies of some eight men, dead
and uneaten; and though the cave-tigers stopped their prowlings now and
again to nuzzle these, and beat them about with playful paw-blows, they
made no pretence at commencing a meal. It was clear that this cruel
sport had grown common to them, and they knew there were other victims
yet to be added to the tally.

Presently, sure enough, as I watched, a valve of the farther gate swung
back an arm's length, and a prisoner, furiously resisting, was thrust
out into the circus. He fell on his face, and after one look around him
he lay resolutely still, with eyes on the ground passively awaiting
his fate. The ponderous stone of the gate clapped to in its place; the
cave-tigers turned in their prowlings; and a chatter of wagers ran to
and fro amongst the watchers behind the arrow-slits.

It seemed there were niceties of cruelty in this wretched game. There
was a sharp clank as the windlasses were manned, and the tethering
chains were drawn in by perhaps a score of links. One of the cave-tigers
crouched, lashed its tail, and launched forth on a terrific spring.
The chain tautened, the massive links sang to the strain, and the great
beast gave a roar which shook the walls. It had missed the prone man by
a hand's breadth, and the watchers behind the arrow-slits shrieked forth
their delight. The other tiger sprang also and missed, and again there
were shouts of pleasure, which mingled with the bellowing voices of the
beasts. The man lay motionless in his form. One more cowardly, or
one more brave, might have run from death, or faced it; but this poor
prisoner chose the middle course--he permitted death to come to him, and
had enough of doggedness to wait for it without stir.

The great cave-tigers were used, it appeared, to this disgusting sport.
There were no more wild springs, no more stubbings at the end of the
massive chains. They lay down on the pavement, and presently began to
purr, rolling on to their sides and rubbing themselves luxuriously. The
prisoner still lay motionless in his form.

By slow degrees the monstrous brutes each drew to the end of its chain
and began to reach at the man with out-stretched forepaw. The male could
not touch him; the female could just reach him with the far tip of a
claw; and I saw a red scratch start up in the bare skin of his side at
every stroke. But still the prisoner would not stir. It seemed to me
that they must slack out more links of one of the tigers' chains, or let
the vile play linger into mere tediousness.

But I had more to learn yet. The male tiger, either taught by his
own devilishness, or by those brutes that were his keepers, had still
another ruse in store. He rose to his feet and turned round, backing
against the chain. A yell of applause from the hidden men behind
the arrow-slits told that they knew what was in store; and then the
monstrous beast, stretched to the utmost of its vast length, kicked
sharply with one hind paw.

I heard the crunch of the prisoner's ribs as the pads struck him, and at
that same moment the poor wretch's body was spurned away by the blow, as
one might throw a fruit with the hand. But it did not travel far. It was
clear that the she-tiger knew this manoeuvre of her mate's. She caught
the man on his bound, nuzzling over him for a minute, and then tossing
him high into the air, and leaping up to the full of her splendid height
after him.

Those other onlookers thought it magnificent; their gleeful shouts said
as much. But for me, my gorge rose at the sight. Once the tigers
had reached him, the man had been killed, it is true, without any
unnecessary lingering. Even a light blow from those terrific paws would
slay the strongest man living. But to see the two cave-tigers toying
with the poor body was an insult to the pride of our race.

However, I was not there to preach the superiority of man to the
beasts, and the indecency and degradation of permitting man to be unduly
insulted. I had come to learn for myself the new balance of things
in the kingdom of Atlantis, and so I stood at my place behind the
arrow-slit with a still face. And presently another scene in this
ghastly play was enacted.

The cave-tigers tired of their sport, and first one and then the other
fell once more to prowling over the littered pavements, with the heavy
chains scraping and chinking in their wake. They made no beginning to
feast on the bodies provided for them. That would be for afterwards. In
the present, the fascination of slaughter was big in them, and they
had thought that it would be indulged further. It seemed that they knew
their entertainers.

Again the windlass clanked, and the tethering chains drew the great
beasts clear of the doorway; and again a valve of the farther door swung
ajar, and another prisoner was thrust struggling into the circus. A
sickness seized me when I saw that this was a woman, but still, in view
of the object I had in hand, I made no interruption.

It was not that I had never seen women sent to death before. A general,
who has done his fighting, must in his day have killed women equally
with men; yes, and seen them earn their death-blow by lusty battling.
Yet there seemed something so wanton in this cruel helpless sacrifice
of a woman prisoner, that I had a struggle with myself to avoid
interference. Still it is ever the case that the individual must be
sacrificed to a policy, and so as I say, I watched on, outwardly cold
and impassive.

I watched too (I confess it freely) with a quickening heart. Here was no
sullen submissive victim like the last. She may have been more cowardly
(as some women are), she may have been braver (as many women have shown
themselves); but, at any rate, it was clear that she was going to make a
struggle for her life, and to do vicious damage, it might be, before
she yielded it up. The watchers behind the arrow-slits recognized this.
Their wagers, and the hum of their appreciation, swept loudly round the
ring of the circus.

They stripped their prisoners, before they thrust them out to this
death, of all the clothes they might carry, for clothes have a value;
and so the woman stood there bare-limbed in the moonlight.

She clapped her back to the great stone door by which she had entered,
and faced fate with glowing eye. Gods! there have been times in early
years when I could have plucked out sword and jumped down, and fought
for her there for the sheer delight of such a battle. But now policy
restrained me. The individual might want a helping hand, but it was
becoming more and more clear that Atlantis wanted a minister also; and
before these great needs, the lesser ones perforce must perish. Still,
be it noted that, if I did not jump down, no other man there that night
had sufficient manhood remaining to venture the opportunity.

My heart glowed as I watched her. She picked a bone from the litter on
the pavement and beat off its head by blows against the wall. Then with
her teeth she fashioned the point to still further sharpness. I could
see her teeth glisten white in the moonrays as she bit with them.

The huge cave-tigers, which stood as high as her head as they walked,
came nearer to her in their prowlings, yet obviously neglected her. This
was part of their accustomed scheme of torment, and the woman knew it
well. There was something intolerable in their noiseless, ceaseless
paddings over the pavement. I could see the prisoner's breast heave as
she watched them. A terror such as that would have made many a victim
sick and helpless.

But this one was bolder than I had thought. She did not wait for a
spring: she made the first attack herself. When the she-tiger made its
stroll towards her, and was in the act of turning, she flung herself
into a sudden leap, striking viciously at its eye with her sharpened
bone. A roar from the onlookers acknowledged the stroke. The
cave-tiger's eye remained undarkened, but the puny weapon had dealt it
a smart flesh wound, and with a great bellow of surprise and pain it
scampered away to gain space for a rush and a spring.

But the woman did not await its charge. With a shrill scream she sped
forward, running at the full of her speed across the moonlight directly
towards that shadowed part of the encircling wall within whose thickness
I had my gazing place; and then, throwing every tendon of her body into
the spring, made the greatest leap that surely any human being
ever accomplished, even when spurred on by the utmost of terror and
desperation. In an after day I measured it, and though of a certainty
she must have added much to the tally by the sheer force of her run,
which drove her clinging up the rough surface of the wall, it is a sure
thing that in that splendid leap her feet must have dangled a man-height
and a half above the pavement.

I say it was prodigious, but then the spur was more than the ordinary,
and the woman herself was far out of the common both in thews and
intelligence; and the end of the leap left her with five fingers lodged
in the sill of the arrow-slit from which I watched. Even then she must
have slipped back if she had been left to herself, for the sill sloped,
and the stone was finely smooth; but I shot out my hand and gripped
hers by the wrist, and instantly she clambered up with both knees on the
sills, and her fingers twined round to grip my wrist in her turn.

And now you will suppose she gushed out prayers and promises, thinking
only of safety and enlargement. There was nothing of this. With savage
panting wordlessness she took fresh grip on the sharpened bone with her
spare hand, and lunged with it desperately through the arrow-slit. With
the hand that clutched mine she drew me towards her, so as to give the
blows the surer chance, and so unprepared was I for such an attack, and
with such fierce suddenness did she deliver it, that the first blow was
