
"No, I am a good daughter of the Church," said the contessa. "And
through you I pay homage to God."

The old woman's maroon satin gown crackled as she bent her knees. Even
kneeling, she was almost as tall as Ugolini. Gold bracelets rattled
around her skinny arms, and heavy medallions dangled from gold chains
around her neck. A net of gold threads held the coiled braids of her
white hair in place.

Once she was on her knees, her grandnephew pulled off his red cap and
bowed to Ugolini with a sweeping gesture. His hair was a mass of tight
black curls. Had he, too, watched the massacre of the Filippeschi,
Sophia wondered. And what had that done to the boy?

"Please let me kiss your ring," the contessa said. She seized his hand
and planted a loud, smacking kiss on his sapphire cardinal's ring.

"It is I who should pay homage to you, Dona Elvira," said Ugolini.

Sophia immediately stepped forward to help the contessa struggle to her
feet. The boy took the old lady from the other side. Sophia caught a
glimpse of him looking at her with bright, amused eyes. Eyes that were
too old for the face of an eleven-year-old boy.

When she got close to the contessa, Sophia smelled an odor that made her
think of a damp cellar. Together Sophia and the Monaldeschi heir walked
with the old lady to a broad-armed chair, where she settled herself,
gasping. Two manservants set smaller chairs for the cardinal and Sophia
facing the contessa.

The contessa's grandnephew leaned elegantly against the back of the old
lady's chair, the fingers of his chubby hands interlinked. Sophia
glanced at him and caught his glittering eyes roving over her body. He
saw her looking at him, and smiled faintly and without embarrassment.

Contessa Elvira raised a trembling hand. "Cardinal Piacenza had been
most unkind. I had a letter from him this morning condemning me in the
rudest terms for our triumph over the Filippeschi canaglia yesterday in
the Piazza San Giovenale. He accused me of sacrilege, because I shed the
blood of Marco during a Mass. When else could I have taken him and his
foul brood unawares? God gave me the opportunity."

"Nothing happens save by the will of God," Ugolini murmured.

"Esattamente! Yet Cardinal Piacenza has the audacity to tell me that I
am in a grave state of sin and that I have led Vittorio here into sin as
well."

Glancing again at Vittorio, Sophia noticed the sword, short enough for a
boy but long enough to kill, that hung from his jeweled belt.

Ugolini shook his head. "No one has the right to say that another is in
sin. Only God sees the soul. _Judge not, lest ye be judged._"

Sophia found it hard to believe that this was the same man whose panic
she had struggled to overcome a few hours earlier. He was suddenly the
perfect clergyman, attentive, sympathetic, sententious.

"Yes, and for what should I be judged?" The contessa lifted both hands
now. "For exacting justice?"

"If you have any doubts, dear Madama," Ugolini said, "I will be happy to
give you absolution."

That was a nice touch, thought Sophia. If she confessed to him, that
would certainly put her under his influence.

But even as they talked, across town the podesta's men might be tearing
Daoud's body to pieces. Sophia felt her stomach knot. She shook her head
as vigorously as she dared, to drive away the hideous images without
attracting attention to herself.

_Hurry! Dear God, make them hurry!_

"I _have_ no doubts," said the old lady firmly. "Besides, I have my own
chaplain. I would not wish another person on earth to know me as well as
he does. But I do thank you for your kind thought, Cardinal. I am glad
to see that not all the princes of the Church think alike in this
matter."

"I am sure Cardinal Piacenza is quite alone," said Ugolini.

The contessa shrugged. "I do not know about that. Since His Holiness
left, no one has called on me. I have been feeling quite abandoned."

Now Sophia began to feel a stronger hope than ever. The old lady liked
to be flattered by princes of the Church. Perhaps she could be won over
after all.

"Surely your guest, Cardinal de Verceuil, attends you often," Ugolini
ventured.

The contessa sniffed. "That Frenchman. He is no more civilized than his
Tartars. I would rather he left me alone. The French are all rather
barbaric. Of course, that fine young Simon de Gobignon--he is most
attractive." She grinned with a lasciviousness that startled Sophia.
"This palace has not been the same since he went back to France."

"Back to France?" Ugolini stared. "I thought he, too, was going to
Perugia."

Sophia felt a ball of ice suddenly encase her heart. She had told
Ugolini, as she told Daoud, that Simon was going to Perugia. She prayed
Ugolini would not suspect that she had been lying.

"Oh, no," said the contessa. "France. He told me himself when he took
leave of me. And when he returns, I think Ghibellini everywhere in Italy
will have reason to tremble. Because the might of France will follow
him. I am only sorry he will not come in time to save Orvieto from the
Sienese. One of my sergentes just reported that the Sienese army is but
a day or two away from here."

_And Lorenzo with it_, thought Sophia. _If only he would hurry._

"What will you do, Contessa?" Ugolini asked. "As a Guelfo family, do the
Monaldeschi intend to leave Orvieto before the Sienese arrive?"

He was straying from the subject, thought Sophia impatiently.

_Never mind the damned Sienese army. They cannot do us any good._

The old lady tossed her head, her hooked nose jutting defiantly. She
laid her hand on Vittorio's.

"We will stand fast. This family has lived in this city since the days
of the Etruscans. I expect our militia to put up a good fight. After our
honor has been satisfied, we will ask, with dignity, for terms."

"Very brave," said Ugolini.

The militia of Orvieto, thought Sophia, was under the command of the
podesta. If d'Ucello was involved in fighting the Sienese, what might
that mean for Daoud?

Dona Elvira looked at the cardinal slyly. "Are you also staying in
Orvieto, Your Eminence?"

"For the moment," said Ugolini.

Sophia was surprised that Ugolini did not say more, but the conversation
seemed to be going the way he wanted it to.

"You may be able to help us, Your Eminence."

Sophia felt more elated than ever. If she wanted help from Ugolini, then
surely she would be willing to help him.

"Nothing would please me more, Contessa."

"You are from the south, from Manfred's kingdom. You might have some
influence with these Ghibellini. Perhaps a word from you would help to
keep our house and our property intact."

Ugolini threw out his arms. "Dear Contessa, anything. Of course, as a
loyal supporter of the pope I do not ordinarily have dealings with
Ghibellini."

"Of course not," the contessa agreed. Vittorio smiled. He had a small,
chiseled mouth, such as Sophia had seen on the men in ancient Roman
sculptures.

"But whatever little I might be able to do, I am entirely at your
service," Ugolini said.

"I have always considered you my very good friend, Your Eminence. Even
though you opposed the alliance of Christians and Tartars and they were
my houseguests."

That startled Sophia. The contessa made it sound as if the Tartars had
left her home.

"_Were_ your houseguests, Madama?" Ugolini asked. So, he had noticed it
too.

She sighed. "Yes, they and that boorish French cardinal left for Perugia
this morning, not long before you came. They chose a bad day to leave.
This morning's storm is not the end of the rain. Another storm is
coming. Every joint in my body aches."

"These storms clear the air," said Ugolini.

The contessa held up a sticklike finger. "Exactly as the storm yesterday
in the Piazza San Giovenale did."

Now she was bringing up her grievance, Sophia thought. Evidently she had
offended a number of cardinals with the massacre of the Filippeschi.

A servant brought a small table of some shiny black wood and set it in
their midst. Its legs were carved in the form of twisting, wingless
dragons. Perhaps it was a gift to the contessa from the Tartars. Sophia
had seen such furnishings in Constantinople and knew they came from the
distant East, where the Tartars ruled.

Another servant brought a tray with small sweet cakes filled with a
paste made of crushed white raisins. A third poured the pale yellow wine
of Orvieto into silver goblets for them. Sophia sipped her wine, but her
stomach churned with fear for Daoud, a fear held rigidly in check. She
could not drink much, and she could not eat at all.

Every so often she glanced at Vittorio di Monaldeschi, and each time she
did, she found his eyes fixed on her.

Ugolini wiped his mouth after finishing off a cake. "As Fortune's wheel
turns, all of us need friends at one time or another."

"How true," said the old lady.

"I come before you today to presume upon our friendship to ask you a
favor, Madama," said Ugolini.

"We need each other, as you have said, Your Eminence."

Sophia prayed that the contessa would agree to help.

Ugolini told how the podesta's men had arrested Daoud the previous
night. Sophia watched the contessa's face for some sign of sympathy, but
the old lady remained as expressionless as a bird.

"I am shocked that the podesta would arrest your houseguest," she said.
"But what can I do? After all, Signore d'Ucello holds the office because
he has our confidence."

_Which means that he stands aside while you murder your enemies._

Ugolini spread his hands. "Precisely because he has your confidence,
dear Madonna, I know he will listen to you. We have had no word of what
has become of our guest and friend."

"I want _everyone_ punished who had anything to do with the attack on my
palace," said the contessa, clenching her bony fist.

And what if the contessa were to discover that the man they were talking
about had incited that attack and used it as cover for his own attempt
to murder the Tartar ambassadors, Sophia thought. She would want him
torn to bits in the piazza. New waves of terror washed over her.

And she would want those who helped him punished along with him. Sophia
glanced at Ugolini and saw that he was sweating.

_Dear God, do not let him falter now._

"Of course, Contessa," he said. "That is why I have come to you. Because
you, and not the podesta, are the one truly injured. But the arrest of
David is a terrible mistake. I place before you my belief in this man's
absolute innocence. I am prepared to swear to it. He was not even here
in Orvieto when that dastardly attack occurred. He was in Perugia. There
are countless witnesses. I know this man. He is a _good_ man, a
merchant, not a warrior."

"I remember him," said the contessa. "A very good-looking blond man. I
heard his conversation with the Tartars and I began to wonder myself
about the wisdom of allying ourselves with them."

"It is probably because David did testify against the Tartars that the
podesta thinks he might be connected with the attack on your palace,"
said Ugolini. "But such a man as David would have nothing to do with
such mascalzoni as the Filippeschi. I, too, have opposed the alliance,
and yet you and I are friends. It is one thing to disagree in a
civilized way. It is another to turn to behave like a scoundrel. David
has the same horror of murder that we all do."

Remembering what she had heard about the killings in the cathedral
plaza, Sophia wondered if the contessa had any horror of murder at all.

"I am sure that is true," said the contessa. "But the podesta must have
good reason for detaining this David."

Despair overwhelmed Sophia. The tears that had been falling in her soul
sprang to her eyelids and began to run down her cheeks. She should not
show her feelings like this, she thought. But what did it matter, when
Daoud was dying and no one would lift a hand to save him?

"Why are you crying, child?" said the contessa. Sophia heard sympathy in
her voice.

"Forgive me, Contessa," she said, sobbing. "This is very rude of me."

"Does this man mean so much to you?" asked the old lady, her rasping
voice softened.

In her anguish, Sophia was still clear-headed enough to see that she
might use that anguish. She threw herself down on the terrazzo floor and
clasped the contessa around the knees.

"Sophia!" She could hear Ugolini's chair scrape as he stood up. The boy
took a step toward her.

"It is all right," said the contessa. "You love this man, do you not?"
She patted Sophia's hair.

"Yes," Sophia wept. "And I swear to you, he is innocent."

_He is, too, because he believes that everything he is doing is right._

"Your Eminence?" said the contessa. "You approve of your niece and this
man from Trebizond?"

"Oh, certainly," said Ugolini waving his hands. "He is a fine man."

"Hmm," said the old lady. "That night at my reception I thought you and
the young Count de Gobignon were attracted to each other."

Sophia felt a strange stab of guilt.

"Oh, he is too far above me, Contessa," she said. "A count. David is a
merchant. We are right for each other."

_It is true that David and I are much more suited than Simon and I._

"It makes me feel young for a moment to see a beautiful woman in love."
The contessa stroked Sophia's cheek with dry, rough fingers.

Sophia opened her eyes wide and looked the contessa full in the face.
"Please help us, Contessa, for the sake of love."

The contessa sighed and smiled. "I will send for d'Ucello. I will
request that he stop questioning your friend." She looked across at
Ugolini. "You must give me your word, Your Eminence, that this David
will not leave Orvieto until all doubts about him are settled."

"Oh, thank you, thank you!" Sophia kissed the shiny knuckles, wetting
the blue-veined hand with her tears.

"Sophia, stand up," said Ugolini, touching her shoulder. "This is
embarrassing."

Vittorio helped her to her feet, holding her waist more tightly than was
necessary.

_Embarrassing? If not for my outburst, there would be no hope of freeing
Daoud._

_But I must live in terror awhile longer. Until I know he is well. That
they have not done anything to him. Oh, God, let him come back to me
healthy and whole._




LIII


Rachel sat on a divan by the window in her room. She had drawn the
curtains back and pushed the shutters open so that she could see out and
feel the cool breeze. She held a small leather-bound book in her hand,
_Geography of the World_, by Yucaf ibn Faruzi, a Spanish Jew. It was one
of the small store of books Angelo had owned, written in Hebrew, that
she had kept with her to help her pass the long hours she spent alone.
Besides enjoying reading, she felt she was somehow pleasing Angelo, who
had taught her to read Hebrew.

She was reading about Egypt when the second storm of the morning struck
Orvieto and the window no longer admitted enough light to read by. A few
water droplets blew in through the open window to fall on the open
pages. She carefully blotted them up with the hem of her satin robe, but
she was afraid more rain would damage the vellum pages. So she shut the
book, and watched the lightning flash and listened to the thunder.

Tilia's house was built halfway down an incline, so Sophia could see
water foaming in the ditch that ran through the center of the street. So
heavy was the rain that waves were flowing down the cobblestones. Where
a raindrop struck the water, the splash was like a little crown.

A dark shadow appeared at the high end of the street, a hooded figure.
Another followed, and another. They rose higher and higher, until she
could see that they were riding horses. What were men doing out in a
storm like this? Were they coming here?

They were. The first men reined up their horses outside Tilia's front
door, dismounted, and moved to the shelter of the overhanging houses
across the street. More men on horses, some on mules, and many more on
foot, gathered outside the house. All wore hoods or broad-brimmed hats
to keep the rain from their heads. Rachel's heart began to thud in her
chest when she saw there were too many for her to count. She saw the
gleam of helmets under some of the hoods, the wet glitter of mail when
an arm or leg emerged from a cloak. A train of mules carrying heavy
packs came down the street and stopped.

Rachel began to tremble. These men had not come for pleasure. There were
too many of them, and their dress and manner was full of menace. She was
glad that the heavy rain forced them to keep their heads down;
otherwise, one of them might have looked up here and seen her. She drew
back a little from the window.

A line of covered carts drawn by pairs of mules pulled up behind the
crowd of armed men. The cart in the lead was bright yellow and red, and
its paint glistened wetly.

Did anyone else in the house know this crowd was out there? Perhaps no
one else was looking out a window. She ran to the door of her room, just
as she heard a pounding from below.

Then there were shouts, bangs, and crashes, the shrill shattering of
glass and porcelain, the heavy thumps of bodies falling. Rachel opened
her door. Other doors swung open along the shadowy third-floor corridor.
Someone stepped out with a candle. Frightened women's faces were white
in the candlelight. She saw Antonia, Angela, Gloria.

She did not see Tilia. She must still be with Sophia, wherever they had
gone this morning.

_Oh, if only Sophia had taken me with her as I begged her to. I knew
something terrible was going to happen._

"What is it?" the women cried to one another. "Who is down there? Wounds
of Jesus!"

Cassio emerged from Francesca's room, tying the drawstring of his hose.
He was a big man, his bare chest matted with black hair, and the sight
of him comforted Rachel until she looked into his face as he hurried
past her and saw that it was tight and pale with fear. And he was
carrying a naked shortsword.

But Cassio's appearance emboldened the women, and they left their rooms
to crowd toward the top of the stairs that led to the lower floors.
Rachel joined them.

"I saw a lot of men outside," Rachel told the others, her heart
battering against her breastbone. "Armed men, with horses and mules and
wagons."

Antonia, a round-faced woman, hair dyed red with henna, pulled her robe
around her. "Another party setting out for Perugia, I suppose. They
probably stopped by for a little farewell fun."

"Then why are they fighting downstairs?" Francesca said, anxiety
sharpening her voice.

Thunder shook the house, drowning out the clamor of the brawling two
stories below. Then Rachel heard the clang of steel and Cassio's voice
crying out angrily.

The carpeted stairs at the end of the corridor shook under heavy feet.
Women's screams, mingled with the cries of men, arose on the lower
floors. She pushed her way to the head of the stairs and looked down.

A group of men were coming up. They had thrown back the hoods of their
brown cloaks, and their pointed helmets reflected the candlelight.
Rachel backed away as she saw that the half-dozen men with helmets were
brandishing long broad-bladed daggers.

The women around her started screaming and darting back into their
rooms. Rachel bolted for her own room.

"Rei-cho!" The man's shrill cry shot an arrow of terror through her.
That was John's voice.

She turned in the doorway of her room and saw the Tartar standing at the
head of the stairs, his soft black cap hiding most of his white hair.
Beside him was a stocky, middle-aged woman, and flanking them were the
swarthy men with their daggers. John and the other men were all smiling,
as if, as Antonia had said, they had come only for a bit of pleasure.
But the tumult downstairs, shaking the house more than the thunder,
belied that.

John spoke to the woman and she called to Rachel. "Signore John must go
to Perugia." Her Italian was strangely accented. "He wishes you to come
with him. He will give you many costly gifts."

Rachel took a step backward into her room. "No. I do not want to go."

Not now. Not when Sophia had just come to tell her they were going to
take her south with them. South to Manfred's kingdom, where Jews were
treated like everyone else. Where she might yet find a place for herself
and forget that she had sold her body.

John and the woman advanced down the corridor, their guards with them.
Some of the swarthy men pushed open the doors of the rooms they passed
and looked in. The doors could not be barred from the inside. Tilia had
always insisted on that, so no client could lock himself in with a woman
and harm her. The men with the daggers grinned at one another and talked
in a strange language.

"No, I don't want to go!" Rachel screamed. She darted into her room and
slammed the door. Frantically, she looked around for something to hold
it shut.

The door started to open, and she threw herself against it. It closed
for a moment. Then she was hurled away from it as it swung inward, John
behind it. She screamed in fear.

The Tartar, who was not much taller than Rachel, strode into the room.
He walked with what appeared to be a swagger because he was slightly
bowlegged. He was talking rapidly in his language, advancing on Rachel
and smiling. He held out his arms. The stout woman stood in the doorway,
watching without expression.

Rachel backed away from them, her body rigid.

"You must come with him now. He is in a great hurry. An army of the
pope's enemies is less that a day from Orvieto, and they want to take
Signore John and Signore Philip prisoner."

"Then let him escape," Rachel cried. "I do not want to go with him." She
was standing before her bed now. The woman spoke to John and he answered
quickly, still smiling.

"He says you are precious to him and he cannot leave you," she said
tonelessly.

She had to get away now, or be John's prisoner for the rest of her life.

Panting more from fury than from exertion, Rachel made a sudden jump to
her right, and when John stepped in that direction to grab her, she
darted to the left and ran out the door. John's translator made no
effort to stop her.

_That would not have fooled him, except that he was not expecting me to
do anything_, she thought as she ran down the corridor.

She held one thought in her mind--she must get out of this building. She
heard screams and sounds of struggle from the rooms of the other women.
She saw Francesca fighting with a helmeted man, and her eyes met
Francesca's over the man's brown-cloaked shoulder. Only one of the
dagger-wielding men was in the corridor now, and she had surprised him.
He shouted at her and ran after her.

Gathering up the skirt of her robe, she raced down the stairs, taking
the last four in a leap. The dark man with the dagger was right behind
her, and behind him she could hear John's shout. There was anger in the
Tartar's voice now. That terrified her even more.

_He did not think I would get away from him this easily._

The dark man grabbed her flying robe, and she felt the silk tear. She
had nothing on underneath the robe. She would not let that stop her from
running. She must not let anything stop her.

She heard the man behind her calling as she ran down the stairs to the
first floor. She was in the corridor now, and she saw that it was
swarming with men in helmets and mail, struggling with Tilia's women.
Some of the men had their breeches down.

She saw tall, beautiful Maiga striking out with her fists at the
helmeted men. But they were wrestling with her and forcing her onto her
back. Agonized pity for Maiga blazed up within her, but she ran on.

One of Tilia's black African servants was lying on the floor across the
corridor. His eyes were open and he was not moving. Again she felt a
surge of pity.

But then terror gripped her.

_They are killing people here! My God, what are they doing, what are
they doing?_

Instead of going on down the stairs from the first floor gallery to the
ground floor, she leapt over the body of the black man and ran into the
crowd of men and women struggling in the hall.

_I am small and I am quick_, she thought, and that gave her the courage
to keep running. The men in the hall were not interested in her, and she
slithered past them while John and his bodyguard stumbled along behind.

The bodyguard's voice sounded far away. Other men were shouting at him.

"Catch her yourself, you damned Armenian ape!" These men were speaking
in Italian. "We've already got ours."

Rachel reached the stairs at the other end of the corridor. They led
down to the same place as did the main stairs, the reception room on the
ground floor. But her pursuers would not know that. Sure enough, they
were following her through this first-floor corridor. She glanced back
and saw that the crowd of Italian men had gotten in their way, so that
half the corridor was between them.

_Run, Rachel!_

Frantically she ran down to the first floor. There, horror greeted her.
More of Tilia's black men--she could not count--were sprawled around the
reception hall.

She saw blood spattered over the frescoes. She saw a black arm lying by
itself. One body had no head. She heard a scream of horror and knew it
was her own voice. Why were they doing this? What devils drove them?
There was blood all over the floor. Puddles of it. She had to dart
around them, over them.

Terror streaked through her as a tall man blocked her path. His hood was
thrown back and his cloak was open, and a jeweled cross glittered on his
chest--like the one Tilia wore, only three times bigger. Their eyes met;
his were staring and full of rage. His nose was big, and his mouth was
small and cruel. He pointed a long finger at her, a fortune in jeweled
rings glittering on his gloved hand.

"You! The one we came for! Stop!"

She stood paralyzed as a recollection of the dread face before her
flashed into her mind. Dinners for John and Philip--Tilia had given
elegant dinners, three or four of them--with musicians and the
companionship of her ladies, Rachel included.

And this was how they repaid her courtesy.

This man had been a guest at those dinners. He was a man of very high
rank, a cardinal in the Christian Church. He was French, she remembered.
His Italian words were heavily accented.

_What will they do to me if I don't obey him? Will they burn me for
being a Jew?_

And there was the other Tartar, Philip, standing beside the French
churchman. He looked like John--round head, brown skin, slitted
eyes--except that his beard and mustache were black. He was carrying a
bow in one hand and had a quiver full of arrows slung over one shoulder.
Rachel froze, like a rabbit trapped by two wolves.

The tall Frenchman reached for Rachel--but another figure appeared
between them, one of Tilia's black men. He blocked the tall man with the
cross, giving Rachel a chance to jump for the door.

Out of the corner of her eye Rachel saw Philip, strong white teeth
gleaming in a brown face, raise his bow. She heard the thrum of the
string, and then a piercing scream. Anguish for the black man welled up
in her.

Her torn robe was flapping as she ran out the door. She almost fell as
someone seized the back of her robe and yanked on it. She twisted out of
the robe and ran on, naked.

She heard John's shrill voice. He had reached the ground floor.

She was out of the house. In an instant her bare body was rain-wet from
head to toe.

A group of big men holding horses stood across the street, under the
overhang of the house opposite Tilia's. They were wearing swords and
purple surcoats over mail shirts. They looked at her gloomily and made
no move to stop her.

