gnarled old fingers tapped the open magazine.

Northwood seized the magazine and looked avidly at the title of the
article, "Creatures of the Light."

"No, I haven't read it," he admitted. "My magazine hasn't come yet."

"Run through it now briefly, will you? And note with especial care the
passages I have marked. In fact, you needn't bother with anything else
just now. Read this--and this--and this." He pointed out penciled
paragraphs.

Northwood read:

    Man always has been, always will be a creature of the light. He
    is forever reaching for some future point of perfected evolution
    which, even when his most remote ancestor was a fish creature
    composed of a few cells, was the guiding power that brought him
    up from the first stinking sea and caused him to create gods in
    his own image.

    It is this yearning for perfection which sets man apart from all
    other life, which made him _man_ even in the rudimentary stages
    of his development. He was man when he wallowed in the slime of
    the new world and yearned for the air above. He will still be
    man when he has evolved into that glorious creature of the
    future whose body is deathless and whose mind rules the
    universe.

Professor Michael, looking over Northwood's shoulder, interrupted the
reading:

"_Man always has been man_," he droned emphatically. "That's not
original with friend Mundson, of course; yet it is a theory that has not
received sufficient investigation." He indicated another marked
paragraph. "Read this thoughtfully, John. It's the crux of Mundson's
thought."

Northwood continued:

    Since the human body is chemical and electrical, increased
    knowledge of its powers and limitations will enable us to work
    with Nature in her sublime but infinitely slow processes of
    human evolution. We need not wait another fifty thousand years
    to be godlike creatures. Perhaps even now we may be standing at
    the beginning of the splendid bridge that will take us to that
    state of perfected evolution when we shall be Creatures who have
    reached the Light.

Northwood looked questioningly at the professor. "Queer, fantastic
thing, isn't it?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Professor Michael smoothed his thin, gray hair with his dried-out hand.
"Fantastic?" His intellectual eyes behind the thick glasses sought the
ceiling. "Who can say? Haven't you ever wondered why all parents expect
their children to be nearer perfection than themselves, and why is it a
natural impulse for them to be willing to sacrifice themselves to better
their offspring?" He paused and moistened his pale, wrinkled lips.
"Instinct, Northwood. We Creatures of the Light know that our race shall
reach that point in evolution when, as perfect creatures, we shall rule
all matter and live forever." He punctuated the last words with blows
on the table.

Northwood laughed dryly. "How many thousands of years are you looking
forward, Professor?"

The professor made an obscure noise that sounded like a smothered sniff.
"You and I shall never agree on the point that mental advancement may
wipe out physical limitations in the human race, perhaps in a few
hundred years. It seems as though your profound admiration for Dr.
Mundson would win you over to this pet theory."

"But what sane man can believe that even perfectly developed beings,
through mental control, could overcome Nature's fixed laws?"

"We don't know! We don't know!" The professor slapped the magazine with
an emphatic hand. "Emil Mundson hasn't written this article for nothing.
He's paving the way for some announcement that will startle the
scientific world. I know him. In the same manner he gave out veiled
hints of his various brilliant discoveries and inventions long before he
offered them to the world."

"But Dr. Mundson is an electrical wizard. He would not be delving
seriously into the mysteries of evolution, would he?"

"Why not?" The professor's wizened face screwed up wisely. "A year ago,
when he was back from one of those mysterious long excursions he takes
in that weirdly different aircraft of his, about which he is so
secretive, he told me that he was conducting experiments to prove his
belief that the human brain generates electric current, and that the
electrical impulses in the brain set up radioactive waves that some day,
among other miracles, will make thought communication possible. Perfect
man, he says, will perform mental feats which will give him complete
mental domination over the physical."

       *       *       *       *       *

Northwood finished reading and turned thoughtfully to the window. His
profile in repose had the straight-nosed, full-lipped perfection of a
Greek coin. Old, wizened Professor Michael, gazing at him covertly,
smothered a sigh.

"I wish you knew Dr. Mundson," he said. "He, the ugliest man in the
world, delights in physical perfection. He would revel in your splendid
body and brilliant mind."

Northwood blushed hotly. "You'll have to arrange a meeting between us."

"I have." The professor's thin, dry lips pursed comically. "He'll drop
in to see you within a few days."

And now John Northwood sat holding Dr. Mundson's card and the wallet
which the scientist had so mysteriously dropped at his feet.

       *       *       *       *       *

Here was high adventure, perhaps, for which he had been singled out by
the famous electrical wizard. While excitement mounted in his blood,
Northwood again examined the photograph. The girl's strange eyes, odd in
expression rather than in size or shape, seemed to hold him. The young
man's breath came quicker.

"It's a challenge," he said softly. "It won't hurt to see what it's all
about."

His watch showed eleven o'clock. He would return the wallet that night.
Into his coat pocket he slipped a revolver. One sometimes needed weapons
in Indian Court.

He took a taxi, which soon turned from the well-lighted streets into a
section where squalid houses crowded against each other, and dirty
children swarmed in the streets in their last games of the day.

Indian Court was little more than an alley, dark and evil smelling.

The chauffeur stopped at the entrance and said:

"If I drive in, I'll have to back out, sir. Number forty-four and a half
is the end house, facing the entrance."

"You've been here before?" asked Northwood.

"Last week I drove the queerest bird here--a fellow as good-looking as
you, who had me follow the taxi occupied by a hunchback with a face
like Old Nick." The man hesitated and went on haltingly: "It might sound
goofy, mister, but there was something funny about my fare. He jumped
out, asked me the charge, and, in the moment I glanced at my taxi-meter,
he disappeared. Yes, sir. Vanished, owing me four dollars, six bits. It
was almost ghostlike, mister."

Northwood laughed nervously and dismissed him. He found his number and
knocked at the dilapidated door. He heard a sudden movement in the
lighted room beyond, and the door opened quickly.

Dr. Mundson faced him.

"I knew you'd come!" he said with a slight Teutonic accent. "Often I'm
not wrong in sizing up my man. Come in."

Northwood cleared his throat awkwardly. "You dropped your wallet at my
feet, Dr. Mundson. I tried to stop you before you got away, but I guess
you did not hear me."

He offered the wallet, but the hunchback waved it aside.

"A ruse, of course," he confessed. "It just was my way of testing what
your Professor Michael told about you--that you are extraordinarily
intelligent, virile, and imaginative. Had you sent the wallet to me, I
should have sought elsewhere for my man. Come in."

       *       *       *       *       *

Northwood followed him into a living room evidently recently furnished
in a somewhat hurried manner. The furniture, although rich, was not
placed to best advantage. The new rug was a trifle crooked on the floor,
and the lamp shades clashed in color with the other furnishings.

Dr. Mundson's intense eyes swept over Northwood's tall, slim body.

"Ah, you're a man!" he said softly. "You are what all men would be if we
followed Nature's plan that only the fit shall survive. But modern
science is permitting the unfit to live and to mix their defective
beings with the developing race!" His huge fist gesticulated madly.
"Fools! Fools! They need me and perfect men like you."

"Why?"

"Because you can help me in my plan to populate the earth with a new
race of godlike people. But don't question me too closely now. Even if I
should explain, you would call me insane. But watch; gradually I shall
unfold the mystery before you, so that you will believe."

He reached for the wallet that Northwood still held, opened it with a
monstrous hand, and reached for the photograph. "She shall bring you
love. She's more beautiful than a poet's dream."

A warm flush crept over the young man's face.

"I can easily understand," he said, "how a man could love her, but for
me she comes too late."

"Pooh! Fiddlesticks!" The scientist snapped his fingers. "This girl was
created for you. That other--you will forget her the moment you set eyes
on the sweet flesh of this Athalia. She is an houri from Paradise--a
maiden of musk and incense." He held the girl's photograph toward the
young man. "Keep it. She is yours, if you are strong enough to hold
her."

Northwood opened his card case and placed the picture inside, facing
Mary's photograph. Again the warning words of the mysterious stranger
rang in his memory: "_The thing inside never will be yours._"

"Where to," he said eagerly; "and when do we start?"

"To the new Garden of Eden," said the scientist, with such a beatific
smile that his face was less hideous. "We start immediately. I have
arranged with Professor Michael for you to go."

       *       *       *       *       *

Northwood followed Dr. Mundson to the street and walked with him a few
blocks to a garage where the scientist's motor car waited.

"The apartment in Indian Court is just a little eccentricity of mine,"
explained Dr. Mundson. "I need people in my work, people whom I must
select through swift, sure tests. The apartment comes in handy, as
to-night."

Northwood scarcely noted where they were going, or how long they had
been on the way. He was vaguely aware that they had left the city
behind, and were now passing through farms bathed in moonlight.

At last they entered a path that led through a bit of woodland. For half
a mile the path continued, and then ended at a small, enclosed field. In
the middle of this rested a queer aircraft. Northwood knew it was a
flying machine only by the propellers mounted on the top of the huge
ball-shaped body. There were no wings, no birdlike hull, no tail.

"It looks almost like a little world ready to fly off into space," he
commented.

"It is just about that." The scientist's squat, bunched-out body,
settled squarely on long, thin, straddled legs, looked gnomelike in the
moonlight. "One cannot copy flesh with steel and wood, but one can make
metal perform magic of which flesh is not capable. My sun-ship is not a
mechanical reproduction of a bird. It is--but, climb in, young friend."

       *       *       *       *       *

Northwood followed Dr. Mundson into the aircraft. The moment the
scientist closed the metal door behind them, Northwood was instantly
aware of some concealed horror that vibrated through his nerves. For one
dreadful moment, he expected some terrific agent of the shadows that
escaped the electric lights to leap upon him. And this was odd, for
nothing could be saner than the globular interior of the aircraft,
divided into four wedge-shaped apartments.

Dr. Mundson also paused at the door, puzzled, hesitant.

"Someone has been here!" he exclaimed. "Look, Northwood! The bunk has
been occupied--the one in this cabin I had set aside for you."

He pointed to the disarranged bunk, where the impression of a head could
still be seen on a pillow.

"A tramp, perhaps."

"No! The door was locked, and, as you saw, the fence around this field
was protected with barbed wire. There's something wrong. I felt it on my
trip here all the way, like someone watching me in the dark. And don't
laugh! I have stopped laughing at all things that seem unnatural. You
don't know what is natural."

Northwood shivered. "Maybe someone is concealed about the ship."

"Impossible. Me, I thought so, too. But I looked and looked, and there
was nothing."

All evening Northwood had burned to tell the scientist about the
handsome stranger in the Mad Hatter Club. But even now he shrank from
saying that a man had vanished before his eyes.

Dr. Mundson was working with a succession of buttons and levers. There
was a slight jerk, and then the strange craft shot up, straight as a
bullet from a gun, with scarcely a sound other than a continuous
whistle.

"The vertical rising aircraft perfected," explained Dr. Mundson. "But
what would you think if I told you that there is not an ounce of
gasoline in my heavier-than-air craft?"

"I shouldn't be surprised. An electrical genius would seek for a less
obsolete source of power."

       *       *       *       *       *

In the bright flare of the electric lights, the scientist's ugly face
flushed. "The man who harnesses the sun rules the world. He can make the
desert places bloom, the frozen poles balmy and verdant. You, John
Northwood, are one of the very few to fly in a machine operated solely
by electrical energy from the sun's rays."

"Are you telling me that this airship is operated with power from the
sun?"

"Yes. And I cannot take the credit for its invention." He sighed. "The
dream was mine, but a greater brain developed it--a brain that may be
greater than I suspect." His face grew suddenly graver.

A little later Northwood said: "It seems that we must be making fabulous
speed."

"Perhaps!" Dr. Mundson worked with the controls. "Here, I've cut her
down to the average speed of the ordinary airplane. Now you can see a
bit of the night scenery."

Northwood peeped out the thick glass porthole. Far below, he saw two
tiny streaks of light, one smooth and stationery, the other wavering as
though it were a reflection in water.

"That can't be a lighthouse!" he cried.

The scientist glanced out. "It is. We're approaching the Florida Keys."

"Impossible! We've been traveling less than an hour."

"But, my young friend, do you realize that my sun-ship has a speed of
over one thousand miles an hour, how much over I dare not tell you?"

Throughout the night, Northwood sat beside Dr. Mundson, watching his
deft fingers control the simple-looking buttons and levers. So fast was
their flight now that, through the portholes, sky and earth looked the
same: dark gray films of emptiness. The continuous weird whistle from
the hidden mechanism of the sun-ship was like the drone of a monster
insect, monotonous and soporific during the long intervals when the
scientist was too busy with his controls to engage in conversation.

For some reason that he could not explain, Northwood had an aversion to
going into the sleeping apartment behind the control room. Then, towards
morning, when the suddenly falling temperature struck a biting chill
throughout the sun-ship, Northwood, going into the cabin for fur coats,
discovered why his mind and body shrank in horror from the cabin.

       *       *       *       *       *

After he had procured the fur coats from a closet, he paused a moment,
in the privacy of the cabin, to look at Athalia's picture. Every nerve
in his body leaped to meet the magnetism of her beautiful eyes. Never
had Mary Burns stirred emotion like this in him. He hung over Mary's
picture, wistfully, hoping almost prayerfully that he could react to her
as he did to Athalia; but her pale, over-intellectual face left him
cold.

"Cad!" he ground out between his teeth. "Forgetting her so soon!"

The two pictures were lying side by side on a little table. Suddenly an
obscure noise in the room caught his attention. It was more vibration
than noise, for small sounds could scarcely be heard above the whistle
of the sun-ship. A slight compression of the air against his neck gave
him the eery feeling that someone was standing close behind him. He
wheeled and looked over his shoulder. Half ashamed of his startled
gesture, he again turned to his pictures. Then a sharp cry broke from
him.

Athalia's picture was gone.

He searched for it everywhere in the room, in his own pockets, under the
furniture. It was nowhere to be found.

In sudden, overpowering horror, he seized the fur coats and returned to
the control room.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dr. Mundson was changing the speed.

"Look out the window!" he called to Northwood.

The young man looked and started violently. Day had come, and now that
the sun-ship was flying at a moderate speed, the ocean beneath was
plainly visible; and its entire surface was covered with broken floes of
ice and small, ragged icebergs. He seized a telescope and focused it
below. A typical polar scene met his eyes: penguins strutted about on
cakes of ice, a whale blowing in the icy water.

"A part of the Antarctic that has never been explored," said Dr.
Mundson; "and there, just showing on the horizon, is the Great Ice
Barrier." His characteristic smile lighted the morose black eyes. "I am
enough of the dramatist to wish you to be impressed with what I shall
show you within less than an hour. Accordingly, I shall make a landing
and let you feel polar ice under your feet."

After less than a minute's search, Dr. Mundson found a suitable place on
the ice for a landing, and, with a few deft manipulations of the
controls, brought the sun-ship swooping down like an eagle on its prey.

For a long moment after the scientist had stepped out on the ice,
Northwood paused at the door. His feet were chained by a strange
reluctance to enter this white, dead wilderness of ice. But Dr.
Mundson's impatient, "Ready?" drew from him one last glance at the cozy
interior of the sun-ship before he, too, went out into the frozen
stillness.

They left the sun-ship resting on the ice like a fallen silver moon,
while they wandered to the edge of the Barrier and looked at the gray,
narrow stretch of sea between the ice pack and the high cliffs of the
Barrier. The sun of the commencing six-months' Antarctic day was a low,
cold ball whose slanted rays struck the ice with blinding whiteness.
There were constant falls of ice from the Barrier, which thundered into
the ocean amid great clouds of ice smoke that lingered like wraiths
around the edge. It was a scene of loneliness and waiting death.

"What's that?" exclaimed the scientist suddenly.

Out of the white silence shrilled a low whistle, a familiar whistle.
Both men wheeled toward the sun-ship.

Before their horrified eyes, the great sphere jerked and glided up, and
swerved into the heavens.

       *       *       *       *       *

Up it soared; then, gaining speed, it swung into the blue distance
until, in a moment, it was a tiny star that flickered out even as they
watched.

Both men screamed and cursed and flung up their arms despairingly. A
penguin, attracted by their cries, waddled solemnly over to them and
