Clarissa and their two out-of-wedlock boys were well taken care of.

It galled Raoul to be so dependent on a man like Eli, to be--he hated to
admit it to himself--afraid of him. A heap depended on Eli's playing his
part today in helping him get control of the estate. Today, Eli would be
leading the Smith County boys, ones who'd been at the Rock River last
June. Having been offered a good day's pay, they would do a little more
Indian fighting.

Raoul felt as if he were going to burst. He couldn't stand this waiting,
while the priest droned on in singsong Latin at the linen-covered table
that had been set up as an altar before the fireplace. Let the fight
begin, for God's sake.

_Indians are all cowards at heart. When I take over here, Pierre's
precious little red bastard will slink away, like Black Hawk did last
summer._

A chill spread across Raoul's back as he asked himself: What if Auguste
doesn't slink away? He might try to rally the servants and some of the
townspeople to fight for him.

They wouldn't fight for a mongrel bastard. People hated Indians. Look
how many men rushed down to the Rock River to fight Black Hawk.

But many people had loved Pierre. This hall was filled, and there were
more people outside who couldn't get in because there wasn't room. All
of them paying their last respects to Pierre. And they knew that Pierre
wanted Auguste to take his place. Would any of them fight to see that
Pierre's will was done?

He felt colder still as he considered the odds. Just about every man in
Smith County had his own rifle or pistol. And Raoul and the men he'd
recruited for today were far outnumbered. He wished he had hired more
men. But too many and the secret would be out, and then Auguste would be
ready for him.

Raoul tried to calm himself. Everyone in Smith County might be armed, he
reasoned, but not everyone wanted to use their weapons. A lot of men
wouldn't fight unless their backs were to the wall. It was the ones who
were willing to fight who got to give orders to the rest. The men Raoul
had picked, Eli and Hodge and the rest of them, were born fighters.

There'd be those who would condemn him, he thought, for seizing the land
the very day of his brother's funeral. It was indecent, he admitted to
himself. But he had no choice. He couldn't allow Auguste to get his feet
planted firmly. He couldn't allow Pierre's will to be read aloud.

He felt even better when he remembered that with Pierre dead the
servants would be taking their orders from Armand. He looked around the
hall for the overseer. There he was, near the door, most of his face
buried by his thick brown beard. Armand's wife, Marchette, was standing
next to him. Sporting a black eye, Raoul noticed with amusement.

Armand Perrault was one who didn't love Pierre.

That sanctimonious hypocrite Pierre. First the squaw, the mongrel's
mother. Then he marries Marie-Blanche, and as soon as she dies, he's
putting it to the cook.

Raoul took a deep breath of relief when he saw that Pere Isaac had
finally finished with the funeral mass. The old Jesuit was again
sprinkling holy water on the black-painted coffin, heaped with wreaths
of roses and chrysanthemums that lay on trestles in the center of the
hall. Frank Hopkins, Raoul knew, had built that coffin of oak planks.

Old red-nosed Guichard came up to Raoul. "Your father requests that you
be one of those who carries your brother's coffin to the wagon."

Raoul felt a momentary jolt of fear. Help pick up Pierre's coffin and
carry it, when he was about to dispossess Pierre's son? If he laid a
hand on Pierre's coffin, God might strike him dead. Or Pierre's ghost
would rise up against him.

He shook his head. Fool's thinking.

"I wouldn't have it any other way, Guichard."

He was angered to see Auguste standing opposite him when he went to the
head of the coffin. It was infuriating to see Pierre's features in that
brown-skinned face. The half-breed was wearing a green clawhammer
jacket, with a black silk band around the left arm.

His arms and back strained as they took the weight of his corner of the
coffin. A chorus of grunts arose from Raoul, Auguste, Armand, Frank
Hopkins, Jacques Manette and Jean-Paul Kobell as they hoisted the coffin
to their shoulders. They trudged out the door with it and slid it on the
bed of a flower-bedecked farm wagon. Guichard helped Elysee climb up on
the wagon. A snap of the old servant's whip started the two horses
moving, as black ribbons tied to their harnesses fluttered.

Raoul walked alone, following the cart the half mile south along the
bluffs to the burial ground. Some of the hands had cut a track through
the shoulder-high prairie grass for the funeral procession to follow.
The fiddler Registre Bosquet marched right behind the wagon playing
hymns, and the servants sang in French.

Raoul cast his eye back over the long line of people following the
coffin. His glance slid past Nicole and Frank and their passel of kids.
With a feeling of satisfaction he saw two of his key men walking near
the end of the procession, Justus Bennett, the county land commissioner,
and Burke Russell, the county clerk. One copy of Pierre's will was in
Russell's keeping, and Raoul had already told him what to do with that.
Russell's wife, Pamela, was walking beside him, a handsome woman with
chestnut hair that she didn't braid as most women did but allowed to
fall in soft waves under her broad-brimmed hat. Strongly attracted to
her himself, Raoul wondered how a bespectacled weakling like Burke
Russell had ever been able to attract such a fine-looking woman. And
what she'd do if she had a sporting proposition from an equally
fine-looking man.

They were at the cemetery now. Raoul liked this hillside rising out of
the bluffs, where Pierre's wife, Marie-Blanche, lay overlooking the
bottomland and the river. The graves of about a dozen others who had
worked and died at Victoire were surrounded by a low split-rail fence.
Tall cedar trees shadowed the white gravestones. The flat markers with
their rounded tops, names, dates and inscriptions were chiseled by
Warren Wilgus, the mason who'd recently moved into the area. Auguste had
already made arrangements to have Pierre's headstone carved.

The sight of a solid limestone cube in the center of the cemetery gave
Raoul a twinge of guilt, as it always did. It was the first stone to
have been placed in the cemetery, and was a memorial to his mother,
Estelle de Marion, who was buried not here but in Kaskaskia, where she
had died in 1802 giving birth to him.

_It wasn't my fault!_

Helene was also remembered, though not buried here. The Indians had
thrown her poor, mutilated body into Lake Michigan. Her memorial marker
stood next to Maman's stone. A carved angel spread his wings over
Helene's name and dates, "HELENE DE MARION VAILLANCOURT, Beloved
Daughter and Sister. 1794-1812. She sings before the throne of God."
Below that were inscribed the name and dates of her husband, Henri
Vaillancourt, whose body also had never been found.

Raoul carried inside himself his own inscription for Helene: _Murdered
by Indians, August 15, 1812. She will be avenged._

And one act of vengeance would take place today, when the half-Sauk
mongrel, whose presence was an affront to Helene, was thrown off this
land.

It gave Raoul an uneasy feeling to be working with Auguste, lifting
Pierre's coffin off the wagon. It might be bad luck. But the time to
strike had not yet come, so he had to walk beside Auguste carrying the
coffin to the newly dug grave. There, crouching in unison, the six
pallbearers laid the coffin on a cradle of two ropes, each end held by
two servants, over the oblong pit. Bending to let his burden down hurt
Raoul's back, and he glanced over at Auguste, hoping to see him having
trouble. But the mongrel's dark face was impassive.

When Raoul saw Elysee shuffling through the gate, leaning on his
silver-headed walking stick, he felt a new tingle of dread. How would
his father greet the move he was going to make? Except for a few brief
and bitter meetings at which he and Papa and Pierre had tried and failed
to settle their differences, he had not spoken to his father in six
years. Armand often brought infuriating news of the old man's growing
fondness for the mongrel, making Raoul hate the redskinned bastard all
the more. Elysee would hardly be happy with what he did today, of
course. But would Papa try to fight his only surviving son? If he did,
Raoul would have to fight back, and then he might be punished by God.

_Nonsense. God doesn't side with Indians. What I am doing is right,
because Pierre was seduced and deluded._

But it wouldn't hurt to try to get in good with the old man. Raoul
walked quickly over to him.

"Take my arm, Papa."

Elysee looked up at him, his eyes bloodshot and red-rimmed, his face
blank, his skin wrinkled parchment.

_The old man's had his share of grief. Too bad he couldn't find reason
to be happy with me. But that's his fault._

In a low, hoarse voice Elysee said, "Thank you, son. It was good of you
to come today."

Raoul sensed an accusation.

"Why wouldn't I come to my own brother's funeral?"

"Because you hated him," Elysee said softly.

At least the old man didn't seem to suspect that he had another reason
for being here today. Containing his anger, Raoul helped his father walk
to the grave. There he left Elysee with Guichard and went around to
stand facing north, where he could see the chateau.

His nagging fear eased a little. So far he had seen no sign that he
would meet with any opposition. It was hard to believe that the mongrel
and his supporters could be planning anything in secret. Still he knew
his heart would not slow down till this was all over.

Pere Isaac stood at the head of Pierre's grave, next to Marie-Blanche's
tombstone. A faint breeze from the river didn't disturb his gray-black
hair or his beard, but rustled the tassels of the purple stole around
his neck, the winglike sleeves of his white surplice and his
ankle-length black cassock.

Trying to hold still as his heart pounded and his hands trembled, Raoul
watched Pere Isaac shake holy water over the coffin, which now lay at
the bottom of the grave. The priest gave his sprinkler to one of the
boys assisting him, opened a prayerbook bound in black leather and began
the graveside prayers.

_Will this never end?_

Raoul stood with his head bowed. He puzzled over what Elysee had said
about hating Pierre.

_Papa always loved Pierre more than me. Thought I was some kind of
savage because I don't have all those French ways like him and Pierre.
I'm the most American member of this family, and he should be proud of
me._

_I didn't hate Pierre. It was just this damn business of him caring more
about redskins than about his own people._

_And he wasn't there when I needed him._

Raoul found himself wishing he could talk to Pierre one last time, try
to make him understand why he felt as he did and had to do the things he
did. Looking down at the coffin in the grave, Raoul thought back to the
last time he had seen Pierre. In early spring after the last of the snow
melted on the ground, out riding Banner on the prairie, alone, he'd come
upon Pierre, also riding alone. They had stared at each other and passed
without a word.

_I didn't know then that was my last chance to speak to him._

Raoul's eyes traveled over the people standing by the grave. Auguste
stood between Elysee and Nicole, looking down into the pit. It pleased
Raoul to see that apparently Auguste had no idea what was about to
happen to him.

But how could he be _sure_ Auguste was unprepared?

Raoul looked over the heads of the mourners, and his heart beat faster
with anticipation. There, across the flat prairie land, he saw tiny
figures surrounding the chateau.

Raoul's fingernails dug into his palms as he clenched his fists to hold
himself together. What if the secret had gotten out? If Auguste knew
what was about to happen, he would surely have prepared some kind of
counterattack. Indians were damned sly.

Pere Isaac closed his prayerbook and put it into his coat pocket.

"This man whom we consign to American soil was, like so many of us, born
on the other side of the ocean," he said. "He came of one of the oldest
and noblest families of France, fleeing the Godless revolution that
tormented their homeland, which was also my homeland. The de Marions
gave themselves soul and body to this new land where they had to make
their own way. Here titles and ancient lineage meant nothing."

_Get on with it, dammit!_

"God saw fit to try them sorely after they came here to Illinois. The
mother of the family died in childbirth. A daughter died a horrid death
at the hands of Indians, and a son"--he gestured at Raoul, who stared
back at him, keeping his face expressionless--"held captive, a slave, by
Indians for two years."

It was good that Pere Isaac mentioned that. It would prepare people to
accept what was about to happen.

"Pierre de Marion was a good man, but he was also a sinner, like all of
us. He fell into the sin of lust, and that sin bore fruit. But Pierre
did not hide his sin as so many men have. He reached out to his son
through me and helped him. Eventually he acknowledged his son and
brought him out of the wilderness to be educated for civilization."

Raoul looked across the open pit at Auguste. The half-breed's red-brown
face was flushed an even darker color, but still he stared fixedly down
into the grave.

_Time to start._

It was an immense relief to begin to move. First, he had to get back to
the chateau ahead of the funeral procession and join his men there.
Slowly, so as not to attract attention, Raoul drew back from the
graveside.

       *       *       *       *       *

Auguste's feet felt heavy and confined in his cowhide boots as they
crunched over the short stubble. He walked alone on the newly cut track
back toward the great stone and log house. He could hear the sound of
spades biting into the mound of dirt beside Pierre's grave and clods of
earth thudding onto his coffin.

Auguste led the procession of mourners. The others let him walk apart,
to be alone with his grief. Behind Auguste, he was aware, were Nicole
and Frank and Nancy Hale and Pere Isaac, and then a long line of
servants and farm hands and village people. Near the end of the
procession Registre Bosquet played a sprightly tune, as was the custom
among the Illinois French, a way of saying that life goes on. In the
rear was the cart that had carried Pierre's coffin, with Elysee and
Guichard.

As Auguste walked, he brooded about Pere Isaac calling him the fruit of
sin. Why did the priest have to dishonor his mother and father so? In
the eyes of the Sauk people he was no "bastard," as he knew some pale
eyes called him. Still, he was glad that the priest said Pierre had done
the right thing in bringing him here. Perhaps people would remember
that, when Raoul tried to take the estate away from him.

As he surely would.

Auguste knew, with a sinking feeling in his stomach, that it was only a
matter of time before Raoul would strike at him.

He felt himself wishing for Black Hawk and Iron Knife and the other Sauk
warriors, even Wolf Paw, to be here to stand by him. And Owl Carver and
Sun Woman to advise him. Now he wished he had not agreed, at his
father's insistence, to have no contact with the band. While he was
being educated, being cut off from them had helped him become more
quickly a part of the white world. But now that Pierre was gone he felt
so terribly alone.

A chill fell over him like a cold downpour. Looking up, he saw men
standing just outside the fence that surrounded the chateau, strung out
in a line along the west side, where the gateway was. He had noticed
them as he was leaving the graveyard, but had thought they must be
hands, with field work of some sort important enough to keep them from
the funeral. Now he was close enough to see that they were carrying
rifles. Auguste recognized Raoul himself standing squarely in the
gateway. How had he gotten over there? Auguste had thought he was with
the funeral procession.

A cold hollow opened in his stomach as he grasped what was happening.

_The moment my father is buried. What a fool I was to think Raoul would
wait awhile._

He heard people murmuring behind him.

"Oh my God," Nicole said. "Not now."

"Auguste!" It was Nancy's voice, shrill with fear. He shook his head,
trying to tell her that he would not turn back, and kept on walking.

In a moment, thought Auguste, he might be joining his father on the
Trail of Souls. He heard footsteps behind him crunching on the dry
grass. It was a comfort to know that there were others near him,
although he knew no one could really help him.

He had no idea what he would do. He asked Earthmaker to show him how to
walk this path with courage and honor.

Keeping his stride firm and steady, Auguste went around the fence to
approach the gate, glancing up at the maple tree under which Pierre had
died.

As Auguste got closer, Raoul threw open his jacket, showing his
gilt-handled pistol holstered on one hip, his huge knife, the one that
had scarred Auguste, sheathed on the other. His eyes were shadowed by
his broad-brimmed black hat, and the black mustache hid his mouth. His
face was a mask.

When they were about ten feet apart, Raoul spoke. "Now that my brother
is in the ground I can speak plain to you. It's over for you here.
You're Pierre's natural son, and this is his burying day, so I won't
kill you unless you force me to it. I want you off de Marion land right
now. I want you out of Smith County by sundown. Get back to the woods
where you came from."

_You cannot know how happy it would make me to do just that, Raoul._
Auguste stood with his feet planted firmly on the stubble. He did not
try to think. He would rely on the spirits for help. He waited for the
knowledge of what to do to come to him.

He felt people coming to stand beside him. He heard the creaking of
wagon wheels and the soft clip-clop of horses' hooves as the cart
carrying Guichard and Elysee rolled past the funeral procession and drew
up alongside him. He glanced at the people standing beside him, to his
right Frank and Nicole, their children behind them, to his left Nancy
Hale and Pere Isaac.

Auguste went colder still as he saw Eli Greenglove, who had been
standing by the gate in the fence around the chateau, walk across the
open space, the tail of his coonskin cap bobbing. Greenglove carried a
long Kentucky rifle. Auguste had heard many a tale about Greenglove's
deadly accuracy. The Missourian took a position to one side, between
Raoul and Auguste.

_He won't even need to be a good shot to kill me from that distance._

Words came suddenly to Auguste's mind. He spoke loudly, so everyone
could hear, and he felt good that his voice was strong. He looked Raoul
in the eye as he spoke.

"I am proud to be a son of the Sauk people. But my father told me I was
his heir. It is in his will. He gave me this house and all this land.
You have no right to force me to leave."

Raoul laughed and slapped the pistol and the knife. "These give me the
right." He waved a hand at the men standing in a line along the fence.
"And them."

Frank Hopkins cleared his throat and spoke. "Raoul, maybe there's no
law around right here and now to make you honor Pierre's will, but there
are courts in Illinois, there's a legislature, there's a governor."

Raoul made a sound halfway between a laugh and a grunt. "Take your
half-breed friend to the governor. John Reynolds wants the Indians out
of Illinois as bad as anybody does. He was there with the militia on
Rock River last June. Hell, go to the President. I'd like to see what an
old Indian killer like Andy Jackson would say to you."

All too true, Auguste thought sadly. He had learned in New York of
Jackson's "removal" policy, aiming to drive all the red people to the
west side of the Mississippi. The work of the white chiefs was to take
land from Indians, not help them keep it.

Pere Isaac said, "To rob the orphan is a sin that cries out to Heaven
for vengeance. If you came to me in confession I could not give you
absolution."

"My conscience is clear," Raoul said. "Victoire is my rightful heritage.
Do you know that this Indian boy you feel so sorry for isn't even a
Christian? I am, Father. A Catholic."

"A very bad one," said Pere Isaac. "I have known Auguste since he was a
small boy. He behaves more like a Christian than you do."

A woman's voice, Nancy Hale's, rang out over the field. "Raoul de
Marion, if you won't listen to your own priest, you'll still have to
face my father. When he hears what you've done he'll preach against you
and he'll stir people to make you do the right thing."

Raoul's face changed. He looked pained.

"Now, Miss Nancy. It isn't proper for a lady like you to concern herself
with what happens to trash like this. You know well and good that your
father may have a low opinion of me, but he has an even lower opinion of
Indians. He won't side with this Indian bastard."

Suddenly Nicole rushed past Auguste.

"You're the one who's trash, Raoul!" she cried, and ran across the
intervening space and swung her hand to slap her brother. Raoul grabbed
her arm and pushed her away roughly. Frank rushed to her side to hold
her, his ink-stained fingers digging into her sleeves.

"I wouldn't want to fight with you, Nicole," said Raoul with a cruel
grin. "I believe you've got the weight advantage on me."

"You're a murderer and a thief, Raoul," she shot back. "And the day will
come when people will have enough of you and drive you out of this
county."

Waves of heat and cold ran through Auguste's body, and when he clenched
his fists he felt the sweat on his palms. He had to speak out. He owed
it to his father to fight, somehow, for this land. But how could he
drive away some twenty armed men?

A sudden thought came to him. "Raoul, I challenge you to fight me for
the land. With pistols or knives or barehanded. Any way you want it."

Raoul grinned, white teeth appearing suddenly under the black mustache.
"You've gotten big in the last six years, but I'm a better shot than you
are, and I'd slice you to bits with my knife. In a barehanded fight I'd
bite your ears off and ram 'em down your throat. We don't need a fight
to prove what anybody can plainly see."

"If you won't fight me you're a coward as well as a thief."

Raoul's eyes narrowed, and his shoulders hunched forward, as if he was
about to attack.

"Dueling is also a grave sin," said Pere Isaac. "And it is against the
law of this state. I forbid you to fight."

Raoul laughed and lifted his empty hands. "Too bad, mongrel. The father
won't let us fight."

Auguste turned to Pere Isaac. "How can you take from me the only way I
have of fighting for this land?"

"If God wants you to have it, He will see that you get it without doing
wrong," said Pere Isaac calmly.

The face of Black Hawk appeared in Auguste's mind, and suddenly he
understood the wrath that had always seemed to smoulder just below the
war chief's skin. This must be how Black Hawk felt when the pale eyes
told him he could no longer come to Saukenuk. That was why Black Hawk
had been leading his people back to Saukenuk year after year. He would
not give up.

And neither would Auguste.

_I must fight. I promised my father I would fight for this land. I
smoked the calumet with him._

He remembered Pierre's words: _Now you have a chance to own land, to be
rich and to have power. You can learn how to use your wealth to protect
your people._

And he was losing that chance. As he saw these rich acres being torn
away from him, more and more he felt himself wanting them.

But how to fight for the land? To charge Raoul's pistol and the rifles
of his men would simply mean death. Surely that was not what Pierre
wanted for him.

An unfamiliar voice said, "Is this really how you settle land disputes
in Smith County?"

Auguste turned to see David Cooper, a lean, hard-eyed man he had met
several weeks earlier when Cooper had visited Pierre to pay his
respects.

Raoul said, "Don't you like the way we do things here, Cooper?"

Cooper's cold expression did not change. "Just requesting information,
Mr. de Marion. That's all."

Cooper had brought his family to Victor from some place in Indiana three
years ago, buying a choice piece of bottomland from Pierre. Auguste had
learned that he was a veteran of the War of 1812.

Justus Bennett, the county land commissioner, who Auguste knew to be one
of Raoul's creatures, said, "Mr. Cooper, I've been reading law most of
my adult life, and I can assure you Mr. Raoul de Marion has as sound a
case under common law and English precedent as I've ever seen."

Auguste doubted that anyone here knew what that meant, impressive as it
might sound.

_The whites know how to twist any law to their advantage._

Cooper said nothing further.

These people might feel sorry for him, Auguste thought, and resent what
Raoul was doing. But he'd get no help from any of the men who were
standing around behind him. Raoul and his men were armed and determined,
and the rest of the people here were not ready to give up their lives to
help a half-breed.

But Auguste had taken advantage of Raoul's distraction with Cooper and
Bennett to cut the distance between himself and his uncle in half. If he
could get close enough to Raoul he might have a chance to get at him
with his knife. He'd worn the deerhorn-handled knife today only because
his father had given it to him.

As he hesitated, he heard footsteps in the grass and turned to see his
grandfather walking toward Raoul with slow but firm steps, thumping his
walking stick on the ground.

"No, Grandpapa!" Auguste called out to him.

"This is my son, I very much regret to say," said Elysee. "And I must
administer correction."

Auguste started to follow Elysee, but Raoul dropped his hand warningly
to his pistol.

"Don't come any closer, half-breed."

"I was with Pierre when he wrote his final will," said Elysee. "And I
have a copy of it. I know his mind was sound. He gave the whole
estate--except for the fur company, which we have always agreed would be
yours--to Auguste."

"You gave the fur company to me when you divided the estate between me
and Pierre years ago," Raoul said. "So my own good brother left me
nothing. Thirty thousand acres of the best land in western Illinois go
to a mongrel Indian, and you say his mind was sound? The more fool you."

"You are un bete!" Elysee shouted. "You are proof that there is no just
God. If there were He would have taken you and let Pierre live."

"Monsieur de Marion!" the priest cried. "Think what you are saying. On
this day of all days."

Raoul said, "I've always known that you loved Pierre and not me, Papa."

"You make it impossible to love you!" Elysee answered. "Now listen to
me. Victoire is my home. I built this place. Those I love are buried
here. I command you, leave at once. Get off this land."

Raoul, a head taller than the old man, took a step toward his father.
"If you wanted it to be yours, you shouldn't have given it to Pierre.
You have nothing now, you old fool."

Elysee swung the stick at Raoul's head. The thump resounded over the
field, and Raoul staggered back, his broad-brimmed hat falling to the
ground.

Raoul bared his teeth, drew back his fist and smashed it into his
father's face. The blow knocked Elysee hard against one of the upright
logs of the gateway. He cried out and fell heavily to the ground. He lay
moaning and jerking his head from side to side in agony. The priest
rushed to him, dropping to his knees.

With a scream Nicole threw herself down beside her father.

A red curtain swept over Auguste's eyes, blinding him momentarily. When
he could see again he saw only the face of one man, Raoul, looking down
at Elysee with triumph and contempt.

Knife in hand, Auguste threw himself at Raoul.

Raoul's pistol was out. His dark eyes gleamed with triumph as he pointed
the muzzle at Auguste's chest.

_He was hoping I would attack him_, Auguste realized, knowing he would
never reach Raoul before the pistol went off.

A sudden movement to his side caught his eye. In a glance he saw Eli
Greenglove swinging a rifle butt at his head.




10

Dispossessed


Auguste woke.

He was in a room he had never seen before. A plain black cross hung high
on one white plaster wall. He lay on a bed with a straw-filled mattress,
on top of the quilt. He wasn't wearing his coat. Or his pale eyes'
boots.

Pain throbbed in his head, and with each pulse his vision momentarily
blurred.

He rolled his pounding head on the pillow and saw Nancy Hale sitting
beside him. Her long blond braids glistened in the pale light that came
through the oiled paper window.

The way she was looking down at him startled him. The blue of her eyes
burned like the blue center of a flame. Her lips seemed fuller and
redder than he'd ever seen them, and they were slightly parted. This was
the way she had been looking at him while he lay unconscious, he
realized, and he had seen it only because he had awakened suddenly and
taken her by surprise.

"What happened?" he asked.

"That man of your uncle's, Eli Greenglove, hit you with his rifle. Your
uncle said he'd kill you next time he sees you awake. So we took you out
here to my father's parsonage."

"How long have I been asleep?" he said.

"A long time. Hours. I'm awfully glad to see you wake up, Auguste. I
didn't know if you ever would. Greenglove hit you hard enough to kill
you."

He remembered Elysee lying on the ground, writhing. Rage boiled up
inside him again as he thought of Raoul striking Grandpapa down.

"How is my grandfather?" He tried to sit up, and the room started to
rock and pitch. The pain pounded on his head like a spiked war club.
Nancy put a hand on his shoulder, and he lay back against the pillow. He
shut his eyes momentarily to get his equilibrium back.

"We don't know--he may have broken his hip. But try not to worry,
Auguste. Nicole and Frank took him back to their house."

That searing gaze of a moment ago was gone, but there was still a warm
light in her eyes.

He heard a footstep on the other side of the bed. He turned, bringing
back the ache in his head full force, to see the tall figure of Reverend
Philip Hale standing in the doorway of the small room. Hale, dressed in
a black clawhammer coat and black trousers with a white silk stock
wrapped around his throat, stood with his arms folded, gazing at Auguste
with pursed lips and a deep crease between his bushy eyebrows.

"You can thank the Lord's mercy you're not hurt worse, young man. I
suppose you'll want to be on your way soon."

"Father!" Nancy exclaimed. "He just came awake. He might have a
fractured skull."

"I think I'm all right," Auguste said. He tried to sit up again. He
managed it, but he felt suddenly dizzy and sick to his stomach. He put
his hand over his mouth. Nancy picked up a china chamber pot from the
bedside and held it for him, but after a moment the spasm of nausea
passed and, gingerly, he shook his head at her. His first afternoon at
Victoire, when he had thrown up his dinner before everyone in the great
hall, flickered through his memory.

He looked up and saw Hale staring at him with even deeper distaste.
Clear enough that the reverend didn't like to see Nancy's care for him.

_Grandpapa's hurt, and I'm the only one around here with medical
training._

Auguste lifted his head again, determined to get up in spite of the
pain. "I must go to my grandfather. He may die if he isn't cared for
properly."

A spear of horror shot through him. His medicine bundle, containing his
precious stones and the bear's claw, was still at the chateau. All his
spiritual power was collected in that bag. Whatever the risk, he must go
back and get it. And he wanted the bag of surgical instruments he'd
brought back from New York.

"I'll be out of here as soon as I can stand, sir," he said. "I have much
to do."

"No!" Nancy cried. "Auguste, you're not well enough to go anywhere. And,
Father, I told you what happened at the funeral. We've got to help
Auguste. If you speak, people will listen."

"I don't know the rights and wrongs of it," said Hale, looking
irritated, presented with a problem he did not want to try to solve.

Auguste said, "My father wanted me to inherit Victoire. There are
witnesses. There are two copies of his will, if Raoul hasn't already
destroyed them."

Reverend Hale glowered at Auguste. "What if Raoul de Marion's men come
looking for you?"

Suddenly, as when facing Raoul at the gateway to Victoire, Auguste felt
terribly alone. Nancy would do anything she could for him; after seeing
her loving look when he awoke he was sure of that. But there was little
enough she could do. Especially because of the way her father so
obviously felt about him.

"I'll be gone as quick as I can, Reverend Hale."

"If they come here while Auguste is here you'll have to tell them he's
not here and refuse to let them in," said Nancy firmly.

"Lie to them? I'm not a Jesuit."

"Father! Would you let Auguste be killed?"

The word "killed" set a storm of frightful thoughts whirling through
Auguste's head. Raoul's pistol had been pointed right at his chest. And
Greenglove had tried to brain him. They wouldn't stop until they had
killed him. Only then would Raoul be secure in his possession of
Victoire. Dazed and hurting though he was, Auguste had to get out of
Smith County if he was to live another day.

Hale turned and went back to his own room, shaking his head.

"Your father is no friend to me," said Auguste.

Nancy's face was like a lake whose surface was troubled by a wind. "He's
very strict. He didn't go to your father's funeral because it was a
Catholic service. But if anything happens he'll do the right thing. You
can count on him for that."

Auguste said nothing. But he didn't share her confidence.

Early that evening, Auguste, Nancy and Reverend Hale were sitting in
the front room of the Hales' one-story house. They had eaten a rabbit
stew with potatoes, onions and beans from the Hales' garden and hominy
grits on the side that Nancy had pounded from corn. They washed it down
with fresh-squeezed apple cider.

"I allow no spiritous liquors in my home," said Reverend Hale.

Now that it was dark Auguste wanted desperately to be off to see
Grandpapa at Nicole and Frank's house. The old man had been badly hurt.
He might be dying.

By candlelight Hale read the Bible aloud to Nancy and Auguste. It was
his nightly custom, Nancy explained.

Auguste heard the soft clip-clop of a horse's hooves and the creak of
carriage wheels and raised a hand to alert the others.

Putting a finger to her lips, Nancy went to the door. She opened it a
crack, then pulled it wider and went out.

"Who is it?" Hale called anxiously.

His heart pounding, Auguste was on his feet, looking for a weapon or for
a place to hide.

No answer came from Nancy, but a moment later she came back, one arm
around another woman's shoulders, supporting her. A blue kerchief
covered the woman's head.

"Who is this?" Hale said again.

"Bon soir, Reverend Hale. Forgive me for disturbing you."

It was a moment before Auguste recognized the battered, swollen face of
Marchette. One of her eyes had been blackened this morning, but now
there were ugly bruises around both eyes, her whole face was swollen and
her lips were cut and puffed.

Heartbroken at the sight of her, Auguste rushed to the cook and took her
hands in his.

"Marchette! What happened to you?"

"I cried very much when you and Monsieur Elysee were hurt today,
Monsieur Auguste. Armand did not like this, and he beat me. It _looks_
very bad, but he did not beat me hard, Monsieur. Whoever Armand beats
hard, dies. But I resolved to do something for you. Monsieur Raoul, he
had barrels of Kaintuck whiskey carted up to the chateau. Many guests
and servants got very drunk. After a while Armand was lying on the floor
beside the table, so then I went to fetch your things. Your trunk was
unlocked, and I gathered up your clothes and books and put them in it
and locked it. I had Bernadette Bosquet, the fiddler's wife, she is my
friend, help carry your trunk down to the carriage."

Auguste felt as if a sudden bright light had flooded his room. His
medicine bundle had been in the trunk. And his surgical instruments.
They were safe.

He jumped up from the table. A throb of pain went through his head, and
he felt dizzy and had to cling to the table for support. Marchette's
eyes widened in alarm, and she put her hands out to him.

Recovered after a moment--and feeling much better now than he had a few
hours ago--he took Marchette's hands in his.

"I can't tell you how much this means to me, Marchette. There were
things in my trunk--sacred things--very important to me. Very precious.
I thank you a thousand times."

Her swollen lips parted in a half smile. She reached into a pocket in
her apron and brought out a large pocket watch gleaming a dull gold.
Then she took out a familiar oval silver case with a velvet ribbon.

"These were your father's, monsieur. I believe he would wish that you
have them."

Auguste opened the case and saw the round lenses for only a moment as
his eyes blurred. He put his hand over his face and held it there until
he no longer felt like weeping. Then he looked at the engraving on the
watch--"Pierre Louis Auguste de Marion, A.D. 1800"--and his eyes filled
up with tears. This, he thought, should go into his medicine bundle with
