hours in which to prepare some mode of effectively combatting the might
of Moyen. Twenty minutes to go; yet the mother-subs would be ashore,
dragging their sweating, monstrous sides out of the deep, within ten
minutes!

Ten minutes ashore and there was no guessing the havoc they could cause
to the United Americas!

"Hurry, Maniel! Hurry! Hurry!" said Prester Kleig.

But he spoke the words to himself, though even had he spoken them aloud
Maniel would not have heard. For Maniel, for two hours, had closed his
mind to everything that transpired outside his own thoughts, devoted to
foiling the power of Moyen.

"I've found him!" snapped Munson.

       *       *       *       *       *

He pointed with a shaking forefinger to one of the mother-subs crawling
up the slant of the ocean bed, twisted one of the little nubs of the
Sound-and-Vision apparatus, and the angelic face and Satanic eyes, the
twisted body, of Moyen came into view.

The face was calm with dreadful purpose, and Moyen stood in the heart of
one of his monsters, his eyes turned toward the land. With a gasp of
terror, dreadfully afraid for the first time, Prester Kleig turned and
looked into the eyes of Charmion....

"No," she said. "It will never happen. I have faith in you!"

There were still ten minutes of the two hours left when the mother-subs
broke water and started crawling inland, swiftly, surely, without
faltering in the slightest as they changed their element from water to
land.

As though their appearance had been the signal, the aero-subs in action
against the first line of American planes broke out of the one-sided
fight and dived for their mother ships, while a mere handful of the
American planes started back for home to prepare anew to continue the
struggle.

Prester Kleig gave the signal to the second monster armada which had
remained in reserve.

"Do everything in your power to halt the march of Moyen's amphibians!"

Ten minutes to go, and Professor Maniel still labored like a Titan.




CHAPTER XI

_Caucasia Falls Silent_


As the scores of amphibian monsters came lumbering forth upon dry land
it became instantly apparent why the aero-subs had returned to the
mother ships. For a few moments, out of the water, the amphibians were
almost helpless, with practically no way of attack or defense--as
helpless as huge turtles turned legs up.

But as each aero-sub entered its proper slot in the side of the mother
amphibian, it was turned about and the nose thrust back into the
opening, which closed down to fit tightly about the nose of the
aero-sub, so that those flame-breathing monsters protruded from the
sides of the amphibians in many places--transforming the amphibians into
monsters with hundreds of golden, licking tongues!

As, with each and every aero-sub in place, the amphibians started moving
inland, Professor Maniel made his first move. With the tiny apparatus
upon which he had been working, he stepped to the table before the
Sound-and-Vision apparatus and spoke softly to his compatriots.

"Gentlemen," he said, "I have finished, and it will work effectively!"

Though Maniel spoke softly, it was plain to be seen that he was proud of
his accomplishment, which remained only to be attached to start
performance.

A matter of seconds....

Yet during those seconds was the real might, the real power for utter
devastation, of Moyen fully exposed!

       *       *       *       *       *

The amphibians got under way as the airplanes of the Americas swept into
the fight.

From the sides of the monsters licked out those golden tongues of
flame--and from the front.

Half a dozen amphibians slipped into New York from the harbor side and
started into the heart of the city. And between the time when Maniel had
said he was ready and the moment when he made his first active move
against Moyen, a half-dozen skyscrapers vanished into nothingness, the
spots where they had stood swept as clear of debris as though the land
had never been reclaimed from Nature!

None was ever destined to know how many lives were lost in that first
attack of the monsters of the golden, myriad tongues; but the monsters
struck in the midst of a working day when the skyscrapers were filled
with office workers.

And resolve struck deep into the hearts of the Secret Agents: if Moyen
were turned back, he must be made to pay for the slaughter.

A matter of seconds....

       *       *       *       *       *

Then a moment of deathly silence as Munson gave way at the screen for
the gnomelike little Professor Maniel.

"Now, gentlemen!" snapped Maniel. "If my theory is correct,"
manipulating instruments with lightning speed as he talked, "the
reversion of the principle of my Vibration-Retarder--which captures
vibrations speeding outward from the earth and transforms them once
again into sound and pictures audible and visible to the human ear--this
apparatus will disintegrate the monsters as our boats and planes were
disintegrated!

"In this I have even been compelled to manipulate in the matter of
time! I must not only defeat and annihilate the minions of Moyen, but
must work from a mathematical absurdity, so that at the moment of impact
that moment itself must become part of the past, sufficiently remote to
remove the monsters at such distance from the earth that not even the
mighty genius of Moyen can return them!"

The whirring, gentle as the whirring of doves' wings. In the center of
the picture on the screen were those half-dozen amphibians laying waste
Manhattan. Maniel set his intricate, delicate machinery into motion.

Instantly the amphibians there seemed to become misty, shadowy, and to
lift out of Manhattan up above the roof-tops of skyscrapers still
remaining, nebulous and wraithlike as ghost-shrouds--yet swinging
outward from the earth with speed almost too swift for the eye to
detect.

But where the amphibians had rested there stood, reclined--in all sorts
of postures, surprising and even a bit ridiculous--the men of Moyen who
had operated the monsters of Moyen!

       *       *       *       *       *

From the Central Radio tower went forth a mighty voice of command to the
planes which had been engaging the aero-subs off the coast.

"Slay! Slay!"

Down flashed the planes of the Americas, and their guns were blazing,
inaudibly, but none the less deadly of aim and of purpose, straight into
the midst of the men of Moyen who had thus been left marooned and almost
helpless with the vanishing of their amphibians.

And, noting how they fell in strangled, huddled heaps before the
vengeful fire of the American planes, the Secret Agents sighed, and
Maniel, his face alight with the pride of accomplishment, switched to
another point along the coast.

And as a new group of the monsters of Moyen came into view, and Maniel
bent to his labors afresh, the hated voice of the master mobster broke
once more in the Secret Room.

"Enough, Kleig! Enough! We will surrender to save lives! I stipulate
only that my own life be spared!"

To which Prester Kleig made instant reply.

"Did you offer us choice of surrender? Did you spare the lives of our
people which, with your control of your golden rays, you could easily
have done? No! Nor will we spare lives, least of all the life of Moyen!"

The whirring again, as of the whirring of doves' wings. More metal
monsters, even as golden tongues spewed forth from their many sides,
vanished from view, leaping skyward, while the operators of them were
left to the mercies of the remaining airmen of the Americans.

       *       *       *       *       *

Voicelessly the word went forth:

"Slay! Slay!"

It was Charmion who begged for mercy for the vanquished as, one by one,
as surely as fate, the monsters with their contained aero-subs were
blotted out, leaving pilots and operators behind them. Down upon these
dropped the airmen of the West, slaying without mercy....

"Please, lover!" Charmion whispered. "Spare them!"

"Even...?" he began, thinking of Moyen, who would have taken Charmion.
He felt her shudder as she read his mind, understood what he would have
asked.

"There he is!" came softly from Munson.

An amphibian had just been disintegrated, had just climbed mistily,
swiftly, into invisibility in the skies. And there in the midst of the
conquerors left behind, his angel's face set in a moody mask, his pale
eyes awful with fear, his misshapen body sagging, terrible in its
realization of failure, was Moyen!

Even as Kleig prepared to give the mercy signal, a plane dived down on
the group about Moyen, and the Secret Agents could see the hand of the
pilot, lifted high, as though he signaled.

The plane was a Mayther! The pilot was Carlos Kane!

       *       *       *       *       *

Just as Kane went into action, and the noiseless bullets from his ship
crashed into that twisted body, causing it to jump and twitch with the
might of them, Prester Kleig gave the signal.

Even as the figure of Moyen crashed to the soil and the man's soul
quitted its mortal casement, Kleig commanded:

"Spare all who surrender! Make them prisoners, to be used to repair the
damage they have done to our country! Guards will be instantly placed
over the amphibians and the aero-subs--for the day may come when we
shall need to know their secrets!"

And, as men, hands lifted high in token of surrender, quitted the now
motionless amphibians, and flyers dropped down to make them prisoners,
Maniel sighed, pressed various buttons on his apparatus, and the mad
scene of carnage they had witnessed for hours faded slowly out, and
darkness and silence filled the Secret Room.

But darkness is the joy of lovers, and in the midst of silence that was
almost appalling by contrast, Kleig and Charmion were received into each
other's arms.


                   +---------------------------+
                   |    Everyone Is Invited    |
                   |    _To "Come Over in_     |
                   |  'THE READERS' CORNER'"!  |
                   +---------------------------+




Vampires of Venus

_By Anthony Pelcher_

[Illustration: _He seized a short knife and threw himself forward._]

  Leslie Larner, an entomologist borrowed from the Earth, pits himself
  against the night-flying vampires that are ravaging the inhabitants
  of Venus.


It was as if someone had thrown a bomb into a Quaker meeting, when
adventure suddenly began to crowd itself into the life of the studious
and methodical Leslie Larner, professor of entomology.

Fame had been his since early manhood, when he began to distinguish
himself in several sciences, but the adventure and thrills he had longed
for had always fallen to the lot of others.

His father, a college professor, had left him a good working brain and
nothing else. Later his mother died and he was left with no relatives in
the world, so far as he knew. So he gave his life over to study and hard
work.

Still youthful at twenty-five, he was hoping that fate would "give him
a break." It did.

He was in charge of a Government department having to do with Oriental
beetles, Hessian flies, boll weevils and such, and it seemed his life
had been just one bug after another. He took creeping, crawling things
seriously and believed that, unless curbed, insects would some day crowd
man off the earth. He sounded an alarm, but humanity was not disturbed.
So Leslie Larner fell back on his microscope and concerned himself with
saving cotton, wheat and other crops. His only diversion was fishing for
the elusive rainbow trout.

He managed to spend a month each year in the Colorado Rockies angling
for speckled beauties.

Larner was anything but a clock-watcher, but on a certain bright day in
June he was seated in his laboratory doing just that.

"Just five minutes to go," he mused.

It was just 4:25 P. M. He had finished his work, put his affairs in
order, and in five minutes would be free to leave on a much needed and
well earned vacation. His bags were packed and at the station. His
fishing tackle, the pride of his young life, was neatly rolled in oiled
silk and stood near at hand.

"I'll just fill my calabash, take one more quiet smoke, and then for the
mountains and freedom," he told himself. He settled back with his feet
on his desk. He half closed his eyes in solid comfort. Then the bomb
fell and exploded.

       *       *       *       *       *

B-r-r-r-r!

The buzzer on his desk buzzed and his feet came off the desk and hit the
floor with a thud. His eyes popped open and the calabash was immediately
laid aside.

That buzzer usually meant business, and it would be his usual luck to
have trouble crash in on him just as he was on the edge of a rainbow
trout paradise.

A messenger was ushered into the room by an assistant. The boy handed
him an envelope, said, "No answer," and departed.

Larner tore open the envelope lazily. He read and then re-read its
contents, while a look of puzzled surprise disturbed his usually placid
countenance. He spread the sheet of paper out on his desk, and for the
tenth time he read:

    Confidential.

    Memorize this address and destroy this paper:

    Tula Bela, 1726 88th Street, West, City of Hesper, Republic of
    Pana, Planet Venus.

    Will meet you in the Frying Pan.

That was all. It was enough. Larner lost his temper. He crumpled the
paper and tossed it in the waste basket. He was not given to profanity,
but he could say "Judas Priest" in a way that sizzled.

"Judas Priest!" he spluttered. "Anyone who would send a man a crazy
bunch of nonsense like that, at a time like this, ought to be snuffed
out like a beetle!

"'Meet you in the Frying Pan,'" he quoted. Then he happened to recall
