
"There she is!" he croaked. "There she is! I claim--"

"There she is!" guffawed a tipsy merclite chewer. "The creatress, come
to punish you! Cut off his nose, O creatress, and stuff it into his
mouth!"

There were shouts of laughter, a surge to see better.

"No! No! I, Deacon Homms, claim the reward!" the old man screamed.
"She is the princess; I know her. She came out of the canal to tempt
me! She is the Princess Sira. Now shall I at last enter the Palace of
Joys! I claim the 100,000 dollars!"

But he still had to catch Sira. The crowd, suddenly sensing that this
old fanatic might be telling the truth, rushed in savagely, each eager
to seize the prize, or at least to establish some claim to a share of
the award. Men and women went down, to be trampled mercilessly.
Inevitably they got in one another's way, and soon swords were rising
redly, falling again.

"Guards! Guards! A riot!" Some were fleeing the scene; others rushing
in, grateful for the opportunity to expend excess pugnacity. A fresh
platoon of soldiers tumbled out of a kiosk leading to an underground
barracks like ants out of a disturbed nest. They deployed, holding
their neuro-pistols before them, focalizers set for maximum
dispersion, therefore non-fatal--merely of paralyzing intensity. Some
of the rioters now turned to run, but others persisted, willing to be
rendered unconscious, just so it would be near the valuable princess.

A few moments later the captain of the guard surveyed the mass of
paralysed bodies and the sword-slashed corpses, all intermingled.

"What's this all about?" he demanded of a scarred, evil-looking fellow
who was the first to rise to his elbow.

"The Princess Sira! I claim the reward. In there! She stood right
there!"

"Get out, you galoon!" the captain growled, knocking the fellow
unconscious with the heavy barrel of his neuro. "Sort 'em out there.
Moggins, Schkamitch. On the double. You will share, according to
rank."

But eagerly as they searched, they did not find Sira. Creeping between
the legs of the maddened reward seekers, she had fought clear, had
gained the shelter of a tall, red conical tree whose closely laced
branches pressed her to the ground, clinging to the greasy trunk.

       *       *       *       *       *

She realized that her sanctuary was none too secure. There would
surely be a methodical search after the first excitement, and she
would be discovered. She had lost her sun-helmet, but nevertheless she
must risk making a break. A large proportion of the people were
wearing such helmets. Perhaps she could snatch one.

But before such an opportunity came, she saw a chance to dash to a
nearby clump of shrubbery. On the other side was a long hedge, leading
to an alley back of a group of warehouses. If she could gain this
alley, she felt sure she would be safe for the time being.

All over the park, which was thirty or forty acres in extent, there
were minor riots, as some unfortunate was mistaken for the princess
and blindly struggled for.

Sira lost no time. She scuttered along the hedge like a frightened
kangrat. But as she crossed a small open space, a stentorian voice
shouted:

"There she is! That's her! The princess!"

Out of the corner of her eye she saw him, running toward her
lumberingly, his great arms outspread. Tuman had been wrong in saying
that on all of Mars there was no man as big as Tolto. This one was,
and he looked more formidable. Instead of Tolto's normally
good-natured face, this one looked like an enraged terrestrial
gorilla, although at the moment it was really expressing joy and
eagerness.

Several other men joined the chase, and then scores. They were fleeter
of foot than the ape-man, but as they passed him in the narrow alley
he smashed them to the pavement with casual blows of his terrifying
hands. Thereafter he was undisputedly in the lead; the others content
to follow in his rear, although many were armed, and the giant was
not.

       *       *       *       *       *

This was an advantage to Sira. The whole mob was slowed by the
lumbering pace of the ape-man, and she was able to keep in the lead
without difficulty. Several times some of her pursuers ran ahead by
other routes, intent on snatching her into some doorway. But each time
she slashed at them with her sword, springing past.

She had not run very far when her fear of another danger was realized.
There was a high, keen whistle overhead, and a scouting police car
flashed near. Under the neuro-pistols both hounds and hare would be
paralyzed, and she would be easily taken. Sira longed for one of these
handy weapons herself, but they were too expensive: she had been
unable to secure one.

Now the police car was coming back. The sliding forward door was
drawn back, and a man was leaning out, neuro alert. Judging the
distance expertly, he pulled the trigger, and a hundred men fell
unconscious.

"Got 'em!" he snapped over his shoulder. "The princess as well. Down
quick!"

Sira, spared because of the officer's unwillingness to take a chance
on injuring her, leaped through a gap in a wall and sprinted through a
garden smothered with thick, leathery-leaved weeds, some of them
higher than her head. She almost laughed with relief, but as she
flitted around the corner of a house toward the street she saw the
gorilla faced giant again in pursuit, and beyond the garden wall the
police ship was just settling to the ground.

It just seemed to be raining giants that day. Sira ran out of a narrow
gate at the front of the house into the street, to be stopped by a
tremendous human framework as solid and unyielding as a mountain. She
stepped back, drew her sword--

"Softly! Softly!" a rumbling bass implored. "Doesn't the Princess Sira
recognize her servant, Tolto?"

"Tolto!" All at once the tautness went out of her, and Sira leaned
against the wall, divided between laughing and crying.

"Tolto and his good friends were looking for you," the big man rumbled
anxiously. "The teletabloids said there was a riot coming--"

       *       *       *       *       *

He got no further. The gorilla-faced pursuer catapulted himself
sideways through the portal, being too wide to go through in the
regular way. He emitted a raucous shout of triumph:

"I got her! It's her, all right! I claim--"

As he reached out his enormous sun-blackened arm there was a thud
that seemed to shake the ground. Instantly enraged, the man's little
red-rimmed eyes jerked quietly to the dealer of that shocking blow.
Then the conical little head sank between the bulging shoulders, the
long, thick arms bowed outward, and the ape-man launched himself at
Tolto.

That was a battle! On the one side devotion, simple-minded loyalty and
a fighting heart in a body of such mechanical perfection as Mars had
never seen before or since. On the other side a primal beast, just as
huge, rage-driven, atavistic, savage.

Fists as large as an average man's head, or larger, crashed against
unprotected face and body. Gigantic muscles rippled and crackled.
Blows echoed from wall to house and seemed to thud against the hearts
of the spectators.

It was as if time and memory had come to a standstill. The present was
not, nor present ambitions and duties. The soldiers came plunging out
into the street, swords in their hands, but they stopped to watch.
Sime, Murray and Tuman, used to instant and automatic battle, watched.
A struggle so titanic, by tacit, by unconsidered consent, must be left
to decide its own course.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tolto seemed to be slowly gaining an advantage. During his novitiate
as a palace guard the other men had instructed him in the science of
their pastime-fighting. Although he scorned to guard against the blows
of his savage antagonist, he placed his own punches more shrewdly,
more effectively. The ape-faced one, through a red film, sensed that
he was being beaten, and that this fight would end in death.

Suddenly he changed his tactics. Rushing in, he threw his arms around
Tolto's great torso. He opened his jaws, and his long yellow fangs
bit into the flesh of Tolto's shoulder.

Tolto, taken slightly by surprise, met this new menace promptly.
Placing his powerful forearm against the battered, hairy face, he
attempted to bend the head back. But it was so small, in proportion,
and so slippery with blood, that he was unable to dislodge it.

So Tolto matched brute strength against brute strength. His arms
encircled his enemy's body, and the tremendous muscles of his
shoulders and body began to arch.

So they stood poised for a few seconds, as if on the brink of
eternity.

"Go-o-o-wie!" exclaimed one of the soldiers, awed.

Slowly, like the agonizingly slow plastic creep of metal under great
pressure, the gorilla-faced giant was yielding. His dark skin became
mottled. His breath came gaspingly. His rope-knotted arms slipped a
little.

But it was not in him to surrender, which might still have saved his
life. With a vicious twisting motion of his head he tried to drag his
fangs through the thick muscles of Tolto's shoulder. The wound began
to bleed more freely, choking the savage at each labored breath.

Now Tolto began to walk forward. Always his antagonist had to yield a
little, unwillingly, grudgingly, just enough to keep the paralyzing
pressure on his spine from becoming unbearable. And slowly,
inexorably, Tolto followed. His arms tightened. His leg slipped
suddenly between the ape-faced man's supports. Tolto grunted. The
sound seemed to labor upward from his innermost being, his body's
protest as he called upon it for its last reserve of strength.

Like an echo, there was a dull crack, a brief, agonized moan from the
ape-faced one; and the savage, unknown giant slumped to the pavement,
dead with a broken back. Tolto staggered to the wall, breathing
deeply.

"Man, what a fight! What a _fight_!" The young Martian captain passed
a shaking hand over his face. The battle had stirred him more deeply
than he wanted to admit. But in a few seconds he came out of his
mental maze.

"Attention! All right, men, you're under arrest. As for the girl--"

"As for the girl," came a clear feminine voice, as Sira stepped out
from the shelter of a buttress some dozen feet away, "--the girl took
advantage of your preoccupation to relieve you of your neuros. As you
see I have two of them in my hand. The rest of them are over by that
wall. No! Don't try to rush! You are welcome to your swords, but they
are useless here."




CHAPTER XII

"_He Must Be a Man of Earth_"


Friend and foe looked stupefied. But they were used to the give and
take of battle. That this girl should disarm a detachment of soldiers
while they and their own men were absorbed in such a common thing as a
fight struck them as humorous. They laughed.

"This is a better break then we deserve," Sime said, grinning with a
trace of sheepishness. "Captain, you take your men across the street
and hold 'em there. We're going to borrow your car. No funny stuff!"
Civilians were flooding into the streets. There would soon be a mob.

"We will not," replied the captain, "try any funny stuff. Some day, my
friend, I hope to open you up with my sword," he added.

"By all means," Sime agreed pleasantly. "My time is pretty well
occupied, but there's no telling when I may meet you again, in my
business. Good day, Captain!"

Tuman stayed at the front gate with his neuro while the others
struggled through the weedy garden to the police ship in the alley,
rejoining them as they were ready to rise.

       *       *       *       *       *

A crowd had gathered. If they wondered at the appearance of these
ragged, scarred and bewhiskered men; at sweat and blood-covered giant
Tolto; the obviously high-bred girl in the laboring man's garments,
they wisely refrained from comment or action, in deference to the
neuros with which the party was bristling.

Once inside and safely in the air, they had time to breathe. Murray,
with a gallantry that sat ill on the scarecrow figure he was, cleared
matters up a trifle.

"Princess Sira? As I thought. Princess, or Your Highness, to be
formal, I am your humble and disreputable servant, Lige Murray, of the
Interplanetary Flying Police. Likewise this gentleman behind the
brush--Sime Hemingway. You know Tuman? You've missed something, Your
Highness! And Tolto! Lucky man!"

Sira recovered quickly from her reaction following the fight. She
found a first-aid kit, bandaged Tolto's wounded shoulder skilfully and
quickly. She had given no sign of recognition as Sime awkwardly bowed,
during Murray's introduction, but now, as Sime held a roll of bandage
for her, she gave him a sidewise look, agleam with mischief.

"But I have decided to remit the punishment--the sentence I passed on
you, Mr. Hemingway," she said, her sweet, child-like face innocent.

"What punishment?" Sime gasped.

"Why, the punishment of death! For kissing me that night!" she
laughed, turning her back.

Murray was heading back for the government park. It was a short
distance with the police car. Soon the broad grounds, with their
scattered, magnificent buildings, lay below them. But the parks were
strangely bare of living creatures. Here and there lay the bodies of
men or women.

"Something's happened!" Murray shouted excitedly. "Look out!"

       *       *       *       *       *

He swerved the ship sharply. They escaped damage as an atomic bomb,
unskilfully aimed, exploded far to one side.

"Funny thing, firing on a police car," Sime puzzled. "They might have
got news from that detachment we grounded, but how do they know this
isn't some other police or military car?"

"Those aren't soldiers," Murray decided. "There's been a riot, and
some civilian's got hold of an ato-projector."

"I know what's happened!" Sira exclaimed suddenly. "Wasil--a
technie--has managed to broadcast the secret session! That upset their
psychology. Oh!" Her face was alight, and she threw up her arms in
ecstasy. As quickly she subsided, and tears came to her eyes.

"Wasil!" she cried. "If he is dead, Mellie will never forgive me!"

"Where is this technie?" Sime asked bruskly.

"In the broadcast room. But they have probably killed him."

"Never can be sure. Head her smack for the main entrance, Murray!"

Murray threw the car into a steep dive, and the hall portal rushed up
to meet them. A soldier came partially out of concealment, waved a
signal. Murray paid him no heed.

They struck with a crash. The stout car crushed through the glittering
doors of metal and glass, and before the fragments fell the four men
were in the thick of short, sharp and decisive battle. Their neuros
hissed venomously, spanged as they met opposing beams. And the
princess, struggling through the wreckage, wept tears of rage as the
coarse fabric of her clothing caught, entangled hopelessly, and held
her.

"Something queer!" Murray said, as they halted for breath after
routing what little opposition they had encountered. "Maybe it's a
trap. But what an expensive trap for somebody! Where's this
broadcasting plant?"

"This way!" Tuman called eagerly. "Maybe we can still save the poor
fellow who turned the trick. Broadcast the secret sessions! Don't tell
me that little girl isn't fit to rule!"

The heavy metal doors were open, and they hurried in. But Tolto,
noting that the princess had not followed, hurried out in search for
her.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sime stumbled over a body. It had been a dark, sleek, youngish man. A
jagged burn on his throat told of the needle-ray. "Who's this fellow,
Murray?"

Murray glanced at the body. He smiled a brief smile of satisfaction.

"That's Scar Balta. Got what's coming to him at last. Help me with
this bird: he's still alive. Cold, though!"

"Got a shot of neuro. Could this be the technie?"

Sime found a fountain of water. He filled a cup, dashed it over the
still face. The shock made the man's lips move.

"Mellie, I did it!" he whispered.

"Who's Mellie?" Sime asked.

"Mellie? Seems to me the princess mentioned her name, This is her
brother. He's the right guy! Take it easy, brother!"

But Wasil was able to sit up.

"I sure fooled him!" he gasped. "Mixed up the circuits. Scar Balta
sat right here while I broadcast the secret sessions, and he was
watching a lot o' haywah in the control screen.

"When Wilcox got word from outside he knew he was done. He thought
Scar'd double-exed him, so came here in person and gave him the
needle-ray."

Despite his nausea, Wasil looked happy.

"Wilcox tried for me, but I dodged back of those frames. So he tried
for me with the neuro. The mob was getting wild outside; there was--"

He could not finish. There was an explosion that shook the building to
its foundations. Tolto came running in. Sira close after him:

"Joro is coming. Joro has detonated the warships. The hall guards have
surrendered. The council is locked up. It can't escape!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Events were transpiring too fast for comprehension. It was several
days later, on a bench in Prince Joro's palace grounds, that Sira
summed it up for Sime Hemingway.

"I'm going to accept the throne!" she said. "I'm going to be a real
queen. Joro has convinced me that it will be a real service to Mars.
The dear old man has schemed and worked so long, so unselfishly."

"Yeh, and he wasn't afraid to fight!" Sime added admiringly. "When he
came charging out of those ships with his gang of monarchists, swords
flashing, it was a pretty sight to see. And when they closed in on
that gang of cheap politicians! Talk about rats in a corner!"

"The prince can fight with his brains as well as with his sword." Sira
submitted. "The whole thing would have been hopeless, if he hadn't
invented the detonating ray that disposed of the warships. You
remember those heavy explosions, shortly after we dropped in the
