silver-white. Brightest world in the firmament--the light from it bathed
the Planetara, illumined the deck, painting everything with silver.

I stood with Carter and Blackstone on the turret bridge. It was obvious
that unless we altered our course, the asteroid would pass too close for
safety. Already we were feeling its attraction; from the control rooms
came the report that our trajectory was disturbed by this new mass so
near.

"Better make your calculations now, Gregg," Blackstone suggested.

       *       *       *       *       *

I cast up the rough elements from the observational instruments in the
turret. It took me some ten or fifteen minutes. When I had us upon our
new course, with the attractive and repulsive plates in the Planetara's
hull set in their altered combinations, I went out to the bridge again.

The asteroid hung over our bow quarter. No more than twenty or thirty
thousand miles away. A giant ball now, filling all that quadrant of the
heavens. The configurations of its mountains--its land and water
areas--were plainly visible. Its axial rotation was apparent.

"Perfectly habitable," Blackstone said. "But I've searched all over this
hemisphere with the glass. No sign of human life--certainly nothing
civilized--nothing in the fashion of cities."

A fair little world, by the look of it. A tiny globe: Blackstone had
figured it at some eight hundred miles in diameter. There seemed a
normal atmosphere. We could see areas where the surface was obscured by
clouds. And oceans, and land masses. Polar icecaps. Lush vegetation at
its equator.

Blackstone had roughly cast its orbital elements. A narrow ellipse. No
wonder we had never encountered this fair little world before. It had
come from the outer region beyond Neptune. At perihelion it would reach
inside Mercury, round the Sun, and head outward again.

       *       *       *       *       *

We swept past the asteroid at a distance of some six thousand miles.
Close enough, in very truth--a minute of flight at our combined speeds
totaling a hundred miles a second. I had descended to the passenger
deck, where I stood alone at a window, gazing.

The passengers were all gathered to view the passing little world. I
saw, not far from me, Anita, standing with her brother; and the giant
figure of Miko with them.

Half an hour since, first with the naked eye, this wandering little
world had shown itself; it swam slowly past, began to dwindle behind us.
A huge half moon. A thinner, smaller quadrant. A tiny crescent, like a
silver bar-pin to adorn some lady's breast. And then it was a dot, a
point of light indistinguishable among the myriad others hovering in
this great black void.

The incident of the passing of the asteroid was over. I turned from the
deck window. My heart leaped. The moment for which all day I had been
subconsciously longing was at hand. Anita was sitting in a deck chair,
momentarily alone. Her gaze was on me as I looked her way, and she
smiled an invitation for me to join her.


CHAPTER VII

_Unspoken Love_

Unspoken love! I think if I had yielded to the impulse of my heart, I
would have poured out all those protestations of a lover's ecstasy,
incongruous here upon this starlit public deck, to a girl I hardly knew.
I think, too, she might have received them with a tender acquiescence.
The starlight was mirrored in her dark eyes. Misty eyes, with great
reaches of unfathomable space in their depths. Yet I felt their
tenderness.

Unfathomable strangeness of love! Who am I to write of it, with all the
poets of all the ages striving to express the unexpressible? A bond,
strangely fashioned by nature, between me and this little dark-haired
Earth beauty. As though marked by the stars we were destined to be
lovers....

Thus ran the romance of my unspoken thoughts. But I was sitting quietly
in the deck chair, striving to regard her gentle beauty impersonally.
And saying:

"But Miss Prince, why are you and your brother going to Ferrok-Shahn?
His business--"

Even as I voiced it, I hated myself for such a question. So nimble is
the human mind that mingled with my rhapsodies of love was my need for
information of George Prince....

"Oh," she said, "this is pleasure, not business, for George." It seemed
to me that a shadow crossed her expressive face. But it was gone in an
instant, and she smiled. "We have always wanted to travel. We are alone
in the world, you know--our parents died when we were children."

       *       *       *       *       *

I filled in her pause. "You will like Mars--so many interesting things
to see."

She nodded. "Yes, I understand so. Our Earth is so much the same all
over, cast all in one mould."

"But a hundred or two hundred years ago it was not, Miss Prince. I have
read how the picturesque Orient, differing from--well, Great-New York,
or London, for instance--"

"Transportation did that," she interrupted eagerly. "Made everything the
same--the people all look alike--dress alike."

We discussed it. She had an alert, eager mind, childlike with its
curiosity, yet strangely matured. And her manner was naively earnest.
Yet this was no clinging vine, this little Anita Prince. There was a
firmness, a hint of masculine strength in her chin, and in her manner.

"If I were a man, what wonders I could achieve in this marvelous age!"
Her sense of humor made her laugh at herself. "Easy for a girl to say
that," she added.

"You have greater wonders to achieve, Miss Prince," I said impulsively.

"Yes? What are they?" She had a very frank and level gaze, devoid of
coquetry.

My heart was pounding. "The wonders of the next generation. A little
son, cast in your own gentle image--"

What madness, this clumsy brash talk! I choked it off.

       *       *       *       *       *

But she took no offense. The dark rose-petals of her cheeks were mantled
deeper red, but she laughed.

"That is true." She turned abruptly serious. "I should not laugh. The
wonders of the next generation--conquering humans marching on...." Her
voice trailed away. My hand went to her arm. Strange tingling something
which poets call love! It burned and surged from my trembling fingers
into the flesh of her forearm.

The starlight glowed in her eyes. She seemed to be gazing, not at the
silver-lit deck, but away into distant reaches of the future. And she
murmured:

"A little son, cast in my own gentle image. But with the strength of his
father...."

Our moment. Just a breathless moment given us as we sat there with my
hand burning her arm, as though we both might be seeing ourselves joined
in a new individual--a little son, cast in his mother's gentle image and
with the strength of his father. Our moment, and then it was over. A
step sounded. I sat back. The giant gray figure of Miko came past, his
great cloak swaying, with his clanking sword-ornament beneath it. His
bullet head, with its close-clipped hair, was hatless. He gazed at us,
swaggered past, and turned the deck corner.

Our moment was gone. Anita said conventionally, "It has been pleasant to
talk with you, Mr. Haljan."

"But we'll have many more," I said. "Ten days--"

"You think we'll reach Ferrok-Shahn on schedule?"

"Yes. I think so.... As I was saying, Miss Prince, you'll enjoy Mars. A
strange, aggressively forward-looking people."

       *       *       *       *       *

An oppression seemed on her. She stirred in her chair.

"Yes, they are," she said vaguely. "My brother and I know many Martians
in Great-New York." She checked herself abruptly. Was she sorry she had
said that? It seemed so.

Miko was coming back. He stopped this time before us.

"Your brother would see you, Anita. He sent me to bring you to his
room."

The glance he shot me had a touch of insolence. I stood up, and he
towered a head over me.

Anita said, "Oh yes. I'll come."

I bowed. "I will see you again, Miss Prince. I thank you for a pleasant
half-hour."

The Martian led her away. Her little figure was like a child with a
giant. It seemed, as they passed the length of the deck with me staring
after them, that he took her arm roughly. And that she shrank from him
in fear.

And they did not go inside. As though to show me that he had merely
taken her from me, he stopped at a distant deck window and stood talking
to her. Once he picked her up as one would pick up a child to show it
some distant object through the window.

"A little son with the strength of his father...." Her words echoed in
my mind. Was Anita afraid of this Martian's wooing? Yet held to him by
some power he might have over her brother? The vagrant thought struck
me.

Was it that?


CHAPTER VIII

_A Scream in the Night_

We kept, on the Planetara, always the time and routine of our port of
departure. The rest of that afternoon and evening were a blank of
confusion to me. Anita's words; the touch of my hand upon her arm; that
vast realm of what might be for us, like a glimpse of a magic land of
happiness which I had seen in her eyes, and perhaps she had seen in
mine--all this surged within me.

I wandered about the vessel. I was not hungry. I did not go to the
dining salon for dinner. I carried Johnson food and water to his cage;
and sat, with my heat-cylinder upon him, listening to his threats of
what would happen when he could complain to the Line's higher
officials.

But what was Johnson doing carrying a plan of the ship's control rooms
in his pockets? And worse: How had he dared open Snap's box in the
helio-room and abstract the code pass-words for this voyage? Without
them we would be an outlawed vessel, subject to arrest if any patrol
hailed us. Had Johnson been planning to sell those pass-words to Miko? I
thought so. I tried to get the confession out of him, but could not.

I had a brief consultation with Captain Carter. He was genuinely
apprehensive now. The Planetara carried no long-range guns, and very few
side-arms. A half-dozen of the heat-ray hand projectors; a few
old-fashioned weapons of explosion-rifles and automatic revolvers. And
hand projectors with the new Benson curve-light. We had models of this
for curved vision, so that one might see around a corner, so to speak.
And with them, we could project the heat-ray in a curve as well.

       *       *       *       *       *

The weapons were all in Carter's chart-room, save the few we officers
always carried. Carter was apprehensive, but of what he could not say.
He had not thought that our plan to stop at the Moon for treasure could
affect this outward voyage. Any danger would be upon the way back, when
the Planetara would be adequately guarded with long-range electronic
guns, and manned with police-soldiers.

But now we were practically defenseless....

I had a moment with Venza, but she had nothing new to communicate to
me.

And for half an hour I chatted with George Prince. He seemed a gay,
pleasant young man. I could almost have fancied I liked him. Or was it
because he was Anita's brother? He told me how he looked forward to
traveling with her on Mars. No, he had never been there before, he
said.

He had a measure of Anita's earnest naive personality. Or was he a very
clever scoundrel, with irony lurking in his soft voice, and a chuckle
that he could so befool me?

"We'll talk again, Haljan. You interest me--I've enjoyed it."

He sauntered away from me, joining the saturnine Ob Hahn, with whom
presently I heard him discussing religion.

The arrest of Johnson had caused considerable comment among the
passengers. A few had seen me drag him forward to the cage. The incident
had been the subject of passenger discussion all afternoon. Captain
Carter had posted a notice to the effect that Johnson's accounts had
been found in serious error, and that Dr. Frank for this voyage would
act in his stead.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was near midnight when Snap and I closed and sealed the helio-room
and started for the chart-room, where we were to meet with Captain
Carter and the other officers. The passengers had nearly all retired. A
game was in progress in the smoking room, but the deck was almost
deserted.

Snap and I were passing along one of the interior corridors. The
stateroom doors, with the illumined names of the passengers, were all
closed. The metal grid of the floor echoed our footsteps. Snap was in
advance of me. His body suddenly rose in the air. He went like a balloon
to the ceiling, struck it gently, and all in a heap came floating down
and landed on the floor!

"What in the infernal!--"

He was laughing as he picked himself up. But it was a brief laugh. We
knew what had happened: the artificial gravity-controls in the base of
the ship, which by magnetic force gave us normality aboard, were being
tampered with! For just this instant, this particular small section of
this corridor had been cut off. The slight bulk of the Planetara,
floating in space, had no appreciable gravity pull on Snap's body, and
the impulse of his step as he came to the unmagnetized area of the
corridor had thrown him to the ceiling. The area was normal now. Snap
and I tested it gingerly.

He gripped me. "That never went wrong by accident, Gregg! Someone down
there--"

       *       *       *       *       *

We rushed to the nearest descending ladder. In the deserted lower room
the bank of dials stood neglected. A score of dials and switches were
here, governing the magnetism of different areas of the ship. There
should have been a night operator, but he was gone.

Then we saw him lying nearby, sprawled face down on the floor! In the
silence and dim lurid glow of the fluorescent tubes, we stood holding
our breaths, peering and listening. No one here.

The guard was not dead. He lay unconscious from a blow on the head. A
brawny fellow. We had him revived in a few moments. A broadcast flash of
the call-buzz brought Dr. Frank in haste from the chart-room.

"What's the matter?"

We pointed at the unconscious man. "Someone was here," I said hastily.
"Experimenting with the magnetic switches. Evidently unfamiliar with
them--pulling one or another to test their workings and so see the
reactions on the dials."

We told him what had happened to Snap in the upper corridor.

Dr. Frank revived the guard in a moment. He was no worse off for the
episode, save a lump on his head, and a nasty headache.

But he had little to tell us. He had heard a step. Saw nothing--and
then had been struck on the head, by some invisible assailant.

       *       *       *       *       *

We left him nursing his head, sitting belligerent at his post. Armed now
with my heat-ray cylinder which I loaned him.
