Irene Kasansky went back to her work. "You know the way," she said.

This time Ronny Bronston pushed open the door to Sid Jakes' office without
knocking. The Section G supervisor was poring over reports on his desk. He
looked up and grinned his Sid Jakes' grin.

"Ronny!" he said. "Welcome back. You know, you're one of the quickest men
ever to return from a Tommy Paine assignment. I was talking to Lee Chang
only a day or so ago. She said you were on your way."

Ronny grunted, his anger growing within him. He lowered himself into one
of the room's heavy chairs, and glared at the other.

Sid Jakes chuckled and leaned back in his chair. "Before we go any
further, just to check, who is Tommy Paine?"

Ronny snapped, "You are."

The supervisor's eyebrows went up.

Ronny said, "You and Ross Metaxa and Lee Chang Chu--and all the rest of
Section G. Section G is Tommy Paine."

"Good man!" Sid Jakes chortled. He flicked a switch on his order box.
"Irene," he said, "how about clearing me through to the commissioner? I
want to take Ronny in for his finals."

Irene snapped back something and Sid Jakes switched off and turned to
Ronny happily. "Let's go," he said. "Ross is free for a time."

Ronny Bronston said nothing. He followed the other. The rage within him
was still mounting.

In the months that had elapsed since Ronny Bronston had seen Ross Metaxa
the latter had changed not at all. His clothing was still sloppy, his eyes
bleary with lack of sleep or abundance of alcohol--or both. His expression
was still sour and skeptical.

He looked up at their entry and scowled, and made no effort to rise and
shake hands. He said to Ronny sourly, "O.K., sound off and get it over
with. I haven't too much time this afternoon."

Ronny Bronston was just beginning to feel tentacles of cold doubt, but he
suppressed them. The boiling anger was uppermost. He said flatly, "All my
life I've been a dedicated United Planets man. All my life I've considered
its efforts the most praiseworthy and greatest endeavor man has ever
attempted."

"Of course, old chap," Jakes told him cheerfully. "We know all that, or
you wouldn't ever have been chosen as an agent for Section G."

Ronny looked at him in disgust. "I've resigned that position, Jakes."

Jakes grinned back at him. "To the contrary, you're now in the process of
receiving permanent appointment."

Ronny snorted his disgust and turned back to Metaxa. "Section G is a
secret department of the Bureau of Investigation devoted to subverting
Article One of the United Planets Charter."

Metaxa nodded.

"You don't deny it?"

Metaxa shook his head.

"Article One," Ronny snapped, "is the basic foundation of the Charter
which every member of UP and particularly every citizen of United Planets,
such as ourselves, has sworn to uphold. But the very reason for the
existence of this Section G is to interfere with the internal affairs of
member planets, to subvert their governments, their economic systems,
their religions, their ideals, their very way of life."

Metaxa yawned and reached into a desk drawer for his bottle. "That's
right," he said. "Anybody like a drink?"

Ronny ignored him. "I'm surprised I didn't catch on even sooner," he said.
"On New Delos Mouley Hassan, the local agent, knew the God-King was going
to be assassinated. He brought in extra agents and even a detail of Space
Forces guards for the emergency. He probably engineered the assassination
himself."

"Nope," Jakes said. "We seldom go _that_ far. Local rebels did the actual
work, but, admittedly, we knew what they were planning. In fact, I've got
a sneaking suspicion that Mouley Hassan provided them with the bomb. That
lad's a bit too dedicated."

"But _why_," Ronny blurted. "That's deliberately interfering with internal
affairs. If the word got out, every planet in UP would resign."

"Probably no planet in the system that needed a change so badly," Metaxa
growled. "If they were ever going to swing into real progress, that
hierarchy of priests had to go." He snorted. "An immortal God-King, yet."

Ronny pressed on. "That was bad enough, but how about this planet Mother,
where the colonists had attempted to return to nature and live in the
manner man did in earliest times."

"Most backward planet in the UP," Metaxa said sourly. "They just had to be
roused."

"And Kropotkin!" Ronny blurted. "Don't you understand, those people were
_happy_ there. Their lives were simple, uncomplicated, and they had
achieved a happiness that--"

Metaxa came to his feet. He scowled at Ronny Bronston and growled,
"Unfortunately, the human race can't take the time out for happiness. Come
along, I want to show you something."

He swung around the corner of his desk and made his way toward a
ceiling-high bookcase.

Ronny stared after him, taken off guard, but Sid Jakes was grinning his
amusement.

Ross Metaxa pushed a concealed button and the bookcase slid away to one
side to reveal an elevator beyond.

"Come along," Metaxa repeated over his shoulder. He entered the elevator,
followed by Jakes.

There was nothing else to do. Ronny Bronston followed them, his face still
flushed with the angered argument.

The elevator dropped, how far, Ronny had no idea. It stopped and they
emerged into a plain, sparsely furnished vault. Against one wall was a
boxlike affair that reminded Ronny of nothing so much as a deep-freeze.

For all practical purposes, that's what it was. Ross Metaxa led him over
and they stared down into its glass-covered interior.

Ronny's eyes bugged. The box contained the partly charred body of an
animal approximately the size of a rabbit. No, not an animal. It had
obviously once been clothed, and its limbs were obviously those of a tool
using life form.

Metaxa and Jakes were staring down at it solemnly, for once no inane grin
on the supervisor's face. And that of Ross Metaxa was more weary than
ever.

Ronny said finally, "What is it?" But he knew.

"You tell us," Metaxa growled sourly.

"It's an intelligent life form," Ronny blurted. "Why has it been kept
secret?"

"Let's go on back upstairs," Metaxa sighed.

Back in his office he said, "Now I go into my speech. Shut up for a
while." He poured himself a drink, not offering one to the other two.
"Ronny," he said, "man isn't alone in the galaxy. There's other
intelligent life. Dangerously intelligent."

In spite of himself Ronny reacted in amusement. "That little creature down
there? The size of a small monkey?" As soon as he said it, he realized the
ridiculousness of his statement.

Metaxa grunted. "Obviously, size means nothing. That little fellow down
there was picked up by one of our Space Forces scouts over a century ago.
How long he'd been drifting through space, we don't know. Possibly only
months, but possibly hundreds of centuries. But however long he's proof
that man is not alone in the galaxy. And we have no way of knowing when
the expanding human race will come up against this other intelligence--and
whoever it was fighting."

                             [Illustration.]

"But," Ronny protested, "you're assuming they're aggressive. Perhaps
coming in contact with these aliens will be the best thing that ever
happened to man. Possibly that little fellow down there is the most
benevolent creature ever evolved."

Metaxa looked at him strangely. "Let's hope so," he said. "However, when
found he was in what must have been a one-man scout. He was dead and his
craft was blasted and torn--obviously from some sort of weapons' fire. His
scout was obviously a military craft, highly equipped with what could only
be weapons, most of them so damaged our engineers haven't been able to
figure them out. To the extent they have been able to reconstruct them,
they're scared silly. No, there's no two ways about it, our little rabbit
sized intelligence down in the vault was killed in an interplanetary
conflict. And sooner or later, Ronny, man in his explosion into the stars
is going to run into either or both of the opponents in that conflict."

Ronny Bronston slumped back into his chair, his brain running out a dozen
leads at once.

Metaxa and Jakes remained quiet, looking at him speculatively.

Ronny said slowly, "Then the purpose of Section G is to push the member
planets of UP along the fastest path of progress, to get them ready for
the eventual, inevitable meeting."

"Not just Section G," Metaxa growled, "but all of the United Planets
organization, although most of the rank and file don't even know our basic
purpose. Section G? We do the dirty work, and are proud to do it, by every
method we can devise."

Ronny leaned forward. "But look," he said. "Why not simply inform all
member planets of this common danger? They'd all unite in the effort to
meet the common potential foe. Anything standing in the way would be
brushed aside."

Metaxa shook his head wearily. "Would they? Is a common danger enough for
man to change his institutions, particularly those pertaining to property,
power and religion? History doesn't show it. Delve back into early times
and you'll recall, for an example, that in man's early discovery of
nuclear weapons he almost destroyed himself. Three or four different
socio-economic systems co-existed at that time and all would have
preferred destruction rather than changes in their social forms."

Jakes said, in an unwonted quiet tone, "No, until someone comes up with a
better answer it looks as though Section G is going to have to continue
the job of advancing man's institutions, in spite of himself."

The commissioner made it clearer. "It's not as though we deal with all our
member planets. It isn't necessary. But you see, Ronny, the best colonists
are usually made up of the, well, crackpot element. Those who are
satisfied, stay at home. America, for instance, was settled by the
adventurers, the malcontents, the non-conformists, the religious cultists,
and even fugitives and criminals of Europe. So it is in the stars. A group
of colonists go out with their dreams, their schemes, their far-out ideas.
In a few centuries they've populated their new planet, and often do very
well indeed. But often not and a nudge, a push, from Section G can start
them up another rung or so of the ladder of social evolution. Most of them
don't want the push. Few cultures, if any, realize they are mortal; like
Hitler's Reich, they expect to last at least a thousand years. They resist
any change--even change for the better."

                  -------------------------------------

Ronny's defenses were crumbling, but he threw one last punch. "How do you
know the changes you make are for the better?"

Metaxa shrugged heavy shoulders. "It's sometimes difficult to decide, but
we aim for changes that will mean an increased scientific progress, a more
advanced industrial technology, more and better education, the opening of
opportunity for every member of the culture to exert himself to the full
of his abilities. The last is particularly important. Too many cultures,
even those that think of themselves as particularly advanced, suppress the
individual by one means or another."

Ronny was still mentally reeling with the magnitude of it all. "But how
can you account for the fact that these alien intelligences haven't
already come in contact with us?"

Metaxa shrugged again. "The Solar System, our sun, is way out in a
sparsely populated spiral arm of our galaxy. Undoubtedly, these others are
further in toward the center. We have no way of knowing how far away they
are, or how many sun systems they dominate, or even how many other empires
of intelligent life forms there are. All we know is that there are other
intelligences in the galaxy, that they are near enough like us to live on
the same type planets. The more opportunity man has to develop before the
initial contact takes place, the stronger bargaining position, or military
position, as the case may be, he'll be in."

Sid Jakes summed up the Tommy Paine business for Ronny's sake. "We need
capable agents badly, but we need dedicated and efficient ones. We can't
afford anything less. So when we come upon potential Section G operatives
we send them out with a trusted Tog to get a picture of these United
Planets of ours. It's the quickest method of indoctrination we've hit
upon; the agent literally teaches himself by observation and
participation. Usually, it takes four or five stops, on this planet and
that, before the probationary agent begins sympathizing with the efforts
of this elusive Tommy Paine. Especially since every Section G agent he
runs into, including the Tog, of course, fills him full of stories of
Tommy Paine's activities.

"You were one of the quickest to stumble on the true nature of our Section
G. After calling at only three planets you saw that we ourselves are Tommy
Paine."

"But ... but what's the end?" Ronny said plaintively. "You say our job is
advancing man, even in spite of himself when it comes to that. We start at
the bottom of the evolutionary ladder in a condition of savagery, clan
communism in government, simple animism in religion, and slowly we
progress through barbarism to civilization, through paganism to the higher
ethical codes, through chattel slavery and then feudalism and beyond. What
is the final end, the Ultima Thule?"

Metaxa was shaking his head again. He poured himself another drink,
offered the bottle this time to the others. "We don't know," he said
wearily, "perhaps there is none. Perhaps there is always another rung on
this evolutionary ladder." He punched at his order box and said, "Irene,
have them do up a silver badge for Ronny."

Ronny Bronston took a deep breath and reached for the brown bottle.
"Well," he said. "I suppose I'm ready to ask for my first assignment." He
thought for a moment. "By the way, if there's any way to swing it, I
wouldn't mind working with Supervisor Lee Chang Chu."

THE END






***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ULTIMA THULE***



CREDITS


October 25, 2009

            Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1
            Produced by Greg Weeks, David King, and the Online Distributed
            Proofreading Team at <http://www.pgdp.net/>.



A WORD FROM PROJECT GUTENBERG


This file should be named 30334.txt or 30334.zip.

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:


    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/0/3/3/30334/


Updated editions will replace the previous one -- the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given away
-- you may do practically _anything_ with public domain eBooks.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project Gutenberg"),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works


1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B.


"Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
