owe their state of solidity. I am at present engaged in a series of
experiments, which I hope will throw great light upon this subject.

It is worthy of being examined, whether hydrogen in its concrete state,
uncombined with caloric, be susceptible of combination with sulphur,
phosphorus, and the metals. There is nothing that we know of, which, _a
priori_, should render these combinations impossible; for combustible
bodies being in general susceptible of combination with each other,
there is no evident reason for hydrogen being an exception to the rule:
However, no direct experiment as yet establishes either the possibility
or impossibility of this union. Iron and zinc are the most likely, of
all the metals, for entering into combination with hydrogen; but, as
these have the property of decomposing water, and as it is very
difficult to get entirely free from moisture in chemical experiments, it
is hardly possible to determine whether the small portions of hydrogen
gas, obtained in certain experiments with these metals, were previously
combined with the metal in the state of solid hydrogen, or if they were
produced by the decomposition of a minute quantity of water. The more
care we take to prevent the presence of water in these experiments, the
less is the quantity of hydrogen gas procured; and, when very accurate
precautions are employed, even that quantity becomes hardly sensible.

However this inquiry may turn out respecting the power of combustible
bodies, as sulphur, phosphorus, and metals, to absorb hydrogen, we are
certain that they only absorb a very small portion; and that this
combination, instead of being essential to their constitution, can only
be considered as a foreign substance, which contaminates their purity.
It is the province of the advocates[23] for this system to prove, by
decisive experiments, the real existence of this combined hydrogen,
which they have hitherto only done by conjectures founded upon
suppositions.

FOOTNOTES:

[22] This term _alloy_, which we have from the language of the arts,
serves exceedingly well for distinguishing all the combinations or
intimate unions of metals with each other, and is adopted in our new
nomenclature for that purpose.--A.

[23] By these are meant the supporters of the phlogistic theory, who at
present consider hydrogen, or the base of inflammable air, as the
phlogiston of the celebrated Stahl.--E.




CHAP. XI.

_Observations upon Oxyds and Acids with several Bases--and upon the
Composition of Animal and Vegetable Substances._


We have, in Chap. V. and VIII. examined the products resulting from the
combustion of the four simple combustible substances, sulphur,
phosphorus, charcoal, and hydrogen: We have shown, in Chap. X that the
simple combustible substances are capable of combining with each other
into compound combustible substances, and have observed that oils in
general, and particularly the fixed vegetable oils, belong to this
class, being composed of hydrogen and charcoal. It remains, in this
chapter, to treat of the oxygenation of these compound combustible
substances, and to show that there exist acids and oxyds having double
and triple bases. Nature furnishes us with numerous examples of this
kind of combinations, by means of which, chiefly, she is enabled to
produce a vast variety of compounds from a very limited number of
elements, or simple substances.

It was long ago well known, that, when muriatic and nitric acids were
mixed together, a compound acid was formed, having properties quite
distinct from those of either of the acids taken separately. This acid
was called _aqua regia_, from its most celebrated property of dissolving
gold, called _king of metals_ by the alchymists. Mr Berthollet has
distinctly proved that the peculiar properties of this acid arise from
the combined action of its two acidifiable bases; and for this reason we
have judged it necessary to distinguish it by an appropriate name: That
of _nitro-muriatic_ acid appears extremely applicable, from its
expressing the nature of the two substances which enter into its
composition.

This phenomenon of a double base in one acid, which had formerly been
observed only in the nitro-muriatic acid, occurs continually in the
vegetable kingdom, in which a simple acid, or one possessed of a single
acidifiable base, is very rarely found. Almost all the acids procurable
from this kingdom have bases composed of charcoal and hydrogen, or of
charcoal, hydrogen, and phosphorus, combined with more or less oxygen.
All these bases, whether double or triple, are likewise formed into
oxyds, having less oxygen than is necessary to give them the properties
of acids. The acids and oxyds from the animal kingdom are still more
compound, as their bases generally consist of a combination of
charcoal, phosphorus, hydrogen, and azote.

As it is but of late that I have acquired any clear and distinct notions
of these substances, I shall not, in this place, enlarge much upon the
subject, which I mean to treat of very fully in some memoirs I am
preparing to lay before the Academy. Most of my experiments are already
performed; but, to be able to give exact reports of the resulting
quantities, it is necessary that they be carefully repeated, and
increased in number: Wherefore, I shall only give a short enumeration of
the vegetable and animal acids and oxyds, and terminate this article by
a few reflections upon the composition of vegetable and animal bodies.

Sugar, mucus, under which term we include the different kinds of gums,
and starch, are vegetable oxyds, having hydrogen and charcoal combined,
in different proportions, as their radicals or bases, and united with
oxygen, so as to bring them to the state of oxyds. From the state of
oxyds they are capable of being changed into acids by the addition of a
fresh quantity of oxygen; and, according to the degrees of oxygenation,
and the proportion of hydrogen and charcoal in their bases, they form
the several kinds of vegetable acids.

It would be easy to apply the principles of our nomenclature to give
names to these vegetable acids and oxyds, by using the names of the two
substances which compose their bases: They would thus become
hydro-carbonous acids and oxyds: In this method we might indicate which
of their elements existed in excess, without circumlocution, after the
manner used by Mr Rouelle for naming vegetable extracts: He calls these
extracto-resinous when the extractive matter prevails in their
composition, and resino-extractive when they contain a larger proportion
of resinous matter. Upon that plan, and by varying the terminations
according to the formerly established rules of our nomenclature, we have
the following denominations: Hydro-carbonous, hydro-carbonic;
carbono-hydrous, and carbono-hydric oxyds. And for the acids:
Hydro-carbonous, hydro carbonic, oxygenated hydro-carbonic;
carbono-hydrous, carbono-hydric, and oxygenated carbono-hydric. It is
probable that the above terms would suffice for indicating all the
varieties in nature, and that, in proportion as the vegetable acids
become well understood, they will naturally arrange themselves under
these denominations. But, though we know the elements of which these are
composed, we are as yet ignorant of the proportions of these
ingredients, and are still far from being able to class them in the
above methodical manner; wherefore, we have determined to retain the
ancient names provisionally. I am somewhat farther advanced in this
inquiry than at the time of publishing our conjunct essay upon chemical
nomenclature; yet it would be improper to draw decided consequences from
experiments not yet sufficiently precise: Though I acknowledge that this
part of chemistry still remains in some degree obscure, I must express
my expectations of its being very soon elucidated.

I am still more forcibly necessitated to follow the same plan in naming
the acids, which have three or four elements combined in their bases; of
these we have a considerable number from the animal kingdom, and some
even from vegetable substances. Azote, for instance, joined to hydrogen
and charcoal, form the base or radical of the Prussic acid; we have
reason to believe that the same happens with the base of the Gallic
acid; and almost all the animal acids have their bases composed of
azote, phosphorus, hydrogen, and charcoal. Were we to endeavour to
express at once all these four component parts of the bases, our
nomenclature would undoubtedly be methodical; it would have the property
of being clear and determinate; but this assemblage of Greek and Latin
substantives and adjectives, which are not yet universally admitted by
chemists, would have the appearance of a barbarous language, difficult
both to pronounce and to be remembered. Besides, this part of chemistry
being still far from that accuracy it must arrive to, the perfection of
the science ought certainly to precede that of its language; and we must
still, for some time, retain the old names for the animal oxyds and
acids. We have only ventured to make a few slight modifications of these
names, by changing the termination into _ous_, when we have reason to
suppose the base to be in excess, and into _ic_, when we suspect the
oxygen predominates.

The following are all the vegetable acids hitherto known:

    1. Acetous acid.
    2. Acetic acid.
    3. Oxalic acid.
    4. Tartarous acid.
    5. Pyro-tartarous acid.
    6. Citric acid.
    7. Malic acid.
    8. Pyro-mucous acid.
    9. Pyro-lignous acid.
    10. Gallic acid.
    11. Benzoic acid.
    12. Camphoric acid.
    13. Succinic acid.

Though all these acids, as has been already said, are chiefly, and
almost entirely, composed of hydrogen, charcoal, and oxygen, yet,
properly speaking, they contain neither water carbonic acid nor oil, but
only the elements necessary for forming these substances. The power of
affinity reciprocally exerted by the hydrogen, charcoal, and oxygen, in
these acids, is in a state of equilibrium only capable of existing in
the ordinary temperature of the atmosphere; for, when they are heated
but a very little above the temperature of boiling water, this
equilibrium is destroyed, part of the oxygen and hydrogen unite, and
form water; part of the charcoal and hydrogen combine into oil; part of
the charcoal and oxygen unite to form carbonic acid; and, lastly, there
generally remains a small portion of charcoal, which, being in excess
with respect to the other ingredients, is left free. I mean to explain
this subject somewhat farther in the succeeding chapter.

The oxyds of the animal kingdom are hitherto less known than those from
the vegetable kingdom, and their number is as yet not at all determined.
The red part of the blood, lymph, and most of the secretions, are true
oxyds, under which point of view it is very important to consider them.
We are only acquainted with six animal acids, several of which, it is
probable, approach very near each other in their nature, or, at least,
differ only in a scarcely sensible degree. I do not include the
phosphoric acid amongst these, because it is found in all the kingdoms
of nature. They are,

    1. Lactic acid.
    2. Saccholactic acid.
    3. Bombic acid.
    4. Formic acid.
    5. Sebacic acid.
    6. Prussic acid.

The connection between the constituent elements of the animal oxyds and
acids is not more permanent than in those from the vegetable kingdom, as
a small increase of temperature is sufficient to overturn it. I hope to
render this subject more distinct than has been done hitherto in the
following chapter.




CHAP. XII.

_Of the Decomposition of Vegetable and Animal Substances by the Action
of Fire._


Before we can thoroughly comprehend what takes place during the
decomposition of vegetable substances by fire, we must take into
consideration the nature of the elements which enter into their
composition, and the different affinities which the particles of these
elements exert upon each other, and the affinity which caloric possesses
with them. The true constituent elements of vegetables are hydrogen,
oxygen, and charcoal: These are common to all vegetables, and no
vegetable can exist without them: Such other substances as exist in
particular vegetables are only essential to the composition of those in
which they are found, and do not belong to vegetables in general.

Of these elements, hydrogen and oxygen have a strong tendency to unite
with caloric, and be converted into gas, whilst charcoal is a fixed
element, having but little affinity with caloric. On the other hand,
oxygen, which, in the usual temperature, tends nearly equally to unite
with hydrogen and with charcoal, has a much stronger affinity with
charcoal when at the red heat[24], and then unites with it to form
carbonic acid.

Although we are far from being able to appreciate all these powers of
affinity, or to express their proportional energy by numbers, we are
certain, that, however variable they may be when considered in relation
to the quantity of caloric with which they are combined, they are all
nearly in equilibrium in the usual temperature of the atmosphere; hence
vegetables neither contain oil[25], water, nor carbonic acid, tho' they
contain all the elements of these substances. The hydrogen is neither
combined with the oxygen nor with the charcoal, and reciprocally; the
particles of these three substances form a triple combination, which
remains in equilibrium whilst undisturbed by caloric but a very slight
increase of temperature is sufficient to overturn this structure of
combination.

If the increased temperature to which the vegetable is exposed does not
exceed the heat of boiling water, one part of the hydrogen combines with
the oxygen, and forms water, the rest of the hydrogen combines with a
part of the charcoal, and forms volatile oil, whilst the remainder of
the charcoal, being set free from its combination with the other
elements, remains fixed in the bottom of the distilling vessel.

When, on the contrary, we employ a red heat, no water is formed, or, at
least, any that may have been produced by the first application of the
heat is decomposed, the oxygen having a greater affinity with the
charcoal at this degree of heat, combines with it to form carbonic acid,
and the hydrogen being left free from combination with the other
elements, unites with caloric, and escapes in the state of hydrogen gas.
In this high temperature, either no oil is formed, or, if any was
produced during the lower temperature at the beginning of the
experiment, it is decomposed by the action of the red heat. Thus the
decomposition of vegetable matter, under a high temperature, is produced
by the action of double and triple affinities; while the charcoal
attracts the oxygen, on purpose to form carbonic acid, the caloric
attracts the hydrogen, and converts it into hydrogen gas.

The distillation of every species of vegetable substance confirms the
truth of this theory, if we can give that name to a simple relation of
facts. When sugar is submitted to distillation, so long as we only
employ a heat but a little below that of boiling water, it only loses
its water of cristallization, it still remains sugar, and retains all
its properties; but, immediately upon raising the heat only a little
above that degree, it becomes blackened, a part of the charcoal
separates from the combination, water slightly acidulated passes over
accompanied by a little oil, and the charcoal which remains in the
retort is nearly a third part of the original weight of the sugar.

The operation of affinities which take place during the decomposition,
by fire, of vegetables which contain azote, such as the cruciferous
plants, and of those containing phosphorus, is more complicated; but, as
these substances only enter into the composition of vegetables in very
small quantities, they only, apparently, produce slight changes upon the
products of distillation; the phosphorus seems to combine with the
charcoal, and, acquiring fixity from that union, remains behind in the
retort, while the azote, combining with a part of the hydrogen, forms
ammoniac, or volatile alkali.

Animal substances, being composed nearly of the same elements with
cruciferous plants, give the same products in distillation, with this
difference, that, as they contain a greater quantity of hydrogen and
azote, they produce more oil and more ammoniac. I shall only produce one
fact as a proof of the exactness with which this theory explains all the
phenomena which occur during the distillation of animal substances,
which is the rectification and total decomposition of volatile animal
oil, commonly known by the name of Dippel's oil. When these oils are
procured by a first distillation in a naked fire they are brown, from
containing a little charcoal almost in a free state; but they become
quite colourless by rectification. Even in this state the charcoal in
their composition has so slight a connection with the other elements as
to separate by mere exposure to the air. If we put a quantity of this
animal oil, well rectified, and consequently clear, limpid, and
transparent, into a bell-glass filled with oxygen gas over mercury, in a
short time the gas is much diminished, being absorbed by the oil, the
oxygen combining with the hydrogen of the oil forms water, which sinks
to the bottom, at the same time the charcoal which was combined with the
hydrogen being set free, manifests itself by rendering the oil black.
Hence the only way of preserving these oils colourless and transparent,
is by keeping them in bottles perfectly full and accurately corked, to
hinder the contact of air, which always discolours them.

Successive rectifications of this oil furnish another phenomenon
confirming our theory. In each distillation a small quantity of charcoal
remains in the retort, and a little water is formed by the union of the
oxygen contained in the air of the distilling vessels with the hydrogen
of the oil. As this takes place in each successive distillation, if we
make use of large vessels and a considerable degree of heat, we at last
decompose the whole of the oil, and change it entirely into water and
charcoal. When we use small vessels, and especially when we employ a
slow fire, or degree of heat little above that of boiling water, the
total decomposition of these oils, by repeated distillation, is greatly
more tedious, and more difficultly accomplished. I shall give a
particular detail to the Academy, in a separate memoir, of all my
experiments upon the decomposition of oil; but what I have related above
may suffice to give just ideas of the composition of animal and
vegetable substances, and of their decomposition by the action of fire.

FOOTNOTES:

[24] Though this term, red heat, does not indicate any absolutely
determinate degree of temperature, I shall use it sometimes to express a
temperature considerably above that of boiling water.--A.

[25] I must be understood here to speak of vegetables reduced to a
perfectly dry state; and, with respect to oil, I do not mean that which
is procured by expression either in the cold, or in a temperature not
exceeding that of boiling water; I only allude to the empyreumatic oil
procured by distillation with a naked fire, in a heat superior to the
temperature of boiling water; which is the only oil declared to be
produced by the operation of fire. What I have published upon this
subject in the Memoirs of the Academy for 1786 may be consulted.--A.




CHAP. XIII.

_Of the Decomposition of Vegetable Oxyds by the Vinous Fermentation._


The manner in which wine, cyder, mead, and all the liquors formed by the
spiritous fermentation, are produced, is well known to every one. The
juice of grapes or of apples being expressed, and the latter being
diluted with water, they are put into large vats, which are kept in a
temperature of at least 10 deg. (54.5 deg.) of the thermometer. A rapid
intestine motion, or fermentation, very soon takes place, numerous
globules of gas form in the liquid and burst at the surface; when the
fermentation is at its height, the quantity of gas disengaged is so
great as to make the liquor appear as if boiling violently over a fire.
When this gas is carefully gathered, it is found to be carbonic acid
perfectly pure, and free from admixture with any other species of air or
gas whatever.

When the fermentation is completed, the juice of grapes is changed from
being sweet, and full of sugar, into a vinous liquor which no longer
contains any sugar, and from which we procure, by distillation, an
inflammable liquor, known in commerce under the name of Spirit of Wine.
As this liquor is produced by the fermentation of any saccharine matter
whatever diluted with water, it must have been contrary to the
principles of our nomenclature to call it spirit of wine rather than
spirit of cyder, or of fermented sugar; wherefore, we have adopted a
more general term, and the Arabic word _alkohol_ seems extremely proper
for the purpose.

This operation is one of the most extraordinary in chemistry: We must
examine whence proceed the disengaged carbonic acid and the inflammable
liquor produced, and in what manner a sweet vegetable oxyd becomes thus
converted into two such opposite substances, whereof one is combustible,
and the other eminently the contrary. To solve these two questions, it
is necessary to be previously acquainted with the analysis of the
fermentable substance, and of the products of the fermentation. We may
lay it down as an incontestible axiom, that, in all the operations of
art and nature, nothing is created; an equal quantity of matter exists
both before and after the experiment; the quality and quantity of the
elements remain precisely the same; and nothing takes place beyond
changes and modifications in the combination of these elements. Upon
this principle the whole art of performing chemical experiments
depends: We must always suppose an exact equality between the elements
of the body examined and those of the products of its analysis.

Hence, since from must of grapes we procure alkohol and carbonic acid, I
have an undoubted right to suppose that must consists of carbonic acid
and alkohol. From these premises, we have two methods of ascertaining
what passes during vinous fermentation, by determining the nature of,
and the elements which compose, the fermentable substances, or by
accurately examining the produces resulting from fermentation; and it is
evident that the knowledge of either of these must lead to accurate
conclusions concerning the nature and composition of the other. From
these considerations, it became necessary accurately to determine the
constituent elements of the fermentable substances; and, for this
purpose, I did not make use of the compound juices of fruits, the
rigorous analysis of which is perhaps impossible, but made choice of
sugar, which is easily analysed, and the nature of which I have already
explained. This substance is a true vegetable oxyd with two bases,
composed of hydrogen and charcoal brought to the state of an oxyd, by a
certain proportion of oxygen; and these three elements are combined in
such a way, that a very slight force is sufficient to destroy the
equilibrium of their connection. By a long train of experiments, made
in various ways, and often repeated, I ascertained that the proportion
in which these ingredients exist in sugar, are nearly eight parts of
hydrogen, 64 parts of oxygen, and 28 parts of charcoal, all by weight,
forming 100 parts of sugar.

Sugar must be mixed with about four times its weight of water, to render
it susceptible of fermentation; and even then the equilibrium of its
elements would remain undisturbed, without the assistance of some
substance, to give a commencement to the fermentation. This is
accomplished by means of a little yeast from beer; and, when the
fermentation is once excited, it continues of itself until completed. I
shall, in another place, give an account of the effects of yeast, and
other ferments, upon fermentable substances. I have usually employed 10
libs. of yeast, in the state of paste, for each 100 libs. of sugar,
with as much water as is four times the weight of the sugar. I shall
give the results of my experiments exactly as they were obtained,
preserving even the fractions produced by calculation.


TABLE I.  _Materials of Fermentation._

                                     libs.    oz.  gros   grs.
Water                                  400     0     0      0
Sugar                                  100     0     0      0
Yeast in paste, 10 libs.   { Water       7     3     6     44
composed of                { Dry yeast   2    12     1     28
                                       ----------------------
                               Total   510


TABLE II. _Constituent Elements of the Materials of Fermentation._

                                                    libs.   oz. gros    grs.

407 libs. 3 oz. 6 gros 44 grs.           { Hydrogen   61     1     2    71.40
