which the heart was intended to carry on alone.

Shabako's heart had not been able to carry on any longer....

       *       *       *       *       *

Wes Craig was afraid to think, afraid almost to look, to see how Taia
had stood the shock. Her sudden weariness became at once all too clear
to him....

Slowly he turned and looked down into the cleft. He saw her--a
slender, quiet little figure, flat on the ice by the body of her slain
lover.

He leaped down the slippery bank and ran to her side; knelt there, and
grasped her cold white hand.

The girl's eyelids were closed, but when he touched her, they
flickered, and a little sigh came from her pallid lips. Then her large
black eyes, opened and looked up straight into his--and when she saw
him there, she smiled.

It wrenched the man's heart. "Taia!" he cried. "Taia!"

She nodded feebly, still smiling, and her lips moved. He bent close.
She was whispering something. The words came to him through a great
fear.

"Take me--take me, O Divine One. Take me with thee to--to
thy--heaven.... Canst thou not--take--Taia?"

With her last bit of quickly ebbing strength, she pressed his hand.
Then the fingers went limp in his, and her arm dropped. And her
eyelids gently closed....

Wes's jaws were clenched tightly as he folded her hands across her
slim body. "If thy Pharaoh had not made me drop the vial," he murmured
softly, "I would again bring thee to life, Taia, and take thee to my
heaven.... Though"--with a sad smile, and relapsing into
English--"Times Square would not be quite the heaven you had
pictured...."

       *       *       *       *       *

He stood up. The irony of the thing gripped him, and brought a wry
smile to his tight lips. The body of Inaros, her dead lover, lay at
her side; and Shabako's still figure was but feet away. Once again
they were all together in death. The Kundrenaline had pierced the
black veil of their silent tryst and brought them back for a few
fleeting hours; but even modern science could not stand long against
the weight of twenty years.

And science would not have another chance with their still bodies.
They would quickly be found there by the pursuing Egyptians, and would
be gone, already decaying, when he could get back with another
vial....

A growing murmur of nearby voices brought the silent man back to the
present. Over the cleft in the ice he saw a string of priests and
warriors speeding towards him. He sighed. It was time to go. There was
much he wanted to learn about these people and their strange
civilization, but there was no chance for it now. Perhaps on another
trip, later.

He looked a last time on Taia, lying by her lover.

Then he scrambled up the other bank and ran towards the hillock behind
which a sleek black monoplane with an eight hundred horse-power motor
awaited him....

       *       *       *       *       *

The thing that followed next was never forgotten by the people who
worshipped Aten, the Sun God. It went down in legends; it was
repeated and repeated, and it grew in the telling. It was awful; it
was magical; it was godlike.

A great thunder sounded from behind the hillock of ice, a thunder that
pulsed louder and louder, until the people fell down in awe, hardly
daring to look. When they did, they saw a gleaming black form that
stood on queer shafts of wood come gliding with the speed of the wind
from behind the hillock. It straightened out on a stretch of snow,
bellowing with a loudness that hammered their eardrums into numbness,
and sped lightly along till the queer shafts of wood left the surface
and the sleek black object soared up into the air.

Into the air! With frightened eyes they watched it wheel around, and
then come roaring towards them. They fell flat again, and did not dare
to look. The thunderous blast passed close over them, then dwindled
and dwindled, until they ventured timidly to look up again.

They saw the shape ringed with sunset fire hurtling through the air,
soaring up and up and up ... till it died to a speck ... till it
disappeared into the face of the sun they worshipped as Aten....

A warrior spoke. His tones were low and awed but they all heard him.

"Truly," he whispered, "he was a god!..."


A ONE-BILLIONTH-OF-A-SECOND CAMERA

Through use of a spectroscopic camera with a shutter which operates in
about one-billionth of a second, physicists at the University of
California have been able to take pictures of the action of light at
various periods during the course of an electrical spark which lasts
only one one-hundred-thousandth of a second.

They have been able to show by photographic evidence that the magnetic
field developed by the passage of an electric current across the spark
gap gives the first light emitted a different appearance from that
emitted a few millionths of a second later.

At the moment that the spark jumps, electricity is released in
enormous quantities much as water is released by the breaking of a
dam. It is this sudden release of the dammed-up current across the
spark gap that causes the temporary magnetic field and the difference
in the appearance of the light from the spark.

In answer to those who scoff at the possibility of a camera shutter
operating in a billionth of a second, it was explained that the
shutter is not a mechanical device, but operates automatically through
the application of a physical law of light. In a general way, it might
be said that the spark takes its own picture.

The spectroscope camera is set up at one end of a long corridor. When
the electrical current jumps across the spark gap it sets up a
momentary current in a set of wires running the length of the corridor
and connected with the camera. This current travels toward the camera
at the rate of about 186,000 miles a second.

At about the same instant that the current jumps, or an infinitesimal
fraction of a second later, the light of the resulting spark starts
toward the camera at a trifle more than 186,000 miles a second. It is
a race between the spark current and the spark light as to which
arrives first. The current jumps just before the spark appears; so it
is possible for the current to reach the camera and close the shutter
even before the light which is to be pictured arrives.

By lengthening the wires between the spark gap and the camera the
light is allowed to arrive first. By suitable adjustment of the
wiring, the shutter can be made to close during any one-billionth of a
second interval during the first four ten-millionths of a second of
the spark's short life.

The camera shutter consists of two Nicol prisms of Iceland spar and
balsam, arranged in such a way that under ordinary conditions the
light coming from the spark is stopped by polarization and prevented
from reaching the camera. Between these two prisms, however, is a
solution of chemicals which will depolarize the light and allow it to
continue.

The wires leading from the spark gap connect with this solution. When
the current jumps across the gap it races down the corridor and
electrifies the solution for about one-billionth of a second. This
electrification removes the depolarizing effects of the solution and
light passage stops; in other words, the shutter is closed.




The Diamond Thunderbolt

_By H. Thompson Rich_

[Illustration: "_Good Lord! What's this?_"]

[Sidenote: Locked in a rocket and fired into space!--such was the fate
which awaited young Stoddard at the end of the diamond trail!]


Prof. Norman Prescott, leader of the American Kinchinjunga expedition,
crept from his dog-tent perched eerily at the 26,000-foot level of
this unscaled Himalayan peak, the third highest in the world. With
anxious eyes he searched the appalling slopes that lifted another
2,000 feet to its majestic summit, now glistening in the radiance of
sunset.

Where was young Jack Stoddard, official geologist and crack
mountaineer of the party?

That morning Professor Prescott and Stoddard had set off together,
from Camp No. 4, at the 22,000-foot level. Mounting laboriously but
swiftly, they had reached the present eyrie by noon. There Stoddard
had left the leader of the expedition and pushed on alone, to
reconnoiter a razor-back ridge that looked as though it might prove
the key to the summit.

But the afternoon had passed; the daring young geologist had promised
to return in an hour; and now it was sunset, with still no sign of
him.

Professor Prescott sighed, and a bitter expression crossed his
bronzed, lined face. Just one more evidence of the cursed luck that
had marked the expedition from the start!

Well he knew that he must head down at once for Camp No. 4 or risk
death on this barren, wind-swept slope, and equally well he knew that
to go would be to leave his brave companion to his fate, providing he
had not already met it on those desolate ridges above.

Yes, and another thing he knew. The report of this latest disaster
would mean the doom of the expedition. The terrified, superstitious
natives would bolt, claiming the "snow people" had struck again.

"Gods of the Mountain" they called them, those mysterious beings they
alone seemed to see--evil spirits who kept guard over this towering
realm, determined none should gain its ultimate heights.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tensely Professor Prescott stood there on that narrow shelf of glacial
ice, peering off into the sunset.

A hundred miles to the west, bathed in the refulgence of a thousand
rainbows, rose the incredible peak of Everest, mightiest of all
mountains, yet less than 1,000 feet higher than Kinchinjunga. And
down, straight down those almost vertical slopes up which the
expedition had toiled all summer, lay gorges choked with tropical
growth. Off to the south, a scant fifty miles away, the British health
station of Darjeeling flashed its white villas in the coppery glow.

An awesome spectacle!--one that human eyes had seldom if ever seen.
Yet from the summit, so invitingly near!...

Perhaps, even now, Stoddard was witnessing this incomparable sight. To
push on, to join him, meant triumph. To head down, defeat. While to
stay, to wait....

Grimly, Professor Prescott left his insecure perch and headed up over
that razor-back ridge whence the young geologist had vanished.

As he proceeded cautiously along, drawing sharp, quick breaths in the
rarefied upper atmosphere, he told himself it was ambition that was
leading him on, but in his heart he knew it was not so. In his heart,
he knew he was going to the rescue of his gallant companion, though
the way meant death.

       *       *       *       *       *

A hundred yards had been gained, perhaps two--each desperate foothold
fraught with peril of a plunge into the yawning abysms to left and
right--when suddenly he spied a figure on a twilit spur ahead.

Panting, he paused. It must be Stoddard! Yet it seemed too small, too
ghostly.

Professor Prescott waved, but even as he looked for an answering
signal, the figure vanished.

"My eyes!" he muttered to himself. "I'm getting snow-blind."

Then he called aloud:

"Jack! Oh, Jack! Hello!"

Only an echo greeted the call, and he did not repeat it but pushed on
silently, conserving his energy.

Was there truth after all in those persistent rumors of the natives
about the snow people who inhabited the upper slopes of the Himalayas?
His tired brain toyed with the idea, to be cut off sharply by the
cheery call:

"Hi there, Professor! Hi-ho!"

And gazing upwards toward a jutting crag not ten rods beyond, he saw
young Stoddard etched against the darkening sky.

       *       *       *       *       *

In a few joyous steps, Professor Prescott had reached his audacious
companion.

"Thank God!" he gasped. "I'd given you up for lost."

"Why give me up for anything so unpleasant?" was the genial reply.
"I've just been enjoying the view."

"Then--then you reached the top?" with a quick intake of breath.

"Well, not exactly, but I feel on top of the world, just the same."

The professor's spirits fell.

"Then I can't see--"

"Of course you can't see!" interrupted Stoddard. "But look at this!"

As he spoke, he drew from a pocket of his leather jacket something
that caught the last light of the dying day and refracted it with
weird brilliance.

Professor Prescott blinked.

"Well?"

"A diamond. As big as your fist! And here's another!"

His left hand reached into his jacket and produced a second sparkling
gem.

"But--but I don't understand--"

"Granted. But you will, when I tell you I've found the Diamond
Thunderbolt!"

The professor gave a shrug of scorn.

"And no doubt you've seen the snow people and have had a perfect
afternoon, while--"

"No, I haven't seen any snow people, but I've had a perfect afternoon,
all right! As I said, I've found the Diamond Thunderbolt; and here are
a couple of chips, picked up from around the edge."

       *       *       *       *       *

So saying, Stoddard extended his two specimens toward Professor
Prescott, who disdained at first to touch them.

"Nothing but quartz!" was the deprecating comment. "The snow has
affected your eyesight, as it has my own."

"I'll say it's affected _yours_, if you don't recognize diamonds when
you see them. But wait till I show you the old Thunderbolt itself!
It's--"

"More quartz!" brusquely. "Be sensible, Jack. This Diamond Thunderbolt
thing is a pure myth, like the snow people business. Just because this
section of India is known as The Land of the Diamond Thunderbolt you
think you're going to find some precious meteor or other, whereas the
term applies merely to the Lama's scepter."

"Granted it does,"--a little impatiently--"but did it ever occur to
you that where there's smoke, there's fire? Meteor is the word! One
struck here once--a diamond meteor!--and I've found it. Take a look at
these two specimens and see what you think."

Whereupon Professor Prescott accepted the glinting gems from his young
friend--to gasp a moment later, as he held them tremblingly:

"Good Lord--they're diamonds, to be sure! Where did you find them?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Stoddard hesitated before replying.

"Not far from here," he said at length, moving off. "Come, I'll show
you."
