
Acting as he had suggested I found to my astonishment I could slip my
hands free; I caught his belt, tried to lift myself by it.

"No use, Doc." The old grin lightened for a moment his tense young face.
"You'll have to keep praying till the power's turned off. Nothing here
you can slide your knees on."

I nodded, waddling close to his side; then sank back on my haunches to
relieve the strain upon my aching leg-muscles.

"Can you see them ahead, Walter--Ruth and the woman?" Ventnor turned his
anxious eyes toward me.

I peered into the glimmering murk; shook my head. I could see nothing.
It was indeed, as though the clustered cubes sped within a bubble of the
now wanly glistening vapors; or rather as though in our passage--as a
projectile does in air--we piled before us a thick wave of the mists
which streaming along each side, closing in behind, obscured all that
lay around.

Yet I had, persistently, the feeling that beyond these shroudings was
vast and ordered movement; marchings and counter-marchings of hosts
greater even than those Golden Hordes of Genghis which ages agone had
washed about the outer bases of the very peaks that hid this place.
Came, too, flitting shadowings of huge shapes, unnameable, moving
swiftly beside our way; gleamings that thrust themselves through the
veils like wheeling javelins of flame.

And always, always, everywhere that constant movement, rhythmic,
terrifying--like myriads of feet of creatures of an unseen, stranger
world marking time just outside the threshold of our own. Preparing,
DRILLING there in some wide vestibule of space between the known and the
unknown, alert and menacing--poised for the signal which would send them
pouring over it.


Once again I seemed to stand upon the brink of an abyss of incredible
revelation, striving helplessly, struggling for realization--and so
struggling became aware that our speed was swiftly slackening, the
roaring blast dying down, the veils before us thinning.

They cleared away. I saw Drake and Ventnor straighten up; raised myself
to my own aching knees.

We were at one end of a vortex, a funneling within the radiant vapors; a
funnel whose further end a mile ahead broadened out into a huge
circle, its mistily outlined edges impinging upon the towering scarp
of the--city. It was as though before us lay, upon its side, a cone of
crystalline clear air against whose curved sides some radiant medium
heavier than air, lighter than water, pressed.

The top arc of its prostrate base reached a thousand feet or more up the
precipitous wall; above it all was hidden in sparkling nebulosities that
were like still clouds of greenly glimmering fire-flies. Back from
the curving sides of this cone, above it and below it, the pressing
luminosities stretched into, it seemed, infinite distances.

Through them, suddenly, thousands of bright beams began to dart, to
dance, weaving and interweaving, shooting hither and yon--like myriads
of great searchlights in a phosphorescent sea fog, like countless lances
of the aurora thrusting through its own iridescent veils! And in the
play of these beams was something appallingly ordered, appallingly
rhythmic.

It was--how can I describe it?--PURPOSEFUL; purposeful as the geometric
shiftings of the Little Things of the ruins, of the summoning song of
Norhala, of the Protean changes of the Smiting Shape and the Following
Thing; and like all of these it was as laden with that baffling
certainty of hidden meanings, of messages that the brain recognized as
such yet knew it never could read.

The rays seemed to spring upward from the earth. Now they were like
countless lances of light borne by marching armies of Titans; now they
crossed and angled and flew as though they were clouds of javelins
hurled by battling swarms of the Genii of Light. And now they stood
upright while through them, thrusting them aside, bending them, passed
vast, vague shapes like mountains forming and dissolving; like darkening
monsters of some world of light pushing through thick forests of
slender, high-reaching trees of cold flame; shifting shadows of
monstrous chimerae slipping through jungles of bamboo with trunks of
diamond fire; phantasmal leviathans swimming through brakes of giant
reeds of radiance rising from the sparking ooze of a sea of star shine.

Whence came the force, the mechanism that produced this cone of clarity,
this NOT searchlight, but unlight in the midst of light? Not from
behind, that was certain--for turning I saw that behind us the mist was
as thick. I turned again--it came to me, why I knew not, yet with an
absolute certainty, that the energy, the force emanated from the distant
wall itself.

The funnel, the cone, did not expand from where we were standing, now
motionless.

It began at the wall and focused upon us.

Within the great circle the surface of the wall was smooth, utterly
blank; upon it was no trace of those flitting lights we had seen before
we had plunged down toward the radiant sea. It shone with a pale blue
phosphorescence. It was featureless, smooth, a blind cliff of polished,
blue metal--and that was all.

"Ruth!" groaned Ventnor. "Where is she?"

Aghast at my mental withdrawal from him, angry at myself for my
callousness, awkwardly I tried to crawl over to him, to touch him,
comfort him as well as I might.

And then, as though his cry had been a signal, the great cone began to
move. Slowly the circled base slipped down the shimmering facades; down,
steadily down; I realized that we had paused at the edge of some steep
declivity, for the bottom of the cone was now at a decided angle while
the upper edge of the circle had dropped a full two hundred feet below
the place where it had rested--and still it fell.


There came a gasp of relief from Ventnor, a sigh from Drake while, from
my own heart, a weight rolled. Not ten yards ahead of us and still deep
within the luminosity had appeared the regal head of Norhala, the lovely
head of Ruth. The two rose out of the glow like swimmers floating from
the depths. Now they were clear before us, and now we could see the
surface of the cube on which they rode.

But neither turned to us; each stared straightly, motionless along the
axis of the sinking cone, the woman's left arm holding Ruth close to her
side.

Drake's hand caught my shoulder in a grip that hurt--nor did he need to
point toward that which had wrung the exclamation from him. The funnel
had broken from its slow falling; it had made one swift, startling
drop and had come to rest. Its recumbent side was now flattened into a
triangular plane, widening from the narrow tip in which we stood to all
of five hundred feet where its base rested against the blue wall, and
falling at a full thirty-degree pitch.

The misty-edged circle had become an oval, a flattened ellipse another
five hundred feet high and three times that in length. And in its exact
center, shining forth as though it opened into a place of pale azure
incandescence was another rectangular Cyclopean portal.

On each side of it, in the apparently solid face of the gleaming,
metallic cliffs, a slit was opening.

They began as thin lines a hundred yards in height through which
the intense light seemed to hiss; quickly they opened--widening like
monstrous cat pupils until at last, their widening ceasing, they glared
forth, the blue incandescence gushing from them like molten steel from
an opened sluice.

Deep within them I sensed a movement. Scores of towering shapes swam
within and glided out of them, each reflecting the vivid light as though
they themselves were incandescent. Around their crests spun wide and
flaming coronets.

They rushed forth, wheeling, whirling, driven like leaves in a
whirlwind. Out they swirled from the cat's eyes of the glimmering wall,
these dervish obelisks crowded with spinning fires. They vanished in the
mists. Instantly with their going, the eyes contracted; were but slits;
were gone. And before us within the oval was only the waiting portal.

The leading block leaped forward. As abruptly, those that bore us
followed. Again under that strain of projectile flight we clutched each
other; the pony screamed in terror. The metal cliff rushed to meet us
like a thunder cloud of steel; the portal raced upon us--a square mouth
of cold blue flame.

And into it we swept; were devoured by it.

Light in blinding, intolerable flood beat about us, blackening the sight
with agony. We pressed, the three of us, against the side of the pony,
burying our faces in its shaggy coat, striving to hide our eyes from the
radiance which, strain closely as we might, seemed to pierce through the
body of the little beast, through our own heads, searing the sight.




CHAPTER X. "WITCH! GIVE BACK MY SISTER"

How long we were within that glare I do not know; it seemed unending
hours; it was of course only minutes--seconds, perhaps. Then I was
sensible of a permeating shadow, a darkness gentle and healing.

I raised my head and opened my eyes. We were moving tranquilly, with
a curious suggestion of homing leisureliness, through a soft, blue
shimmering darkness. It was as though we were drifting within some high
borderland of light; a region in which that rapid vibration we call the
violet was mingled with a still more rapid vibration whose quick pulsing
was felt by the brain but ever fled ere that brain could register it in
terms of color. And there seemed to be a film over my sight; dazzlement
from the unearthly blaze, I thought, shaking my head impatiently.

My eyes focused upon an object a little more than a foot away; my neck
grew rigid, my scalp prickled while I stared, unbelieving. And that at
which I stared was--a skeleton hand. Every bone a grayish black, sharply
silhouetted, clean as some master surgeon's specimen, it was extended
as though clutching at--clutching at--what was that toward which it was
reaching?

Again the icy prickling over scalp and skin--for its talons stretched
out to grasp a steed that Death himself might have ridden, a rack whose
bare skull hung drooping upon bent vertebrae.

I raised my hands to my face to shut out the ghostly sight--and swiftly
the clutching bony hand moved toward me--was before my eyes--touched me.

The cry that sheer horror wrested from me was strangled by realization.
And so acute was my relief, so reassuring was it to have in the midst
of these mysteries some sane, understandable thing occur that I laughed
aloud.

For the skeleton hand was my own. The mournful ghastly mount of death
was--our pony. And when I looked again I knew what I would see--and
see them I did--two tall skeletons, skulls resting on their bony arms,
leaning against the frame of the beast.

While ahead of us, floating poised upon the surface of the glistening
cube, were two women skeletons--Ruth and Norhala!

Weird enough was the sight. Dureresque, grimly awful as materialization
of a scene of the Dance Macabre--and yet--vastly comforting.

For here was something which was well within the range of human
knowledge. It was the light about us that did it; a vibration that even
as I conjectured, was within the only partly explored region of the
ultraviolet and the comparatively unexplored region above it.

Yet there were differences, for there was none of that misty halo around
the bones, the flesh which the X-rays cannot render wholly invisible.
The skeletons stood out clean cut, with no trace of fleshly vestments.

I crept over, spoke to the two.

"Don't look up yet," I said. "Don't open your eyes. We're going through
a queer light. It has an X-ray quality. You're going to see me as a
skeleton--"

"What?" shouted Drake. Disobeying my warning he straightened, glared
at me. And disquieting as the spectacle had been before, fully
understanding it as I did, I could not restrain my shudder at the utter
weirdness of that skull which was his head thrusting itself toward me.

The skeleton that was Ventnor turned to me; was arrested by the sight of
the flitting pair ahead. I saw the fleshless jaws clamp, then opened to
speak.

Abruptly, upon the skeletons in front the flesh dropped back. Girl and
woman stood there once again robed in beauty.

So swift was that transition from the grisly unreal to the normal that
even to my unsuperstitious mind it smacked of necromancy. The next
instant the three of us stood looking at each other, clothed once more
in the flesh, and the pony no longer the steed of death, but our shaggy,
patient little companion.

The light had changed; the high violet had gone from it, and it was shot
with yellow gleamings like fugitive sunbeams. We were passing through
a wide corridor that seemed to be unending. The yellow light grew
stronger.

"That light wasn't exactly the Roentgen variety," Drake interrupted my
absorption in our surroundings. "And I hope to God it's as different as
it seemed. If it's not we may be up against a lot of trouble."

"More trouble than we're in?" I asked, a trifle satirically.

"X-ray burns," he answered, "and no way to treat them in this place--if
we live to want treatment," he ended grimly.

"I don't think we were subjected to their action long enough--" I began,
and was silent.

The corridor had opened without warning into a place for whose immensity
I have no images that are adequate. It was a chamber that was vaster
than ten score of the Great Halls of Karnac in one; great as that fabled
hall in dread Amenti where Osiris sits throned between the Searcher of
Hearts and the Eater of Souls, judging the jostling hosts of the newly
dead.

Temple it was in its immensity, and its solemn vastness--but unlike any
temple ever raised by human toil. In no ruin of earth's youth giants'
work now crumbling under the weight of time had I ever sensed a
shadow of the strangeness with which this was instinct. No--nor in the
shattered fanes that once had held the gods of old Egypt, nor in the
pillared shrines of Ancient Greece, nor Imperial Rome, nor mosque,
basilica nor cathedral.

All these had been dedicated to gods which, whether created by humanity
as science believes, or creators of humanity as their worshippers
believed, still held in them that essence we term human.

The spirit, the force, that filled this place had in it nothing, NOTHING
of the human.

No place? Yes, there was one--Stonehenge. Within that monolithic circle
I had felt a something akin to this, as inhuman; a brooding spirit
stony, stark, unyielding--as though not men but a people of stone had
raised the great Menhirs.

This was a sanctuary built by a people of metal!

It was filled with a soft yellow glow like pale sunshine. Up from its
floor arose hundreds of tremendous, square pillars down whose polished
sides the crocus light seemed to flow.

Far, far as the gaze could reach, the columns marched, oppressively
ordered, appallingly mathematical. From their massiveness distilled a
sense of power, mysterious, mechanical yet--living; something priestly,
hierophantic--as though they were guardians of a shrine.

Now I saw whence came the light suffusing this place. High up among the
pillars floated scores of orbs that shone like pale gilt frozen suns.
Great and small, through all the upper levels these strange luminaries
gleamed, fixed and motionless, hanging unsupported in space. Out from
their shining spherical surfaces darted rays of the same pale gold,
rigid, unshifting, with the same suggestion of frozen stillness.

"They look like big Christmas-tree stars," muttered Drake.

"They're lights," I answered. "Of course they are. They're not
matter--not metal, I mean--"

"There's something about them like St. Elmo's fire, witch
lights--condensations of atmospheric electricity," Ventnor's voice was
calm; now that it was plain we were nearing the heart of this mystery
in which we were enmeshed he had clearly taken fresh grip, was again his
observant, scientific self.

We watched, once more silent; and indeed we had spoken little since
we had begun that ride whose end we sensed close. In the unfolding of
enigmatic happening after happening the mind had deserted speech and
crouched listening at every door of sight and hearing to gather some
clue to causes, some thread of understanding.

Slowly now we were gliding through the forest of pillars; so effortless,
so smooth our flight that we seemed to be standing still, the tremendous
columns flitting past us, turning and wheeling around us, dizzyingly. My
head swam with the mirage motion, I closed my eyes.

"Look," Drake was shaking me. "Look. What do you make of that?"

Half a mile ahead the pillars stopped at the edge of a shimmering,
quivering curtain of green luminescence. High, high up past the pale
gilt suns its smooth folds ran, into the golden amber mist that canopied
the columns.

In its sparkling was more than a hint of the dancing corpuscles of the
aurora; it was, indeed, as though woven of the auroral rays. And all
about it played shifting, tremulous shadows formed by the merging of the
golden light with the curtain's emerald gleaming.

Up to its base swept the cube that bore Ruth and Norhala--and stopped.
From it leaped the woman, and drew Ruth down beside her, then turned and
gestured toward us.

That upon which we rode drew close. I felt it quiver beneath me; felt on
the instant, the magnetic grip drop from me, angle downward and leave me
free. Shakily I arose from aching knees, and saw Ventnor flash down and
run, rifle in hand, toward his sister.

Drake bent for his gun. I moved unsteadily toward the side of the
clustered cubes. There came a curious pushing motion driving me to the
edge. Sliding over upon me came Drake and the pony--

The cube tilted, gently, playfully--and with the slightest of jars the
three of us stood beside it on the floor, we two men gaping at it in
