
Her face brightened as she turned toward him. "I wish I could powder my
nose," she said, pouting. "Only I can't reach it!"

"Too bad. These space suits rob a girl of so many of her exquisite
little tricks."

"Well," she put in, "I can still cover up my yawns with my hand if I
find this pastime too much of a bore." They both chuckled at this little
joke.

Janice took the last missile from the case she had been emptying and
rammed it home. She jerked the lanyard, and with a thudding jolt the
torpedo was on its way. Then she paused to scan the horde of Alkebar
through an observation port. "Hurrah," she cried, "we're scoring!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Without discontinuing his hurried feeding of his smoldering piece,
Shelby looked up. The cloud had grown considerably in the few moments of
action. It had cleared the asteroid now, and the other nebulous spot
that marked the position of the Black Emperor's second army, was coming
up to merge with it. In the midst of the first cloud, hundreds of minute
specks of light were flashing--the atomic torpedoes were exploding. The
sight reminded Shelby of what he had so often seen through the lens of a
spintharoscope.

Alkebar's army continued to increase rapidly in apparent size. It looked
like a monster amoeba. But now the amoeba was beginning to writhe,
to swell up and grow dimmer. It shot out long sinuous pseudopods that
seemed to grope angrily. Both Earthians sensed that the fight was about
to begin in earnest.

With renewed vigor they fell to the task of loading and discharging the
catapults; and close beside them the two Space Men who acted as gunners,
labored coolly and methodically over their weapons, but with even
greater efficiency, for their training had been long and thorough.

Telaba worked the levers of the signaling mechanism, and a brilliant
purple star visible to all his henchmen shot up over the back of his
beast. They saw it and read its meaning. Spread out to avoid enemy fire!
As one man they obeyed, but they were none too soon. With abrupt
suddenness the maelstrom of silent flashing death was upon them.

It was a pretty sight to the Earthians--those soundless globes of green
flame that glowed dazzling for an infinitesimal instant, on the rich
jewels and polished rifle barrels of the hordesmen coursing close by.
But they were not deceived.

A Space Man vanished, torn to tiny fragments that mixed with the cosmic
dust of the void. A huge disc, bearing a cylindrical battle car, was
hit, and a jagged hole torn in its side. It twisted crazily, turning
over and over. Austin and Jan felt the vibration of shell fragments
banging violently against their own vehicle.

The nearer nebulous cloud had ceased to be a cloud now. It had resolved
itself into a myriad swarm of dim specks which the Earthians knew were
Space Men. Plainly Alkebar's minions were charging rapidly, bent on
wiping Telaba's smaller force out of existence at one blow.

The bombardment doubled, tripled, quadrupled in intensity until it
seemed that all space had turned to fire. Before the withering blast the
army of the rebel chief was speedily being dissolved into drifting
wreckage.

An exploding torpedo ripped several yards of armor from one side of
Telaba's vehicle and reduced one of his black gunners to a mangled pulp
from which the purple fluid spurted.

The force of the concussion turned the great disc completely over.
Battered and blinded by the green glare, which exceeded even the sun of
the void in intensity the Earthians tumbled against their weapons.
Janice Darell started to scream but managed to check it--biting her lips
savagely.

An explosive rifle bullet struck the huge vehicle, and it wavered.

Shelby spoke to Telaba who was clinging firmly to a stanchion with one
hand and operating his signaling machine with the other. "Turn back,
chief," the Earthman advised. "Our only motive is to annoy them and
delay them. To continue this charge can mean nothing but destruction for
our entire force."

Telaba sensed the mental vibrations that went with Shelby's words. "To
turn back cannot do, Earthman," he said. And it seemed to the young
engineer that there was a vibrant note of sadness in his telepathic
voice. "Look! You see all guns and catapults point forward only. Not
swing to rear--same on all gun cars. If run, not possible to shoot at
chasing enemy. Then they get us. That Alkebar's idea so his men must
take offensive or die. He think that make them strong."

"But the riflemen are not so handicapped," Shelby persisted. "We can die
here if necessary, but someone must live to carry on. Order them back!"

The chieftain shook his bulbous head. "To try what you say--useless.
They not desert comrades or king. If I command, they disobey." There was
a finality in his words which neither of the Earthians tried to dispute.

So that was it! Well, there was no sense wasting time talking. Shelby
gripped a machine gun and sent a spray of explosive bullets ripping out
into the ether. Janice did likewise.

As they worked their weapons they spoke rapidly to each other. "You
understood what Telaba said? You know what that means?" Shelby asked.

"Yes. It's about the end of our tape, but that's nothing. We've been
fairly lucky. All we can do now is hope that Ankova wins through to Mars
in time, and fight like--like--"

"Hell!" Shelby's words slipped between clenched teeth, and Jan flashed
him a quick smile even as their tracer streams crossed in the midst of a
group of hurtling Alkebarians who had pressed too close together.

"Anyway, good luck!"

"And the very best of luck to you!"

The opposing forces were very close together now. The first of the
Alkebarians were plainly visible--their long guns flashing--their ebony
arms waving signals which probably passed for shouts of triumph among
their ranks.




CHAPTER X

The Coming of the Atomic Ray


Both armies had cut down their velocity enormously, but still they tore
along at breakneck speed. And they moved like true Cossacks of the void,
directing their machines by deft motions on the mysterious levers. Now
diving, now climbing, now swinging this way and that to avoid the
missiles of their opponents, they tore on. And death was everywhere.

No torpedoes were flying now, but machine guns and rifles were working
terrible havoc. And so the horde of Alkebar closed with the forces of
the rebel chieftain.

The machine which bore Telaba, directed by its skillful driver, dived
and swung and zigzagged like a mad thing; but still the bullets rattled
against the metal armor of the car. Its sides had been repeatedly
struck, yet owing to its tough shell, had not yet been disabled.

Everywhere about it, mounted horrors whirled in an inextricable tangle,
shooting and loading, and dying by the green flashes, their vitals
strewing the ether.

Telaba had deserted his post at the signaling machine, for further
orders were useless. For his rebels at least, it was every man for
himself. He too was operating a machine gun.

The stars spun dizzily about the Earthians, as the machine beneath them
careened in its insane fight. Every time a Space Man wearing a red
circle on his breast crossed their sights, a burst spat from their hot
weapons, frequently with good results.

A group of at least twenty Alkebarians sought to attack from the blind
spot at the rear. But the driver twisted levers with a quick jerk, and
the luckless riflemen found themselves facing four streams of steel.
Those that could, darted out of range and renewed the attack from a
different angle.

Frequently, throughout the battle, Shelby had wondered what had happened
to Hekalu Selba and the Atomic Ray. Why wasn't he on hand to assist his
ally, the Black Emperor? Oh, well, regardless of whether the Martian was
there or not the outcome would evidently be the same--only now it would
be more dragged out.

The Earthian was surprised therefore, when suddenly the efforts of the
enemy to exterminate them, which had been so intense in the brief
moments since they had closed, suddenly lessened. Alkebarians were
darting hastily toward the rear. Their actions did not suggest flight;
it seemed that they were going to meet a new and more terrible enemy.
The rebels could wait.

And the people of the rebel chief for the moment did not pursue--did not
even fire. For they too saw! To the rear, in the center of Alkebar's
horde, came the dazzling flares of explosions. So many and so close
together were they, that they looked like a titanic conflagration of
green flame. Against the light, the silhouettes of confused and
bewildered space riders careened, like frightened pollywogs. The
holocaust moved--swung. It was like a tapered column of fire veiled by a
faint bluish haze.

The Earthians, Telaba, and the two remaining Space Men, forgetful of
everything else, were staring in awed wonder at the phenomenon through
the forward observation bay. It was Shelby who found the first part of
the explanation.

"It's the Atomic Ray!" he almost shrieked. "Freeing the atomic energy in
the materials that make up the bodies of Alkebar's men--literally
causing their flesh and bones to explode! But how--what the devil--!"

"Look!" cried Jan. She pointed far up over their heads to where the cone
of faintly bluish light swung, free from the milling horde. Up and up to
its apex, and there hung what appeared to be a tiny cocoon of burnished
silver.

The girl peered through her binoculars for a long moment. "I see the
name. It is the _Selba_," she said. "Hekalu has made a mistake--he's
attacking the wrong force! Or--or some ally of ours has gained control
of the ship!" she hazarded.

"No time to make guess now," said Telaba. "To fight, much better." He
had returned to the signaling mechanism, and was working it with cool
efficiency, rallying his battered forces.

Like tigers they fell upon the Alkebarians, shattering them out of
existence with a steady storm of rifle bullets. They met with only a
weak resistance for the foe seemed to realize that the fates had played
them false. The blue ray had been their promise, and now, like the sword
of their ancient god of destruction, it was weaving calmly this way and
that, snuffing them into nothingness. The Black Emperor's horde was
dissolving, scattering.

Battalions of terrified Space Men poured past the rebel chieftain's car,
shooting only hurried and ineffective volleys at their enemies, who
pressed fiercely upon them. And never did Jan and Shelby miss a chance
to spray them with searing bursts of machine-gun fire.

There was a lull. The Earthians took the opportunity to look up at the
angel of death that was the _Selba_, far above. Most of Alkebar's huge
army had already perished, or had dispersed in flight into the desert of
space from which it had been recruited. But that the space ship would
presently be engaged in a serious fight was evident.

       *       *       *       *       *

A determined force which must have numbered a hundred thousand, was
hurtling up at it, surrounding the craft with a halo of bursting
torpedoes. At the head of the body of Space Men was a huge beast bearing
on its back a car similar to Telaba's. Veri-colored signal stars spurted
from it. Alkebar himself must be in it directing operations!

Coolly the guiding hand aboard the _Selba_ was swinging his dreadful
weapon this way and that, annihilating the attackers as one might
annihilate a swarm of mosquitoes with a blowtorch. Half of them had
already been reduced to those basic, intangible vibrations which
constitute all substance. It was terrible, it was glorious; but what
could it all mean? Hekalu's ship!

The still formidable remnants of the vengeance squadron was seeking to
close in--to grapple with the vessel. The _Selba_ was trying to dart out
of their way, but the speed of the Space Men, a gift of Nature, was
greater than that of this fastest ship designed by man. Grimly, in the
face of almost certain death, they kept on. A score or so succeeded in
landing on the curving hull, and, like leeches they clung to it. The
Atomic Ray arched angrily, cutting a deep swath through those who still
sought a hold.

And then the gleaming form of the _Selba_ was completely hidden by the
swarm of enraged horrors that poured over it. The Atomic Ray was snuffed
out. The beholders saw the air lock being pried open, and the Space Men
crowding into the interior of the craft. For a second the _Selba_
wobbled crazily, and then her rocket motors ceased to flame.

"What are we waiting for? We have friends up there!" Jan cried.

Telaba flashed his orders, and the entire cavalcade charged toward the
vessel, their guns spewing flame.

It was only a matter of a minute or so before that hurtling torrent of
rebels had swept the Alkebarians from their prey. Those of the Black
Emperor's men who had forced their way into the ship managed to hold the
entrance for a short time, but under the urgings of their intrepid
chief, the zealous rebels shot and hewed their enemies down as though
they had been paper marionettes. The way was clear.

Telaba waved an order to his driver, and the space beast drew up
alongside the _Selba_. Expectantly eager, the Earthians clambered
aboard, followed by the chief.

The ship was a shambles. Its corridors were littered with bodies of
Space Men who wore on their breasts the red circle which signified
loyalty to the Black Emperor. Telaba's followers had done well.

The three made their way to the control room. Intuitively they had
sensed what they would find there, and so, they were not surprised at
what they saw--wreckage and the carcasses of Alkebar's warriors. The
Martian had put up a stiff fight.

Shelby bent over the armored form of Akar Hekalu Selba which was
sprawling on the floor, beside the pilot seat. A gaping hole in the
tough metal plating under his right arm, and a thin trickle of blood,
told clearly what had happened. "They got him," the Earthman muttered.
"But why?"

Jan's eyes had wandered to the narrow desk before the pilot seat. There
were the instruments and devices by means of which the ship was
controlled, and there was the lever which had moved the ray projector in
its mounting just beneath the nose of the craft. A calculating pad and a
stylus were lying on the desk.

Something was written on the pad--a message. She called to Shelby, and
together they read the brief, hastily scrawled note. It was in English:

"To Janice Darell and Austin Shelby, Greeting. Alkebar is breaking into
the ship, and Telaba is coming. You will be with him, I know. From among
my enemies I have chosen my friends. A man must have friends, and
traitors do not serve. Forgive me for stealing your glory, Mr. Shelby. I
shall be grateful. _Sidi Yadi_, Hekalu Selba, Akar."

Shelby looked at Jan and then at Telaba who was standing close beside
them. "So that's it," he said slowly. "Nobody is totally bad."

"Not even Hekki," Jan put in. A hint of a wistful smile flickered about
her lips. "I guess it's the end now," she went on. "A glorious
adventure. Back to Earth!" Her voice had taken on a dreamy exultant
quality.

"The end, Jan?" Austin asked. "Haven't you forgotten something?"

She looked puzzled, and then she laughed a brief gay little laugh which
made roguish dimples twinkle in her cheeks. Even her fantastic attire
could not hide her beauty. "You ridiculous old dumb-bell! Of course it
isn't the end--just the beginning--with you!"

It was a considerable time before Shelby was able to repair the _Selba_
sufficiently so that she could get underway for Mars but the task was
finished at last. Escorted by the rebel chief's fierce hordesmen, they
set out for the Red Planet.

Somehow, snatches of the ancient Bedouin song tinkled in Shelby's mind.
He had read old books. "Across the desert I come to thee, On a stallion
shod with fire...."

That did not quite fit the situation, for Jan was with him. But his
steed, the _Selba_, was truly shod with fire. The rocket nozzles--and
damaged though she was, she behaved like a thoroughbred. And out there
in the void beside the ship--what were those shapes?--bizarre,
impossible, yet real--real.

       *       *       *       *       *


In docks scattered over Earth and Mars, battleships of space and their
crews wait expectantly for an alarm that may never come. Telescopes comb
the sky. Out there the Star People, new arrivals in the solar system,
are shifting, moving about restlessly. But the planets feel secure.
Their fleets could cope with the Space Men, were they a hundred times
more numerous. And once in a while, on the desolate Sahara, or Mohave or
Taraal, shadows come, settling down like flecks of darkness from the
midnight heaven. They are Telaba's and Ankova's people. For a while--a
day perhaps--they stay, bartering their exotic treasures for human
wares. Then silently, mysteriously, they are gone, into the night....

THE END



