
Numbly they followed on--Dor and Jon and Jak and the two youngsters. The
ground inclined upward. They came upon puffballs. There was a new kind
visible, colored a lurid red, that did not grow like the others. It
seemed to begin and expand underground, then thrust away the soil above
in its development. Its taut, angry-red parchment envelope seemed to
swell from a reservoir of subterranean material. Burl and the others had
never seen anything like it.

They climbed higher. As other edible mushrooms came into view Burl's
followers cheered visibly. This was a new tribal ground anyhow and it
had not been fully explored. But Burl was leading them to quantities of
food they had never suspected before.

Quaintly, it was Burl himself who began to feel an uncomfortable dryness
in his throat. He knew what he was about. His followers did not suspect
because to them what he intended was simply inconceivable. They couldn't
suspect it because they couldn't imagine anybody doing such a thing. It
simply couldn't be thought of at all.

It is rather likely that Burl began to regret that he had thought of it.
It had come to him first as an angry notion in the night. Then the idea
had developed as a suitable punishment for his abandonment. By dawn it
was an ambition so terrifying that it fascinated him. Now he was
committed to it in his own mind, and the only way to keep his knees from
knocking together was to keep moving. If his followers had protested
now, he would have allowed himself to be persuaded. But he heard more
pleased murmurs. There was more edible stuff, in quantity. But there
were no ant-trails here, no sounds of foraging beetles. This was an area
which Burl's tribesmen could clearly see was almost devoid of dangerous
life. They seemed to brighten a little. This, they seemed to think,
would be a good place to move to.

But Burl knew better. There were few ground-insects here because the
area was hunted out. And Burl knew what had done the hunting.

He expected the others to realize where they were when they dodged
around a clump of the new red puffballs and saw bald rock before them
and a falling-away to emptiness beyond. Even then they could have
retreated, but it did not enter their heads that Burl could do anything
like this.

They didn't know where they were until Burl held up his hand for silence
almost at the edge of the rock-knob which rose a hundred feet sheer,
curving out a little near its top. They looked out uncomprehendingly at
the mist-filled air and the nightmare landscape fading into its
grayness. A tiny spider, the very youngest of hatchlings and barely four
inches across, stealthily stalked another vastly smaller mite. The other
was the many-legged larva of the oil-beetle. The larva itself had been
called--on other planets by other men--the bee-louse. It could easily
hide in the thick furl of a giant bumble-bee. But this one small
creature never practiced that ability. The hatchling spider sprang and
the small midge died. When the spider had grown and, being grown, spun a
web, it would slay great crickets with the same insane ferocity.

Burl's followers saw first this and then certain three-quarter-inch
strands of dirty silk that came up over the edge of the precipice. As
one man after another realized where he was, he trembled violently. Dor
turned gray. Jon and Jak were paralyzed with horror. They couldn't run.

Seeing the others even more frightened than himself filled Burl with a
wholly unwarranted courage. When he opened his mouth, they cringed. If
he shouted then at least one, more likely several, of them would die.

And this was because some forty or fifty feet down the mould-speckled
precipice hung a drab-white object nearly hemispherical, some six feet
in its half-diameter. A number of little semi-circular doors were fixed
about its sides like arches. Though each one seemed to be a doorway,
only one would open.

The thing had been oddly beautiful at first glance. It was held fast to
the inward-sloping stone by cables, one or two of which stretched down
toward the ground. Others reached up over the precipice-edge to hold it
fast. It was a most unusual engineering feat, yet something more than
that: this was also an ogre's castle. Ghastly trophies were fastened to
the outer walls and hung by silken cords below it. Here was the hind-leg
of one of the smaller beetles, there the wing-case of a flying creature.
Here a snail-shell--the snails of Earth would hardly have recognized
their descendant--and there a boulder weighing forty pounds or more. The
shrunken head-armor of a beetle, the fierce jaws of a cricket, the
pitiful shreds of dozens of creatures--all had once provided meals for
the monster in the castle. And dangling by the longest cord of all was
the shrunken, shriveled body of a long-dead man.

Burl glared at his tribesmen, clamping his jaws tight lest they chatter.
He knew, as did the others, that any noise would bring the clotho spider
swinging up its anchor-cables to the cliff-top. The men didn't dare
move. But every one of them--and Burl was among the foremost--knew that
inside the half-dome of gruesome relics the monster reposed in luxury
and ease. It had eight furry, attenuated legs and a face that was a mask
of horror. The eyes glittered malevolently above needle-sharp mandibles.
It was a hunting-spider. At any moment it might leave the charnel-house
in which it lived to stalk and pursue prey.

Burl motioned the others forward. He led one of them to the end of a
cable where it curled up over the edge for an anchorage. He ripped the
end free--and his flesh crawled as he did so. He found a boulder and
knotted the end of the cable about it. In a whisper that imitated a
spider's ferocity, Burl gave the man orders. He plucked a second quaking
tribesman by the arm. With the jerky, uncontrolled movements of a robot,
Dor allowed himself to be led to a second cable.

Burl commanded in a frenzy. He worked with stiff fingers and a dry
throat, not knowing how he could do this thing. He had formed a plan in
anger which he somehow was carrying out in a panic. Although his
followers were as responsive as dead men, they obeyed him because they
felt like dead men, unable to resist. After all, it was simple enough.
There were boulders at the top of the precipice and silken cables hung
taut over the edge. As Burl fastened a heavy boulder to each cable he
could find, he loosened the silken strand until it hung tight only at
the very edge of the more-than-vertical fall.

He took his post--and his followers gazed at him with the despairing
eyes of zombies--and made a violent, urgent gesture. One man dumped his
boulder over the precipice's edge. Burl cried out shrilly to the others,
half-mad with his own terror. There was a ripping sound. The other men
dumped their boulders over, fleeing with the movement--the paralysis of
horror relieved by that one bit of exertion.

Burl could not flee. He panted and gasped, but he had to see. He stared
down the dizzy wall. Boulders ripped and tore their way down the
cliff-wall, pulling the cables loose from the face of the precipice.
They shot out into space and jerked violently at the half-globular nest,
ripping it loose from its anchorage.

Burl cried out exultantly. And as he cried out the shout became a
bubbling sound; for although the ogre's silken castle did swing clear,
it did not drop the sixty feet to the hard ground below. There was one
cable Burl had missed, hidden by rock-tripe and mould in a depressed
part of the cliff-top. The spider's house was dangling crazily by that
one strand, bobbing erratically to and fro in mid-air.

And there was a convulsive struggle inside it. One of the arch-doors
opened and the spider emerged. It was doubtless confused, but spiders
simply do not know terror. Their one response to the unusual is
ferocity. There was still one cable leading up the cliff-face--the
thing's normal climbing-rope to its hunting-ground above. The spider
leaped for this single cable. Its legs grasped the cord. It swarmed
upward, poison fangs unsheathed, mandibles clashing in rage. The shaggy
hair of its body seemed to bristle with insane ferocity. The skinny
articulated legs fairly twinkled as it rose. It made slavering noises,
unspeakably horrifying.

Burl's followers were already in panic-stricken flight. He could hear
them crashing through obstacles as they ran glassy-eyed from the horror
they only imagined, but which Burl could not but encounter. Burl
shivered, his body poised for equally frenzied but quite hopeless
flight. But his first step was blocked. There was a boulder behind him,
standing on end, reaching up to his knee. He could not take the first
step without dodging it.

It was not the Burl of the terror-filled childhood who acted then. It
was the throw-back, the atavism to a bolder ancestry. While the Burl who
was a product of his environment was able to know only the stunned
sensations of purest panic, the other Burl acted on a sounder basis of
desperation. The emerging normal human seized the upright boulder. He
staggered to the rock-face with it. He dumped it down the line of the
descending cable.

Humans do have ancestral behavior-patterns built into their nervous
systems. A frightened small child does not flee; it swarms up the
nearest adult to be carried away from danger. At ten a child does not
climb but runs. And there is an age when it is normal for a man to stand
at bay. This last instinct can be conditioned away. In Burl's fellows
and his immediate forbears it had been. But things had happened to Burl
to break that conditioning.

He flung the pointed boulder down. For the fraction of a second he heard
only the bubbling, gnashing sounds the spider made as it climbed toward
him. Then there was a quite indescribable cushioned impact. After that,
there were seconds in which Burl heard nothing whatever--and then a
noise which could not be described either, but was the impact of the
spider's body on the ground a hundred feet below, together with the
pointed boulder it had fought insanely during all its fall. And the
boulder was on top. The noise was sickening.

Burl found himself shaking all over. His every muscle was tense and
strained. But the spider did not crawl over the edge of the precipice
and something had hit far below.

A long minute later he managed to look.

The nest still dangled at the end of the single cable, festooned with
its gruesome trophies. But Burl saw the spider. It was, of course,
characteristically tenacious of life. Its legs writhed and kicked, but
the body was crushed and mangled.

As Burl stared down, trying to breathe again, an ant drew near the
shattered creature. It stridulated. Other ants came. They hovered
restlessly at the edge of the death-scene. One loathesome leg did not
quiver. An ant moved in on it.

The ants began to tear the dead spider apart, carrying its fragments to
their city a mile away.

Up on the cliff-top Burl got unsteadily to his feet and found that he
could breathe. He was drenched in sweat, but the shock of triumph was as
overwhelming as any of the terrors felt by ancestors on this planet.

On no other planet in the Galaxy could any human experience such triumph
as Burl felt now because never before had human beings been so
completely subjugated by their environment. On no other planet had such
an environment existed, with humans flung so helplessly upon its mercy.

Burl had been normal among his fellows when he was as frightened and
furtive as they. Now he had been given shock treatment by fate. He was
very close to normal for a human being newly come to the forgotten
planet, save that he had the detailed information which would enable a
normal man to cope with the nightmare environment. What he lacked now
was the habit.

But it would be intolerable for him to return to his former state of
mind.

He walked almost thoughtfully after his fled followers. And he was
still a savage in that he was remarkably matter-of-fact. He paused to
break off a huge piece of the edible golden mushrooms his fellow-men had
noticed on the way up. Lugging it easily, he went back down over the
ground that had looked so astonishingly free of inimical life--which it
was because of the spider that had used it as a hunting-preserve.

Burl began to see that it was not satisfactory to be one of a tribe of
men who ran away all the time. If one man with a spear or stone could
kill spiders, it was ridiculous for half a dozen men to run away and
leave that one man the job alone. It made the job harder.

It occurred to Burl that he had killed ants without thinking too much
about it, but nobody else had. Individual ants could be killed. If he
got his followers to kill foot-long ants, they might in time battle the
smaller, two-foot beetles. If they came to dare so much, they might
attack greater creatures and ultimately attempt to resist the real
predators.

Not clearly but very dimly, the Burl who had been shocked back to the
viewpoint which was normal to the race of men saw that human beings
could be more than the fugitive vermin on which other creatures preyed.
It was not easy to envision, but he found it impossible to imagine
sinking back to his former state. As a practical matter, if he was to
remain as leader his tribesmen would have to change.

It was a long time before he reached the neighborhood of the
hiding-place of which he had not been told the night before. He sniffed
and listened. Presently he heard faint, murmurous noises. He traced
them, hearing clearly the sound of hushed weeping and excited, timid
chattering. He heard old Tama shrilly bewailing fate and the stupidity
of Burl in getting himself killed.

He pushed boldly through the toadstool-growth and found his tribe all
gathered together and trembling. They were shaken. They chattered
together--not discussing or planning, but nervously recalling the
terrifying experience they had gone through.

Burl stepped through the screen of fungi and men gaped at him. Then they
leaped up to flee, thinking he might be pursued. Tet and Dik babbled
shrilly. Burl cuffed them. It was an excellent thing for him to do. No
man had struck another man in Burl's memory. Cuffings were reserved for
children. But Burl cuffed the men who had fled from the cliff-edge. And
because they had not been through Burl's experiences, they took the
cuffings like children.

He took Jon and Jak by the ear and heaved them out of the hiding-place.
He followed them, and then drove them to where they could see the base
of the cliff from whose top they had tumbled stones--and then run away.
He showed them the carcass of the spider, now being carted away
piecemeal by ants. He told them angrily how it had been killed.

They looked at him fearfully.

He was exasperated. He scowled at them. And then he saw them shifting
uneasily. There were clickings. A single, foraging black ant--rather
large, quite sixteen inches long--moved into view. It seemed to be
wandering purposelessly, but was actually seeking carrion to take back
to its fellows. It moved toward the men. They were alive, therefore, it
did not think of them as food--though it could regard them as enemies.

Burl moved forward and struck with his club. It was butchery. It was
unprecedented. When the creature lay still he commanded one of his typo
for followers to take it up. Inside its armored legs there would be
meat. He mentioned the fact, pungently. Their faces expressed amazed
wonderment.

There was another clicking. Another solitary ant. Burl handed his club
to Dor, pushing him forward. Dor hesitated. Though he was not afraid of
one wandering ant, he held back uneasily. Burl barked at him.

Dor struck clumsily and botched the job. Burl had to use his spear to
finish it. But a second bit of prey lay before the men.

Then, quite suddenly, this completely unprecedented form of foraging
became understandable to Burl's followers. Jak giggled nervously.

An hour later Burl led them back to the tribe's hiding-place. The others
had been terror-stricken, not knowing where the men had gone. But their
terror changed to mute amazement when the men carried huge quantities of
meat and edible mushroom into the hiding-place. The tribe held what
amounted to a banquet.

Dik and Tet swaggered under a burden of ant-carcass. This was not, of
course, in any way revolting. Back on Earth, even thousands of years
before, Arabs had eaten locusts cooked in butter and salted. All men had
eaten crabs and other crustaceans, whose feeding habits were similar to
those of ants. If Burl and his tribesmen had thought to be fastidious,
ants on the forgotten planet would still have been considered edible,
since they had not lost the habits of extreme cleanliness which made
them notable on Earth.

This feast of all the tribe, in which men had brought back not only
mushroom to be eaten, but actual prey--small prey--of their hunting, was
very probably the first such occasion in at least thirty generations of
the forty-odd since the planet's unintended colonization. Like the other
events, which began with Burl trying to spear a fish with a
rhinoceros-beetle's horn, it was not only novel, on that world, but
would in time have almost incredibly far-reaching consequences. Perhaps
the most significant thing about it was its timing. It came at very
nearly the latest instant at which it could have done any good.

There was a reason which nobody in the tribe would ever remember to
associate with the significance of this banquet. A long time
before--months in terms of Earth-time--there had been a strong breeze
that blew for three days and nights. It was an extremely unusual
windstorm. It had seemed the stranger, then, because during all its
duration everyone in the tribe had been sick, suffering continuously.
When the windstorm had ended, the suffering ceased. A long time passed
and nobody remembered it any longer.
