


PART II




X


It took minutes only.

He had headed back to the waterfront, afraid to run, with some vague
notion of stealing a boat. Before he reached the row of saloons and
joints, a smart-looking squad of eight tall men overtook him.

"Hold it, mister," a sergeant said. "Are you Orsino?"

"No," he said hopelessly. "That crazy woman began to yell at me that I
was Orsino, but my name's Wyman. What's this about?"

The other men fell in beside and behind him. "We're stepping over to
O.N.I.," the sergeant said.

"There's the son of a bitch!" somebody bawled. Suddenly there were a
dozen sweatered Guardsmen around them. Their leader was the thug Orsino
had beaten in a fair fight. He said silkily to the sergeant: "We want
that boy, leatherneck. Blow."

       *       *       *       *       *

The sergeant went pale. "He's wanted for questioning by the O.N.I.," he
said stolidly.

"Get the marine three-striper!" the Guardsman chortled. He stuck his jaw
into the sergeant's face. "Tell your squad to blow. You marines ought to
know by now that you don't mess with the Guard."

A very junior officer appeared. "What's going on here, you men?" he
shrilled. "Atten-_shun_!" He was ignored as Guardsman and marines
measured one another with their eyes. "I said _attention_! Dammit,
sergeant, _report_!" There was no reaction. The officer yelled: "You men
may think you can get away with this but by God, you're wrong!" He
strode away, his fists clenched and his face very red.

Orsino saw him stride through a gate into a lot marked _Bupers Motor
Pool_. And he felt a sudden wave of communal understanding that there
were only seconds to go. The sergeant played for time: "I'll be glad to
surrender the prisoner," he started, "if you have anything to show in
the way of--"

The Guardsman kicked for the pit of the sergeant's stomach. He was a
sucker Orsino thought abstractedly as he saw the sergeant catch his
foot, dump him and pivot to block another Guardsman. Then he was
fighting for his life himself, against three bellowing Guardsmen.

A ripping, hammering noise filled the air suddenly. Like cold magic, it
froze the milling mob where it stood. Fifty-caliber noise.

The jaygee was back, this time in a jeep with a twin fifty. And he was
glaring down its barrels into the crowd. People were beginning to stream
from the saloons, joints and shipfitting shops.

The jaygee cocked his cap rakishly over one eye. "_Fall in!_" he rasped,
and a haunting air of familiarity came over Orsino.

The waiting jeep, almost bucking in its eagerness to be let
loose--Orsino on the ground, knees trembling with tension--a perfect
change of mount scene in a polo match. He reacted automatically.

There was a surrealist flash of the jaygee's face before he clipped him
into the back of the square little truck. There was another flash of
spectators scrambling as he roared the jeep down the road.

From then on it was just a question of hanging onto the wheel with one
hand, trying to secure the free-traversing twin-fifty with the other,
glancing back to see if the jaygee was still out, avoiding yapping dogs
and pedestrians, staying on the rutted road, pushing all possible speed
out of the jeep, noting landmarks, estimating the possibility of
dangerous pursuit. For a two-goal polo player, a dull little practice
session.

The road, such as it was, wound five miles inland through scrubby
woodland and terminated at a lumber camp where chained men in rags were
dragging logs.

Orsino back tracked a quarter-mile from the camp and jolted overland in
a kidney-cracking hare and hounds course at fifty per.

The jeep took it for an hour in the fading afternoon light and then
bucked to a halt. Orsino turned for an overdue check on the jaygee and
found him conscious, but greenly clinging to the sides of the vehicle.
But he saw Orsino staring and gamely struggled to his feet, standing in
the truck bed. "You're under arrest, sailor," he said. "Striking an
officer, abuse of government property, driving a government vehicle
without a trip-ticket--" His legs betrayed him and he sat down, hard.

Orsino thought very briefly of letting him have a burst from the
twin-fifty, and abandoned the idea.

He seemed to have bitched up everything so far, but he was still on a
mission. He had a commissioned officer of the Government approximately
in his power. He snapped: "Nonsense. _You're_ under arrest."

The jaygee seemed to be reviewing rapidly any transgressions he may have
committed, and asked at last, cautiously: "By what authority?"

"I represent the Syndic."

It was a block-buster. The jaygee stammered: "But you can't--But there
isn't any way--But how--"

"Never mind how."

"You're crazy. You must be, or you wouldn't stop here. I don't believe
you're from the continent and I don't believe the jeep's broken down."
He was beginning to sound just a little hysterical. "It can't break down
here. We must be more than thirty miles inland."

"What's special about thirty miles inland?"

"The natives, you fool!"

The natives again. "I'm not worried about natives. Not with a pair of
fifties."

"You don't understand," the jaygee said, forcing calm into his voice.
"This is The Outback. They're in charge here. We can't do a thing with
them. They jump people in the dark and skewer them. Now fix this damn
jeep and let's get rolling!"

"Into a firing squad? Don't be silly, lieutenant. I presume you won't
slug me while I check the engine?"

The jaygee was looking around him. "My God, no," he said. "You may be a
gangster, but--" He trailed off.

Orsino stiffened. Gangster was semi-dirty talk. "Listen, pirate," he
said nastily, "I don't believe--"

"_Pirate?_" the jaygee roared indignantly, and then shut his mouth with
a click, looking apprehensively about. The gesture wasn't faked; it
alarmed Orsino.

"Tell me about your wildmen," he said.

"Go to hell," the jaygee said sulkily.

"Look, you called me a gangster first. What about these natives? You
were trying to trick me, weren't you?"

"Kiss my royal North American eyeball, gangster."

"Don't be childish," Charles reproved him, feeling adult and superior.
(The jaygee looked a couple of years younger than he.) He climbed out of
his seat and lifted the hood. The damage was trivial; a shear pin in the
transmission had given way. He reported mournfully: "Cracked block. The
jeep's through forever. You can get on your way, lieutenant. I won't try
to hold you."

The jaygee fumed: "You couldn't hold me if you wanted to, gangster. If
you think I'm going to try and hoof back to the base alone in the dark,
you're crazy. We're sticking together. Two of us may be able to hold
them off for the night. In the morning, we'll see."

Well, maybe the officer did _believe_ there were wildmen in the woods.
That didn't mean there _were_.

The jaygee got out and looked under the hood uncertainly. It was obvious
that in the first place he was no mechanic and in the second place he
couldn't conceive of anybody voluntarily risking the woods rather than
the naval base. "Uh-huh," he said. "Dismount that gun while I get a fire
started."

"Yes, sir," Charles said sardonically, saluting. The jaygee absently
returned the salute and began to collect twigs.

Orsino asked: "How do these aborigines of yours operate?"

"Sneak up in the dark. They have spears and a few stolen guns. Usually
they don't have cartridges for them but you can't count on that. But
they have ... witches."

Orsino snorted. He was getting very hungry indeed. "Do you know any of
the local plants we might eat?"

The jaygee said confidently: "I guess we can get by on roots until
morning."

Orsino dubiously pulled up a shrub, dabbed clods off its root and tasted
it. It tasted exactly like a root. He sighed and changed the subject.
"What do we do with the fifties when I get them both off the mount?"

"The jeep mount breaks down some damn way or other into two low-mount
tripods. See if you can figure it out while I get the fire going."

The jaygee had a small, smoky fire barely going in twenty minutes.
Orsino was still struggling with the jeep gun mount. It came apart, but
it couldn't go together again. The jaygee strolled over at last
contemptuously to lend a hand. He couldn't make it work either.

Two lost tempers and four split fingernails later it developed the
"elevating screw" really held the two front legs on and that you
elevated by adjusting the rear tripod leg. "A hell of an officer you
are," Orsino sulked.

It began to rain, putting the fire out with a hiss. They wound up prone
under the jeep, not on speaking terms, each tending a gun, each
presumably responsible for 180 degrees of perimeter.

       *       *       *       *       *

Charles was fairly dry, except for a trickle of icy water following a
contour that meandered to his left knee. After an hour of
eye-straining--nothing to be seen--and ear-straining--only the patter of
rain--he heard a snore and kicked the jaygee.

The jaygee cursed wearily and said: "I guess we'd better talk to keep
awake."

"_I'm_ not having any trouble, pirate."

"Oh, knock it off--where do you get that pirate bit, gangster?"

"You're outlaws, aren't you?"

"Like hell we are. _You're_ the outlaws. You rebelled against the
lawfully constituted North American Government. Just because you
won--for the time being--doesn't mean you were right."

"The fact that we won does mean that we were right. The fact that your
so-called Government lives by raiding and scavenging off us means you
were wrong. God, the things I've seen since I joined up with you thugs!"

"I'll bet. Respect for the home, sanctity of marriage, sexual morality,
law and order--you never saw anything like that back home, did you
gangster?" He looked very smug.

Orsino clenched his teeth. "Somebody's been telling you a pack of lies,"
he said. "There's just as much home and family life and morality and
order back in Syndic Territory as there is here. And probably a lot
more."

"Bull. I've seen intelligence reports; I know how you people live. Are
you telling me you don't have sexual promiscuity? Polygamy? Polyandry?
Open gambling? Uncontrolled liquor trade? Corruption and shakedowns?"

Orsino squinted along the barrel of the gun into the rain. "Look," he
said, "take me as an average young man from Syndic Territory. I know
maybe a hundred people. I know just three women and two men who are what
you'd call promiscuous. I know one family with two wives and one
husband. I don't really know any people personally who go in for
polyandry, but I've met three casually. And the rest are ordinary
middle-aged couples."

"Ah-_hah_! Middle-aged! Do you mean to tell me you're just leaving out
anybody under middle age when you talk about morality?"

"Naturally," Charles said, baffled. "Wouldn't you?"

The only answer was a snort.

"What are bupers?" Charles asked.

"Bu-Pers," the jaygee said distinctly. "Bureau of Personnel, North
American Navy."

"What do you do there?"

"What _would_ a personnel bureau do?" the jaygee said patiently. "We
recruit, classify, assign, promote and train personnel."

"Paperwork, huh? No wonder you don't know how to shoot or drive."

"If I didn't need you to cover my back, I'd shove this MG down your
silly throat. For your information, gangster, all officers do a tour of
duty on paperwork before they're assigned to their permanent branch. I'm
going into the pigboats."

"Why?"

"Family. My father commands a sub. He's Captain Van Dellen."

_Oh, God. Van Dellen._ The sub commander Grinnel--and he--had murdered.
The kid hadn't heard yet that his father had been "lost" in an emergency
dive.

       *       *       *       *       *

The rain ceased to fall; the pattering drizzle gave way to irregular,
splashing drops from leaves and branches.

"Van Dellen," Charles said. "There's something you ought to know."

"It'll keep," the jaygee answered in a grim whisper. The bolt of his gun
clicked. "I hear them out there."




XI


She felt the power of the goddess working in her, but feebly. Dark ...
so dark ... and so tired ... how old was she? More than eight hundred
moons had waxed and waned above her head since birth. And she had run at
the head of her spearmen to the motor sounds. A motor meant the
smithymen from the sea, and you killed smithymen when you could.

She let out a short shrill chuckle in the dark. There was a rustling of
branches. One of the spearmen had turned to stare at the sound. She knew
his face was worried. "Tend to business, you fool!" she wheezed. "Or by
Bridget--" His breath went in with a hiss and she chuckled again. You
had to let them know who was the cook and who was the potatoes every now
and then. Kill the fool? Not now; not when there were smithymen with
guns waiting to be taken.

The power of the goddess worked stronger in her withered breast as her
rage grew at their impudence. Coming into _her_ woods with their
stinking metal!

There were two of them. A grin slit her face. She had not taken two
smithymen together for thirty moons. For all her wrinkles and creaks,
what a fine vessel she was for the power, to be sure! Her worthless,
slow-to-learn niece could run and jump and she had a certain air, but
she'd never be such a vessel. Her sister--the crone spat--these were
degenerate days. In the old days, the sister would have been spitted
