
"Hold still now, kid, while I get your retina pattern."

       *       *       *       *       *

Later on a bunch of rowdies, led by a giant, started to raise hell
around the palace. They hadn't even gotten the kid to the guard house
yet, but somehow in the confusion the boy got away. One guard, who wore
a size seventeen uniform was knocked unconscious, but no one else was
hurt. They dispersed the rowdies, carried the guard to the infirmary,
and left. The doctor saw him in the waiting room, then left him there
momentarily to look for an accident report slip in the supply room at
the other side of the building. (He could have sworn that a whole pad of
them had been lying on the desk when he'd stepped out for a bit ten
minutes ago.) When the doctor returned with the slip the soldier was
still there--only he was stark naked.

       *       *       *       *       *

A minute later, an unfamiliar guard, wearing a size seventeen uniform,
saluted the guard at the gate, and marched in.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two strange men behind the gate flung a cord with a weight on one end
over a third story cornice. They missed once, then secured it the second
time and left it hanging there.

A guard wearing a size seventeen uniform came down the hall of the west
wing of the castle, stopped before a large double door on which was a
silver crown, indicating the room of the Queen Mother; he took a
complete set of keys to the private suites of the royal family from his
cloak, and locked her Majesty firmly in her room. At the next door, he
locked Prince Let securely in his. Then he went rapidly on.

Tel ran till he got to the corner, rounded it, and checked the street
sign. It was correct. So he went to a doorway and sat down to wait.

       *       *       *       *       *

At the same time, Prince Let, getting ready for bed and wearing nothing
but his undershirt, looked out the window and saw a girl with white hair
hanging head down outside the shutter. He stood very still The upside
down face smiled at him. Then the hands converged at the window lock,
did something, and the two glass panels came open. The girl rolled over
once, turned quickly, and suddenly she was crouching on the window
ledge.

Let snatched up his pajama bottoms first, and ran to the door second.
When he couldn't open it, he whirled around and pulled on his pajama
pants.

Alter put her finger to her lips as she stepped down into his room.
"Keep quiet," she whispered. "And relax," she added. "The Duchess of
Petra sent me. More or less." She had been instructed to use that name
to calm the prince. It seemed to work a trifle.

"Look," explained Alter, "you're being kidnapped. It's for your own
good, believe me." She watched the blond boy come away from the door.

"Who are you?" he asked.

"I'm a friend of yours if you'll let me be."

"Where are you going to take me?"

"You're going to go on a trip. But you'll come back, eventually."

"What has my mother said?"

"Your mother doesn't know. Nobody knows except you and the Duchess, and
the few people who're helping her."

Let appeared to be thinking. He walked over to his bed, sat down, and
pressed his heel against the side board. There was a tiny click. Nothing
else happened. "Why won't they open the door?" he asked.

"It's been locked," Alter said. Suddenly she looked at the clock beside
the Prince's bed, and turned to the window. Light from the crystal
chandelier caught on the shells that were strung on leather thongs
around her neck as she turned.

Let put his hand quietly on the newel post of his bed and pressed his
thumb hard on the purple garnet that encrusted the crowning ornamental
dolphin. Nothing happened except a tiny click.

At the window, Alter reached out her hand, just as a bundle appeared
outside on a lowered rope. She pulled them in, untied them, and shook
them out as the rope suddenly flew out the window again. "Here," she
said. "Get into these." It was a suit of rags. She tossed them to him.

Finally Let slipped out of his pajama pants and into the suit.

"Now look in your pocket," Alter said.

The boy did and took out a bunch of keys.

"You can open the door with those," Alter said. "Go on."

Let paused, then went to the door. Before he put the key in the lock
though, he bent down and looked through the keyhole. "Hey," he said,
looking back at the girl. "Come here. Do you see anything?"

Alter crossed the room, bent down, and looked. The only motion Let made
was to lean against one of the panels on the wall, which gave a slight
click. Nothing happened.

"I don't see anything," Alter said. "Open the door."

Let found the proper key, put it in the lock, and the door swung back.

"All right, you kids," said the guard who was standing on the other side
of the door (who incidentally wore a size seventeen uniform), "you come
along with me." He took Let firmly by one arm and Alter by the other and
marched them down the hall. "I'm warning you to keep quiet," the guard
said to Let as they turned the last corner.

Three minutes later they were outside the castle. As the guard passed
another uniformed man at the Sentry's post, he said, "More stupid kids
trying to break into the palace."

"What a night," said the guard and scratched his head. "A girl too?"

"Looks like it," said the guard who was escorting Alter and the Prince.
"I'm taking them to be photographed."

"Sure," answered the guard, and saluted.

The two children were marched down the street toward the guard house.
Before they got there, they were turned off into a side street. Then
suddenly the guard was gone. A black-haired boy with green eyes was
coming toward them.

"Is this the Prince?" Tel asked.

"Un-huh," said Alter.

"Who are you?" Let asked. "Where are you taking me?"

"My name is Tel. I'm a fisherman's son."

"My name is Alter," Alter introduced herself.

"She's an acrobat," Tel added.

"I'm the Prince," Let said. "Really. I'm Prince Let."

The two others looked at the blond boy who stood in front of them in
rags like their own. Suddenly they laughed. The Prince frowned. "Where
are you taking me?" he asked again.

"We're taking you to get something to eat and where you can get a good
night's sleep," Alter answered. "Come on."

"If you hurt me, my mother will put you in jail."

"Nobody's going to hurt you, silly," Tel said. "Come on."




CHAPTER VI


The Duchess of Petra said, "Now, your first direct assignment will
be ..."

       *       *       *       *       *

Then, the sudden green of beetles' wings; the red of polished carbuncle;
a web of silver fire; lightning and blue smoke. Columns of jade caught
red light through the great crack in the roof. The light across the
floor was red. Jon felt that there were others with him, but he could
not be sure. Before him, on a stone platform, three marble crescents
were filled with pulsating shadows. Jon Koshar looked at them, and then
away. There were many more columns, most broken.

He saw a huge break in the sanctuary wall. Outside he could look down on
an immense red plain. At a scribed line, the plain changed color to an
even more luminous red. Near the temple a few geometrical buildings cast
maroon pinions of shadow over the russet expanse. Suddenly he realized
that the further half of the plain was an immense red sea, yet with a
perfectly straight shore line. Calmly it rippled toward the bright
horizon.

At the horizon, filling up nearly a quarter of the sky, was what seemed
to be a completely rounded mountain of dull red. No, it was a segment of
a huge red disk, a great dull sun lipping the horizon of the planet. Yet
it was dim enough so that he could stare directly at it without
blinking. Above it, the atmosphere was a rich purple.

Then there was a voice from behind him, and he turned to the triple
throne once more.

"Hail, hosts of Earth," the voice began. The very shadows of the room
were like red bruises on the stone. "You are in the halls of an extinct
city on Creton III. Twelve million years ago this planet housed a
civilization higher than yours today. Now it is dead, and only we are
left, sitting on their thrones in the twilight of their dying, ruddy
sun."

"Who are you?" demanded Jon, but his voice sounded strange, distorted.
As he bit the last word off, another voice broke in.

"What do you really want from us?"

Then a third voice.

"What are you going to do with us?"

Jon looked around but saw no one else. Suddenly another picture, the
picture of a world of white desert where the sky was deep blue and each
object cast double shadows, filled his mind. "This isn't the world you
took me to before ..." he exclaimed.

"No," came the quiet voice, "this is not the world we took you to
before. Listen. We are homeless wanderers of space. Our origin was not
only in another galaxy, but in another universe, eternities ago. By way
of this universe we can move from star to star without transversing any
segment of time, unless we desire. Thus we have dwelt quietly in the
dead cities of myriad suns till now. We have never tampered with any
living species, though there is something in us that yearns for the
extinct cultures.

"Recently according to our standards, though still much older than your
solar system, a dark force has come into the universe. It has evolved
similarly to us, and also leaps among galaxies in moments. Yet it holds
no culture sacred that it finds, and has already tampered with a score
of civilizations. It is younger than we are, and can only exist in one
individual at a time, while our entity has three lobes, so to speak.
This rival thinks nothing of completely changing the mind of its host,
giving deadly information, even new powers. We are bound only to ride
with your minds, warn you, guide you, but changing your body before your
minds, and that only to keep you from death. So it will be your own
greed, your own selflessness that will eventually win or lose this
battle. Therefore it will be won or lost within the framework of your
own civilization."

"Then tell us this," came a voice that was not Jon's. "What is on the
other side of the radiation barrier?"

"But we have told you already. And you have guessed. Toromon is at war
with an economic condition. Beyond the barrier is a civilization which
is controlled by the Lord of the Flames. He is only in one member of
their number, and any time he may move to another, although it is not
likely."

"Are they our enemies?"

"Your only enemies are yourselves. But he must be evicted none the less.
To do that, all you must do is confront the individual who is bearing
him, the three of you together. But you must all be within seeing
distance of him at once. For we work through your minds. What you cannot
perceive, we cannot affect."

"How will we do this?"

"One of you has already been made immune to the radiation barrier. So
will the rest of you when it becomes necessary. This is what you will do
for us, and it will also remove the threatening element of the unknown
that distracts Toromon from her own problems."

"But why our planet?" a voice asked.

"Yours is an ideal experimenting ground. Because of the Great Fire, your
planet has many civilizations that are now completely isolated from one
another; many, however, are on a fairly high level. The radiation
barriers that lace your planet will keep you isolated from them for some
time. When the Lord of the Flames is finished with one empire, he may
wish to try a different method on a basically similar civilization. For
all your isolated empires had the same base. Marinor, Letpar, Calcivon,
Aptor--these are all empires on your planet of which you have never
heard. But your first concern is Toromon."

"Will we remember all this?" Jon asked.

"You will remember enough. Good-bye; you know your task." The red haze
in the deserted temple pulsed and the jade columns flickered. Hands of
blue smoke caught him and flung him through a lightning flash. Whirled
through a net of silver, he dropped through red into the vivid green of
beetles' wings.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jon blinked. The Duchess took a step backwards. The green carpet, the
rich wood-paneled walls, the glass-covered desk: they were in a sitting
room of his father's house, again.

Finally Jon asked, "Now just what am I supposed to do, again? And
explain it very carefully."

"I was going to say," said the Duchess, "that you were to get to the
Prince, who is being kept at an inn in the Devil's Pot, and accompany
him to the forest people. I want him to stay there until this war is
over. They live a different life from any of the other people of this
empire. They will give him something he'll be able to use. I told you I
spent some time there when I was younger. I can't explain exactly what
it is, but it's a certain ruggedness, a certain strength. Maybe they
won't give it to him, but if he's got it in him, they'll bring it out."

"What about ... the Lord of the Flames?"

"I don't--do you have any idea, Jon?"

"Well, assuming we get beyond the radiation barrier, assuming we find
what people we're fighting, assuming we find which one of them is
carrying around the Lord of the Flames, and assuming we can all three of
us get to him at once--assuming all that, there's no problem. But we
can't, can we? Look, I'll be going to the forest, so I'll be closest to
the radiation barrier. I'll try to get through, see what the situation
is, and then the two of you can come on. All right?"

"Fine."

"If nothing else, it'll put me closer to the Lord of the Flames ... and
my freedom."

"How are you not free now, Jon Koshar?" the Duchess asked.

Instead of answering, he said, "Give me the address of the inn at the
Devil's Pot."

       *       *       *       *       *

