Even this base steel is too honorable for your foul head. Nay, die as
thieves die!'

The ax fell in a devastating arch, and the Aquilonian cried out and went
to his knees, grasping the severed stump of his right arm from which
blood spouted. It had been shorn away at the elbow, and the ax,
unchecked in its descent, had gashed deeply into his side, so that his
entrails bulged out.

'Lie there and bleed to death,' grunted Conan, casting the ax away
disgustedly. 'Come, Countess!'

Stooping, he slashed the cords that bound her wrists and lifting her as
if she had been a child, strode from the dungeon. She was sobbing
hysterically, with her arms thrown about his corded neck in a frenzied
embrace.

'Easy all,' he muttered. 'We're not out of this yet. If we can reach
the dungeon where the secret door opens on stairs that lead to the
tunnel--devil take it, they've heard that noise, even through these
walls.'

Down the corridor arms clanged and the tramp and shouting of men echoed
under the vaulted roof. A bent figure came hobbling swiftly along,
lantern held high, and its light shone full on Conan and the girl. With
a curse the Cimmerian sprang toward him, but the old watchman,
abandoning both lantern and pike, scuttled away down the corridor,
screeching for help at the top of his cracked voice. Deeper shouts
answered him.

Conan turned swiftly and ran the other way. He was cut off from the
dungeon with the secret lock and the hidden door through which he had
entered the Tower, and by which he had hoped to leave, but he knew this
grim building well. Before he was king he had been imprisoned in it.

He turned off into a side passage and quickly emerged into another,
broader corridor, which ran parallel to the one down which he had come,
and which was at the moment deserted. He followed this only a few yards,
when he again turned back, down another side passage. This brought him
back into the corridor he had left, but at a strategic point. A few feet
farther up the corridor there was a heavy bolted door, and before it
stood a bearded Nemedian in corselet and helmet, his back to Conan as he
peered up the corridor in the direction of the growing tumult and wildly
waving lanterns.

Conan did not hesitate. Slipping the girl to the ground, he ran at the
guard swiftly and silently, sword in hand. The man turned just as the
king reached him, bawled in surprise and fright and lifted his pike; but
before he could bring the clumsy weapon into play, Conan brought down
his sword on the fellow's helmet with a force that would have felled an
ox. Helmet and skull gave way together and the guard crumpled to the
floor.

In an instant Conan had drawn the massive bolt that barred the door--too
heavy for one ordinary man to have manipulated--and called hastily to
Albiona, who ran staggering to him. Catching her up unceremoniously with
one arm, he bore her through the door and into the outer darkness.

They had come into a narrow alley, black as pitch, walled by the side of
the Tower on one hand, and the sheer stone back of a row of buildings on
the other. Conan, hurrying through the darkness as swiftly as he dared,
felt the latter wall for doors or windows, but found none.

The great door clanged open behind them, and men poured out, with
torches gleaming on breast-plates and naked swords. They glared about,
bellowing, unable to penetrate the darkness which their torches served
to illuminate for only a few feet in any direction, and then rushed
down the alley at random--heading in the direction opposite to that
taken by Conan and Albiona.

'They'll learn their mistake quick enough,' he muttered, increasing his
pace. 'If we ever find a crack in this infernal wall--damn! The street
watch!'

Ahead of them a faint glow became apparent, where the alley opened into
a narrow street, and he saw dim figures looming against it with a
glimmer of steel. It was indeed the street watch, investigating the
noise they had heard echoing down the alley.

'Who goes there?' they shouted, and Conan grit his teeth at the hated
Nemedian accent.

'Keep behind me,' he ordered the girl. 'We've got to cut our way through
before the prison guards come back and pin us between them.'

And grasping his sword, he ran straight at the oncoming figures. The
advantage of surprise was his. He could see them, limned against the
distant glow, and they could not see him coming at them out of the black
depths of the alley. He was among them before they knew it, smiting with
the silent fury of a wounded lion.

His one chance lay in hacking through before they could gather their
wits. But there were half a score of them, in full mail, hard-bitten
veterans of the border wars, in whom the instinct for battle could take
the place of bemused wits. Three of them were down before they realized
that it was only one man who was attacking them, but even so their
reaction was instantaneous. The clangor of steel rose deafeningly, and
sparks flew as Conan's sword crashed on basinet and hauberk. He could
see better than they, and in the dim light his swiftly moving figure was
an uncertain mark. Flailing swords cut empty air or glanced from his
blade, and when he struck it was with the fury and certainty of a
hurricane.

But behind him sounded the shouts of the prison guards, returning up the
alley at a run, and still the mailed figures before him barred his way
with a bristling wall of steel. In an instant the guards would be on his
back--in desperation he redoubled his strokes, flailing like a smith on
an anvil, and then was suddenly aware of a diversion. Out of nowhere
behind the watchmen rose a score of black figures and there was a sound
of blows, murderously driven. Steel glinted in the gloom, and men cried
out, struck mortally from behind. In an instant the alley was littered
with writhing forms. A dark, cloaked shape sprang toward Conan, who
heaved up his sword, catching a gleam of steel in the right hand. But
the other was extended to him empty and a voice hissed urgently: 'This
way, your Majesty! Quickly!'

With a muttered oath of surprise, Conan caught up Albiona in one
massive arm, and followed his unknown befriender. He was not inclined to
hesitate, with thirty prison guardsmen closing in behind him.

Surrounded by mysterious figures he hurried down the alley, carrying the
countess as if she had been a child. He could tell nothing of his
rescuers except that they wore dark cloaks and hoods. Doubt and
suspicion crossed his mind, but at least they had struck down his
enemies, and he saw no better course than to follow them.

As if sensing his doubt, the leader touched his arm lightly and said:
'Fear not, King Conan; we are your loyal subjects.' The voice was not
familiar, but the accent was Aquilonian of the central provinces.

Behind them the guards were yelling as they stumbled over the shambles
in the mud, and they came pelting vengefully down the alley, seeing the
vague dark mass moving between them and the light of the distant street.
But the hooded men turned suddenly toward the seemingly blank wall, and
Conan saw a door gape there. He muttered a curse. He had traversed that
alley by day, in times past, and had never noticed a door there. But
through it they went, and the door closed behind them with the click of
a lock. The sound was not reassuring, but his guides were hurrying him
on, moving with the precision of familiarity, guiding Conan with a hand
at either elbow. It was like traversing a tunnel, and Conan felt
Albiona's lithe limbs trembling in his arms. Then somewhere ahead of
them an opening was faintly visible, merely a somewhat less black arch
in the blackness, and through this they filed.

After that there was a bewildering succession of dim courts and shadowy
alleys and winding corridors, all traversed in utter silence, until at
last they emerged into a broad lighted chamber, the location of which
Conan could not even guess, for their devious route had confused even
his primitive sense of direction.




10

A Coin from Acheron


Not all his guides entered the chamber. When the door closed, Conan saw
only one man standing before him--a slim figure, masked in a black cloak
with a hood. This the man threw back, disclosing a pale oval of a face,
with calm, delicately chiseled features.

The king set Albiona on her feet, but she still clung to him and stared
apprehensively about her. The chamber was a large one, with marble walls
partly covered with black velvet hangings and thick rich carpets on the
mosaic floor, laved in the soft golden glow of bronze lamps.

Conan instinctively laid a hand on his hilt. There was blood on his
hand, blood clotted about the mouth of his scabbard, for he had sheathed
his blade without cleansing it.

'Where are we?' he demanded.

The stranger answered with a low, profound bow in which the suspicious
king could detect no trace of irony.

'In the temple of Asura, your Majesty.'

Albiona cried out faintly and clung closer to Conan, staring fearfully
at the black, arched doors, as if expecting the entry of some grisly
shape of darkness.

'Fear not, my lady,' said their guide. 'There is nothing here to harm
you, vulgar superstition to the contrary. If your monarch was
sufficiently convinced of the innocence of our religion to protect us
from the persecution of the ignorant, then certainly one of his subjects
need have no apprehensions.'

'Who are you?' demanded Conan.

'I am Hadrathus, priest of Asura. One of my followers recognized you
when you entered the city, and brought the word to me.'

Conan grunted profanely.

'Do not fear that others discovered your identity,' Hadrathus assured
him. 'Your disguise would have deceived any but a follower of Asura,
whose cult it is to seek below the aspect of illusion. You were followed
to the watch tower, and some of my people went into the tunnel to aid
you if you returned by that route. Others, myself among them, surrounded
the tower. And now, King Conan, it is yours to command. Here in the
temple of Asura you are still king.'

'Why should you risk your lives for me?' asked the king.

'You were our friend when you sat upon your throne,' answered Hadrathus.
'You protected us when the priests of Mitra sought to scourge us out of
the land.'

Conan looked about him curiously. He had never before visited the temple
of Asura, had not certainly known that there was such a temple in
Tarantia. The priests of the religion had a habit of hiding their
temples in a remarkable fashion. The worship of Mitra was overwhelmingly
predominant in the Hyborian nations, but the cult of Asura persisted, in
spite of official ban and popular antagonism. Conan had been told dark
tales of hidden temples where intense smoke drifted up incessantly from
black altars where kidnapped humans were sacrificed before a great
coiled serpent, whose fearsome head swayed for ever in the haunted
shadows.

Persecution caused the followers of Asura to hide their temples with
cunning art, and to veil their rituals in obscurity; and this secrecy,
in turn, evoked more monstrous suspicions and tales of evil.

But Conan's was the broad tolerance of the barbarian, and he had refused
to persecute the followers of Asura or to allow the people to do so on
no better evidence than was presented against them, rumors and
accusations that could not be proven. 'If they are black magicians,' he
had said, 'how will they suffer you to harry them? If they are not,
there is no evil in them. Crom's devils! Let men worship what gods they
will.'

At a respectful invitation from Hadrathus he seated himself on an ivory
chair, and motioned Albiona to another, but she preferred to sit on a
golden stool at his feet, pressing close against his thigh, as if
seeking security in the contact. Like most orthodox followers of Mitra,
she had an intuitive horror of the followers and cult of Asura,
instilled in her infancy and childhood by wild tales of human sacrifice
and anthropomorphic gods shambling through shadowy temples.

Hadrathus stood before them, his uncovered head bowed.

'What is your wish, your Majesty?'

'Food first,' he grunted, and the priest smote a golden gong with a
silver wand.

Scarcely had the mellow notes ceased echoing when four hooded figures
came through a curtained doorway bearing a great four-legged silver
platter of smoking dishes and crystal vessels. This they set before
Conan, bowing low, and the king wiped his hands on the damask, and
smacked his lips with unconcealed relish.

'Beware, your Majesty!' whispered Albiona. 'These folk eat human flesh!'

'I'll stake my kingdom that this is nothing but honest roast beef,'
answered Conan. 'Come, lass, fall to! You must be hungry after the
prison fare.'

Thus advised, and with the example before her of one whose word was the
ultimate law to her, the countess complied, and ate ravenously though
daintily, while her liege lord tore into the meat joints and guzzled the
wine with as much gusto as if he had not already eaten once that night.

'You priests are shrewd, Hadrathus,' he said, with a great beef-bone in
his hands and his mouth full of meat. 'I'd welcome your service in my
campaign to regain my kingdom.'

Slowly Hadrathus shook his head, and Conan slammed the beef-bone down on
the table in a gust of impatient wrath.

'Crom's devils! What ails the men of Aquilonia? First Servius--now you!
Can you do nothing but wag your idiotic heads when I speak of ousting
these dogs?'

Hadrathus sighed and answered slowly: 'My lord, it is ill to say, and I
fain would say otherwise. But the freedom of Aquilonia is at an end.
Nay, the freedom of the whole world may be at an end! Age follows age in
the history of the world, and now we enter an age of horror and slavery,
as it was long ago.'

'What do you mean?' demanded the king uneasily.

Hadrathus dropped into a chair and rested his elbows on his thighs,
staring at the floor.

'It is not alone the rebellious lords of Aquilonia and the armies of
Nemedia which are arrayed against you,' answered Hadrathus. 'It is
sorcery--grisly black magic from the grim youth of the world. An awful
shape has risen out of the shades of the Past, and none can stand before
it.'

'What do you mean?' Conan repeated.

'I speak of Xaltotun of Acheron, who died three thousand years ago, yet
walks the earth today.'

Conan was silent, while in his mind floated an image--the image of a
bearded face of calm inhuman beauty. Again he was haunted by a sense of
uneasy familiarity. Acheron--the sound of the word roused instinctive
vibrations of memory and associations in his mind.

'Acheron,' he repeated. 'Xaltotun of Acheron--man, are you mad? Acheron
has been a myth for more centuries than I can remember. I've often
wondered if it ever existed at all.'

'It was a black reality,' answered Hadrathus, 'an empire of black
magicians, steeped in evil now long forgotten. It was finally overthrown
by the Hyborian tribes of the west. The wizards of Acheron practised
foul necromancy, thaumaturgy of the most evil kind, grisly magic taught
them by devils. And of all the sorcerers of that accursed kingdom, none
was so great as Xaltotun of Python.'

'Then how was he ever overthrown?' asked Conan skeptically.

'By some means a source of cosmic power which he jealously guarded was
stolen and turned against him. That source has been returned to him, and
he is invincible.'

Albiona, hugging the headsman's black cloak about her, stared from the
priest to the king, not understanding the conversation. Conan shook his
head angrily.

'You are making game of me,' he growled. 'If Xaltotun has been dead
three thousand years, how can this man be he? It's some rogue who's
taken the old one's name.'

Hadrathus leaned to an ivory table and opened a small gold chest which
stood there. From it he took something which glinted dully in the mellow
light--a broad gold coin of antique minting.

'You have seen Xaltotun unveiled? Then look upon this. It is a coin
which was stamped in ancient Acheron, before its fall. So pervaded with
sorcery was that black empire, that even this coin has its uses in
making magic.'

Conan took it and scowled down at it. There was no mistaking its great
antiquity. Conan had handled many coins in the years of his plunderings,
and had a good practical knowledge of them. The edges were worn and the
inscription almost obliterated. But the countenance stamped on one side
was still clear-cut and distinct. And Conan's breath sucked in between
his clenched teeth. It was not cool in the chamber, but he felt a
prickling of his scalp, an icy contraction of his flesh. The countenance
was that of a bearded man, inscrutable, with a calm inhuman beauty.

'By Crom! It's he!' muttered Conan. He understood, now, the sense of
familiarity that the sight of the bearded man had roused in him from the
first. He had seen a coin like this once before, long ago in a far land.

With a shake of his shoulders he growled: 'The likeness is only a
coincidence--or if he's shrewd enough to assume a forgotten wizard's
name, he's shrewd enough to assume his likeness.' But he spoke without
conviction. The sight of that coin had shaken the foundations of his
universe. He felt that reality and stability were crumbing into an abyss
of illusion and sorcery. A wizard was understandable; but this was
diabolism beyond sanity.

'We cannot doubt that it is indeed Xaltotun of Python,' said Hadrathus.
'He it was who shook down the cliffs at Valkia, by his spells that
enthrall the elementals of the earth--he it was who sent the creature of
darkness into your tent before dawn.'

Conan scowled at him. 'How did you know that?'

'The followers of Asura have secret channels of knowledge. That does not
matter. But do you realize the futility of sacrificing your subjects in
a vain attempt to regain your crown?'

Conan rested his chin on his fist, and stared grimly into nothing.
Albiona watched him anxiously, her mind groping bewildered in the mazes
of the problem that confronted him.

'Is there no wizard in the world who could make magic to fight
Xaltotun's magic?' he asked at last.

Hadrathus shook his head. 'If there were, we of Asura would know of him.
Men say our cult is a survival of the ancient Stygian serpent-worship.
That is a lie. Our ancestors came from Vendhya, beyond the Sea of
Vilayet and the blue Himelian mountains. We are sons of the East, not
the South, and we have knowledge of all the wizards of the East, who are
greater than the wizards of the West. And not one of them but would be a
straw in the wind before the black might of Xaltotun.'

'But he was conquered once,' persisted Conan.

'Aye; a cosmic source was turned against him. But now that source is
again in his hands, and he will see that it is not stolen again.'

'And what is this damnable source?' demanded Conan irritably.

'It is called the Heart of Ahriman. When Acheron was overthrown, the
primitive priest who had stolen it and turned it against Xaltotun hid it
in a haunted cavern and built a small temple over the cavern. Thrice
thereafter the temple was rebuilt, each time greater and more
elaborately than before, but always on the site of the original shrine,
though men forgot the reason therefor. Memory of the hidden symbol faded
from the minds of common men, and was preserved only in priestly books
and esoteric volumes. Whence it came no one knows. Some say it is the
veritable heart of a god, others that it is a star that fell from the
skies long ago. Until it was stolen, none had looked upon it for three
thousand years.

'When the magic of the Mitran priests failed against the magic of
Xaltotun's acolyte, Altaro, they remembered the ancient legend of the
heart, and the high priest and an acolyte went down into the dark and
terrible crypt below the temple into which no priest had descended for
three thousand years. In the ancient iron-bound volumes which speak of
the Heart in their cryptic symbolism, it is also told of a creature of
darkness left by the ancient priest to guard it.

'Far down in a square chamber with arched doorways leading off into
immeasurable blackness, the priest and his acolytes found a black stone
altar that glowed dimly with inexplicable radiance.

'On that altar lay a curious gold vessel like a double-valved sea-shell
which clung to the stone like a barnacle. But it gaped open and empty.
The Heart of Ahriman was gone. While they stared in horror, the keeper
of the crypt, the creature of darkness, came upon them and mangled the
high priest so that he died. But the acolyte fought off the being--a
mindless, soulless waif of the pits brought long ago to guard the
Heart--and escaped up the long black narrow stairs carrying the dying
priest, who before he died, gasped out the news to his followers, bade
them submit to a power they could not overcome, and commanded secrecy.
But the word has been whispered about among the priests, and we of Asura
learned of it.'

'And Xaltotun draws his power from this symbol?' asked Conan, still
skeptical.

'No. His power is drawn from the black gulf. But the Heart of Ahriman
