
"That's what I was thinking."

Crag debated, and finally shrugged his shoulders. "Guess we're elected
as angels of mercy. Well, let's go."

"Yeah, Florence Nightingale Larkwell," the construction boss spat. He
looped a line under the unconscious man's arms and rolled him to the
brink of the opening.

"Ought to shove him out and let him bounce a while," he growled.

Crag didn't answer. He ran the other end of the line around a metal
stanchion and signaled Larkwell to edge the inert figure through the
hatch. Crag let the line out slowly until it became slack. Larkwell
straightened up and leaned against the hatch combing with a foolish look
on his face. Crag took one look at his gaping expression.

"Oxygen," he snapped. Larkwell looked blank. He seized the extra
cylinder from his belt and hooked it into Larkwell's suit, turning the
valve. Larkwell started to sway, and almost fell through the hatch
combing before Crag managed to pull him to safety.

Within moments comprehension dawned on Larkwell's face. Crag quickly
checked his own oxygen. It was low. Too low. The time they had lost
taking the wrong route ... the time taken to open Bandit's hatch ... had
upset Nagel's oxygen calculations. It was something else to remember in
the future. He switched cylinders, then made a rapid calculation. It was
evident they couldn't carry the injured man back with the amount of
oxygen remaining. He got on the interphones and outlined the problem to
Nagel.

"Try one of Bandit's cylinders," he suggested. "They just might fit."

"No go. I've already looked them over." He kicked the problem around in
his mind.

"Here's the routine," he told him. "You start out to meet us with a
couple of extra cylinders. We'll take along a couple of Bandit's spares
to last this critter until you can modify the valves on his suit to fit
our equipment. Prochaska can guide the works. Okay?"

"Roger," Prochaska cut in. Nagel gave an affirmative grunt.

Crag lowered two of Bandit's cylinders and the stretcher to the floor of
the crater, then took a last look around the cabin. Gotch, he knew,
would ask him a thousand technical questions regarding the rocket's
construction, equipment, and provisioning. He filed the mental pictures
away for later analysis and turned to Larkwell.

"Let's go." They descended to the plain and rolled the unconscious
crewman onto the stretcher. Crag grunted as he hoisted his end. It
wasn't going to be easy.

The return trip proved a nightmare. Despite the moon's low surface
gravity--one-sixth that of earth--the stretcher seemed an intolerable
weight pulling at their arms. They trudged slowly toward the Aztec with
Crag in the lead, their feet kicking up little fountains of dust.

Before they had gone half a mile, they were sweating profusely and their
arms and shoulders ached under their burden. Larkwell walked silently,
steadily, but his breath was becoming a hoarse pant in Crag's earphones.
The thought came to Crag that they wouldn't make it if, by any chance,
Nagel failed to meet them. But he can't fail--not with Prochaska guiding
them, he thought.

They reached the end of the rill and stopped to rest. Crag checked his
oxygen meter. Not good. Not good at all, but he didn't say anything to
Larkwell. The construction boss swung his eyes morosely over the plain
and cursed.

"Nine planets and thirty-one satellites in the Solar System and we had
to pick this dog," he grumbled. "Gotch must be near-sighted."

Crag sighed and picked up his end of the stretcher. When Larkwell had
followed suit they resumed their trek. They were moving around the base
of a small knoll when Larkwell's foot struck a pothole in the ash and he
stumbled. He dropped the end of the stretcher in trying to regain his
balance. It struck hard against the ground, transmitting the jolt to
Crag's aching shoulders. He lowered his end of the stretcher, fearful
the plow had damaged the injured man's helmet. Larkwell watched
unsympathetically while he examined it.

"Won't make much difference," he said.

Crag managed a weak grin. "Remember, we're angels of mercy."

"Yeah, carrying Lucifer."

The helmet proved intact. Crag sighed and signaled to move on. They
hoisted the stretcher and resumed their slow trek toward the Aztec.

Crag's body itched from perspiration. His face was hot, flushed and his
heart thudded in his ears. Larkwell's breathing became a harsh rasp in
the interphones. Occasionally Prochaska checked their progress. Crag
thought Nagel was making damned poor time. He looked at his oxygen meter
several times, finally beginning to worry. Larkwell put his fears into
words.

"We'd better drop this character and light out for the Aztec," he
growled. "We're not going to make it this way."

"Nagel should reach us soon."

"Soon won't be soon enough."

"Nagel! Get on the ball," Crag snapped curtly into the interphones.

"Moving right along." The oxygen man's voice was a flat imperturbed
twang. Crag fought to keep his temper under control. Nagel's calm was
maddening. But it was their necks that were in danger. He repressed his
anger, wondering again at the wisdom of trying to save the enemy
crewman. If he lived?

In short time Larkwell was grumbling again. He was on the point of
telling him to shut up when Nagel appeared in the distance. He was
moving slowly, stooped under the weight of the spare oxygen cylinders.
He appeared somewhat like an ungainly robot, moving with mechanical
steps--the movements of a machine rather than a man. Crag kept his eyes
on him. Nagel never faltered, never changed pace. His figure grew
steadily nearer, a dark mechanical blob against the gray ash. Crag
suddenly realized that Nagel wasn't stalling; he simply lacked the
strength for what was expected of him. Somehow the knowledge added to
his despair.

They met a short time later. Nagel dropped his burden in the ash and
squirmed to straighten his body. He looked curiously at the figure in
the stretcher, then at Crag.

"Doesn't make much sense to me," he said critically. "Where are we going
to get the oxygen to keep this bird alive?"

"That's my worry," Crag snapped shortly.

"Seems to me it's mine," Nagel pointed out. "I'm the oxygen man."

Crag probed the voice for defiance. There was none. Nagel was merely
stating a fact--an honest worry. His temper was subsiding when Larkwell
spoke.

"He's right. This bird's a parasite. We ought to heave him in the rill.
Hell, we've got worries enough without...."

"Knock it off," Crag snarled harshly. There was a short silence during
which the others looked defiantly at him.

"Stop the bickering and let's get going," Crag ordered. He felt on the
verge of an explosion, wanted to lash out. Take it easy, he told
himself.

With fresh oxygen and three men the remainder of the trip was easier.
Prochaska was waiting for them. He helped haul the Bandit crewman to the
safety of the space cabin. When it was pressurized they removed their
suits and Crag began to strip the heavy space garments from the injured
man's body. He finished and stepped back, letting him lie on the deck.

They stood in a tight half-circle, silently studying the inert figure.
It was that of an extremely short man, about five feet, Crag judged, and
thin. A thinness without emaciation. His face was pale, haggard and,
like the Aztec crewmen's, covered with stubbly beard. He appeared in his
late thirties or early forties but Crag surmised he was much younger.
His chest rose and fell irregularly and his breathing was harsh. Crag
knelt and checked his pulse. It was shallow, fast.

"I don't know." He got to his feet. "He may have internal injuries ...
or just a bad concussion."

"To hell with him," spat Larkwell.

Prochaska said, "He'll either live or die. In either case there's not
much we can do about it." His voice wasn't callous, just matter-of-fact.
Crag nodded agreement. The Chief turned his back. Crag was brooding over
the possible complications of having an enemy in their midst when his
nostrils caught a familiar whiff. He turned, startled. The Chief was
holding a pot of coffee.

"I did smuggle one small helping," he confessed.

Crag looked thoughtfully at the pot. "I should cite you for a
court-martial. However ..." He reached for the cup the Chief was
extending.

They drank the coffee slowly, savoring each drop, while Larkwell
outlined their next step. It was one Crag had been worrying about.

"As you know, the plans call for living in the Aztec until we can get a
sheltered airlock into operation," Larkwell explained. "To do that we
gotta lower this baby to the horizontal so I can loosen the afterburner
section and clear out the gunk. Then we can get the prime airlock
installed and working. That should give us ample quarters until we can
build the permanent lock--maybe in that rill we passed."

"We got to rush that," Nagel cut in. "Right now we lose total cabin
pressure every time we stir out of this trap. We can't keep it up for
long."

Crag nodded. Nagel was right. The airlock had to be the first order of
business. The plans called for just such a move and, accordingly, the
rocket had been designed with such a conversion in mind. Only it had
been planned as a short-term stopgap--one to be used only until a
below-surface airlock could be constructed. Now that Drone Able had been
lost--

"Golly, what'll we do with all the room?" Prochaska broke in humorously.
He flicked his eyes around the cabin. "Just imagine, we'll be able to
sleep stretched out instead of doubled up in a bucket seat."

Larkwell took up the conversation and they listened while he outlined
the step-by-step procedure. It was his show and they gave him full
stage. He suggested they might be able to use one of Aztec's now useless
servo motors in the task. When he finished, Crag glanced down at the
Bandit crewman. Pale blue eyes stared back at him. Ice-blue, calm, yet
tinged with mockery. They exchanged a long look.

"Feel better?" Crag finally asked, wondering if by any chance he spoke
English.

"Yes, thank you." The voice held the barest suggestion of an accent.

"We brought you to our ship ..." Crag stopped, wondering how to proceed.
After all the man was an enemy. A dangerous one at that.

"So I see." The voice was laconic. "Why?"

"We're human," snapped Crag brutally. The pale blue eyes regarded him
intently.

"I'm Adam Crag, Commander," he added. The Bandit crewman tried to push
himself up on his elbow. His face blanched and he fell back.

"I seem to be a trifle weak," he apologized. He looked at the circle of
faces before his eyes settled back on Crag. "My name is Richter. Otto
Richter."

Prochaska said, "That's a German name."

"I am German."

"On an Iron Curtain rocket?" Nagel asked sarcastically. Richter gave the
oxygen man a long cool look.

"That seems to be the case," he said finally. The group fell silent. It
was Crag's move. He hesitated. When he spoke his tone was decisive.

"We're stuck with you. For the time being you may regard yourself as
confined. You will not be allowed any freedom ... until we decide what
to do with you."

"I understand."

"As soon as we modify the valves on your suit to fit our cylinders we're
going to move you outside." He instructed Nagel to get busy on the
valves, then turned to Larkwell.

"Let's get along with lowering this baby."




CHAPTER 10


"Gordon Nagel?" The professor turned the name over in his mind. "Yes, I
believe I recall him. Let's see, that would have been about...." He
paused, looking thoughtfully into space.

The agent said, "Graduated in '55. One of your honor students."

"Ah, yes, how could I have forgotten?" The Professor folded his hands
across his plump stomach and settled back in his chair.

"I seem to recall him as sort of an intense, nervous type," he said at
last. "Sort of withdrawn but, as you mentioned, quite brilliant. Now
that I think of it--"

He abruptly stopped speaking and looked at the agent with a startled
face.

"You mean the man in the moon?" he blurted.

"Yes, that's the one."

"Ah, no wonder the name sounded so familiar. But, of course, we have so
many famous alumni. Ruthill University prides itself--"

"Of course," the agent cut in.

The professor gave him a hurt look before he began talking again. He
rambled at length. Every word he uttered was taped on the agent's pocket
recorder.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Gordon Nagel, the young man on the moon flight? Why certainly I recall
young Nagel," the high school principal said. "A fine student ... one of
the best." He looked archly at the agent down a long thin nose.

"Braxton High School is extremely proud of Gordon Nagel. Extremely
proud. If I say so myself he has set a mark for other young men to
strive for."

"Of course," the agent agreed.

"This is a case which well vindicates the stress we've put on the
physical and life sciences," the principal continued. "It is the
objective of Braxton High School to give every qualified student the
groundwork he needs for later academic success. That is, students with
sufficiently high I.Q.," he added.

"Certainly, but about Gordon Nagel...?"

"Yes, of course." The principal began to speak again. The agent relaxed,
listening. He didn't give a damn about the moon but he was extremely
interested in the thirty some years of Nagel's life preceding that trip.
Very much so. He left the school thinking that Nagel owed quite a lot to
Braxton High. At least the principal had inferred as much.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Yes, I did go with Gordon for a while," Mrs. LeRoy Farwell said. "But
of course it was never serious. Just an occasional school dance or
something. He might be famous but, well, frankly he wasn't my type. He
was an awful drip." Her eyes brushed the agent's face meaningfully.

"I like 'em live, if you know what I mean."

"Certainly, Mrs. Farwell," the agent said gravely. "But about Nagel...?"

There were many people representing three decades of contact with Gordon
Nagel. Some of them recalled him only fleetingly. Others rambled at
length. Odd little entries came to life to fit into the dossier.
Photographs and records were exhumed. Gordon Nagel ... Gordon Nagel....

The file on Gordon Nagel grew.

       *       *       *       *       *

Colonel Michael Gotch didn't like the idea of an addition to the Aztec
crew. Didn't like it at all. He informed Crag that the rescue had been
entirely unnecessary. Unrealistic, was the word he had used. He was
extremely interested in the fact that Bandit housed an arsenal. He
suggested, in view of Drone Able's loss, they shouldn't overlook
Bandit's supplies.

"Especially as you have another mouth to feed," he said blandly.

Crag agreed. He didn't say so but he had already planned just such a
move. The Colonel immediately launched into a barrage of questions
concerning the crashed rocket. He seemed grieved when Crag couldn't
supply answers down to the last detail.

"Look," Crag finally exploded, "give us time ... time. We just got here.
Remember?"

"Yes ... yes, I know. But the information is vital," Gotch said firmly.
"I would appreciate it if you would try...."

Crag cursed and snapped the communicator off.

"What's wrong? The bird colonel heckling you?"

"Hounding is the word," Crag corrected. He fixed the Chief with a
baleful eye and uttered an epithet with regard to the Colonel's
ancestry. Prochaska chuckled.

Larkwell quickly demonstrated that he knew the Aztec inside and out far
better than did any of the others. Aside from several large cables
supplied expressly for the purpose of lowering the rocket, he obtained
the rest of the equipment needed from the ship.

Under his direction two winches were set up about thirty yards from the
ship and a cable run to each to form a V-line. A second line ran from
each winch to a nearby shallow gully. Heavy weights--now useless parts
of the ship's engines--were fastened to these and buried. The lines were
intended to anchor the winches during the critical period of lowering
the rocket. Finally Larkwell ran a guide line from the Aztec's nose to a
third winch. This one was powered by an electric motor which was powered
by the ship's batteries.
