
It was Daddy. He knew it was Daddy, and Daddy was afraid. Daddy was
running, with the desperation of a hunted animal, running down a
corridor, his mind in a frenzy of fear. He was peering back over his
shoulder, his breath coming in great gasps as he reached the end of the
hall, wrenched vainly at the door and then collapsed against it. And
while he sobbed in great gasps, tears of fear and desperation ran down
his cheeks.

Jeff saw the door; he felt Daddy's body heaving, heard the furious
pulse pounding in his own head. He saw the cold, darkened corridor, and
his mind was picked up in the frenzied sweep of his father's thoughts,
carried in a rush he could neither understand nor oppose. Stronger than
ever before, his thoughts were Daddy's thoughts. He saw through Daddy's
eyes; he felt through Daddy's body. In the closest rapport they had
ever known, though Jeff lay here on the grassy plot, his body writhed
with the pain and fear that Daddy was suffering miles distant.

_They're coming_, his mind screamed. _Trapped, trapped--what can
I do?_ Daddy was racing back up the corridor now, his eye catching
an elevator standing open. He ran inside, groped frantically for the
switch. He had to get away, had to get down below, somehow get to the
street! Oh, God, what a mistake to walk into this place--an office
building, of all places, where they could so easily follow him in, cut
him off, trap him!

Why had he come? Why? He'd known they were hunting for him, knew they'd
been getting closer and closer. But how could he have sensed that
this day would bring a panic, that the stock market would take its
nosedive this one particular day, putting the finger on him without any
question, spotting him, pointing out his exact location to his hunters,
beyond shadow of doubt?

How could he have known? This was to have been the final test, the
test to prove the force he had in his mind--the force which had been
destroying and destroying and destroying. And it had emanated from
his own mind in some unspeakable way, uncontrolled, unbelieved and
misunderstood. It was the force which had brought the hunters to him.

_But not now!_ Oh, please, please, not now--not when he was so close
to the answer. Not when he was so close. Slowly, helpless anger seethed
through his mind. They had no right to stop him now. In another day,
another week, he could have the answer. In another few days he would
have corralled this frightening power, controlled it. He knew he could
find the answer. He stood on the very brink. But now the hunters had
trapped him--

_Why, Daddy? Why are they hunting you? Oh, Daddy, Daddy, please, I'm
so scared! Please, Daddy, come home. Please don't be so much afraid,
Daddy. I'm so frightened...._

The elevator gave a lurch. He fell against the door as the car ground
to a halt between floors. Frantically, he pounded the button, waited
through long eternities as the car sat, silent, motionless. Then his
fingers ran hastily along the cracks in the car door, seeking a hold,
trying desperately to wrench open the locked door.

He felt them coming, somewhere above him, somewhere below him. Then
something tore loose in his mind; some last dam of control broke,
and he was screaming his defiance at them, screaming his hatred, his
bitterness. They had him, they were going to kill him without trial,
shoot him down like a mad dog. He felt them flinch and cower back at
the stream of hatred roaring out of his mind, felt them move back. They
were afraid of him, but they were determined to kill him.

_A sound above!_ He flattened back against the elevator wall, wrenching
at the metal grating with superhuman strength, trying to twist open
the metal, to find some way into the shaft below. Someone was coming
down from above, down onto the top of the elevator; someone whose mind
was filled with fear, but who moved with determination. There was a
scraping sound from above, a dull twang of cable striking against cable.

_They could be cutting the car loose._

He leaped for the ceiling of the car, stabbing up with his fingers for
the little escape doorway. Sheer hatred drove his legs as he jumped
and jumped again, until the door flew up. His hand caught the rim, and
he dragged his body up. He jerked his shoulders through the small
opening, heaving and lunging through to the top of the car.

He looked up. He saw a face, a single face, hanging mistily above him.
Dimly he made out the form of a man hanging on the cable twenty feet
above. His legs were wrapped around the cables and one hand carried
the small, dully gleaming weapon. His mind screamed hatred at the man,
and he grabbed at the cables, wrenching them, shaking them like a
huge tree. He saw the man slowly moving down, spinning back and forth
helplessly as the cables vibrated. But he held on tenaciously, moving
closer.

_Daddy! Stop him! Daddy, don't let him kill you._

The face came into clearer view: a thin face, an evil one, twisted with
fear and pain. The figure moved slowly down the cables, slowly turning,
lifting the arm with the weapon, patiently trying to take aim. It was
a gaunt face, with high cheekbones, slightly bulging eyes, high flat
forehead, graying hair. _Remember that face, Jeff. Never forget that
face, that face is the face of the man who is butchering your father._
Hatred streamed out at the face; he crouched back against the wall of
the shaft, wrenching at the cables, trying vainly to shake the killer
loose. He had to get him first; he had to stop him. _He's so close;
he's turning; the gun is raising. I'll never get him--_

The face, hovering close, eyes wide--the face of a ghoul--and below the
face was the dull, round hole of the gun muzzle, just inches away. A
finger tightened. A horrible flash came, straight in the eyes--

_Daddy!_

The thoughts screamed through his mind: the bitter, naked hatred, the
hatred of madness, streaming out in one last searing inferno. Then came
a sickening lurch, a lurch of maddened fear and hate. And there was the
snuffing out of a light, leaving darkness....

_Daddy! No, Daddy. No, I can't feel you any more, Daddy. What have they
done to you? Oh, please, Daddy, talk to me. Talk to me. No, no, no. Oh,
Daddy, Daddy, Daddy...._

Dr. Schiml looked up from the pale, prostrate form after a long time;
his forehead was beaded with sweat. The color had drained almost
completely from Jeff's face, and his skin had taken a waxy cast. His
breathing was so shallow it was hardly audible in the still room, and
the panel of flickering lights had become almost completely still.

"We can't go on yet," said Dr. Schiml, his voice hoarse. "We'll have to
wait." He turned and walked across the room, trying to keep his eyes
away from the prostrate form on the bed; yet everywhere he went, it
seemed his eyes caught the idiotic stare in the man's blank eyes. "Well
have to wait," he repeated, and his voice was almost a sob.




CHAPTER THIRTEEN


Paul Conroe moved for the first time, running a hand through his thick
gray hair as he glanced up at Schiml. "Some of that came through to
me, even now," he said weakly. His face, also, was ashen and his eyes
were haunted. "To think that he hated me that much, and to think _why_
he hated me--" He shook his head and buried his face in his hands. "I
never knew about the old man and the son. I just never knew. If I'd
known, I'd never have done it."

The room was still for a long moment. Then Schiml blinked at Conroe,
his hands trembling. "So this is the tremendous power, the mutant
strain we've been trying to trace for so long."

"This is one of the tremendous powers," Conroe replied wearily. "Jeff
probably has all the power that his father had, though it hasn't all
matured yet. It's just latent, waiting for the time that the genes
demand of his body for fulfillment. Nothing more. And other people have
the same powers. Hundreds, thousands of other people. Somewhere, a
hundred and fifty years ago, there was a change--a little change in one
man or one woman."

He looked up at Schiml, the haunted look still in his large eyes.
"Extra-sensory powers--no doubt of it, a true mutant strain, but tied
in to a sleeper--a black gene that spells insanity. One became two
and two spread to four--extra-sensory power and gene-linked insanity.
Always together, growing, insidiously growing like a cancer. And it's
eating out the roots of our civilization."

He stood up, walked across the room and stared down at the pallid-faced
man in the bed. "This answers so many things, Roger," he said finally.
"We knew old Jacob Meyer had a son, of course. We even suspected then
that the son might share some of his powers. But this! We never dreamed
it. The father and son were practically two people with one mind, in
almost perfect mutual rapport. Only the son was so young he couldn't
understand what was wrong. All he knew was that he 'felt' Daddy and
could tell what Daddy was thinking. Actually, everything that went on
in his father's mind--_everything_--was in his mind too. At least, in
the peak of the old man's cycle of insanity--"

Schiml looked up sharply. "Then there's no doubt in your mind that the
old man was insane?"

Conroe shook his head. "Oh, no. There was no doubt. He was insane, all
right. A psychiatric analysis of his behavior was enough to convince
me of that, even if following him and watching him wasn't. He had a
regular cycle of elation and depression, so regular it could almost be
clocked. He'd even spotted the symptoms of the psychosis himself, back
in his college days. But of course he hadn't realized what it was. All
he knew was that at certain times he seemed to be surrounded by these
peculiar phenomena, which happened rapidly and regularly at those times
when he was feeling elated, on top of the world. And at other times
he seemed to carry with him an aura of depression. Actually, when he
hit the blackest depths of his depressions, he would be bringing about
whole waves of suicides and depression--errors and everything else."

Conroe took a deep breath. "We knew all this at the time, of course.
What we didn't know was that the old man had been seeking the answer
himself, actively seeking it. All we knew was that he was actively the
most dangerous man alive on Earth, and that until he was killed he
would become more and more dangerous--dangerous enough to shake the
very roots of our civilization."

Schiml nodded slowly. "And you're sure that his destructive use of his
power was a result directly of the insanity?"

Conroe frowned. "Not quite," he said after a moment. "Actually, you
couldn't say that Jacob Meyer 'used' his extra-sensory powers. They
weren't, for the most part, the kind of powers he could either control
or 'use.' They were the sort of powers that just happened. He had a
power, and when he was running high--in a period of elation, when
everything was on top of the world--the power functioned. He fairly
exuded this power that he carried, and the higher he rose in his
elation, the more viciously dangerous the power became."

Conroe stopped, staring at the bed for a long moment. "The hellish
thing was that it couldn't possibly be connected up with a human power
at all. After all, how can one human being have an overwhelming effect
on the progress of a business cycle? He can't, of course, unless he's
a dictator, or a tremendously powerful person in some other field. And
Jacob Meyer was neither. He was a simple, half-starved statistician
with a bunch of ideas that he couldn't even understand himself, much
less sell to anyone who could do anything with them. Or how can a man,
_just by being in the vicinity_, tip the balance that topples the stock
market into an almost irreparable sag?"

Conroe leaned forward, groping for words. "Jacob Meyer's psychokinesis
was not the sort of telekinesis that we saw Jeff turning against me in
that room a couple of hours ago. He could probably have managed that,
too, if he had hated me enough. But if Jacob Meyer's mind had merely
affected physical things--the turn of a card, the fall of the dice, the
movement of molecules from one place to another--he would have been a
simple problem. We could have isolated him, studied him. But it wasn't
that simple."

Paul Conroe sat back, regarding Schiml with large, sad eyes. "It
would have been impossible to prove in a court of law. We knew it and
the government knew it. That was why they appointed us assassins to
deal with him. _Because Jacob Meyer's mind affected probabilities._
By his very presence, in a period of elation, he upset the normal
probabilities of occurrences going on around him. We watched him,
Roger. It was incredible. We watched him in the stock market, and we
saw the panic start almost the moment he walked in. We saw the buyers
suddenly and inexplicably change their minds and start selling instead
of buying. We saw what happened in the Bank of the Metropolis that
first day we tried for him. He was scared, his mind was driven into a
peak of fear and anger; it started a bank run that morning that nearly
bankrupted the most powerful financial house on the East Coast! We saw
this one little man's personal, individual influence on international
diplomacy, on finances, on gambling in Reno, on the thinking and acting
of the man on the street. It was incredible, Roger."

"But surely Jacob Meyer wasn't the only one--"

"Oh, there were others, certainly. We've a better idea of that, now,
after all these years of study. There were and are thousands and
thousands--some like me, some much worse--all carrying some degree of
extra-sensory power from that original mutant strain, all with the
gene-linked psychosis paired up with it every time. And we've seen
our civilization struggling against these thousands just to keep its
feet. But Jacob Meyer was the first case of the whole, full-blown
change in one man that we'd ever found. He was running wild, his mind
was completely insane. And the extra-sensory powers he carried were so
firmly enmeshed in the insanity that there was no separating the two.
Meyer tipped us off. He set us on the trail, and the trail led to his
son after he was dead--"

"Yes, the son. We have the son." Schiml scowled at the
shallow-breathing form on the bed. "We should have had him
before--years before."

"Of course we should. But the son vanished after his father's death.
We never knew why he vanished--until now. But now we know that when we
killed his father, we did more than just that. We almost killed our
last chance to catch this thing and study it before it was too late.
Because when we killed Jeff's father, _we killed Jeff Meyer too_."

Schiml scowled. "I don't follow. He's still alive."

"Oh, of course he's still alive. But can't you see what happened
to him? He was living in his father's mind; he knew everything his
father knew--but he didn't understand it. He thought with his father's
thoughts, he saw through his father's eyes, because they were mutually
and completely telepathic. He felt his father's fear and frustration
and bitterness when we trapped him in that office building finally. He
lay screaming on the ground on a farm somewhere, but actually he was in
his father's mind.

"It was a mad mind, a mind rising to the highest screaming heights
of mania, as he waited for me to come down and kill him. And Jeff
was surrounded with his father's hatred. He saw my face through his
father's eyes, and all he could understand was that his daddy was being
butchered and that I was butchering him. When the bullet went into his
father's brain and split his skull open, Jeff Meyer felt that too. When
his father died, Jeff died too--a part of him, that is. They were one
mind and part of that one mind was destroyed."

Conroe paused, his forehead covered with perspiration. The room was
silent except for the hoarse breathing of the man on the table.
Conroe's face, as he looked down, was that of a ghost.

"No wonder the boy disappeared," he whispered. "He'd been shot through
the head. He was almost virtually dead. He must have gone into shock
for years after such a trauma, Roger. He must have spent years roaming
that farm, cared for by an aunt or uncle or cousin, while he slowly
recovered. No wonder we could find no trace. And then, when he did get
well, all he knew was that his father had been murdered. He didn't
know how; he didn't know why, and he dared never remember the truth.
Because, the truth was that _he_ had been killed. All he dared
recognize was my face--a recurrent, nightmarish hallucination, rising
out of his dreams, plaguing him on the streets, tormenting him day and
night."

"But you were hunting him."

"Oh, yes, we were hunting him. It was inevitable that sooner or later
we would come up face to face. But when we did, I received such a
horrible mental blow that I couldn't even look to see what he looked
like. I could do nothing but scream and run. When he saw me that day in
the night club, he took complete leave of his senses. He exploded into
hatred and bitterness. And then he resolved to hunt me down and kill me
for killing his father."

Conroe spread his hands apologetically. "It seemed good sense to use
that hatred and singleness of purpose to draw him here. But it was
torture. He followed me with his mind, without even knowing it. It was
old Jacob Meyer's face that haunted me everywhere I went. I didn't know
why, then, because I didn't know Jeff had been part of that mind. And
Jeff didn't know that he carried and broadcast that horror wherever he
went."

Conroe leaned back, his body limp in exhaustion. "We needed Jeff
so desperately. Yes, we needed him in here, for testing, for this
study. It's been a long, tedious job, studying him, observing him,
photographing him, learning how much of his father's power he had. And
we dared not bring him in here until we were sure it was safe. And now,
with what he knows, he is more vitally dangerous than his father ever
was. There are hundreds that carry the change, in larger or smaller
part, all gene-linked with insanity. And Jeff Meyer is insane as any
of the rest of them. But at least there's hope, because we can study
him now. Because unless we can somehow separate the function of the
insanity from the function of the psychokinesis, we have no choice
left, no hope."

Schiml looked up, his eyes wide. "No choice--"

"--but to kill them, every one. To hunt out the strain and wipe it
from the face of the Earth so ruthlessly and completely that it can
never rise again. And to wipe out with it the first new link in the
evolution of Man since the dawn of history."

Slowly Roger Schiml's eyes traveled from Jeff Meyers' form on the bed
to Paul Conroe's grave face. "There's no other way?"

"None," said Paul Conroe.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Jeff," said Dr. Schiml. "Jeff Meyer."

The figure on the cot stirred ever so slightly. The eyes slowly closed,
then reopened, looking slightly less blank. Jeff's lips parted in an
almost inaudible groan, hardly more than a breath.

"Jeff. You've got to hear me a minute. Listen, Jeff, we're trying to
help you. Can you hear that? We're trying to help you, Jeff, and we
need your help."

The eyes shifted, turned to Schiml's face. They were haunted eyes--eyes
that had seen the grave and beyond it.

"Please, Jeff. Listen. We're hunting. We're trying to find a way to
help you. You know about your father now, the truth about your father,
don't you?"

The eyes wavered, came back, and the head nodded ever so slightly. "I
know," came the sighing reply.

"You've got to tell us what to do, Jeff. There are good powers here in
your mind, and there are terrible powers, ruinous powers. We've got to
find them both, find where they lie, how they work. You must tell us,
as we probe--tell us when we strike the good, when we strike the bad.
Do you understand, Jeff?"

Again the head nodded. Jeff's jaw tightened a trifle and an expression
of infinite fatigue crossed his face. "Go on, Doc."

Dr. Schiml leaned over the proper controls and moved the dial on the
microvernier. He moved it again, watching, moving it still again. A
fine sweat broke out on his forehead as he worked, and he felt Conroe's
soft eyes on him, waiting, hoping....

And then a whimper broke from Jeff's lips, an indefinable sound,
helpless and childlike, a little cry of terror. Dr. Schiml looked up,
his heart thumping in his throat. Jeff's eyes were wide again, staring
lifelessly, and his breath was shallow and thready. Schiml glanced
quickly at Conroe, then back, his eyes reflecting the fear and tension
in his mind. And as he worked his shoulders slumped forward, prepared
for defeat. Because what he was doing was impossible, and he knew it
was impossible. But he knew, above all, that it had to succeed.




CHAPTER FOURTEEN


He was spinning like a top, end over end, as though he had sprung off
a huge, powerful diving board. He rose higher and higher into the air.
Lying tense, Jeff knew that his body was still on the soft bed, yet
he felt his feet rising, his head sinking, as he spun head over heels
through the blackness. And he could feel the tiny probing needle,
seeking, hunting, stimulating....

A siren noise burst in his ears: a shimmering blast of screeching
musical sound that sent cold shivers down his back. Then it leveled
off to an up-and-down whine that gradually became a blat of static in
his ear. Somewhere, out of the uneven grating of the noise, he heard a
voice whispering in his ear, hoarsely. He paused, straining to hear,
trying to catch an occasional word.

He knew that there were no voices outside of his body. He was sure of
that. Yet he heard the sound, deeper in his ear, louder and softer,
then louder again. It whispered to him, carrying a note of deepest
urgency in the soft sibilants. Quite suddenly, it seemed vitally
important to hear what the voice was saying, for the words were clearly
directed at him. He shifted slightly and listened harder, until the
words came through clearly.

And then he gasped, a feeling of panic sweeping through him. He heard
the words and they were nonsense words, sounds without meanings.
Something stirred in his mind, some vague memory of nonsense words,
of a horrible shock. Had there been a shock? But the strange sounds
frightened him, driving fear down through the marrow of his bones.
The whispering sounds were sinister: babbling sounds, sounds of words
that _needed_ meaning and had none--half-words, garbled, twisted,
meaningless.

Cautiously he opened his eyes, peered through the murky blackness to
see the whisperers. His eyes fastened on two shapeless forms, tall,
ghostly, in black robes with hoods drawn up over their faces. The
figures leaned on their sticks and held their heads together. They
babbled nonsense to each other with such fierce earnestness that they
seemed somehow horridly ridiculous. Taking a deep breath, Jeff started
toward the two figures, then stopped short, his heart pounding wildly
in his throat.

Because the moment he had made a move toward them, the figures turned
sharply toward him, and their nonsense voices had suddenly become clear
for the briefest moment. They became clear and unmistakable and heavy
with horrible meaning: "Stay away, Jeff Meyer. Stay away."

He stared about, trembling, trying to place himself, trying to find
some landmark. The hooded figures turned back to each other and began
babbling once again. But now they seemed to be standing before an
archway--a gloomy, gray archway which they seemed to be guarding.
Slowly, slyly, Jeff started to move away from them. But he watched them
from stealthy eyes, and as he moved away the gloom about him cleared,
and things were suddenly brighter. And then there was singing in his
ears, joyous choruses bursting forth in happy song. A great feeling of
relief and complacency settled down upon him like a mantle. He smiled
and breathed deeper and started to roll over.

"_What was that, Jeff? What did we strike?_"

He shook his head violently, a frown creasing his face. "Stay away,"
he muttered. "The old men, they were there." Suddenly he felt himself
twist around until he was facing the hooded figures again, and his feet
were moving him toward them again, involuntarily, inexorably. And then
the nonsense words settled out again, more menacingly, louder this
time than before: "No closer, Jeff Meyer. Stay away--away--away."

"Can't go there," he muttered aloud.

"_Why not, Jeff?_"

"They won't let me. I've got to stay away."

"_What are they guarding, Jeff?_"

"I don't know. I don't know, I tell you. I've got to stay away!"

And then suddenly the singing dissolved into a hideous cacophony of
clashing sounds, a din that nearly deafened him. A huge wave suddenly
swept up around him. It was like a breaker at the ocean's edge,
swirling up, surrounding him, catching him up and hurling him head over
heels down a long, whirling tunnel. Desperately he fought for balance
and finally found his feet under him once again. But then the ground
was moving under him. He ran frantically, until his breath came in
short gasps and his blood pounded in his ears. Then he caught a branch
that swept by near him, and raised himself up as the flooding water
roared underneath him.

The sky around him was clouding over blackly. Far in the distance he
saw a blinding flash of lightning, ripping through the sky, bringing
the bleak, wind-torn landscape into sharp relief in his mind as he
clung to the branch. He heard a flapping of wings as a huge, black
vulture skimmed by. And then the rain began to fall, a cold, soaking
rain that ate through his clothes and soaked his skin. It ran in
torrents into his eyes and ears and mouth.

And then he heard voices all around him. How could there be voices
here? For there were no people, no sign of warm-blooded life. But there
were voices, pleasant ones. They came from all sides. He could see no
one, but he could _feel_ them.

_Feel them!_ He gasped in pure joy, shooting out his mind eagerly,
unbelievingly, searching out the sudden feeling of perfect, warm
_contact_ he had just felt. And then his mind was running from person
to person, dozens of persons, and he could feel them all, as clearly,
as wondrously as he had ever felt his father--sharply, beautifully.

He cried out, he cried out for joy. Tears of unrelieved happiness
rolled down his cheeks as he stretched out his mind and embraced the
thoughts of the people he could feel but not see. And he felt his own
thoughts being met, being caught and embraced and understood.

"Right here!" he shouted. "Schiml, this is it, don't lose it, man. This
is the center. I'm controlling it. You've got it now. _Work it, Schiml.
Work it for all you've got._"

And then he looked at the black, menacing sky around him, and his mind
laughed and cried out for the clouds to go away. And there was a wild
whirling of clouds and they broke, and the sun was streaming down upon
him suddenly. He threw himself from the tree, ran down the hillside. He
felt a wonderful, overpowering freedom he had never felt before, his
mind free to soar and soar without hindrance. There was nothing now to
stand between it and complete understanding of all men. It was a mind
which could go wherever he wanted it to go, do whatever he wished.

He ran down toward the bottom of the hill and felt his control growing
with every step he took. He knew when he reached the bottom of the hill
that the battle would be won, so he ran all the faster.

And then, like some horrible nightmare, the hooded figures loomed up
directly in his path, long bony fingers stabbing out at him accusingly.
He fell flat on his face at the overpowering warning in the voices that
struck him. And he lay at the feet of the figures and sobbed, his whole
body shaking with bitter, hopeless sobs. And the dark clouds gathered
again. He was too late, too late.

"_What are they guarding, Jeff?_"
