or something else to sit on, in case we go to smash."

"We're not liable to have any accidents with the professor in charge,"
Jack answered. "Didn't he bring us safe out of some pretty tight holes
when we went to the north pole in the airship, and again when we found
the south pole in the submarine?"

"Yes, but this is different," objected Mark.

"Well, I'm not worrying," Jack went on. "It doesn't do any good, and
only makes you lie awake nights. By the way, I wonder what time it is
getting to be."

He looked at his watch and found it was close on to eight o'clock in the
evening. So late had dinner been served, and so varied were the
happenings of the last few hours, that time had passed quickly.

"Why it's almost bed-time," said Jack. "I wonder if we are to go on
dropping into the depths of nowhere all night."

At that moment the professor entered the room where the boys were. He
seemed quite pleased over something, and was smiling.

"Everything is going along famously," he said. "I have just tested the
air and find it is rich in oxygen. We shall suffer nothing on that
score. The heat too, seems to have decreased. On the whole, everything
favors us."

"Are we going on down?" asked Mark.

"As far as we can," Mr. Henderson answered. "Let me see how far we are
below now."

He went to the gage that indicated the vertical position of the ship.
Because of the changed conditions, the craft now sinking below the
surface of the earth instead of rising above it, as was its wont, some
calculations were necessary. These the scientist made as quickly as he
could.

"We are now ten miles underground!" he exclaimed. "That is doing very
well. My theories are working out. I think we shall land somewhere
before long."

"I hopes so!" exclaimed Washington coming in at this point. "I'm mighty
skeered shootin' down int' this dark hole, and no time-table t' show
when we's due t' arrive."

"We ought to land in a couple of days more," the professor answered.
"Never mind about worrying Washington, I'll take care of you."

"I hopes so, Perfesser," the colored man said. "I got a little girl
waitin' for me back in Georgia, an' I'd like t' see her 'fore I git
burned up."

Accompanied by the professor, the boys made a tour of the ship to see
that all the machinery and apparatus were in working order. Owing to the
changed conditions the negative gravity engine had to be worked at
faster speed than usual, since the downward pull of the earth was
greater the farther they descended into the interior and they did not
want to fall too swiftly. But this was easily provided for, since the
professor had made the apparatus capable of standing a great strain.

The ten miles had become fourteen when the professor, finding that
everything was in good shape, proposed that the boys go to bed. They did
not want to, though they were sleepy, and they feared to miss some
strange sights.

But when the professor had promised to call them in case anything
unusual developed, they consented to turn in, and Bill and Tom assumed
their duties, which were light enough, now that the ship was merely
falling into the immense shaft.

When Mark turned into his bunk he could not go to sleep at once. It may
have been the excitement over their new position, or because he had
eaten too hearty a supper, but the fact was he remained awake for some
time.

While thus tossing restlessly on his bed, wondering what ailed him, he
thought he heard a noise in the main apartment out of which the
storeroom opened. He crawled softly from his bed, and looked from his
stateroom door.

In the light of a shaded electric Mark saw the figure of some one glide
across the floor and take refuge in the room, which Professor Henderson
always was so particular about.

"I wonder what or who that was," reasoned Mark. "There is some mystery
in this. Can the professor have concealed some one on this ship whose
presence he does not want to admit? It certainly looks so."

Not wanting to awaken the ship's crew, and remembering what Mr.
Henderson had said about any one entering the storeroom, Mark went back
to bed, to fall into an uneasy slumber.

"Breakfast!" called Washington breaking in on a fine dream Jack was
having about being captain of a company of automobile soldiers. "Last
call for breakfast!"

"Hello! Is it morning?" asked Jack.

"Not so's you could notice it," Washington went on. "It's as dark as a
stack of black cats and another one throwed in. But breakfast is ready
jest the same."

The boys were soon at the table, and learned that nothing of importance
had occurred during the night. The _Mermaid_ had been kept going slowly
down, and about seven o'clock registered more than fifty miles below the
earth's surface.

Still there was no change in the outward surroundings. It remained as
black as the interior of Egypt when that country was at its darkest. The
powerful electrics could not pierce the gloom. The ship was working
well, and the travelers were very comfortable.

Down, down, down, went the _Mermaid_. The temperature, which had risen
to about ninety went back to sixty-nine, and there seemed to be no more
danger from the inner fires.

They were now a hundred miles under the surface. But still the professor
kept the _Mermaid_ sinking. Every now and again he would take an
observation, but only found the impenetrable darkness surrounded them.

"We must arrive somewhere, soon," he muttered.

It was about six o'clock that night that the alarm bell set up a sudden
ringing. The professor who was making some calculations on a piece of
paper jumped to his feet, and so did a number of the others.

"We are nearing the bottom!" he cried. "The bell has given us warning!"




                               CHAPTER XV

                         IN THE STRANGE DRAUGHT


The boys ran to attend to the engines and apparatus to which they had
been assigned in view of this emergency. The professor, Washington,
Bill, Tom and Andy, who had kept to themselves since the descent, came
running out of the small cabin where they usually sat, and wanted to
know what it was all about.

"We may hit something, in spite of all precautions," Mr. Henderson
remarked. "Slow down the ship."

The _Mermaid_ was, accordingly checked in her downward flight, by a
liberal use of the gas and the negative gravity machine.

The bell continued to ring, and the dials pointed to the mark that
indicated the ship was more than one hundred and fifty miles down.

Mark, who had run to the engine room to check the descent, came back.

"Why didn't you slow her down?" asked the professor.

"I did," replied the boy. "The negative gravity and the gas machines are
working at full speed."

"Then why are we still descending?" asked the scientist. "For a while
our speed was checked, but now we are falling faster than before."

"I attended to the apparatus," Mark insisted.

Just then, from without the ship, came a terrible roaring sound, as
though there was a great cyclone in progress. At the same time, those
aboard the craft could feel themselves being pulled downward with
terrific force.

"We are caught in a draught!" Mr. Henderson cried. "We are being sucked
down into the depths of the earth!"

He ran to the engine room. With the help of the boys he set in motion an
auxiliary gravity machine, designed to exert a most powerful influence
against the downward pull of the earth. As they watched the great wheels
spin around, and heard the hum and whirr of the dynamos, the boys
watched the pointer which indicated how low they were getting.

And, as they watched, they saw that the needle of the dial kept moving,
moving, moving.

"Our efforts are useless! We can't stop!" the professor cried.

Grave indeed was the plight of the adventurers. In their ship they were
being sucked down into unknown regions and all their efforts did not
avail to save them. It was an emergency they could not guard against,
and which could not have been foreseen.

"What are to do?" asked Mark.

"We can only wait," Mr. Henderson replied. "The terrible suction may
cease, or it may carry us to some place of safety. Let us hope for the
best."

Seeing there was no further use in running the engines in an effort to
check the downward rush the machines were stopped. Then they waited for
whatever might happen.

Now that they seemed in imminent peril Washington was as cool as any
one. He went about putting his kitchen in order and getting ready for
the next meal as if they were sailing comfortably along on the surface
of the ocean. As for old Andy he was nervous and frightened, and plainly
showed it. With his gun in readiness he paced back and forth as if on
the lookout for strange beasts or birds.

Bill and Tom were so alarmed that they were of little use in doing
anything, and they were not disturbed in their staterooms where they
went when it became known that the ship was unmanageable.

The boys and the professor, while greatly frightened at the unexpected
turn of events, decided there was no use in giving way to foolish alarm.
They realized they could do nothing but await developments.

At the same time they took every precaution. They piled all the bedding
on the floor of the living room, so that the pillows and mattresses
might form a sort of pad in case the ship was dashed down on the bottom
of the big hole.

"Not that it would save us much," Jack observed with a grim smile, "but
somehow it sort of makes your mind easier."

All this while the ship was being sucked down at a swift pace. The
pointer of the gage, indicating the depth, kept moving around and soon
they were several hundreds of miles below the surface of the earth.

The professor tried, by means of several instruments, to discover in
which direction they were headed, and whether they were going straight
down or at an angle. But some strange influence seemed to affect the
gages and other pieces of apparatus, for the pointers and hands would
swing in all directions, at one time indicating that they were going
down, and, again, upward.

"There must be a strong current of electricity here," Mr. Henderson
said, "or else there is, as many suspect, a powerful magnet at the
center of the earth, which we are nearing."

"What will you do if the ship is pulled apart, or falls and is smashed?"
asked Mark with much anxiety.

"You take a cheerful view of things," said Jack.

"Well, it's a good thing to prepare for emergencies," Mark added.

"If the ship was to be separated by the magnetic pull, or if it fell on
sharp rocks and was split in twain, I am afraid none of us could do
anything to save ourselves," the professor answered. "Still, if we were
given a little warning of the disaster, I have means at hand whereby we
might escape with our lives. But it would be a perilous way of----"

"I reckon yo' all better come out an' have supper," broke in Washington.
"Leastways we'll call it supper, though I don't rightly know whether
it's night or mornin'. Anyhow I've got a meal ready."

"I don't suppose any of us feel much like eating," observed Mr.
Henderson, "but there is no telling when we will have the chance again,
so, perhaps, we had better take advantage of it."

For a while they ate in silence, finding that they had better appetites
than they at first thought. Old Andy in particular did full justice to
the food Washington had prepared.

"I always found it a good plan to eat as much and as often as you can,"
the hunter remarked. "This is a mighty uncertain world."

"You started to tell us a little while ago, Professor," said Mark,
"about a plan you had for saving out lives if worst came to worst, and
there was a chance to put it into operation. What is it?"

"I will tell you," the aged inventor said. "It is something about which
I have kept silent, as I did not want to frighten any of you. It was my
latest invention, and I had only perfected it when we started off on
this voyage. Consequently I had no chance to try it. The machine works
in theory, but whether it does in practice is another question. That is
why I say there is a risk. But we may have to take this risk. I have
placed aboard this ship a----"

The professor was interrupted in what he was about to say by a curious
tremor that made the whole ship shiver as though it had struck some
obstruction. Yet there was no sudden jolt or jar such as would have been
occasioned by that.

At the same time Washington, who was out in the kitchen, came running
into the dining room, crying:

"We're droppin' into a ragin' fire, Perfesser!"

"What do you mean?" asked Mr. Henderson.

"I jest took a look down through th' hole in th' bottom of the ship!"
cried Washington. "It's all flames an' smoke below us!"

"I wonder if it is the end," the professor muttered in a low voice.

Followed by the boys, the inventor hastened to the floor-window. The
lights were turned off to enable a better view to be had of what was
below them.

Leaning over the glass protected aperture the boys and the professor
saw, far, far down, a bright light shining. It was as if they were miles
above a whole town of blast furnaces, the stacks of which were belching
forth flames and smoke. The rolling clouds of vapor were illuminated by
a peculiar greenish light, which, at times, turned to red, blue, purple
and yellowish hues.

The effect was weird and beautiful though it was full of terror for the
travelers. It seemed as if they were falling into some terrible pit of
fire, for the reflection of what they feared were flames, could plainly
be seen.

"I wish I'd never come on this terrible voyage!" wailed Washington. "I'd
rather freeze to death than be burned up."

"Washington, be quiet!" commanded the professor sternly. "This is no
time for foolishness. We must work hard to save our lives, for we are in
dire peril.

"Mark, you and Washington, with Jack, start the engines. Turn on every
bit of power you can. Fill the gas holder as full as it will hold, and
use extra heavy pressure. I will see if I can not work the negative
gravity apparatus to better advantage than we did before. We must escape
if possible!"

The boys, as was also Washington, were only too glad to have something
to do to take their mind off their troubles. All three were much
frightened, but Mark and Jack tried not to show it. As for Washington he
was almost crying.

Soon the whirr and hum of the machinery in the _Mermaid_ was heard. The
craft, which was rushing in some direction, either downward, ahead or
backwards within the unknown depths, shivered from the speed of the
dynamos and other apparatus. Soon the boys could hear the professor
starting the negative gravity engine, and then began a struggle between
the forces of nature and those of mankind.

Once more the adventurers anxiously watched the gages and indicators.
For a while the ship seemed to be holding out against the terrible
influence that was sucking her down. She appeared to hesitate. Then, as
the downward force triumphed over the mechanical energy in the craft,
she began to settle again, and soon was descending, if that was the
direction, as fast as before.

"It is of no use," said the professor with a groan. "I must try our last
resort!"

He started from the engine room where Mark and Jack had gone. As he did
so, he glanced at a thermometer hanging on the wall near the door.

