have been proud of.  And now, that day, all the long hours that I had
put into careful study, practice and training brought me in two or
three minutes a full return upon my investment.  Californians, as a
rule, are familiar with ju-jutsu, and I especially had made a study of
it for several years, both at school and in the gym of the Los Angeles
Athletic Club, while recently I had had, in my employ, a Jap who was a
wonder at the art.

It took me just about thirty seconds to break the elbow of one of my
assailants, trip another and send him stumbling backward among his
fellows, and throw the third completely over my head in such a way that
when he fell his neck was broken.  In the instant that the others of
the party stood in mute and inactive surprise, I unslung my
rifle--which, carelessly, I had been carrying across my back; and when
they charged, as I felt they would, I put a bullet in the forehead of
one of them.  This stopped them all temporarily--not the death of their
fellow, but the report of the rifle, the first they had ever heard.
Before they were ready to attack me again, one of them spoke in a
commanding tone to his fellows, and in a language similar but still
more comprehensive than that of the tribe to the south, as theirs was
more complete than Ahm's.  He commanded them to stand back and then he
advanced and addressed me.

He asked me who I was, from whence I came and what my intentions were.
I replied that I was a stranger in Caspak, that I was lost and that my
only desire was to find my way back to my companions.  He asked where
they were and I told him toward the south somewhere, using the
Caspakian phrase which, literally translated, means "toward the
beginning."  His surprise showed upon his face before he voiced it in
words.  "There are no Galus there," he said.

"I tell you," I said angrily, "that I am from another country, far from
Caspak, far beyond the high cliffs.  I do not know who the Galus may
be; I have never seen them.  This is the farthest north I have been.
Look at me--look at my clothing and my weapons. Have you ever seen a
Galu or any other creature in Caspak who possessed such things?"

He had to admit that he had not, and also that he was much interested
in me, my rifle and the way I had handled his three warriors.  Finally
he became half convinced that I was telling him the truth and offered
to aid me if I would show him how I had thrown the man over my head and
also make him a present of the "bang-spear," as he called it.  I
refused to give him my rifle, but promised to show him the trick he
wished to learn if he would guide me in the right direction.  He told
me that he would do so tomorrow, that it was too late today and that I
might come to their village and spend the night with them.  I was loath
to lose so much time; but the fellow was obdurate, and so I accompanied
them.  The two dead men they left where they had fallen, nor gave them
a second glance--thus cheap is life upon Caspak.

These people also were cave-dwellers, but their caves showed the result
of a higher intelligence that brought them a step nearer to civilized
man than the tribe next "toward the beginning." The interiors of their
caverns were cleared of rubbish, though still far from clean, and they
had pallets of dried grasses covered with the skins of leopard, lynx,
and bear, while before the entrances were barriers of stone and small,
rudely circular stone ovens.  The walls of the cavern to which I was
conducted were covered with drawings scratched upon the sandstone.
There were the outlines of the giant red-deer, of mammoths, of tigers
and other beasts.  Here, as in the last tribe, there were no children
or any old people.  The men of this tribe had two names, or rather
names of two syllables, and their language contained words of two
syllables; whereas in the tribe of Tsa the words were all of a single
syllable, with the exception of a very few like Atis and Galus.  The
chief's name was To-jo, and his household consisted of seven females
and himself.  These women were much more comely, or rather less hideous
than those of Tsa's people; one of them, even, was almost pretty, being
less hairy and having a rather nice skin, with high coloring.

They were all much interested in me and examined my clothing and
equipment carefully, handling and feeling and smelling of each article.
I learned from them that their people were known as Band-lu, or
spear-men; Tsa's race was called Sto-lu--hatchet-men.  Below these in
the scale of evolution came the Bo-lu, or club-men, and then the Alus,
who had no weapons and no language.  In that word I recognized what to
me seemed the most remarkable discovery I had made upon Caprona, for
unless it were mere coincidence, I had come upon a word that had been
handed down from the beginning of spoken language upon earth, been
handed down for millions of years, perhaps, with little change.  It was
the sole remaining thread of the ancient woof of a dawning culture
which had been woven when Caprona was a fiery mount upon a great
land-mass teeming with life.  It linked the unfathomable then to the
eternal now.  And yet it may have been pure coincidence; my better
judgment tells me that it is coincidence that in Caspak the term for
speechless man is Alus, and in the outer world of our own day it is
Alalus.

The comely woman of whom I spoke was called So-ta, and she took such a
lively interest in me that To-jo finally objected to her attentions,
emphasizing his displeasure by knocking her down and kicking her into a
corner of the cavern.  I leaped between them while he was still kicking
her, and obtaining a quick hold upon him, dragged him screaming with
pain from the cave.  Then I made him promise not to hurt the she again,
upon pain of worse punishment. So-ta gave me a grateful look; but To-jo
and the balance of his women were sullen and ominous.

Later in the evening So-ta confided to me that she was soon to leave
the tribe.

"So-ta soon to be Kro-lu," she confided in a low whisper.  I asked her
what a Kro-lu might be, and she tried to explain, but I do not yet know
if I understood her.  From her gestures I deduced that the Kro-lus were
a people who were armed with bows and arrows, had vessels in which to
cook their food and huts of some sort in which they lived, and were
accompanied by animals.  It was all very fragmentary and vague, but the
idea seemed to be that the Kro-lus were a more advanced people than the
Band-lus.  I pondered a long time upon all that I had heard, before
sleep came to me.  I tried to find some connection between these
various races that would explain the universal hope which each of them
harbored that some day they would become Galus.  So-ta had given me a
suggestion; but the resulting idea was so weird that I could scarce
even entertain it; yet it coincided with Ahm's expressed hope, with the
various steps in evolution I had noted in the several tribes I had
encountered and with the range of type represented in each tribe.  For
example, among the Band-lu were such types as So-ta, who seemed to me
to be the highest in the scale of evolution, and To-jo, who was just a
shade nearer the ape, while there were others who had flatter noses,
more prognathous faces and hairier bodies.  The question puzzled me.
Possibly in the outer world the answer to it is locked in the bosom of
the Sphinx.  Who knows?  I do not.

Thinking the thoughts of a lunatic or a dope-fiend, I fell asleep; and
when I awoke, my hands and feet were securely tied and my weapons had
been taken from me.  How they did it without awakening me I cannot tell
you.  It was humiliating, but it was true. To-jo stood above me.  The
early light of morning was dimly filtering into the cave.

"Tell me," he demanded, "how to throw a man over my head and break his
neck, for I am going to kill you, and I wish to know this thing before
you die."

Of all the ingenuous declarations I have ever heard, this one copped
the proverbial bun.  It struck me as so funny that, even in the face of
death, I laughed.  Death, I may remark here, had, however, lost much of
his terror for me.  I had become a disciple of Lys' fleeting philosophy
of the valuelessness of human life. I realized that she was quite
right--that we were but comic figures hopping from the cradle to the
grave, of interest to practically no other created thing than ourselves
and our few intimates.

Behind To-jo stood So-ta.  She raised one hand with the palm toward
me--the Caspakian equivalent of a negative shake of the head.

"Let me think about it," I parried, and To-jo said that he would wait
until night.  He would give me a day to think it over; then he left,
and the women left--the men for the hunt, and the women, as I later
learned from So-ta, for the warm pool where they immersed their bodies
as did the shes of the Sto-lu.  "Ata," explained So-ta, when I
questioned her as to the purpose of this matutinal rite; but that was
later.

I must have lain there bound and uncomfortable for two or three hours
when at last So-ta entered the cave.  She carried a sharp knife--mine,
in fact, and with it she cut my bonds.

"Come!" she said.  "So-ta will go with you back to the Galus. It is
time that So-ta left the Band-lu.  Together we will go to the Kro-lu,
and after that the Galus.  To-jo will kill you tonight. He will kill
So-ta if he knows that So-ta aided you.  We will go together."

"I will go with you to the Kro-lu," I replied, "but then I must return
to my own people `toward the beginning.'"

"You cannot go back," she said.  "It is forbidden.  They would kill
you.  Thus far have you come--there is no returning."

"But I must return," I insisted.  "My people are there.  I must return
and lead them in this direction."

She insisted, and I insisted; but at last we compromised.  I was to
escort her as far as the country of the Kro-lu and then I was to go
back after my own people and lead them north into a land where the
dangers were fewer and the people less murderous. She brought me all my
belongings that had been filched from me--rifle, ammunition, knife, and
thermos bottle, and then hand in hand we descended the cliff and set
off toward the north.

For three days we continued upon our way, until we arrived outside a
village of thatched huts just at dusk.  So-ta said that she would enter
alone; I must not be seen if I did not intend to remain, as it was
forbidden that one should return and live after having advanced this
far.  So she left me. She was a dear girl and a stanch and true
comrade--more like a man than a woman.  In her simple barbaric way she
was both refined and chaste.  She had been the wife of To-jo.  Among
the Kro-lu she would find another mate after the manner of the strange
Caspakian world; but she told me very frankly that whenever I returned,
she would leave her mate and come to me, as she preferred me above all
others.  I was becoming a ladies' man after a lifetime of bashfulness!

At the outskirts of the village I left her without even seeing the sort
of people who inhabited it, and set off through the growing darkness
toward the south.  On the third day I made a detour westward to avoid
the country of the Band-lu, as I did not care to be detained by a
meeting with To-jo.  On the sixth day I came to the cliffs of the
Sto-lu, and my heart beat fast as I approached them, for here was Lys.
Soon I would hold her tight in my arms again; soon her warm lips would
merge with mine. I felt sure that she was still safe among the hatchet
people, and I was already picturing the joy and the love-light in her
eyes when she should see me once more as I emerged from the last clump
of trees and almost ran toward the cliffs.

It was late in the morning.  The women must have returned from the
pool; yet as I drew near, I saw no sign of life whatever. "They have
remained longer," I thought; but when I was quite close to the base of
the cliffs, I saw that which dashed my hopes and my happiness to earth.
Strewn along the ground were a score of mute and horrible suggestions
of what had taken place during my absence--bones picked clean of flesh,
the bones of manlike creatures, the bones of many of the tribe of
Sto-lu; nor in any cave was there sign of life.

Closely I examined the ghastly remains fearful each instant that I
should find the dainty skull that would shatter my happiness for life;
but though I searched diligently, picking up every one of the
twenty-odd skulls, I found none that was the skull of a creature but
slightly removed from the ape.  Hope, then, still lived.  For another
three days I searched north and south, east and west for the hatchetmen
of Caspak; but never a trace of them did I find.  It was raining most
of the time now, and the weather was as near cold as it ever seems to
get on Caprona.

At last I gave up the search and set off toward Fort Dinosaur. For a
week--a week filled with the terrors and dangers of a primeval world--I
pushed on in the direction I thought was south. The sun never shone;
the rain scarcely ever ceased falling. The beasts I met with were fewer
in number but infinitely more terrible in temper; yet I lived on until
there came to me the realization that I was hopelessly lost, that a
year of sunshine would not again give me my bearings; and while I was
cast down by this terrifying knowledge, the knowledge that I never
again could find Lys, I stumbled upon another grave--the grave of
William James, with its little crude headstone and its scrawled
characters recording that he had died upon the 13th of
September--killed by a saber-tooth tiger.

I think that I almost gave up then.  Never in my life have I felt more
hopeless or helpless or alone.  I was lost.  I could not find my
friends.  I did not even know that they still lived; in fact, I could
not bring myself to believe that they did.  I was sure that Lys was
dead.  I wanted myself to die, and yet I clung to life--useless and
hopeless and harrowing a thing as it had become. I clung to life
because some ancient, reptilian forbear had clung to life and
transmitted to me through the ages the most powerful motive that guided
his minute brain--the motive of self-preservation.

At last I came to the great barrier-cliffs; and after three days of mad
effort--of maniacal effort--I scaled them.  I built crude ladders; I
wedged sticks in narrow fissures; I chopped toe-holds and finger-holds
with my long knife; but at last I scaled them. Near the summit I came
upon a huge cavern.  It is the abode of some mighty winged creature of
the Triassic--or rather it was. Now it is mine.  I slew the thing and
took its abode.  I reached the summit and looked out upon the broad
gray terrible Pacific of the far-southern winter.  It was cold up
there.  It is cold here today; yet here I sit watching, watching,
watching for the thing I know will never come--for a sail.



Chapter 10

Once a day I descend to the base of the cliff and hunt, and fill my
stomach with water from a clear cold spring.  I have three gourds which
I fill with water and take back to my cave against the long nights.  I
have fashioned a spear and a bow and arrow, that I may conserve my
ammunition, which is running low.  My clothes are worn to shreds.
Tomorrow I shall discard them for leopard-skins which I have tanned and
sewn into a garment strong and warm.  It is cold up here.  I have a
fire burning and I sit bent over it while I write; but I am safe here.
No other living creature ventures to the chill summit of the barrier
cliffs.  I am safe, and I am alone with my sorrows and my remembered
joys--but without hope. It is said that hope springs eternal in the
human breast; but there is none in mine.

I am about done.  Presently I shall fold these pages and push them into
my thermos bottle.  I shall cork it and screw the cap tight, and then I
shall hurl it as far out into the sea as my strength will permit.  The
wind is off-shore; the tide is running out; perhaps it will be carried
into one of those numerous ocean-currents which sweep perpetually from
pole to pole and from continent to continent, to be deposited at last
upon some inhabited shore.  If fate is kind and this does happen, then,
for God's sake, come and get me!

It was a week ago that I wrote the preceding paragraph, which I thought
would end the written record of my life upon Caprona. I had paused to
put a new point on my quill and stir the crude ink (which I made by
crushing a black variety of berry and mixing it with water) before
attaching my signature, when faintly from the valley far below came an
unmistakable sound which brought me to my feet, trembling with
excitement, to peer eagerly downward from my dizzy ledge.  How full of
meaning that sound was to me you may guess when I tell you that it was
the report of a firearm!  For a moment my gaze traversed the landscape
beneath until it was caught and held by four figures near the base of
the cliff--a human figure held at bay by three hyaenodons, those
ferocious and blood-thirsty wild dogs of the Eocene.  A fourth beast
lay dead or dying near by.

I couldn't be sure, looking down from above as I was; but yet I
trembled like a leaf in the intuitive belief that it was Lys, and my
judgment served to confirm my wild desire, for whoever it was carried
only a pistol, and thus had Lys been armed.  The first wave of sudden
joy which surged through me was short-lived in the face of the
swift-following conviction that the one who fought below was already
doomed.  Luck and only luck it must have been which had permitted that
first shot to lay low one of the savage creatures, for even such a
heavy weapon as my pistol is entirely inadequate against even the
lesser carnivora of Caspak. In a moment the three would charge! A
futile shot would but tend more greatly to enrage the one it chanced to
hit; and then the three would drag down the little human figure and
tear it to pieces.

And maybe it was Lys!  My heart stood still at the thought, but mind
and muscle responded to the quick decision I was forced to make. There
was but a single hope--a single chance--and I took it. I raised my
rifle to my shoulder and took careful aim.  It was a long shot, a
dangerous shot, for unless one is accustomed to it, shooting from a
considerable altitude is most deceptive work. There is, though,
something about marksmanship which is quite beyond all scientific laws.

Upon no other theory can I explain my marksmanship of that moment.
Three times my rifle spoke--three quick, short syllables of death. I
did not take conscious aim; and yet at each report a beast crumpled in
its tracks!

From my ledge to the base of the cliff is a matter of several thousand
feet of dangerous climbing; yet I venture to say that the first ape
from whose loins my line has descended never could have equaled the
speed with which I literally dropped down the face of that rugged
escarpment.  The last two hundred feet is over a steep incline of loose
rubble to the valley bottom, and I had just reached the top of this
when there arose to my ears an agonized cry--"Bowen!  Bowen!  Quick, my
love, quick!"

I had been too much occupied with the dangers of the descent to glance
down toward the valley; but that cry which told me that it was indeed
Lys, and that she was again in danger, brought my eyes quickly upon her
in time to see a hairy, burly brute seize her and start off at a run
toward the near-by wood.  From rock to rock, chamoislike, I leaped
downward toward the valley, in pursuit of Lys and her hideous abductor.

He was heavier than I by many pounds, and so weighted by the burden he
carried that I easily overtook him; and at last he turned, snarling, to
face me.  It was Kho of the tribe of Tsa, the hatchet-men.  He
recognized me, and with a low growl he threw Lys aside and came for me.
"The she is mine," he cried. "I kill!  I kill!"

I had had to discard my rifle before I commenced the rapid descent of
the cliff, so that now I was armed only with a hunting knife, and this
I whipped from its scabbard as Kho leaped toward me. He was a mighty
beast, mightily muscled, and the urge that has made males fight since
the dawn of life on earth filled him with the blood-lust and the thirst
to slay; but not one whit less did it fill me with the same primal
passions.  Two abysmal beasts sprang at each other's throats that day
beneath the shadow of earth's oldest cliffs--the man of now and the
man-thing of the earliest, forgotten then, imbued by the same deathless
passion that has come down unchanged through all the epochs, periods
and eras of time from the beginning, and which shall continue to the
incalculable end--woman, the imperishable Alpha and Omega of life.

Kho closed and sought my jugular with his teeth.  He seemed to forget
the hatchet dangling by its aurochs-hide thong at his hip, as I forgot,
for the moment, the dagger in my hand.  And I doubt not but that Kho
would easily have bested me in an encounter of that sort had not Lys'
voice awakened within my momentarily reverted brain the skill and
cunning of reasoning man.

"Bowen!" she cried.  "Your knife!  Your knife!"

It was enough.  It recalled me from the forgotten eon to which my brain
had flown and left me once again a modern man battling with a clumsy,
unskilled brute.  No longer did my jaws snap at the hairy throat before
me; but instead my knife sought and found a space between two ribs over
the savage heart.  Kho voiced a single horrid scream, stiffened
spasmodically and sank to the earth. And Lys threw herself into my
arms.  All the fears and sorrows of the past were wiped away, and once
again I was the happiest of men.

With some misgivings I shortly afterward cast my eyes upward toward the
precarious ledge which ran before my cave, for it seemed to me quite
beyond all reason to expect a dainty modern belle to essay the perils
of that frightful climb.  I asked her if she thought she could brave
the ascent, and she laughed gayly in my face.

"Watch!" she cried, and ran eagerly toward the base of the cliff. Like
a squirrel she clambered swiftly aloft, so that I was forced to exert
myself to keep pace with her.  At first she frightened me; but
presently I was aware that she was quite as safe here as was I. When we
finally came to my ledge and I again held her in my arms, she recalled
to my mind that for several weeks she had been living the life of a
cave-girl with the tribe of hatchet-men.  They had been driven from
their former caves by another tribe which had slain many and carried
off quite half the females, and the new cliffs to which they had flown
had proven far higher and more precipitous, so that she had become,
through necessity, a most practiced climber.

She told me of Kho's desire for her, since all his females had been
stolen and of how her life had been a constant nightmare of terror as
she sought by night and by day to elude the great brute. For a time
Nobs had been all the protection she required; but one day he
disappeared--nor has she seen him since.  She believes that he was
