set curved towards the squares attached a little higher up. Moreover, the
kind of curvature in the two cases is different. The squares attached above
the apex cause the radicle to bend abruptly, the part above and beneath
remaining nearly straight; so that here there is little or no transmitted
effect. On the other hand, the squares attached to the apex affect the
radicle for a length of from about 4 to even 8 mm., inducing in most cases
a symmetrical curvature; so that here some influence is transmitted from
the apex for this distance along the radicle.

Pisum sativum (var. Yorkshire Hero): Sensitiveness of the apex of the
Radicle.--Little squares of the same card-like paper were affixed (April
24th) with shellac to one side of the apex of 10 vertically suspended
radicles: the temperature of the water in the bottom of the jars was 60o -
61o F. Most of these radicles were acted on in 8 h. 30 m.; and eight of
them became in the course of 24 h. conspicuously, and the remaining two
slightly, deflected from the perpendicular and from the side bearing the
attached squares. Thus all were acted on; but it will suffice to describe
two conspicuous cases. In one the terminal portion of the radicle was bent
at right angles (A, Fig. 66) after 24h.; and in the other (B) it had by
this time become hooked, with the apex pointing to the zenith. The two bits
of card here used were .07 inch in length and .04 inch in breadth. Two
other radicles, which after 8 h. 30 m. were moderately deflected, became
straight again after 24h. Another
[page 159]
trial was made in the same manner with 15 radicles; but from circumstances,
not worth explaining, they were only once and briefly examined after the
short

Fig. 66. Pisum sativum: deflection produced within 24 hours in the growth
of vertically dependent radicles, by little squares of card affixed with
shellac to one side of apex: A, bent at right angles; B, hooked.

interval of 5 h. 30 m.; and we merely record in our notes "almost all bent
slightly from the perpendicular, and away from the squares; the deflection
amounting in one or two instances to nearly a rectangle." These two sets of
cases, especially the first one, prove that the apex of the radicle is
sensitive to slight contact and that the upper part bends from the touching
object. Nevertheless, on June 1st and 4th, 8 other radicles were tried in
the same manner at a temperature of 58o - 60o F., and after 24 h. only 1
was decidedly bent from the card, 4 slightly, 2 doubtfully, and 1 not in
the least. The amount of curvature was unaccountably small; but all the
radicles which were at all bent, were bent away from the cards.

We now tried the effects of widely different temperatures on the
sensitiveness of these radicles with squares
[page 160]
of card attached to their tips. Firstly, 13 peas, most of them having very
short and young radicles, were placed in an ice-box, in which the
temperature rose during three days from 44o to 47o F. They grew slowly, but
10 out of the 13 became in the course of the three days very slightly
curved from the squares; the other 3 were not affected; so that this
temperature was too low for any high degree of sensitiveness or for much
movement. Jars with 13 other radicles were next placed on a chimney-piece,
where they were subjected to a temperature of between 68o and 72o F., and
after 24 h., 4 were conspicuously curved from the cards, 2 slightly, and 7
not at all; so that this temperature was rather too high. Lastly 12
radicles were subjected to a temperature varying between 72o and 85o F.,
and none of them were in the least affected by the squares. The above
several trials, especially the first recorded one, indicate that the most
favourable temperature for the sensitiveness of the radicle of the pea is
about 60o F.

The tips of 6 vertically dependent radicles were touched once with dry
caustic, in the manner described under Vicia faba. After 24 h. four of them
were bent from the side bearing a minute black mark; and the curvature
increased in one case after 38 h., and in another case after 48 h., until
the terminal part projected almost horizontally. The two remaining radicles
were not affected.

With radicles of the bean, when extended horizontally in damp air,
geotropism always conquered the effects of the irritation caused by squares
of card attached to the lower sides of their tips. A similar experiment was
tried on 13 radicles of the pea; the squares being attached with shellac,
and the temperature between 58o - 60o F. The result was somewhat different;
for
[page 161]
these radicles are either less strongly acted on by geotropism, or, what is
more probable, are more sensitive to contact. After a time geotropism
always prevailed, but its action was often delayed; and in three instances
there was a most curious struggle between geotropism and the irritation
caused by the cards. Four of the 13 radicles were a little curved downwards
within 6 or 8 h., always reckoning from the time when the squares were
first attached, and after 23 h. three of them pointed vertically downwards,
and the fourth at an angle of 45o beneath the horizon. These four radicles
therefore did not seem

Fig. 67. Pisum sativum: a radicle extended horizontally in damp air with a
little square of card affixed to the lower side of its tip, causing it to
bend upwards in opposition to geotropism. The deflection of the radicle
after 21 hours is shown at A, and of the same radicle after 45 hours at B,
now forming a loop.

to have been at all affected by the attached squares. Four others were not
acted on by geotropism within the first 6 or 8 h., but after 23 h. were
much bowed down. Two others remained almost horizontal for 23 h., but
afterwards were acted on. So that in these latter six cases the action of
geotropism was much delayed. The eleventh radicle was slightly curved down
after 8 h., but when looked at again after 23 h. the terminal portion was
curved upwards; if it had
[page 162]
been longer observed, the tip no doubt would have been found again curved
down, and it would have formed a loop as in the following case. The twelfth
radicle after 6 h. was slightly curved downwards; but when looked at again
after 21 h., this curvature had disappeared and the apex pointed upwards;
after 30 h. the radicle formed a hook, as shown at A (Fig. 67); which hook
after 45 h. was converted into a loop (B). The thirteenth radicle after 6
h. was slightly curved downwards, but within 21 h. had curved considerably
up, and then down again at an angle of 45o beneath the horizon, afterwards
becoming perpendicular. In these three last cases geotropism and the
irritation caused by the attached squares alternately prevailed in a highly
remarkable manner; geotropism being ultimately victorious.

Similar experiments were not always quite so successful as in the above
cases. Thus 6 radicles, horizontally extended with attached squares, were
tried on June 8th at a proper temperature, and after 7 h. 30 m. none were
in the least curved upwards and none were distinctly geotropic; whereas of
6 radicles without any attached squares, which served as standards of
comparison or controls, 3 became slightly and 3 almost rectangularly
geotropic within the 7 h. 30 m.; but after 23 h. the two lots were equally
geotropic. On July 10th another trial was made with 6 horizontally extended
radicles, with squares attached in the same manner beneath their tips; and
after 7 h. 30 m., 4 were slightly geotropic, 1 remained horizontal, and 1
was curved upwards in opposition to gravity or geotropism. This latter
radicle after 48 h. formed a loop, like that at B (Fig. 67).

An analogous trial was now made, but instead of attaching squares of card
to the lower sides of the
[page 163]
tips, these were touched with dry caustic. The details of the experiment
will be given in the chapter on Geotropism, and it will suffice here to say
that 10 peas, with radicles extended horizontally and not cauterised, were
laid on and under damp friable peat; these, which served as standards or
controls, as well as 10 others which had been touched on the upper side
with the caustic, all became strongly geotropic in 24 h. Nine radicles,
similarly placed, had their tips touched on the lower side with the
caustic; and after 24 h., 3 were slightly geotropic, 2 remained horizontal,
and 4 were bowed upwards in opposition to gravity and to geotropism. This
upward curvature was distinctly visible in 8 h. 45m. after the lower sides
of the tips had been cauterised.

Little squares of card were affixed with shellac on two occasions to the
tips of 22 young and short secondary radicles, which had been emitted from
the primary radicle whilst growing in water, but were now suspended in damp
air. Besides the difficulty of attaching the squares to such finely pointed
objects as were these radicles, the temperature was too high,--varying on
the first occasion from 72o to 77o F., and on the second being almost
steadily 78o F.; and this probably lessened the sensitiveness of the tips.
The result was that after an interval of 8 h. 30 m., 6 of the 22 radicles
were bowed upwards (one of them greatly) in opposition to gravity, and 2
laterally; the remaining 14 were not affected. Considering the unfavourable
circumstances, and bearing in mind the case of the bean, the evidence
appears sufficient to show that the tips of the secondary radicles of the
pea are sensitive to slight contact.

Phaseolus multiflorus: Sensitiveness of the apex of the Radicle.--
Fifty-nine radicles were tried with squares
[page 164]
of various sizes of the same card-like paper, also with bits of thin glass
and rough cinders, affixed with shellac to one side of the apex. Rather
large drops of the dissolved shellac were also placed on them and allowed
to set into hard beads. The specimens were subjected to various
temperatures between 60o and 72o F., more commonly at about the latter. But
out of this considerable number of trials only 5 radicles were plainly
bent, and 8 others slightly or even doubtfully, from the attached objects;
the remaining 46 not being at all affected. It is therefore clear that the
tips of the radicles of this Phaseolus are much less sensitive to contact
than are those of the bean or pea. We thought that they might be sensitive
to harder pressure, but after several trials we could not devise any method
for pressing harder on one side of the apex than on the other, without at
the same time offering mechanical resistance to its growth. We therefore
tried other irritants.

The tips of 13 radicles, dried with blotting-paper, were thrice touched or
just rubbed on one side with dry nitrate of silver. They were rubbed
thrice, because we supposed from the foregoing trials, that the tips were
not highly sensitive. After 24 h. the tips were found greatly blackened; 6
were blackened equally all round, so that no curvature to any one side
could be expected; 6 were much blackened on one side for a length of about
1/10th of an inch, and this length became curved at right angles towards
the blackened surface, the curvature afterwards increasing in several
instances until little hooks were formed. It was manifest that the
blackened side was so much injured that it could not grow, whilst the
opposite side continued to grow. One alone out of these 13 radicles became
curved from the blackened side, the
[page 165]
curvature extending for some little distance above the apex.

After the experience thus gained, the tips of six almost dry radicles were
once touched with the dry caustic on one side; and after an interval of 10
m. were allowed to enter water, which was kept at a temperature of 65o -
67o F. The result was that after an interval of 8 h. a minute blackish
speck could just be distinguished on one side of the apex of five of these
radicles, all of which became curved towards the opposite side--in two
cases at about an angle of 45o--in two other cases at nearly a rectangle--
and in the fifth case at above a rectangle, so that the apex was a little
hooked; in this latter case the black mark was rather larger than in the
others. After 24 h. from the application of the caustic, the curvature of
three of these radicles (including the hooked one) had diminished; in the
fourth it remained the same, and in the fifth it had increased, the tip
being now hooked. It has been said that after 8 h. black specks could be
seen on one side of the apex of five of the six radicles; on the sixth the
speck, which was extremely minute, was on the actual apex and therefore
central; and this radicle alone did not become curved. It was therefore
again touched on one side with caustic, and after 15 h. 30 m. was found
curved from the perpendicular and from the blackened side at an angle of
34o, which increased in nine additional hours to 54o.

It is therefore certain that the apex of the radicle of this Phaseolus is
extremely sensitive to caustic, more so than that of the bean, though the
latter is far more sensitive to pressure. In the experiments just given,
the curvature from the slightly cauterised side of the tip, extended along
the radicle for a length of nearly 10 mm.; whereas in the first set
[page 166]
of experiments, when the tips of several were greatly blackened and injured
on one side, so that their growth was arrested, a length of less than 3 mm.
became curved towards the much blackened side, owing to the continued
growth of the opposite side. This difference in the results is interesting,
for it shows that too strong an irritant does not induce any transmitted
effect, and does not cause the adjoining, upper and growing part of the
radicle to bend. We have analogous cases with Drosera, for a strong
solution of carbonate of ammonia when absorbed by the glands, or too great
heat suddenly applied to them, or crushing them, does not cause the basal
part of the tentacles to bend, whilst a weak solution of the carbonate, or
a moderate heat, or slight pressure always induced such bending. Similar
results were observed with Dionaea and Pinguicula.

The effect of cutting off with a razor a thin slice from one side of the
conical apex of 14 young and short radicles was next tried. Six of them
after being operated on were suspended in damp air; the tips of the other
eight, similarly suspended, were allowed to enter water at a temperature of
about 65o F. It was recorded in each case which side of the apex had been
sliced off, and when they were afterwards examined the direction of the
curvature was noted, before the record was consulted. Of the six radicles
in damp air, three had their tips curved after an interval of 10 h. 15 m.
directly away from the sliced surface, whilst the other three were not
affected and remained straight; nevertheless, one of them after 13
additional hours became slightly curved from the sliced surface. Of the
eight radicles with their tips immersed in water, seven were plainly curved
away from the sliced surfaces after 10 h. 15 m.; and with
[page 167]
respect to the eighth which remained quite straight, too thick a slice had
been accidentally removed, so that it hardly formed a real exception to the
general result. When the seven radicles were looked at again, after an
interval of 23 h. from the time of slicing, two had become distorted; four
were deflected at an angle of about 70o from the perpendicular and from the
cut surface; and one was deflected at nearly 90o, so that it projected
almost horizontally, but with the extreme tip now beginning to bend
downwards through the action of geotropism. It is therefore manifest that a
thin slice cut off one side of the conical apex, causes the upper growing
part of the radicle of this Phaseolus to bend, through the transmitted
effects of the irritation, away from the sliced surface.

Tropaeolum majus: Sensitiveness of the apex of the Radicle to contact.--
Little squares of card were attached with shellac to one side of the tips
of 19 radicles, some of which were subjected to 78o F., and others to a
much lower temperature. Only 3 became plainly curved from the squares, 5
slightly, 4 doubtfully, and 7 not at all. These seeds were, as we believed,
old, so we procured a fresh lot, and now the results were widely different.
Twenty-three were tried in the same manner; five of the squares produced no
effect, but three of these cases were no real exceptions, for in two of
them the squares had slipped and were parallel to the apex, and in the
third the shellac was in excess and had spread equally all round the apex.
One radicle was deflected only slightly from the perpendicular and from the
card; whilst seventeen were plainly deflected. The angles in several of
these latter cases varied between 40o and 65o from the perpendicular; and
in two of them it amounted after 15 h. or 16 h. to about 90o. In one
instance a loop
[page 168]
was nearly completed in 16 h. There can, therefore, be no doubt that the
apex is highly sensitive to slight contact, and that the upper part of the
radicle bends away from the touching object.

Gossypium herbaceum: Sensitiveness of the apex of the Radicle.--Radicles
were experimented on in the same manner as before, but they proved
ill-fitted for our purpose, as they soon became unhealthy when suspended in
damp air. Of 38 radicles thus suspended, at temperatures varying from 66o
to 69o F., with squares of card attached to their tips, 9 were plainly and
7 slightly or even doubtfully deflected from the squares and from the
perpendicular; 22 not being affected. We thought that perhaps the above
temperature was not high enough, so 19 radicles with attached squares,
likewise suspended in damp air, were subjected to a temperature of from 74o
to 79o F., but not one of them was acted on, and they soon became
unhealthy. Lastly, 19 radicles were suspended in water at a temperature
from 70o to 75o F., with bits of glass or squares of the card attached to
their tips by means of Canada-balsam or asphalte, which adhered rather
better than shellac beneath the water. The radicles did not keep healthy
for long. The result was that 6 were plainly and 2 doubtfully deflected
from the attached objects and the perpendicular; 11 not being affected. The
evidence consequently is hardly conclusive, though from the two sets of
cases tried under a moderate temperature, it is probable that the radicles
are sensitive to contact; and would be more so under favourable conditions.

Fifteen radicles which had germinated in friable peat were suspended
vertically over water. Seven of them served as controls, and they remained
quite straight during 24 h. The tips of the other eight radicles
[page 169]
were just touched with dry caustic on one side. After only 5 h. 10 m. five
of them were slightly curved from the perpendicular and from the side
bearing the little blackish marks. After 8 h. 40 m., 4 out of these 5 were
deflected at angles between 15o and 65o from the perpendicular. On the
other hand, one which had been slightly curved after 5 h. 10 m., now became
straight. After 24 h. the curvature in two cases had considerably
increased; also in four other cases, but these latter radicles had now
become so contorted, some being turned upwards, that it could no longer be
ascertained whether they were still curved from the cauterised side. The
control specimens exhibited no such irregular growth, and the two sets
presented a striking contrast. Out of the 8 radicles which had been touched
with caustic, two alone were not affected, and the marks left on their tips
by the caustic were extremely minute. These marks in all cases were oval or
elongated; they were measured in three instances, and found to be of nearly
the same size, viz. 2/3 of a mm. in length. Bearing this fact in mind, it
should be observed that the length of the curved part of the radicle, which
had become deflected from the cauterised side in the course of 8 h. 40 m.
was found to be in three cases 6, 7, and 9 mm.

Cucurbita ovifera: Sensitiveness of the apex of the Radicle.--The tips
proved ill-fitted for the attachment of cards, as they are extremely fine
and flexible. Moreover, owing to the hypocotyls being soon developed and
becoming arched, the whole radicle is quickly displaced and confusion is
thus caused. A large number of trials were made, but without any definite
result, excepting on two occasions, when out of 23 radicles 10 were
deflected from the attached squares
[page 170]
of card, and 13 were not acted on. Rather large squares, though difficult
to affix, seemed more efficient than very small ones.

We were much more successful with caustic; but in our first trial, 15
radicles were too much cauterised, and only two became curved from the
blackened side; the others being either killed on one side, or blackened
equally all round. In our next trial the dried tips of 11 radicles were
touched momentarily with dry caustic, and after a few minutes were immersed
in water. The elongated marks thus caused were never black, only brown, and
about ½ mm. in length, or even less. In 4 h. 30 m. after the cauterisation,
6 of them were plainly curved from the side with the brown mark, 4
slightly, and 1 not at all. The latter proved unhealthy, and never grew;
and the marks on 2 of the 4 slightly curved radicles were excessively
minute, one being distinguishable only with the aid of a lens. Of 10
control specimens tried in the same jars at the same time, not one was in
the least curved. In 8 h. 40 m. after the cauterisation, 5 of the radicles
out of the 10 (the one unhealthy one being omitted) were deflected at about
90o, and 3 at about 45o from the perpendicular and from the side bearing
the brown mark. After 24 h. all 10 radicles had increased immensely in
length; in 5 of them the curvature was nearly the same, in 2 it had
increased, and in 3 it had decreased. The contrast presented by the 10
controls, after both the 8 h. 40 m. and the 24 h. intervals, was very
great; for they had continued to grow vertically downwards, excepting two
which, from some unknown cause, had become somewhat tortuous.

In the chapter on Geotropism we shall see that 10 radicles of this plant
were extended horizontally on and beneath damp friable peat, under which
conditions
[page 171]
they grow better and more naturally than in damp air; and their tips were
slightly cauterised on the lower side, brown marks about ½ mm. in length
being thus caused. Uncauterised specimens similarly placed became much bent
downwards through geotropism in the course of 5 or 6 hours. After 8 h. only
3 of the cauterised ones were bowed downwards, and this in a slight degree;
4 remained horizontal; and 3 were curved upwards in opposition to
geotropism and from the side bearing the brown mark. Ten other specimens
had their tips cauterised at the same time and in the same degree, on the
upper side; and this, if it produced any effect, would tend to increase the
power of geotropism; and all these radicles were strongly bowed downwards
after 8 h. From the several foregoing facts, there can be no doubt that the
cauterisation of the tip of the radicle of this Cucurbita on one side, if
done lightly enough, causes the whole growing part to bend to the opposite
side.
Raphanus sativus: Sensitiveness of the apex of the Radicle.--We here
encountered many difficulties in our trials, both with squares of card and
with caustic; for when seeds were pinned to a cork-lid, many of the
radicles, to which nothing had been done, grew irregularly, often curving
upwards, as if attracted by the damp surface above; and when they were
immersed in water they likewise often grew irregularly. We did not
therefore dare to trust our experiments with attached squares of card;
nevertheless some of them seemed to indicate that the tips were sensitive
to contact. Our trials with caustic generally failed from the difficulty of
not injuring too greatly the extremely fine tips. Out of 7 radicles thus
tried, one became bowed after 22 h. at an angle of 60o, a second at 40o,
[page 172]
and a third very slightly from the perpendicular and from the cauterised
side.

Aesculus hippocastanum: Sensitiveness of the apex of the Radicle.--Bits of
glass and squares of card were affixed with shellac or gum-water to the
tips of 12 radicles of the horse-chestnut; and when these objects fell off,
they were refixed; but not in a single instance was any curvature thus
caused. These massive radicles, one of which was above 2 inches in length
and .3 inch in diameter at its base, seemed insensible to so slight a
stimulus as any small attached object. Nevertheless, when the apex
encountered an obstacle in its downward course, the growing part became so
uniformly and symmetrically curved, that its appearance indicated not mere
mechanical bending, but increased growth along the whole convex side, due
to the irritation of the apex.

That this is the correct view may be inferred from the effects of the more
powerful stimulus of caustic. The bending from the cauterised side occurred
much slower than in the previously described species, and it will perhaps
be worth while to give our trials in detail.

[The seeds germinated in sawdust, and one side of the tips of the radicles
were slightly rubbed once with dry nitrate of silver; and after a few
minutes were allowed to dip into water. They were subjected to a rather
varying temperature, generally between 52o and 58o F. A few cases have not
been thought worth recording, in which the whole tip was blackened, or in
which the seedling soon became unhealthy.

(1.) The radicle was slightly deflected from the cauterised side in one day
(i.e. 24 h.); in three days it stood at 60o from the perpendicular; in four
days at 90o; on the fifth day it was curved up about 40o above the horizon;
so that it had passed through an angle of 130o in the five days, and this
was the greatest amount of curvature observed.

(2.) In two days radicle slightly deflected; after seven days
[page 173]
deflected 69o from the perpendicular and from the cauterised side; after
eight days the angle amounted to nearly 90o.

(3.) After one day slight deflection, but the cauterised mark was so faint
that the same side was again touched with caustic. In four days from the
first touch deflection amounted to 78o, which in an additional day
increased to 90o.

(4.) After two days slight deflection, which during the next three days
certainly increased but never became great; the radicle did not grow well
and died on the eighth day.

(5.) After two days very slight deflection; but this on the fourth day
amounted to 56o from the perpendicular and from the cauterised side.

(6.) After three days doubtfully, but after four days certainly deflected
from the cauterised side. On the fifth day deflection amounted to 45o from
the perpendicular, and this on the seventh day increased to about 90o.

(7.) After two days slightly deflected; on the third day the deflection
amounted to 25o from the perpendicular, and this did not afterwards
increase.

(8.) After one day deflection distinct; on the third day it amounted to
44o, and on the fourth day to 72o from the perpendicular and the cauterised
side.

(9.) After two days deflection slight, yet distinct; on the third day the
tip was again touched on the same side with caustic and thus killed.

(10.) After one day slight deflection, which after six days increased to
50o from the perpendicular and the cauterised side.

(11.) After one day decided deflection, which after six days increased to
62o from the perpendicular and from the cauterised side.

(12.) After one day slight deflection, which on the second day amounted to
35o, on the fourth day to 50o, and the sixth day to 63o from the
perpendicular and the cauterised side.

(13.) Whole tip blackened, but more on one side than the other; on the
fourth day slightly, and on the sixth day greatly deflected from the more
blackened side; the deflection on the ninth day amounted to 90o from the
perpendicular.

(14.) Whole tip blackened in the same manner as in the last case: on the
second day decided deflection from the more blackened side, which increased
on the seventh day to nearly 90o; on the following day the radicle appeared
unhealthy.

(15.) Here we had the anomalous case of a radicle bending
[page 174]
slightly towards the cauterised side on the first day, and continuing to do
so for the next three days, when the deflection amounted to about 90o from
the perpendicular. The cause appeared to lie in the tendril-like
sensitiveness of the upper part of the radicle, against which the point of
a large triangular flap of the seed-coats pressed with considerable force;
and this irritation apparently conquered that from the cauterised apex.]

These several cases show beyond doubt that the irritation of one side of
the apex, excites the upper part of the radicle to bend slowly towards the
opposite side. This fact was well exhibited in one lot of five seeds pinned
to the cork-lid of a jar; for when after 6 days the lid was turned upside
down and viewed from directly above, the little black marks made by the
caustic were now all distinctly visible on the upper sides of the tips of
the laterally bowed radicles. A thin slice was shaved off with a razor from
one side of the tips of 22 radicles, in the manner described under the
common bean; but this kind of irritation did not prove very effective. Only
7 out of the 22 radicles became moderately deflected in from 3 to 5 days
from the sliced surface, and several of the others grew irregularly. The
evidence, therefore, is far from conclusive.

Quercus robur: Sensitiveness of the apex of the Radicle.--The tips of the
radicles of the common oak are fully as sensitive to slight contact as are
those of any plant examined by us. They remained healthy in damp air for 10
days, but grew slowly. Squares of the card-like paper were fixed with
shellac to the tips of 15 radicles, and ten of these became conspicuously
bowed from the perpendicular and from the squares; two slightly, and three
not at all. But two of the latter were not real exceptions, as they were at
first very short, and hardly grew afterwards. Some of the more
[page 175]
remarkable cases are worth describing. The radicles were examined on each
successive morning, at nearly the same hour, that is, after intervals of 24
h.

[No. 1. This radicle suffered from a series of accidents, and acted in an
anomalous manner, for the apex appeared at first insensible and afterwards
sensitive to contact. The first square was attached on Oct 19th; on the
21st the radicle was not at all curved, and the square was accidentally
knocked off; it was refixed on the 22nd, and the radicle became slightly
curved from the square, but the curvature disappeared on the 23rd, when the
square was removed and refixed. No curvature ensued, and the square was
again accidentally knocked off, and refixed. On the morning of the 27th it
was washed off by having reached the water in the bottom of the jar. The
square was refixed, and on the 29th, that is, ten days after the first
square had been attached, and two days after the attachment of the last
square, the radicle had grown to the great length of 3.2 inches, and now
the terminal growing part had become bent away from the square into a hook
(see Fig. 68).

Fig. 68. Quercus robur: radicle with square of card attached to one side of
apex, causing it to become hooked. Drawing one-half natural scale.

No. 2. Square attached on the 19th; on the 20th radicle slightly deflected
from it and from the perpendicular; on the 21st deflected at nearly right
angles; it remained during the next two days in this position, but on the
25th the upward curvature was lessened through the action of geotropism,
and still more so on the 26th.

No. 3. Square attached on the 19th; on the 21st a trace of curvature from
the square, which amounted on the 22nd to about 40o, and on the 23rd to 53o
from the perpendicular.

No. 4. Square attached on the 21st; on the 22nd trace of curvature from the
square; on the 23rd completely hooked with the point turned up to the
zenith. Three days afterwards (i.e. 26th) the curvature had wholly
disappeared and the apex pointed perpendicularly downwards.

No. 5. Square attached on the 21st; on the 22nd decided
[page 176]
though slight curvature from the square; on the 23rd the tip had curved up
above the horizon, and on the 24th was hooked with the apex pointing almost
to the zenith, as in Fig. 68.

No. 6. Square attached on the 21st; on the 22nd slightly curved from the
square; 23rd more curved; 25th considerably curved; 27th all curvature
lost, and the radicle was now directed perpendicularly downwards.

No. 7. Square attached on the 21st; on the 22nd a trace of curvature from
the square, which increased next day, and on the 24th amounted to a right
angle.

It is, therefore, manifest that the apex of the radicle of the oak is
highly sensitive to contact, and retains its sensitiveness during several
days. The movement thus induced was, however, slower than in any of the
previous cases, with the exception of that of Aesculus. As with the bean,
the terminal growing part, after bending, sometimes straightened itself
through the action of geotropism, although the object still remained
attached to the tip.

The same remarkable experiment was next tried, as in the case of the bean;
namely, little squares of exactly the same size of the card-like sanded
paper and of very thin paper (the thicknesses of which have been given
under Vicia faba) were attached with shellac on opposite sides (as
accurately as could be done) of the tips of 13 radicles, suspended in damp
air, at a temperature of 65o - 66o F. The result was striking, for 9 out of
these 13 radicles became plainly, and 1 very slightly, curved from the
thick paper towards the side bearing the thin paper. In two of these cases
the apex became completely hooked after two days; in four cases the
deflection from the perpendicular and from the side bearing the thick
paper, amounted in from two to four days to angles of 90o, 72o, 60o, and
49o, but in two other cases to only 18o and 15o. It should, however, be
stated that in the
[page 177]
case in which the deflection was 49o, the two squares had accidentally come
into contact on one side of the apex, and thus formed a lateral gable; and
the deflection was directed in part from this gable and in part from the
thick paper. In three cases alone the radicles were not affected by the
difference in thickness of the squares of paper attached to their tips, and
consequently did not bend away from the side bearing the stiffer paper.

Zea mays: Sensitiveness of the apex of the Radicle to contact.--A large
number of trials were made on this plant, as it was the only monocotyledon
on which we experimented. An abstract of the results will suffice. In the
first place, 22 germinating seeds were pinned to cork-lids without any
object being attached to their radicles, some being exposed to a
temperature of 65o - 66o F., and others to between 74o and 79o; and none of
them became curved, though some were a little inclined to one side. A few
were selected, which from having germinated on sand were crooked, but when
suspended in damp air the terminal part grew straight downwards. This fact
having been ascertained, little squares of the card-like paper were affixed
with shellac, on several occasions, to the tips of 68 radicles. Of these
the terminal growing part of 39 became within 24 h. conspicuously curved
away from the attached squares and from the perpendicular; 13 out of the 39
forming hooks with their points directed towards the zenith, and 8 forming
loops. Moreover, 7 other radicles out of the 68, were slightly and two
doubtfully deflected from the cards. There remain 20 which were not
affected; but 10 of these ought not to be counted; for one was diseased,
two had their tips quite surrounded by shellac, and the squares on 7 had
slipped so as to stand parallel to the apex, instead of obliquely
[page 178]
on it. There were therefore only 10 out of the 68 which certainly were not
acted on. Some of the radicles which were experimented on were young and
short, most of them of moderate length, and two or three exceeded three
inches in length. The curvature in the above cases occurred within 24 h.,
but it was often conspicuous within a much shorter period. For instance,
the terminal growing part of one radicle was bent upwards into a rectangle
in 8 h. 15 m., and of another in 9 h. On one occasion a hook was formed in
9 h. Six of the radicles in a jar containing nine seeds, which stood on a
sand-bath, raised to a temperature varying from 76o to 82o F., became
hooked, and a seventh formed a complete loop, when first looked at after 15
hours.

The accompanying figures of four germinating seeds (Fig. 69) show, firstly,
a radicle (A) the apex of which has become so much bent away from the
attached square as to form a hook. Secondly (B), a hook converted through
the continued irritation of the card, aided perhaps by geotropism, into an
almost complete circle or loop. The tip in the act of forming a loop
generally rubs against the upper part of the radicle, and pushes off the
attached square; the loop then contracts or closes, but never disappears;
and the apex afterwards grows vertically downwards, being no longer
irritated by any attached object. This frequently occurred, and is
represented at C. The jar above mentioned with the six hooked radicles and
another jar were kept for two additional days, for the sake of observing
how the hooks would be modified. Most of them became converted into simple
loops, like that figured at C; but in one case the apex did not rub against
the upper part of the radicle and thus remove the card; and it consequently
made, owing
[page 179]
to the continued irritation from the card, two complete loops, that is, a
helix of two spires; which afterwards became pressed closely together. Then
geotropism prevailed and caused the apex to grow perpendicularly downwards.
In another case, shown at (D), the apex

Fig. 69. Zea mays: radicles excited to bend away from the little squares of
card attached to one side of their tips.

in making a second turn or spire, passed through the first loop, which was
at first widely open, and in doing so knocked off the card; it then grew
perpendicularly downwards, and thus tied itself into a knot, which soon
became tight!

Secondary Radicles of Zea.--A short time after the first radicle has
appeared, others protrude from the
[page 180]
seed, but not laterally from the primary one. Ten of these secondary
radicles, which were directed obliquely downwards, were experimented on
with very small squares of card attached with shellac to the lower sides of
their tips. If therefore the squares acted, the radicles would bend upwards
in opposition to gravity. The jar stood (protected from light) on a
sand-bath, which varied between 76o and 82o F. After only 5 h. one appeared
to be a little deflected from the square, and after 20 h. formed a loop.
Four others were considerably curved from the squares after 20 h., and
three of them became hooked, with their tips pointing to the zenith,--one
after 29 h. and the two others after 44 h. By this latter time a sixth
radicle had become bent at a right angle from the side bearing the square.
Thus altogether six out of the ten secondary radicles were acted on, four
not being affected. There can, therefore, be no doubt that the tips of
these secondary radicles are sensitive to slight contact, and that when
thus excited they cause the upper part to bend from the touching object;
but generally, as it appears, not in so short a time as in the case of the
first-formed radicle.

SENSITIVENESS OF THE TIP OF THE RADICLE TO MOIST AIR.

