dried mucin was then soaked in water for two days, and little cubes of
the proper size were placed on three leaves.  After four days the
tentacles

* See, for instance, Schiff, 'Phys. de la Digestion,' 1867, tom. ii.,
p. 38.  [page 123]

round the margins of the discs were a little inflected, and the
secretion collected on the disc was acid, but the exterior tentacles
were not affected. One leaf began to re-expand on the fourth day, and
all were fully re-expanded on the sixth. The glands which had been in
contact with the mucin were a little darkened. We may therefore
conclude that a small amount of some impurity of a moderately exciting
nature had been absorbed. That the mucin employed by me did contain
some soluble matter was proved by Dr. Sanderson, who on subjecting it
to artificial gastric juice found that in 1 hr. some was dissolved, but
only in the proportion of 23 to 100 of fibrin during the same time. The
cubes, though perhaps rather softer than those left in water for the
same time, retained their angles as sharp as ever. We may therefore
infer that the mucin itself was not dissolved or digested. Nor is it
digested by the gastric juice of living animals, and according to
Schiff* it is a layer of this substance which protects the coats of the
stomach from being corroded during digestion.

Pepsin.--My experiments are hardly worth giving, as it is scarcely
possible to prepare pepsin free from other albuminoids; but I was
curious to ascertain, as far as that was possible, whether the ferment
of the secretion of Drosera would act on the ferment of the gastric
juice of animals. I first used the common pepsin sold for medicinal
purposes, and afterwards some which was much purer, prepared for me by
Dr. Moore. Five leaves to which a considerable quantity of the former
was given remained inflected for five days; four of them then died,
apparently from too great stimulation. I then tried Dr. Moore's pepsin,
making it into a paste with water, and placing such small particles on
the discs of five leaves that all would have been quickly dissolved had
it been meat or albumen. The leaves were soon inflected; two of them
began to re-expand after only 20 hrs., and the other three were almost
completely re-expanded after 44 hrs. Some of the glands which had been
in contact with the particles of pepsin, or with the acid secretion
surrounding them, were singularly pale, whereas others were singularly
dark-coloured. Some of the secretion was scraped off and examined under
a high power; and it abounded with granules undistinguishable from
those of pepsin left in water for the same length of time. We may
therefore infer, as highly probable (remembering what small quantities
were given), that the ferment of Drosera does not act on or digest

* 'Leons phys. de la Digestion,' 1867, tom. ii., p. 304.  [page 124]

pepsin, but absorbs from it some albuminous impurity which induces
inflection, and which in large quantity is highly injurious. Dr. Lauder
Brunton at my request endeavoured to ascertain whether pepsin with
hydrochloric acid would digest pepsin, and as far as he could judge, it
had no such power. Gastric juice, therefore, apparently agrees in this
respect with the secretion of Drosera.

Urea.--It seemed to me an interesting inquiry whether this refuse of
the living body, which contains much nitrogen, would, like so many
other animal fluids and substances, be absorbed by the glands of
Drosera and cause inflection. Half-minim drops of a solution of one
part to 437 of water were placed on the discs of four leaves, each drop
containing the quantity usually employed by me, namely 1/960 of a
grain, or .0674 mg.; but the leaves were hardly at all affected. They
were then tested with bits of meat, and soon became closely inflected.
I repeated the same experiment on four leaves with some fresh urea
prepared by Dr. Moore; after two days there was no inflection; I then
gave them another dose, but still there was no inflection. These leaves
were afterwards tested with similarly sized drops of an infusion of raw
meat, and in 6 hrs. there was considerable inflection, which became
excessive in 24 hrs.  But the urea apparently was not quite pure, for
when four leaves were immersed in 2 dr. (7.1 ml.) of the solution, so
that all the glands, instead of merely those on the disc, were enabled
to absorb any small amount of impurity in solution, there was
considerable inflection after 24 hrs., certainly more than would have
followed from a similar immersion in pure water. That the urea, which
was not perfectly white, should have contained a sufficient quantity of
albuminous matter, or of some salt of ammonia, to have caused the above
effect, is far from surprising, for, as we shall see in the next
chapter, astonishingly small doses of ammonia are highly efficient. We
may therefore conclude that urea itself is not exciting or nutritious
to Drosera; nor is it modified by the secretion, so as to be rendered
nutritious, for, had this been the case, all the leaves with drops on
their discs assuredly would have been well inflected.  Dr. Lauder
Brunton informs me that from experiments made at my request at St.
Bartholomew's Hospital it appears that urea is not acted on by
artificial gastric juice, that is by pepsin with hydrochloric acid.

Chitine.--The chitinous coats of insects naturally captured by the
leaves do not appear in the least corroded. Small square pieces of the
delicate wing and of the elytron of a Staphylinus [page 125] were
placed on some leaves, and after these had re-expanded, the pieces were
carefully examined. Their angles were as sharp as ever, and they did
not differ in appearance from the other wing and elytron of the same
insect which had been left in water. The elytron, however, had
evidently yielded some nutritious matter, for the leaf remained clasped
over it for four days; whereas the leaves with bits of the true wing
re-expanded on the second day. Any one who will examine the excrement
of insect-eating animals will see how powerless their gastric juice is
on chitine.

Cellulose.--I did not obtain this substance in a separate state, but
tried angular bits of dry wood, cork, sphagnum moss, linen, and cotton
thread. None of these bodies were in the least attacked by the
secretion, and they caused only that moderate amount of inflection
which is common to all inorganic objects. Gun-cotton, which consists of
cellulose, with the hydrogen replaced by nitrogen, was tried with the
same result. We have seen that a decoction of cabbage-leaves excites
the most powerful inflection. I therefore placed two little square bits
of the blade of a cabbage-leaf, and four little cubes cut from the
midrib, on six leaves of Drosera. These became well inflected in 12
hrs., and remained so for between two and four days; the bits of
cabbage being bathed all the time by acid secretion. This shows that
some exciting matter, to which I shall presently refer, had been
absorbed; but the angles of the squares and cubes remained as sharp as
ever, proving that the framework of cellulose had not been attacked.
Small square bits of spinach-leaves were tried with the same result;
the glands pouring forth a moderate supply of acid secretion, and the
tentacles remaining inflected for three days. We have also seen that
the delicate coats of pollen grains are not dissolved by the secretion.
It is well known that the gastric juice of animals does not attack
cellulose.

Chlorophyll.--This substance was tried, as it contains nitrogen. Dr.
Moore sent me some preserved in alcohol; it was dried, but soon
deliquesced. Particles were placed on four leaves; after 3 hrs. the
secretion was acid; after 8 hrs. there was a good deal of inflection,
which in 24 hrs. became fairly well marked. After four days two of the
leaves began to open, and the other two were then almost fully
re-expanded. It is therefore clear that this chlorophyll contained
matter which excited the leaves to a moderate degree; but judging by
the eye, little or none was dissolved; so that in a pure state it would
not probably have been attacked by the secretion. Dr. Sanderson tried
that which I [page 126] used, as well as some freshly prepared, with
artificial digestive liquid, and found that it was not digested. Dr.
Lauder Brunton likewise tried some prepared by the process given in the
British Pharmacopoeia, and exposed it for five days at the temperature
of 37o Cent. to digestive liquid, but it was not diminished in bulk,
though the fluid acquired a slightly brown colour. It was also tried
with the glycerine extract of pancreas with a negative result. Nor does
chlorophyll seem affected by the intestinal secretions of various
animals, judging by the colour of their excrement.

It must not be supposed from these facts that the grains of
chlorophyll, as they exist in living plants, cannot be attacked by the
secretion; for these grains consist of protoplasm merely coloured by
chlorophyll. My son Francis placed a thin slice of spinach leaf,
moistened with saliva, on a leaf of Drosera, and other slices on damp
cotton-wool, all exposed to the same temperature. After 19 hrs. the
slice on the leaf of Drosera was bathed in much secretion from the
inflected tentacles, and was now examined under the microscope. No
perfect grains of chlorophyll could be distinguished; some were
shrunken, of a yellowish-green colour, and collected in the middle of
the cells; others were disintegrated and formed a yellowish mass,
likewise in the middle of the cells. On the other hand, in the slices
surrounded by damp cotton-wool, the grains of chlorophyll were green
and as perfect as ever. My son also placed some slices in artificial
gastric juice, and these were acted on in nearly the same manner as by
the secretion. We have seen that bits of fresh cabbage and spinach
leaves cause the tentacles to be inflected and the glands to pour forth
much acid secretion; and there can be little doubt that it is the
protoplasm forming the grains of chlorophyll, as well as that lining
the walls of the cells, which excites the leaves.

Fat and Oil.--Cubes of almost pure uncooked fat, placed on several
leaves, did not have their angles in the least rounded. We have also
seen that the oil-globules in milk are not digested.  Nor does olive
oil dropped on the discs of leaves cause any inflection; but when they
are immersed in olive oil, they become strongly inflected; but to this
subject I shall have to recur.  Oily substances are not digested by the
gastric juice of animals.

Starch.--Rather large bits of dry starch caused well-marked inflection,
and the leaves did not re-expand until the fourth day; but I have no
doubt that this was due to the prolonged irritation of the glands, as
the starch continued to absorb the secretion. The particles were not in
the least reduced in size; [page 127] and we know that leaves immersed
in an emulsion of starch are not at all affected. I need hardly say
that starch is not digested by the gastric juice of animals.

Action of the Secretion on Living Seeds.

The results of some experiments on living seeds, selected by hazard,
may here be given, though they bear only indirectly on our present
subject of digestion.

Seven cabbage seeds of the previous year were placed on the same number
of leaves. Some of these leaves were moderately, but the greater number
only slightly inflected, and most of them re-expanded on the third day.
One, however, remained clasped till the fourth, and another till the
fifth day. These leaves therefore were excited somewhat more by the
seeds than by inorganic objects of the same size. After they
re-expanded, the seeds were placed under favourable conditions on damp
sand; other seeds of the same lot being tried at the same time in the
same manner, and found to germinate well. Of the seven seeds which had
been exposed to the secretion, only three germinated; and one of the
three seedlings soon perished, the tip of its radicle being from the
first decayed, and the edges of its cotyledons of a dark brown colour;
so that altogether five out of the seven seeds ultimately perished.

Radish seeds (Raphanus sativus) of the previous year were placed on
three leaves, which became moderately inflected, and re-expanded on the
third or fourth day. Two of these seeds were transferred to damp sand;
only one germinated, and that very slowly. This seedling had an
extremely short, crooked, diseased, radicle, with no absorbent hairs;
and the cotyledons were oddly mottled with purple, with the edges
blackened and partly withered.

Cress seeds (Lepidum sativum) of the previous year were placed on four
leaves; two of these next morning were moderately and two strongly
inflected, and remained so for four, five, and even six days. Soon
after these seeds were placed on the leaves and had become damp, they
secreted in the usual manner a layer of tenacious mucus; and to
ascertain whether it was the absorption of this substance by the glands
which caused so much inflection, two seeds were put into water, and as
much of the mucus as possible scraped off. They were then placed on
leaves, which became very strongly inflected in the course of 3 hrs.,
and were still closely inflected on the third day; so that it evidently
was not the mucus which excited so [page 128] much inflection; on the
contrary, this served to a certain extent as a protection to the
seeds.  Two of the six seeds germinated whilst still lying on the
leaves, but the seedlings, when transferred to damp sand, soon died; of
the other four seeds, only one germinated.

Two seeds of mustard (Sinapis nigra), two of celery (Apium
graveolens)--both of the previous year, two seeds well soaked of
caraway (Carum carui), and two of wheat, did not excite the leaves more
than inorganic objects often do. Five seeds, hardly ripe, of a
buttercup (Ranunculus), and two fresh seeds of Anemone nemorosa,
induced only a little more effect.  On the other hand, four seeds,
perhaps not quite ripe, of Carex sylvatica caused the leaves on which
they were placed to be very strongly inflected; and these only began to
re-expand on the third day, one remaining inflected for seven days.

It follows from these few facts that different kinds of seeds excite
the leaves in very different degrees; whether this is solely due to the
nature of their coats is not clear. In the case of the cress seeds, the
partial removal of the layer of mucus hastened the inflection of the
tentacles.  Whenever the leaves remain inflected during several days
over seeds, it is clear that they absorb some matter from them. That
the secretion penetrates their coats is also evident from the large
proportion of cabbage, raddish, and cress seeds which were killed, and
from several of the seedlings being greatly injured. This injury to the
seeds and seedlings may, however, be due solely to the acid of the
secretion, and not to any process of digestion; for Mr.  Traherne
Moggridge has shown that very weak acids of the acetic series are
highly injurious to seeds. It never occurred to me to observe whether
seeds are often blown on to the viscid leaves of plants growing in a
state of nature; but this can hardly fail sometimes to occur, as we
shall hereafter see in the case of Pinguicula. If so, Drosera will
profit to a slight degree by absorbing matter from such seeds.]

Summary and Concluding Remarks on the Digestive Power of Drosera.

When the glands on the disc are excited either by the absorption of
nitrogenous matter or by mechanical irritation, their secretion
increases in quantity and becomes acid. They likewise transmit [page
129] some influence to the glands of the exterior tentacles, causing
them to secrete more copiously; and their secretion likewise becomes
acid.  With animals, according to Schiff,* mechanical irritation
excites the glands of the stomach to secrete an acid, but not pepsin.
Now, I have every reason to believe (though the fact is not fully
established), that although the glands of Drosera are continually
secreting viscid fluid to replace that lost by evaporation, yet they do
not secrete the ferment proper for digestion when mechanically
irritated, but only after absorbing certain matter, probably of a
nitrogenous nature. I infer that this is the case, as the secretion
from a large number of leaves which had been irritated by particles of
glass placed on their discs did not digest albumen; and more especially
from the analogy of Dionaea and Nepenthes. In like manner, the glands
of the stomach of animals secrete pepsin, as Schiff asserts, only after
they have absorbed certain soluble substances, which he designates as
peptogenes. There is, therefore, a remarkable parallelism between the
glands of Drosera and those of the stomach in the secretion of their
proper acid and ferment.

The secretion, as we have seen, completely dissolves albumen, muscle,
fibrin, areolar tissue, cartilage, the fibrous basis of bone, gelatine,
chondrin, casein in the state in which it exists in milk, and gluten
which has been subjected to weak hydrochloric acid. Syntonin and
legumin excite the leaves so powerfully and quickly that there can
hardly be a doubt that both would be dissolved by the secretion. The
secretion

* 'Phys. de la Digestion,' 1867, tom. ii. pp. 188, 245.  [page 130]

failed to digest fresh gluten, apparently from its injuring the glands,
though some was absorbed. Raw meat, unless in very small bits, and
large pieces of albumen, &c., likewise injure the leaves, which seem to
suffer, like animals, from a surfeit. I know not whether the analogy is
a real one, but it is worth notice that a decoction of cabbage leaves
is far more exciting and probably nutritious to Drosera than an
infusion made with tepid water; and boiled cabbages are far more
nutritious, at least to man, than the uncooked leaves. The most
striking of all the cases, though not really more remarkable than many
others, is the digestion of so hard and tough a substance as cartilage.
The dissolution of pure phosphate of lime, of bone, dentine, and
especially enamel, seems wonderful; but it depends merely on the
long-continued secretion of an acid; and this is secreted for a longer
time under these circumstances than under any others. It was
interesting to observe that as long as the acid was consumed in
dissolving the phosphate of lime, no true digestion occurred; but that
as soon as the bone was completely decalcified, the fibrous basis was
attacked and liquefied with the greatest ease. The twelve substances
above enumerated, which are completely dissolved by the secretion, are
likewise dissolved by the gastric juice of the higher animals; and they
are acted on in the same manner, as shown by the rounding of the angles
of albumen, and more especially by the manner in which the transverse
striae of the fibres of muscle disappear.

The secretion of Drosera and gastric juice were both able to dissolve
some element or impurity out of the globulin and haematin employed by
me. The secretion also dissolved something out of chemically [page 131]
prepared casein, which is said to consist of two substances; and
although Schiff asserts that casein in this state is not attacked by
gastric juice, he might easily have overlooked a minute quantity of
some albuminous matter, which Drosera would detect and absorb. Again,
fibro-cartilage, though not properly dissolved, is acted on in the same
manner, both by the secretion of Drosera and gastric juice. But this
substance, as well as the so-called haematin used by me, ought perhaps
to have been classed with indigestible substances.

That gastric juice acts by means of its ferment, pepsin, solely in the
presence of an acid, is well established; and we have excellent
evidence that a ferment is present in the secretion of Drosera, which
likewise acts only in the presence of an acid; for we have seen that
when the secretion is neutralised by minute drops of the solution of an
alkali, the digestion of albumen is completely stopped, and that on the
addition of a minute dose of hydrochloric acid it immediately
recommences.

The nine following substances, or classes of substances, namely,
epidermic productions, fibro-elastic tissue, mucin, pepsin, urea,
chitine, cellulose, gun-cotton, chlorophyll, starch, fat and oil, are
not acted on by the secretion of Drosera; nor are they, as far as is
known, by the gastric juice of animals. Some soluble matter, however,
was extracted from the mucin, pepsin, and chlorophyll, used by me, both
by the secretion and by artificial gastric juice.

The several substances, which are completely dissolved by the
secretion, and which are afterwards absorbed by the glands, affect the
leaves rather differently. They induce inflection at very different
[page 132] rates and in very different degrees; and the tentacles
remain inflected for very different periods of time. Quick inflection
depends partly on the quantity of the substance given, so that many
glands are simultaneously affected, partly on the facility with which
it is penetrated and liquefied by the secretion, partly on its nature,
but chiefly on the presence of exciting matter already in solution.
Thus saliva, or a weak solution of raw meat, acts much more quickly
than even a strong solution of gelatine. So again leaves which have
re-expanded, after absorbing drops of a solution of pure gelatine or
isinglass (the latter being the more powerful of the two), if given
bits of meat, are inflected much more energetically and quickly than
they were before, notwithstanding that some rest is generally requisite
between two acts of inflection. We probably see the influence of
texture in gelatine and globulin when softened by having been soaked in
water acting more quickly than when merely wetted. It may be partly due
to changed texture, and partly to changed chemical nature, that
albumen, which had been kept for some time, and gluten which had been
subjected to weak hydrochloric acid, act more quickly than these
substances in their fresh state.

The length of time during which the tentacles remain inflected largely
depends on the quantity of the substance given, partly on the facility
with which it is penetrated or acted on by the secretion, and partly on
its essential nature. The tentacles always remain inflected much longer
over large bits or large drops than over small bits or drops. Texture
probably plays a part in determining the extraordinary length of time
during which the tentacles remain inflected [page 133] over the hard
grains of chemically prepared casein. But the tentacles remain
inflected for an equally long time over finely powdered, precipitated
phosphate of lime; phosphorus in this latter case evidently being the
attraction, and animal matter in the case of casein. The leaves remain
long inflected over insects, but it is doubtful how far this is due to
the protection afforded by their chitinous integuments; for animal
matter is soon extracted from insects (probably by exosmose from their
bodies into the dense surrounding secretion), as shown by the prompt
inflection of the leaves. We see the influence of the nature of
different substances in bits of meat, albumen, and fresh gluten acting
very differently from equal-sized bits of gelatine, areolar tissue, and
the fibrous basis of bone. The former cause not only far more prompt
and energetic, but more prolonged, inflection than do the latter. Hence
we are, I think, justified in believing that gelatine, areolar tissue,
and the fibrous basis of bone, would be far less nutritious to Drosera
than such substances as insects, meat, albumen, &c. This is an
interesting conclusion, as it is known that gelatine affords but little
nutriment to animals; and so, probably, would areolar tissue and the
fibrous basis of bone. The chondrin which I used acted more powerfully
than gelatine, but then I do not know that it was pure. It is a more
remarkable fact that fibrin, which belongs to the great class of
Proteids,* including albumen in one of its sub-groups, does not excite
the tentacles in a greater degree, or keep them inflected for a longer
time, than does gelatine, or

* See the classification adopted by Dr. Michael Foster in Watts'
'Dictionary of Chemistry,' Supplement 1872, page 969.  [page 134]

areolar tissue, or the fibrous basis of bone. It is not known how long
an animal would survive if fed on fibrin alone, but Dr. Sanderson has
no doubt longer than on gelatine, and it would be hardly rash to
predict, judging from the effects on Drosera, that albumen would be
found more nutritious than fibrin. Globulin likewise belongs to the
Proteids, forming another sub-group, and this substance, though
containing some matter which excited Drosera rather strongly, was
hardly attacked by the secretion, and was very little or very slowly
attacked by gastric juice. How far globulin would be nutritious to
animals is not known. We thus see how differently the above specified
several digestible substances act on Drosera; and we may infer, as
highly probable, that they would in like manner be nutritious in very
different degrees both to Drosera and to animals.

The glands of Drosera absorb matter from living seeds, which are
injured or killed by the secretion. They likewise absorb matter from
pollen, and from fresh leaves; and this is notoriously the case with
the stomachs of vegetable-feeding animals. Drosera is properly an
insectivorous plant; but as pollen cannot fail to be often blown on to
the glands, as will occasionally the seeds and leaves of surrounding
plants, Drosera is, to a certain extent, a vegetable-feeder.

Finally, the experiments recorded in this chapter show us that there is
a remarkable accordance in the power of digestion between the gastric
juice of animals with its pepsin and hydrochloric acid and the
secretion of Drosera with its ferment and acid belonging to the acetic
series. We can, therefore, hardly doubt that the ferment in both cases
is closely similar, [page 135] if not identically the same. That a
plant and an animal should pour forth the same, or nearly the same,
complex secretion, adapted for the same purpose of digestion, is a new
and wonderful fact in physiology. But I shall have to recur to this
subject in the fifteenth chapter, in my concluding remarks on the
Droseraceae.  [page 136]



                          CHAPTER VII.

                THE EFFECTS OF SALTS OF AMMONIA.

Manner of performing the experiments--Action of distilled water in
comparison with the solutions--Carbonate of ammonia, absorbed by the
roots--The vapour absorbed by the glands- -Drops on the disc--Minute
drops applied to separate glands--Leaves immersed in weak
solutions--Minuteness of the doses which induce aggregation of the
protoplasm--Nitrate of ammonia, analogous experiments with--Phosphate
of ammonia, analogous experiments with- -Other salts of
ammonia--Summary and concluding remarks on the action of salts of
ammonia.

THE chief object in this chapter is to show how powerfully the salts of
ammonia act on the leaves of Drosera, and more especially to show what
an extraordinarily small quantity suffices to excite inflection. I
shall, therefore, be compelled to enter into full details. Doubly
distilled water was always used; and for the more delicate experiments,
water which had been prepared with the utmost possible care was given
me by Professor Frankland. The graduated measures were tested, and
found as accurate as such measures can be. The salts were carefully
weighed, and in all the more delicate experiments, by Borda's double
method.  But extreme accuracy would have been superfluous, as the
leaves differ greatly in irritability, according to age, condition, and
constitution. Even the tentacles on the same leaf differ in
irritability to a marked degree. My experiments were tried in the
following several ways.

[Firstly.--Drops which were ascertained by repeated trials to be on an
average about half a minim, or the 1/960 of a fluid ounce (.0296 ml.),
were placed by the same pointed instrument on the [page 137] discs of
the leaves, and the inflection of the exterior rows of tentacles
observed at successive intervals of time. It was first ascertained,
from between thirty and forty trials, that distilled water dropped in
this manner produces no effect, except that sometimes, though rarely,
two or three tentacles become inflected. In fact all the many trials
with solutions which were so weak as to produce no effect lead to the
same result that water is inefficient.

Secondly.--The head of a small pin, fixed into a handle, was dipped
into the solution under trial. The small drop which adhered to it, and
which was much too small to fall off, was cautiously placed, by the aid
of a lens, in contact with the secretion surrounding the glands of one,
two, three, or four of the exterior tentacles of the same leaf. Great
care was taken that the glands themselves should not be touched. I had
supposed that the drops were of nearly the same size; but on trial this
proved a great mistake. I first measured some water, and removed 300
drops, touching the pin's head each time on blotting-paper; and on
again measuring the water, a drop was found to equal on an average
about the 1/60 of a minim. Some water in a small vessel was weighed
(and this is a more accurate method), and 300 drops removed as before;
and on again weighing the water, a drop was found to equal on an
average only the 1/89 of a minim. I repeated the operation, but
endeavoured this time, by taking the pin's head out of the water
obliquely and rather quickly, to remove as large drops as possible; and
the result showed that I had succeeded, for each drop on an average
equalled 1/19.4 of a minim. I repeated the operation in exactly the
same manner, and now the drops averaged 1/23.5 of a minim. Bearing in
mind that on these two latter occasions special pains were taken to
remove as large drops as possible, we may safely conclude that the
drops used in my experiments were at least equal to the 1/20 of a
minim, or .0029 ml. One of these drops could be applied to three or
even four glands, and if the tentacles became inflected, some of the
solution must have been absorbed by all; for drops of pure water,
applied in the same manner, never produced any effect. I was able to
hold the drop in steady contact with the secretion only for ten to
fifteen seconds; and this was not time enough for the diffusion of all
the salt in solution, as was evident, from three or four tentacles
treated successively with the same drop, often becoming inflected. All
the matter in solution was even then probably not exhausted.

Thirdly.--Leaves cut off and immersed in a measured [page 138] quantity
of the solution under trial; the same number of leaves being immersed
at the same time, in the same quantity of the distilled water which had
been used in making the solution.  The leaves in the two lots were
compared at short intervals of time, up to 24 hrs., and sometimes to 48
hrs. They were immersed by being laid as gently as possible in numbered
watch-glasses, and thirty minims (1.775 ml.) of the solution or of
water was poured over each.

Some solutions, for instance that of carbonate of ammonia, quickly
discolour the glands; and as all on the same leaf were discoloured
simultaneously, they must all have absorbed some of the salt within the
same short period of time. This was likewise shown by the simultaneous
inflection of the several exterior rows of tentacles. If we had no such
evidence as this, it might have been supposed that only the glands of
the exterior and inflected tentacles had absorbed the salt; or that
only those on the disc had absorbed it, and had then transmitted a
motor impulse to the exterior tentacles; but in this latter case the
exterior tentacles would not have become inflected until some time had
elapsed, instead of within half an hour, or even within a few minutes,
as usually occurred. All the glands on the same leaf are of nearly the
same size, as may best be seen by cutting off a narrow transverse
strip, and laying it on its side; hence their absorbing surfaces are
nearly equal. The long-headed glands on the extreme margin must be
excepted, as they are much longer than the others; but only the upper
surface is capable of absorption. Besides the glands, both surfaces of
the leaves and the pedicels of the tentacles bear numerous minute
papillae, which absorb carbonate of ammonia, an infusion of raw meat,
metallic salts, and probably many other substances, but the absorption
of matter by these papillae never induces inflection. We must remember
that the movement of each separate tentacle depends on its gland being
excited, except when a motor impulse is transmitted from the glands of
the disc, and then the movement, as just stated, does not take place
until some little time has elapsed. I have made these remarks because
they show us that when a leaf is immersed in a solution, and the
tentacles are inflected, we can judge with some accuracy how much of
the salt each gland has absorbed. For instance, if a leaf bearing 212
glands be immersed in a measured quantity of a solution, containing
1/10 of a grain of a salt, and all the exterior tentacles, except
twelve, are inflected, we may feel sure that each of the 200 glands can
