
"Those that remained about the field were real.  Those we loosed
as scavengers to devour the bodies of the dead of Torquas.  This
thing is demanded by the realists among us.  I am a realist.  Tario
is an etherealist.

"The etherealists maintain that there is no such thing as
matter--that all is mind.  They say that none of us exists, except
in the imagination of his fellows, other than as an intangible,
invisible mentality.

"According to Tario, it is but necessary that we all unite in
imagining that there are no dead Torquasians beneath our walls,
and there will be none, nor any need of scavenging banths."

"You, then, do not hold Tario's beliefs?" asked Carthoris.

"In part only," replied the Lotharian.  "I believe, in fact I know,
that there are some truly ethereal creatures.  Tario is one, I am
convinced.  He has no existence except in the imaginations of his
people.

"Of course, it is the contention of all us realists that all
etherealists are but figments of the imagination.  They contend
that no food is necessary, nor do they eat; but any one of the most
rudimentary intelligence must realize that food is a necessity to
creatures having actual existence."

"Yes," agreed Carthoris, "not having eaten to-day I can readily
agree with you."

"Ah, pardon me," exclaimed Jav.  "Pray be seated and satisfy your
hunger," and with a wave of his hand he indicated a bountifully
laden table that had not been there an instant before he spoke.  Of
that Carthoris was positive, for he had searched the room diligently
with his eyes several times.

"It is well," continued Jav, "that you did not fall into the hands
of an etherealist.  Then, indeed, would you have gone hungry."

"But," exclaimed Carthoris, "this is not real food--it was not here
an instant since, and real food does not materialize out of thin
air."

Jav looked hurt.

"There is no real food or water in Lothar," he said; "nor has there
been for countless ages.  Upon such as you now see before you have
we existed since the dawn of history.  Upon such, then, may you
exist."

"But I thought you were a realist," exclaimed Carthoris.

"Indeed," cried Jav, "what more realistic than this bounteous feast?
It is just here that we differ most from the etherealists.  They
claim that it is unnecessary to imagine food; but we have found
that for the maintenance of life we must thrice daily sit down to
hearty meals.

"The food that one eats is supposed to undergo certain chemical
changes during the process of digestion and assimilation, the
result, of course, being the rebuilding of wasted tissue.

"Now we all know that mind is all, though we may differ in the
interpretation of its various manifestations.  Tario maintains
that there is no such thing as substance, all being created from
the substanceless matter of the brain.

"We realists, however, know better.  We know that mind has the
power to maintain substance even though it may not be able to create
substance--the latter is still an open question.  And so we know
that in order to maintain our physical bodies we must cause all
our organs properly to function.

"This we accomplish by materializing food-thoughts, and by partaking
of the food thus created.  We chew, we swallow, we digest.  All our
organs function precisely as if we had partaken of material food.
And what is the result?  What must be the result?  The chemical
changes take place through both direct and indirect suggestion,
and we live and thrive."

Carthoris eyed the food before him.  It seemed real enough.  He
lifted a morsel to his lips.  There was substance indeed.  And
flavour as well.  Yes, even his palate was deceived.

Jav watched him, smiling, as he ate.

"Is it not entirely satisfying?" he asked.

"I must admit that it is," replied Carthoris.  "But tell me, how
does Tario live, and the other etherealists who maintain that food
is unnecessary?"

Jav scratched his head.

"That is a question we often discuss," he replied.  "It is the
strongest evidence we have of the non-existence of the etherealists;
but who may know other than Komal?"

"Who is Komal?" asked Carthoris.  "I heard your jeddak speak of
him."

Jav bent low toward the ear of the Heliumite, looking fearfully
about before he spoke.

"Komal is the essence," he whispered.  "Even the etherealists
admit that mind itself must have substance in order to transmit to
imaginings the appearance of substance.  For if there really was
no such thing as substance it could not be suggested--what never
has been cannot be imagined.  Do you follow me?"

"I am groping," replied Carthoris dryly.

"So the essence must be substance," continued Jav.  "Komal is the
essence of the All, as it were.  He is maintained by substance.
He eats.  He eats the real.  To be explicit, he eats the realists.
That is Tario's work.

"He says that inasmuch as we maintain that we alone are real we
should, to be consistent, admit that we alone are proper food for
Komal.  Sometimes, as to-day, we find other food for him.  He is
very fond of Torquasians."

"And Komal is a man?" asked Carthoris.

"He is All, I told you," replied Jav.  "I know not how to explain
him in words that you will understand.  He is the beginning and
the end.  All life emanates from Komal, since the substance which
feeds the brain with imaginings radiates from the body of Komal.

"Should Komal cease to eat, all life upon Barsoom would cease to be.
He cannot die, but he might cease to eat, and, thus, to radiate."

"And he feeds upon the men and women of your belief?" cried Carthoris.

"Women!" exclaimed Jav.  "There are no women in Lothar.  The last
of the Lotharian females perished ages since, upon that cruel and
terrible journey across the muddy plains that fringed the half-dried
seas, when the green hordes scourged us across the world to this
our last hiding-place--our impregnable fortress of Lothar.

"Scarce twenty thousand men of all the countless millions of our
race lived to reach Lothar.  Among us were no women and no children.
All these had perished by the way.

"As time went on, we, too, were dying and the race fast approaching
extinction, when the Great Truth was revealed to us, that mind is
all.  Many more died before we perfected our powers, but at last
we were able to defy death when we fully understood that death was
merely a state of mind.

"Then came the creation of mind-people, or rather the materialization
of imaginings.  We first put these to practical use when the
Torquasians discovered our retreat, and fortunate for us it was
that it required ages of search upon their part before they found
the single tiny entrance to the valley of Lothar.

"That day we threw our first bowmen against them.  The intention
was purely to frighten them away by the vast numbers of bowmen which
we could muster upon our walls.  All Lothar bristled with the bows
and arrows of our ethereal host.

"But the Torquasians did not frighten.  They are lower than the
beasts--they know no fear.  They rushed upon our walls, and standing
upon the shoulders of others they built human approaches to the
wall tops, and were on the very point of surging in upon us and
overwhelming us.

"Not an arrow had been discharged by our bowmen--we did but cause
them to run to and fro along the wall top, screaming taunts and
threats at the enemy.

"Presently I thought to attempt the thing--THE GREAT THING.  I centred
all my mighty intellect upon the bowmen of my own creation--each
of us produces and directs as many bowmen as his mentality and
imagination is capable of.

"I caused them to fit arrows to their bows for the first time.  I
made them take aim at the hearts of the green men.  I made the
green men see all this, and then I made them see the arrows fly,
and I made them think that the points pierced their hearts.

"It was all that was necessary.  By hundreds they toppled from
our walls, and when my fellows saw what I had done they were quick
to follow my example, so that presently the hordes of Torquas had
retreated beyond the range of our arrows.

"We might have killed them at any distance, but one rule of war we
have maintained from the first--the rule of realism.  We do nothing,
or rather we cause our bowmen to do nothing within sight of the
enemy that is beyond the understanding of the foe.  Otherwise they
might guess the truth, and that would be the end of us.

"But after the Torquasians had retreated beyond bowshot, they turned
upon us with their terrible rifles, and by constant popping at us
made life miserable within our walls.

"So then I bethought the scheme to hurl our bowmen through the
gates upon them.  You have seen this day how well it works.  For
ages they have come down upon us at intervals, but always with the
same results."

"And all this is due to your intellect, Jav?" asked Carthoris.  "I
should think that you would be high in the councils of your people."

"I am," replied Jav, proudly.  "I am next to Tario."

"But why, then, your cringing manner of approaching the throne?"

"Tario demands it.  He is jealous of me.  He only awaits the
slightest excuse to feed me to Komal.  He fears that I may some
day usurp his power."

Carthoris suddenly sprang from the table.

"Jav!" he exclaimed.  "I am a beast!  Here I have been eating my
fill, while the Princess of Ptarth may perchance be still without
food.  Let us return and find some means of furnishing her with
nourishment."

The Lotharian shook his head.

"Tario would not permit it," he said.  "He will, doubtless, make
an etherealist of her."

"But I must go to her," insisted Carthoris.  "You say that there
are no women in Lothar.  Then she must be among men, and if this
be so I intend to be near where I may defend her if the need arises."

"Tario will have his way," insisted Jav.  "He sent you away and
you may not return until he sends for you."

"Then I shall go without waiting to be sent for."

"Do not forget the bowmen," cautioned Jav.

"I do not forget them," replied Carthoris, but he did not tell
Jav that he remembered something else that the Lotharian had let
drop--something that was but a conjecture, possibly, and yet one
well worth pinning a forlorn hope to, should necessity arise.

Carthoris started to leave the room.  Jav stepped before him,
barring his way.

"I have learned to like you, red man," he said; "but do not forget
that Tario is still my jeddak, and that Tario has commanded that
you remain here."

Carthoris was about to reply, when there came faintly to the ears
of both a woman's cry for help.

With a sweep of his arm the Prince of Helium brushed the Lotharian
aside, and with drawn sword sprang into the corridor without.




CHAPTER VIII

THE HALL OF DOOM


As Thuvia of Ptarth saw Carthoris depart from the presence of Tario,
leaving her alone with the man, a sudden qualm of terror seized
her.

There was an air of mystery pervading the stately chamber.  Its
furnishings and appointments bespoke wealth and culture, and
carried the suggestion that the room was often the scene of royal
functions which filled it to its capacity.

And yet nowhere about her, in antechamber or corridor, was there
sign of any other being than herself and the recumbent figure of
Tario, the jeddak, who watched her through half-closed eyes from
the gorgeous trappings of his regal couch.

For a time after the departure of Jav and Carthoris the man eyed
her intently.  Then he spoke.

"Come nearer," he said, and, as she approached: "Whose creature
are you?  Who has dared materialize his imaginings of woman?  It is
contrary to the customs and the royal edicts of Lothar.  Tell me,
woman, from whose brain have you sprung?  Jav's?  No, do not deny
it.  I know that it could be no other than that envious realist.  He
seeks to tempt me.  He would see me fall beneath the spell of your
charms, and then he, your master, would direct my destiny and--my
end.  I see it all!  I see it all!"

The blood of indignation and anger had been rising to Thuvia's
face.  Her chin was up, a haughty curve upon her perfect lips.

"I know naught," she cried, "of what you are prating!  I am Thuvia,
Princess of Ptarth.  I am no man's 'creature.'  Never before to-day
did I lay eyes upon him you call Jav, nor upon your ridiculous city,
of which even the greatest nations of Barsoom have never dreamed.

"My charms are not for you, nor such as you.  They are not for
sale or barter, even though the price were a real throne.  And as
for using them to win your worse than futile power--"  She ended
her sentence with a shrug of her shapely shoulders, and a little
scornful laugh.

When she had finished Tario was sitting upon the edge of his
couch, his feet upon the floor.  He was leaning forward with eyes
no longer half closed, but wide with a startled expression in them.

He did not seem to note the LESE MAJESTE of her words and manner.
There was evidently something more startling and compelling about
her speech than that.

Slowly he came to his feet.

"By the fangs of Komal!" he muttered.  "But you are REAL!  A REAL
woman!  No dream!  No vain and foolish figment of the mind!"

He took a step toward her, with hands outstretched.

"Come!" he whispered.  "Come, woman!  For countless ages have I
dreamed that some day you would come.  And now that you are here
I can scarce believe the testimony of my eyes.  Even now, knowing
that you are real, I still half dread that you may be a lie."

Thuvia shrank back.  She thought the man mad.  Her hand stole to
the jewelled hilt of her dagger.  The man saw the move, and stopped.
A cunning expression entered his eyes.  Then they became at once
dreamy and penetrating as they fairly bored into the girl's brain.

Thuvia suddenly felt a change coming over her.  What the cause of
it she did not guess; but somehow the man before her began to assume
a new relationship within her heart.

No longer was he a strange and mysterious enemy, but an old and
