additional motive for their presence. Under cultivation, in well-watered
garden soil--and how many charming varieties of barberries are
cultivated--the thorny shrub loses much of its armor, putting forth many
more leaves, in rosettes, along more numerous twigs, instead. Even the
prickly pear cactus might become mild as a lamb were it to forswear
sandy deserts and live in marshes instead. Country people sometimes rob
the birds of the acid berries to make preserves. The wood furnishes a
yellow dye.




POPPY FAMILY _(Papaveraceae)_


Bloodroot; Indian Paint; Red Puccoon

_Sanguinaria canadensis_

_Flowers_--Pure white, rarely pinkish, golden centred, 1 to 1-1/2 in.
across, solitary, at end of a smooth, naked scape 6 to 14 in. tall.
Calyx of 2 short-lived sepals; corolla of 8 to 12 oblong petals, early
falling; stamens numerous; 1 short pistil composed of 2 carpels.
_Leaves:_ Rounded, deeply and palmately lobed, the 5 to 9 lobes often
cleft. _Rootstock:_ Thick, several inches long, with fibrous roots, and
filled with orange-red juice.

_Preferred Habitat_--Rich woods and borders; low hillsides.

_Flowering Season_--April-May.

_Distribution_--Nova Scotia to Florida, westward to Nebraska.

Snugly protected in a papery sheath enfolding a silvery-green
leaf-cloak, the solitary erect bud slowly rises from its embrace, sheds
its sepals, expands into an immaculate golden-centred blossom that,
poppy-like, offers but a glimpse of its fleeting loveliness ere it drops
its snow-white petals and is gone. But were the flowers less ephemeral,
were we always certain of hitting upon the very time its colonies are
starring the woodland, would it have so great a charm? Here to-day, if
there comes a sudden burst of warm sunshine; gone to-morrow, if the
spring winds, rushing through the nearly leafless woods, are too rude to
the fragile petals--no blossom has a more evanescent beauty, none is
more lovely. After its charms have been displayed, up rises the circular
leaf-cloak on its smooth reddish petiole, unrolls, and at length
overtops the narrow, oblong seed-vessel. Wound the plant in any part,
and there flows an orange-red juice, which old-fashioned mothers used to
drop on lumps of sugar and administer when their children had coughs and
colds. As this fluid stains whatever it touches--hence its value to the
Indians as a war-paint--one should be careful in picking the flower. It
has no value for cutting, of course; but in some rich, shady corner of
the garden, a clump of the plants will thrive and bring a suggestive
picture of the spring woods to our very doors. It will be noticed that
plants having thick rootstock, corms, and bulbs, which store up food
during the winter, like the irises, Solomon's seals, bloodroot, adder's
tongue, and crocuses, are prepared to rush into blossom far earlier in
spring than fibrous-rooted species that must accumulate nourishment
after the season has opened.


Greater Celandine; Swallow-wort

_Chelidonium majus_

_Flowers_--Lustreless yellow, about 1/2 in. across, on slender pedicels,
in a small umbel-like cluster. Sepals 2, soon falling; 4 petals, many
yellow stamens, pistil prominent. _Stem:_ Weak, 1 to 2 ft. high,
branching, slightly hairy, containing bright orange acrid juice.
_Leaves:_ Thin, 4 to 8 in. long, deeply cleft into 5 (usually) irregular
oval lobes, the terminal one largest. _Fruit:_ Smooth, slender, erect
pods, 1 to 2 in. long, tipped with the persistent style.

_Preferred Habitat_--Dry waste land, fields, roadsides, gardens, near
dwellings.

_Flowering Season_--April-September.

_Distribution_--Naturalized from Europe in eastern United States.

Not this weak invader of our roadsides, whose four yellow petals suggest
one of the cross-bearing mustard tribe, but the pert little Lesser
Celandine, Pilewort, or Figwort Buttercup (_Ficaria Ficaria_), one of
the crowfoot family, whose larger solitary satiny yellow flowers so
commonly star European pastures, was Wordsworth's special delight--a
tiny, turf-loving plant, about which much poetical association clusters.
Having stolen passage across the Atlantic, it is now making itself at
home about College Point, Long Island; on Staten Island; near
Philadelphia, and maybe elsewhere. Doubtless it will one day overrun our
fields, as so many other European immigrants have done.

The generic Greek name of the greater celandine, meaning a swallow, was
given it because it begins to bloom when the first returning swallows
are seen skimming over the water and freshly ploughed fields in a
perfect ecstasy of flight, and continues in flower among its erect seed
capsules until the first cool days of autumn kill the gnats and small
winged insects not driven to cover. Then the swallows, dependent on such
fare, must go to warmer climes where plenty still fly. Quaint old
Gerarde claims that the Swallow-wort was so called because "with this
herbe the dams restore eyesight to their young ones when their eye be
put out" by swallows. Coles asserts "the swallow cureth her dim eyes
with Celandine."




FUMITORY FAMILY _(Fumariaceae)_


Dutchman's Breeches; White Hearts; Soldier's Cap; Ear-drops

_Dicentra Cucullaria_

_Flowers_--White, tipped with yellow, nodding in a 1-sided raceme. Two
scale-like sepals; corolla of 4 petals, in 2 pairs, somewhat cohering
into a heart-shaped, flattened, irregular flower, the outer pair of
petals extended into 2 widely spread spurs, the small inner petals
united above; 6 stamens in 2 sets; style slender, with a 2-lobed stigma.
_Scape: 5_ to 10 in. high, smooth, from a bulbous root. _Leaves:_ Finely
cut, thrice compound, pale beneath, on slender petioles, all from base.

_Preferred Habitat_--Rich, rocky woods.

_Flowering Season_--April-May.

_Distribution_--Nova Scotia to the Carolinas, west to Nebraska.

Rich leaf mould, accumulated between crevices of rock, makes the ideal
home of this delicate yet striking flower, coarse-named, but refined in
all its parts. Consistent with the dainty, heart-shaped blossoms that
hang trembling along the slender stem like pendants from a lady's ear,
are the finely dissected, lace-like leaves, the whole plant repudiating
by its femininity its most popular name. It was Thoreau who observed
that only those plants which require but little light, and can stand the
drip of trees, prefer to dwell in the woods--plants which have commonly
more beauty in their leaves than in their pale and almost colorless
blossoms. Certainly few woodland dwellers have more delicately beautiful
foliage than the fumitory tribe.


Squirrel Corn

_Dicentra canadensis_

_Flowers_--Irregular, greenish white tinged with rose, slightly
fragrant, heart-shaped, with 2 short rounded spurs, more than 1/2 in.
long, nodding on a slender Calyx of 2 scale-like sepals; corolla
heart-shaped at base, consisting of 4 petals in 2 united pairs, a
prominent crest on tips of inner ones; 6 stamens in 2 sets; style with
2-lobed stigma. _Scape_; Smooth, 6 to 12 in. high, the rootstock bearing
many small, round, yellow tubers like kernels of corn. _Leaves_: All
from root, delicate, compounded of 3 very finely dissected divisions.

_Preferred Habitat_--Rich, moist woods.

_Flowering Season_--May-June.

_Distribution_--Nova Scotia to Virginia, and westward to the
Mississippi.

Any one familiar with the Bleeding-heart _(Dicentra eximia)_ of
old-fashioned gardens, found growing wild in the Alleghanies, and with
the exquisite White Mountain Fringe _(Adlumia fungosa)_ often brought
from the woods to be planted over shady trellises, or with the
Dutchman's breeches, need not be told that the little squirrel corn is
next of kin or far removed from the Pink Corydalis. It is not until we
dig up the plant and look at its roots that we see why it received its
name. A delicious perfume like hyacinths, only fainter and subtler,
rises from the dainty blossoms.




MUSTARD FAMILY _(Cruciferae)_


Shepherd's Purse; Mother's Heart

_Capsella Bursa-pastoris_

_Flowers_--Small, white, in a long, loose raceme, followed by triangular
and notched (somewhat heart-shaped) pods, the valves boat-shaped and
keeled. Sepals and petals 4; stamens 6; 1 pistil. _Stem:_ 6 to 18 in.
high, from a deep root. _Leaves:_ Forming a rosette at base, 2 to 5 in.
long, more or less cut (pinnatifid), a few pointed, arrow-shaped leaves
also scattered along stem and partly clasping it.

_Preferred Habitat_--Fields, roadsides, waste places.

_Flowering Season_--Almost throughout the year.

_Distribution_--Over nearly all parts of the earth.

From Europe this little low plant found its way, to become the commonest
of our weeds, so completing its march around the globe. At a glance one
knows it to be related to the alyssum and candytuft of our gardens,
albeit a poor relation in spite of its vaunted purses--the tiny,
heart-shaped seed-pods that so rapidly succeed the flowers. What is the
secret of its successful march over the face of the earth? Like the
equally triumphant chickweed, it is easily satisfied with unoccupied
waste land, it avoids the fiercest competition for insect trade by
prolonging its season of bloom far beyond that of any native flower, for
there is not a month in the year when one may not find it even in New
England in sheltered places.


Black Mustard

_Brassica nigra_

_Flowers_--Bright yellow, fading pale, 1/4 to 1/2 in. across, 4-parted,
in elongated racemes; quickly followed by narrow, upright 4-sided pods
about 1/2 in. long appressed against the stem. _Stem:_ Erect, 2 to 7 ft.
tall, branching. _Leaves:_ Variously lobed and divided, finely toothed,
the terminal lobe larger than the 2 to 4 side ones.

_Preferred Habitat_--Roadsides, fields, neglected gardens.

_Flowering Season_--June-November.

_Distribution_--Common throughout our area; naturalized from
Europe and Asia.

    "The kingdom of heaven is like unto a grain of mustard seed,
    which a man took and sowed in his field: which indeed is less
    than all seeds; but when it is grown, it is greater than the
    herbs, and becometh a tree, so that the birds of the air come
    and lodge in the branches thereof."

Commentators differ as to which is the mustard of the parable--this
common Black Mustard, or a rarer shrub-like tree (_Salvadora Persica_),
with an equivalent Arabic name, a pungent odor, and a very small seed.
Inasmuch as the mustard which is systematically planted for fodder by
Old World farmers grows with the greatest luxuriance in Palestine, and
the comparison between the size of its seed and the plant's great height
was already proverbial in the East when Jesus used it, evidence strongly
favors this wayside weed. Indeed, the late Doctor Royle, who endeavored
to prove that it was the shrub that was referred to, finally found that
it does not grow in Galilee.

Now, there are two species which furnish the most powerfully pungent
condiment known to commerce; but the tiny dark brown seeds of the Black
Mustard are sharper than the serpent's tooth, whereas the pale brown
seeds of the White Mustard, often mixed with them, are far more mild.
The latter (_Brassica alba_) is a similar, but more hairy, plant, with
slightly larger yellow flowers. Its pods are constricted like a
necklace between the seeds.

The coarse Hedge Mustard (_Sisymbrium officinale_), with rigid,
spreading branches, and spikes of tiny pale yellow flowers, quickly
followed by awl-shaped pods that are closely appressed to the stem,
abounds in waste places throughout our area. It blooms from May to
November, like the next species.

Another common and most troublesome weed from Europe is the Field or
Corn Mustard, Charlock or Field Kale (_Brassica arvensis_) found in
grain fields, gardens, rich waste lands, and rubbish heaps. The
alternate leaves, which stand boldly out from the stem, are oval,
coarsely saw-toothed, or the lower ones more irregular, and lobed at
their bases, all rough to the touch, and conspicuously veined.




PITCHER-PLANT FAMILY _(Sarracenaceae)_


Pitcher-plant; Side-saddle Flower; Huntsman's Cup; Indian Dipper

_Sarracenea purpurea_

_Flower_--Deep reddish purple, sometimes partly greenish, pink, or red,
2 in. or more across, globose; solitary, nodding from scape 1 to 2 ft.
tall. Calyx of 5 sepals, with 3 or 4 bracts at base; 5 overlapping
petals, enclosing a yellowish, umbrella-shaped dilation of the style,
with 5 rays terminating in 5-hooked stigmas; stamens indefinite.
_Leaves:_ Hollow, pitcher-shaped through the folding together of their
margins, leaving a broad wing; much inflated, hooded, yellowish green
with dark maroon or purple lines and veinings, 4 to 12 in. long, curved,
in a tuft from the root.

_Preferred Habitat_--Peat-bogs; spongy, mossy swamps.

_Flowering Season_--May-June.

_Distribution_--Labrador to the Rocky Mountains, south to Florida,
Kentucky, and Minnesota.

   "What's this I hear
       About the new carnivora?
       Can little plants
       Eat bugs and ants
       And gnats and flies?
   A sort of retrograding:
       Surely the fare
       Of flowers is air
       Or sunshine sweet;
       They shouldn't eat
   Or do aught so degrading!"

There must always be something shocking in the sacrifice of the higher
life to the lower, of the sensate to what we are pleased to call the
insensate, although no one who has studied the marvellously intelligent
motives that impel a plant's activities can any longer consider the
vegetable creation as lacking sensibility. Science is at length giving
us a glimmering of the meaning of the word universe, teaching, as it
does, that all creatures in sharing the One Life share in many of its
powers, and differ from one another only in degree of possession, not in
kind. The transition from one so-called kingdom into another presumably
higher one is a purely arbitrary line marked by man, and often
impossible to define. The animalcule and the insectivorous plant know no
boundaries between the animal and the vegetable. And who shall say that
the sundew or the bladderwort is not a higher organism than the amoeba?
Animated plants and vegetating animals parallel each other. Several
hundred carnivorous plants in all parts of the world have now been named
by scientists.

It is well worth a journey to some spongy, sphagnum bog to gather clumps
of pitcher-plants which will furnish an interesting study to an entire
household throughout the summer while they pursue their nefarious
business in a shallow bowl on the veranda. A modification of the petiole
forms a deep, hollow pitcher having for its spout a modification of the
blade of the leaf. Usually the pitchers are half filled with water and
tiny drowned victims when we gather them. Some of this fluid must be
rain, but the open pitcher secretes much juice, too. Certain relatives,
whose pitchers have hooded lids that keep out rain, are nevertheless
filled with fluid. On the Pacific Coast the golden jars of _Darlingtonia
californica_, with their overarching hoods, are often so large and
watery as to drown small birds and field mice. Note in passing that
these otherwise dark prisons have translucent spots at the top, whereas
our pitcher-plant is lighted through its open transom.

A sweet secretion within the pitcher's rim, which some say is
intoxicating, others that it is an anesthetic, invites insects to a
fatal feast. It is a simple enough matter for them to walk into the
pitcher over the band of stiff hairs pointing downward like the withes
of a lobster pot, that form an inner covering, or to slip into the well
