court of mystery.  "Eleven devils.  Plenty soon come bung'low.  What
do?"

Number Thirteen had seen von Horn's extra bull whip hanging upon a peg
in the living room.  For answer he stepped into that room and took the
weapon down.  Then he returned to the professor's side.

Outside the frightened monsters groped through the blinding rain and
darkness in search of shelter.  Each vivid lightning flash, and
bellowing of booming thunder brought responsive cries of rage and
terror from their hideous lips.  It was Number Twelve who first spied
the dim light showing through the bungalow's living room window.  With
a low guttural to his companions he started toward the building.  Up
the low steps to the verandah they crept.  Number Twelve peered through
the window.  He saw no one within, but there was warmth and dryness.

His little knowledge and lesser reasoning faculties suggested no
thought of a doorway.  With a blow he shattered the glass of the
window.  Then he forced his body through the narrow aperture.  At the
same moment a gust of wind sucking through the broken panes drew open
the door, and as Number Thirteen, warned by the sound of breaking
glass, sprang into the living room he was confronted by the entire
horde of misshapen beings.

His heart went out in pity toward the miserable crew, but he knew that
his life as well as those of the two men in the adjoining room depended
upon the force and skill with which he might handle the grave crisis
which confronted them.  He had seen and talked with most of the
creatures when from time to time they had been brought singly into the
workshop that their creator might mitigate the wrong he had done by
training the poor minds with which he had endowed them to reason
intelligently.

A few were hopeless imbeciles, unable to comprehend more than the
rudimentary requirements of filling their bellies when food was placed
before them; yet even these were endowed with superhuman strength; and
when aroused battled the more fiercely for the very reason of their
brainlessness.  Others, like Number Twelve, were of a higher order of
intelligence.  They spoke English, and, after a fashion, reasoned in a
crude sort of way.  These were by far the most dangerous, for as the
power of comparison is the fundamental principle of reasoning, so they
were able to compare their lot with that of the few other men they had
seen, and with the help of von Horn to partially appreciate the
horrible wrong that had been done them.

Von Horn, too, had let them know the identity of their creator, and
thus implanted in their malformed brains the insidious poison of
revenge.  Envy and jealousy were there as well, and hatred of all
beings other than themselves.  They envied the ease and comparative
beauty of the old professor and his assistant, and hated the latter for
the cruelty of the bull whip and the constant menace of the ever ready
revolver; and so as they were to them the representatives of the great
human world of which they could never be a part, their envy and
jealousy and hatred of these men embraced the entire race which they
represented.

It was such that Number Thirteen faced as he emerged from the
professor's apartment.

"What do you want here?" he said, addressing Number Twelve, who stood a
little in advance of the others.

"We have come for Maxon," growled the creature.  "We have been penned
up long enough.  We want to be out here.  We have come to kill Maxon
and you and all who have made us what we are."

"Why do you wish to kill me?" asked the young man.  "I am one of you.
I was made in the same way that you were made."

Number Twelve opened his mismated eyes in astonishment.

"Then you have already killed Maxon?" he asked.

"No.  He was wounded by a savage enemy.  I have been helping to make
him well again.  He has wronged me as much as he has you.  If I do not
wish to kill him, why should you?  He did not mean to wrong us.  He
thought that he was doing right.  He is in trouble now and we should
stay and protect him."

"He lies," suddenly shouted another of the horde.  "He is not one of
us.  Kill him!  Kill him!  Kill Maxon, too, and then we shall be as
other men, for it is these men who keep us as we are."

The fellow started forward toward Number Thirteen as he spoke, and
moved by the impulse of imitation the others came on with him.

"I have spoken fairly to you," said Number Thirteen in a low voice.
"If you cannot understand fairness here is something you can
understand."

Raising the bull whip above his head the young giant leaped among the
advancing brutes and lay about him with mighty strokes that put to
shame the comparatively feeble blows with which von Horn had been wont
to deal out punishment to the poor, damned creatures of the court of
mystery.

For a moment they stood valiantly before his attack, but after two had
grappled with him and been hurled headlong to the floor they gave up
and rushed incontinently out into the maelstrom of the screaming
tempest.

In the doorway behind him Sing Lee had been standing waiting the
outcome of the encounter and ready to lend a hand were it required.  As
the two men turned back into the professor's room they saw that the
wounded man's eyes were open and upon them.  At sight of Number
Thirteen a questioning look came into his eyes.

"What has happened?" he asked feebly of Sing.  "Where is my daughter?
Where is Dr. von Horn?  What is this creature doing out of his pen?"

The blow of the parang upon the professor's skull had shocked his
overwrought mind back into the path of sanity.  It had left him with a
clear remembrance of the past, other than the recent fight in the
living room--that was a blank--and it had given him a clearer
perspective of the plans he had been entertaining for so long relative
to this soulless creature.

The first thought that sprang to his mind as he saw Number Thirteen
before him was of his mad intention to give his daughter to such a
monstrous thing.  With the recollection came a sudden loathing and
hatred of this and the other creatures of his unholy experimentations.

Presently he realized that his questions had not been answered.

"Sing!" he shouted.  "Answer me.  Where are Virginia and Dr. von Horn?"

"All gonee.  Me no know.  All gonee.  Maybeso allee dead."

"My God!" groaned the stricken man; and then his eyes again falling
upon the silent giant in the doorway, "Out of my sight," he shrieked.
"Out of my sight!  Never let me see you again--and to think that I
would have given my only daughter to a soulless thing like you.  Away!
Before I go mad and slay you."

Slowly the color mounted to the neck and face of the giant--then
suddenly it receded, leaving him as ashen as death.  His great hand
gripped the stock of the bull whip.  A single blow was all that would
have been needed to silence Professor Maxon forever.  There was murder
in the wounded heart.  The man took a step forward into the room, and
then something drew his eyes to a spot upon the wall just above
Professor Maxon's shoulder--it was a photograph of Virginia Maxon.

Without a word Number Thirteen turned upon his heel and passed out into
the storm.



8

THE SOUL OF NUMBER 13


Scarcely had the Ithaca cleared the reef which lies almost across the
mouth of the little harbor where she had been moored for so many months
than the tempest broke upon her in all its terrific fury.  Bududreen
was no mean sailor, but he was short handed, nor is it reasonable to
suppose that even with a full crew he could have weathered the terrific
gale which beat down upon the hapless vessel.  Buffeted by great waves,
and stripped of every shred of canvas by the force of the mighty wind
that howled about her, the Ithaca drifted a hopeless wreck soon after
the storm struck her.

Below deck the terrified girl clung desperately to a stanchion as the
stricken ship lunged sickeningly before the hurricane.  For half an
hour the awful suspense endured, and then with a terrific crash the
vessel struck, shivering and trembling from stem to stern.

Virginia Maxon sank to her knees in prayer, for this she thought must
surely be the end.  On deck Bududreen and his crew had lashed
themselves to the masts, and as the Ithaca struck the reef before the
harbor, back upon which she had been driven, the tall poles with their
living freight snapped at the deck and went overboard carrying every
thing with them amid shrieks and cries of terror that were drowned and
choked by the wild tumult of the night.

Twice the girl felt the ship strike upon the reef, then a great wave
caught and carried her high into the air, dropping her with a
nauseating lunge which seemed to the imprisoned girl to be carrying the
ship to the very bottom of the ocean.  With closed eyes she clung in
silent prayer beside her berth waiting for the moment that would bring
the engulfing waters and oblivion--praying that the end might come
speedily and release her from the torture of nervous apprehension that
had terrorized her for what seemed an eternity.

After the last, long dive the Ithaca righted herself laboriously,
wallowing drunkenly, but apparently upon an even keel in less turbulent
waters.  One long minute dragged after another, yet no suffocating
deluge poured in upon the girl, and presently she realized that the
ship had, at least temporarily, weathered the awful buffeting of the
savage elements.  Now she felt but a gentle roll, though the wild
turmoil of the storm still came to her ears through the heavy planking
of the Ithaca's hull.

For a long hour she lay wondering what fate had overtaken the vessel
and whither she had been driven, and then, with a gentle grinding
sound, the ship stopped, swung around, and finally came to rest with a
slight list to starboard.  The wind howled about her, the torrential
rain beat loudly upon her, but except for a slight rocking the ship lay
quiet.

Hours passed with no other sounds than those of the rapidly waning
tempest.  The girl heard no signs of life upon the ship.  Her curiosity
became more and more keenly aroused.  She had that indefinable,
intuitive feeling that she was utterly alone upon the vessel, and at
length, unable to endure the inaction and uncertainty longer, made her
way to the companion ladder where for half an hour she futilely
attempted to remove the hatch.

As she worked she failed to hear the scraping of naked bodies
clambering over the ship's side, or the padding of unshod feet upon the
deck above her.  She was about to give up her work at the hatch when
the heavy wooden cover suddenly commenced to move above her as though
actuated by some supernatural power.  Fascinated, the girl stood gazing
in wide-eyed astonishment as one end of the hatch rose higher and
higher until a little patch of blue sky revealed the fact that morning
had come.  Then the cover slid suddenly back and Virginia Maxon found
herself looking into a savage and terrible face.

The dark skin was creased in fierce wrinkles about the eyes and mouth.
Gleaming tiger cat's teeth curved upward from holes pierced to receive
them in the upper half of each ear.  The slit ear lobes supported heavy
rings whose weight had stretched the skin until the long loop rested
upon the brown shoulders.  The filed and blackened teeth behind the
loose lips added the last touch of hideousness to this terrible
countenance.

Nor was this all.  A score of equally ferocious faces peered down from
behind the foremost.  With a little scream Virginia Maxon sprang back
to the lower deck and ran toward her stateroom.  Behind her she heard
the commotion of many men descending the companionway.


As Number Thirteen came into the campong after quitting the bungalow
his heart was a chaos of conflicting emotions.  His little world had
been wiped out.  His creator--the man whom he thought his only friend
and benefactor--had suddenly turned against him.  The beautiful
creature he worshipped was either lost or dead; Sing had said so.  He
was nothing but a miserable THING.  There was no place in the world for
him, and even should he again find Virginia Maxon, he had von Horn's
word for it that she would shrink from him and loathe him even more
than another.

With no plans and no hopes he walked aimlessly through the blinding
rain, oblivious of it and of the vivid lightning and deafening thunder.
The palisade at length brought him to a sudden stop.  Mechanically he
squatted on his haunches with his back against it, and there, in the
midst of the fury of the storm he conquered the tempest that raged in
his own breast.  The murder that rose again and again in his untaught
heart he forced back by thoughts of the sweet, pure face of the girl
whose image he had set up in the inner temple of his being, as a
gentle, guiding divinity.

"He made me without a soul," he repeated over and over again to
himself, "but I have found a soul--she shall be my soul.  Von Horn
could not explain to me what a soul is.  He does not know.  None of
them knows.  I am wiser than all the rest, for I have learned what a
soul is.  Eyes cannot see it--fingers cannot feel it, but he who
possess it knows that it is there for it fills his whole breast with a
great, wonderful love and worship for something infinitely finer than
man's dull senses can gauge--something that guides him into paths far
above the plain of soulless beasts and bestial men.

"Let those who will say that I have no soul, for I am satisfied with
the soul I have found.  It would never permit me to inflict on others
the terrible wrong that Professor Maxon has inflicted on me--yet he
never doubts his own possession of a soul.  It would not allow me to
revel in the coarse brutalities of von Horn--and I am sure that von
Horn thinks he has a soul.  And if the savage men who came tonight to
kill have souls, then I am glad that my soul is after my own
choosing--I would not care for one like theirs."

The sudden equatorial dawn found the man still musing.  The storm had
ceased and as the daylight brought the surroundings to view Number
Thirteen became aware that he was not alone in the campong.  All about
him lay the eleven terrible men whom he had driven from the bungalow
the previous night.  The sight of them brought a realization of new
responsibilities.  To leave them here in the campong would mean the
immediate death of Professor Maxon and the Chinaman.  To turn them into
the jungle might mean a similar fate for Virginia Maxon were she
wandering about in search of the encampment--  Number Thirteen could
not believe that she was dead.  It seemed too monstrous to believe that
he should never see her again, and he knew so little of death that it
was impossible for him to realize that that beautiful creature ever
could cease to be filled with the vivacity of life.

The young man had determined to leave the camp himself--partly on
account of the cruel words Professor Maxon had hurled at him the night
before, but principally in order that he might search for the lost
girl.  Of course he had not the remotest idea where to look for her,
but as von Horn had explained that they were upon a small island he
felt reasonably sure that he should find her in time.

As he looked at the sleeping monsters near him he determined that the
only solution of his problem was to take them all with him.  Number
Twelve lay closest to him, and stepping to his side he nudged him with
the butt of the bull whip he still carried.  The creature opened his
dull eyes.

"Get up," said Number Thirteen.

Number Twelve rose, looking askance at the bull whip.

"We are not wanted here," said Number Thirteen.  "I am going away and
you are all going with me.  We shall find a place where we may live in
peace and freedom.  Are you not tired of always being penned up?"

"Yes," replied Number Twelve, still looking at the whip.

"You need not fear the whip," said the young man.  "I shall not use it
on those who make no trouble.  Wake the others and tell them what I
have said.  All must come with me--those who refuse shall feel the
whip."

Number Twelve did as he was bid.  The creatures mumbled among
themselves for a few minutes.  Finally Number Thirteen cracked his long
whip to attract their attention.

"Come!" he said.

Nine of them shuffled after him as he turned toward the outer
gate--only Number Ten and Number Three held back.  The young man walked
quickly to where they stood eyeing him sullenly.  The others halted to
watch--ready to spring upon their new master should the tide of the
impending battle turn against him.  The two mutineers backed away
snarling, their hideous features distorted in rage.

"Come!" repeated Number Thirteen.

"We will stay here," growled Number Ten.  "We have not yet finished
with Maxon."

A loop in the butt of the bull whip was about the young man's wrist.
Dropping the weapon from his hand it still dangled by the loop.  At the
same instant he launched himself at the throat of Number Ten, for he
