perhaps a red Martian of his own race. Could he be sure that this was
true he must make some effort to rescue her even though the customs of
his strange world required it only in case she was of his own country;
but he was not sure; she might not be a red Martian at all, or, if she
were, it was as possible that she sprang from an enemy people as not.
His first duty was to return to his own people with as little personal
risk as possible, and though the thought of adventure stirred his blood
he put the temptation aside with a sigh and turned away from the
peaceful and beautiful valley that he longed to enter, for it was his
intention to skirt its eastern edge and continue his search for Gathol
beyond.

As Gahan of Gathol turned his steps along the southern slopes of the
hills that bound Bantoom upon the south and east, his attention was
attracted toward a small cluster of trees a short distance to his
right. The low sun was casting long shadows. It would soon be night.
The trees were off the path that he had chosen and he had little mind
to be diverted from his way; but as he looked again he hesitated. There
was something there besides boles of trees, and underbrush. There were
suggestions of familiar lines of the handicraft of man. Gahan stopped
and strained his eyes in the direction of the thing that had arrested
his attention. No, he must be mistaken--the branches of the trees and a
low bush had taken on an unnatural semblance in the horizontal rays of
the setting sun. He turned and continued upon his way; but as he cast
another side glance in the direction of the object of his interest, the
sun's rays were shot back into his eyes from a glistening point of
radiance among the trees.

Gahan shook his head and walked quickly toward the mystery, determined
now to solve it. The shining object still lured him on and when he had
come closer to it his eyes went wide in surprise, for the thing they
saw was naught else than the jewel-encrusted emblem upon the prow of a
small flier. Gahan, his hand upon his short-sword, moved silently
forward, but as he neared the craft he saw that he had naught to fear,
for it was deserted. Then he turned his attention toward the emblem. As
its significance was flashed to his understanding his face paled and
his heart went cold--it was the insignia of the house of The Warlord of
Barsoom. Instantly he saw the dejected figure of the captive being led
back to her prison in the valley just beyond the hills. Tara of Helium!
And he had been so near to deserting her to her fate. The cold sweat
stood in beads upon his brow.

A hasty examination of the deserted craft unfolded to the young jed the
whole tragic story. The same tempest that had proved his undoing had
borne Tara of Helium to this distant country. Here, doubtless, she had
landed in hope of obtaining food and water since, without a propellor,
she could not hope to reach her native city, or any other friendly
port, other than by the merest caprice of Fate. The flier seemed intact
except for the missing propellor and the fact that it had been
carefully moored in the shelter of the clump of trees indicated that
the girl had expected to return to it, while the dust and leaves upon
its deck spoke of the long days, and even weeks, since she had landed.
Mute yet eloquent proofs, these things, that Tara of Helium was a
prisoner, and that she was the very prisoner whose bold dash for
liberty he had so recently witnessed he now had not the slightest doubt.

The question now revolved solely about her rescue. He knew to which
tower she had been taken--that much and no more. Of the number, the
kind, or the disposition of her captors he knew nothing; nor did he
care--for Tara of Helium he would face a hostile world alone. Rapidly
he considered several plans for succoring her; but the one that
appealed most strongly to him was that which offered the greatest
chance of escape for the girl should he be successful in reaching her.
His decision reached he turned his attention quickly toward the flier.
Casting off its lashings he dragged it out from beneath the trees, and,
mounting to the deck tested out the various controls. The motor started
at a touch and purred sweetly, the buoyancy tanks were well stocked,
and the ship answered perfectly to the controls which regulated her
altitude. There was nothing needed but a propellor to make her fit for
the long voyage to Helium. Gahan shrugged impatiently--there must not
be a propellor within a thousand haads. But what mattered it? The craft
even without a propellor would still answer the purpose his plan
required of it--provided the captors of Tara of Helium were a people
without ships, and he had seen nothing to suggest that they had ships.
The architecture of their towers and enclosures assured him that they
had not.

The sudden Barsoomian night had fallen. Cluros rode majestically the
high heavens. The rumbling roar of a banth reverberated among the
hills. Gahan of Gathol let the ship rise a few feet from the ground,
then, seizing a bow rope, he dropped over the side. To tow the little
craft was now a thing of ease, and as Gahan moved rapidly toward the
brow of the hill above Bantoom the flier floated behind him as lightly
as a swan upon a quiet lake. Now down the hill toward the tower dimly
visible in the moonlight the Gatholian turned his steps. Closer behind
him sounded the roar of the hunting banth. He wondered if the beast
sought him or was following some other spoor. He could not be delayed
now by any hungry beast of prey, for what might that very instant be
befalling Tara of Helium he could not guess; and so he hastened his
steps. But closer and closer came the horrid screams of the great
carnivore, and now he heard the swift fall of padded feet upon the
hillside behind him. He glanced back just in time to see the beast
break into a rapid charge. His hand leaped to the hilt of his
long-sword, but he did not draw, for in the same instant he saw the
futility of armed resistance, since behind the first banth came a herd
of at least a dozen others. There was but a single alternative to a
futile stand and that he grasped in the instant that he saw the
overwhelming numbers of his antagonists.

Springing lightly from the ground he swarmed up the rope toward the bow
of the flier. His weight drew the craft slightly lower and at the very
instant that the man drew himself to the deck at the bow of the vessel,
the leading banth sprang for the stern. Gahan leaped to his feet and
rushed toward the great beast in the hope of dislodging it before it
had succeeded in clambering aboard. At the same instant he saw that
others of the banths were racing toward them with the quite evident
intention of following their leader to the ship's deck. Should they
reach it in any numbers he would be lost. There was but a single hope.
Leaping for the altitude control Gahan pulled it wide. Simultaneously
three banths leaped for the deck. The craft rose swiftly. Gahan felt
the impact of a body against the keel, followed by the soft thuds of
the great bodies as they struck the ground beneath. His act had not
been an instant too soon. And now the leader had gained the deck and
stood at the stern with glaring eyes and snarling jaws. Gahan drew his
sword. The beast, possibly disconcerted by the novelty of its position,
did not charge. Instead it crept slowly toward its intended prey. The
craft was rising and Gahan placed a foot upon the control and stopped
the ascent. He did not wish to chance rising to some higher air current
that would bear him away. Already the craft was moving slowly toward
the tower, carried thither by the impetus of the banth's heavy body
leaping upon it from astern.

The man watched the slow approach of the monster, the slavering jowls,
the malignant expression of the devilish face. The creature, finding
the deck stable, appeared to be gaining confidence, and then the man
leaped suddenly to one side of the deck and the tiny flier heeled as
suddenly in response. The banth slipped and clutched frantically at the
deck. Gahan leaped in with his naked sword; the great beast caught
itself and reared upon its hind legs to reach forth and seize this
presumptuous mortal that dared question its right to the flesh it
craved; and then the man sprang to the opposite side of the deck. The
banth toppled sideways at the same instant that it attempted to spring;
a raking talon passed close to Gahan's head at the moment that his
sword lunged through the savage heart, and as the warrior wrenched his
blade from the carcass it slipped silently over the side of the ship.

A glance below showed that the vessel was drifting in the direction of
the tower to which Gahan had seen the prisoner led. In another moment
or two it would be directly over it. The man sprang to the control and
let the craft drop quickly toward the ground where followed the banths,
still hot for their prey. To land outside the enclosure spelled certain
death, while inside he could see many forms huddled upon the ground as
in sleep. The ship floated now but a few feet above the wall of the
enclosure. There was nothing for it but to risk all on a bold bid for
fortune, or drift helplessly past without hope of returning through the
banth-infested valley, from many points of which he could now hear the
roars and growls of these fierce Barsoomian lions.

Slipping over the side Gahan descended by the trailing anchor-rope
until his feet touched the top of the wall, where he had no difficulty
in arresting the slow drifting of the ship. Then he drew up the anchor
and lowered it inside the enclosure. Still there was no movement upon
the part of the sleepers beneath--they lay as dead men. Dull lights
shone from openings in the tower; but there was no sign of guard or
waking inmate. Clinging to the rope Gahan lowered himself within the
enclosure, where he had his first close view of the creatures lying
there in what he had thought sleep. With a half smothered exclamation
of horror the man drew back from the headless bodies of the rykors. At
first he thought them the corpses of decapitated humans like himself,
which was quite bad enough; but when he saw them move and realized that
they were endowed with life, his horror and disgust became even greater.

Here then was the explanation of the thing he had witnessed that
afternoon, when Tara of Helium had struck the head from her captor and
Gahan had seen the head crawl back to its body. And to think that the
pearl of Helium was in the power of such hideous things as these. Again
the man shuddered, but he hastened to make fast the flier, clamber
again to its deck and lower it to the floor of the enclosure. Then
he strode toward a door in the base of the tower, stepping lightly
over the recumbent forms of the unconscious rykors, and crossing
the threshold disappeared within.



CHAPTER VIII

CLOSE WORK

Ghek, in his happier days third foreman of the fields of Luud, sat
nursing his anger and his humiliation. Recently something had awakened
within him the existence of which he had never before even dreamed. Had
the influence of the strange captive woman aught to do with this unrest
and dissatisfaction? He did not know. He missed the soothing influence
of the noise she called singing. Could it be that there were other
things more desirable than cold logic and undefiled brain power? Was
well balanced imperfection more to be sought after then, than the high
development of a single characteristic? He thought of the great,
ultimate brain toward which all kaldanes were striving. It would be
deaf, and dumb, and blind. A thousand beautiful strangers might sing
and dance about it, but it could derive no pleasure from the singing or
the dancing since it would possess no perceptive faculties. Already had
the kaldanes shut themselves off from most of the gratifications of the
senses. Ghek wondered if much was to be gained by denying themselves
still further, and with the thought came a question as to the whole
fabric of their theory. After all perhaps the girl was right; what
purpose could a great brain serve sealed in the bowels of the earth?

And he, Ghek, was to die for this theory. Luud had decreed it. The
injustice of it overwhelmed him with rage. But he was helpless. There
was no escape. Beyond the enclosure the banths awaited him; within, his
own kind, equally as merciless and ferocious. Among them there was no
such thing as love, or loyalty, or friendship--they were just brains.
He might kill Luud; but what would that profit him? Another king would
be loosed from his sealed chamber and Ghek would be killed. He did not
know it but he would not even have the poor satisfaction of satisfied
revenge, since he was not capable of feeling so abstruse a sentiment.

Ghek, mounted upon his rykor, paced the floor of the tower chamber in
which he had been ordered to remain. Ordinarily he would have accepted
the sentence of Luud with perfect equanimity, since it was but the
logical result of reason; but now it seemed different. The stranger
woman had bewitched him. Life appeared a pleasant thing--there were
great possibilities in it. The dream of the ultimate brain had receded
into a tenuous haze far in the background of his thoughts.

At that moment there appeared in the doorway of the chamber a red
warrior with naked sword. He was a male counterpart of the prisoner
whose sweet voice had undermined the cold, calculating reason of the
kaldane.

"Silence!" admonished the newcomer, his straight brows gathered in an
ominous frown and the point of his longsword playing menacingly before
the eyes of the kaldane. "I seek the woman, Tara of Helium. Where is
she? If you value your life speak quickly and speak the truth."

If he valued his life! It was a truth that Ghek had but just learned.
He thought quickly. After all, a great brain is not without its uses.
Perhaps here lay escape from the sentence of Luud.

"You are of her kind?" he asked. "You come to rescue her?"

"Yes."

"Listen, then. I have befriended her, and because of this I am to die.
If I help you to liberate her, will you take me with you?"

Gahan of Gathol eyed the weird creature from crown to foot--the perfect
body, the grotesque head, the expressionless face. Among such as these
had the beautiful daughter of Helium been held captive for days and
weeks.

"If she lives and is unharmed," he said, "I will take you with us."

"When they took her from me she was alive and unharmed," replied Ghek.
"I cannot say what has befallen her since. Luud sent for her."

"Who is Luud? Where is he? Lead me to him." Gahan spoke quickly in
tones vibrant with authority.

"Come, then," said Ghek, leading the way from the apartment and down a
stairway toward the underground burrows of the kaldanes. "Luud is my
king. I will take you to his chambers."

"Hasten!" urged Gahan.

"Sheathe your sword," warned Ghek, "so that should we pass others of my
kind I may say to them that you are a new prisoner with some likelihood
of winning their belief."

Gahan did as he was bid, but warning the kaldane that his hand was ever
ready at his dagger's hilt.

"You need have no fear of treachery," said Ghek. "My only hope of life
lies in you."

"And if you fail me," Gahan admonished him, "I can promise you as sure
a death as even your king might guarantee you."

Ghek made no reply, but moved rapidly through the winding subterranean
corridors until Gahan began to realize how truly was he in the hands of
this strange monster. If the fellow should prove false it would profit
Gahan nothing to slay him, since without his guidance the red man might
never hope to retrace his way to the tower and freedom.

Twice they met and were accosted by other kaldanes; but in both
instances Ghek's simple statement that he was taking a new prisoner to
Luud appeared to allay all suspicion, and then at last they came to the
ante-chamber of the king.

"Here, now, red man, thou must fight, if ever," whispered Ghek. "Enter
there!" and he pointed to a doorway before them.

"And you?" asked Gahan, still fearful of treachery.

"My rykor is powerful," replied the kaldane. "I shall accompany you and
fight at your side. As well die thus as in torture later at the will of
Luud. Come!"

But Gahan had already crossed the room and entered the chamber beyond.
Upon the opposite side of the room was a circular opening guarded by
two warriors. Beyond this opening he could see two figures struggling
upon the floor, and the fleeting glimpse he had of one of the faces
suddenly endowed him with the strength of ten warriors and the ferocity
of a wounded banth. It was Tara of Helium, fighting for her honor or
her life.

The warriors, startled by the unexpected appearance of a red man, stood
for a moment in dumb amazement, and in that moment Gahan of Gathol was
upon them, and one was down, a sword-thrust through its heart.

"Strike at the heads," whispered the voice of Ghek in Gahan's ear. The
latter saw the head of the fallen warrior crawl quickly within the
aperture leading to the chamber where he had seen Tara of Helium in the
clutches of a headless body. Then the sword of Ghek struck the kaldane
of the remaining warrior from its rykor and Gahan ran his sword through
the repulsive head.

Instantly the red warrior leaped for the aperture, while close behind
him came Ghek.

"Look not upon the eyes of Luud," warned the kaldane, "or you are lost."

Within the chamber Gahan saw Tara of Helium in the clutches of a mighty
body, while close to the wall upon the opposite side of the apartment
crouched the hideous, spider-like Luud. Instantly the king realized the
menace to himself and sought to fasten his eyes upon the eyes of Gahan,
and in doing so he was forced to relax his concentration upon the rykor
in whose embraces Tara struggled, so that almost immediately the girl
found herself able to tear away from the awful, headless thing.

