bosom of the sea below, and Gazen, habitually staid, actually shouted
with glee. His voice startled the utter stillness, and was mocked by a
faint echo from the surface of the water. By timing the interval between
a call and its echo we found it nearly ten seconds, which corresponded
to a height of about a mile. A repetition of the test from time to time
showed that the car was now travelling at a fairly constant level. The
wide ocean spread all around us; neither sail nor shore, nor living
creature was visible, and we had begun to ask ourselves whether we had
not found a watery planet, when Gazen suddenly cried out,

"Land!"

"Whereaway?" I enquired with breathless interest.

He pointed a little to the right of our course, and following the
direction of his finger, I saw a dim outline where sea and sky met. It
might have been mistaken for the tip of a cloud, but as we advanced it
rose above the horizon and took a definite shape not unlike a truncated
cone.

The glasses showed it to be an island apparently of volcanic formation,
and after a brief consultation with Carmichael, we steered towards it.
The emotion of Columbus when he arrived at the Bahamas affords, perhaps,
the nearest parallel to our feelings, but in our case the land in sight
was the outlier of another planet. Watchful curiosity and silent
expectation, the ineffable sorcery of new scenes, the mystery of the
unknown, the romance of adventure, the exultation of triumph, and the
dread of disaster, were inextricably blended in our hearts. It was a
glorious hour, and come what might, we all felt that we had not lived in
vain.

The island rose out of the sea like a volcanic peak, and was evidently
encircled with a barrier reef, as we could trace a line of snowy surf
breaking on its outer verge, and parting the sapphire blue of the deep
water without from the emerald green shoals within. The coast, sweeping
in beautiful bays, dotted with overgrown islets, and fended by rocky
promontories, was rimmed with beaches of yellow sand. The steep sides of
the mountain, broken with precipices, and shaggy with vegetation,
ascended from a multitude of spurs and buttresses, resembling billows of
verdure, and towered into the clouds.

I have used the word verdure, but it is really a misnomer, for although
the prevailing tint of the foliage was a dark green, the entire forest
was streaked like a rainbow with innumerable flowers, and the breeze
which blew from it was laden with the most delightful perfume, Evidently
it was all a howling wilderness, for we could not detect the slightest
vestige of human dwellings or cultivation. We did not even observe any
signs of bird or beast. A profound stillness brooded over the solitude,
and was scarcely broken by the drowsy murmur of distant waterfalls.

A forest, like the sea or desert, has a magical power to stimulate the
fancy and touch the primitive chords of the heart. Even a Scotch
hillside, or a Devonshire moor, can throw their wild spells over the
civilised man of letters, and appeal to savage or poetical instincts
underlying all his culture. So now, where everything seen or unseen, was
new and strange, and the imagination was quite free to rove, the charm
was more intense. We stood and gazed upon the moving panorama like
persons in a trance. The trees and plants grew in zones according to
their different levels above the sea, after the manner of those on the
earth, but we were too high to distinguish the various kinds.
Apparently, however, feathery palms and gigantic grasses prevailed in
the lower, and glossy evergreens, resembling the magnolia and
rhododendron, in the middle grounds. All this part of the forest was so
thickly encumbered with flowering creepers and parasites as to seem one
immense bower, dense enough to exclude the sunlight and make a perpetual
twilight underneath. The higher slopes were clad with pine-trees, having
long thin needles, which hung from their boughs like fringes of green
hair, and bushy shrubs which reminded me of heaths. Above these,
enormous ferns with fronds twenty or thirty feet in length, and thickets
draped in variegated mosses were thriving in the spray of a thousand
slender cataracts which poured from the brink of the precipitous crags
on the summit of the mountain.

Seen from a distance, the cliffs appeared of a ruddy tint, but on coming
closer we found this was due to myriads of huge lichens of a deep
crimson and orange, and that the natural colours of the rock, vermilion
and blue, lemon, yellow, purple, and olive green, almost vied with those
of the forest lower down the steep.

We glided over the crest at a point where it was almost free of cloud,
and were astonished to find it carved by the weather into the most
fantastic shapes, rudely imitating the colossal figures of men and
animals, or the towers and turrets of ruined castles. After the novelty
of this goblin architecture had passed, however, its effect was somewhat
dreary. The wind, moaning through the lifeless aisles and crannies of
the dripping rocks, the rolling mist and shuddering pools of water,
induced a sense of loneliness and depression. The revulsion in our
feelings was therefore all the greater when the car suddenly escaped
from this height of desolation, and a magnificent prospect burst upon
our view.

An immense valley seemed to lie far beneath us, but it was really a
table-land of hills, rocks, and mountains, shaggy with vegetation, and
flung together in riotous confusion like the billows of a raging sea.
The stupendous cliffs behind us dropped sheerly down to the level of the
plateau, some ten or twenty thousand feet below, and swept around it as
a curving wall on either hand until they vanished in the distance. It
was evidently the crater of the extinct volcano.

Our journey across that blooming wilderness will never fade from my
recollection, but when I attempt to give the reader an idea of it,
impressions crowd so thick and fast upon me as to choke my utterance; I
am equally in danger of soaring into a wild extravagance of generality
and sinking into a mere catalogue of detail. Yet I find it impossible
to hit a mean that can do any justice to it. The extraordinary way in
which the ancient lavas of the interior had been riven, upheaved, and
piled upon each other by the volcanic forces, the bewildering variety
and exuberance of the tropical plants and trees which battened on the
rich and crumbling soil, completely baffles all description. What the
imagination is unable to conceive, and the eye itself is overpowered in
beholding, the pen can never hope to depict. Let the grandest mountain
scenes of your memory be jumbled together as in a dream and overgrown
with the maddest jungles of the Ganges or the Amazon, and the
phantasmagoria would still be nothing to the living reality.

Most of the highest peaks and ridges, as well as the deepest valleys and
ravines, were covered with the embowering forest; but here and there a
huge boss of granite or porphyry reared its bare scalp out of the
verdure like the head and shoulders of some antediluvian monster. The
gigantic palms and foliage trees, all tufted with air-plants or
strangled with climbers, were literally buried in flowers of every hue,
and the crown of the forest rolled under us like a sea of blossoms.
Every moment one enchanting prospect after another opened to our
wondering eyes. Now it was a waterfall, gleaming like a vein of silver
on the brow of a lofty precipice, and descending into a lakelet bordered
with red, blue, and yellow lilies. Again it was a natural bridge,
spanning a deep chasm or tunnel in the rock, through which a river
boiled and roared in a series of cascades and rapids. Ever and anon we
passed over glades and prairies, carpeted with orchids, and dotted with
clumps of shrubbery, a mass of golden bloom, or tremendous blocks of
basalt hung with crimson creepers. Butterflies with azure wings of a
surprising spread and lustre, alighted on the flowers, and great birds
of resplendent plumage flashed from grove to grove. A sun, twice the
diameter of ours, blazed in the northern sky, but the intensity of his
rays was tempered by a thin veil of cloud. The atmosphere although warm
and moist, was not oppressive like that of a forcing-house, and the
breeze was balmy with delicious perfume.

As each new marvel came in sight, unstaled by familiar and untarnished
by vulgar associations, fresh from the hand of nature, so to speak, we
were filled as we had never been before with an intoxicating sense of
the divine mystery and miracle of life. For myself I was fairly
dumbfounded with amazement, and my companion, the hard-headed sceptical
astronomer, kept on crying and muttering to himself, "My God! my God!"
as if he had become a drivelling fool.

We travelled league after league of this paradise run wild (I cannot
tell how many) without noticing any change in the character of the
scenery. At length, however, it grew less savage by degrees, and we
entered on a park-like country which gained in loveliness what it lost
in grandeur. Low hills, clad from base to summit in masses of gorgeous
bloom, and mirrored in sequestered lakes fringed with pied water-lilies;
groves of majestic cedars inviting to repose; rambling shrubberies and
evergreen trees festooned with flowering vines; brooks as clear as
crystal, murmuring over their pebbly beds, now hiding under drooping
boughs, now lost in brakes of tall reeds and foliage plants; grassy
meadows gay with crocusses, hyacinths, and tulips, or such-like flowers;
isolated rocks and boulders mantled with vivid moss and lichens; hot
springs falling over basins and terraces of tinted alabaster; clustering
palms and groups of spiry pine-trees; geysers throwing up columns of
spray tinged with rainbows; all these and a thousand other features of
the landscape which must be nameless passed before our view.

Again and again we startled some herd of wild quadrupeds or flock of
gaudy birds unknown to science. Legions of large and burnished insects,
veritable living jewels, might be seen everywhere, and flaunting
butterflies hovered about the car. So far we had not observed the least
sign of human occupation, and yet, as Gazen remarked, the appearance of
the country seemed to betray the influence of art. It had not the wild
and wasteful luxuriance of the earlier tract, of a region left entirely
in the hands of Nature, but rather of a paradise which had been dressed
and kept by the gods.

Owing to the height at which we were travelling, and the undulating
character of the surface, we could not see very far ahead. At length,
however, on emerging from a gap in a range of hills, we came upon a vast
plain or prairie stretching away into the distance, and there in the
blue haze of the horizon we saw, or fancied we saw, the architecture and
gardens of a great city, on the borders of a lake, and above the lake,
suspended in mid-air, a spectral palace, glittering in the sunbeams.

We raised a shout of joy and triumph at this discovery.

"Stop a minute, though," said Gazen, and a shade of doubt passed over
his face. "Perhaps it is only a mirage."

We levelled our glasses at the distant scene, and scanned it with
palpitating hearts. We could discern the general shape, and even the
details of many houses, and the roofs and minarets of the palace, which
was evidently built on the top of an island in the midst of the lake.

"That is not a phantasm," said I at last; "it is a real city."

Gazen made no reply, but turned and silently shook me by the hand. The
tears were standing in his eyes.

A delightful breeze, fragrant with innumerable flowers, mantled the long
grass of the prairie which was threaded by a maze of silver streams, and
diversified with bosky woodlands. Ere long we observed fantastic
cottages and picturesque villas nestling in the coppices, and as may be
imagined we were all on tip-toe with curiosity to catch a sight of their
inhabitants. We were anxious to see whether they looked like human
beings, and how they were disposed towards us.

For a long time we looked in vain, but at length we saw a figure moving
across the prairie which turned out to be that of--a _man_. Yes, a man
like ourselves, but well stricken in years, and to judge by his costume
apparently a savage. His back was towards us, and as we floated past the
professor shouted in a tone loud enough for him to hear,

"Good evening, sir."

The native started, and lifting his eyes to the car beheld it with
astonishment and awe. He raised his hands in the air, then dropped them
by his side, and sank upon his knees.

"That's a good sign," said Gazen with a grim smile. "I wonder if he
understands English. Let's try him again," and he cried out, "What's the
name of this place?" but the car was going rapidly, and if there was any
response it was lost upon the wind.

As we approached the city, the cottages became thicker and thicker. They
were of various sizes, and of a light fanciful design adapted to a warm
climate. Each of them was surrounded by a grove or garden rich in
flowers and fruit. There were grassy trails and roads from one to
another, but we did not see any fields or fences, flocks or herds.

We also saw more and more of the inhabitants--men, women, and children.
They were evidently a fine race, tall, handsome, and of white
complexion; but the men in general were darker than the women. From
their gay dresses, and the condition of the land, we had set them down
for savages; but on a nearer view, their lack of arms, the beauty of
their homes, and their own graceful demeanour, obliged us to reconsider
our opinion. When they first saw the car they did not fly in terror, or
muster hastily in armed and yelling bands. Many of them ran and cried,
it is true, but only to call their friends, and while some stood with
bowed heads and upraised hands as the car floated by, others, like the
old man, fell upon their knees as though in prayer.

It was getting late in the day, and the sun was now sloping to the crest
of the mountain wall encircling the crater. Accordingly we held a
consultation with Carmichael as to whether we should land there, or
proceed to the city.

Carmichael thought we should go on.

"But," said Gazen, "would it not be safer to try the temper of the
people first, here in the country?"

"These people are not savages," replied Carmichael. "They are civilised,
or semi-civilised, else how could they have built so fine a city as that
appears. If we should see any signs of hostility amongst them, however,
the car is plated with metal and will protect us--we have arms and can
defend ourselves--and, besides, we can rise again, and slip away from
them."

We decided to advance, but Gazen and I took the precaution to belt on
our revolvers.

The huge limb of the sun, red and glowing, sank to rest in a bed of
purple clouds on the summit of the rosy precipice, and filled all the
green plain with a rich amber light. The fantastic towers and trees of
the distant city by the lake shone in his mellow lustre; the solitary
island swam in a flood of gold, and the quaint edifice which crowned it
blazed with insufferable splendour. As the eerie gloaming died in the
west, and thin grey mists began to veil the outlandish scene, we
realised to the full that we were all alone and friendless in an unknown
world, and a deep sentiment of exile took possession of our souls.

The gloaming fell, and myriads of lights twinkled in the dusk, some
flitting about like fireflies, others stationary, while a hum of many
voices ascended to our ears. The lights showed us that we were gliding
over the city, and the voices told us that our arrival was causing a
great commotion. Presently we floated above a large open space or
square, lit with coloured lanterns, and evidently adorned with trees,
fountains, and statuary. Here a great number of people had assembled,
and as they appeared quite orderly and peaceable, we determined to land.
While the car descended cautiously, Gazen and I kept a sharp watch on
the crowd, with our revolvers in our hands. Instead of anger and
resistance, however, the natives only manifested friendly signs of
welcome. They withdrew to a respectful distance, and, dropping on their
knees, burst into a song or hymn of wonderful sweetness as the car
touched the ground.




CHAPTER VIII.

THE CRATER LAND.


A man of dignified and venerable mien stepped from the crowd, and
followed by a train of youths and maidens, each bearing a vase or a tray
of fruit and flowers, came towards the car. While yet some ten or twelve
paces distant he stopped, and saluted Gazen and myself by lifting his
hands gracefully in the air, and bowing his head. After we had
acknowledged his greeting with due respect, he addressed us, speaking
fluently, and in a reverent, not to say a humble tone; but his words,
being entirely strange to our ears, we could only shake our heads with a
baffled smile, and reply in English that we did not understand. On this
a look of doubt and wonder passed over his face, and pointing, first to
the car, then to the sky, he seemed to enquire whether we had not
dropped from the clouds. We nodded our assent, and the astronomer,
indicating the Earth, which was now shining in the east as a beautiful
green star, endeavoured to let him know by signs that we had come from
