He lay face down on the metal ground until he felt hands grip his boots,
then he asked, "All set?"

Two voices answered, "Ready."

Rip put his gloves on the ground, then heaved forward and slightly upward
to overcome his inertia and that of his men. The trio moved slowly,
almost parallel with the surface. Once or twice Rip reached down to a
convenient crystal and put his strength into changing course and
altitude. Those were the only times when he felt the tug of his men.

He reached the first pyramid of thorium and directed, "Get behind these
rocks and stay down. Feel your way. Use me for a guide. I'll hold on
until you're under cover." He gripped a crystal. "Come on."

Dominico pulled himself along Dowst's prone form and then along Rip's.
When Dominico had reached the shelter of the crystals, Dowst crawled
along, with Rip's body for his guide, passed over him, and reached cover.
Rip followed.

The belt lights of the two Connies were almost abreast of them. Far to
their left, Rip saw another pair of lights. That was a pair he hadn't
seen before.

"We'll wait until they pass," he told his men. "Then we'll get up and
rush them from behind. They can't hear us coming. Dowst, you take the
near one. I'll take the far one. Dominico, you help as needed, but
concentrate on cutting off their equipment. The first thing we must do is
cut their communicators; otherwise they'll warn the rest. Then turn off
their air supplies and collapse their suits."

One thing was in their favor. The space suits worn by the Connies were
almost the same as theirs. The controls were of the same kind. The only
way to know a Connie was by his bubble, which was a little more tubular
than the round bubbles of the Federation.

Rip suddenly realized that he wasn't nervous anymore. He grinned. After
all, this was what he was trained for.

The Connies came abreast and passed. "Let's go," Rip said, and as he rose
he heard Koa's voice.

The sergeant major said, "Kemp, kneel on their right side. Trudeau and
I will hit them from the left and tumble them over you. Get their
communicators first."

Koa had his own methods and they sounded good.

Rip started slowly. He wanted to get directly behind the Connies. He
stayed down low until he was sure they couldn't see him unless they
turned.

Dowst and Dominico were right with him. "Come on," he said, and started
gliding after the helmeted figures. He kept his eyes on the one he had
selected, and he called on all the myriad stars of space to give him
luck. If the men turned, his plan for quick victory would fail.

He sensed his Planeteers beside him as the figures loomed ahead. He gave
a final spring that sent him through space with knees bent and outthrust,
his hands reaching.

His knees connected solidly with the Connie's thighs, and his hands
groped around the bulky space suit. He felt a rheostat control and
twisted savagely, then groped for the distinctive star-shaped button
of the air supply.

The Connie wrenched violently and threw them both upward. Rip felt the
star shape and twisted. If he could only deflate the Connie's suit! But
the man was writhing from his grip, clawing for a weapon.

Then Rip stopped reaching for the deflation valve. He grabbed his knife,
jerked it free, and thrust it against the middle of the Connie's back.
Then he clanged his bubble against the man's helmet for direct
communication and shouted, "Grab some space, or I'll let vack into
you!"

The Connie understood English. Most earthlings did. But even better was
his understanding of the pressure on his back. He stopped struggling; his
arms shot starward.

Rip breathed freely for the first time since he had leaped, and
exultation grew in him. He had his first man! His first hand-to-hand
fight had ended in victory so easily that he could hardly believe it.

He took time to look around him and saw that he was a good five feet
above the asteroid.

Below him, a Connie belt light sent its shaft parallel with the ground,
and he knew the second man was down.

The question was, had either of them shouted before their communicators
were cut off?

"Dowst," he called urgently. "All okay?"

"No," Dowst said grimly. "We got the Connie, but he got Dominico. Cut his
leg with a space knife. I'm putting a patch on it. You okay?"

"Yes. When you can, pull me down."

"Right you are."

Dominico spoke up. "Don't worry about me, sir. Nothing bad. I don't lose
much air."

"Fine, Dominico. Glad it wasn't worse."

But Rip knew it wasn't good, either. A cut with a space knife let air out
of the suit and created at least a partial vacuum. If it also cut flesh,
the vacuum let the blood pressure force out blood and tissue to turn a
minor wound into an ugly one.

They would have to bring this space flap with the Connies to a quick end,
Rip thought. He had to get his men into air somehow, to take a look at
their wounds. Bradshaw needed attention immediately, and now so did
Dominico.

Dowst reached up, took Rip's ankle, and pulled him down. Rip held on to
his captive. Then the private bound the Connie's hands, jerked his
communicator control completely off, and turned his air back on. Since
Rip had been unable to collapse the suit, the Connie was comfortable
enough. The reason for collapsing the suit was to deprive the enemy of
air instantly, so that he could be tied up while helpless from lack of
oxygen. There was enough air in the suit for only a few breaths once the
supply was cut off.

The Connie on the ground was neatly trussed. Rip's prisoner joined him.
Dowst switched off his belt light. "Now what, sir?"

Dominico was standing patiently nearby. He said nothing. Rip knew that no
more could be done for the Italian at present. "Go back to the cave,
Dominico," he ordered.

"I can stay with you, sir."

"No, Dominico. Thanks for the offer, but we'll get along. Go back to the
cave."

"Yes, sir."

Rip was a little worried. He had heard nothing from Koa since that first
exchange. He told Dowst as much. But Koa himself heard and answered.

"Lieutenant, we're all right. Got two Connies, and I don't think they had
a chance to yell. But I'm sorry about one, sir. Kemp had to swing at him
and busted his bubble."

"Fatal?"

"No, we patched it in time. But worse than Bradshaw."

"Tough." Rip couldn't feel too sympathetic.

After all, it was the Connie cruiser's fault Bradshaw had felt high vack.
"All right. We have four. That leaves nine."

Santos came on the circuit. "Sir, this is Santos. Only three men are at
the snapper-boats. If you could get here without being seen, maybe we
could knock them off. The rest wouldn't be much good if we had their
boats."

"You're right, Santos," Rip replied instantly. Why hadn't he seen that
for himself? He knew how he and Dowst could approach the craters without
being spotted, now that they had removed two teams of Connies. "We're on
our way. Koa, make it if you can."

"Yes, sir."

Dominico was already making his way back to the cave. Rip and Dowst
started for the horizon at a good walk, not afraid now to use their
lights, at least for a few yards. If any of the remaining Connie search
teams saw the lights, they would think they were their own men's.

Rip remembered the lay of the ground and Santos' description of the
snapper-boats' position. He circled almost to the horizon, then told
Dowst to cut his light. He cut his own. In a moment they topped the
horizon and, standing with only helmets visible from the snapper-boats,
looked the situation over.

The three Connies were standing between them and the boats. To the left
of the boats was the second crater. Rip studied the ground as best he
could in the Connie belt lights and decided on a plan of action. Calling
to Dowst, he circled again. Presently they were approaching the crater.
The Connies were just about twenty-five yards from the crater's opposite
rim.

Rip said, "I hate to do this, Dowst, but I can't see any way out. We have
to go into the crater."

Dowst merely said, "Yes, sir."

The extra radiation might put both of them well over the safety limits
long before Earth was reached, and they both knew it. He reached the
crater's edge and walked right down into it.

They were out of sight of the Connies now. Rip walked up the other side
of the crater until his bubble was just below ground level. The chunks of
thorium he had ordered thrown in to block some of the radiation made
walking a little difficult.

"Santos," he said, "we're in the second crater."

"Sir, I'm beyond the first, between two crystals. Pederson is near you
somewhere."

"Good. When I give the word, turn up your helmet light until they can see
a pretty good glow. Keep watching them." The bubbles were equipped with
lights, but they were seldom used. He outlined his plan swiftly. Both
Santos and Dowst acknowledged.

Koa reported in. "We're after two more Connies near the wreck of the
landing boat, sir."

"Be careful. Pederson, go help Koa. Nunez, how are things at the cave?"

"Nunez reporting, sir. Two Connies in sight, but they haven't seen us
yet."

"Let me know when they spot the cave."

"Yes, sir."

"Santos, go ahead."

For long moments there was silence. Rip felt for a solid foothold, found
one, and flexed his knees. He kept his back straight and his eyes on the
crater rim. His hands were occupied with two air bottles taken from his
belt, and his thumbs were on their valve releases. He waited patiently
for word from Santos that his helmet glow had been seen.

Santos yelled, "Now!"

Rip's legs straightened with a mighty thrust. He flashed into space
headfirst, at an angle that took him over the crater's rim and fifty feet
above the ground. He caught a glimpse of Santos' helmet, glowing like a
pink balloon, and of the three Connies facing it.

Rip's arms flashed above his head. His thumbs compressed. Air spurted
from the two bottles, driving him downward feetfirst, directly at the
heads of the Connies!




CHAPTER TEN

Get the Scorpion!


From the corner of his eye, Rip saw Dowst's heavy space boots and knew
the private was right with him. As they drove down, one of the Connies
stepped a little distance away from the others, probably to get a better
look at Santos. The Connie sensed something and turned, just as Rip and
Dowst flashed downward on his two mates.

Rip's boots caught one Connie where his bubble joined his suit, and the
impact drove the man downward to the unyielding surface of the asteroid
with a soundless smash. Rip threw up his arms to cushion his helmet as he
struck the ground beyond his enemy. He threw the air bottles away. He
fought to keep his feet under him and almost succeeded, but his knees hit
the ground, and pistol and knife bit into them painfully.

Two figures came into his view, locked tightly together, arms flailing.
It was Dowst and the second Connie. He got to his feet and was moving to
the Planeteer's aid when Santos' voice shrilled in his helmet. "Sir! Look
left!"

Rip whirled. The Connie who had stepped aside was advancing, pistol in
hand. His light caught Rip full in the face.

The young officer thought quickly. The Connie hadn't fired. Why? Suddenly
he had it. The man hadn't fired for fear of hitting his friend, who was
battling with Dowst. Rip was in front of them. Quickly he dropped to one
knee, reaching for his own pistol. The Connie wouldn't dare fire now. The
high-velocity slug would go right through him, to explode in one of the
struggling figures behind--and the wrong one might get it.

The Connie saw Rip's action and tossed his pistol aside. He, too, knew he
couldn't fire. He reached into a knee pouch and drew out his space knife.
He leaped for the Planeteer.

Rip pulled frantically at his pistol. It was stuck fast, probably caught
in the fabric by his knee landing. The space knife wouldn't be caught. It
was smooth, with no projections to catch. He shifted knees and jerked it
out.

The Connie's flying body hit him, and a powerful arm circled his waist.
Rip thrust upward with his knees, one hand reaching for the Connie's
suit valve. But the Connie had one arm free, too. He drove his glove up
under Rip's heart. Rip let go of the valve and used his elbow to lever
away, just as the Connie pressed his knife's release valve. The blade
slammed outward and drove into the inside of Rip's right arm, just above
the elbow.

Pain lanced through him, and he felt the blood rush to the wound as air
poured through the gap in his suit. He gritted his teeth and smashed at
the Connie with his own knife. It rammed home, and he squeezed the
release. The blade connected solidly. He was suddenly free.

He pressed the wounded arm to his side, stopping the outpouring of
air. The cut hurt like all the devils of space. With his other hand he
increased the air in his suit, then looked swiftly around. The Connie was
on his knees, both gloves pressed tightly to his side.

Dowst was just finishing a knot in the safety line that bound a second
enemy's hands. The Connie Rip had rocketed down on was still lying where
he had fallen. And Corporal Santos, the enemy's pneumatic chatter gun at
the ready, was standing guard.

Rip turned up the volume in his communicator. He tried to sound calm,
but the shakiness of triumph and excitement was in his voice. "All
Planeteers. We have the Connie snapper-boats. Koa, bring your men here."

He felt someone working on his arm and turned to see Corporal Pederson,
his face one vast grin in the glare from Dowst's belt light. "Koa didn't
need me," he said.

Rip grinned back. "Nunez," he called, "how are things at the cave?"

"Sir, this is Nunez. Two Connies were prowling around, but they didn't
see the entrance. Then, a minute ago, they hurried away."

Rip considered. "Koa, how many Connies have you?"

"Four, sir."

With the five he and Dowst had taken, that meant four sill at large, and
from Nunex's report, some Connie yelling had been going on. The four
certainly knew by this time that there were Federal men on the asteroid.
Unless something were done quickly the four Connies would be shooting at
them from the darkness. He ordered, "All Planeteers, kill your belt
lights."

The lights on the Connies they had just taken still glowed. Dowst was
putting a patch on the Connie Rip had stabbed. He waited until the
private had finished, then said, "Turn out the Connies' lights, too."

If he could get in touch with the Connies, he could tell them they were
finished. But using the snapper-boat radios was out, because the enemy
cruiser would hear. The cruiser couldn't hear the helmet communications,
though, because they carried only a short distance. The cruiser was close
enough so that a helmet communicator turned on full volume might barely
