"President Camari must accept that we have the
military forces to impose our will on Slingshot,"
he said, momentarily shifting his eyes to Drummer.
"If he does not accept my offer I want to ram it
down his throat. Have you come up with an action
to implement our new policy?"

"I have."

"Lay it out."

"With no advance notice, impose the inventory tax
on all Slingshot supplies on board the Depot and
on UIPS vessels on both sides of the Fandango
force field. The first step is to conduct our own
inventory of UIPS property in Plutonian space; to
do that we must have on site access to the Depot's
records, and spot check the records against the
assets. The presence of our military forces in
space close to the Depot will back up our inventory
staff. Businesslike, formal, and highly visible."

"Why don't you use that tactic on the dozens of
Slingshot laboratories and assembly centers here
on Pluto's surface? Seems to me that would be
less risky."

"For good reasons, Mr. President. We need
an exercise that is sufficiently visible, even
spectacular, to make both the UIPS and our
INOR allies respect our will and capabilities to
use organized military forces throughout our
legitimate jurisdiction. A surface operation on
Pluto will be barely noticed and not impress them
with our military strength."

"How do you expect the Depot to react?"

"At first, with confusion. The Depot Commander
will try to bluff. Meanwhile, he'll spunnel an alarm
to Earth and insist on guidance. We must not
accept delay."

"What if you meet resistance?"

"Overcome it. Set an example. After all, we are
exercising our rights as a sovereign nation."

"And after the inventory?"

"If peacefully accomplished, we withdraw. We'll
spunnel formal documentation to the UIPS on the
amount of taxes due, the schedule for payment
and penalties for delinquencies."

"The penalties?"

"I have several in mind. Fines for minor delays,
blockade of the depot and, eventually, military
action should they get nasty."

"How soon can you launch?"

"Three days."

"Do it."

Drummer turned to leave. Narval raised his jeweled
hand. Drummer paused and turned back.

"What's this I've heard from Scarf about you taking
a pack of escaped Inner Region convicts under your
wing?"

"There's more to it than that," replied Drummer.
He filled in the gaps.

Narval scrutinized his fingernails as Drummer
talked.

"I'm surprised to hear you patronize drinking
establishments where such raffish elements gather,"
Narval murmured around the focus of his attention.

"I feel it my duty to get about, to see, and to
listen. There is much to learn by observing our
people going about their daily lives. The Charnel
Pit is one of the few places in Coldfield where
people gather to relax and talk."

Narval peered sideways at Drummer from narrowed
eyes.

"Hm, you see and you listen to the people. What
else, I wonder? Do the people also see and listen
to you? What do you tell them, Drummer?"

"I tell them nothing, President Narval. I don't
know what you mean."

"Well, let it go for now. Back to your little
brood. You say they're experienced spacers, and
you've checked the facts of their escape. You
know we're short-handed in technicians for the
military fleet. Can we use them?"

"I'm not certain that I trust them," Drummer
responded.

"Test them."

"How?"

"Take them along on the inventory operation."

"...and?"

"As I say, test them. Force whoever is leading them
into a difficult situation. Keep him close to you
and watch how he works himself out of it. If he
does well, throw him to another pack of wolves. Get
him and his gang involved, deeper. Make them prove
themselves. When you're satisfied, bring them up
to a level where we're squeezing from them all
they have that's useful to us."

"Scarf is after them."

"Leave Scarf to me, Drummer. That's all."

 ##

Scarf entered and waited for Narval to notice him.
Narval's eyes were fixed on his hands. He spoke
without looking up.

"Drummer has given me his side of the incident
in the bar-room," he said, his voice cutting with
sarcasm. "The hangers-on in that sinkhole have,
by now, spread their version all over Coldfield,
Lamplight, as well as the depot and Slingshot.
You came out of it looking like a fool in a
confrontation that enhances Drummer's image to
the detriment of the President's Chief of Security."

Narval raised his head. His small eyes drilled into
Scarf.

"I don't trust Drummer," he said. "I suspect him
of trying to subvert my rule. He's too popular in
the Council and among the officers and men of
the military fleet. I can't chance direct action
against him at this time. For the moment, I need
his expertise in military strategy and managing
our resources.

"I'm looking to you to find or create enough
evidence so that, when I'm ready, we can undermine
Drummer's reputation. As it is, you've built him up
by embarrassing your high position in my government.
Do your job right, and my problem with Drummer
will fade away. I'm not pleased at all with your
progress so far."

Scarf's face was flushed.

"Yes, sir," he said. "My intent was to accost
Drummer in a public place, draw him out, and make
him look foolish. The circumstances in the Charnel
Pit were fine, or so I thought. Intervention by an
outsider was totally unexpected. When I get my
hands on that convict, I have plans for him."

"Hold off, Scarf. You can have him when I'm done
with the pack, including Drummer. Until then, put
your anger aside."

"Yes, sir."

"Now, listen carefully."

Narval leaned forward, eyes on Scarf. He described
Drummer's upcoming inventory operation. Stubby
fingers smoothed the desk surface.

"I'll tell Drummer that I want you to go along
on the inventory," he said. "Think up a reason;
I don't care what it is so long as it gets you
aboard. The real reason is to keep your eyes on
Drummer, the operation, and these convicts he's
harboring. I want to know everything that happens.
Do you understand?"

"Yes, sir. I do." Scarf's eyes lit up. He continued
eagerly. "If Drummer goes to the depot or boards
UIPS ships, I should go along to see what he does.
As Chief of Security, my position should compel him
to accompany him. I suggest, sir, that you appoint
me as your counter-intelligence representative
on Drummer's task force. My job, then, would be
to check if the depot or a transport, whichever
we board, is conducting secret surveillance of
our military facilities, field training, and ship
movements. Drummer can be told that my boarding
the depot would be essential to the mission you've
assigned to me."

"Hasn't our man on the depot told us they've been
performing those observations for the UIPS for
quite a while? Wouldn't Drummer see through that
ploy?"

"Not if you tell him this would be the first
opportunity for your Chief of Security to enter
a UIPS domain and report to you directly on his
observations. It would take me out from under
Drummer's command."

"Hm, yes, I see what you mean." Narval returned
to examining his fingernails. He lifted a finger to
his lips and nibbled.

"Very well, Scarf. I'll tell Drummer."





 Chapter SIXTEEN


Drummer paced the command deck of the Plutonian
flagship Dragon, Brad nearby. Scarf, sprawled in
an open accello-net fastened to a nearby bulkhead,
watched and listened.

The ship vibrated as it moved along the launch rail
leading to the mouth of the tunnel hanger. Captain
Hyk, the ship's Commander, hunched over a control
computer on the nearby bridge and snapped orders
to his Operations Officer. Both cast sideways glances
at Scarf, discomfited by his presence.

Brad visualized the scene on the bridges and flight
decks of the more than two dozen warships, ranging
from cruisers to fighters that formed the task
force. All were in final countdown for launch from
tunnels and galleries cut into reinforced chasms
across a hundred kay of Pluto's surface.

At Drummer's invitation, Brad analyzed the launch
schedule and deployment pattern. He had tactfully
suggested substantive alterations to minimize
warning time to the depot and its nearby
transports. After some debate, during which
Brad repeatedly justified his proposals to skeptical
ship commanders, they were computer-tested,
modified and accepted.

Brad knew he was on trial. Ram's words surfaced
as he scanned the bridge: "...you will lie, cheat,
bribe, subvert, sabotage, and kill for us, and
should our greater purpose call for you to do so,
against us."

"This one," he mused, ironically, "is on the
'against us' side of the ledger."

Hodak appeared at the entry to the command deck
and beckoned to Brad. As Brad approached, Scarf rose
and sauntered in their direction, seemingly scrutinizing
instrument dials and panels along the way. His ears
seemed to throb with the effort of eavesdropping.

"I've gone over the maintenance and operations
checklists for all ships and technical support
committed to this mission, as you told me to,"
Hodak said, "and then spot-checked them against
installed equipment. We've only been on this
job a couple of days, so I couldn't probe to any
meaningful depth."

He heaved a deep sigh. "From what I've seen so far,
Brad, the systems are not as well-maintained as they
should be, and much of the data and crew training
are not applicable or out of date.

"My recommendation is that as soon as we get back
we conduct a hard-nosed professional inspection
of the fleet to pinpoint all the cats-and-dogs these
dunderheads have jerry-rigged into the equipment
and the software. We gotta give priority to the
checklists that need to be updated to correspond
with installed equipment. No two ships have the
same configuration, so each checklist will have
to be tailored. That's only the first step, and it'll
be one helluva lotta work."

"Drummer's main concern right now is getting
through this operation without using weapons
or incurring a technical breakdown," Brad said.
"Either one will detract from the image we're
trying to build. He should know ASAP what you
found. I'll pass it along to him. Stand by with
Kumiko in case Drummer needs some technical
advice on weapons or engineering."

"Right."

Hodak turned to leave, and his eyes met Scarf's.
Hodak grinned, and gave Scarf a thumbs up. Scarf
glowered and turned away, moving back to the net.
Hodak disappeared down the passageway.

The ship advanced along a rail into a gallery at
the mouth of the tunnel. Captain Hyk turned
to Drummer.

"The Dragon is at launch station," he said.

Drummer and Brad stepped from the command deck
to a small balcony overlooking a shallow pit covered
by a pale, translucent screen. A network of lines,
representing tunnels and galleries, formed on the
screen, each incorporating a tiny, yellow moving
and blinking light to indicate a warship under
Drummer's command. As each light reached launch
position, it halted and changed from yellow to
green. Drummer and Brad watched the last of
the yellows convert. All green, ready to launch.

Drummer picked up a microphone, Brad beside him.

"This is Drummer," he said. "Operation
authenticator Tornado Six. Execute. First wave.
Launch."

Five green lights flashed to red and disappeared,
on their way to predesignated stations outside
Fandango: one off each blunt end of the Depot
cylinder and the remainder at the entry to the
gateway force field.

Ten seconds later Drummer repeated his codes and
launched the second wave. The corresponding lights
on the screen flashed red and out. New green lights
appeared in their place, this time moving in arcs
converging on the cylinder centered in a sphere:
the depot in its force field cocoon.

The converging lines massed, reformed, and spread
into a pattern resembling the spoke tips of an open
umbrella, with the Gateway, the crowded transports
and the depot centered at what would be the
umbrella's handgrip.

 ##

Drummer turned his head and looked at Brad.

"Went off rather well," he said.

"Seems so. That was the easy part. I don't envy
you the next."

Drummer touched a switch connecting him to the
bridge.

"Captain," he said. "Launch the Dragon. Take your
position at the coordinates I gave to you. Activate
our comm system to the depot."

The ship shuddered as it shot from the gallery and
headed for the concentration of spacecraft above
Pluto. It slowed as it passed through the umbrella
formation and stopped fifty kay from the nearest
transport.

Time lapse from launch was less than two minutes.
Surprise was complete; the effect, paralyzing.

All movement around the depot slowed to a halt.
The intranet filled with "What the hell's going on?",
"Who are these guys?", and "Bring on the dancing
girls." Then, suddenly, the channels blanked,
replaced by silence.

Drummer keyed his microphone open and handed it
to Brad.

Brad took on a harsh tone.

"Attention: Commander of Slingshot Logistics Depot
and Masters of all vessels, inside or outside the
Fandango Force Field. The national interests of the
Government of Planet Pluto demands compliance
with Plutonian laws by all persons and properties
within its jurisdiction. You and your vessels and
the Logistics Depot are in Plutonian territory,
therefore, our laws apply to you.

"The Fleet Commander of this Plutonian Security
Force wishes to speak with the Commander of the
Slingshot Logistics Depot. Depot Commander, please
identify yourself and stand by. Acknowledge."

Silence. Thirty seconds.

"Logistics Depot. This is the Plutonian Security
Force. The message we sent you moments ago was for
the Depot Commander. Did you read? Acknowledge."

The reply came.

"Your message received. Please identify Fleet
Commander."

Brad and Drummer exchanged glances. Drummer
chuckled.

"The formalities must be observed," he chuckled,
his tone dry. "Tell him."

Brad keyed the mike.

"Fleet Commander Deke Drummer." He put a rasp
into his voice. "Now, get on with it."

Another voice came on.

"Colonel Hanno here. I'm the Depot Commander.
What the hell game are you playing, Drummer?"

Brad's tone turned icy.

"Let's get one point straight, Colonel Hanno. You
will be speaking with a Fleet Commander with the
rank of Admiral. Should you need to be reminded,
Planet Pluto is a sovereign and independent nation,
and you are a guest within our borders. Your choice
of words is offensive. Do you read?"

A long pause.

"I read."





 Chapter SEVENTEEN


Drummer reached for the mike.

"Colonel Hanno, this is Admiral Drummer." He winked
