
"Well, you are entitled to your opinion, Mr. Sinclair. And if the other
planters are going to rebuild your buildings, that's fine and charitable
of them." Suddenly Connel's voice became harsh. "That does not, however,
erase the fact that a group of uniformed men, armed with paralo-ray guns
and with ships equipped with blasters, attacked you! Atomic blasters,
Mr. Sinclair, are not bought at the local credit exchange. They are made
exclusively for the Solar Guard! That bunch of hotheaded kids, as you
call them, are capable of attacking any community--even ships of the
Solar Guard itself! That is a threat to the peace of the solar system
and must be stopped!"

Sinclair nodded quickly. "Oh, I agree, Major, I agree. I'm just saying
that--"

Connel stopped him. "I understand, Mr. Sinclair. You're a peaceful man
and want to keep your life peaceful. But my job is to ensure that peace.
As long as a group of militant toughs like we had here are on the loose,
you won't have peace. You'll have pieces!"

Tom, Roger, and Astro, sitting quietly and listening, felt like standing
up and cheering as the major finished.

"I know you can't tell me what you're going to do, Major Connel," said
the planter, "but I hope that you'll allow me to help in any way I can."

Connel hesitated before answering. "Thank you, Mr. Sinclair. But I'm not
here officially now." And then he added, "Nor in regard to the
Nationalists."

Sinclair's eyes lit up slightly. "Oh?"

"No. As you know, the cadets had quite a time with a tyrannosaurus. They
wounded it and it might still be dangerous. That is, more dangerous than
normally. I've got orders to track him down and finish him off."

"But I thought you said you were going to put a stop to this business
with the Nationalists," said the planter.

"I said the Solar Guard would, Sinclair."

"Oh, yes," mumbled Sinclair, "the Solar Guard. Of course."

Connel got up abruptly. "I would appreciate it if you would look after
our ship, though," he said. "I don't think we'll be longer than a week.
Shouldn't be hard to track a tyrannosaurus, especially if it's wounded."

"I suppose you have all the equipment you need," said Sinclair.

"Yes, thank you," replied Connel. Then, thanking Mrs. Hill for the
refreshments, the burly spaceman and the three cadets said good-by and
left the house.

An hour later, ready to strike off into the jungle, the Solar Guard
officer took four of the latest model shock rifles out of the arms
locker of the _Polaris_ and gave one to each boy with extra ammunition.
"Never go after a giant with a popgun," he said. "It's a wonder you
didn't kill yourselves with those old blasters you used, let alone kill
a tyranno."

The three cadets examined the rifles closely and with enthusiasm.

"These are the latest Solar Guard issue," said Connel. "When you pull
that trigger, you release a force three times greater than anything put
into a rifle before."

Then, checking the _Polaris_ and cutting all power, Connel removed the
master switch and hid it. "That's so no one will get any bright ideas
while we're gone," he explained as the boys watched curiously.

"You think someone might try to steal her, sir?" asked Tom.

"You never can tell, Corbett," answered Connel noncommittally.

Once again the three boys moved across the clearing toward the jungle
wall. Astro took the lead as before, followed by Roger and Tom, and
Connel brought up the rear. They moved directly to the spot where they
had last seen the tyrannosaurus, found the trampled underbrush and
massive tracks, and moved purposefully into the dank, suffocating green
world.

The trail was plain to see. Where the boys once had to hack their way
through the thick underbrush, the monster had created a path for them.
The three cadets felt better about being back in the jungle with more
reliable equipment and joked about what they would do to the
tyrannosaurus when they saw it again.

"I thought you were supposed to be the home-grown Venusian hick that
could manage in the jungle like that fairy-tale character, Tarzan,"
Roger teased Astro.

"Listen, you sleepwalking space Romeo," growled Astro, "I know more
about this jungle than you could learn in ten years. And I'm not foolish
enough to battle with a tyranno with the odds on his side. I ran for a
good reason!"

"Boy, did you run!" taunted Roger. "You were as fast as the _Polaris_ on
emergency thrust!"

"Knock off that rocket wash!" roared Connel. "The Nationalists might
have security patrols in this area. They could hear you talking and
blast you before you could bat an eyelash! Now keep quiet and stay
alert!"

The three cadets quieted down after that, walking carefully, stepping
around dead brush that might betray their presence. After working their
way along the tyrannosaurus's trail for several hours, Connel called a
halt, and after a quick look at his compass, motioned for them to cut
away from the monster's tracks.

"We'll start working around in a circle," he said. "One day east, one
south, west, and north. Then we'll move in closer to the heart of the
circle, and repeat the same procedure. That should cover a lot of ground
in eight days. If anything's moving around out here, besides what should
be here, we'll find it. From now on, we'll have a scout. Astro, you know
the jungle, you take the point, about five hundred yards ahead. If you
see anything, signs of a patrol or any danger from the jungle, fall back
and report. Don't try to do anything yourself. Four guns in a good
position are better than one popping off by itself."

"Aye, aye, sir," said Astro. With a quick nod to Tom and Roger, he moved
off through the jungle. In ten feet he was invisible. In thirty seconds
his footsteps were lost in the thousands of jungle sounds around them.

"I'll take the lead now," said Connel. "Corbett, you bring up the rear.
All right, move out!"

From above, in the leafy roof covering the jungle; from the side, in the
thick tangle of vines; and from below, in the thorny underbrush, the
eyes of living things, jungle things, followed the movements of the
three spacemen, perhaps wondering if these new beasts were a threat to
their lives.




CHAPTER 10


"Hal-loo-ooo!"

Astro's voice boomed out over the tops of the trees, where the birds
fluttered in sudden fright. It echoed through the darkness around him,
where smaller creatures crawled and slithered into the protection of
their holes. The voice of the big cadet was loud, but it was not loud
enough for his mates to hear.

Astro was lost.

He couldn't understand how it had happened. Over and over during the
past six hours he had retraced his steps mentally, trying to visualize
the trail, trying to locate the telltale marks he had made with his
jungle knife, and so find Major Connel, Tom, and Roger. It was dark now
and the big cadet had to face the dangerous jungle alone. He laughed
ironically. Connel had given him the point because he knew the jungle!
And now he was lost.

Astro was a little frightened too. It was his frank realization of
trouble that made him afraid. He knew what was in the jungle, and though
he had been there alone before, he had never been in it as deeply as
this, nor had he ever been lost in the nightmarish place after sundown.

While he was desperately anxious to find his unit mates, he had not
fired his rifle. The threat of exposing his position to a possible
Nationalist patrol prevented him from signaling with the blaster or even
from building a fire. During the last hours of the day, when the
suspicion that he was lost became a concrete fact, the big cadet had
been reluctant even to yell. Now, with pitch-black night closing around
him, he dared to call, hoping it would be heard and recognized by his
friends, or if not, considered the howl of a jungle beast by an enemy
patrol should one be near.

He stood with his back against the rough bark of a teakwood tree to
protect his rear and to face out toward the pitch-black night. More than
once the big cadet felt the sudden ripple of a crawling thing moving
around him, across his toes or down the tree trunk. There was a sudden
thrashing in the underbrush near by and he brought the shock rifle up
quickly, ears tuned for the growl, or scream, or hiss of an attacking
beast.

The luminous dial of his watch showed it to be three thirty in the
morning, two and a half hours to go before the sun would drive the
fearful darkness away. He had been calling every five minutes. And every
time he shouted, the movements in the darkness around him increased.

"Hal-loo-ooo!"

He waited, turning his head from one side to the other, intent on the
sounds that came from a distance; the answering call of the waddling
ground bird that had confused him at first until he recognized it; the
shrill scream of the tiny swamp hog; the distant chattering of the
monkeylike creatures in the treetops. But there was no sound from a
human throat.

Astro called again and again. The seconds dragged by into minutes, the
minutes into an hour, and then two hours, and finally, as every muscle
in his body ached from standing backed up to the tree all night and
holding his rifle on alert, the gray murky dawn broke over the jungle
and he began to see the green of the jungle around him. When the sun at
last broke over the Venusian horizon, the night's frost on the leaves
and bushes danced and glittered like jewels.

He washed his face in a near-by pool, careful not to drink any of the
water. He opened a can of synthetic food, and after eating his fill,
cleared away the brush down to the naked black soil and banking it high
on all sides he stretched full length on the ground. He dared not sleep.
Hungry animals were moving about freely now. A paralo-ray gun and the
rifle, both cocked and ready to fire, were held in his hands. He relaxed
as completely as he could, idly watching the mother of a brood of the
anthropoids scamper through the branches of the trees overhead, bringing
her squalling young their breakfast. An hour later, refreshed, he
started through the jungle again, eyes open for signs of recent
activity, human activity, for the big cadet wanted to return to his
comrades.

Stopping occasionally to climb a tree, Astro searched the sky above the
treetops for smoke that would mark a campsite. He felt that sure if
there was any, he would find Roger, Tom, and Connel, since a Nationalist
patrol wouldn't advertise its presence in the jungle. But there were no
smoke signs. The top of the jungle stretched green and still as far as
he could see, steaming under the burning rays of the sun.

Astro knew that it would be impossible to spend another night like the
first in the jungle, so after searching through the forest until three
in the afternoon, he stopped, opened another can of synthetic food, and
ate. He was used to being alone now. The first wave of fear had left
him and he was beginning to remember things he knew as a young boy;
jungle signs that warned him of dangers, the quick identification of the
animal cries, and the knowledge of the habits of the jungle creatures.

After eating, he took his jungle knife and hacked at a long, tough vine,
yanking it down from its lofty tangle. He started weaving it into a
tight oblong basket and two hours later, just before the sun dropped
into the jungle for the night, he was finished. He had a seven-foot bag
woven tightly and pulled together with a small opening at one end. Just
before the sky darkened, the big cadet crawled into this makeshift
sleeping bag, pulled the opening closed with a tight draw cord, and in
thirty seconds was asleep. Nothing would be able to bite through the
tough vine matting, and the chances of a larger beast accidentally
stepping on him were small. Nevertheless, Astro had pulled the bag close
to a huge tree and placed it deep between the swollen roots.

He awoke with a start. The ground was shaking violently. He was sweating
profusely and judged that it must be late in the morning with the sun
beating directly on him. Carefully he opened the end of the makeshift
sleeping bag and peered out. He gasped and reached for his shock rifle,
bringing it up into firing position. The sight that confronted him was
at once horrifying and fascinating. A hundred yards away, a giant snake,
easily a hundred feet long and five feet thick, was wrapped around a
raging tyrannosaurus. The monsters were in a fight to death. Astro
shuddered and pulled back into the bag, keeping the blaster aimed at the
two struggling beasts.

[Illustration: _Astro kept his blaster aimed at the monsters_]

The big cadet deduced that the snake must have been surprised in its
feeding by the tyrannosaurus, and was trying to defend itself. There
wasn't a living thing in the jungle that would deliberately attack a
tyrannosaurus. Only man, with his intelligence and deadly weapons,
could win over the brute force and cunning of the jungle giant. And even
that had failed with this monster. Astro quickly saw it was the same
beast that had chased the three cadets out of the jungle!

With three coils wrapped around the tyrannosaurus's body, the snake was
trying to wrap a fourth around its neck and strangle it, but the monster
was too wily. Rearing back, it suddenly fell to the ground, its weight
crushing the three coils around its middle. The snake jerked
spasmodically, stunned, as the tyrannosaurus scrambled up again. The
ground trembled and branches were ripped from near-by trees. All around
the jungle had been leveled. Everything fell before the thrashing
monsters.

Recovering, the snake's head darted in again, trying to circle the
tyrannosaurus's head and complete the last and fatal coil, but the giant
beast lunged, its massive jaws snapping, and the snake drew back.
Suddenly its tail lashed out and circled the left legs of the
tyrannosaurus. Astro could see the beast straining against the sudden
pressure, at the same time alert for the swooping head of the snake. The
pressure on the leg was too great, and the beast fell to the ground,
giving the snake a momentary advantage. Its head darted in again, but
the tyrannosaurus drew its head into its narrow shoulders, then shot out
again as the snake missed. Astro saw the snake quiver and jerk back as
the tyrannosaurus clamped its jaws closed and bit a chunk out of the
green, scaly body.

The snake had enough. It wanted to get away, to slip to the top of the
tallest tree in the forest, out of reach of the tyrannosaurus, and wait
for the wound to heal or for death to come. It unwound in a maddened
convulsive movement and slithered toward the tree where Astro lay. But
the monster was after it, immediately grabbing it by the tail and
jerking it back. The snake was forced to turn and fight back.

Astro knew that if the snake could get away it would head for the
teakwood above his head, the highest tree around, and the tyrannosaurus
would stamp the ground around its base into powder. He had to move!

A hundred feet to the left was a wild thicket of ground thorns, their
needlelike tips bristling. Even the snake would stay away from them. It
was his only chance should the snake get loose from the tyrannosaurus
again. Making up his mind quickly, the cadet opened the end of the
sleeping bag and shoved his weapons out before him. Then hugging the
ground, he dashed across the clearing. This gave the tyrannosaurus its
final advantage. The snake pulled back, momentarily attracted by Astro's
move, and the tyrannosaurus struck, catching the snake just behind the
head in a grip of death.

The thorns ripped at Astro's tight-fitting jungle dress, tearing into
his flesh as he dove into the thicket. But once inside the cadet lay
still, pointing his rifle at the tyrannosaurus who was methodically
finishing off the giant snake. In a few seconds the snake was dead and
the tyrannosaurus began to feast.

Astro stayed in the thicket, watching the monster devour nearly all of
the dead reptile foe and then rise up and move off through the jungle.
Astro knew that in no time the scavengers of the jungle would be
swarming over the remains of the snake. Once again he had to move.

Getting out of the thicket was painful. From every direction the thorns
jabbed at him, and but for the toughness of his jungle suit, Astro would
have been ripped to shreds. After easing his way back into the
clearing, the cadet pulled out the remains of his jungle pack. He then
saw that his suit was torn to ribbons, and the many slashes on his chest
and arms were bleeding profusely. The scent of the blood would attract
the carnivorous creatures, so he stripped off the bloody jungle suit,
dropping it back in the thicket, and hurried away. A short time later he
came to a water hole where he sponged himself off and applied medication
from his emergency kit to the scratches. Finished, he took stock. The
night's sleep had refreshed him, and except for the loss of his
protective clothing, he was in good shape. He shouldered the pack,
strapped the paralo-ray gun to his hips, and gripping the rifle tightly,
he moved off through the jungle once more. He decided to follow the
tyrannosaurus. The beast would leave a path for him, saving him the
effort of hacking his way through the vines and creepers, and should an
enemy patrol be out, it would stay away from the tyrannosaurus. Finally,
he knew Tom, Roger, and Connel would go after the beast if they saw it.

The sun shone down on the half-naked giant moving through the jungle, a
new white-skinned animal who was braver than the rest, a creature who
dared to trail the king of the jungle.

       *       *       *       *       *

"It's all my fault!" said Connel disgustedly. "I should have been able
to read his trail signs."

Tom did not answer. He pulled the straps of his jungle pack tighter and
slung it over his shoulder. Roger stood to one side, watching Major
Connel. Both boys sensed what was coming.

"Well, this is the last day we can spend searching for him," said
Connel. "We've already lost two days."

Roger glanced at Tom and said casually, "It wouldn't hurt to keep our
eyes open for signs of him, would it, sir?"

"Now listen, boys," said Connel firmly, "I know how you feel about
Astro. I have to admit I have a liking for the lad myself. But we've
been sent out here to locate the base of operations of the Nationalists.
The best way to do that is to work around the jungle in a given area. We
haven't done that so far. We've put all our time and effort into a
random search for Astro. We can't signal him, build a fire, shoot off a
blaster--or use any of the simple communication devices. We have to work
under cover, for fear of giving away our presence here in the jungle."
He slung his gear over his shoulder and added, "We'll continue our
search for Astro until noon and then we simply will have to abandon it.
And stop worrying about him. He's a big strong lad and he's been in this
jungle alone before. I have every confidence that he can make his way
back to Sinclair's plantation safely."

The Solar Guard officer paused and looked at the two downcast cadets
before him. "None of that sulking business!" he growled. "You're cadets
on an urgent mission. Now move out. I'll take the point first and you
