to the boat-berth hatch, I pulled down as many parkas and pairs of
overpants as I could carry, squeezing past Tom, who was collecting
fleece-lined hip boots. Each pair was buckled together at the tops; a
hunter always does that, even at home ashore.

Ramon had the hatch open, and had opened the top hatch of the boat,
below. I threw my double armload of clothing down through it and slid
down after, getting out of the way of the load of boots Tom dumped
ahead of him. Joe Kivelson came down last, carrying the ship's log and
some other stuff. A little water was trickling over the edge of the
hatch above.

"It's squirting up from below in a dozen places," he said, after he'd
sealed the boat. "The whole front of the ship must be blown out."

"Well, now we know what happened to Simon MacGregor's _Claymore_," I
said, more to myself than to anybody else.

Joe and Hans Cronje, the gunner, were getting a rocket out of the
locker, detaching the harpoon and fitting on an explosive warhead. He
stopped, while he and Cronje were loading it into the after launcher,
and nodded at me.

"That's what I think, too," he said. "Everybody grab onto something;
we're getting the door open."

I knew what was coming and started hugging a stanchion as though it
were a long-lost sweetheart, and Murell, who didn't but knew enough to
imitate those who did, hugged it from the other side. The rocket
whooshed out of the launcher and went off with a deafening bang
outside. For an instant, nothing happened, and I told Murell not to
let go. Then the lock burst in and the water, at seventy fathoms'
pressure, hit the boat. Abdullah had gotten the engines on and was
backing against it. After a little, the pressure equalized and we went
out the broken lock stern first.

We circled and passed over the _Javelin_, and then came back. She was
lying in the ooze, a quarter over on her side, and her whole bow was
blown out to port. Joe Kivelson got the square box he had brought down
from the ship along with the log, fussed a little with it, and then
launched it out the disposal port. It was a radio locator. Sometimes a
lucky ship will get more wax than the holds' capacity; they pack it in
skins and anchor it on the bottom, and drop one of those gadgets with
it. It would keep on sending a directional signal and the name of the
ship for a couple of years.

"Do you really think it was sabotage?" Murell was asking me. Blowing
up a ship with sixteen men aboard must have seemed sort of extreme to
him. Maybe that wasn't according to Terran business ethics. "Mightn't
it have been a power unit?"

"No. Power units don't blow, and if one did, it would vaporize the
whole ship and a quarter of a cubic mile of water around her. No, that
was old fashioned country-style chemical explosive. Cataclysmite,
probably."

"Ravick?" he asked, rather unnecessarily.

"You know how well he can get along without you and Joe Kivelson, and
here's a chance to get along without both of you together." Everybody
in the boat was listening, so I continued: "How much do you know about
this fellow Devis, who strained his back at the last moment?"

"Engine room's where he could have planted something," Joe Kivelson
said.

"He was in there by himself for a while, the morning after the
meeting," Abdullah Monnahan added.

"And he disappeared between the meeting room and the elevator, during
the fight," Tom mentioned. "And when he showed up, he hadn't been
marked up any. I'd have thought he'd have been pretty badly
beaten--unless they knew he was one of their own gang."

"We're going to look Devis up when we get back," somebody said
pleasantly.

"If we get back," Ramon Llewellyn told him. "That's going to take some
doing."

"We have the boat," Hans Cronje said. "It's a little crowded, but we
can make it back to Port Sandor."

"I hope we can," Abe Clifford, the navigator, said. "Shall we take her
up, Joe?"

"Yes, see what it's like on top," the skipper replied.

Going up, we passed a monster at about thirty fathoms. It stuck its
neck out and started for us. Monnahan tilted the boat almost vertical
and put on everything the engines had, lift and drive parallel. An
instant later, we broke the surface and shot into the air.

The wind hit the boat as though it had been a ping-pong ball, and it
was several seconds, and bad seconds at that, before Monnahan regained
even a semblance of control. There was considerable bad language, and
several of the crew had bloody noses. Monnahan tried to get the boat
turned into the wind. A circuit breaker popped, and red lights blazed
all over the instrument panel. He eased off and let the wind take
over, and for a while we were flying in front of it like a rifle
bullet. Gradually, he nosed down and submerged.

"Well, that's that." Joe Kivelson said, when we were back in the
underwater calm again. "We'll have to stay under till the wind's over.
Don't anybody move around or breathe any deeper than you have to.
We'll have to conserve oxygen."

"Isn't the boat equipped with electrolytic gills?" Murell asked.

"Sure, to supply oxygen for a maximum of six men. We have sixteen in
here."

"How long will our air last, for sixteen of us?" I asked.

"About eight hours."

It would take us fifty to get to Port Sandor, running submerged. The
wind wouldn't even begin to fall in less than twenty.

"We can go south, to the coast of Hermann Reuch's Land," Abe Clifford,
the navigator, said. "Let me figure something out."

He dug out a slide rule and a pencil and pad and sat down with his
back to the back of the pilot's seat, under the light. Everybody
watched him in a silence which Joe Kivelson broke suddenly by
bellowing:

"Dumont! You light that pipe and I'll feed it to you!"

Old Piet Dumont grabbed the pipe out of his mouth with one hand and
pocketed his lighter with the other.

"Gosh, Joe; I guess I just wasn't thinking..." he began.

"Well, give me that pipe." Joe put it in the drawer under the charts.
"Now you won't have it handy the next time you don't think."

After a while, Abe Clifford looked up. "Ship's position I don't have
exactly; somewhere around East 25 Longitude, South 20 Latitude. I
can't work out our present position at all, except that we're
somewhere around South 30 Latitude. The locator signal is almost
exactly north-by-northeast of us. If we keep it dead astern, we'll
come out in Sancerre Bay, on Hermann Reuch's Land. If we make that,
we're all right. We'll be in the lee of the Hacksaw Mountains, and we
can surface from time to time to change air, and as soon as the wind
falls we can start for home."

Then he and Abdullah and Joe went into a huddle, arguing about
cruising speed submerged. The results weren't so heartening.

"It looks like a ten-hour trip, submerged," Joe said. "That's two
hours too long, and there's no way of getting more oxygen out of the
gills than we're getting now. We'll just have to use less. Everybody
lie down and breathe as shallowly as possible, and don't do anything
to use energy. I'm going to get on the radio and see what I can
raise."

Big chance, I thought. These boat radios were only used for
communicating with the ship while scouting; they had a strain-everything
range of about three hundred miles. Hunter-ships don't crowd that close
together when they're working. Still, there was a chance that somebody
else might be sitting it out on the bottom within hearing. So Abe took
the controls and kept the signal from the wreck of the _Javelin_ dead
astern, and Joe Kivelson began speaking into the radio:

"Mayday, Mayday, Mayday, Mayday. Captain Kivelson, _Javelin_, calling.
My ship was wrecked by an explosion; all hands now in scout boat,
proceeding toward Sancerre Bay, on course south-by-southwest from the
wreck. Locator signal is being broadcast from the _Javelin_. Other
than that, we do not know our position. Calling all craft, calling
Mayday."

He stopped talking. The radio was silent except for an occasional
frying-fat crackle of static. Then he began over again.

I curled up, trying to keep my feet out of anybody's face and my face
clear of anybody else's feet. Somebody began praying, and somebody
else told him to belay it, he was wasting oxygen. I tried to go to
sleep, which was the only practical thing to do. I must have
succeeded. When I woke again, Joe Kivelson was saying, exasperatedly:

"Mayday, Mayday, Mayday, Mayday..."




11

DARKNESS AND COLD


The next time I woke, Tom Kivelson was reciting the Mayday, Mayday
incantation into the radio, and his father was asleep. The man who had
been praying had started again, and nobody seemed to care whether he
wasted oxygen or not. It was a Theosophist prayer to the Spirit
Guides, and I remembered that Cesario Vieira was a Theosophist. Well,
maybe there really were Spirit Guides. If there were, we'd all be
finding out before long. I found that I didn't care one hoot which
way, and I set that down to oxygen deficiency.

Then Glenn Murell broke in on the monotone call for help and the
prayer.

"We're done for if we stay down here another hour," he said. "Any
argument on that?"

There wasn't any. Joe Kivelson opened his eyes and looked around.

"We haven't raised anything at all on the radio," Murell went on.
"That means nobody's within an hour of reaching us. Am I right?"

"I guess that's about the size of it," Joe Kivelson conceded.

"How close to land are we?"

"The radar isn't getting anything but open water and schools of
fish," Abe Clifford said. "For all I know, we could be inside Sancerre
Bay now."

"Well, then, why don't we surface?" Murell continued. "It's a thousand
to one against us, but if we stay here our chances are precisely one
hundred per cent negative."

"What do you think?" Joe asked generally. "I think Mr. Murell's stated
it correctly."

"There is no death," Cesario said. "Death is only a change, and then
more of life. I don't care what you do."

"What have we got to lose?" somebody else asked. "We're broke and
gambling on credit now."

"All right; we surface," the skipper said. "Everybody grab onto
something. We'll take the Nifflheim of a slamming around as soon as
we're out of the water."

We woke up everybody who was sleeping, except the three men who had
completely lost consciousness. Those we wrapped up in blankets and
tarpaulins, like mummies, and lashed them down. We gathered everything
that was loose and made it fast, and checked the fastenings of
everything else. Then Abdullah Monnahan pointed the nose of the boat
straight up and gave her everything the engines could put out. Just as
we were starting upward, I heard Cesario saying:

"If anybody wants to see me in the next reincarnation, I can tell you
one thing; I won't reincarnate again on Fenris!"

The headlights only penetrated fifty or sixty feet ahead of us. I
could see slashers and clawbeaks and funnelmouths and gulpers and
things like that getting out of our way in a hurry. Then we were out
of the water and shooting straight up in the air.

It was the other time all over again, doubled in spades, only this
time Abdullah didn't try to fight it; he just kept the boat rising.
Then it went end-over-end, again and again. I think most of us blacked
out; I'm sure I did, for a while. Finally, more by good luck than good
management, he got us turned around with the wind behind us. That
lasted for a while, and then we started keyholing again. I could see
the instrument panel from where I'd lashed myself fast; it was going
completely bughouse. Once, out the window in front, I could see jagged
mountains ahead. I just shut my eyes and waited for the Spirit Guides
to come and pick up the pieces.

When they weren't along, after a few seconds that seemed like half an
hour, I opened my eyes again. There were more mountains ahead, and
mountains to the right. This'll do it, I thought, and I wondered how
long it would take Dad to find out what had happened to us. Cesario
had started praying again, and so had Abdullah Monnahan, who had just
remembered that he had been brought up a Moslem. I hoped he wasn't
trying to pray in the direction of Mecca, even allowing that he knew
which way Mecca was from Fenris generally. That made me laugh, and
then I thought, This is a fine time to be laughing at anything. Then I
realized that things were so bad that anything more that happened was
funny.

I was still laughing when I discovered that the boat had slowed to a
crawl and we were backing in between two high cliffs. Evidently
Abdullah, who had now stopped praying, had gotten enough control of
the boat to keep her into the wind and was keeping enough speed
forward to yield to it gradually. That would be all right, I thought,
if the force of the wind stayed constant, and as soon as I thought of
that, it happened. We got into a relative calm, the boat went forward
again, and then was tossed up and spun around. Then I saw a mountain
slope directly behind us, out the rear window.

A moment later, I saw rocks and boulders sticking out of it in
apparent defiance of gravitation, and then I realized that it was
level ground and we were coming down at it backward. That lasted a few
seconds, and then we hit stern-on, bounced and hit again. I was
conscious up to the third time we hit.

The next thing I knew, I was hanging from my lashings from the side of
the boat, which had become the top, and the headlights and the lights
on the control panel were out, and Joe Kivelson was holding a
flashlight while Abe Clifford and Glenn Murell were trying to get me
untied and lower me. I also noticed that the air was fresh, and very
cold.

"Hey, we're down!" I said, as though I were telling anybody anything
they didn't know. "How many are still alive?"

"As far as I know, all of us," Joe said. "I think I have a broken
arm." I noticed, then, that he was holding his left arm stiffly at his
side. Murell had a big gash on top of his head, and he was mopping
blood from his face with his sleeve while he worked.

When they got me down, I looked around. Somebody else was playing a
flashlight around at the stern, which was completely smashed. It was
a miracle the rocket locker hadn't blown up, but the main miracle was
that all, or even any, of us were still alive.

We found a couple of lights that could be put on, and we got all of us
picked up and the unconscious revived. One man, Dominic Silverstein,
had a broken leg. Joe Kivelson's arm was, as he suspected, broken,
another man had a fractured wrist, and Abdullah Monnahan thought a
couple of ribs were broken. The rest of us were in one piece, but all
of us were cut and bruised. I felt sore all over. We also found a
nuclear-electric heater that would work, and got it on. Tom and I
rigged some tarpaulins to screen off the ruptured stern and keep out
the worst of the cold wind. After they got through setting and
splinting the broken bones and taping up Abdullah's ribs, Cesario and
Murell got some water out of one of the butts and started boiling it
for coffee. I noticed that Piet Dumont had recovered his pipe and was
smoking it, and Joe Kivelson had his lit.

"Well, where are we?" somebody was asking Abe Clifford.

The navigator shook his head. "The radio's smashed, so's the receiver
for the locator, and so's the radio navigational equipment. I can
state positively, however, that we are on the north coast of Hermann
Reuch's Land."

Everybody laughed at that except Murell. I had to explain to him that
Hermann Reuch's Land was the antarctic continent of Fenris, and hasn't
any other coast.

"I'd say we're a good deal west of Sancerre Bay," Cesario Vieira
hazarded. "We can't be east of it, the way we got blown west. I think
we must be at least five hundred miles east of it."

"Don't fool yourself, Cesario," Joe Kivelson told him. "We could have
gotten into a turbulent updraft and been carried to the upper,
eastward winds. The altimeter was trying to keep up with the boat and
just couldn't, half the time. We don't know where we went. I'll take
Abe's estimate and let it go at that."

"Well, we're up some kind of a fjord," Tom said. "I think it branches
like a Y, and we're up the left branch, but I won't make a point of
that."

"I can't find anything like that on this map," Abe Clifford said,
after a while.

