
"What's the matter with you?" demanded Shinny. "You got space fever or
something?"

Mason, sitting quietly in the dirty hotel room, was grinning from ear to
ear.

"So you got Manning for us, eh?" repeated Loring at last. "I wanta tell
you something, Shinny. I was the one that got that kid to break outta
that space station!"

"You what?" asked Shinny. The little spaceman had come to like the
straightforwardness of Roger.

"That's right," said Loring. "When Mason and me loused up taking over
the _Annie Jones_, that kid, Manning, was on the radar watch at the
station. At the same time we were gonna crash into the station he
crossed a coupla wires and was talking to his girl back on Earth! They
think _he_ fouled up the radar and caused the crash!"

"Then he's your fall guy," commented Shinny thoughtfully.

"Right," said Loring. "And now you come along and tell us that we can
get him to astrogate us out to Tara! I tell ya, Mason, this is the
greatest gag I've heard in years!"

"Yeah," agreed Mason, his weak mouth still stretched in a stupid grin,
"but you have to be careful he never finds out it was us that got him
into all his trouble!"

"Leave that to me," said Loring. "He'll never know a thing. In fact,
he'll thank us for getting him off the station and then giving him a
chance to get back in space." He turned to Shinny. "You got the ship?"

"I told you before," said Shinny, "there ain't anything to be had."

"Well, we gotta have a ship," said Loring. "A fortune waiting for us in
the deep and no space wagon to go get it!"

"There _is_ a ship," said Shinny. "Not too good, but a spaceship."

"Where?" asked Loring.

"Near Venusport. Out in the jungles, to be exact. Needs a little fixing,
but it'll make a deep space hop well enough."

"Who does it belong to?" demanded Loring.

"Me," said Shinny, a strange twinkle in his eyes.

"_You?_" gasped Loring. "By the craters of Luna, where did you get a
spaceship?"

"Fifteen years ago a freighter was forced down in the jungles right near
Venusport," said Shinny. "I was prospecting near by for pitchblende,
back when everybody thought Venus was loaded with it. I saw the crew
leave in jet boats. Soon as they was out of sight I went over to take a
look. I wanted to see if there was any grub I could swipe and save
myself a trip back to Venusport for more supplies. Anyway, I went aboard
and found the grub all right, but I got nosy about why they had made an
emergency touchdown. I looked around the power deck and found they had
busted their reaction timer. I got the idea then of fixing it up and
bringing it back to Venusport to give them young jerks a surprise. I
lifted her off the ground and then figured why should I give it back?
Just move it someplace else and let the vines and creepers grow over it
for a few days."

"Didn't the crew come back looking for it?" asked Loring.

"Did they?" chortled Shinny. "I'll say they did! Almost drove them poor
fellers crazy. I guess they searched for that old wagon for three months
before giving up."

"And--and you mean it's still there--and in good condition?" asked
Loring.

"Needs a little fuel," said Shinny, "and probably a good overhaul, but I
don't think there's anything serious the matter with it."

"By the craters of Luna," exclaimed Loring, "we'll blast off
immediately!"

"Hold on," said Shinny. "I didn't say I'd give it to you."

"Well, what do you want for it?" demanded Loring.

"Now let me see," mused Shinny. "I figure that if _you_ figure to get as
much as twenty million credits out of the copper, a full quarter share
ought to be about right."

"Five million credits for a--a ship that's been rotting in the jungle
for fifteen years!" exclaimed Loring.

"She's in good shape," defended Shinny. "I go out there every six months
or so and turn over the reactors just to keep 'em from getting rusty."

"Why didn't you try to do something with it before?" asked Loring.

"Never had no occasion to," answered Shinny. "Well, is it a deal, or
isn't it?"

"Too much," snapped Loring.

"That's my price," said Shinny.

"I could take the ship and not give you anything," sneered Loring.

"If the Solar Guard looked for three months in that jungle, with a
hundred men and instruments, do you think you'll find it?"

"I'll give you a fifth share," said Loring.

"Nope," said Shinny, "I've named my price. You either take it or leave
it!" He glared at Loring.

Mason finally spoke. "Take it, Loring," he said, "and let's get out of
here. I'm getting jittery over that investigation that's coming up on
the station."

"All right," said Loring, "it's a deal. One quarter share for the ship."

"Done!" said Shinny--"Now I guess we'd better go talk to that boy
Manning, eh?"

"Don't you think it'll be a little dangerous taking him along?" whined
Mason.

"Yeah, maybe you're right," said Loring.

[Illustration]

"If it was me," said Shinny, "I wouldn't give it a second thought.
You're going into _deep_ space. It ain't like a hop to Mars or Titan.
This is as deep as you can go. If I was you, I'd want the best there is
in my crew. And from what I've heard about that young feller, he's the
best there is on the radar bridge. You know who his father was?"

"Who?" asked Mason.

"Ken--" Shinny suddenly closed his mouth tight. "Just another spaceman,"
he said, "but a good one!" He rose quickly. "Well, I'm supposed to meet
Manning in an hour at the Cosmos."

[Illustration]

The three men left the dingy hotel and walked out into the main street
of Spaceman's Row. In a few moments they arrived at the Cafe Cosmos.
Roger was already there, seated at the same table and watching the
door. When he saw Loring and Mason with Shinny, he eyed them warily.

"Hiya, kid!" greeted Loring. "Glad to see you took my advice and got
away from 'Blast-off' Connel." Mason waved a salute, and the three men
sat down.

Roger ignored Loring and Mason, speaking directly to Shinny. "Did you
complete our deal?" he asked softly.

"Nope," answered Shinny. "I brought you another one instead."

Roger held out his hand. "My one hundred credits--_now!_"

"Never mind the credits, kid," said Loring, "we've got more important
things to talk about."

Roger continued to look at Shinny, his palm outstretched on the top of
the table. "One hundred credits," he repeated coldly.

Reluctantly, Shinny handed over the money. Slowly, carefully, Roger
counted the bills, and then, after putting them away, he turned to face
Loring for the first time.

"You said you have something important to discuss with me?" he drawled.

"I see you learned fast, kid!" said Loring with a crooked smile. "I
wouldn't trust Shinny as far as I could throw a comet!"

Mason laughed loudly. The other three merely glared at him, and he
stopped abruptly.

"Here's the proposition, Manning," said Loring, leaning across the
table. "I've gotta ship and I wanta make a hop into deep space. I want
you to do the astrogation!"

"I'm interested," said Roger. "Keep talking."

Briefly Loring described the copper satellite, its potential value, and
what they expected to get out of it. Roger listened without comment.
When Loring had finished, Shinny told him about the ship and its
condition. When Shinny finished, Loring turned to Roger.

"Well, Manning," he asked, "how do you like the setup?"

"How much do I get out of it?" asked Roger.

"One twentieth of the take," said Loring.

"There are four of us. One full quarter-share, nothing less," drawled
Roger.

"One-fourth to Shinny and one-fourth to him," whined Mason. "That only
leaves us a fourth apiece!"

"That's more than you've got now," snapped Loring. "All right, Manning,
you're in!"

Roger smiled for the first time. "When do we blast off?"

"As soon as we get that space wagon in shape we hit the deep!" said
Loring.

"I think I need a drink on that," said Shinny. He yelled for the
bartender, who brought rocket juice and Martian fizz.

Roger picked up the glass of the sweet water and glanced around the
table.

"What's the name of that space wagon you've got buried in the jungles,
Mr. Shinny?"

"Ain't got no name," said Shinny.

Roger paused, a slight smile playing at the corners of his mouth. "Then
I propose we name her after the hearts of each of us here at the table."

"What's that?" asked Loring.

"_Space Devil_," said Roger.

Shinny grinned, his frail body trembling slightly from his silent
laughter. He held up the glass of rocket juice.

"I propose a toast to the _Space Devil_!"

"To the _Space Devil_," said the others together.

"And whatever trouble she brings," added Roger softly.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER 11


"Cadet _Higgins_!" Major Connel's voice roared over the ship's intercom
as the giant rocket cruiser _Polaris_ blasted smoothly through space.

"Yes, sir," squeaked Alfie in reply.

"Cadet Higgins," said Connel, "I thought I had requested a sight on the
sun star Regulus at fifteen hundred hours!"

"You did, sir," replied Alfie.

"_Then why, by the craters of Luna, don't I have that position?_"

"I was--busy, sir," came the meek reply.

"Cadet Higgins," sighed Connel patiently, "would you be so kind as to
come down to the control deck?"

In the short space of time since their departure from the space station
Major Connel had learned that to scold Cadet Higgins was not the way to
gain his attention. In fact, Major Connel had not been able to find a
way of getting the little cadet's attention in any manner, at any time,
on anything.

"I can't right now, sir," replied Alfie.

"What do you _mean_, you can't?" exploded Connel.

"I mean, sir," explained Alfie, "that I've just sighted Tara and I have
to get a position check on her before we go any farther, to ensure that
we traverse the same trajectory on our return trip and thus avoid the
problem of finding a new and safe route back."

"Cadet Alfie Higgins"--Connel's voice climbed to a frenzied shriek--"if
you are not on this control deck in ten seconds, I'll personally see
that you are fed to a dinosaur when we touch down on Tara and you'll
never return. _Now get down here!_"

Tom and Astro, who could hear the conversation over the intercom, were
finding it very difficult to keep from laughing out loud at the
innocence of Alfie and the outraged wrath of Major Connel.

Tom, particularly, had discovered that Alfie's innocent refusal to be
bullied by Connel had made the time pass more quickly on the long haul
through deep space. More than once he had seen Major Connel rage against
the underweight cadet and become even more frustrated at his childlike
resistance. It had helped Tom forget the empty feeling he experienced
every time he called the radar deck and heard Alfie's mild voice instead
of Roger's usual mocking answer. Astro, too, had managed to forget the
loneliness he felt aboard the great cruiser by watching the antics of
Alfie and Major Connel. More than once he had instigated situations
where Alfie would get caught red-handed in a harmless error, and then he
lay flat on the power deck, laughing until his sides ached, as he
listened to Alfie and Major Connel over the intercom.

It had helped. Both Tom and Astro admitted it had helped, but it still
didn't take away the dull ache each felt when an occasional remark,
situation, or thought would bring Roger to mind.

Tom flipped the teleceiver on and waited for the blank screen to show
him Tara. Connel stood to one side, also watching for the image of the
planet to take form on the gray-black screen. A hatch clanked behind
them, and Alfie stepped into the control deck to snap to his version of
attention.

"Cadet Higgins reporting, sir," he said quietly.

Connel stepped in front of him, placed his hands on his hips, and bent
slightly, pushing his face almost into Alfie's.

"Cadet Higgins, I want you to know I have taken all the blasted
space-brained antics I'm going to take from you," said Connel quietly.

"Yes, sir," replied Alfie blandly.

"And," said Connel, shaking a finger in Alfie's face, "_and_ if there is
one more--just _one_ more brazen, flagrant disregard of my _specific_
orders, then, Cadet Higgins, I promise you the most miserable trip back
to Earth you will ever know in your entire career! I promise you I'll
make you sweat! I'll--I'll--" Connel stopped short and shuddered.
Alfie's owl-eyed look of innocence seemed to unnerve him. He tried to
resume his tirade, but the words failed him. He finally turned away,
growling, "Higgins, get up on that radar deck and do as you're told,
_when_ you're told to do it and _not_ when you want to do it! Is that
clear?"

"Yes, sir," said Alfie meekly. He saluted and returned to the radar
deck.

"Corbett!" snapped Connel. "If I should appear to be losing control of
myself when addressing Cadet Higgins, you have my official permission to
restrain me. Use force if necessary!"

Tom bit his lip to keep from laughing and managed to mumble "Yes, sir."
He turned quickly to the control board and began focusing on the planet
lying dead ahead of the decelerating spaceship. They had been slowing
down for several days, since their speed with the added hyperdrive had
been increased greatly. The young cadet adjusted the last dial and the
blue-green planet sprang into clear sharp focus on the screen.

"Why," gasped Tom. "Sir, look! It's just like Earth!"

"In more ways than one, Corbett," replied Connel. "What's our range?"

"I'd say we're close enough to reduce thrust to a quarter regular space
speed, sir."

"Very well," said Connel. "Now look to the right on the screen. See that
small dark patch over there in the middle of the planet?"

"Yes, sir," replied Tom.

"That's where we want to touch down," said Connel. "You stay here on the
control deck and maneuver the ship closer in while I go to the radar
deck and contact Space Academy on the transmitter. I've got to report
that we expect to land soon."

"Very well, sir," said Tom. He turned and flipped the intercom switch.
"Control deck to power deck," he said. "Check in, Astro."

"Power deck here," replied Astro. "What's up, Tom?"

