ring from one of the small peaks at his back. But the man in the boat
did not turn his head; there was no change in the speed of that paddle
dip.

Shann leaped down the outer slope to the beach, skidding the last few
feet, saving himself from going headfirst into the water only by a
painful wrench of his body.

"Thorvald!" He tried calling again. But that head, bright under the sun
did not turn; there was no answer. Shann tore at his clothes and kicked
off his boots.

He did not think of the possibility of lurking sea monsters as he
plunged into the water, swam for the canoe edging along the reef,
plainly bound for the sea gate to the southwest. Shann was not a
powerful swimmer. His first impetus gave him a good start, but after
that he had to fight for each foot he gained, and the fear grew in him
that the other would reach the reef passage before he could catch up. He
wasted no more time trying to hail Thorvald, putting all his breath and
energy into the effort of overtaking the craft.

And he almost made it, his hand actually slipping along the log which
furnished the balancing outrigger. As his fingers tightened on the slimy
wood he looked up, and loosed that hold again in time perhaps to save
his life.

For when he ducked to let the water cover his head in an impromptu half
dive, Shann carried with him a vivid picture, a picture so astounding
that he was a little dazed.

Thorvald had stopped paddling at last, because that paddle had to be put
to another use. Had Shann not released his hold on the log and gone
under water, that crudely fashioned piece of wood might, have broken his
skull. He saw only too clearly the paddle raised in both hands as an
ugly weapon, and Thorvald's face, convulsed in a spasm of rage which
made it as inhuman as a Throg's.

Sputtering and choking, Shann fought up to the air once more. The paddle
was back at the task for which it had been carved, the canoe was
underway again, its occupant paying no more attention to what lay behind
than if he _had_ successfully disposed of the man in the water. To
follow would be only to invite another attack, and Shann might not be so
lucky next time. He was not good enough a swimmer to try any tricks such
as oversetting the canoe, not when Thorvald was an expert who could
easily finish off a fumbling opponent.

Shann swam wearily to shore where the wolverines waited, unable yet to
make sense of that attack in the lagoon. What had happened to Thorvald?
What motive had led the other to leave Shann and the animals on this
island, the island Thorvald had called a starting point in his search
for the natives of Warlock? Or had every bit of that tall tale been
invented by the Survey officer for some obscure purpose of his own,
certainly no sane purpose? Against that logic Shann could only set the
carved disk, and he had only Thorvald's word that that had been
discovered here.

He dragged himself out of the water on his hands and knees and lay,
winded and gasping. Taggi came to lick his face, nuzzle him, making a
small, bewildered whimpering. While above, the leather-headed birds
called and swooped, fearful and angry for their disturbed nesting place.
The Terran retched, coughed up water, and then sat up to look around.

The spread of lagoon was bare. Thorvald must have rounded the south
point of land and be very close to the reef passage, perhaps through it
by now. Not stopping for his clothes, Shann started up the slope,
crawling part of the way on his hands and knees.

He reached the crest again and got to his feet. The sun made an
eye-dazzling glitter of the waves. But under the shade of his hands
Shann saw the canoe again, beyond the reef, heading on out along the
island chain, not back to shore as he had expected. Thorvald was still
on the hunt, but for what? A reality which existed, or a dream in his
own disturbed brain?

Shann sat down. He was very hungry, for that adventure in the lagoon had
sapped his strength. And he was a prisoner along with the wolverines, a
prisoner on an island which was half the size of the valley which held
the Survey camp. As far as he knew, his only supply of drinkable water
was that tank of evil-smelling rain which would be speedily evaporated
by a sun such as the one now beating down on him. And between him and
the shore was the sea, a sea which harbored such creatures as the
fork-tail he had watched die.

Thorvald was still steadily on course, not to the next island in the
chain, a small, bare knob, but to the one beyond that. He could have
been hurrying to a meeting. Where and with what?

Shann got to his feet, started down to the beach once more, sure now
that the officer had no intention of returning, that he was again on his
own with only his wits and strength to keep him alive--alive and somehow
free of this water-washed prison.




10. A TRAP FOR A TRAPPER


Shann took up the piece of soft chalklike stone he had found and drew
another short white mark on the rust-red of a boulder well above tide
level. That made three such marks, three days since Thorvald had
marooned him. And he was no nearer the shore now than he had been on
that first morning! He sat where he was by the boulder, aware that he
should be up, trying to climb to the less accessible nests of the sea
birds. The prisoners, man and wolverines, had cleaned out all those they
had discovered on beach and cliffs. But at the thought of more eggs,
Shann's stomach knotted in pain and he began to retch.

There had been no sign of Thorvald since Shann had watched him steer
between the two westward islands. And the younger Terran's faint hope
that the officer would return had died. On the shore a few feet away lay
his own pitiful attempt to solve the problem of escape.

The force ax had vanished with Thorvald, along with all the rest of the
meager supplies which had been the officer's original contribution to
their joint equipment. Shann had used his knife on brush and small
trees, trying to put together some kind of a raft. But he had not been
able to discover here any of those vines necessary for binding, and his
best efforts had all come to grief when he tried them in a lagoon
launching. So far he had achieved no form of raft which would keep him
afloat longer than five minutes, let alone support three of them as far
as the next island.

Shann pulled listlessly at the framework of his latest try, fully
disheartened. He tried not to think of the unescapable fact that the
water in the rain tank had sunk to only an inch or so of muddy scum.
Last night he had dug in the heart of the interior valley where the
rankness of the vegetation was a promise of moisture, to uncover damp
clay and then a brackish ooze. Far too little to satisfy both him and
the animals.

There were surely fish somewhere in the lagoon. Shann wondered if the
raw flesh of sea dwellers could supply the water they needed. But
lacking net, line, or hooks, how did one fish? Yesterday, using his
stunner, he had brought down a bird, to discover the carcass so rank
even the wolverines, never dainty eaters, refused to gnaw it.

The animals prowled the two beaches, and Shann guessed they hunted shell
dwellers, for at times they dug energetically in the gravel. Togi was
busied in this way now, the sand flowing from under her pumping legs,
her claws raking in good earnest.

And it was Togi's excavation which brought Shann a first ray of hope.
Her excitement was so marked that he believed she was in quest of some
worthwhile game and he moved across to inspect the pit. A patch of
brown, which had been skimmed bare by one raking paw, made him shout.

Taggi shambled downslope, going to work beside his mate with an
eagerness as open as hers. Shann hovered at the edge of the pit they
were rapidly enlarging. The brown patch was larger, disclosing itself as
a hump doming up from the gravel. The Terran did not need to run his
hands over that rough surface to recognize the nature of the find. This
was another shell such as had come floating in after the storm to form
the raw material of their canoe.

However, as fast as the wolverines dug, they did not appear to make
correspondingly swift headway in uncovering their find as might
reasonably be expected. In fact, a witness could guess that the shell
was sinking at a pace only a fraction slower than the burrowers were
using to free it. Intrigued by that, Shann went back to the waterline,
secured one of the lengths he had been trying to weave into his
failures, and returned to use it as a makeshift shovel.

Now, with three of them at the digging, the brown hump was uncovered,
and Shann pried down around its edge, trying to lever it up and over. To
his amazement, his tool was caught and held, nearly jerked from his
hands. To his retaliating tug the obstruction below-ground gave way, and
the Terran sprawled back, the length of wood coming clear, to show the
other end smashed and splintered as if it had been caught between
mashing gears.

For the first time he understood that they were dealing not with an
empty shell casing buried by drift under this small beach, but with a
shell still inhabited by the Warlockian to whom it was a natural
covering, and that that inhabitant would fight to continue ownership. A
moment's examination of that splintered wood also suggested that the
shell's present wearer appeared well able to defend itself.

Shann attempted to call off the wolverines, but they were out of control
now, digging frantically to get at this new prey. And he knew that if he
pulled them away by force, they were apt to turn those punishing claws
and snapping jaws on him.

It was for their protection that he returned to digging, though he no
longer tried to pry up the shell. Taggi leaped to the top of that dome,
sweeping paws downward to clear its surface, while Togi prowled around
its circumference, pausing now and then to send dirt and gravel
spattering, but treading warily as might one alert for a sudden attack.

They had the creature almost clear now, though the shell still rested
firmly on the ground, and they had no notion of what it might protect.
It was smaller, perhaps two thirds the size of the one which Thorvald
had fashioned into a seagoing craft. But it could provide them with
transportation to the mainland if Shann was able to repeat the feat of
turning it into an outrigger canoe.

Taggi joined his mate on the ground and both wolverines padded about the
dome, obviously baffled. Now and then they assaulted the shell with a
testing paw. Claws raked and did not leave any marks but shallow
scratches. They could continue that forever, as far as Shann could see,
without solving the problem in the least.

He sat back on his heels and studied the scene in detail. The excavation
holding the shelled creature was some three yards above the high-water
mark, with a few more feet separating that from the point where lazy
waves now washed the finer sand. Shann watched the slow inward slip of
those waves with growing interest. Where their combined efforts had
failed to win this odd battle, perhaps the sea itself could now be
pressed into service.

Shann began his own excavation, a trough to lead from the waterline to
the pit occupied by the obstinate shell. Of course the thing living in
or under that covering might be only too familiar with salt water. But
it had placed its burrow, or hiding place, above the reach of the waves
and so might be disconcerted by the sudden appearance of water in its
bed. However, the scheme was worth trying, and he went to work doggedly,
wishing he could make the wolverines understand so they would help him.

They still prowled about their captive, scrapping at the sand about the
shell casing. At least their efforts would keep the half-prisoner
occupied and prevent its escape. Shann put another piece of his raft to
work as a shovel, throwing up a shower of sand and gravel while sweat
dampened his tattered blouse and was salt and sticky on his arms and
face.

He finished his trench, one which ran at an angle he hoped would feed
water into the pit rapidly once he knocked away the last barrier against
the waves. And, splashing out into the green water, he did just that.

His calculations proved correct. Waves lapped, then flowed in a rapidly
thickening stream, puddling out about the shell as the wolverines drew
back, snarling. Shann lashed his knife fast to a stout length of
sapling, so equipping himself with a spear. He stood with it ready in
his hand, not knowing just what to expect. And when the answer to his
water attack came, the move was so sudden that in spite of his
preparation he was caught gaping.

For the shell fairly erupted out of the mess of sand and water. A
complete fringe of jointed, clawed brown limbs churned in a
forward-and-upward dash. But the water worked to frustrate that charge.
For one of the pit walls crumbled, over-balancing the creature so that
the fore end of the shell lifted from the ground, the legs clawing
wildly at the air.

Shann thrust with the spear, feeling the knife point go home so deeply
that he could not pull his improvised weapon free. A limb snapped claws
only inches away from his leg as he pushed down on the haft with all his
strength. That attack along with the initial upset of balance did the
job. The shell flopped over, its rounded hump now embedded in the watery
sand of the pit while the frantic struggles of the creature to right
itself only buried it the deeper.

The Terran stared down upon a segmented under belly where legs were
paired in riblike formation. Shann could locate no head, no good target.
But he drew his stunner and beamed at either end of the oval, and then,
for good measure, in the middle, hoping in one of those three general
blasts to contact the thing's central nervous system. He was not to know
which of those shots did the trick, but the frantic wiggling of the legs
slowed and finally ended, as a clockwork toy might run down for want of
winding--and at last projected, at crooked angles, completely still. The
shell creature might not be dead, but it was tamed for now.

Taggi had only been waiting for a good chance to do battle. He grabbed
one of those legs, worried it, and then leaped to tear at the under
body. Unlike the outer shell, this portion of the creature had no proper
armor and the wolverine plunged joyfully into the business of the kill,
his mate following suit.

The process of butchery was a bloody, even beastly job, and Shann was
shaken before it was complete. But he kept at his labors, determined to
have that shell, his one chance of escape from the Island. The
wolverines feasted on the greenish-white flesh, but he could not bring
himself to sample it, climbing to the heights in search of eggs, and
making a happy find of a niche filled with the edible moss-fungi.

By late afternoon he had the shell scooped fairly clean and the
wolverines had carried away for burial such portions as they had not
been able to consume at their first eating. Meanwhile, the
leather-headed birds had grown bold enough to snatch up the fragments he
tossed out on the water, struggling for that bounty against feeders
arising from the depths of the lagoon.

At the coming of dusk Shann hauled the bloodstained, grisly trophy well
up the beach and wedged it among the rocks, determined not to lose his
treasure. Then he stripped and washed, first his clothing and then
himself, rubbing his hands and arms with sand until his skin was tender.
He was still exultant at his luck. The drift would supply him with
materials for an outrigger. One more day's work--or maybe two--and he
could leave. He wrung out his blouse and gazed toward the distant line
of the shore. Once he had his new canoe ready he would try to make the
trip back in the early morning while the mists were still on the sea.
That should give him cover against any Throg flight.

That night Shann slept in the deep fog of bodily exhaustion. There were
no dreams, nothing but an unconsciousness which even a Throg attack
could not have pierced. He roused in the morning with an odd feeling of
guilt. The water hole he had scooped in the valley yielded him some
swallows tasting of earth, but he had almost forgotten the flavor of a
purer liquid. Munching on a fistful of moss, he hurried down to the
shore, half fearing to find the shell gone, his luck out once again.

Not only was the shell where he had wedged it, but he had done better
than he knew when he had left it exposed in the night. Small things
scuttled away from it into hiding, and several birds arose--scavengers
had been busy lightening his unwelcome task for that morning. And
seeing how the clean-up process had gone, Shann had a second
inspiration.

Pushing the thing down the beach, he sank it in the shallows with
several rocks to anchor it. Within a few seconds the shell was invaded
by a whole school of spiny-tailed fish, that ate greedily. Leaving his
find to their cleansing, Shann went back to prospect the pile of raft
material, choosing pieces which could serve for an outrigger frame. He
was handicapped as he had been all along by the absence of the vines one
could use for lashings. And he had reached the point of considering a
drastic sacrifice of his clothing to get the necessary strips when he
saw Taggi dragging behind him one of the jointed legs the wolverines had
put in storage the day before.

Now and again Taggi laid his prize on the shingle, holding it firmly
pinned with his forepaws as he tried to worry loose a section of flesh.
But apparently that feat was beyond even his notable teeth, and at
length he left it lying there in disgust while he returned to a cache
for more palatable fare. Shann went to examine more closely the
triple-jointed limb.

The casing was not as hard as horn or shell, he discovered upon testing;
it more resembled tough skin laid over bone. With a knife he tried to
loosen the skin--a tedious job requiring a great deal of patience, since
the tissue tore if pulled away too fast. But with care he acquired a few
thongs perhaps a foot long. Using two of these, he made a trial binding
of one stick to another, and experimented farther, soaking the whole
construction in sea water and then exposing it to the direct rays of the
sun.

When he examined his test piece an hour later, the skin thongs had set
into place with such success that the one piece of wood might have been
firmly glued to the other. Shann shuffled his feet in a little dance of
triumph as he went on to the lagoon to inspect the water-logged shell.
The scavengers had done well. One scraping, two at the most, would have
the whole thing clean and ready to use.

But that night Shann dreamed. No climbing of a skull-shaped mountain
this time. Instead, he was again on the beach, laboring under an
overwhelming compulsion, building something for an alien purpose he
could not understand. And he worked as hopelessly as a beaten slave,
knowing that what he made was to his own undoing. Yet he could not halt
the making, because just beyond the limit of his vision there stood a
dominant will which held him in bondage.

And he awoke on the beach in the very early dawn, not knowing how he had
come there. His body was bathed in sweat, as it had been during his
day's labors under the sun, and his muscles ached with fatigue.

But when he saw what lay at his feet he cringed. The framework
of the outrigger, close to completion the night before, was
dismantled--smashed. All those strips of hide he had so laboriously
culled were cut--into inch-long bits which could be of no service.

Shann whirled, ran to the shell he had the night before pulled from the
water and stowed in safety. Its rounded dome was dulled where it had
been battered, but there was no break in the surface. He ran his hands
anxiously over the curve to make sure. Then, very slowly, he came back
to the mess of broken wood and snipped hide. And he was sure, only too
sure, of one thing. He, himself, had wrought that destruction. In his
dream he had built to satisfy the whim of an enemy; in reality he had
