perfectly. See the power-plant up there? Notice those big supporting
rings and bearings? Well, the power-plant is entirely separate from the
ship, as it is inside that inner sphere, about which the outer sphere
and the ship itself are free to revolve in any direction. No matter how
much the ship rolls and pitches, as she is bound to do every time we
come near enough to any star or planet to be influenced by its
gravitation, the bar stays where it is pointed. Those six big jackets in
the outer sphere, on the six sides of the bar, cover six pairs of
gyroscope wheels, weighing several tons each, turning at a terrific
speed in a vacuum. The gyroscopes keep the whole outer sphere in exactly
the same position as long as they are kept turning, and afford us not
only permanent planes of reference, but also a solid foundation in those
planes which can be used in pointing the bar. The bar can be turned
instantly to any direction whatever by special electrical instruments on
the boards. You see, the outer sphere stays immovably fixed in that
position, with the bar at liberty to turn in any direction inside it,
and the ship at liberty to do the same thing outside it.

"Now we will show you where we sleep," Seaton continued. "We have eight
rooms, four below and four above," leading the way to a narrow, steep
steel stairway and down into a very narrow hall, from either side of
which two doors opened. "This is my room, the adjoining one is Mart's.
Shiro sleeps across the hall. The rest of the rooms are for our guests
on future trips."

Sliding back the door, he switched on the light and revealed a small but
fully-appointed bedroom, completely furnished with everything necessary,
yet everything condensed into the least possible space. The floor, like
the one above, was of cushioned leather supported by springs. The bed
was a modification of the special seats already referred to. Opening
another sliding door, he showed them an equally complete and equally
compact bathroom.

"You see, we have all the comforts of home. This bathroom, however, is
practical only when we have some force downward, either gravitation or
our own acceleration. The same reasoning accounts for the hand-rails you
see everywhere on board. Drifting in space, you know, there is no
weight, and you can't walk; you must pull yourself around. If you tried
to take a step you would bounce up and hit the ceiling, and stay there.
That is why the ceilings are so well padded. And if you tried to wash
your face you would throw water all over the place, and it would float
around in the air instead of falling to the floor. As long as we can
walk we can use the bathroom--if I should want to wash my face while we
are drifting, I just press this button here, and the pilot will put on
enough acceleration to make the correct use of water possible. There are
a lot of surprising things about a trip into space."

"I don't doubt it a bit, and I'm simply wild to go for a ride with you.
When will you take me, Dicky?" asked Dorothy eagerly.

"Very soon, Dottie. As soon as we get her in perfect running condition.
You shall be the first to ride with us, I promise you."

"Where do you cook and eat? How do you see out? How about the air and
water supply? How do you keep warm, or cool, as the case may be?" asked
the girl's father, as though he were cross-examining a witness.

"Shiro has a galley on the main floor, and tables fold up into the wall
of the main compartment. The passengers see out by sliding back steel
panels, which normally cover the windows. The pilot can see in any
direction from his seat at the instrument-board, by means of special
instruments, something like periscopes. The windows are made of optical
glass similar to that used in the largest telescopes. They are nearly as
thick as the hull and have a compressive resistance almost equal to that
of armor steel. Although so thick, they are crystal clear, and a speck
of dust on the outer surface is easily seen. We have water enough in
tanks to last us three months, or indefinitely if we should have to be
careful, as we can automatically distill and purify all our waste water,
recovering absolutely pure H2O. We have compressed air, also in tanks,
but we need very little, as the air is constantly being purified. Also,
we have oxygen-generating apparatus aboard, in case we should run short.
As to keeping warm, we have electric heating coils, run by the
practically inexhaustible power of a small metal bar. If we get too near
the sun and get too warm, we have a refrigerating machine to cool us
off. Anything else?"

"You'd better give up, Dad," laughingly advised his daughter. "You've
thought of everything, haven't you, Dick?"

"Mart has, I think. This is all his doing, you know. I wouldn't have
thought of a tenth of it, myself."

"I must remind you young folks," said the older man, glancing at his
watch, "that it is very late and high time for Dottie and me to be going
home. We would like to stay and see the rest of it, but you know we must
be away from here before daylight."

       *       *       *       *       *

As they went into the house Vaneman asked:

"What does the other side of the moon look like? I have always been
curious about it."

"We were not able to see much," replied Crane "It was too dark and we
did not take the time to explore it, but from what we could see by means
of our searchlights it is very much like this side--the most barren and
desolate place imaginable. After we go to Mars, we intend to explore the
moon thoroughly."

"Mars, then, is your first goal? When do you intend to start?"

"We haven't decided definitely. Probably in a day or two. Everything is
ready now."

As the Vanemans had come out in the street car, in order to attract as
little attention as possible, Seaton volunteered to take them home in
one of Crane's cars. As they bade Crane goodnight after enjoying Shiro's
"suitable refreshment" the lawyer took the chauffeur's seat, motioning
his daughter and Seaton into the closed body of the car. As soon as they
had started Dorothy turned in the embrace of her lover's arm.

"Dick," she said fiercely. "I would have been worried sick if I had
known that you were way off there."

"I knew it, sweetheart. That's why I didn't tell you we were going. We
both knew the Skylark was perfectly safe, but I knew that you would
worry about our first trip. Now that we have been to the moon you won't
be uneasy when we go to Mars, will you, dear?"

"I can't help it, boy. I will be afraid that something terrible has
happened, every minute. Won't you take me with you? Then, if anything
happens, it will happen to both of us, and that is as it should be. You
know that I wouldn't want to keep on living if anything _should_ happen
to you."

He put both arms around her as his reply, and pressed his cheek to hers.

"Dorothy sweetheart, I know exactly how you feel. I feel the same way
myself. I'm awfully sorry, dear, but I can't do it. I know the machine
is safe, but I've got to prove it to everybody else before I take you on
a long trip with me. Your father will agree with me that you ought not
to go, on the first trip or two, anyway. And besides, what would Madam
Grundy say?"

"Well, there _is_ a way...." she began, and he felt her face turn hot.

His arms tightened around her and his breath came fast.

"I know it, sweetheart, and I would like nothing better in the world
than to be married today and take our honeymoon in the Skylark, but I
can't do it. After we come back from the first long trip we will be
married just as soon as you say ready, and after that we will always be
together wherever I go. But I can't take even the millionth part of a
chance with anything as valuable as you are--you see that, don't you,
Dottie?"

"I suppose so," she returned disconsolately, "but you'll make it a short
trip, for my sake? I know I won't rest a minute until you get back."

"I promise you that we won't be gone more than four days. Then for the
greatest honeymoon that ever was," and they clung together in the dark
body of the car, each busy with solemn and beautiful thoughts of the
happiness to come.

They soon reached their destination. As they entered the house Dorothy
made one more attempt.

"Dad, Dick is just too perfectly mean. He says he won't take me on the
first trip. If you were going out there wouldn't mother want to go along
too?"

After listening to Seaton he gave his decision.

"Dick is right, Kitten. He must make the long trip first. Then, after
the machine is proved reliable, you may go with him. I can think of no
better way of spending a honeymoon--it will be a new one, at least. And
you needn't worry about the boys getting back safely. I might not trust
either of them alone, but together they are invincible. Good-night,
children. I wish you success, Dick," as he turned away.

Seaton took a lover's leave of Dorothy, and went into the lawyer's
study, taking an envelope from his pocket.

"Mr. Vaneman," he said in a low voice, "we think the Steel crowd is
still camping on our trail. We are ready for them, with a lot of stuff
that they never heard of, but in case anything goes wrong, Martin has
written between the lines of this legal form, in invisible ink A-36,
exactly how to get possession of all our notes and plans, so that the
company can go ahead with everything. With those directions any chemist
can find and use the stuff safely. Please put this envelope in the
safest place you can think of, and then forget it unless they get both
Crane and me. There's about one chance in a million of their doing that,
but Mart doesn't gamble on even that chance."

"He is right, Dick. I believe that you can outwit them in any situation,
but I will keep this paper where no one except myself can ever see it,
nevertheless. Good-night, son, and good luck."

"The same to you, sir, and thank you. Good-night."




    +--------------------------------------+
    |                                      |
    | _The author of this story, being a   |
    | chemist of high standing and an      |
    | excellent mathematician, gives us a  |
    | rare gem in this interplanetary      |
    | tale. For one thing, he suggests an  |
    | interesting use of the action of     |
    | acceleration. In this instalment it  |
    | is made to take the place of gravity |
    | when the interplanetary vehicle is   |
    | out in open space. In order to get   |
    | the gravity effect, a positive or    |
    | negative acceleration could be given |
    | out.                                 |
    |                                      |
    | This instalment retains its easy     |
    | flow of language and continues to    |
    | develop surprise episodes with a     |
    | remarkable degree of realism._       |
    |                                      |
    +--------------------------------------+




CHAPTER VIII

Indirect Action


The afternoon following the homecoming of the Skylark, Seaton and
Dorothy returned from a long horseback ride in the park. After Seaton
had mounted his motorcycle Dorothy turned toward a bench in the shade of
an old elm to watch a game of tennis on the court next door. Scarcely
had she seated herself when a great copper-plated ball alighted upon the
lawn in front of her. A heavy steel door snapped open and a powerful
figure clad in aviator's leather, the face completely covered by the
hood, leaped out. She jumped to her feet with a cry of joyful surprise,
thinking it was Seaton--a cry which died suddenly as she realized that
Seaton had just left her and that this vessel was far too small to be
the Skylark. She turned in flight, but the stranger caught her in three
strides. She found herself helpless in a pair of arms equal in strength
to Seaton's own. Picking her up lightly as a baby, DuQuesne carried her
over to the space-car. Shriek after shriek rang out as she found that
her utmost struggles were of no avail against the giant strength of her
captor, that her fiercely-driven nails glanced harmlessly off the heavy
glass and leather of his hood, and that her teeth were equally
ineffective against his suit.

With the girl in his arms DuQuesne stepped into the vessel, and as the
door clanged shut behind them Dorothy caught a glimpse of another woman,
tied hand and foot in one of the side seats of the car.

"Tie her feet, Perkins," DuQuesne ordered brusquely, holding her around
the body so that her feet extended straight out in front of him. "She's
a wildcat."

As Perkins threw one end of a small rope around her ankles Dorothy
doubled up her knees, drawing her feet as far away from him as possible.
As he incautiously approached, she kicked out viciously, with all the
force of her muscular young body behind her heavy riding-boots.

The sharp heel of one small boot struck Perkins squarely in the pit of
the stomach--a true "solar-plexus" blow--and completely knocked out, he
staggered back against the instrument-board. His out-flung arm pushed
the speed lever clear out to its last notch, throwing the entire current
of the batteries through the bar, which was pointed straight up, as it
had been when they made their landing, and closing the switch which
threw on the power of the repelling outer coating. There was a creak of
the mighty steel fabric, stressed almost to its limit as the vessel
darted upward with its stupendous velocity, and only the
carefully-planned spring-and-cushion floor saved their lives as they
were thrown flat and held there by the awful force of their acceleration
as the space-car tore through the thin layer of the earth's atmosphere.
So terrific was their speed, that the friction of the air did not have
time to set them afire--they were through it and into the perfect vacuum
of interstellar space before the thick steel hull was even warmed
through. Dorothy lay flat upon her back, just as she had fallen, unable
even to move her arms, gaining each breath only by a terrible effort.
Perkins was a huddled heap under the instrument-board. The other
captive, Brookings' ex-secretary, was in somewhat better case, as her
bonds had snapped like string and she was lying at full length in one of
the side-seats--forced into that position and held there, as the design
of the seats was adapted for the most comfortable position possible
under such conditions. She, like Dorothy, was gasping for breath, her
straining muscles barely able to force air into her lungs because of the
paralyzing weight of her chest.

DuQuesne alone was able to move, and it required all of his Herculean
strength to creep and crawl, snake-like, toward the instrument-board.
Finally attaining his goal, he summoned all his strength to grasp, not
the controlling lever, which he knew was beyond his reach, but a cut-out
switch only a couple of feet above his head. With a series of convulsive
movements he fought his way up, first until he was crouching on his
elbows and knees, and then into a squatting position. Placing his left
hand under his right, he made a last supreme effort. Perspiration
streamed from him, his mighty muscles stood out in ridges visible even
under the heavy leather of his coat, his lips parted in a snarl over his
locked teeth as he threw every ounce of his wonderful body into an
effort to force his right hand up to the switch. His hand approached it
slowly--closed over it and pulled it out.

The result was startling. With the mighty power instantly cut off, and
with not even the ordinary force of gravitation to counteract the force
DuQuesne was exerting, his own muscular effort hurled him up toward the
center of the car and against the instrument-board. The switch, still in
his grasp, was again closed. His shoulder crashed against the levers
which controlled the direction of the bar, swinging it through a wide
arc. As the ship darted off in the new direction with all its old
acceleration, he was hurled against the instrument board, tearing one
end loose from its supports and falling unconscious to the floor on the
other side. After a time, which seemed like an eternity, Dorothy and the
other girl felt their senses slowly leave them.

With four unconscious passengers, the space-car hurtled through empty
space, its already inconceivable velocity being augmented every second
by a quantity bringing its velocity near to that of light, driven onward
by the incredible power of the disintegrating copper bar.

       *       *       *       *       *

Seaton had gone only a short distance from his sweetheart's home when
over the purring of his engine he thought he heard Dorothy's voice
raised in a scream. He did not wait to make sure, but whirled his
machine about and the purring changed instantly to a staccato roar as he
threw open the throttle and advanced the spark. Gravel flew from beneath
his skidding wheels as he negotiated the turn into the Vaneman grounds
at suicidal speed. But with all his haste he arrived upon the scene just
in time to see the door of the space-car close. Before he could reach it
the vessel disappeared, with nothing to mark its departure save a
violent whirl of grass and sod, uprooted and carried far into the air by
the vacuum of its wake. To the excited tennis-players and the screaming
mother of the abducted girl it seemed as though the great metal ball had
vanished utterly--only Seaton, knowing what to expect, saw the line it
made in the air and saw for an instant a minute dot in the sky before it
disappeared.

Interrupting the clamor of the young people, each of whom was trying to
tell him what had happened, he spoke to Mrs. Vaneman.

"Mother, Dottie's all right," he said rapidly but gently. "Steel's got
her, but they won't keep her long. Don't worry, we'll get her. It may
take a week or it may take a year, but we'll bring her back," and
leaping upon his motorcycle, he shattered all the speed laws on his way
to Crane's house.

"Mart!" he yelled, rushing into the shop, "they've got Dottie, in a bus
made from our plans. Let's go!" as he started on a run for the testing
shed.

