she gasped. "Not that way. Not that way--please."

She could have been pleading with a brick wall. John Dennis
continued--her natural reactions interested him. He frowned and seemed
puzzled by the excitement he generated within her.

Then she cried out and rolled away from him and lay sobbing, her face
buried in the pillow. But they were dry sobs; strange, tense sounds
filling a questionable and dubious ecstasy.

"You are cruel," she whimpered.

"Cruel?"

"You make love so brutally."

He considered this and then got off the bed. "I do not like making
love."

He began putting on his clothes. She watched him, completely defeated.
"Where do you come from?" she demanded. "Who are you? Why did you want
to know about the man with the broken leg?"

He turned from putting on his shirt and stood motionless, looking down
into her eyes and after a moment or two it did not matter to Rhoda
again. It mattered no more than it had in the beginning. The strange
fire had not been quenched by what had occurred. It was still there, in
her mind more than in her body, but finding its boundaries was not
important either.

"Are you going?"

"Yes."

"Will you come back?"

"I will come back. I want you to find out from Frank Corson what
happened to the androids."

"He doesn't know."

"Have him find out for you."

"I can't do that."

"Then I will not come back."

Somehow, in the part of Rhoda Kane's mind that was beyond her control,
the thought that John Dennis might not return took on the proportions of
a disaster. Her feeling was akin to panic as she said, "I will make him
find out."

"Then I will come back."

"Please. I will wait for you."

       *       *       *       *       *

Les King answered the knock on the door and broke into a smile. "Well,
talk about luck! I've been looking all over hell for you. Come in. Come
in."

The tenth android was already in. He walked across the room and turned
to look back at Les King with the outside light behind him.

King returned the gaze and wondered if he was afraid. It was an odd
thing to wonder about. A man should know his own emotions. But King
could not quite analyze the ones that struck him at that moment. For one
thing, he'd discounted most of what Taber had said. There was something
going on here, true--something big. When the government could cover up a
murder in Greenwich Village, there had to be a big score at stake. And
there _had_ been a murder--but no cops, no police cars, nothing. Only a
couple of guys in an unmarked truck walking out with what could have
been a rolled-up carpet. They'd swiped _his_ pictures and told him to
keep his mouth shut.

This last was what made Les King mad. He'd found the story. It was his
by every right. But when they were ready to break it they'd do it
through some privileged Washington newspaperman who'd get it on a silver
platter. The hell with that stuff. It would take more than a shadowy
character like Brent Taber to scare him off.

He looked at the man in the blue suit and said, "You've been lucky.
They're after you."

"Who is _they_?"

"Taber. The government crowd. The police, too, maybe. You killed that
guy in the Village, didn't you?" Les King had decided a bold approach
was the best way. But he was no fool. He kept his hand on the doorknob
and watched the man carefully. "By the way, you haven't told me your
name."

"John Dennis."

"You look like a man named Sam Baker. He disappeared about ten years
ago--from a little town upstate."

"I am John Dennis."

King shrugged. "Okay, you're John Dennis. All I want to do is stay on
top of this thing and have the inside track when it breaks."

"Brent Taber told you to forget about it."

King did not like the odd feeling of helplessness that seemed to have a
grip on him. He was not alarmed, though. Over and above this was a
sense of excitement. There was money here--he knew damned well there was
money here.

"You want money, don't you?"

The question startled King. Could the guy read his mind? "Who the hell
doesn't?" he retorted defensively. "If you're heeled you've got it
made."

Somehow King felt that the pressure, the odd excitement, lessened in
intensity. His nerves, he conceded, were sure playing tricks.

"There are some things I want. I will tell you where they are. I will
give you money for them."

An espionage approach? King wondered. In a way, he hoped it was. He
could always get clear. When the time was right, when he had the story
locked, he'd go to the FBI with it. He had a quick vision of a spread in
_Life_, a title: "I Broke the Russian Spy Ring." His own by-line.

"That sounds touchy," he said.

"I will tell you where to go and what to do."

"I'll have to know more than that."

"I will tell you what to do."

John Dennis left without saying good-bye.

Les King stared at the inner side of the closed door. "Jesus!" he
muttered.

But the excitement was creeping back.




8


Brent Taber stood in front of the desk of Authority and said, "Mr.
Porter, I don't think you people realize the gravity of this situation."

Porter's eyes were frosty. "And just what gives you that idea?"

"The fact that I'm being hamstrung at every turn. Men I assigned to
search out the last android have been taken off the job, transferred
away from me without notice."

"You speak of being _hamstrung_." Porter pronounced the term with an
inflection of disgust, as though it were a vulgarism no gentleman would
use. "You say we do not realize the gravity of the situation. Perhaps we
realize it far more than you do. It may be that your activities have
been indirectly curtailed because you have not recognized the vital need
of harmony in government."

"Are you telling me Crane's ego is still smarting?"

"_Senator_ Crane did, in the spirit of co-operation, mention certain
leaks in your department."

"What in hell are you talking about?"

"I'd watch my tone if I were you, Taber. You aren't talking to one of
your legmen now!"

Taber's teeth came tight together. "I'm sorry. Let me repeat the
question. Exactly what was the nature of the leak to which the Senator
referred?"

"A tape--transcribed at one of your top-secret meetings."

Taber's fist closed and opened. "I guess maybe I have been lax," he said
softly.

Porter, grimly happy to have made his point, went on. "As to policy up
above, I'll be quite frank. We have not necessarily gone along with your
theory that the so-called androids were from outer space."

"Then where do you think they originated?"

"We have put data into the calculators on that point. So far, the
results have been inconclusive."

"That's too bad."

"Your sarcasm is uncalled for. I am quite willing to tell you, however,
that we have been proceeding in the matter. You are aware, no doubt, of
the recent space shot that ended disastrously?"

"Who isn't?"

Still insistent upon treating Taber like a backward child, Porter said,
"The missile was safely launched and made five orbits and then suffered
destruction."

"There was a lot of newspaper copy written on the failure; a lot of
questions asked as to the cause."

"The releases were entirely true," Porter said with prim severity.
"There was malfunction of crucial units under stress. But another phase
was not made public. The astronaut's mission--one of them, at least--was
to hunt outer space for foreign bodies of any description."

"What did he report?"

"Nothing."

"I recall a story printed by some Washington columnist that some of the
code picked up from the missile was not translated for the press. This,
he stated, in view of the Administration's current 'Open End' policy on
such matters, was strange."

"If you're implying that we censored certain information, that's quite
true. In the public interest."

"To keep scientific information out of Russian hands?"

"In this case, no. The astronaut fell victim to a psychological stress
that was unforeseen. What he sent made no sense whatever. We blame the
medical men for not finding the flaw in his psyche."

"And I would be entirely out of line in assuming he did discover hostile
foreign bodies and was destroyed by them?"

"Entirely," Porter snapped.

Brent Taber's eyes were stony. "But I _am_ to assume that you're asking
for my resignation."

Now Porter shrugged. "If that is the way you see it, I can, of course,
only tender my regrets."

"Well, you won't have to. I'm not resigning."

The sharp declaration made Porter blink. "It's rather unusual that a
man, after a vote of no confidence--"

"To hell with that. If a tape got out of my office, it's my fault. I'll
grant that. But there's more to this. I'm willing to bet the man who
told you was the same one who engineered the steal."

"That's ridiculous! Are you accusing Senator Crane of--?"

"I'm accusing an opportunist-demagogue of playing fast and loose with
national safety to further his own ends and salve his ego. I'm accusing
the men above me of being too weak-kneed to back their own against
outside interference."

"I'll stand for no insults from you, Taber!"

"You'll take it and like it," Brent Taber said savagely. "You'll take it
because you can't knock me out of my office overnight. It will take
time. You've got to go up through the command and you'll have to go
pretty high before you'll find anyone who'll do it with the stroke of a
pen. Nobody wants to stick their neck out."

"Of course," Porter replied icily, "if you care to keep functioning as a
discredited person--"

"I can. And I will. I'd be a coward if I didn't."

Porter was obviously disappointed but he shrugged. "That's your
privilege. You, of course, will not be taken off the payroll."

"The payroll be damned. Send my checks to the Red Cross!"

And Brent Taber strode out of Porter's office, a man who stood alone in
the Washington jungle of clashing ambitions, of purposes and
cross-purposes--but a man who had no thought of quitting.

After Brent left, Porter put through a call to Senator Crane's office.

" ... so, while severing Brent Taber from official activity would be
rather difficult, Senator, I have, in the interests of efficiency,
withdrawn most of his facilities."

"A wise move, Porter. A very wise move."

"By the way, Senator, that hydroelectric project on the Panamint River
your Conservation people have in the works. I'm quite interested in it."

"Is that so?" Crane asked guardedly.

"Yes. Perhaps because of my experience along those lines in South
America. I consider it a great opportunity to serve and I understand the
administrator's post is still open."

Porter's tone was vague. "Yes. I believe it is."

"Of course, I'm quite happy where I am, you understand. I'm not looking
for a change. However, the challenge does intrigue me."

"I'll give you a ring, Porter. Just sit tight until you hear from me."

After hanging up, Porter sat back and wondered. He tried to analyze the
tone in which Crane had made the promise to call. It had been falsely
cordial, beyond a doubt. Maybe Crane figured Taber's scalp was too small
a price to pay for the hydroelectric plum. Well, in that case, Porter
philosophized, he hadn't lost a great deal. It was all in the game.

       *       *       *       *       *

Frank Corson was confused and troubled by the changes that continued to
come over Rhoda Kane. He could not quite put his finger on the start of
it, but as he saw her now, a scant two weeks after the incident of the
man with two hearts, he could clearly see the changes. Where she had
been a beautiful, poised, self-controlled woman, she was now more
nervous and quick of movement, brighter of eye, full of a new restless
energy he could not account for.

Also, the dominance in their affair had shifted. He had always, it
seemed, been the dominant factor, in that Rhoda had continually catered
to his moods and bent to the winds of his own unrest and
dissatisfaction.

But one evening when he was free of duty at Park Hill, Rhoda came home
and entered the apartment without glancing toward the double-width sofa
by the window. Frank, stretched out with a drink in his hand, watched
her as she took her key out of the lock and put it back in her purse. He
was struck by the fact that with this new "personality" that had become
a part of her, she was even more attractive than before. A glow had been
added. The quiet, dignified, statuesque beauty of before had been
mysteriously vitalized by a new kind of inner life.

She turned from the door and, looking into the bright glare of the
eight-foot windows, she saw him on the sofa and took a quick step
forward.
