helpless.

An interval passed. With the contact plate of my fingers against this
hull it seemed that I could hear voices within, strange,
indistinguishable words. I twisted, but could not see into the port.

Again the rotation was slowing. The near shape of the enemy vessel
swung close and past; and again and again I saw that we were over it,
dropping down into the wide black opening of the funnel-top. It yawned
presently like a great black tunnel, into which we fell.

The jar of landing knocked me loose, and no doubt the attraction
radiance also released me. I fell another space, bounced up and sank
back. I thought that something like a sliding port-door closed over
me.

And then, in the dimness, figures were gripping me. I lashed and
struck, but the knife was wrenched away.

I was a prisoner in a pressure-port of the enemy ship!




8


It seemed that the small room had a very faint radiance showing
through my vizor pane. Narrow enclosing walls were visible. It was a
triangular-shaped space, fifteen feet or so down one side, with a
concave ceiling overhead. I was lying on the floor. The darkness at
first had been impenetrable. The figures which had flung me down and
seized my knife were gone; I had not seen them nor where they went.

For a moment I lay cushioned by my bloated suit. When I struggled to
my feet, I was almost weightless. The movement of getting upright
flung me upward as though I were a tossed feather. My helmet struck
the metal ceiling, so sharp a blow that I feared for an instant I had
smashed the helmet.

From the ceiling, with flailing arms and legs, I sank back to the
grid-floor; and in a moment I was able to stand upright with so slight
a feeling of weight that I could have been a bit of thistle ready to
blow away in the least wind.

There was, as I stood there balancing myself, a queer feeling of
triumph within me. A triumphant hope; for coming down in the ship's
capacious funnel--larger than it had seemed from a distance--I had
seen what appeared to be a small projectile, resting in some strange
landing gear. The disc bearing me had settled on a stage alongside it.
Was that the projectile from Earth?

A growing air pressure was around me; the tiny Erentz dials within my
helmet had been immovable, but now they were showing outside pressure. I
stood waiting. Whatever sounds were here I could not tell. Then
presently the dials stopped. They registered seventeen pounds--whatever
that might mean here. I loosed the helmet and took it off.

With the first gasping breath my senses reeled. I sank to the floor,
and though I tried to replace the helmet, it was too late. My thoughts
were fading. A strange chemical odor was in my nostrils. It was like
breathing a thin, perfumed water.

The drifting away was pleasant.

Tortured dreams came with my awakening. I found myself in the same dim
room upon the floor. I could breathe better now, and in a few more
hours the strangeness had almost gone. I found now that I was not
injured, but I was ravenously hungry.

Again, gingerly as before, I stood up and slid my space-suit from me;
and now I was aware of movement and sound. The floor-grid vibrations
were apparent. And there was a dim, distant, tiny throbbing; it was
much like the interior of the _Cometara_ while in flight.

And there were other sounds, indescribably faint, yet strangely clear.
I thought they might be distant voices.

I took a cautious step. I could see a dim blank wall nearby with what
seemed a bowl-like article of furniture on the floor against the wall.
For all my caution, I sailed upward; but this time I held my balance.
And I found that with my negligible weight, I could almost swim in
this strange air! I hit the wall and slid slowly down it to the floor
again, like a man sinking to the bottom of a tank.

It suddenly occurred to me to put my ear against the wall. At once the
sounds all became incredibly louder. It was a confusion of sound: the
mechanisms of the vessel, some of which I thought I could identify,
and some not; the strange swish and thump of what might have been
people moving; and there were voices.

The voices seemed mingled babble coming from everywhere. The timber of
the sound was very strange. It held no suggestion of how far away from
me the voices might be. There were so many of them I could only think
they were scattered about the ship; and yet they all seemed together.
After a moment, the blend was less confusing. Again, very strangely my
hearing seemed able to separate one from the other.

I was to learn that the atmosphere handled sound vibrations
differently from that of Earth. Voices had a muffled tone, as though
they were smothered. There was undoubtedly a vibrational distortion;
and a sound-wave speed slower than Earth's normal-pressure rate of
1,050 feet a second, perhaps as slow as 700. Yet sounds remained
audible over longer distances than on Earth.

In this instance now, as I listened with my ear to the wall of the
ship, I was hearing all its sounds picked up and carried by the metal.

Now I heard a strange tongue: two types of voices, slow, measured,
carefully-intoned phrases, and voices of a curiously sepulchral,
hollow sound. My mind went back to the Red Spark restaurant room.

And suddenly I realized that amid the babble I was hearing English. A
man's voice, talking English. I caught, very clearly the phrase:

"Master, yes. She means well. Can you not see it?"

Molo's voice! Then the girls must be here also.

Another voice: "I am not sure. Perhaps. The Great Intelligence will
talk with her when we are arrived." It was the slow measured voice of
one of the brains.

"When will that be? Pretty soon now, won't it, Molo?"

Venza! A great wave of thankfulness swept me. And then I heard Anita.
"Your two captives, where are they? You're not going to kill them, are
you?"

"No," said Molo. "Perhaps not. No one has inspected the new one yet.
The other is being cared for. The Great Intelligence will question him
when we arrive."

"We are arriving," said Venza. "That's your world, Wandl, down there,
isn't it?"

"Yes. We are dropping fast."

The voice of the brain: "Come, Wyk. The instruments are showing events
on our captured worlds. Take me to watch. I am tired of movement."

"Yes. Master."

It seemed that the brain was being carried away; Molo and the two
girls were being left alone. I had thought at first that they were in
the adjacent room to me, but they could have been far distant. They
had mentioned two captives. One, obviously, was myself. Was the other
Snap?

"Come," Molo was saying, "stand here with me and we will watch this
world. Not mine, Venza _chia_, as you just called it, But my adopted
world. And it will be yours, until we rule the new Mars."

I heard them moving to gaze through the window-port. Then came Anita's
voice: "If it's anything like this ship, it will be very strange."

"Strange indeed, little dove. I was there only once, a month ago, and
for a few hours only. The Great Intelligence, as they call him, talked
with me, absorbing my knowledge: they call it that. And he was much
impressed by me, and made very wonderful promises in exchange for my
fidelity. And for my sister, too."

I learned further how Molo and Meka became identified with the
Wandlites; it was as we had suspected.

"You will rule Mars?" Venza was saying. "When this is over, you mean
you will really be given Mars to rule?"

"I would rather live on the Earth," said Anita. "There was a young man
there."

"He will not be there much longer." Molo laughed. "You are very lucky
that I fancy you!"

"Lucky indeed," Venza echoed. "No death for me. I'm too young."

"But all those millions dead. It seems so terrible."

"It is, for them!" Molo was in high good humor, pleased with himself
and with these girls. "See down there; that blurring is the heavy air.
We're almost down into it now."

I heard the sound of someone joining them, and then the hollow voice
again: "Molo! Bad tidings come from Mars. One of the Masters was
captured there in Ferrok-Shahn. They tortured him as they did the one
on Earth. But he did not die unyielding. He spoke and told our plans!"

"Hah! Did I not advise you to keep those helpless things on Wandl?"

"But it is done now. The worlds know our purpose. They are preparing
spaceships. Already some are rising from Ferrok-Shahn, from Grebhar
and from Greater New York."

"We knew they were doing that."

"But now they know our purpose. The Master Intelligence fears that
they will come raiding Wandl. Our vessels are being made ready to go
out and repel them."

The hollow voice ceased.

"Your purpose discovered?" asked Anita. "What does that mean? Won't
you tell us now? Twin queens for your future Mars, and you treat us
like children!"

"That light-beam he so cleverly planted in Greater New York," Venza
hinted.

"Yes, I will tell you. Without me in New York and my men who went with
these Wandlites to Ferrok-Shahn and Grebhar, the vital gravity beams
could never successfully have been planted. The apparatus was
complicated; you saw it. You saw the labor I had making the contact?"

"But what are the light-beams for?"

I listened, breathless, as he told them. The electronic beams could
not be destroyed; a disintegration of the rock atoms had been set up.
With each rotation of the Earth it was sweeping the sky. From a great
control station, Wandl was flinging attraction gravity upon that beam,
using it as a monstrous lever upon the rotation of Earth. With every
daily passage now the force was being exerted. The rotation was
slowing. In a few days it would stop, with the end of the beam drawn
to Wandl and held there.

And the beams from Grebhar and Ferrok-Shahn were the same. Three giant
chains! Then Wandl, traveling of its own gravitational volition, would
withdraw from our solar system. The gravitational chains would pull
the Earth, Venus and Mars after it!

Titanic tow-ropes! The destruction, not of our worlds, but of all life
upon them, for the cold of interstellar space would leave no living
organism. Three dead worlds; Wandl would draw them to her own Sun and
then free them, send them, with new orbits, around the distant blazing
star. Three new worlds brought home triumphantly by Wandl to join the
little family of inhabited planets revolving around this other Sun.
Three fair and lovely worlds, warmed back by the other sunlight to be
green mansions untenanted, ready to receive the new beings who would
come and possess them.




9


"You, Snap!"

"Gregg! But how...?"

"Hush! They might hear us."

"They can do more than that. They can almost hear you think."

"Anita and Venza are here."

"I know it. I was with them for a time. This accursed gravity! I can't
walk."

"Careful," I whispered. "You can crack your head on something with the
least false step. Are they taking us ashore?"

"I guess so. How did you happen...?"

"Tell you later."

They had come for me in that dark pressure-port, taken me along a dim
corridor of the ship, which evidently had landed a few moments before.
Then Snap, with strange figures around him, had been flung at me.

These weird beings! The brains were here, but not many; I saw half a
dozen on the ship. They could move easily now. They bounced upon their
small arms and legs, hitching with little leaps of a few feet. Close
at hand they were gruesome; from a distance they had the aspect of
thirty-inch ovoids, bouncing of their own volition. And I saw too that
underneath, toward the back, was a shriveled body.

The other figures were wholly different; they seemed at first to be
ten-foot, upright insects. The two legs were like stilts, the body
narrow but with bulging chest. The neck was thin, holding the small
round head, about the size of my own.

Words seem futile to picture this thing which was a man of Wandl.
There was no skin, but instead what seemed to be a glossy, hard brown
shell. It was laid in scales; and upon the legs was a brown fuzz of
stiff hair. There were many joints, both of the legs and the torso.
Clothing was worn; a single garment, hanging from a wide belt halfway
down the legs seemed incongruous, fantastically aping humanity.

This was the worker, equipped by nature for mechanical tasks. There
were not two arms, but at least ten. From what could have been called
the shoulders, they were tentacles, half the length of an elephant's
trunk, with many-fingered hands at the ends. From the waist depended
huge lobster-like pincers; and from the chest and back the arms were
smaller, each with a different type finger-claw.

The head and face were most of all a personal mocking of mankind.
Wide, upstanding, listening ears were upon the sides of the head, one
on the forehead and one on the back. The face was mobile, with tiny
brown scales small as a fish. A nose orifice, with two protruding
brown eyes above it was set outward on stems, and an upended slit of a
mouth. There was an eye in the back of the head.

Probably, over eons of upward development from what was perhaps an
original single type, these two specialized forms had developed. The
"Masters," as they were known upon Wandl, neglected the body for the
brain, and the "Workers," the reverse. There was no separate
individual for the female. As is the case with primitive organisms,
they were all bi-sexual, the parent dying in the reproduction of
offspring.

Of necessity I have been forced into digression. But at the time, Snap
and I clung together, whispering, as a group of workers pushed us down
a descending incline. Snap, back there in Greater New York when Molo's
contact light had burst into existence, had fallen, half unconscious.
They picked him up. Molo was going to kill him, but the girls
persuaded him to take Snap with them.

"Anita and Venza pretended never to have seen me before," Snap
whispered to me now. "You take the same line."

"If we get with them."

"We will."

It was weird, this landing upon Wandl. We had left the vessel's
side-port and were descending what seemed a narrow, hundred-foot
landing incline. We were outdoors, and it was night. Shafts of colored
radiance flashed around us. The ship was poised on a disc-like
platform, with skeleton legs. It seemed a hundred feet or more down to
the ground level from where the colored lights were darting up.
