side of the shrubbery, saw the humans before them and rose steeply,
picking up speed.

A great many separate, clearly detailed things seemed to be going on
within the next four or five seconds. Mihul swore, scooping the Denton
out of its holster. Trigger already had the Yool out, but the gun was
unfamiliar; she hesitated. Fascinated, she glanced from the speeding,
soaring feather-balls to Mihul, watched the tall woman straighten for an
overhead shot, left hand grasping right wrist to steady the lightweight
Denton--and in that particular instant Trigger knew exactly what was
going to happen next.

The Denton flicked forth one bolt. Mihul stretched a little more for the
next shot. Trigger wheeled matter-of-factly, dropping the Yool, left
elbow close in to her side. Her left fist rammed solidly into Mihul's
bare brown midriff, just under the arch of the rib cage.

That punch, in those precise circumstances, would have paralyzed the
average person. It didn't quite paralyze Mihul. She dropped forward,
doubled up and struggling for breath, but already twisting around
toward Trigger. Trigger stepped across her, picked up the Denton,
shifted its setting, thumbed it to twelve-hour stunner max, and let
Mihul have it between the shoulder blades.

Mihul jerked forward and went limp.

Trigger stood there, shaking violently, looking down at Mihul and
fighting the irrational conviction that she had just committed
cold-blooded murder.

The gun-pup trotted up with the one downed bird. He placed it reverently
by Mihul's outflung hand. Then he sat back on his haunches and regarded
Trigger with something of the detached compassion of a good undertaker.

Apparently this wasn't his first experience with a hunting casualty.

The story Trigger babbled into the hopper's communicator a minute later
was that Drura Lod had succumbed to an attack of Dykart fever coma--and
that an ambulance and a fast flit to a hospital in the nearest city were
indicated.

The preserve hotel was startled but reassuring. That the mother should
be afflicted with the same ailment as the daughter was news to them but
plausible enough. Within eight minutes, a police ambulance was flying
Mihul and Trigger at emergency speeds towards a small Uplands City
behind the mountains.

Trigger never found out the city's name. Three minutes after she'd
followed Mihul's floating stretcher into the hospital, she quietly left
the building again by a street entrance. Mihul's wallet had contained
two hundred and thirteen crowns. It was enough, barely.

She got a complete change of clothes in the first Automatic Service
store she came to and left the store in them, carrying the sporting
outfit in a bag. The aircab she hired to take her to Ceyce had to be
paid for in advance, which left her eighty-two crowns. As they went
flying over a lake a while later, the bag with the sporting clothes and
accessories was dumped out of the cab's rear window. It was just
possible that the Space Scouts had been able to put that tracer material
idea to immediate use.

In Ceyce a short two hours after she'd felled Mihul, Trigger called the
interstellar spaceport and learned that the Dawn City was open to
passengers and their guests.

Birna Drellgannoth picked up her tickets and went on board, mingling
unostentatiously with a group in a mood of festive leave-taking. She
went fading even more unostentatiously down a hallway when the group
stopped cheerfully to pose for a solidopic girl from one of the news
agencies. She located her cabin after a lengthy search, set the door to
don't-disturb, glanced around the cabin and decided to inspect it in
more detail later.

She pulled off her slippers, climbed on the outsized divan which passed
here for a bunk, and stretched out.

She lay there a while, blinking at the ceiling and worrying a little
about Mihul. Even theoretically a stunner-max blast couldn't cause Mihul
the slightest permanent damage. It might, however, leave her in a
fairly peevish mood after the grogginess wore off, since the impact
wasn't supposed to be pleasant. But Mihul had stated she would hold no
grudges over a successful escape attempt; and even if they caught up
with her again before she got to Manon, this attempt certainly had to be
rated a technical success.

They might catch up, of course, Trigger thought. The Federation must
have an enormous variety of means at its disposal when it set out
seriously to locate one of its missing citizens. But the Dawn City would
be some hours on its way before Mihul even began to think coherently
again. She'd spread the alarm then, but it should be a while before they
started to suspect Trigger had left the planet. Maccadon was her home
world, after all. If she'd just wanted to hole up, that was where she
would have had the best chance to do it successfully.

Evalee, the first Hub stop, was only nine hours' flight away; Garth lay
less than five hours beyond Evalee. After that there was only the long
subspace run to Manon....

They'd have to work very fast to keep her from leaving the Hub this
time!

Trigger glanced over at the Denton lying by the bedside ComWeb on a
little table at the head of the divan-thing. She was aware of a feeling
of great contentment, of growing relaxation. She closed her eyes.

By and large, she thought--all things considered--she hadn't come off
badly among the cloak and dagger experts! She was on her way to Manon.

Some hours later she slept through the Dawn City's thunderous takeoff.

When she woke up next she was in semidarkness. But she knew where she
was and a familiar feeling of low-weight told her the ship was in
flight. She sat up.

At her motion, the area about her brightened, and the cabin grew visible
again. It was rather large, oval-shaped. There were three closed doors
in the walls, and the walls themselves were light amber, of oddly
insubstantial appearance. A rosy tinge was flowing up from the floor
level through them, and as the color surged higher and deepened, there
came an accompanying stir of far-off, barely audible music. The
don't-disturb sign still reflected dimly from the interior panels of the
passage door. Trigger found its control switch on the bedstand and shut
it off.

At once a soft chiming sounded from the miniature ComWeb on the
bedstand. Its screen filled with a pulsing glow, and there was a voice.

"This is a recording, Miss Drellgannoth," the voice told her. "If Room
Service may intrude with an audio message, please be so good as to touch
the blue circle at the base of your ComWeb."

Trigger touched the blue circle. "Go ahead," she invited.

"Thank you, Miss Drellgannoth," said the voice. "For the duration of the
voyage your personal ComWeb will be opened to callers, for either audio
or visual intrusion, only by your verbal permission or by your touch on
the blue circle."

It stopped. Another voice picked up. "This is your Personal Room
Stewardess, Miss Drellgannoth. Forgive the intrusion, but the ship will
dive in one hour. Do you wish to have a rest cubicle prepared?"

"No, thanks," Trigger said. "I'll stay awake."

"Thank you, Miss Drellgannoth. As a formality and in accordance with
Federation regulations, allow me to remind you that Federation Law does
not permit the bearing of personal weapons by passengers during a dive."

Her glance went to the Denton. "All right," she said. "I won't. It's
because of dive hallucinations, I suppose?"

"Thank you very much, Miss Drellgannoth. Yes, it is because of the
misapprehensions which may be caused by dive hallucinations. May I be of
service to you at this time? Perhaps you would like me to demonstrate
the various interesting uses of your personal ComWeb Cabinet?"

Trigger's eyes shifted to the far end of the cabin. A rather large, very
elegant piece of furniture stood there. Its function hadn't been
immediately obvious, but she had heard of ComWeb Service Cabinets.

She thanked the stewardess but declined the offer. The lady switched
off, apparently a trifle distressed at not having discovered anything
Birna Drellgannoth's personal stewardess might do for Birna right now.

Trigger went curiously over to the cabinet. It opened at her touch and
she sat down before it, glancing over its panels. A remarkable number
of uses were indicated, which might make it confusing to the average Hub
citizen. But she had been trained in communications, and the service
cabinet was as simple as any gadget in its class could get.

She punched in the ship's location diagram. The Dawn City was slightly
more than an hour out of Ceyce Port, but it hadn't yet cleared the
subspace nets which created interlocking and impenetrable fields of
energy about the Maccadon System. A ship couldn't dive in such an area
without risking immediate destruction; but the nets were painstakingly
maintained insurance against a day when subspace warfare might again
explode through the Hub.

Trigger glanced over the diagrammed route ahead. Evalee.... Garth. A
tiny green spark in the far remoteness of space beyond them represented
Manon's sun.

Eleven days or so. With the money to afford a rest cubicle, the time
could be cut to a subjective three or four hours.

But it would have been foolish anyway to sleep through the one trip on a
Hub luxury liner she was ever likely to take in her life.

She set the cabinet to a review of the Dawn City's passenger facilities,
and was informed that everything would remain at the disposal of waking
passengers throughout all dives. She glanced over bars, fashion shows,
dining and gaming rooms. The Cascade Plunge, from the looks of it, would
have been something for Mihul.... "Our Large Staff of Traveler's
Companions"--just what she needed. The Solido Auditorium "... and the
Inferno--our Sensations Unlimited Hall." A dulcet voice informed her
regretfully that Federation Law did not permit the transmission of full
SU effects to individual cabins. It did, however, permit a few sample
glimpses. Trigger took her glimpses, sniffed austerely, switched back to
the fashions.

There had been a neat little black suit on display there. While she
didn't intend to start roaming about the ship until it dived and the
majority of her fellow travelers were immersed in their rest cubicles,
she probably still would be somewhat conspicuous in her Automatic Sales
dress on a boat like the Dawn City. That little black suit hadn't looked
at all expensive--

"Twelve hundred forty-two Federation credits?" she repeated evenly a
minute later. "I see!"

Came to roughly eight hundred fifty Maccadon crowns, was what she saw.

"May we model it in your suite, madam?" the store manager inquired.

"No, thanks," Trigger told her. "Just looking them over a bit." She
switched off, frowned absently at a panel labeled "Your Selection of
Personalized Illusion Arrangements," shook her head, snapped the cabinet
shut and stood up. It looked like she had a choice between being
conspicuous and staying in her cabin and playing around with things like
the creation of illusion scenes.

And she was really a little old for that kind of entertainment.

She opened the door to the narrow passageway outside the cabin and
glanced tentatively along it. It was very quiet here. One of the reasons
this was the cheapest cabin they'd had available presumably was that it
lay outside the main passenger areas. To the right the corridor opened
on a larger hall which ran past a few hundred yards of storerooms before
it came to a stairway. At the head of the stairway, one came out
eventually on one of the passenger levels. To the left the corridor
ended at the door of what seemed to be the only other cabin in this
section.

Trigger looked back toward the other cabin.

"Oh," she said. "Well ... hello."

The other cabin door stood open. A rather odd-looking little person sat
in a low armchair immediately inside it. She had lifted a thin,
green-sleeved arm in a greeting or beckoning gesture as Trigger turned.

She repeated the gesture now. "Come here, girl!" she called amiably in a
quavery old-woman voice.

Well, it couldn't do any harm. Trigger put on her polite smile and
walked down the hall toward the open door. A quite tiny old woman it
was, with a head either shaved or naturally bald, dressed in a kind of
dark-green pajamas. Long glassy earrings of the same color pulled down
the lobes of her small ears. The oddness of the face was due mainly to
the fact that she wore a great deal of make-up, and that the make-up was
a matching green.

She twisted her head to the left as Trigger came up, and chirped
something. Another woman appeared behind the door, almost a duplicate of
the first, except that this one had gone all out for pink. Tiny things.
They both beamed up at her.

Trigger beamed back. She stopped just outside the door.

"Greetings," said the pink one.

"Greetings," Trigger replied, wondering what world they came from. The
style wasn't exactly like anything she'd seen before.

"We," the green lady informed her with a not unkindly touch of
condescension, "are with the Askab of Elfkund."

"Oh!" said Trigger in the tone of one who is impressed. Elfkund hadn't
rung any bells.

"And with whom are you, girl?" the pink one inquired.

"Well," Trigger said, "I'm not actually _with_ anybody."

The smiles faded abruptly. They glanced at each other, then looked back
at Trigger. Rather severely, it seemed.

"Did you mean," the green one asked carefully, "that you are _not_ a
retainer?"

Trigger nodded. "I'm from Maccadon," she explained. "The name is Birna
Drellgannoth."

"Maccadon," the pink one repeated. "You are a commoner then, young
Birna?"

"Of course she is!" The green one looked offended. "Maccadon!" She got
out of her chair with remarkable spryness and moved to the door. "It's
quite drafty," she said, looking pointedly past Trigger. The door closed
on Trigger's face. A second later, she heard the lock snap shut. A
moment after that, the don't-disturb sign appeared.

Well, she thought, wandering back to her cabin, it didn't look as if she
were going to be bothered with excessively friendly neighbors on this
trip.

She had a bath and then discovered a mechanical stylist in a recess
beside the bathroom mirror. She swung the gadget out into the room, set
it for a dye removal operation and sat down beneath it. A redhead again
a minute or so later, she switched the machine to Orado styles and left
it to make up its electronic mind as to what would be the most suitable
creation under the circumstances.

The stylist hovered above her for over a minute, muttering and clucking
as it conducted an apparently disapproving survey of the job. Then it
went swiftly and silently to work. When it shut itself off, Trigger
checked the results in the mirror.

She wasn't too pleased. An upswept arrangement which brought out the
bone structure of her face rather well but didn't do much else for her.
Possibly the stylist had included the Automatic Sales dress in its
computations.

Well, it would have to do for her first tour of the ship.




11


The bedside ComWeb warned her politely that it was now ten minutes to
dive point. Waking passengers who experienced subspace distress in any
form could obtain immediate assistance by a call on any ComWeb. If they
preferred, they could have their cabins kept under the continuous visual
supervision of their personal steward or stewardess.

The Dawn City's passenger areas still looked rather well populated when
Trigger arrived. But some of the passengers were showing signs of
regretting their decision to stay awake. Presently she became aware of a
faint queasiness herself.

It wasn't bad--mainly a sensation as if the ship were trying
continuously to turn over on its axis around her and not quite making
it--and she knew from previous experience that after the first hour or
so she would be completely free of that. She walked into a low, dimly
lit, very swank-looking gambling room, still well patronized by the
hardier section of her fellow travelers, searching for a place where she
could sit down unobtrusively for a while and let the subspace reaction
work itself out.

A couch beside a closed door near the unlit end of the room seemed about
right for the purpose.

Trigger sat down and glanced around. There were a variety of games in
progress, all unfamiliar to her. The players were mostly men, but a
remarkable number of beautiful women, beautifully gowned, stood around
the tables as observers. Traveler's Companions, Trigger realized
suddenly--the Dawn City's employees naturally would be inured to
subspace effects. From the scraps of talk she could pick up, the stakes
seemed uniformly high.

A swirl of vertigo suddenly built up in her again. This one was stronger
than most; for a moment she couldn't be sure whether she was going to be
sick or not. She stood up, stepped over to the door a few feet away,
pulled it open and went through, drawing it shut behind her.

There had been a shielding black-light screen in the doorway. On the
other side was bottled sunshine.

She found herself on a long balcony which overlooked a formal garden
enclosure thirty feet below. There was no one else in sight. She leaned
back against the wall beside the door, closed her eyes and breathed
slowly and deeply for some seconds. The sickish sensation began to
fade.

When she opened her eyes again, she saw the little yellow man.

He stood motionless at the far end of the garden, next to some flowering
shrubbery out of which he might have just stepped. He seemed to be
