that the Supreme Court actually forced the governor to postpone his
proposed bombing, though it did not discontinue the evacuation.

There were few indeed who understood how the weed would digest the very
wood, bricks or stucco and who packed up and moved out ahead of the
troops. American flags and shotguns recalled the heroic days of the
frontier, and defiance of the governor's edict was the rule instead of
the exception. Fierce old ladies dared the militiamen to lay a finger on
them or their possessions and apoplectic gentlemen, eyes as glazed as
those of the huntingtrophies on their walls, sputtered refusals to stir,
no, not for all the brutal force in the world. No one was seriously hurt
in this rebellion, the commonest wound being long scratches on the
cheeks of the guardsmen, inflicted by feminine nails, as with various
degrees of resistance the inhabitants were carried or shooed from their
dwellings.

While the wrangling over its destruction went on, the grass continued
its progress. Out through Cahuenga Pass it flowed, toward fertile San
Fernando Valley. Steadily it climbed to the hilltops, masticating sage,
greasewood, oak, sycamore and manzanita with the same ease it bolted
houses and pavements. Into Griffith Park it swaggered, mumbling the
planetarium, Mount Hollywood and Fern Dell in successive mouthfuls and
swarmed down to the concretelined bed of the Los Angeles River. Here
ineffectual shallow pools had preserved illusion and given tourists
something at which to laugh in the dry season; the weed licked them up
like a thirsty cow at a wallow. Up and down and over the river it ran,
each day with greater speed.

It broke into the watermains, it tore down the poles bearing electric,
telephone and telegraph wires, it forced its way between the threaded
joints of gaspipes and turned their lethal vapor loose in the air until
all services in the vicinity were hastily discontinued. Short weeks
after I'd inoculated Mrs Dinkman's lawn, that part of Los Angeles known
as Hollywood had disappeared from the map of civilization and had become
one solid mass of green devilgrass.

No one refused to move for this dispossessor as they had for the
governor; thousands of homeless fled from it. Their going clogged the
highways with automobiles and produced an artificial gasoline shortage
reminiscent of wartime. In downtown Los Angeles freightcars stood
unloaded on their sidings, their consignees out of business and the
warehouses glutted. The strain on local transportation, already
enfeebled by a publicservice system designed for a city one twentieth
its size and a complete lack of those facilities mandatory in every
other large center of population, increased by the necessary rerouting
around the affected area, threatened disruption of the entire organism
and the further disintegration of the city's already weakened
coordination. The values of realestate dropped, houses were sold for a
song, officebuildings for an aria, hotels for a chorus.

The San Francisco Chamber of Commerce, secure in the knowledge its city
suffered from nothing worse than fires, earthquakes, a miserable
climate, and an invincible provincialism, invited displaced businessmen
to resettle themselves in an area where improbable happenings were less
likely; and the state of Oklahoma organized a border patrol to keep out
Californians.

I could not blame the realestate men for attempting to unload their
holdings before they suffered the fate of one tall building at Hollywood
and Highland. The grass closed about its base like a false foundation
and surged on to new conquests, leaving the monolith bare and forlorn in
its new surroundings. At first the weed satisfied itself with jocular
and teasing ventures up the smooth sides; then, as though rasped by the
skyscraper's quiescence, it forced its way into the narrow space between
the steel sash, filling the lower floor and bursting out again in a riot
of whirling tendrils. Up the sides it climbed like some false ivy;
clinging, falling back, building upon its own defeated body until it
reached another story--and another and another. At each one the tale was
repeated: windows burglariously forced, a floor suffocated, egress
effected, and another height of wall scaled. At the end the proud
structure was a lonely obelisk furred in a green covering to the very
flagpole on its peak, from which waved disappointed yet still aspiring
runners.

Upward and outward continuously, empty lot, fillingstation, artistic
billboard, all alike to the greedy fingers. Like thumb and index they
formed a crescent, a threatening semicircle, reaching forward by
indirection. Northward and southeastward, the two aqueducts kept the
desert from reclaiming its own; for fifty years the city had scraped up,
bought, pilfered or systematically robbed all the water it could get;
through the gray, wet lines, siphons, opencuts, pumps, lifts, tunnels,
the metropolis sucked life. Now the desert had an ally, the grassy
fingers avoided the downtown district, feeling purposefully and
dangerously toward the aqueducts.

I spent much of my time, when not actively watching the grass, in the
_Intelligencer_ office. I had now agreed to write articles for several
weekly magazines, and though they edited my copy with a heavy and
unappreciative hand, still they never outraged me as Le ffacase did by
causing another man to usurp my name. Since I was in both senses
nominally a member of the staff, I had no qualms about using the
journal's typewriters and stationery for the construction of little
essays on the grass as seen through the eyes of one who had cause to
know it better than anyone else.

"The-uh curse of Garry-baldi be upon the head of that ee-veal man who-uh
controls this organeye-zation," rolled out Gootes in pseudoChurchillian
tones. "The-uh monster has woven a web; we are-uh summoned, Bertie."

I got up resignedly and followed him to the managingeditor's office. We
were not greeted directly. Instead, a question was thrown furiously over
our heads. "Where is he? What bristling and baseless egomania sways him
to affront the _Daily Intelligencer_ with his contumacious and indecent
unpunctuality?"

"Who, chief?" asked Gootes.

Le ffacase ignored him. "When this great newspaper condescends to shed
the light of acceptance, to say nothing of an obese and taxable
paycheck, upon the gross corpus of an illiterate moviecameraman, a false
Daguerre, a spurious Steichen, a dubious Eisenstein, it has a right to
expect a return for the goods showered upon such a deceitful sluggard."

Still ignoring Gootes, he turned to me, and apparently putting the
berated one from his mind, went on with comparative mildness: "Weener,
an unparalleled experience is to fall to your lot. You have not achieved
this opportunity through any excellence of your own, for I must say,
after lengthy contact, no vestige of merit in you is perceptible either
to the nude eye or through an ultramicroscope. Nevertheless, by pure
unhappy chance you are the property of the _Intelligencer_, and as such
this illustrious organ intends to confer upon you the signal honor of
being a Columbus, a Van Diemen, an Amundsen. You, Weener, in your
unworthy person, shall be the first man to set foot upon a virgin land."

This speech being no more comprehensible to me than his excoriation of
an unknown individual, I could only stay silent and try to look
appreciative.

"Yes, Weener, you; some refugee from the busy newsroom of the Zwingle
(Iowa) _Weekly Patriot_," a disdainful handwave referred this
description to Gootes; "some miserable castoff from a fourthrate quickie
studio masquerading as a newscameraman; and a party of sheep--perhaps I
could simplify my whole sentence by saying merely a party of bloody
sheep--will be landed by parachute on top of the grass this very
afternoon."

He smacked his lips. "I can see tomorrow's bannerline now: 'Agent of
Destruction Views Handiwork.' Should you chance to survive, your
ghostwritten impressions--for which we pay too high a price, far too
high a price--will become doubly valuable. Should you come, as I
confidently expect, to a logical conclusion, the _Intelligencer_ will
supply a suitable obituary. Now get the bloody hell out of here and
either let me see you never again, or as a triumphant Balboa who has
sat, if not upon a peak in Darien, at least upon something more
important than your own backside."


_23._ The inside of the converted armybomber smelled like exactly what
it was--a barn. Ten sheep and a solitary goat were tethered to
stanchions along the sides. The sheep bleated continuously, the goat
looked cynically forbearing, and all gave off an ammoniacal smell which
was not absorbed by the bed of hay under their hoofs.

Enthusiasm for this venture was an emotion I found practically
impossible to summon up. Even without Le ffacase's sanguinary
prophecies, I objected to the trip. I had never been in a plane in my
life, and this for no other reason than disinclination. I feared every
possible consequence of the parachutejump, from instant annihilation
through a broken neck in the jerk of its opening, down to being
smothered in its folds on the ground. I distinctly did not want to go.

But caution sometimes defeats itself; I was so afraid of going that I
hesitated to admit my timidity and so I found myself herded with my two
companions, the pilot and crew, in with the sheep and the goat. I was
not resigned, but I was quiescent. Gootes and the animals were not.

While we waited he went through his entire stock of tricks including a
few new ones which were not completely successful, before the cameraman,
panting, arrived ten minutes after our scheduled departure. His name was
Rafe Slafe--which I thought an improbable combination of syllables--and
he was so chubby in every part you imagined you saw the smile which
ought to have gone with such a face and figure. Before his breath had
settled down to a normal routine, Gootes had rushed upon him with an
enthusiastic, "Ah, Rafello muchacho, give to me the abrazo; como usted,
companero?"

Slafe scorned reply, pushing Gootes aside with one plump hand while with
the other he tidied the sparse black hairs of his mustache, which was
trimmed down to an eyebrow shading his lip. After inspecting and
rejecting several identical bucketseats he found one less to his
distaste than the others and stowed his equipment, which was extensive,
requiring several puffing trips backandforth, next to it. Then he
lowered his backside onto the unyielding surface with the same anxiety
with which he might have deposited a fortune in a dubious bank.

His hands darted in and out of pockets which apparently held a small
pharmacopoeia. Pulling out a roll of absorbentcotton from which he
plucked two wads, he stuck them thoughtfully in his ears. He withdrew a
nasalsyringe and used it vigorously, swallowed gulps of a clearly
labeled seasickremedy, and then sucked at pills from various boxes whose
purpose was not so obvious. To conclude, he unstopped a glass vial and
sniffed at it. All the while Gootes hovered over him, solicitously
deluging him with friendly queries in one accent or another.

I lost interest in both fellowpassengers, for the plane, after shaking
us violently, started forward, and before I was clearly aware of it had
left the ground. Looking from the windows I regretted my first airplane
ride hadnt been taken under less trying circumstances, for it was an
extraordinarily pleasant experience to see the field dwindle into a
miniature of itself and the ground beneath become nothing more than a
large and highly colored reliefmap.

To our right was the stagnant river, dammed up behind the blockading arm
of grass. Leftward, downtown, the thumb of the cityhall pointed rudely
upward and far beyond was the listless Pacific. Ahead, the gridiron of
streets was shockingly interrupted and severed by the great green mass
plumped in its center.

It grew to enormous bigness and everything else disappeared; we were
over and looked down upon it, a pasture hummock magnified beyond belief;
retaining its essential identity, but made ominous by its unappropriate
situation and size. As we hovered above the very pinnacle, the rounded
peak which poked up at us, the pilot spoke over the intercommunication
system. "We will circle till the load is disposed of. First the animals
will be dropped, then the equipment, finally the passengers. Is that
clear?"

Everything was clear to me except how we should escape from that green
mountain once we had got upon it. This was apparently in the hands of Le
ffacase, a realization, remembering his grisly conversation, making me
no easier in my mind. Nor did I relish the pilot's casual description of
myself as part of a "load"--to be disposed of.

Slafe suddenly came to life and after peering through a sort of
lorgnette hanging round his neck, mumbling unintelligibly to himself all
the while, started his camera which went on clicking magically with no
apparent help from him. Efficiently and swiftly the crew fastened upon
the helpless and bleating sheep their parachutes and onebyone dropped
them through the open bombbay. The goat went last and she did not bleat,
but dextrously butted two of her persecutors and micturated upon the
third before being cast into space.

I would have forgone the dubious honor of being the first to land upon
the grass, but the crew apparently had their orders; I was courteously
tapped upon the shoulder--I presume the warders are polite when they
enter the condemned cell at dawn--my chute was strapped upon me and the
instructions I had already read in their printed form at least sixty
times were repeated verbally, so much to my confusion that when I was
finally in the air I do not know to this day whether I counted six,
sixty, six hundred, or six thousand before jerking the ripcord. Whatever
the number, it was evidently not too far wrong, for although I received
a marrowexploding shock, the parachute opened and I floated down.

But no sooner were my fears of the parachute's performance relieved than
I was for the first time assailed with apprehension at the thought of my
destination. The grass, the weed, the destroying body which had devoured
so much was immediately below me. I was irrevocably committed to come
upon it--not at its edges where other men battled with it
heroically--but at its very heart, where there were none to challenge
it.

Still tormented and dejected, I landed easily and safely a few feet from
the goat and just behind the rearquarters of one of the sheep.

And now I pause in my writing to sit quite still and remember--more
than remember, live through again--the sensation of that first physical
contact with the heart of the grass. Ecstasy is a pale word to apply to
the joy of touching and resting upon that verdure. Soft--yes, it was
soft, but the way sand is soft, unyieldingly. Unlike sand, however, it
did not suggest a tightlypacked foundation, but rather the firmness of a
good mattress resting on a wellmade spring. It was resilient, like
carefully tended turf, yet at the same time one thought, not of the
solid ground beneath, but of feathers, or even more of buoyant clouds.
My parachute having landed me gently on my feet, I sank naturally to my
knees, and then, impelled by some other force than gravity, my body fell
fully forward in complete relaxation until my face was buried in the
thickly growing culms and my arms stretched out to embrace as much of
the lush surface as they could encompass.

Far more complex than the mere physical reactions were the psychical
ones. When a boy I had, like every other, daydreamed of discovering new
continents, of being first to climb a hitherto unscaled peak, to walk
before others the shores of strange archipelagoes, to bring back tales
of outlandish places and unfrequented isles. Well, I was doing these
things now, long after the disillusionment adolescence brought to these
childish dreams. But in addition it was in a sense _my_ island, _my_
mountain, _my_ land--for I had caused it to be. A sensation of
tremendous vivacity and wellbeing seized upon me; I could not have lain
upon the grass more than half a second before I leaped to my feet. With
a nimbleness quite foreign to my natural habits I detached the
encumbering chute and jumped and danced upon the sward. The goat
regarded me speculatively through rectangular pupils, but did not offer,
in true capricious fashion, to gambol with me. Her criticism did not
stay me, for I felt absolutely free, extraordinarily exhilarated,
inordinately stimulated. I believe I even went so far as to shout out
loud and break into song.

The descent of Slafe, still solemnly recording the event, camera before
him in the position of present arms, did not sober my intoxication,
though circumspection caused me to act in a more conventional way. I
freed him from his harness, for he was too busy taking views of the
grass, the sky, the animals and me to perform this service for himself.

I do not know if he was affected the way I was, for his deceptively
genial face showed no emotion as he went on aiming his camera here and
there with sour thoroughness. Then, apparently satisfied for the moment,
he applied himself once more to the nasalsyringe and the pillboxes.

On Gootes, however, the consequence of the landing must have been much
the same as on me. He too capered and sang and his dialect renderings
reached a new low, such as even a burlesqueshow comedian would have
spurned. "Tis the old sod itself," he kept repeating, "Erin go bragh. Up
Dev!" and he laughed inanely.

We must have wasted fully an hour in this fashion before enough coolness
returned to allow anything like calm observation. When it did, we
unpacked the equipment, despite obstacles interposed by Gootes, who,
still hilarious, found great delight in making the various instruments
disappear and reappear unexpectedly. It was quite complete and we--or
rather Slafe--recorded the thermometer and barometer readings as well as
the wind direction and altitude, these to be later compared with others
taken under normal conditions at the same hour.

Included in the gear were telescope and binoculars; these we put to our
eyes only to realize with surprise that we were located in the center of
a hollow bowl perhaps a hundred and fifty or two hundred feet across and
that an horizon of upsurging vegetation cut off our view of anything
except the sky itself. I could have sworn we had landed on a flat
plateau, if indeed the contour had not sloped upward to a cap. How,
then, did we come to find ourselves in a depression? Did the grass shift
like the sea it resembled? Or--incredible thought--had our weight caused
us to sink imperceptibly into a soft and treacherous bed?

I felt my happiness oozing away. What is man, I thought, but a pigmy
trapped in a bowl, bounded by an unknown beginning and headed for a
concealed destination? It was sweet to be, but whether good or evil lay
in the unseen, who knew? Uneasiness, which did not quite displace my
earlier buoyancy, took hold of me.

The animals, in contrast, gave no signals of disquiet. They cropped at
the grass without nervousness, perhaps more from habit than hunger. They
did not seem to be obtaining much sustenance; clearly they found it hard
to bite off mouthfuls of forage. Rather, they chewed sidewise, like a
cat, at the tough rubbery tendrils.

"I tank I want to go home--anyways I tank I want to get out of dis
haole," remarked Gootes. Slafe had unpacked another camera and attached
various gadgets to it, pursing his lips and running his hands lovingly
over the assembled product before thrusting it downward into the stolons
where queer shocks of radiance seemed to indicate he was taking
flashlight pictures of the subsurface.

But the sheep and the cameraman could not distract my attention from the
appearance of a trap which the basin of grass was assuming, while Gootes
was so volatile he couldnt even put on a simulated stoicism. In a panic
I started to climb frantically, all the elation of my first encounter
with the mound completely evaporated. The goat raised her head to note
my undignified scrambling, but the sheep kept up their determined
nibbling.

The trough, as I said, could not have been more than a couple of hundred
feet across and though the loose runners impeded my progress I must have
covered twice the distance to the edge of the rim before I realized it
was as far from me as when I had started. Gootes, going in a direction
oblique to mine, had no better success. His waving arms and struggling
body indicated his awareness of his predicament. Only Slafe was
undisturbed, perhaps unconscious of our efforts, for he had taken out
still another camera and was lying on his back, pointing it over our
heads at the boundary of grass and sky.

Hysteria burned my lungs as I continued the dreamlike battle upward.
Fear may have confused me, but it seemed as though the enveloping weed
was now positively rather than merely negatively hampering me. The
runners whipped around my legs in clinging spirals; the surface, always
soft, now developed treacherous spots like quicksands and while one foot
remained comparatively secure, the other sank deeply, tripping me.
Prone, the entangling fronds caught at my arms and neck; the green
blades, no longer tender, scratched my face and smothered my useless
cries for help. I sobbed childishly, knowing myself doomed to die in
this awful morass, drowned in an unnatural sea.

So despairing were my thoughts that I gave up all struggle and lay there
weakly crying when I noticed the grass relaxing its hold, I was sinking
in no farther; indeed it seemed the lightest effort would set me free. I
rose to my knees and finally to my feet, but I was so shaken by my
battle I made no attempt to continue forward, but stood gazing around me
marveling that I was still, even if only for a few more moments, alive.

"Belly belong you walk about too much, ay? Him fella look-look no got
belly." Gootes had given up his endeavor to reach the rim and apparently
struggled all the way over to impart, if I understood his _bechedemer_,
this absurd and selfevident piece of information.

"This is hardly a time for levity," I rebuked him coldly.

"Couldnt think of a better. Reality is escaped through one flippancy or
another. Rafe has his--" he waved his hand toward the still industrious
cameraman "--and I have mine. I bet W R has a telescope or a periscope
or a spectroscope somehow trained on us right now and will see to it the
rescue party arrives ten minutes after all life is extinct."

To tell the truth I'd forgotten our expedition was but a stunt initiated
by the _Daily Intelligencer_ to rebound to its greater publicity. Here
in this isolate cup it was difficult to conceive of an anterior
existence; I thought of myself, as in some strange manner indigenous to
and part of the weed. To recall now that we were here purposefully, that
others were concerned with our venture, and that we might reasonably
hope for succor extricated me from my subjective entanglement with the
grass much as the relaxation of my body a short while before freed me
from its physical bonds. I looked hopefully at the empty sky: of course
we would get help at any moment.

Once more my spirits were raised; there was no point in trying to get
out of the depression now, seeing we could as easily be rescued from one
portion of the grass as from another. Again the grass was soft and
pleasant to touch and Slafe's preoccupation with his pictures no longer
seemed either eccentric or heroic, but rather proper and sensible. Like
Alice and the Red Queen, since we had given up trying to reach a
particular spot we found ourselves able to travel with comparative ease.
We inspected Slafe's activities with interest and responded readily to
his autocratic gestures indicating positions and poses we should take in
order to be incorporated in his record.

But our gaiety was again succeeded by another period of despondency; we
repeated all our antics, struggles and despair. Again I fought madly
against the enmeshing weed and again I gave myself up to death only to
be revived in the moment of my resignation.

The cameraman was still untouched by the successive waves of fear and
joyfulness. Invincibly armored by some strange spirit he kept on and on,
although by now I could not understand--in those moments when I could
think about anything other than the grass--what new material he could
find for his film. Skyward and downward, to all points of the compass,
holding his cameras at crazy angles, burlesquing all photographers, his
zeal was unabated, unaffected even by the force of the grass.

Our alternating moods underwent a subtle change: the spans of defeat
grew longer, the moments of hope more fleeting. The sheep too at last
were infected by uneasiness, bleating piteously skyward and making no
attempt to nibble any longer. The goat, like Slafe, was unmoved; she
disdained the emotional sheep.

And now with horror I suddenly realized that a physical change had
marched alongside the fluctuations of our temper. The circumference of
the bowl was the same as at first, but imperceptibly yet swiftly the
hollow had deepened, sunk farther from the sky, the walls had become
almost perpendicular and to my terror I found myself looking upward from
the bottom of a pit at the retreating sky.

I suppose everyone at some time has imagined himself irrevocably
imprisoned, cast into some lightless dungeon and left to die. Such
visions implied human instrumentality, human whim; the most implacable
jailer might relent. But this, this was an incarceration no supplication
could end, a doom not to be stayed. Silently, evenly, unmeasuredly the
well deepened and the walls became more sheer.

Like kittens about to be ignominiously drowned we slid into a huddled
bunch at the bottom of the sack, men and animals equally helpless and
distraught. Fortunately it was during one of the now rare periods of
resurgence that we saw the helicopter, for I do not think we should have
had the spiritual strength needful to help ourselves had it come during
our times of dejection. Gootes and I yelled and waved our arms
frenziedly, while Slafe, exhibiting faint excitement for the first time,
contorted himself to aim the camera at the machine's belly. Evidently
the pilot spotted us without difficulty for the ship came to a hovering
rest over the mouth of the well and a jacobsladder unrolled its length
to dangle rope sides and wooden rungs down to us.

"Snatched from the buzzsaw as the express thundered across the switch
and the water came up to our noses," chanted Gootes. "W R has a vilely
melodramatic sense of timing."

The ladder was nearest Slafe, but working more furiously than ever, he
