abilities and potentials. But there was no other society to turn to,
either.

He was not a man "alone, afraid" in a world he had never made. He was a
man who had been made for a world, a society, that did not exist.

Women? A wife? A family life?

Where? With whom?

He pushed the thoughts from his mind, the questions unanswered and
perhaps unanswerable. In spite of the apparent bleakness of the future,
he had no desire to die, and there was, psychologically, the possibility
that too much brooding of that kind would evoke a subconscious reaction
that could slow him down or cause a wrong decision at a vital moment. A
feeling of futility could operate to bring on his death in spite of his
conscious determination to win the coming battle with the Nipe.

The Nipe was his first duty. When that job was finished, he would
consider the problem of himself. Just because he could not now see the
answer to that problem did not mean that no answer existed.

He suddenly realized that he was hungry. He had been walking through
Memorial Park, past the museum--an old, worn edifice that was still
called the Missouri Pacific Building. There was a small restaurant only
a block away.

He reached into his pocket and took out the few coins that were there.
Not much, but enough to buy a sandwich and a glass of milk. Because of
the trust fund that had been set up when he had started the treatment at
the Neurophysical Institute, he was already well off, but he didn't have
much cash. What good was cash at the Institute, where everything was
provided?

He stopped at a newsvendor, dropped in a coin, and waited for the
reproducing mechanism to turn out a fresh paper. Then he took the folded
sheets and went on to the restaurant.

He rarely read a newssheet. Mostly, his information about the world that
existed outside the walls of the Institute came from the televised
newscasts. But, occasionally, he liked to read the small, relatively
unimportant little stories about people who had done small, relatively
unimportant things--stories that didn't appear in the headlines or the
newscasts.

The last important news story that he had heard had come two nights
before. The Nipe had robbed an optical products company in Miami. The
camera had shown the shop on the screen. Whatever had been used to blow
open the vault had been more effective than necessary. It had taken the
whole front door of the shop and both windows, too. The bent and twisted
paraglass that had lain on the pavement showed how much force had been
applied from within.

And yet, the results had not been those of an explosion. It was more as
though some tremendous force had _pushed_ outward from within. It had
not been the shattering shock of high explosive, but some great thrust
that had unhurriedly, but irresistibly, moved everything out of its way.

Nothing had been moved very far, as it would have been by a blast. It
appeared that everything had simply fallen aside, as though scattered by
a giant hand. The main braces of the storefront were still there, bent
outward a little, but not broken.

The vault door had been slammed to the floor of the shop, only a few
feet from the front door. The vault itself had been farther back, and
the camera had showed it standing wide open, gaping. Inside, there had
been pieces of fragile glass standing on the shelves, unmoved, unharmed.

The force, whatever it had been, had moved in one direction only, from a
point within the vault, just a few feet from the door, pushing outward
to tear out the heavy door as though it had been made of paraffin or
modeling clay.

Stanton had recognized the vault construction type: the Voisier
construction, which, by test, could withstand almost everything known,
outside of the actual application of atomic energy itself. In a
widely-publicized demonstration several years before, a Voisier vault
had been cut open by a team of well-trained, well-equipped technicians.
It had taken twenty-one hours for them to breach the wall, and they had
had no fear of interruption, or of making a noise, or of setting off the
intricate alarms that were built into the safe itself. Not even a
borazon drill could make much of an impression on a metal which had been
formed under millions of atmospheres of pressure.

And yet the Nipe had taken that door out in a second, without much
effort at all.

The crowd that had gathered at the scene of the crime had not been
large. The very thought of the Nipe kept people away from places where
he was known to have been. The specter of the Nipe evoked a fear, a
primitive fear--fear of the dark and fear of the unknown--combined with
the rational fear of a very real, very tangible danger.

And yet, there _had_ been a crowd of onlookers. In spite of their fear,
it is hard to keep human beings from being curious. It was known that
the Nipe didn't stay around after he had struck, and, besides, the area
was now full of armed men. So the curious came to look and to stare in
revulsion at the neat pile of gnawed and bloody bones that had been the
night watchman, carefully killed and eaten by the Nipe before he had
opened the vault.

_Thus curiosity does make fools of us all, and the native hue of caution
is crimsoned o'er by the bright red of morbid fascination._

Stanton went through the door of the automatic restaurant and walked
over to the vending wall. The big dining room was only about three
quarters full of people, and there were plenty of seats available. He
fed coins into the proper slots, took his sandwich and milk over to a
seat in one corner and made himself comfortable.

He flipped open the newspaper and looked at the front page.

And, for a moment, his brain seemed to freeze.

The story itself was straightforward enough:

    BENCHAIM KIDNAPPERS NABBED!

    STAN MARTIN DOES IT AGAIN!

    CERES, June 3 (_Interplanetary News Service_)--The three men and
    three women who allegedly kidnapped 10-year-old Shmuel BenChaim were
    brought to justice today through the single-handed efforts of
    Stanley Martin, famed investigator for Lloyd's of London. The boy,
    held prisoner for more than ten weeks on a small planetoid, was
    reported in good health.

    According to Lt. John Vale of the Planetoid Police, the kidnap gang
    could not have been taken by direct assault on their hideout because
    of fear that the boy might be killed.

    "The operation required a carefully planned one-man infiltration of
    their hideout," Lt. Vale said. "Mr. Martin was the man for the job."

    Labeled "the most outrageous kidnapping in history", the affair was
    conceived as a long-term method of gaining control of Heavy Metals
    Incorporated, controlled by Moishe BenChaim, the boy's father. The
    details ...

But Bart Stanton wasn't interested in the details. After only a glance
through the first part of the article, his eyes returned to the picture
that had caught his attention. The line of print beneath it identified
the picture as being that of a man named Stanley Martin.

But a voice in Bart Stanton's brain said: _Not Stan Martin! The name is
Mart Stanton!_

And Bartholomew felt a roar of confusion in his mind--because he didn't
know who Mart Stanton was, and because the face in the picture was his
own.




_[13]_


He was walking again.

He didn't quite remember how he had left the automat, and he really
didn't even try to remember.

He was trying to remember other things--further back--before he had ...

Before he had _what_?

Before the Institute. Before the beginning of the operations.

The memories were there, all right. He could sense them, floating in
some sort of mental limbo, just beyond the grasp of his conscious mind,
like the memories of a dream after one has awakened. Each time he would
try to reach into the darkness to grasp one of the pieces, it would
shatter into smaller bits. The big patterns were too fragile to
withstand the direct probing of his conscious mind, and even the
resulting fragments did not want to hold still long enough to be
analyzed.

And, while a part of his mind probed frantically after the elusive
particles of memory, another part of it watched the process with
semi-detached amusement.

He had always known there were holes in his memory (_Always? Don't kid
yourself, pal!_), but it was disconcerting to find an area that was as
full of holes as a used machine-gun target. The whole fabric had been
punched to bits.

No man's memory is completely available at any given time. Whatever the
recording process is, however completely every bit of data may be
recorded during a lifetime, much of it is unavailable. It may be
incompletely cross-indexed, or, in some instances, labeled DO NOT SCAN.
Or, metaphorically, the file drawer may be locked. It may be that, in
many cases, if a given bit of data remains unscanned for a long enough
period, it fades into illegibility, never reinforced by the scanning
process. Sensory data, coming in from the outside world as it does, is
probably permanent. But the thought patterns originating within the mind
itself, the processes that correlate and cross-index and speculate on
and hypothesize about the sensory data, these are much more fragile. A
man might glance once through a Latin primer and have each and every
page imprinted indelibly on his recording mechanism and still be unable
to make sense out of _Nauta in cubitu cum puella est_.

Sometimes a man is aware of the holes in his memory. ("What _was_ the
name of that fellow I met at Eddie's party? Can't remember it for the
life of me.") At other times, a memory may lay dormant and completely
unremembered, leaving no apparent gap, until a tag of some kind brings
it up. ("That girl with the long hair reminds me of Suzie Blugerhugle.
My gosh! I haven't thought of her in years!") Both factors seemed to be
operating in Bart Stanton's mind at this time.

Incredibly, he had never, in the past year at least, had occasion to try
to remember much about his past life. He had known who he was without
thinking about it particularly, and the rest of his knowledge--language,
history, social behavior, politics, geography, and so on--had been
readily available for the most part. Ask an educated man to give the
product of the primes 2, 13, and 41, or ask him to give the date of the
Norman Conquest, and he can give you the answers very quickly. He may
have to calculate the first, which will make him pause for a second
before answering, but the second will come straight out of his memory
records. In neither case does he have to think of where he learned the
process or the fact, or who taught it to him, or when he got the
information.

But now the picture and the name in the paper had brought forth a
reaction in Stanton's mind, and he was trying desperately to bring the
information out of oblivion.

Did he have a mother? Surely. But could he remember her? _Yes!_
Certainly. A pretty, gentle, rather sad woman. He could remember when
she died, although he couldn't remember ever having actually attended
the funeral.

What about his father?

Try as he might, he could find no memory whatever of his father, and, at
first, that bothered him. He could remember his mother--could almost see
her moving around in the apartment where they had lived in ... in ... in
Denver! Sure! And he could remember the big building itself, and the
block, and even Mrs. Frobisher, who lived upstairs! And the school! And
the play area! A great many memories came crowding back, but there was
no trace of his father.

And yet ...

Oh, of _course_! That was it! His father had been killed in an accident
when Martinbart were very young.

_Martinbart!_

The name flitted through his mind like a scrap of paper in a high wind,
but mentally he reached out and grasped it.

Martinbart. Martin-Bart. Mart 'n' Bart. Mart _and_ Bart.

The Stanton Twins.

It was very curious, he thought, that he should have forgotten his
brother. And even more curious that the name in the paper had not
brought him instantly to mind.

Martin, the cripple. Martin, the boy with the poor, weak,
radiation-shattered nervous system. The boy who had had to stay in a
therapeutic chair all his life because his efferent nerves could not
control his body. The boy who couldn't speak. Or, rather, _wouldn't_
speak because he was ashamed of the gibberish that resulted.

Martin. The nonentity. The nothing. The nobody.

The one who watched and listened and thought, but could do nothing.

Bart Stanton stopped suddenly and unfolded the newspaper again under the
glow of the streetlamp. His memories certainly didn't jibe with _this_!

His eyes ran down the column of type:

    Mr. Martin has, in the years since he has been in the Belt, run up
    an enviable record, both as an insurance investigator and as a
    police detective, although his connection with the Planetoid Police
    is, necessarily, an unofficial one. Probably not since Sherlock
    Holmes has there been such mutual respect and co-operation between
    the official police and a private investigator.

There was only one explanation, Stanton thought. Martin, too, had been
treated by the Institute. His memory was still blurry and incomplete, he
knew, but he did suddenly remember that a decision had been made for
Martin to take the treatment.

He chuckled a little at the irony of it. It looked as though they hadn't
been able to make a superman of Martin, but they _had_ been able to make
a normal and extraordinarily capable human being of him, he thought. Now
it was Bart who was the freak, the odd one.

_Turn about is fair play_, he thought. But somehow it didn't seem quite
fair.

He crumpled the newspaper, dropped it into a nearby waste chute, and
walked on through the night toward the Neurophysical Institute.




_FOURTH INTERLUDE_


"You understand, Mrs. Stanton," said the psychiatrist, "that a great
part of Martin's trouble is mental as well as physical. Because of the
nature of his ailment, he has withdrawn, pulled himself away from
communication with others. If these symptoms had been brought to my
attention earlier, the mental disturbance might have been more easily
analyzed and treated."

"I suppose so. I'm sorry, Doctor," said Mrs. Stanton. Her manner
betrayed weariness and pain. "It was so ... so difficult. Martin could
never talk very well, you know, and he just talked less and less as the
years went by. It was so slow and so gradual that I never really noticed
it."

_Poor woman_, the doctor thought. _She's not well, herself. She should
have married again, years ago, rather than force herself to carry the
whole burden alone. Her role as a doting mother hasn't helped either of
the boys to overcome the handicaps that were already present._

"I've honestly tried to do my very best with Martin," Mrs. Stanton went
on unhappily. "And so has Bart, I know. When they were younger, Bart
used to take him out all the time. They went everywhere together. Of
course, I don't expect Bart to do that so much any more. He has his own
life to live. He can't take Martin out on dates or things like that. He
has interests outside the home now, like other boys his age. That's only
normal. But when he's at home, Bart helps me with Martin all the time."

"I understand," said the psychiatrist. _This is no time to tell her that
Bartholomew's tests indicate that he has subconsciously resented
Martin's presence for a long time_, he thought. _She has enough to worry
about._

"_I_ don't understand," said Mrs. Stanton, breaking into sudden tears.
"I just don't understand why Martin should behave this way! Why should
he just sit there with his eyes closed and ignore everybody? Why should
he ignore his mother and his brother? Why?"

The doctor comforted her in a warmly professional manner, then, as her
tears subsided, he said, "We don't understand all the factors ourselves,
Mrs. Stanton. At first glance, Martin's reactions appear to be those one
would expect of schizophrenic withdrawal. But there are certain aspects
of the case that make it unusual. His behavior doesn't quite follow the
pattern we usually expect from such cases as this. His extreme physical
disability has drastically modified the course of his mental
development, and, at the same time, made it difficult for us to make any
analysis of his mental state." _If only_, he added to himself, _she had
followed the advice of her family physician, years ago. If she had only
put the boy under the proper care, none of this would have happened._

