commandant. I am making investigation on the spot. Out." He turned to
look coldly at Kennon.

"Who are you--and what happened here?" he asked.

Kennon told him.

"You mean you took George!" Arleson said.

"Look in his cell if you don't believe me."

The soldier looked and then turned hack to Kennon. There was awed
respect in his hard brown eyes. "You did that!--to him! Man, you're a
fighter," he said in an unbelieving voice.

A stretcher detail manned by two sober-faced Lani females came in,
loaded Douglas's body on the stretcher, and silently bore it away.

"Douglas was a fool," Arleson said. "He knew we never handle this kind
without maximum restraint. I wonder why he did it?"

"I couldn't say. He told me that gas and shackles would hold him."

"He knew better. These Lani know gas capsules. All George had to do was
hold his breath. In that cell George would have killed you. You couldn't
have stayed away from him."

Kennon shrugged. Maybe that was what Douglas had wanted. Kennon sighed.
He didn't have the answer. And it could just be that Douglas had tried
to show off. Well, he would pay for it. He'd have a stiff neck for
months, and perhaps that was a proper way to end it.

* * *

Commander Mullins, a thin gray-faced man with the hard cold eyes of
a professional soldier, came into the corridor followed by another
trooper.

His eyes took in the wreckage that had been George, the split lips,
the smashed nose, the puffed eyes, the cuts and bruises, and then raked
across Kennon.

"Spaceman--hey?" he asked. "I've seen work like that before."

Kennon nodded. "I was once. I'm station veterinarian now. Douglas called
me over--said it was an emergency."

Mullins nodded.

"Well--why aren't you tending to it?"

"I have to examine them," Kennon said gesturing at the cells. "And I
don't want any more trouble like this."

"Don't worry. You won't have it. Now that you've beaten George, you'll
have no trouble at all. You're top dog." Mullins gestured at the cages.
"They'll be good for a while. Now you'd better get on with your work.
There's been enough disruption of routine for today. The men will help
you."

* * *

Kennon checked in at the commandant's office before he left for the main
island.

"How is Douglas?" he asked.

"He's alive," Mullins said. "We flew him to Albertsville--and good
riddance. How are the Lani?"

"They'll be all right," Kennon said. "It's just food poisoning. I
suggest you check your kitchen and your food handlers. There's a break
in sanitation that could incapacitate your whole command. I found a few
things wrong but there are probably more."

"I'll check on it--and thanks for the advice," Mullins said. "Sit down,
Doctor. Your airboat won't be serviced for another few minutes. Tell me
how things are on the main island. How's Blalok?"

"You know him?"

"Of course. I used to be a frequent visitor there. But with that young
pup here, I couldn't leave. I didn't dare to. He'd have disrupted
routine in a single day. Look what he did in half an hour. Frankly, I
owe you a debt for getting him off my hands." Mullins chuckled dryly.

"That's a fine thing to say," Kennon grinned. "But I can sympathize. It
took us two months to straighten out Alexandria after the Boss-man sent
him here."

"I heard about that."

"Well--we're under control now. Things are going pretty smoothly."

"They'll be better here," Mullins said. "Now that Douglas is gone." He
shrugged. "I hope the Boss doesn't send him back. He's hard to handle
and he makes discipline a problem."

"Could you tell me--or would it be violating security?" Kennon said.
"Why do you have a Class II installation on full war footing out here?"

Mullins chuckled. "It's no secret," he said. "There was a commercial
raid on this place about fifty years ago. Seems as though one of our
competitors didn't like us. Alexandria was on a war footing then and
managed to hold them off. But it scared the Old Man. You see, our
competitive position is based on Lani labor. Our competitors didn't know
that. Their intelligence wasn't so good. Up until that time, we'd been
keeping the males out here in what was hardly more than a stockade.
Those people could have taken a few dozen females and a couple of males
and they'd have been in business. But they didn't know. They tried to
smash Alexandria instead. Naturally they didn't have a chance. And after
it was over the Old Man got smart. He still had the tapes for Alexandria
so he built a duplicate out here and spent a few millions on modern
armament. The way we're set now it'd take a battle group to hurt us."

"But how about security? Don't the others know about the Lani now?"

"It's a moot question. But it won't do them any good. They can't crack
this place, and without males, all the females on Flora wouldn't do
them enough long-term good to pay for the force they'd need to be
successful."

"So that's why the males are isolated."

"There's another reason--two of them in fact. One is physical. Even
the best male is a dangerous beast. They have a flair for violence that
makes them useless as labor and their training doesn't help matters.
And the other is mental. The females on the main island believe that we
humans are responsible for the continuation of their breed. This tends
to keep them in line. We have a great deal more trouble with them out
here once they know the truth. We've had a number of cases of females
trying to engineer a male's escape. But they're never repeated," Mullins
said grimly. "Actually, it would be an interesting life out here, except
for the abattoir." He grimaced. "That's an unpleasant chore."

"You mean--" Kennon said.

"Why, certainly. What else could we do with senile animals?"

"But that's murder!"

Mullins shook his head. "No more than killing a cow for beef."

"You know," Kennon said, "I've never thought of what happened to aged
Lani. Sure, I've never seen one, but--Lord Lister!--I'm a fool."

"You'll get used to the idea," Mullins said. "They aren't human, and
except for a few, they aren't as intelligent as a Santosian Varl. I know
that they look like us except for those tails, but that's as far as it
goes. I've spent two hundred years with them and I know what I'm talking
about."

"That's what Alexander says."

"He should know. He's lived with them all his life."

"Well--perhaps. But I'm not convinced."

"Neither was Old Doc--not until the day he died."

"Did he change then?"

"I don't know. I wasn't there. But Old Doc was a stubborn cuss."

Kennon stood up. "I've given instructions for treatment to your
corpsman," he said. "Now I think I'd better be getting back. I have some
reports to finish."

Mullins smiled grimly. "You know," he said, "I get the feeling that you
don't approve of this operation."

"Frankly, I don't," Kennon said, "but I signed a contract." He turned
toward the door and gestured to the two Lani who waited outside with his
bags. "I can find my way to the roof," he said.

"Well--good luck," Mullins said. "We'll call you again if we need you."

"Do that," Kennon replied. He wanted to leave, to get away from this
place and back to the main island. He wanted to see Copper. He'd be
damned if anyone was going to butcher her. If he had to stay here until
she died of old age, he'd do it. But nobody was going to hurt her.



CHAPTER XII

Kennon wondered if his colleagues in human medicine felt toward their
patients as he did toward the Lani, or if they ultimately lost their
individuality and became mere hosts for diseases, parasites,
and tumors--vehicles for the practice of surgical and medical
skills--economic units whose well-being meant a certain amount of
credits. Probably not, he decided. They were human and their very
humanity made them persons rather than things.

But the possession of individuality was not an asset in the practice of
animal medicine where economics was the main factor and the satisfaction
of the owner the principal personality problem. The normal farm animals,
the shrakes, cattle, sheep, morks, and swine were no problem. They were
merely a job. But the Lani were different. They weren't human, but they
were intelligent and they did have personality even though they didn't
possess that indefinable quality that separated man from the beasts. It
was hard to treat them with dispassionate objectivity. In fact, it was
impossible.

And this lack of objectivity annoyed him. Should he be this way? Was he
right to identify them as individuals and treat them as persons
rather than things? The passing months had failed to rob them of their
personalities: they had not become the faceless mass of a herd of cattle
or a flock of sheep. They were still not essentially different
from humans--and wouldn't men themselves lose many of their human
characteristics if they were herded into barracks and treated as
property for forty generations? Wouldn't men, too, approach the animal
condition if they were bred and treated as beasts, their pedigrees
recorded, their types winnowed and selected? The thought was annoying.

It would be better, Kennon reflected, if he didn't have time to think,
if he were so busy he could drop to his bed exhausted each night and
sleep without dreaming, if he could keep on the run so fast that he
wouldn't have time to sit and reflect. But he had done his work too
well. He had trained his staff too thoroughly. They could handle the
petty routines of minor treatment and laboratory tests as well as he. He
had only the intellectual stimulation of atypical cases and these were
all too rare. The routine inspections were boring, yet he forced himself
to make them because they filled the time. The hospital wards were
virtually empty of patients, the work was up to date, the whole island
was enjoying a carnival of health, and Kennon was still impaled upon
the horns of his dilemma. It wasn't so bad now that the first shock was
over, but it was bad enough--and showed no signs of getting better. Now
that Copper realized he wanted her, she did nothing to make his life
easier. Instead she did her best to get underfoot, usually in some
provocative position. It was enough to try the patience of a marble
statue Kennon reflected grimly. But it did have its humorous side
and were it not for the fact that Copper wasn't human could have
been thoroughly enjoyable. That, however, was the real hell of it. He
couldn't relax and enjoy the contest--his feet were on too slippery
ground. And Copper with her unerring female instinct knew just what to
do to make the footing slipperier. Sooner or later, she was certain that
he would fall. It was only a question of applying sufficient pressure at
the right spot and the right time. Now that she knew he desired her,
she was content to wait. The only thing that had bothered her was the
uncertainty whether he cared or not. For Copper the future was a simple
thing and she was lighthearted about it. But not so Kennon. Even after
the initial shock had passed there still remained the moral customs, the
conditioning, and the prohibitions. But Copper--was Copper--and somehow
the conditioning lost its force in her presence. Perhaps, he thought
wryly, it was a symptom of the gradual erosion of his moral character in
this abnormal environment.

"I'm getting stale," he confided to Copper as he sat in his office idly
turning the pages of the Kardon Journal of Allied Medical Sciences.
"There's nothing to do that's interesting."

"You could help me," Copper said as she looked up from the pile of cards
she was sorting. He had given her the thankless task of reorganizing the
files, and she was barely half through the project.

"There's nothing to do that's interesting," he repeated. He cocked his
head to one side. From this angle Copper looked decidedly intriguing as
she bent over the file drawer and replaced a stack of cards.

"I could suggest something," Copper said demurely.

"Yes, I know," he said. "You're full of suggestions."

"I was thinking that we could go on a picnic."

"A what?"

"A picnic. Take a lunch and go somewhere in the jeep. Maybe up into the
hills. I think it might be fun."

"Why not?" Kennon agreed. "At least it would break the monotony. Tell
you what. You run up to the house and tell Kara to pack a lunch and
we'll take the day off."

"Good! I hoped you'd say that. I'm getting tired of these dirty old
cards." She stood up and sidled past the desk. Kennon resisted the
impulse to slap as she went past, and congratulated himself on his
self-control as she looked at him with a half-disappointed expression
on her face. She had expected it, he thought gleefully. Score one for
morality.




He smiled. Whatever the other Lani might be, Copper was different.
Quick, volatile, intelligent, she was a constant delight, a flashing
kaleidoscope of unexpected facets. Perhaps the others were the same if
he knew them better. But he didn't know them--and avoided learning. In
that direction lay ulcers.

"We'll go to Olympus," he said.

Copper looked dubious. "I'd rather not go there. That's forbidden
ground."

"Oh nonsense. You're merely superstitious."

She smiled. "Perhaps you're right. You usually are."

"That's the virtue of being a man. Even if I'm wrong, I'm right." He
chuckled at the peculiar expression on her face.

"Now off with you--and get that lunch basket packed."

She bowed. "Yes, master. Your slave flies on winged feet to execute your
commands."

Kennon chuckled. Copper had been reading Old Doc's romances again. He
recognized the florid style.

* * *

Kennon landed the jeep in a mountain meadow halfway up the slope of
the peacefully slumbering volcano. It was quiet and cool, and the light
breeze was blowing Olympus's smoky cap away from them to the west.
Copper unpacked the lunch. She moved slowly. After all, there was plenty
of time, and she wasn't very hungry. Neither was Kennon.

"Let's go for a walk," Copper said. "The woods look cool--and maybe we
can work up an appetite."

"Good idea. I could use some exercise. That lunch looks big enough to
choke a horse and I'd like to do it justice."

They walked through the woods, skirting scant patches of underbrush,
slowly moving higher on the mountain slopes. The trees, unlike those
of Beta, did not end abruptly at a snow line, but pushed green fingers
upward through passages between old lava flows, on whose black wrinkled
surfaces nothing grew. The faint hum of insects and the piping calls of
the birdlike mammals added to the impression of remoteness. It was hard
to believe that scarcely twenty kilometers from this primitive microcosm
was the border of the highly organized and productive farmlands of
Outworld Enterprises.

"Do you think we can see the hospital if we go high enough?" Copper
said. She panted a little, unaccustomed to the altitude.

"Possibly," Kennon said. "It is a long distance away. But we should be
able to see Alexandria," he added. "That's high enough and big enough."
He looked at her curiously. "How is it that you're so breathless?"
he asked. "We're not that high. You're getting fat with too much soft
living."

Copper smiled. "Perhaps I'm getting old."

"Nonsense," Kennon chuckled. "It's just fat. Come to think of it you
are plumper. Not that I mind, but if you're going to keep that sylphlike
figure you'd better go on a diet."

"You're too good to me," Copper said.

"You're darn right I am. Well--let's get going. Exercise is always good
for the waistline, and I'd like to see what's up ahead."

Scarcely a kilometer ahead they came to a wall of lava that barred their
path. "Oh, oh," Kennon said. "We can't go over that." He looked at the
wrinkled and shattered rock with its knifelike edges.

"I don't think my feet could take it," Copper admitted.

"It looks like the end of the trail."

"No--not quite," Kennon said. "There seems to be a path here." He
pointed to a narrow cleft in the black rock. "Let's see where it goes."

Copper hung back. "I don't think I want to," she said doubtfully. "It
looks awfully dark and narrow."

"Oh, stop it. Nothing's going to hurt us. Come on." Kennon took her
hand.

Unwillingly Copper allowed herself to be led forward. "There's something
about this place that frightens me," she said uncomfortably as the high
black wails closed in, narrowing until only a slit of yellow sky was
visible overhead. The path underfoot was surprisingly smooth and free
from rocks, but the narrow corridor, steeped in shadows, was gloomy and
depressingly silent. It even bothered Kennon, although he wouldn't
admit it. What forces had sliced this razor-thin cleft in the dense
rock around them? Earthquake probably. And if it happened once it could
happen again. He would hate to be trapped here entombed in shattered
rock.

Gradually the passage widened, then abruptly it ended. A bleak vista of
volcanic ash dotted with sputter cones opened before them. It was a
flat tableland, roughly circular, scarcely half a kilometer across,
a desolation of black rock, stunted trees and underbrush, and gray
volcanic ash. A crater, somewhat larger than the rest, lay with its
nearest edge about two hundred meters away. The rock edges were fire
polished, gleaming in the yellow sunshine, and the thin margin of trees
and brush surrounding the depression were gnarled and shrunken, twisted
into fantastic shapes.

"Hey! what's this?" Kennon asked curiously. "That crater looks peculiar,
like a meteor had struck here--but those stunted plants--hmm--there
must have been some radioactivity too." He looked at the crater
speculatively. "Now I wonder--" he began.

Copper had turned a sickly white. "No!" she said in a half-strangled
voice--"oh, no!"

Kennon looked at her. "You know what this is?" he demanded.

"No," Copper said. But her voice was unsteady.

"You're lying."

"But I don't know." Copper wailed. "I'm only guessing. I've never seen
this place before in my life! Please!--let's get out of here!"
