    Moved contrary with thwart obliquities,
    Or save the Sun his labour, and that swift
    Nocturnal and diurnal rhomb supposed
    Invisible else above all stars, the wheel
    Of day and night; which needs not thy belief,
    If Earth, industrious of herself, fetch day
    Travelling east, and with her part averse
    From the Sun's beam meet night, her other part
    Still luminous by his ray. What if that light,
    Sent from her through the wide transpicuous air,
    To the terrestrial Moon be as a star,
    Enlightening her by day, as she by night
    This Earth--reciprocal, if land be there,
    Fields and inhabitants? Her spots thou seest
    As clouds, and clouds may rain, and rain produce
    Fruits in her softened soil, for some to eat
    Allotted there; and other Suns, perhaps,
    With their attendant Moons, thou wilt descry,
    Communicating male and female light--
    Which two great sexes animate the World,
    Stored in each orb perhaps with some that live.
    For such vast room in Nature unpossessed
    By living soul, desert and desolate,
    Only to shine, yet scarce to contribute
    Each orb a glimpse of light, conveyed so far
    Down to this habitable, which returns
    Light back to them, is obvious to dispute.--viii. 122-58.

The Copernican theory, which is less complicated and more easily
understood than the Ptolemaic, is described by Milton with accuracy and
methodical skill.

The Sun having been assigned that central position in the system which
his magnitude and importance claim as his due, the planets circling in
orbits around him have their motions described in a manner indicative of
the precise knowledge which Milton acquired of this theory. At this time
the law of gravitation was unknown, and, although the ellipticity of the
orbits of the planets had been discovered by Kepler, the nature of the
motive force which guided and retained them in their paths still
remained a mystery. It was believed that the planets were whirled round
the Sun, as if by the action of magnetic fibres; a mutual attractive
influence having been supposed to exist between them and the orb,
similar to that of the opposite poles of magnets.

Milton alludes to this theory in the following lines:--

                            They, as they move
    Their starry dance in numbers that compute
    Days, months, and years, towards his all-cheering lamp
    Turn swift their various motions, or are turned
    By his magnetic beam.--iii. 579-83.

An important advance upon this theory was made by Horrox, who, in his
study of celestial dynamics, attributed the curvilineal motion of the
planets to the influence of two forces, one projective, the other
attractive. He illustrated this by observing the path described by a
stone when thrown obliquely into the air. He perceived that its motion
was governed by the impulse imparted to it by the hand, and also by the
attractive force of the Earth. Under these two influences, the stone
describes a graceful curve, and in its descent falls at the same angle
at which it rose. Hence arises the general law: 'When two spheres are
mutually attracted, and if not prevented by foreign influences, their
straight paths are deflected into curves concave to each other, and
corresponding with one of the sections of a cone, according to the
velocity of the revolving body. If the velocity with which the revolving
body is impelled be equal to what it would acquire by falling through
half the radius of a circle described from the centre of deflection, its
orbit will be circular; but if it be less than that quantity, its path
becomes elliptical.'

Newton afterwards embraced this law in his great principle of
gravitation, and demonstrated that the force which guides and retains
the Earth and planets in their orbits resides in the Sun. By the orb's
attractive influence a planet, after having received its first impulse,
is deflected from its original straight path, and bent towards that
luminary, and by the combined action of the projective and attractive
forces is made to describe an orbit which, if elliptical, has one of its
foci occupied by the Sun. So evenly balanced are those two forces, that
one is unable to gain any permanent ascendency over the other, and
consequently the planet traverses its orbit with unerring regularity,
and, if undisturbed by external influences, will continue in its path
for all time.

Milton describes the position of the planets in the sky as--

    Now high, now low, then hid;

and their motions--

    Progressive, retrograde, or standing still.

It is evident that Milton was familiar with the apparently irregular
paths pursued by the planets when observed from the Earth. He knew of
their stationary points, and also the backward loopings traced out by
them on the surface of the sphere.

If observed from the Sun, all the planets would be seen to follow their
true paths round that body; their motion would invariably lie in the
same direction, and any variation in their speed as they approached
perihelion or aphelion would be real. But the planets, when observed
from the Earth, which is itself in motion, appear to move irregularly.
Sometimes they remain stationary for a brief period, and, instead of
progressing onward, affect a retrograde movement. This irregularity of
motion is only apparent, and can be explained as a result of the
combined motions of the Earth and planets, which are travelling together
round the Sun with different velocities, and in orbits of unequal
magnitude.

In his allusion to the Copernican system the 'planet' 'Earth' is
described by Milton as seventh. This is not strictly accurate, as only
five planets were known--viz. Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn;
but to make up the number Milton has included the Moon, which may be
regarded as the Earth's planet.

The three motions ascribed to the Earth are--(1) The diurnal rotation on
her axis; (2) her annual revolution round the Sun; (3) Precession of the
Equinoxes.

The rotation of the Earth on her axis may be likened to the spinning
motion of a top, and is the cause of the alternation of day and night.
This rotatory motion is sustained with such exact precision that, during
the past 2,000 years, it has been impossible to detect the minutest
difference in the time in which the Earth accomplishes a revolution on
her axis, and therefore the length of the sidereal day, which is 3
minutes 56 seconds shorter than the mean solar day, is invariable. In
this motion of the Earth we have a time-measuring unit which may be
regarded as absolutely correct.

The Earth completes a revolution of her orbit in 365-1/4 days. In this
period of time she accomplishes a journey of 580 millions of miles,
travelling at the average rate of 66,000 miles an hour. The change of
the seasons, and the lengthening and shortening of the day, are natural
phenomena, which occur as a consequence of the Earth's annual revolution
round the Sun. Precession is a retrograde or westerly motion of the
equinoctial points, caused by the attraction of the Sun, Moon, and
planets on the spheroidal figure of the Earth. By this movement the
poles of the Earth are made to describe a circular path in that part of
the heavens to which they point; so that, after the lapse of many years,
the star which is known as the Pole Star will not occupy the position
indicated by its name, but will be situated at a considerable distance
from the pole. These motions, Milton says, unless attributed to the
Earth, must be ascribed to several spheres crossing and thwarting each
other obliquely; but the Earth, by rotating from west to east, will of
herself fetch day, her other half, averted from the Sun's rays, being
enveloped in night. Thus saving the Sun his labour, and the 'primum
mobile,' 'that swift nocturnal and diurnal rhomb,' which carried all the
lower spheres along with it, and brought about the change of day and
night.

Milton's allusion to the occurrence of natural phenomena in the Moon
similar to those which happen on the Earth is in keeping with the
opinions entertained regarding our satellite, Galileo having imagined
that he discovered with his telescope continents and seas on the lunar
surface, which led to the belief that the Moon was the abode of
intelligent life.

    ... and other suns, perhaps,
    With their attendant moons, thou wilt descry
    Communicating male and female light.--viii. 148-50.

Milton in these lines refers to Jupiter and Saturn, and their
satellites, which had been recently discovered; those of the former by
Galileo, and four of those of the latter by Cassini. The existence of
male and female light was an idea entertained by the ancients, and which
is mentioned by Pliny. The Sun was regarded as a masculine star, and the
Moon as feminine; the light emanating from each being similarly
distinguished, and possessing different properties.

Milton supposes that, as the Earth receives light from the stars, she
returns light back to them. But in his time little was known about the
stars, nor was it ascertained how distant they are.

The Angel, in bringing to a conclusion his conversation with Adam, deems
it unadvisable to vouchsafe him a decisive reply to his inquiry
regarding the motions of celestial bodies, and in the following lines
gives a beautifully poetical summary of this elevated and philosophic
discussion:--

    But whether thus these things, or whether not,
    Whether the Sun, predominant in Heaven,
    Rise on the Earth, or Earth rise on the Sun;
    He from the east his flaming round begin,
    Or she from west her silent course advance
    With inoffensive pace that spinning sleeps
    On her soft axle, whilst she paces even,
    And bears thee soft with the smooth air along--
    Solicit not thy thoughts with matters hid.--viii. 159-67.

In this scientific discourse between Adam and Raphael, in which they
discuss the structural arrangement of the heavens and the motions of
celestial bodies, we are afforded an opportunity of learning what exact
and comprehensive knowledge Milton possessed of both the Ptolemaic and
Copernican theories. The concise and accurate manner in which he
describes the doctrines belonging to each system indicates that he must
have devoted considerable time and attention to making himself master of
the details associated with both theories, which in his time were the
cause of much controversy and discussion among philosophers and men of
science.

The Ptolemaic system, with its crystalline spheres revolving round the
Earth, the addition to those of cycles and epicycles, and the heaping of
them upon each other, in order to account for phenomena associated with
the motions of celestial bodies, are concisely and accurately described.

The unreasonableness of this theory, when compared with the Copernican,
is clearly delineated by Milton where Adam is made to express his views
with regard to motion in the heavens. His argument, declared in logical
and persuasive language, demonstrates how contrary to reason it would be
to imagine that the entire heavens should revolve round the Earth to
bring about a result which could be more easily attained by imparting
motion to the Earth herself. The inconceivable velocity with which it
would be necessary for the celestial orbs to travel in order to
accomplish their daily revolution is described by him as opposed to all
reason, and entailing upon them a journey which it would be impossible
for material bodies to perform. None the less accurate is Milton's
description of the Copernican system. He describes the Sun as occupying
that position in the system which his magnitude and supreme importance
claim as his sole right, having the planets with their satellites,

    That from his lordly eye keep distance due.--iii. 578,

circling in majestic orbits around him, acknowledging his controlling
power, and bending to his firm but gentle sway. Their positions, their
paths, and their motions, real and apparent, are described in flowing
and harmonious verse.




CHAPTER IV

MILTON AND GALILEO


After the death of his mother, which occurred in 1637, Milton expressed
a desire to visit the Continent, where there were many places of
interest which he often longed to see. Having obtained the consent of
his kind and indulgent father, he set out on his travels in April 1638,
accompanied by a single man-servant, and arrived in Paris, where he only
stayed a few days. During his residence in the French capital he was
introduced by Lord Scudamore, the English Ambassador at the Court of
Versailles, to Hugo Grotius, one of the most distinguished scholars and
philosophic thinkers of his age. From Paris Milton journeyed to Nice,
where he first beheld the beauty of Italian scenery and the classic
shores of the Mediterranean Sea. From Nice he sailed to Genoa and
Leghorn, and after a short stay at those places continued his journey to
Florence, one of the most interesting and picturesque of Italian cities.
Situated in the Valley of the Arno, and encircled by sloping hills
covered with luxuriant vegetation, the sides of which were studded with
residences half-hidden among the foliage of gardens and vineyards,
Florence, besides being famed for its natural beauty, was at that time
the centre of Italian culture and learning, and the abode of men eminent
in literature and science. Here Milton remained for a period of two
months, and enjoyed the friendship and hospitality of its most noted
citizens, many of whom delighted to honour their English visitor. He was
warmly welcomed by the members of the various literary academies, who
admired his compositions and conversation; the flattering encomiums
bestowed upon him by those learned societies having been amply repaid by
Milton in choice and elegant Latin verse.

Among those who resided in the vicinity of Florence was the illustrious
Galileo, who in his sorrow-stricken old age was held a prisoner of the
Inquisition for having upheld and taught scientific doctrines which were
declared to be heretical. After his abjuration he was committed to
prison, but on the intervention of influential friends was released
after a few days' incarceration, and permitted to return to his home at
Arcetri. He was, however, kept under strict surveillance, and forbidden
to leave his house or receive any of his intimate friends without having
first obtained the sanction of the ecclesiastical authorities. After
several years of close confinement at Arcetri, during which time he
suffered much from rheumatism and continued ill-health, aggravated by
grief and mental depression consequent upon the death of his favourite
daughter, Galileo applied for permission to go to Florence in order to
place himself under medical treatment. This request was granted by the
Pope subject to certain conditions, which would be communicated to him
when he presented himself at the office of the Inquisition at Florence.
These were more severe than he anticipated. He was forbidden to leave
his house or receive any of his friends there, and those injunctions
were so strictly adhered to that during Passion Week he had to obtain a
special order so that he might be able to attend mass. At the expiration
of a few months Galileo was ordered to return to Arcetri, which he never
left again.

An affliction, perhaps the most deplorable that can happen to any human
being, was added to the burden of Galileo's misfortunes and woes. A
disorder which had some years previously injured the sight of his right
eye returned in 1636. In the following year the left eye became
similarly affected, with the result that in a few months Galileo became
totally blind. His friends at first hoped that the disease was cataract,
and that some relief might be afforded by means of an operation; but it
was discovered to be an opacity of the cornea, which at his age was
considered unamenable to treatment. This sudden and unexpected calamity
was to Galileo a most deplorable occurrence, for it necessitated the
relinquishment of his favourite pursuit, which he followed with such
intense interest and delight. His friend Castelli writes: 'The noblest
eye is darkened which Nature ever made; an eye so privileged, and gifted
with such rare qualities that it may with truth be said to have seen
more than all of those eyes who are gone, and to have opened the eyes of
all who are to come.' Galileo endured his affliction with patient
resignation and fortitude, and in the following extract from a letter by
him he acknowledges the chastening hand of a Divine Providence: 'Alas!
your dear friend and servant Galileo has become totally blind, so that
this heaven, this earth, this universe, which with wonderful
observations I had enlarged a hundred and a thousand times beyond the
belief of bygone ages, henceforward for me is shrunk into the narrow
