mind until he knew every street in Orvieto.

The house of Tilia Caballo stood on a street that was wider than most
at the east end of town. Even though Ugolini had described it as
ordinary-looking, Daoud was surprised to see how much it resembled the
shabby buildings on either side of it. He had expected some sign of
luxury, some flamboyance. He had thought to hear music as he approached,
as he would have outside one of the brothels of El Kahira--before
Baibars closed them. The house was quiet, unadorned save for a
third-floor balcony above the entryway. It gave no sign of who its
occupants were. He knew it only by counting--fifth house from the
corner, Ugolini had said. Unlike the roof of the cardinal's palace,
which was flat, the roof of Tilia's house was sharply peaked.

It looked like anything but a brothel. And though there were enough
small houses near it to hold two or three hundred people, the street was
not crowded, as were streets everywhere else in Orvieto. He saw a few
men lounging in doorways, a pair of men walking arm in arm past Tilia's
front door, but that was all. Distinguished churchmen and men of wealth
and good family could come here without attracting notice.

_Even so, I seem to be the only visitor who comes before dusk. Well, if
people see me and think I am a well-to-do merchant who frequents
Orvieto's finest brothel, that is exactly what I want them to think._

He felt the heaviness in his groin and the lightness in his stomach that
always accompanied his visits to women when he had done without pleasure
for a long time. He wondered if the Christian courtesan he picked
tonight would be able to match the accomplishments of the women who
served the Mamelukes in El Kahira. She would surely not be able to equal
the incredible pleasures he had enjoyed with Blossoming Reed.

He knocked at the plain dark-brown door, and it swung open immediately,
as if the one behind it had watched him approach. There stood one of
Tilia's black men, wearing a turban, robes, and pantaloons that for all
the world made him look like a harem guard in El Kahira. The costume
made Daoud uneasy. The slave bowed in silence, and with a sweep of his
arm bade Daoud enter.

The entrance hall was a surprise. It seemed much too large for the
building he had just entered. He stood on a Persian carpet in a wide,
high-ceilinged room filled with light. Candles burned in sconces around
the walls and in two chandeliers hanging from the ceiling. Two tall,
thick candles stood in twisting brass stands the height of a man on
either side of a marble staircase. A pungent fragrance filled the air,
and Daoud realized that the candles were scented. If Tilia could afford
to burn this many candles every night, her trade must be profitable
indeed.

He understood now why the interior of Tilia's establishment was so
different from the exterior. She must have acquired all the buildings
side by side along this street and then hollowed them out. He noticed
that where the walls of the building through which he had entered should
have been, there stood marble Roman columns two stories high. Counting
the rows of columns stretching right and left, he estimated that this
great hall must be as wide as five of the original houses that had been
absorbed into Tilia's mansion.

The black man struck a large gong beside the door, giving off a low,
mellow note. Almost immediately Tilia appeared at the top of the
staircase. Smiling broadly, she flounced down the steps, the gold and
jewels scattered over her person throwing off sparks in every direction.

"I knew you would be coming soon, David," she said in a low voice. "I am
glad you came early in the evening. We can talk freely now. If more of
my clients were here, we would have to seclude ourselves."

Daoud jerked his head at the black servant. "Why in God's name do you
dress your men as Muslims here, where there is so much fear and hatred
of 'Saracens,' as they call us?"

Tilia laughed, the pillow of flesh under her chin quivering. "Do you not
know that it has long been fashionable among Christians to borrow from
the world of Islam? They copy everything from ways of dressing to words
and ideas. Most people think the Hohenstaufens have gone too far with
their Saracen army, but among the great houses of Italy each must have
its Moorish servants with great turbans and sashes and pantaloons. And
here in Orvieto, the pope's city, it makes my clients feel especially
wicked to enter a house staffed with slaves so dressed."

"I would not enjoy going into a brothel where the servants were dressed
like Christian monks," Daoud said scornfully.

Tilia sighed. "I will tell you what seeing these men in Saracen garb
does for me. It reminds me of when I was a young woman in Cairo." She
looked around at her hall and sighed again. "Young and beautiful and
unhappy. Now I am rich and content, but I tell you in all honesty I
would give all this up to be young and beautiful."

Daoud was surprised. He had not known that Tilia had once lived in El
Kahira. Was that, he wondered, how Baibars came to know her? Was that
why, even though Daoud did not fully trust her, he felt oddly
comfortable with her?

"And where are the young and beautiful and unhappy women in this house,
then?"

She smiled and laid a hand on his arm. "Are you here to avail yourself?"

"First, I want to send a message to my master. Then that."

"Of course. Come with me."

He followed her up the marble steps, idly wondering if her rump looked
as huge with her gown off, and whether Cardinal Ugolini actually did go
to bed with her, and if so how he could be aroused by such a grossly fat
woman. Not that Ugolini, with his rodent's face, was any more attractive
than his mistress.

The stairs to the third floor were narrower and darker and more winding,
and after that there was a maze of corridors to negotiate. Even with the
help of the Sufi mental training for warriors, Daoud knew he would never
be able to find his way here again.

Tilia gestured to a trapdoor. "Push that back for me."

Daoud climbed a ladder, raised the heavy door, and found himself on a
walkway built over the centerline of a roof. It was wide enough for two
men to stand side by side, but there was no railing, and on either side
the red-tiled roof sloped down sharply. The walkway led to a small
structure made of wooden slats, from which Daoud heard fluttering and
cooing. The sight of the dovecote and the sound of the warbling pigeons
reminded Daoud of the rooftops of El Kahira, and for a moment he yearned
for a sight of the Bhar al-Nil flowing swiftly past the city or the
sound of the muezzin's call to prayer.

He stopped to look around. This was an excellent vantage point. From
here he could see that Tilia's mansion was actually shaped like
Ugolini's, a hollow square around an atrium. The difference was that her
establishment was made from the joining of many houses that had once
been separate. From here he could also see most of Orvieto. Rows and
rows of peaked roofs glowed warm red and orange in the sunset. Off in
the northwest corner of the city bulked the great roof of the cathedral,
like a galley among rowboats. To the south, the six square turrets of
the pope's palace. And on all sides of the city, the rounded green hills
of this part of Italy called Umbria.

"The piccioni fly to Napoli," said Tilia breathlessly behind him. Daoud
was amazed at how she had managed to climb so many steps and finally a
ladder. There must be muscle under all that fat.

He pulled open the whitewashed wooden door of the dovecote. His entry
set off a furious flapping of wings, unleashing a storm of feathers in
the dark enclosure. The smell of pigeon droppings was heavy in the warm
air. He began breathing through his mouth to keep the odor out of his
nose. Tilia pushed past him, whistling and clucking to the pigeons and
calming them down.

"Who gets the messages in Napoli?" he asked.

She turned to him with a smile. "Another brothel keeper. A man. I will
not tell you his name. The wives of my piccioni live in his dovecote.
When I release a piccione here, he flies to Napoli and visits with his
wife until one of my servants rides there and brings him back. Piccioni
are much more faithful to their mates than men and women."

Daoud laughed. He enjoyed Tilia's cynicism. The strong light of the
setting sun fell in bars through the slats across her face and body.

"How long does it take for the messages to reach El Kahira?"

She looked at him as if he were a simpleton. "Who can say? From Napoli
someone must take the message capsules aboard a ship to a port in
Outremer. So, how long it takes depends on whether the sea is angry or
calm. Once in Outremer they might go on by piccioni again or by camel
caravan. Once I had a reply within two months. The longest I had to wait
was a year and three months." She had, Daoud noted, the brothel keeper's
good memory for numbers.

"May this arrive sooner than that." Daoud reached into a leather scrip
at his belt and drew out the two rolled slips of parchment, each crowded
with tiny Arabic characters.

"Two letters? Where is the other one going?"

"Both to Baibars. They are duplicates. We do that in the field whenever
possible. Twice as much chance that the message will get through."

"I will send one tonight and the other tomorrow morning. What are you
telling him?"

Daoud was not sure Tilia should be asking him that. But as "Morgiana"
she had sent Baibars dozens of long letters from Orvieto. Surely no one
had a better right to know about this correspondence.

Daoud shrugged. "That I have arrived here safely with two companions
sent with me by King Manfred, and that we have been welcomed by the one
who was awaiting me. Even though this is written in a cipher, your name
and the cardinal's name are not mentioned. I go on to say that we have
stirred up the people of Orvieto against the Tartars and that I will
soon speak against them before the pope. And I tell him something of
what I have learned about Italy. He is very curious about the lands of
the infidel."

"The cardinal has agreed to present you to Pope Urban, then?" Her
eyebrows twitched and her mouth tightened.

Her look of displeasure irritated him. For all he knew, it was her
influence that made Ugolini so difficult. But, he thought with grudging
admiration, she herself seemed more resolute than the cardinal.

"He came to see that it was the only course open to us."

"You are persuasive. I see better why your master sent you." She took
the parchments from him, rolled them even tighter, and tied each one
into a tiny leather capsule. One capsule disappeared into a jeweled
purse that hung on her hip. The other she put aside while she reached
into a cage, whistling and twittering. Her hand came out again grasping
a pigeon.

"This is Tonio. He is ten years old. He always gets through." Daoud was
amazed at how calmly the pigeon reposed in Tilia's hand. He was even
more surprised when she handed the bird to him, but he quickly took him,
holding him around the back with thumb and forefinger behind his head,
leaving his chest free so he could breathe easily.

"You've handled birds before," she said, deftly fastening a capsule
under Tonio's wing. She took the bird back from Daoud. Outside the coop,
she opened her hands and the bird took off with a fanning of wings.

"There now," said Tilia. "With that out of the way, perhaps you would
like a piccione of another sort for your pleasure."

"I would indeed," said Daoud, feeling a warmth spread through his body.

"I have just the one for you," Tilia said, patting him on the arm as
they returned to the trap door. "Her name is Francesca. She is
beautiful, warm-hearted, and very discreet. She will serve you supper,
and if you like her, you may spend the night with her. And you need pay
me nothing."

"You are too generous, Madama," said Daoud, recovering from a small
surprise. He had assumed that Tilia would give him access to her women
out of simple hospitality, and it had never occurred to him that he
would have to pay.




XIII


Simon stood shifting from foot to foot in the graveled yard before the
palace of Pope Urban. An Italian cardinal had just arrived with his
retinue of bishops, monsignori, priests, and monks, and Simon knew it
would be some time before the procession passed all the guards and the
majordomo at the main door.

Alain de Pirenne, beside him, said in a low voice, "I still can't
believe it. We are about to attend a council called by the pope
himself." His blue eyes were huge, and his fair skin was flushed with
excitement. He was dressed in his best, an azure tunic with silver
embroidery at the sleeves and collar, and on his feet poulaines, black
deerskin shoes whose elongated toes came to points. The hilt of the
longsword hanging at his waist was plain, but Simon knew it had been in
the Pirenne family for generations.

"Do not believe it yet, Alain," Simon said wryly. "We were not invited,
and we have not yet been let in."

"Surely they would not keep out so great a seigneur as you," said Alain.
"Especially when you have been faithfully protecting the Tartars for a
month."

"Well, that is what I am counting on," Simon said.

They stood inside a high wall of cream-colored tufa, the same rock on
which Orvieto stood. The wall, topped with square battlements,
surrounded the papal palace. Simon's gaze swept beyond the wall toward
the bluish tops of nearby hills, wreathed in morning mist, then back to
the row of pine trees that stood between the wall and the palace, the
massed green of the needles almost so dark as to appear black. The
palace itself, fortified by six square turrets, was of white limestone.
It must have cost the papal treasury a fortune, Simon thought, to haul
all those big blocks up here. Within this solid edifice, surrounded by
this high wall, atop the impregnable mesa of Orvieto, the Holy Father
was certainly well protected.

The last monk in his gray gown had passed the guards at the door, and
Simon saw more clergymen massing at the outer gate. He took a deep
breath and started up the stairs, de Pirenne hurrying behind him. He
reminded himself, _I am the Count de Gobignon_.

He said as much to the majordomo, who stood before him in white silk
tunic with the keys of Peter embroidered in black on the left breast.

"Ah, Your Signory, I saw your brave battle in the cathedral with that
heretic assassin." The majordomo had a prominent upper lip that made him
look like a horse. "A thousand welcomes to the palace of His Holiness. I
will be happy to tell him that you are attending the council." He showed
big yellow teeth in an unctuous grin.

Then his face fell as he looked down at Simon's belt. "I regret, Your
Signory, but you may not wear your sword in the palace of the pope. Even
though you wielded it most gloriously in His Holiness's service. Only
the papal guards may bear arms within. A thousand pardons, but you must
take it off. You may leave it with the capitano of the guard if you
wish."

Simon's face burned with embarrassment as he realized he was going to
have to disappoint Alain. The scimitar was one of his most precious
possessions, and he would not entrust it to a stranger, even a stranger
in the service of the pope. With a sigh he unbuckled his belt and handed
it, with his dagger and the jewel-handled scimitar, to de Pirenne.

"If only I had thought to bring Thierry with us," he said. "Forgive me,
Alain, but would you be good enough to take these back to the Palazzo
Monaldeschi? Then you can meet me back here."

"Forgive _me_, Your Signory!" the majordomo interjected. "I am desolate,
but His Holiness himself has commanded that no one is to enter after the
council begins."

Simon felt angry words forcing their way to his lips. But he clamped his
mouth shut. This was, after all, the court of the Vicar of Christ on
earth, and he did not dare protest against its customs. He had the
reputation of France to think of. These Italians already thought the
French were all barbarians.

"I knew it was too good to be true," de Pirenne said with a rueful smile
as he turned away. "I will be waiting for you in the yard outside,
Monseigneur."

Simon shared his friend's unhappiness. This would have been something
for Alain to remember for the rest of his life.

"Bring our horses," Simon said. "We can go riding in the country after
the council is over." Alain's downcast face brightened at that. Simon
knew that Alain, born and reared in a country castle, hated being cooped
up in town.

Simon turned away, feeling dread at having to go into the papal court
alone.

       *       *       *       *       *

The great hall of the pope's palace was long, high, narrow, and shadowy.
Even though it was a sunny day outside, the small windows of white glass
on both sides of the room admitted insufficient light, and had to be
supplemented by a double row of three-tiered chandeliers, each bearing
dozens of candles. The pope could have saved himself the cost of a great
many candles, Simon thought, if he had built his great hall in the new
style, like the king's palace in Paris, with buttresses that allowed for
much larger windows.

But this was Italy, he reminded himself, where there was war in the city
streets, even war against the pope. Large glass windows would offer poor
protection. The King of France did not have such worries.

At the far end of the room a long flight of marble steps swept up to an
enormous gilded throne, empty at present. Down the center of the steps
ran a purple carpet, and over the carpet lay a wide strip of white
linen.

Two rows of high-backed pews faced each other on either side of the
throne. Between them was a table laid with rolls of parchment, an
inkstand, and a sheaf of quills. The pews were as yet empty, but around
them stood cardinals in bright red robes with flat, broad-brimmed red
hats--some of them Simon remembered seeing at the cathedral two weeks
before. Farther removed from the throne and more numerous were the
purple-robed archbishops and bishops. Scattered around the hall were
priests, monks, and friars in black, white, brown, and gray. There must
be nearly a hundred men in the room, Simon guessed. The air was filled
with a buzz of conversation.

He felt the hollow in his stomach and the trembling in his knees that
disturbed him whenever he entered a roomful of strangers. And these
strangers were, most of them, the spiritual lords of the Church. He
looked for a place where he could stand inconspicuously. He dared not
speak to anyone. He felt as if a frown from one of these men would be
enough to send him into disordered retreat.

And suddenly before him there was the frowning face of Cardinal Paulus
de Verceuil. The wide red hat with its heavy tassels seemed precariously
balanced on his head. His gold pectoral cross was set with emeralds and
rubies. The buttons that ran down the front of his scarlet cassock,
Simon noticed, were embroidered with gold thread.

"What the devil are you doing here?"

Simon cast about wildly in his mind for a sensible answer. Nothing he
could say, he was sure, would win this cardinal's approval.

"I--I feel it is important that I know what is decided here, Your
Eminence."

"These deliberations are no business of yours. Your duty is to protect
the ambassadors. You have deserted your post."

Stung, Simon wished de Verceuil were not an ordained priest and a prince
of the Church, so that he could challenge him. That he could do nothing
about de Verceuil's accusation infuriated him.

"The Tartars are safely at the Monaldeschi palace guarded by all of our
knights and men-at-arms. When Count Charles d'Anjou laid this task upon
me, I understood that I was to help advance the alliance with the
Tartars. I cannot do that if I am kept in ignorance." After a pause he
added, "Your Eminence."

That was almost as good as a challenge. Simon felt light-headed, and his
limbs tingled. He wanted to raise his arms and shake his fists.

De Verceuil's face turned a deep maroon, but before he could speak, a
figure also in cardinal's red appeared beside them.

"Paulus de Verceuil! Is this not the young Count de Gobignon, Peer of
the Realm? You are remiss, mon ami. You should have realized that the
French cardinals here in Orvieto would wish to meet one of France's
greatest barons."

This cardinal had a long black beard, and eyes set in deep hollows. He
could easily have presented a dour figure, but stood smiling with his
hands clasped over a broad stomach.

De Verceuil took several deep breaths, and his cheeks returned to their
normal color. "Monseigneur the Cardinal Guy le Gros, I present the Count
Simon de Gobignon," he said in a sour monotone.

Simon immediately dropped to one knee and bent his head toward the ring
the cardinal held out to him. The stone, as big as Cardinal le Gros's
knuckle, was a spherical, polished sapphire with a cross-shaped
four-pointed star glowing in its center. Holding the cardinal's cold,
soft hand, Simon touched the gem lightly with his lips.

_I believe I am supposed to gain an indulgence from kissing this ring_,
he thought. He rose to his feet. He tried to remember what he knew about
Guy le Gros. He had heard a bit about each of the fourteen French
cardinals. Le Gros, he recalled, had been a knight and a prominent
lawyer, ultimately a member of the king's cabinet. Then he had joined
the clergy. He had been the first cardinal elevated by Pope Urban.

"Doubtless you knew Count Simon's late father," said de Verceuil to le
Gros. "Since you served as a counselor to the king."

Simon wanted to shrink out of sight at the reminder of Amalric de
Gobignon. De Verceuil had mentioned him out of deliberate cruelty, Simon
was certain. He felt even more crushed when he saw the pained look that
passed briefly over Cardinal le Gros's features.

"Oh, yes, I met your father many years ago," said le Gros, his light
tone reassuring Simon a bit. "He was a tall man like you, but blond, as
I recall."

The suggestion that he did not resemble Amalric de Gobignon chilled
Simon.

"As a father of unmarried daughters, Cardinal le Gros," de Verceuil
said, "you might be interested to know that the count has no wife."

Le Gros shrugged and smiled at Simon. "His Eminence never misses an
opportunity to remind me that I was once a family man. Perhaps Paulus
envies my wider experience of life."

"Not at all!" de Verceuil protested.

"Or perhaps he thinks it a scandal that a cardinal should have
daughters," said le Gros, still addressing Simon. "At least mine are
legitimate, unlike the offspring of certain other princes of the Church.
As for the high office, it was not my choice. His Holiness commanded
me." He leaned confidentially toward Simon. "He needed more French
cardinals. He cannot trust the Italians to support him against the
accursed Manfred von Hohenstaufen."

"Even more than that, he was hoping you could persuade King Louis to
give his brother Charles permission to fight Manfred," said de Verceuil.
"You failed him in that."

"That case is not closed," said le Gros. "Indeed, what we do here today
may lead directly to the overthrow of the odious Manfred, as I am sure
you both understand." He smiled, first at Simon, then at de Verceuil.
"But should we not be speaking Latin, the mother tongue of the Church?
Some lupus might be spying on us."

In Latin de Verceuil answered, "I fear Count Simon would be unable to
follow us."

"Not at all, domini mei," Simon cut in quickly, also in Latin. "I have
had some instruction in that language." His many and often quarreling
guardians had agreed at least that he should have an education far
superior to that of most other great barons. Having studied for two
years at the University of Paris, Simon had once been the victim of a
lupus, a wolf, an informer who reported students for breaking the
university rule that Latin must be spoken at all times. The fine he paid
was negligible, but his embarrassment was keen.

"Good for you, my boy," said le Gros, patting him lightly on the
shoulder. De Verceuil's lips puckered as if he had been sucking on a
lemon.

A sudden blast of trumpets silenced the conversation in the hall.
Servants swung open double doors near the papal throne, and two men
entered. One was Pope Urban, whom Simon had not seen since the day of
that ill-omened papal mass for the Tartar ambassadors. His white beard
fanned in wispy locks over his chest. The mouth framed by his beard was
compressed, and his eyes were hard. Simon knew that he had been born
Jacques Pantaleone at Troyes in France, not far from Gobignon, and was a
shoemaker's son. Only in the Church could a man from such a humble
beginning rise to such high position. Urban had the face of a man who
could cut the toughest leather to his pattern.

Age had bent the pope somewhat, and he leaned on the shoulder of a man
who walked beside him. This man was so unusual a figure that he drew
Simon's attention away from Pope Urban. Like the Holy Father, he was
wearing white, but it was the white robe of a Dominican friar, and it
curved out around his belly like the sail of a galley with the wind
behind it. He was partially bald, his face round as a full moon, and his
eyes, nose, and mouth were half buried in flesh the sallow color of new
wheat. He nodded repeatedly in response to something the pope was
earnestly saying to him.

"Who is _that_?" Simon whispered, earning himself a black look from de
Verceuil.

"Fra Tomasso d'Aquino," said Cardinal le Gros. "I am told he is the
wisest man alive. Papa Pantaleone has appointed him to conduct this
inquiry, unfortunately."

"Why unfortunately, dominus meus?"

"Bad enough for us that d'Aquino is Italian, he is also a relative of
the Hohenstaufens. His older brothers have served both Frederic and
Manfred."

"A relative of the Hohenstaufens!" de Verceuil exclaimed loud enough for
two nearby bishops to turn and stare at him. "How can His Holiness trust
such a man?"

"Fra Tomasso is not _that_ close a relative," said le Gros. "Papa
Pantaleone hates the Hohenstaufens more than anyone. Have they not
forced him to immure himself here in the hills, when he should by rights
be reigning in Rome? And yet he favors Aquino because Aquino is loyal to
the Church and well informed. Come, let us find our seats." They walked
together toward the pews near the papal throne.

And Simon was suddenly standing alone at the back of the congregation.

Standing at the foot of the steps leading up to his throne, Pope Urban
turned, smiled, and spread his hands in benediction. He intoned a prayer
beginning, "Dominus Deus," very rapidly in Latin and followed with
greetings to all present. He mentioned each cardinal, archbishop, and
bishop by name, then several distinguished abbots and monsignori. His
white beard fluttered as he spoke.

Then Simon heard, "And we greet with joy our countryman, Simon, Count de
Gobignon, who bears one of France's most ancient and honored names."

A stunning brightness blinded Simon, as if lightning had struck right in
front of him. _Ancient and honored!_ In front of so many leaders of the
Church. If at this moment some hidden enemy were to shoot an arrow at
the pope, Simon would have leapt to take it in his own breast with joy.

_What magnanimity!_ Simon thought. He remembered the majordomo saying he
would tell the pope Simon was there. He looked to see how de Verceuil
had reacted to the pope's singling him out, but the cardinal was hidden
somewhere in the rows of red-hatted figures lined up in their pews on
either side of the pope. Simon noticed other prelates staring at him,
then turning away as he looked at them, and his face went hot.

Meanwhile the pope was talking about the Tartars. "We must soon decide
whether it be God's will that Christian princes join with the Tartars
and aid them in their war against the Saracens, or whether we should
forbid this alliance with pagans. We shall have a private audience later
this week with the two ambassadors from Tartary. But today we ask your
counsel. So that all may speak freely, we have expressly not invited the
Tartar emissaries. We ask God to help us make a wise decision." He
introduced Fra Tomasso d'Aquino.

To Simon's surprise, Pope Urban did not then ascend to his throne but
instead came down, disappearing into the midst of his counselors. The
cardinals sat in their pews. The lesser dignitaries sat on smaller
chairs in rows facing the throne. When everyone was in place, Simon
could see Pope Urban in a tall oaken chair at the foot of the steps.

There was no chair for Simon, even though the pope had greeted him by
name. No matter, many of the lesser clergy also remained standing. He
pressed forward through the crowd until he was just behind the seated
men so that he could see and hear better.

The corpulent Fra Tomasso took his place behind the table in a heavy
chair wider than the pope's, though its back was not as high. He called
for Cardinal Adelberto Ugolini. The cardinal, a tiny man with flowing
side whiskers and a receding chin, stood up at his place in the pews. He
in turn summoned from the audience a knight called Sire Cosmas.

Sire Cosmas, an elderly man, walked stiffly to the pope and knelt before
him. Ugolini told the assembly that Cosmas had seen and fought the
Tartar invaders in his native Hungary and was driven from his home by
them.

_The Tartars have long since withdrawn from Hungary_, Simon thought.
_Why did Sire Cosmas never go back there?_

Sire Cosmas was lean and dark, with gray hair that fell to his
shoulders. Over scarlet gloves he wore many rings that flashed as he
gestured.

"They came without warning and all at once, like a summer cloudburst,"
the Hungarian said. "One moment we were at peace, the next the lines of
Tartar horsemen darkened the eastern horizon from the Baltic to the
Adriatic."

Sire Cosmas's Latin was very good, fast and fluent.

Simon stood transfixed as Cosmas described the fall of one Russian city
after another, how the Tartars leveled Riazan, Moscow, and Kiev and
butchered all their people. They would gather all the women, rape them,
and cut their throats. The men they cut in two, impaled on stakes,
roasted, flayed alive, used as archery targets, or suffocated by
pounding dirt down their throats. The details of the atrocities sickened
Simon. On into Poland the Tartars came.

Cosmas's tale of the trumpeter of Krakow, who kept sounding the alarm
from the cathedral tower until Tartar arrows struck him down, brought
tears to Simon's eyes.

Simon found the Hungarian's recital spellbinding. Cosmas had undoubtedly
repeated his account many times, polishing his storytelling skills a
little more with each occasion. It was probably easy and perhaps
profitable for him to remain in western Europe telling and retelling, in
great halls and at dinner tables, his adventures with the Tartars.

_How much is Cardinal Ugolini paying him for this performance?_

The flower of European chivalry engaged the Tartars at Liegnitz in
Poland, Sire Cosmas said, and when the battle was over, thousands of
knights from Hungary, Poland, Germany, Italy, France, England, and as
far away as Spain lay dead and dying on the field and the Tartars were
triumphant. They turned then to meet another mighty Christian army, that
of King Bela of Hungary, at Mohi.

"I fought in that battle," Cosmas declared. "The dog-faced Tartars
bombarded us with terrible weapons that burst into flame and gave off
poisonous smoke, so that men died of breathing it. We advanced against
them and discovered that we were surrounded. Their pitiless volleys of
arrows slowly reduced our numbers all that long day. In the late
afternoon we saw their columns gathering for a charge, but we also saw a
gap in their line. Many of us, myself among them, rushed for that gap,
throwing down our arms and armor so we could escape more quickly. It was
a devilish trick. The Tartar heavy cavalry fell upon those who remained
behind, now few in number, and slaughtered all. The light cavalry rode
along the flanks of those who retreated, shooting them down till bodies
in their thousands littered the road. I was one of the few who, by God's
grace and by feigning death, lived."

The Tartars advanced to the Danube, he went on, burning everything,
killing all the people in towns and villages. They burned Pest to the
ground. On Christmas Day in the year 1241 the Danube froze hard. The
Tartars crossed and destroyed Buda. They advanced into Austria. Tartar
columns were sighted from the walls of Vienna. Europe lay helpless
before them.

"Only the hand of God saved us. He willed that at that very moment the
emperor of the Tartars in their far-off homeland should die," Sire
Cosmas concluded. "All the kings and generals of the Tartars had to
depart from Europe, with their armies, to choose their next emperor.
Those parts of Poland and Hungary they had occupied, they left a dead,
silent desert.

"Since then the Tartars have made war on the Saracens, which pleases us,
of course. But is the enemy of our enemy truly our friend? Permit me to
doubt it, good Fathers. We are no better able to fight the Tartars now
than we were after Mohi. I urge you to let the Tartars and Saracens wear
themselves out fighting each other. Let us not help the Tartars with
their distant wars, losing knights and men we might later need to defend
Europe against those devils themselves."

Sire Cosmas's words chilled Simon. He felt himself almost persuaded that
the Tartars were a menace to the world. It might be a grave error to
work for an alliance with them. And yet, for the sake of his family he
had accepted this mission. He could not back down now. Uneasily he
rubbed his damp palms on his tunic.

There was a murmur of conversation as Sire Cosmas finished and bowed.

Fra Tomasso, scribbling notes on a parchment, looked up and asked, "Did
you say that the Tartar soldiers have the faces of dogs, Sire Cosmas?"

Cosmas shook his head, looking himself somewhat sheepish, Simon thought.
"We spoke of them so because their pointed fur caps made them look like
dogs."

"I wondered, because Aristotle writes of men with animals' heads living
in remote regions," said the stout Dominican. He made a note.

Cosmas brightened. "They do eat the flesh of living prisoners. And I
hope I may not offend your chastity by telling you this, but they slice
off the breasts of the women they rape and serve them as delicacies to
their princes. Raw."

Simon thought of John and Philip and wondered whether they had ever done
such horrible things. He wished he had learned more about the Tartars
before agreeing to pursue this cause.

"To hear of such deeds is not likely to cause concupiscent movements in
normal men," said Fra Tomasso dryly. "Have you seen such abominations
with your own eyes?"

"No," said Cosmas, "but I heard it from many people when the Tartars
were invading us."

"Thank you," said d'Aquino, making another note. He put his quill down
and started to heave his bulk up from his chair. Cardinal Ugolini darted
past him, resting his hand momentarily on d'Aquino's shoulder, and the
Dominican settled back down again.

That cardinal looks just like a fat little mouse, Simon thought. One of
the Italians. And it was he who had brought this Sire Cosmas to speak
against the Tartars. He might well be a key opponent of the alliance.
What would it take to change his mind?

Ugolini beckoned toward the audience, and a tall blond man came forward
now to stand beside him.

_I have seen him before_, Simon thought. _Where?_

"Holy Fathers," said Ugolini, "Providence sends us this man, David of
Trebizond, a trader in Cathayan silks. He has traveled in recent years
among the Tartars. David speaks Greek but not Latin. I will translate
what he says."

Simon remembered at last where he had seen David of Trebizond. Standing
on a balcony and looking pleased as the people rioted against the Tartar
ambassadors. And now here to speak against the alliance.

The back of his neck tingling, Simon thought, _This man is an enemy_.




XIV


Ugolini spoke in a low voice to the blond man in a language Simon
guessed was Greek, and David answered at some length.

"You must suppose now that I am David speaking directly to you," said
Ugolini in Latin to the assembly, patting the front of his red satin
robe. "I come from an old merchant family of Trebizond. Caravans from
across Turkestan bring us silks from Cathay. We are Christians according
to the Greek rite."

This provoked a hostile murmur from the audience.

Ugolini hesitated, then said, "I speak in my own person for a moment--I,
too, am inclined to treat as suspect what a so-called Catholic of the
schismatic Greek Church tells me. But I have talked long with David, and
I am convinced he is a virtuous man. After all, the Greeks, like us, are
believers in Christ. And Trebizond is at war with Constantinople, so we
can trust this man the more for that."

Again David spoke in Greek to Ugolini. Unable to understand David's
words, Simon listened to his voice. It was rich and resonant. A virtuous
man? A traveling mountebank, more likely. He felt a deep distrust of
both David and Ugolini.

"From time to time the Saracens tried to conquer us, but with the grace
of God we fought them off," said David through Ugolini. "And when we
were not at war with them we traded with them, for Trebizond lives by
trade. And now that the Tartars have conquered all of Persia, we trade
with them."

Fra Tomasso raised a broad hand and asked, "Do you find the Tartars
honest traders?"

"They would rather take what they want by looting or tribute or
taxation. Eventually they think they will not have to trade. They
believe the blue sky, which they worship, will permit them to conquer
the whole world, and then all peoples will slave for them. Just as they
use subject people, so, if you ally yourselves with them, they will use
you. You will help them destroy the Moslems, and then they will turn on
you."

_He hates the Tartars. I can hear it in his voice, see it in the glow in
his eyes. He is sincere enough about that._

A cardinal shouted out something in Latin too rapid for Simon to
understand. An archbishop bellowed an answer. Two cardinals were arguing
loudly in the pews on the other side of the room. Suddenly all the
Church leaders seemed to be talking at once. Fra Tomasso picked up a
little bell from his desk and rang it vigorously. Simon could barely
hear it, and everyone ignored it.

_The princes of the Church quarrel among themselves like ordinary men._

