near giving me my quietus. But I grappled with the poor frantic creature
as gently as might be--the stone of the wall separating us always--and
stripped her of her weapon, and held her firmly captive till she might
calm herself.

"That was an ungrateful blow," I said. "But for my hand you'd have
slipped and be the sport of a tiger's paw this minute."

"Oh, I must kill some one," she panted, "before I am killed myself."

"There will be time enough to think upon that some other day; but for
now you are far enough off meeting further harm."

"You are lying to me. You will throw me to the beasts as soon as I loose
my grip. I know your kind: you will not be robbed of your sport."

"I will go so far as to prove myself to you," said I, and called out for
the warder who had tended the doors below. "Bid those tigers be tethered
on a shorter chain," I ordered, "and then go yourself outside into the
circus, and help this lady delicately to the ground."

The word was passed and these things were done; and I too came out into
the circus and joined the woman, who stood waiting under the moonlight.
But the others who had seen these doings were by no means suited at the
change of plan. One of the great stone valves of the farther door opened
hurriedly, and a man strode out, armed and flushed. "By all the Gods!"
he shouted. "Who comes between me and my pastime?"

I stepped quietly to the advance. "I fear, sir," I said, "that you must
launch your anger against me. By accident I gave that woman sanctuary,
and I had not heart to toss her back to your beasts."

His fingers began to snap against his hilt.

"You have come to the wrong market here with your qualms. I am captain
here, and my word carries, subject only to Phorenice's nod. Do you
hear that? Do you know too that I can have you tossed to those striped
gate-keepers of mine for meddling in here without an invitation?" He
looked at me sharp enough, but saw plainly that I was a stranger. "But
perhaps you carry a name, my man, which warrants your impertinence?"

"Deucalion is my poor name," I said, "but I cannot expect you will know
it. I am but newly landed here, sir, and when I left Atlantis some score
of years back, a very different man to you held guard over these gates."
He had his forehead on my feet by this time. "I had it from the Empress
this night that she will to-morrow make a new sorting of this kingdom's
dignities. Perhaps there is some recommendation you would wish me to lay
before her in return for your courtesies?"

"My lord," said the man, "if you wish it, I can have a turn with those
cave-tigers myself now, and you can look on from behind the walls and
see them tear me."

"Why tell me what is no news?"

"I wish to remind my lord of his power; I wish to beg of his clemency."

"You showed your power to these poor prisoners; but from what remains
here to be seen, few of them have tasted much of your clemency."

"The orders were," said the captain of the gate, as though he thought a
word might be said here for his defence, "the orders were, my lord, that
the tigers should be kept fierce and accustomed to killing."

"Then, if you have obeyed orders, let me be the last to chide you.
But it is my pleasure that this woman be respited, and I wish now to
question her."

The man got to his feet again with obvious relief, though still bowing
low.

"Then if my lord will honour me by sitting in my room that overlooks the
outer gate, the favour will never be forgotten."

"Show the way," I said, and took the woman by the fingers, leading her
gently. At the two ends of the circus the tigers prowled about on short
chains, growling and muttering.

We passed through the door into the thickness of the outer wall, and the
captain of the gate led us into his private chamber, a snug enough box
overlooking the plain beyond the city. He lit a torch from his lamp
and thrust it into a bracket on the wall, and bowing deeply and walking
backwards, left us alone, closing the door in place behind him. He was
an industrious fellow, this captain, to judge from the spoil with
which his chamber was packed. There could have come very few traders in
through that gate below without his levying a private tribute; and so,
judging that most of his goods had been unlawfully come by, I had little
qualm at making a selection. It was not decent that the woman, being
an Atlantean, should go bereft of the dignity of clothes, as though
she were a mere savage from Europe; and so I sought about amongst the
captain's spoil for garments that would be befitting.

But, as I busied myself in this search for raiment, rummaging amongst
the heaps and bales, with a hand and eye little skilled in such
business, I heard a sound behind which caused me to turn my head, and
there was the woman with a dagger she had picked from the floor, in the
act of drawing it from the sheath.

She caught my eye and drew the weapon clear, but seeing that I made no
advance towards her, or move to protect myself, waited where she was,
and presently was took with a shuddering.

"Your designs seem somewhat of a riddle," I said. "At first you
wished to kill me from motives which you explained, and which I quite
understood. It lay in my power next to confer some small benefit
upon you, in consequence of which you are here, and not--shall we
say?--yonder in the circus. Why you should desire now to kill the only
man here who can set you completely free, and beyond these walls, is a
thing it would gratify me much to learn. I say nothing of the trifle of
ingratitude. Gratitude and ingratitude are of little weight here. There
is some far greater in your mind."

She pressed a hand hard against her breasts. "You are Deucalion," she
gasped; "I heard you say it."

"I am Deucalion. So far, I have known no reason to feel shame for my
name."

"And I come of those," she cried, with a rising voice, "who bite against
this city, because they have found their fate too intolerable with the
land as it is ordered now. We heard of your coming from Yucatan. It was
we who sent the fleet to take you at the entrance to the Gulf."

"Your fleet gave us a pretty fight."

"Oh, I know, I know. We had our watchers on the high land who brought us
the tidings. We had an omen even before that. Where we lay with our army
before the walls here, we saw great birds carrying off the slain to the
mountains. But where the fleet failed, I saw a chance where I, a woman,
might--"

"Where you might succeed?" I sat me down on a pile of the captain's
stuffs. It seemed as if here at last that I should find a solution for
many things. "You carry a name?" I asked.

"They call me Nais."

"Ah," I said, and signed to her to take the clothes that I had sought
out. She was curiously like, so both my eyes and hearing said, to Ylga,
the fan-girl of Phorenice, but as she had told me of no parentage I
asked for none then. Still her talk alone let me know that she was bred
of none of the common people, and I made up my mind towards definite
understanding. "Nais," I said, "you wish to kill me. At the same time I
have no doubt you wish to live on yourself, if only to get credit from
your people for what you have done. So here I will make a contract with
you. Prove to me that my death is for Atlantis' good, and I swear by our
Lord the Sun to go out with you beyond the walls, where you can stab me
and then get you gone. Or the--"

"I will not be your slave."

"I do not ask you for service. Or else, I wished to say, I shall live
so long as the High Gods wish, and do my poor best for this country. And
for you--I shall set you free to do your best also. So now, I pray you,
speak."




7. THE BITERS OF THE WALLS (FURTHER ACCOUNT)


"You will set me free," she said, regarding me from under her brows,
"without any further exactions or treaty?"

"I will set you free exactly on those terms," I answered, "unless indeed
we here decide that it is better for Atlantis that I should die, in
which case the freedom will be of your own taking."

"My lord plays a bold game."

"Tut, tut," I said.

"But I shall not hesitate to take the full of my bond, unless my
theories are most clearly disproved to me."

"Tut," I said, "you women, how you can play out the time needlessly.
Show me sufficient cause, and you shall kill me where and how you
please. Come, begin the accusation."

"You are a tyrant."

"At least I have not paraded my tyrannies in Atlantis these twenty
years. Why, Nais, I did but land yesterday."

"You will not deny you came back from Yucatan for a purpose."

"I came back because I was sent for. The Empress gives no reasons for
her recalls. She states her will; and we who serve her obey without
question."

"Pah, I know that old dogma."

"If you discredit my poor honesty at the outset like this, I fear we
shall not get far with our unravelling."

"My lord must be indeed simple," said this strange woman scornfully, "if
he is ignorant of what all Atlantis knows."

"Then simple you must write me down. Over yonder in Yucatan we were too
well wrapped up in our own parochial needs and policies to have
leisure to ponder much over the slim news which drifted out to us from
Atlantis--and, in truth, little enough came. By example, Phorenice
(whose office be adored) is a great personage here at home; but over
there in the colony we barely knew so much as her name. Here, since I
have been ashore, I have seen many new wonders; I have been carried by a
riding mammoth; I have sat at a banquet; but in what new policies there
are afoot, I have yet to be schooled."

"Then, if truly you do not know it, let me repeat to you the common
tale. Phorenice has tired of her unmated life."

"Stay there. I will hear no word against the Empress."

"Pah, my lord, your scruples are most decorous. But I did no more than
repeat what the Empress had made public by proclamation. She is minded
to take to herself a husband, and nothing short of the best is good
enough for Phorenice. One after another has been put up in turn as
favourite--and been found wanting. Oh, I tell you, we here in Atlantis
have watched her courtship with jumping hearts. First it was this one
here, then it was that one there; now it was this general just returned
from a victory, and a day later he had been packed back to his camp, to
give place to some dashing governor who had squeezed increased revenues
from his province. But every ship that came from the West said that
there was a stronger man than any of these in Yucatan, and at last the
Empress changed the wording of her vow. 'I'll have Deucalion for my
husband,' said she, 'and then we will see who can stand against my
wishes.'"

"The Empress (whose name be adored) can do as she pleases in such
matters," I said guardedly; "but that is beside the argument. I am here
to know how it would be better for Atlantis that I should die?"

"You know you are the strongest man in the kingdom."

"It pleases you to say so."

"And Phorenice is the strongest woman."

"That is beyond doubt."

"Why, then, if the Empress takes you in marriage, we shall be under a
double tyranny. And her rule alone is more cruelly heavy than we can
bear already."

"I pass no criticism on Phorenice's rule. I have not seen it. But I
crave your mercy, Nais, on the newcomer into this kingdom. I am strong,
say you, and therefore I am a tyrant, say you. Now to me this sequence
is faulty."

"Who should a strong man use strength for, if not for himself? And if
for himself, why that spells tyranny. You will get all your heart's
desires, my lord, and you will forget that many a thousand of the common
people will have to pay for them."

"And this is all your accusation?"

"It seems to be black enough. I am one that has a compassion for my
fellow-men, my lord, and because of that compassion you see me what I am
to-day. There was a time, not long passed, when I slept as soft and ate
as dainty as any in Atlantis."

I smiled. "Your speech told me that much from the first."

"Then I would I had cast the speech off, too, if that is also a livery
of the tyrant's class. But I tell you I saw all the oppression myself
from the oppressor's side. I was high in Phorenice's favour then."

"That, too, is easy of credence. Ylga is the fan-girl to the Empress
now, and second lady in the kingdom, and those who have seen Ylga could
make an easy guess at the parentage of Nais."

"We were the daughters of one birth; but I do not count with either
Zaemon or Ylga now. Ylga is the creature of Phorenice, and Phorenice
would have all the people of Atlantis slaves and in chains, so that
she might crush them the easier. And as for Zaemon, he is no friend of
Phorenice's; he fights with brain and soul to drag the old authority
to those on the Sacred Mountain; and that, if it come down on us again,
would only be the exchange of one form of slavery for another."

"It seems to me you bite at all authority."

"In fact," she said simply, "I do. I have seen too much of it."

"And so you think a rule of no-rule would be best for the country?"

"You have put it plainly in words for me. That is my creed to-day. That
is the creed of all those yonder, who sit in the camp and besiege this
city. And we number on our side, now, all in Atlantis save those in the
city and a handful on the priests' Mountain."

I shook my head. "A creed of desperation, if you like, Nais, but,
believe me, a silly creed. Since man was born out of the quakings and
the fevers of this earth, and picked his way amongst the cooler-places,
he has been dependent always on his fellow-men. And where two are
congregated together, one must be chief, and order how matters are to be
governed--at least, I speak of men who have a wish to be higher than the
beasts. Have you ever set foot in Europe?"

"No."

"I have. Years back I sailed there, gathering slaves. What did I see? A
country without rule or order. Tyrants they were, to be sure, but they
were the beasts. The men and the women were the rudest savages, knowing
nothing of the arts, dressing in skins and uncleanness, harbouring in
caves and the tree-tops. The beasts roamed about where they would, and
hunted them unchecked."

"Still, they fought you for their liberty?"

"Never once. They knew how disastrous was their masterless freedom. Even
to their dull, savage brains it was a sure thing that no slavery could
be worse; and to that state you, and your friends, and your theories,
will reduce Atlantis, if you get the upper hand. But, then, to argue
in a circle, you will never get it. For to conquer, you must set up
leaders, and once you have set them up, you will never pull them down
again."

"Aye," she said with a sigh, "there is truth in that last."

The torch had filled the captain's room with a resinous smoke, but the
flame was growing pale. Dawn was coming in greyly through a slender
arrow-slit, and with it ever and again the glow from some mountain out
of sight, which was shooting forth spasmodic bursts of fire. With it
also were mutterings of distant falling rocks, and sullen tremblings,
which had endured all the night through, and I judged that earth was in
one of her quaking moods, and would probably during the forthcoming day
offer us some chastening discomforts.

On this account, perhaps, my senses were stilled to certain evidences
which would otherwise have given me a suspicion; and also, there is no
denying that my general wakefulness was sapped by another matter. This
