
       *       *       *       *       *

It was a brave gesture of the President of the United States; he dared
the scorn and laughter of the world in standing behind his Secretary
of War. The world is quick to turn and rend with ridicule a false
prophet. And despite the unanswerable facts, the scope and power of
the menace was not entirely believed. It was difficult for the
conscious minds of men to conceive of the barriers of vast space as
swept aside and the earth laid open to attack.

England was slow to respond to the invitation of the President: this
matter required thought and grave deliberation in parliament. It might
not be true: the thought, whether spoken or unexpressed, was clinging
to their minds. And even if true--even if this lone ship had wandered
in from space--there might be no further attack.

"Why," they asked, "should there be more unprovoked assaults from the
people of another planet? What was their object? What had they to
gain? ... Perhaps we were safe after all." The answer that destroyed
all hope came to them borne in upon a wall of water that swept the
British coast.

The telescopes of the world were centered now on just one object in
the heavens. The bright evening star that adorned the western sky was
the target for instruments great and small. It was past the half-moon
phase now, and it became under magnification a gleaming crescent, a
crescent that emitted from the dark sphere it embraced vivid flashes
of light. Sykes' report had ample corroboration; the flash was seen by
many, and it was repeated the next night and the next.

What was it? the waiting world asked. And the answer came not from the
telescopes and their far-reaching gaze but from the waters of the
Atlantic. In the full blaze of day came a meteor that swept to the
earth in an arc of fire to outshine the sun. There must have been
those who saw it strike--passengers and crews of passing ships--but
its plunge into the depths of the Atlantic spelled death for each
witness.

       *       *       *       *       *

The earth trembled with the explosion that followed. A gas--some new
compound that united with water to give volumes tremendous--that only
could explain it. The ocean rose from its depths and flung wave after
wave to race outward in circles of death.

Hundreds of feet in height at their source--this could only be
estimated--they were devastating when they struck. The ocean raged
over the frail bulwark of England in wave upon wave, and, retreating,
the waters left smooth, shining rock where cities had been. The stone
and steel of their buildings was scattered far over the desolate land
or drawn in the suction of retreating waters to the sea.

Ireland, too, and France and Spain. Even the coast of America felt the
shock of the explosion and was swept by tidal waves of huge
proportions. But the coast of Britain took the blow at its worst.

The world was stunned and waiting--waiting!--when the next blow fell.
The flashes were coming from Venus at regular intervals, just twenty
hours and nineteen minutes apart. And with exactly the same time
intervals the bolts arrived from space to lay waste the earth.

They struck where they would: the ocean again; the Sahara; in the
mountains of China; the Pacific was thrown into fearful convulsions;
the wheat fields of Canada trembled and vanished before a blast of
flaming gas....

Twenty hours and nineteen minutes! Where it would strike, the next
star-shell, no man might say; that it surely would come was a deadly
and nerve-shattering certainty. The earth waited and prayed under
actual bombardment.

       *       *       *       *       *

Some super-gun, said science with conviction; a great bore in the
planet itself, perhaps. But it was fixed, and the planet itself aimed
with an accuracy that was deadly; aimed once as each revolution
brought its gun on the target. Herein, said science, lay a basis for
hope.

If, in that distant world, there was only one such bore, it must be
altering its aim as the planet approached; the gun must cease to bear
upon the earth. And the changing sweep of the missiles' flight
confirmed their belief.

Each meteor-shell that came rushing into Earth's embrace burned
brilliantly as it tore into the air. And each flaming arc was
increasingly bent, until--twenty hours and nineteen minutes had
passed--twenty minutes--thirty--another hour ... and the peoples of
Earth dropped humbly to their knees in thankful prayer, or raised
vengeful eyes and clenched fists toward the heavens while their
quivering lips uttered blasphemous curses. The menace, for the time,
had passed; the great gun of Venus no longer was aiming toward the
earth.

"No more ships," was the belief; "not this time." And the world turned
to an accounting of its losses, and to wonder--wonder--what the
planet's return would bring. A year and one half was theirs; one year
and a half in which to live in safety, in which to plan and build.

       *       *       *       *       *

A column, double leaded, in the _London Times_ voiced the feeling of
the world. It was copied and broadcast everywhere.

"Another attack," it concluded, "is not a probability--it is a
certainty. They are destroying us for some reason known only to
themselves. Who can doubt that when the planet returns there will be a
further bombardment; an invasion by armed forces in giant ships; bombs
dropped from them miles high in the air. This is what we must look
forward to--death and destruction dealt out by a force we are unable
to meet.

"Our munitions factories may build larger guns, but can they reach the
heights at which these monster ships of space will lie, with any faint
probability of inflicting damage? It is doubtful.

"Our aircraft is less than useless; its very name condemns it as
inept. Craft of the air!--and we have to war against space ships which
can rise beyond the thin envelope of gas that encircles the earth.

"The world is doomed--utterly and finally doomed; it is the end of
humankind; slavery to a conquering race at the very best, unless--

"Let us face the facts fairly. It is war--war to the death--between
the inhabitants of this world and of that other. We are men. What they
are God alone can say. But they are creatures of mind as are we; what
they have done, we may do.

"There is our only hope. It is vain, perhaps--preposterous in its
assumption--but our sole and only hope. We must meet the enemy and
defeat him, and we must do it on his own ground. To destroy their
fleet we must penetrate space; to silence their deadly bombardment we
must go out into space as they have done, reach their distant world
as they have reached ours, and conquer as we would have been
conquered.

"It is a tenuous hope, but our only one. Let our men of mundane
warfare do their best--it will be useless. But if there be one spark
of God-given genius in the world that can point the way to victory,
let those in authority turn no deaf ear.

"It is a battle now of minds, and the best minds will win. Humanity--all
humankind--is facing the end. In less than one year and a half we must
succeed--or perish. And unless we conquer finally and decisively, the story
of man in the history of the universe will be a tale that is told, a record
of life in a book that is ended--closed--and forgotten through all
eternity."


CHAPTER VII

A breath of a lethal gas shot from the flying ship had made Captain
Blake as helpless as if every muscle were frozen hard, and he had got
it only lightly, mixed with the saving blast of oxygen. His heart had
gone on, and his breathing, though it became shallow, did not cease;
he was even able to turn his eyes. But to the men in the observatory
room the gas from the weapons of the attacking force came as a
devastating, choking cloud that struck them senseless as if with a
blow. Lieutenant McGuire hardly heard the sound of his own pistol
before unconsciousness took him.

It was death for the men who were left--for them the quick darkness
never lifted--but for McGuire and his companion there was reprieve.

He was lying flat on a hard floor when remembrance crept slowly back
to his benumbed brain. An odor, sickish-sweet, was in his nostrils;
the breath of life was being forcibly pumped and withdrawn from
laboring lungs; a mask was tight against his face. He struggled to
throw it off, and someone bending over removed it.

Someone! His eyes stared wonderingly at the grotesque face like a
lingering phantasm of fevered dreams. There were others, he saw, and
they were working over a body not far away upon the floor. He
recognized the figure of Professor Sykes. Short, stocky, his clothes
disheveled--but Sykes, unmistakably, despite the mask upon his face.

He, too, revived as McGuire watched, and, like the flyer, he looked
wonderingly about him at his strange companions. The eyes of the two
met and held in wordless communication and astonishment.

       *       *       *       *       *

The unreal creatures that hovered near withdrew to the far side of the
room. The walls beyond them were of metal, white and gleaming; there
were doorways. In another wall were portholes--round windows of thick
glass that framed circles of absolute night. It was dark out beyond
them with a blackness that was relieved only by sharp pin-points of
brilliance--stars in a night sky such as McGuire had never seen.

Past and present alike were hazy to the flyer; the spark of life had
been brought back to his body from a far distance; there was time
needed to part the unreal from the real in these new and strange
surroundings.

There were doorways in the ceiling, and others in the floor near where
he lay; ladders fastened to the wall gave access to these doors. A
grotesque figure appeared above the floor and, after a curious glance
at the two men, scrambled into the room and vanished through the
opening in the ceiling. It was some time before the significance of
this was plain to the wondering man--before he reasoned that he was in
the enemy ship, aimed outward from the earth, and the pull of
gravitation and the greater force of the vessel's constant
acceleration held its occupants to the rear walls of each room. That
lanky figure had been making its way forward toward the bow of the
ship. McGuire's mind was clearing; he turned his attention now to the
curious, waiting creatures, his captors.

There were five of them standing in the room, five shapes like men,
yet curiously, strangely, different. They were tall of stature, narrow
across the shoulders, muscular in a lean, attenuated fashion. But
their faces! McGuire found his eyes returning in horrified fascination
to each hideous, inhuman countenance.

A colorless color, like the dead gray of ashes; a skin like that of an
African savage from which all but the last vestige of color had been
drained. It was transparent, parchment-like, and even in the light of
the room that glowed from some hidden source, he could see the
throbbing lines of blood-vessels that showed livid through the
translucent skin. And he remembered, now, the fingers, half-seen in
his moments of awakening--they were like clinging tendrils, colorless,
too, in that ashy gray, and showed the network of veins as if each
hand had been flayed alive.

       *       *       *       *       *

The observer found himself analyzing, comparing, trying to find some
earthly analogy for these unearthly creatures. Why did he think of
potatoes sprouting in a cellar? What possible connection had these
half-human things with that boyhood recollection? And he had seen some
laboratory experiments with plants and animals that had been cut off
from the sunlight--and now the connection was clear; he knew what this
idea was that was trying to form.

These were creatures of the dark. These bleached, drained faces showed
skin that had never known the actinic rays of the sun; their whole
framework proclaimed the process that had been going on through
countless generations. Here was a race that had lived, if not in
absolute darkness, then in some place where sunlight never shone--a
place of half-light--or of clouds.

"Clouds!" The exclamation was startled from him. And: "Clouds!" he
repeated meditatively; he was seeing again a cloud-wrapped world in
the eye-piece of a big refracting telescope. "Blanketed in clouds,"
Professor Sykes had said. The scientist himself was speaking to him
now in bewildered tones.

"Clouds?" he inquired. "That's a strange remark to make. Where are we,
Lieutenant McGuire? I remember nothing after you fired. Are we
flying--in the clouds?"

"A long, long way beyond them, is my guess," said McGuire grimly. It
was staggering what all this might mean; there was time needed for
fuller comprehension. But the lean bronzed face of the flyer flushed
with animation, and in spite of the terrors that must surely lie ahead
he felt strangely elated at the actuality of an incredible adventure.

       *       *       *       *       *

Slowly he got to his feet to find that his muscles still were
reluctant to respond to orders; he helped the professor to arise. And
from the group that drew back further into the far end of the room
came a subdued and rasping tumult of discordant sound.

One, seemingly in charge, held a weapon in his hand, a slender tube no
thicker than a common wire; and ending in a cylinder within the
creature's hand. He pointed it in threatening fashion while his voice
rose in a shrill call. McGuire and Professor Sykes stood quiet and
waited for what the next moment might have in store, but McGuire waved
the weapon aside in a gesture that none could fail to read.

"Steady," he told his companion. "We're in a ticklish position. Do
nothing to alarm them."

From up above them came an answering shrill note. Another of the
beings was descending into the room.

"Ah!" said Lieutenant McGuire softly, "the big boss, himself. Now
let's see what will happen."

If there had seemed something of timidity in the repulsive faces of
the waiting creatures, this newcomer was of a different type. He
opened flabby thin lips to give one sharp note of command. It was as
sibilant as the hissing of a snake. The man with the weapon returned
it to a holder at his side; the whole group cringed before the power
and authority of the new arrival.

The men that they had seen thus far were all garbed alike; a
loose-fitting garment of one piece that was ludicrously like the play
rompers that children might wear. These were dull red in color, the
red of drying blood, made of strong woven cloth. But this other was
uniformed differently.

McGuire noted the fineness of the silky robe. Like the others this was
made of one piece, loosely fitting, but its bright vivid scarlet made
the first seem drab and dull. A belt of metal about his waist shone
like gold and matched the emblem of precious metal in the turban on
his head.

       *       *       *       *       *

All this the eyes of the flyer took in at a glance; his attention was
only momentarily diverted from the ashen face with eyes narrow and
slitted, that stared with the cold hatred of a cat into those of the
men.

He made a sound with a whistling breath. It seemed to be a question
directed to them, but the import of it was lost.

"An exceedingly queer lot," Professor Sykes observed. "And this chap
seems distinctly hostile."

"He's no friend of mine," said McGuire as the thin, pendulous lips
repeated their whistling interrogation.

"I can't place them," mused the scientist. "Those facial
characteristics.... But they must be of some nationality, speak some
tongue."

He addressed himself to the figure with the immobile, horrid face.

"We do not understand you," he said with an ingratiating smile.
"_Comprenez vous Francaise?_... _Non?_"... German, perhaps, or
Spanish?... "_Sprecken sie Deutsche?_ _Usted habla Espanola?_..."

He followed with a fusillade of questions in strange and varying
tongues. "I've even tried him with Chinese," he protested in
bewilderment and stared amazed at his companion's laughter.

There had to be a reaction from the strain of the past hours, and
Lieutenant McGuire found the serious questioning in polyglot tongues
and the unchanging feline stare of that hideous face too much for his
mental restraint. He held his sides, while he shook and roared with
laughter beyond control, and the figure before him glared with evident
disapproval of his mirth.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a hissing order, and two figures from the corner sprang
forward to seize the flyer with long clinging fingers. Their strength
he had overestimated, for a violent throw of his body twisted him
free, and his outstretched hands sent the two sprawling across the
