after them.

It was then that Gordon finally shook off the stupor of utter
bewilderment that had held him. Springing from his booth, he rushed
after the trio.

The dancers in his way delayed Gordon momentarily. Leah and the
stranger were already gone when he reached the door. The narrow little
entrance hallway to the Hut was deserted save for a figure sprawled
there on the floor near the outer door.

It was the body of Dave Redding. Gordon shuddered as he glanced
briefly down at the huddled figure. A single mighty blow from some
unknown weapon had crumpled the director's entire face in, like the
shattered shell of a broken egg.

       *       *       *       *       *

Gordon charged on through the outer door just as a heavy sedan came
careening out of the parking lot. He had a flashing glimpse of Leah
and the stranger in the front seat of the big car.

Gordon raced for his own machine, a powerful low-slung roadster. A
single vicious jab at the starting button, and the big motor leaped
into roaring life. Gordon shot out from the parking lot onto the main
boulevard. A hundred yards away the sedan was fleeing toward
Hollywood.

Gordon tramped hard on the accelerator. His engine snarled with the
unleashed fury of a hundred horsepower. The gap between the two cars
swiftly lessened.

Then the stranger seemed to become aware for the first time that he
was being followed. The next second the big sedan accelerated with the
hurtling speed of a flying bullet. Gordon sent his own foot nearly to
the floor. The roadster jumped to eighty miles an hour, yet the sedan
continued to leave it remorselessly behind.

The two cars started up the northern slope of Cahuenga Pass with the
sedan nearly two hundred yards ahead, and gaining all the time. Gordon
wondered briefly if they were to flash down the other side of the Pass
and on into Hollywood at their present mad speed.

Then at the summit of the Pass the sedan swerved abruptly to the right
and fled west along the Mulholland Highway. Gordon's tires screamed as
he swerved the roadster in hot pursuit.

       *       *       *       *       *

The dark winding mountain highway was nearly deserted at that hour of
the night. Save for an occasional automobile that swerved frantically
to the side of the road to dodge the roaring onslaught of the racing
cars, Gordon and the stranger had the road to themselves.

The stranger seemed no longer to be trying to leave his pursuer
hopelessly behind. He allowed Gordon to come within a hundred yards of
him. But that was as near as Gordon could get, is spite of the
roadster's best efforts.

Half a dozen times Gordon trod savagely upon his accelerator in a
desperate attempt to close the gap, but each time the sedan fled with
the swift grace of a scudding phantom. Finally Gordon had to content
himself with merely keeping his distance behind the glowing red
tail-light of the car ahead.

They passed Laurel Canyon, and still the big sedan bored on to the
west. Then finally, half a dozen miles beyond Laurel Canyon, the
stranger abruptly left the main highway and started up a narrow
private road to the crest of one of the lonely hills. Gordon slowly
gained in the next two miles. When the road ended in a winding
gravelled driveway into the grounds of what was apparently a private
estate, the roadster was scarcely a dozen yards behind.

The stranger's features as he stood there stiffly erect in the vivid
glare of the roadster's headlights were still as devoid of all
expression as ever. The only things that really seemed alive in that
masque of a face were the two eyes, glowing eery blue-green fire like
twin entities of alien evil.

Gordon wasted no time in verbal sparring. He motioned briefly to Leah
Keith's rigid form in the front seat of the sedan.

"Miss Keith is returning to Hollywood with me," he said curtly. "Will
you let her go peaceably, or shall I--?" He left the question
unfinished, but its threat was obvious.

"Or shall you do what?" asked the stranger quietly. There was an oddly
metallic ring in his low even tones. His words were so precisely
clipped that they suggested some origin more mechanical than human.

"Or shall I take Miss Keith with me by force?" Gordon flared angrily.

"You can try to take the lady by force--if you wish." There was an
unmistakable jeering note in the metallic tones.

The taunt was the last thing needed to unleash Gordon's volatile
temper. He stepped forward and swung a hard left hook for that
expressionless masque of a face. But the blow never landed. The
stranger dodged with uncanny swiftness. His answering gesture seemed
merely the gentlest possible push with an outstretched hand, yet
Gordon was sent reeling backward a full dozen steps by the terrific
force of that apparently gentle blow.

       *       *       *       *       *

Recovering himself, Gordon grimly returned to the attack. The stranger
again flung out one hand in the contemptuous gesture with which one
would brush away a troublesome fly, but this time Gordon was more
cautious. He neatly dodged the stranger's blow, then swung a vicious
right squarely for his adversary's unprotected jaw.

The blow smashed solidly home with all of Gordon's weight behind it.
The stranger's jaw buckled and gave beneath that shattering impact.
Then abruptly his entire face crumpled into distorted ruin. Gordon
staggered back a step in sheer horror at the gruesome result of his
blow.

The stranger flung a hand up to his shattered features. When his hand
came away again, his whole face came away with it!

Gordon had one horror-stricken glimpse of a featureless blob of
rubbery bluish-gray flesh in which fiendish eyes of blue-green fire
blazed in malignant fury.

Then the stranger fumbled at his collar, ripping the linen swiftly
away. Something lashed out from beneath his throat--a loathsome
snake-like object, slender and forked at the end. For one ghastly
moment, as the writhing tentacle swung into line with him, Gordon saw
its forked ends glow strange fire--one a vivid blue, the other a
sparkling green.

Then the world was abruptly blotted out for Blair Gordon.

       *       *       *       *       *

Consciousness returned to Gordon as swiftly and painlessly as it had
left him. For a moment he blinked stupidly in a dazed effort to
comprehend the incredible scene before him.

He was seated in a chair over near the wall of a large room that was
flooded with livid red light from a single globe overhead. Beside him
sat Leah Keith, also staring with dazed eyes in an effort to
comprehend her surroundings. Directly in front of them stood a figure
of stark nightmare horror.

The weirdly glowing eyes identified the figure as that of the stranger
at the Maori Hut, but there every point of resemblance ceased. Only
the cleverest of facial masques and body padding could ever have
enabled this monstrosity to pass unnoticed in a world of normal human
beings.

Now that his disguise was completely stripped away, his slight frame
was revealed as a grotesque parody of that of a human being, with arms
and legs like pipe-stems, a bald oval head that merged with neckless
rigidity directly into a heavy-shouldered body that tapered into an
almost wasp-like slenderness at the waist. He was naked save for a
loin cloth of some metallic fabric. His bluish-gray skin had a dull
oily sheen strangely suggestive of fine grained flexible metal.

The creature's face was hideously unlike anything human. Beneath the
glowing eyes was a small circular mouth orifice with a cluster of
gill-like appendages on either side of it. Patches of lighter-colored
skin on either side of the head seemed to serve as ears. From a point
just under the head, where the throat of a human being would have
been, dangled the foot-and-a-half long tentacle whose forked tip had
sent Gordon into oblivion.

Behind the creature Gordon was dimly aware of a maze of complicated
and utterly unfamiliar apparatus ranged along the opposite wall,
giving the room the appearance of being a laboratory of some kind.

       *       *       *       *       *

Gordon's obvious bewilderment seemed to amuse the bluish-gray
monstrosity. "May I introduce myself?" he asked with a mocking note in
his metallic voice. "I am Arlok of Xoran. I am an explorer of Space,
and more particularly an Opener of Gates. My home is upon Xoran, which
is one of the eleven major planets that circle about the giant
blue-white sun that your astronomers call Rigel. I am here to open the
Gate between your world and mine."

Gordon reached a reassuring hand over to Leah. All memory of their
quarrel was obliterated in the face of their present peril. He felt
her slender fingers twine firmly with his. The warm contact gave them
both new courage.

"We of Xoran need your planet and intend to take possession of it,"
Arlok continued, "but the vast distance which separates Rigel from
your solar system makes it impracticable to transport any considerable
number of our people here in space-cars for, though our space-cars
travel with practically the speed of light, it requires over five
hundred and forty years for them to cross that great void. So I was
sent as a lone pioneer to your Earth to do the work necessary here in
order to open the Gate that will enable Xoran to cross the barrier in
less than a minute of your time.

       *       *       *       *       *

"That gate is the one through the fourth dimension, for Xoran and your
planet in a four-dimensional universe are almost touching each other
in spite of the great distance separating them in a three-dimensional
universe. We of Xoran, being three-dimensional creatures like you
Earthlings, can not even exist on a four-dimensional plane. But we
can, by the use of apparatus to open a Gate, pass through a thin
sector of the fourth dimension and emerge in a far distant part of our
three-dimensional universe.

"The situation of our two worlds," Arlok continued, "is somewhat like
that of two dots on opposite ends of a long strip of paper that is
curved almost into a circle. To two-dimensional beings capable only of
realizing and traveling along the two dimensions of the paper itself
those dots might be many feet apart, yet in the third dimension
straight across free space they might be separated by only the
thousandth part of an inch. In order to take that short cut across the
third dimension the two-dimensional creatures of the paper would have
only to transform a small strip of the intervening space into a
two-dimensional surface like their paper.

"They could, do this, of course, by the use of proper
vibration-creating machinery, for all things in a material universe
are merely a matter of vibration. We of Xoran plan to cross the
barrier of the fourth dimension by creating a narrow strip of
vibrations powerful enough to exactly match and nullify those of the
fourth dimension itself. The result will be that this narrow strip
will temporarily become an area of three dimensions only, an area over
which we can safely pass from our world to yours."

       *       *       *       *       *

Arlok indicated one of the pieces of apparatus along the opposite wall
of the room. It was an intricate arrangement of finely wound coils
with wires leading to scores of needle-like points which constantly
shimmered and crackled with tiny blue-white flames. Thick cables ran
to a bank of concave reflectors of some gleaming grayish metal.

"There is the apparatus which will supply the enormous power necessary
to nullify the vibrations of the fourth dimensional barrier," Arlok
explained. "It is a condenser and adapter of the cosmic force that you
call the Millikan rays. In Xoran a similar apparatus is already set up
and finished, but the Gate can only be opened by simultaneous actions
from both sides of the barrier. That is why I was sent on my long
journey through space to do the necessary work here. I am now nearly
finished. A very few hours more will see the final opening of the
Gate. Then the fighting hordes of Xoran can sweep through the barrier
and overwhelm your planet.

"When the Gate from Xoran to a new planet is first opened," Arlok
continued, "our scientists always like to have at least one pair of
specimens of the new world's inhabitants sent through to them for
experimental use. So to-night, while waiting for one of my final
castings to cool, I improved the time by making a brief raid upon the
place that you call the Maori Hut. The lady here seemed an excellent
type of your Earthling women, and the meteoric iron in her necklace
made a perfect focus for electric hypnosis. Her escort was too
inferior a specimen to be of value to me so I killed him when he
attempted to interfere. When you gave chase I lured you on until I
could see whether you might be usable. You proved an excellent
specimen, so I merely stunned you. Very soon now I shall be ready to
send the two of you through the Gate to our scientists in Xoran."

       *       *       *       *       *

A cold wave of sheer horror swept over Gordon. It was impossible to
doubt the stark and deadly menace promised in the plan of this grim
visitor from an alien universe--a menace that loomed not only for
Gordon and Leah but for the teeming millions of a doomed and
defenseless world.

"Let me show you Xoran," Arlok offered. "Then you may be better able
to understand." He turned his back carelessly upon his two captives
and strode over to the apparatus along the opposite wall.

Gordon longed to hurl himself upon the unprotected back of the
retreating Xoranian, but he knew that any attempt of that kind would
be suicidal. Arlok's deadly tentacle would strike him down before he
was halfway across the room.

He searched his surroundings with desperate eyes for anything that
might serve as a weapon. Then his pulse quickened with sudden hope.
There on a small table near Leah was the familiar bulk of a .45
calibre revolver, loaded and ready for use. It was included in a
miscellaneous collection of other small earthly tools and objects that
Arlok had apparently collected for study.

There was an excellent chance that Leah might be able to secure the
gun unobserved. Gordon pressed her fingers in a swift attempt at
signalling, then jerked his head ever so slightly toward the table. A
moment later the quick answering pressure of Leah's fingers told him
that she had understood his message. From the corner of his eye Gordon
saw Leah's other hand begin cautiously groping behind her for the
revolver.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then both Gordon and Leah froze into sudden immobility as Arlok faced
them again from beside an apparatus slightly reminiscent of an earthly
radio set. Arlok threw a switch, and a small bank of tubes glowed pale
green. A yard-square plate of bluish-gray metal on the wall above the
apparatus glowed with milky fluorescence.

"It is easy to penetrate the barrier with light waves," Arlok
explained. "That is a Gate that can readily be opened from either
side. It was through it that we first discovered your Earth."

Arlok threw a rheostat on to more power. The luminous plate cleared
swiftly. "And there, Earthlings, is Xoran!" Arlok said proudly.

Leah and Gordon gasped in sheer amaze as the glowing plate became a
veritable window into another world--a world of utter and alien
terror.

The livid light of a giant red sun blazed mercilessly down upon a
landscape from which every vestige of animal and plant life had
apparently been stripped. Naked rocks and barren soil stretched
illimitably to the far horizon in a vast monotony of utter desolation.

Arlok twirled the knob of the apparatus, and another scene flashed
into view. In this scene great gleaming squares and cones of metal
rose in towering clusters from the starkly barren land. Hordes of
creatures like Arlok swarmed in and around the metal buildings. Giant
machines whirled countless wheels in strange tasks. From a thousand
great needle-like projections on the buildings spurted shimmering
sheets of crackling flame, bathing the entire scene in a whirling mist
of fiery vapors.

Gordon realized dimly that he must be looking into one of the cities
of Xoran, but every detail of the chaotic whirl of activity was too
utterly unfamiliar to carry any real significance to his bewildered
brain. He was as hopelessly overwhelmed as an African savage would be
if transported suddenly into the heart of Times Square.

       *       *       *       *       *

Arlok again twirled the knob. The scene shifted, apparently to another
planet. This world was still alive, with rich verdure and swarming
millions of people strangely like those of Earth. But it was a doomed
world. The dread Gate to Xoran had already been opened here. Legions
of bluish-gray Xoranians were attacking the planet's inhabitants, and
the attack of those metallic hosts was irresistible.

The slight bodies of the Xoranians seemed as impervious to bullets and
missiles as though armor-plated. The frantic defense of the
beleaguered people of the doomed planet caused hardly a casualty in
the Xoranian ranks.

The attack of the Xoranians was hideously effective. Clouds of dense
yellow fog belched from countless projectors in the hands of the
bluish-gray hosts, and beneath that deadly miasma all animal and plant
life on the doomed planet was crumbling, dying, and rotting into a
liquid slime. Then even the slime was swiftly obliterated, and the
Xoranians were left triumphant upon a world starkly desolate.

"That was one of the minor planets in the swarm that make up the solar
system of the sun that your astronomers call Canopus," Arlok
explained. "Our first task in conquering a world is to rid it of the
unclean surface scum of animal and plant life. When this noxious
surface mold is eliminated, the planet is then ready to furnish us
sustenance, for we Xoranians live directly upon the metallic elements
of the planet itself. Our bodies are of a substance of which your
