

CHAPTER VIII

_Struggle for Mastery_

It was Apeman who charged. Pity for Apeman welled up in Bentley. That
was his own body which Apeman was so illy using. His own poor bruised
and bleeding body, which Apeman had all but slain by forcing it far
beyond human endurance. It must be saved, in spite of Apeman.

But there was something first to do. Bentley bent over Ellen, caught
her under his arm, and returned to the trees, with Apeman chattering
angrily and futilely behind him. Bentley found a crotch in the tree
where he could place Ellen, made sure that she was safely propped
there and that no snakes were near, and hurried back to the contest
with Apeman which could not be avoided.

He did not fear the battle he knew he must fight. He hurried back
because Apeman might realize himself beaten and escape into the
jungle. In his weakened condition he could not travel far and would be
easy prey for any prowling leopard, easy prey for the crawling things
whose fangs held sure death. Or would the cunning of Apeman, denizen
of the jungle, warn him against any such? His ape brain would warn
him, but would his human strength avail in case of necessity, in case
of attack by another ape, or a four-footed carnivore?

Bentley hurried back because Apeman must be saved, somehow, even
against his will. Apeman hated Manape with a deadly hatred. Yet to
subdue the travesty of a human being, Manape must take care that he
did not destroy his own casement of humanity. Any moment now and a
great cat might charge from the shadows and destroy Apeman.

       *       *       *       *       *

Apeman, snarling, beating his puny chest with his puny hands, was
waiting for Manape his enemy.

Manape found himself thinking of the line: "'O wad some power the
giftie gie us, to see oursilves as ithers see us,'" and adding some
thoughts of his own.

"If that were actually 'I' down there, my chance of preserving the
life of myself, and that of Ellen against the rigors of the jungle,
would be absolutely nil. How helpless we humans are in primitive
surroundings! The tiniest serpent may slay us. The jungle cats destroy
us with ease, if we be not equipped with artificial weapons which our
better brains have created. As Manape, Barter's trained ape, I am
better fitted to protect Ellen than if I were Bentley--the Bentley of
the _Bengal Queen_. Yet she will cower away from me when she wakens."

Now Bentley was down, and Apeman was charging. He charged at a
staggering run. He stepped on a thorn, hesitated, and whimpered. But
he possessed unusual courage, for he still came on. Apeman knew the
law of the jungle, that the weakest must die. Death was to be his
portion if he could not withstand the assaults of Manape, and he came
to meet his fate with high brute courage.

Apeman was close in. His hands were swinging, fists closed, in a
strange travesty of a fighting man. Apeman was snarling. He groped for
the throat of Manape with his human teeth--which sank home in the
tough hide of Manape, hurting him as little as though Apeman were
toothless.

"As Bentley I would have no chance at all against a great ape," said
Bentley to himself.

       *       *       *       *       *

How could he take the pugnacity out of Apeman without destroying him?
If he struck him he might strike too hard and slay Apeman--which was
the equivalent of slaying himself. So Manape extended his mighty
hands, caught Apeman under the armpits and held him up, feet swinging
free. Yet Apeman still struggled, gnashed his teeth, and beat himself
on the chest.

How utterly futile! As futile as Bentley in his own casement would
have been against a great ape! Apeman might destroy himself through
his very rage. How could Bentley render the travesty unconscious and
yet make sure that Apeman did not die?

If he struck he might strike too hard and slay.

What should he do?

A low coughing sound came from somewhere close by. From the deeps of
his consciousness Bentley knew that sound. He clutched Apeman in his
right arm, swung back to the tree and up among the branches. He was
just in time. The tawny form of a great cat passed beneath, missing
him by inches.

But while he had saved himself and Apeman, he had been clumsy. He had
struck the head of Apeman against the bole of the tree, and Apeman
hung limp in his arm. Bentley, fear such as he had never before known
gripping him, pressed his huge ear to Apeman's heart. It was beating
steadily and strongly. With a great inner sigh of relief he climbed to
safety in the tree, bearing Apeman with him.

       *       *       *       *       *

He reached the crotch where Ellen rested, and disposed Apeman nearby,
his own gross body between them. He even dared to gather Ellen closer
against him for warmth. His left hand held tightly the wrist of the
unconscious Apeman, so that he should not fall and become prey of the
night denizens of the jungle.

So, the two who seemed to be human--Apeman and Ellen, passed from
unconsciousness into natural sleep, while Bentley-Manape remained
motionless between them, afraid to close his eyes lest something even
more terrible than hitherto experienced might transpire. But his ears
caught every sound of the jungle, and his sensitive ape's nostrils
brought him every scent--which his man's mind strove to analyze,
reaching back and back into the dim and misty past for identification
of odors that were new, or that were really old, yet which had been
lost to man since they had left forever the simian homes of their
ancestors and their senses had become more highly specialized.

The questions which turned over and over in Bentley's mind were these:

How shall I tell Ellen the truth? Will she believe it?

What is the rest of Barter's experiment? How shall I proceed from this
moment on? How shall I procure food for Ellen? What food will Apeman
choose for my body to assimilate?

And jungle night drew on. Once Ellen shivered and pressed closer to
Manape as she slept.

What would morning bring to this strange trio?


CHAPTER IX

_Fate Decides_

Morning brought the great apes of the jungle--scores of them. They had
approached so silently through the darkness that Bentley had not heard
them, and his ape's nostrils had not told his human brain the meaning
of their odor. It appeared too that his ape's ears had tricked him.
For when morning came there were great apes everywhere.

Bentley still held the wrist of Apeman, whose chest was rising and
falling naturally, though the body was limp and plainly exhausted, and
exuded perspiration that told of some jungle fever or other illness
perhaps, induced by hardship and over-exertion. The ape's brain of
Apeman had driven Bentley's body to the uttermost, and now that body
must pay.

Bentley wondered how far he was now from the cabin of Caleb Barter.

He doubted if Apeman could stand the return journey, though Bentley's
ape body could have carried Apeman's with ease. But would Apeman
stand the journey? Apeman, Bentley knew, was going into the Valley of
the Shadow, and something must be done to save him. But what?

And the great apes constituted a new menace, though they were making
no effort to molest the three in the tree. Apeman must be placed in a
shady place and some attention paid to his needs. But the human body
with the ape's brain could not tell how it hurt or where.

The first task was to get the two beings down from the tree, and much
depended upon chance. To the apes Bentley was another ape, one
moreover which had slain a number of them. But Apeman was a human
being, as was Ellen Estabrook. The whole thing constituted a fine
problem for the brain of Manape.

       *       *       *       *       *

If Manape were to attempt first aid for Apeman, how would such a sight
react upon Ellen Estabrook? If Manape were to attempt to take Apeman
back to Caleb Barter, leading the way for Ellen, would she follow, and
what would his action tell her? She would think herself demented,
imagining things, because a great ape did things which only human
beings were supposedly capable of doing.

If she knew, of course, it would make a difference. But she did not,
and Bentley had no means by which to inform her. That was a problem
for the future. Ellen was sleeping the sleep of utter exhaustion and
he felt that he could safely leave her for the moment while he swung
Apeman down from the tree. He must work fast, and return for Ellen
before the great apes discovered the helpless Apeman at the foot of
the tree. He hoped to get Ellen down while she slept, knowing that she
would be in mortal fear of him if she wakened and found herself in his
power.

Bentley got Apeman down, and looked about him. No apes were close
enough, as far as he could tell, to molest Apeman before Bentley could
return with Ellen. He raced back into the tree, lifted Ellen so gently
that she scarcely altered the even motion of her breathing--and for a
moment he hesitated. So close to him were her tired lips. So
woe-begone and pathetic her appearance, a great well of pity for her
rose in the heart of Bentley--or what was the seat of this emotion
within him? Was the brain the seat of the emotions? Or the heart? But
Bentley's true heart was in Apeman's human body, so there must be some
other explanation for the feeling which grew and grew within Bentley
for Ellen.

He leaned forward with the intention of touching his lips to the tired
thin lips of Ellen Estabrook, then drew back in horror.

How could he kiss this woman whom he loved with the gross lips of
Manape, the great ape?

He could, of course, but suppose she wakened at his caress and saw the
great figure of the jungle brute, with all man's emotions and desires,
yet with none of man's restraint--bending over her? Women had gone
insane over less.

       *       *       *       *       *

He hurried down with Ellen, and placed her beside Apeman.

By now the great apes had discovered the strange trio and were coming
close to investigate. There was a huge brute who came the fastest and
seemed to be the leader of the apes, if any they had. But even this
one did not offer a challenge, did not seem perturbed in the least.
But he did seem filled with childish curiosity. The apes themselves
were like children, children grown to monstrous proportions, advancing
and retreating, staring at this trio, darting away when Apeman or
Ellen made some sort of movement.

Bentley could sense too their curiosity where he was concerned. Their
senses told them that Bentley was a great ape. Their instincts,
however, made them hesitate, uncertain as to his true "identity"--or
so Bentley imagined.

Ellen still slept, but she must have sensed the near presence of
potential enemies, for she was stirring fitfully, preparing to waken.

What would her reaction be when she opened her eyes to see Manape near
her, standing guard over Apeman, with the jungle on all sides filled
with the lurking nightmare figures of other great apes?

A moan of anguish came from Apeman. He stirred, and groans which
seemed to rack his whole white bruised body came forth. The brain of
the ape was reacting to the suffering of Bentley's body--and a brute
was whimpering with its hurts. The advancing apes came to pause. They
seemed to stare at one another in amazement. They were suddenly
frightened, amazed, unable to understand the thing they saw and were
listening to. Bentley crouched there, watching the apes, and he
fancied he could understand their sudden new hesitancy.

       *       *       *       *       *

He did not know, but he guessed that the moans and groans of Apeman
were comprehensible to the great apes. They knew that this strangely
white creature was an ape, though he looked like a man. Already they
had wondered as much as they were capable, about Manape. They had
sensed something not simian about him which puzzled them.

But from the lips of Apeman, to add to their mystification, came the
groans and moans of an ape that was suffering. Bentley held his
position, wondering what they would do. That they meant no harm he was
sure, else they would long since have charged and overborne the
three--unless they remembered the super-simian might of Manape and
were afraid to attack again. Bentley hoped so, for that would make
things easier for them all.

Now the nearest apes were almost beside the body of Apeman, which was
still covered with agony sweat. The lips emitted moans and faint blurs
of gibberish. Bentley noted that the leading ape was a great she. The
female came forward hesitantly, making strange sounds in her throat,
and it seemed to Bentley that Apeman answered them. For the she came
forward with the barest trace of hesitancy, stared for a moment at
Manape, with a sort of challenge in her savage little red eyes, then
dropped to all fours beside Apeman and began to lick his wounds!

The she knew something of the injuries of Apeman and was doing what
instinct told her to do for him. Now the rest of the apes were all
about them--and Ellen wakened with a shrill cry of terror.

Bentley remained as a man turned to stone. If he moved toward the
woman he loved she would flee from him in terror--out among the other
apes and into the jungle where she would have no slightest chance for
life. If he did nothing she might still run.

       *       *       *       *       *

Wildly she looked about her. She screamed again when she saw the she
bending over the travesty she thought to be Bentley, and licking the
poor bruised body. Ellen cast a sidelong look at Manape, and there was
something distinctly placating in her eyes. She recognized Manape, and
wanted his friendship. What thoughts crowded her brain as she realized
that she was in the center of a group of anthropoids who could have
destroyed her with their fingers in a matter of seconds!

She did the one thing which proved to Bentley that she was worthy of
any man's love. The great she who licked the wounds of Apeman was
thrice the size of Ellen. Yet Ellen crawled to Apeman, little sounds
of pity in her throat. Instantly the snarling of the she sent her
back. The she had, for the time being at least, assumed proprietorship
of Apeman, and was bidding Ellen keep her distance. And the she meant
it, too. For she bared her fighting fangs when Ellen again approached
close enough to have touched the body of Apeman.

This time the she advanced a step toward the girl, and her snarl was a
terrible sound. Ellen retreated, but no further than was necessary to
still that snarl in the throat of the she. Manape moved in quite close
now, into position to interfere if the she tried to actually injure
Ellen Estabrook. If only, Bentley thought, there were some way of
making himself known to Ellen! But how could she believe, even if a
way were discovered?

"What shall I do?" moaned Ellen aloud, wringing her hands. "Poor Lee!
I can't move him. That brute won't let me touch him. Oh, I'm afraid!"

Bentley wanted to tell her not to be afraid, but had learned from
experience that when he tried to speak his voice was the bellowing one
of a great ape. And if he were to enunciate words that Ellen could
understand, what then? English from the lips of a giant anthropoid!
She would not believe, would think herself insane--and with excellent
reason. Slowly, as matters were transpiring, she had already been
given sufficient reason to believe that her mind was tottering.

       *       *       *       *       *

Manape stood guard over her. A she had adopted the thing she thought
was Bentley. A score of great apes, which only three days ago had
tried to destroy both Bentley and herself, now surrounded Bentley and
Ellen with all the appearance of amity--crude, true, but
unmistakable. Certainly this was sufficiently beyond all human
experience to make Ellen believe she were in the throes of some awful
nightmare. What would she think if an ape began to address her in
English, and "Bentley" suddenly held speech with the great apes?

Add to this possibility, suppose she were suddenly confronted with the
truth--that the essential entities of Bentley and Manape had been
exchanged, and the whole thing were explained to her from the gross
lips of Manape himself, while "Bentley" looked on and chattered a
