In less than an hour Kinnison was called into the Office of the
President. He was completely at ease; Black was not.

"It has been decided to ... uh ... ask for your resignation," the
President announced at last.

"Save your breath," Kinnison advised. "I came down here to do a job, and
the only way you can keep me from doing that job is to fire me."

"That was not ... uh ... entirely unexpected. A difficulty arose,
however, in deciding what reason to put on your termination papers."

"I can well believe that. You can put down anything you like," Kinnison
shrugged, "with one exception. Any implication of incompetence and
you'll have to prove it in court."

"Incompatibility, say?"

"O.K."

"Miss Briggs--'Incompatibility with the highest echelon of Stoner and
Black, Inc.,' please. You may as well wait, Dr. Kinnison; it will take
only a moment."

"Fine. I've got a couple of things to say. First, I know as well as you
do that you're between Scylla and Charybdis--damned if you do and damned
if you don't."

"Certainly not! Ridiculous!" Black blustered, but his eyes wavered.
"Where did you get such a preposterous idea? What do you mean?"

"If you ram those sub-standard H.E.A.T. shell through, you are going to
have some more prematures. Not many--the stuff is actually almost good
enough--one in ten thousand, say: perhaps one in fifty thousand. But you
know damned well that you can't afford _any_. What my Siberians and
Inspectors know about you and Keller and Piddy and the Nine Line would
be enough; but to cap the climax that brainless jackal of yours let the
cat completely out of the bag this afternoon, and everybody in Building
One was listening. One more premature would blow Entwhistle wide
open--would start something that not all the politicians in Washington
could stop. On the other hand, if you scrap those lots and go back to
pouring good loads, your Mr. Stoner, of New York and Washington, will be
very unhappy and will scream bloody murder. I'm sure, however, that you
won't offer any Plate D loads to Ordnance--in view of the temper of my
boys and girls, and the number of people who heard your dumb stooge give
you away, you won't dare to. In fact, I told some of my people that you
wouldn't; that you are a smart enough operator to keep your nose clean."

"You _told_ them!" Black shouted, in anger and dismay.

"Yes? Why not?" The words were innocent enough, but Kinnison's
expression was full of meaning. "I don't want to seem trite, but you are
just beginning to find out that honesty and loyalty are a hell of a hard
team to beat."

"Get out! Take these termination papers and GET OUT!"

And Doctor Ralph K. Kinnison, head high, strode out of President Black's
office and out of Entwhistle Ordnance Plant.




CHAPTER 6

19--?


"Theodore K. Kinnison!" a crisp, clear voice snapped from the speaker of
an apparently cold, ordinary-enough-looking radio-television set.

A burly young man caught his breath sharply as he leaped to the
instrument and pressed an inconspicuous button.

"Theodore K. Kinnison acknowledging!" The plate remained dark, but he
knew that he was being scanned.

"Operation Bullfinch!" the speaker blatted.

Kinnison gulped. "Operation Bullfinch--Off!" he managed to say.

"Off!"

He pushed the button again and turned to face the tall, trim
honey-blonde who stood tensely poised in the archway. Her eyes were wide
and protesting; both hands clutched at her throat.

"Uh-huh, sweets, they're coming--over the Pole," he gritted. "Two hours,
more or less."

"Oh, Ted!" She threw herself into his arms. They kissed, then broke
away.

The man picked up two large suitcases, already packed--everything else,
including food and water, had been in the car for weeks--and made
strides. The girl rushed after him, not bothering even to close the door
of the apartment, scooping up _en passant_ a leggy boy of four and a
chubby, curly-haired girl of two or thereabouts. They ran across the
lawn toward a big, low-slung sedan.

"Sure you got your caffeine tablets?" he demanded as they ran.

"Uh-huh."

"You'll need 'em. Drive like the devil--_stay ahead_! You can--this heap
has got the legs of a centipede and you've got plenty of gas and oil.
Eleven hundred miles from anywhere and a population of one-tenth per
square mile--you'll be safe there if anybody is."

"It isn't us I'm worried about--it's you!" she panted. "Technos' wives
get a few minutes' notice ahead of the H-blast--I'll be ahead of the
rush and I'll stay ahead. It's you, Ted--_you_!"

"Don't worry, keed. That popcycle of mine has got legs, too, and there
won't be so much traffic, the way I'm going."

"Oh, blast! I didn't mean that, and you know it!"

They were at the car. While he jammed the two bags into an
exactly-fitting space, she tossed the children into the front seat, slid
lithely under the wheel, and started the engine.

"I know you didn't, sweetheart. I'll be back." He kissed her and the
little girl, the while shaking hands with his son. "Kidlets, you and
mother are going out to visit Grand-dad Kinnison, like we told you all
about. Lots of fun. I'll be along later. Now, Lady Lead-Foot, scram--and
shovel on the coal!"

The heavy vehicle backed and swung; gravel flew as the accelerator-pedal
hit the floor.

Kinnison galloped across the alley and opened the door of a small
garage, revealing a long, squat motorcycle. Two deft passes of his hands
and two of his three spotlights were no longer white--one flashed a
brilliant purple, the other a searing blue. He dropped a perforated
metal box into a hanger and flipped a switch--a peculiarly-toned siren
began its ululating shriek. He took the alley turn at an angle of
forty-five degrees; burned the pavement toward Diversey.

The light was red. No matter--everybody had stopped--that siren could be
heard for miles. He barreled into the intersection; his step-plate
ground the concrete as he made a screaming left turn.

A siren--creeping up from behind. City tone. Two red spots--city cop--so
soon--good! He cut his gun a trifle, the other bike came alongside.

"Is this IT?" the uniformed rider yelled, over the coughing thunder of
the competing exhausts.

"Yes!" Kinnison yelled back. "Clear Diversey to the Outer Drive, and the
Drive south to Gary and north to Waukegan. Snap it up!"

The white-and-black motorcycle slowed; shot over toward the curb. The
officer reached for his microphone.

Kinnison sped on. At Cicero Avenue, although he had a green light,
traffic was so heavy that he had to slow down; at Pulaski two policemen
waved him through a red. Beyond Sacramento nothing moved on wheels.

Seventy ... seventy five ... he took the bridge at eighty, both wheels
in air for forty feet. Eighty five ... ninety ... that was about all he
could do and keep the heap on so rough a road. Also, he did not have
Diversey all to himself any more; blue-and-purple-flashing bikes were
coming in from every side-street. He slowed to a conservative fifty and
went into close formation with the other riders.

The H-blast--the city-wide warning for the planned and supposedly
orderly evacuation of all Chicago--sounded, but Kinnison did not hear
it.

Across the Park, edging over to the left so that the boys going south
would have room to make the turn--even such riders as those need _some_
room to make a turn at fifty miles per hour!

Under the viaduct--biting brakes and squealing tires at that sharp,
narrow, right-angle left turn--north on the wide, smooth Drive!

That highway was made for speed. So were those machines. Each rider, as
he got into the flat, lay down along his tank, tucked his chin behind
the cross-bar, and twisted both throttles out against their stops. They
were in a hurry. They had a long way to go; and if they did not get
there in time to stop those trans-polar atomic missiles, all hell would
be out for noon.

Why was all this necessary? This organization, this haste, this
split-second timing, this city-wide exhibition of insane hippodrome
riding? Why were not all these motorcycle-racers stationed permanently
at their posts, so as to be ready for any emergency? Because America,
being a democracy, could not strike first, but had to wait--wait in
instant readiness--until she was actually attacked. Because every good
Techno in America had his assigned place in some American Defense Plan;
of which Operation Bullfinch was only one. Because, without the presence
of those Technos at their every-day jobs, all ordinary technological
work in America would perforce have stopped.

A branch road curved away to the right. Scarcely slowing down, Kinnison
bulleted into the turn and through an open, heavily-guarded gate. Here
his mount and his lights were passwords enough: the real test would come
later. He approached a towering structure of alloy--jammed on his
brakes--stopped beside a soldier who, as soon as Kinnison jumped off,
mounted the motorcycle and drove it away.

Kinnison dashed up to an apparently blank wall, turned his back upon
four commissioned officers holding cocked forty-fives at the ready, and
fitted his right eye into a cup. Unlike fingerprints, retinal patterns
cannot be imitated, duplicated, or altered; any imposter would have died
instantly, without arrest or question. For every man who belonged
aboard that rocket had been checked and tested--_how_ he had been
checked and tested!--since one spy, in any one of those Technos' chairs,
could wreak damage untellable.

The port snapped open. Kinnison climbed a ladder into the large, but
crowded, Operations Room.

"Hi, Teddy!" a yell arose.

"Hi, Walt! Hi-ya, Red! What-ho, Baldy!" and so on. These men were
friends of old.

"Where are they?" he demanded. "Is our stuff getting away? Lemme take a
peek at the Ball!"

"I'll say it is! O.K., Ted, squeeze in here!"

He squeezed in. It was not a ball, but a hemisphere, slightly oblate and
centered approximately by the North Pole. A multitude of red dots moved
slowly--a hundred miles upon that map was a small distance--northward
over Canada; a closer-packed, less numerous group of yellowish-greens,
already on the American side of the Pole, was coming south.

As had been expected, the Americans had more missiles than did the
enemy. The other belief, that America had more adequate defenses and
better-trained, more highly skilled defenders, would soon be put to
test.

A string of blue lights blazed across the continent, from Nome through
Skagway and Wallaston and Churchill and Kaniapiskau to Belle Isle;
America's First Line of Defense. Regulars all. Ambers almost blanketed
those blues; their combat rockets were already grabbing altitude. The
Second Line, from Portland, Seattle, and Vancouver across to Halifax,
also showed solid green, with some flashes of amber. Part Regulars; part
National Guard.

Chicago was in the Third Line, all National Guard, extending from San
Francisco to New York. Green--alert and operating. So were the Fourth,
the Fifth, and the Sixth. Operation Bullfinch was clicking; on schedule
to the second.

A bell clanged; the men sprang to their stations and strapped down.
Every chair was occupied. Combat Rocket Number One Oh Six Eight Five,
full-powered by the disintegrating nuclei of unstable isotopes, took off
with a whooshing roar which even her thick walls could not mute.

The Technos, crushed down into their form-fitting cushions by three G's
of acceleration, clenched their teeth and took it.

Higher! Faster! The rocket shivered and trembled as it hit the wall at
the velocity of sound, but it did not pause.

Higher! Faster! Higher! Fifty miles high. One hundred ... five hundred
... a thousand ... fifteen hundred ... two thousand! Half a radius--the
designated altitude at which the Chicago Contingent would go into
action.

Acceleration was cut to zero. The Technos, breathing deeply in relief,
donned peculiarly-goggled helmets and set up their panels.

Kinnison stared into his plate with everything he could put into his
optic nerve. This was not like the Ball, in which the lights were
electronically placed, automatically controlled, clear, sharp, and
steady. This was radar. A radar considerably different from that of
1948, of course, and greatly improved, but still pitifully inadequate in
dealing with objects separated by hundreds of miles and traveling at
velocities of thousands of miles per hour!

Nor was this like the practice cruises, in which the targets had been
harmless barrels or equally harmless dirigible rockets. This was the
real thing; the targets today would be lethal objects indeed. Practice
gunnery, with only a place in the Proficiency List at stake, had been
exciting enough: this was too exciting--_much_ too exciting--for the
keenness of brain and the quickness and steadiness of eye and of hand so
soon to be required.

A target? Or was it? Yes--three or four of them!

"Target One--Zone Ten," a quiet voice spoke into Kinnison's ear and one
of the white specks upon his plate turned yellowish green. The same
words, the same lights, were heard and seen by the eleven other Technos
of Sector A, of which Kinnison, by virtue of standing at the top of his
Combat Rocket's Proficiency List, was Sector Chief. He knew that the
voice was that of Sector A's Fire Control Officer, whose duty it was to
determine, from courses, velocities, and all other data to be had from
ground and lofty observers, the order in which his Sector's targets
should be eliminated. And Sector A, an imaginary but sharply-defined
cone, was in normal maneuvering the hottest part of the sky. Fire
Control's "Zone Ten" had informed him that the object was at extreme
range and hence there would be plenty of time. Nevertheless:

"Lawrence--two! Doyle--one! Drummond--stand by with three!" he snapped,
at the first word.

In the instant of hearing his name each Techno stabbed down a series of
studs and there flowed into his ears a rapid stream of figures--the
up-to-the-second data from every point of observation as to every
element of motion of his target. He punched the figures into his
calculator, which would correct automatically for the motion of his own
vessel--glanced once at the printed solution of the problem--tramped
down upon a pedal once, twice, or three times, depending upon the
number of projectiles he had been directed to handle.

Kinnison had ordered Lawrence, a better shot than Doyle, to launch two
torpedoes; neither of which, at such long range, was expected to strike
its mark. His second, however, should come close; so close that the
instantaneous data sent back to both screens--and to Kinnison's--by the
torpedo itself would make the target a sitting duck for Doyle, the less
proficient follower.

Drummond, Kinnison's Number Three, would not launch his missiles unless
Doyle missed. Nor could both Drummond and Harper, Kinnison's Number Two,
be "out" at once. One of the two had to be "in" at all times, to take
Kinnison's place in charge of the Sector if the Chief were ordered out.
For while Kinnison could order either Harper or Drummond on target, he
could not send himself. He could go out only when ordered to do so by
Fire Control: Sector Chiefs were reserved for emergency use only.

"Target Two--Zone Nine," Fire Control said.

"Carney, two. French, one. Day, stand by with three!" Kinnison ordered.

"Damn it--missed!" This from Doyle. "Buck fever--no end."

"O.K., boy--that's why we're starting so soon. I'm shaking like a
vibrator myself. We'll get over it...."

The point of light which represented Target One bulged slightly and went
out. Drummond had connected and was back "in".

"Target Three--Zone Eight. Four--eight," Fire Control remarked.

"Target Three--Higgins and Green; Harper stand by. Four--Case and
Santos: Lawrence."

After a minute or two of actual combat the Technos of Sector A began to
steady down. Stand-by men were no longer required and were no longer
assigned.

"Target Forty-one--six," said Fire Control; and:

"Lawrence, two. Doyle, two," ordered Kinnison. This was routine enough,
but in a moment:

"Ted!" Lawrence snapped. "Missed--wide--both barrels. Forty-one's
dodging--manned or directed--coming like hell--watch it, Doyle--WATCH
IT!"

"Kinnison, take it!" Fire Control barked, voice now neither low nor
steady, and without waiting to see whether Doyle would hit or miss.
"It's in Zone Three already--collision course!"

"Harper! Take over!"

Kinnison got the data, solved the equations, launched five torpedoes at
