mirror-sphere it shot to them across the vast distance the reflected
glory of the sun. But the globe ahead was a ghostly world. Its black
disk was lost in the utter blackness of space. It was a circle, marked
only by the absence of star-points and by the halo of violet glow that
edged it about.

Chet cut down the repelling blast. He let the circle enlarge, then
swung the ship end for end in mid-space that the more powerful stern
exhaust might be ready to counteract the gravitational pull of the new
world.

Again those impalpable clouds surrounded them. Here was the enveloping
gas that made this a dark moon--the gas, if Harkness' theory was
correct, that let the sun's rays pass unaltered; that took the light
through freely to illumine this globe, but that barred its return
passage as reflected light.

Black--dead black was the void into which they were plunging, until
the darkness gave way before a gentle glow that enfolded their ship.
The golden light enveloped them in growing splendor. Through every
lookout it was flooding the cabin with brilliant rays, until, from
below them, directly astern of the ship, where the thundering blast
checked their speed of descent, emerged a world.

       *       *       *       *       *

And, to Chet Bullard, softly fingering the controls of the first ship
of space--to Chet Bullard, whose uncanny skill had brought the tiny
speck that was their ship safely back from the dark recesses of the
unknown--there came a thrill that transcended any joy of the first
exploration.

Here was water in great seas of unreal hue--and those seas were his!
Vast continents, ripe for adventure and heavy with treasure--and they,
too, were his! His own world--his and Diane's and Walt's! Who was this
man, Schwartzmann, that dared dream of violating their possessions?

A slender tube pressed firmly, uncompromisingly, into his back to give
the answer to his question. "Almost I wish you had missed it!" Herr
Schwartzmann was saying. "But now you will land; you will set us down
in some place that you know. No tricks, Herr Bullard! You are clever,
but not clever enough for that. We will land, yess, where you know it
is safe."

From the lookout, the man stared for a moment with greedy eyes; then
brought his gaze back to the three. His men, beside Harkness and
Diane, were alert; the scientist, Kreiss, stood close to Chet.

"A nice little world," Schwartzmann told them. "Herr Harkness, you
have filed claims on it; who am I to dispute with the great Herr
Harkness? Without question it iss yours!"

He laughed loudly, while his eyes narrowed between creasing wrinkles
of flesh. "You shall enjoy it," he told them; "--all your life."

And Chet, as he caught the gaze of Harkness and Diane, wondered how
long this enjoyment would last. "All your life!" But this was rather
indefinite as a measure of time.


CHAPTER V

_A Desperate Act_

The ship that Chet Bullard and Harkness had designed had none of the
instruments for space navigation that the ensuing years were to bring.
Chet's accuracy was more the result of that flyer's sixth sense--that
same uncanny power that had served aviators so well in an earlier day.
But Chet was glad to see his instruments registering once more as he
approached a new world.

Even the sonoflector was recording; its invisible rays were darting
downward to be reflected back again from the surface below. That
absolute altitude recording was a joy to read; it meant a definite
relationship with the world.

"I'll hold her at fifty thousand," he told Harkness. "Watch for some
outline that you can remember from last time."

There was an irregular area of continental size; only when they had
crossed it did Harkness point toward an outflung projection of land.
"That peninsula," he exclaimed; "we saw that before! Swing south and
inland.... Now down forty, and east of south.... This ought to be the
spot."

Perhaps Harkness, too, had the flyer's indefinable power of
orientation. He guided Chet in the downward flight, and his pointing
finger aimed at last at a cluster of shadows where a setting sun
brought mountain ranges into strong relief. Chet held the ship steady,
hung high in the air, while the quick-spreading mantle of night swept
across the world below. And, at last, when the little world was
deep-buried in shadow, they saw the red glow of fires from a hidden
valley in the south.

"Fire Valley!" said Chet. "Don't say anything about me being a
navigator. Wait, you've brought us home, sure enough."

"Home!" He could not overcome this strange excitement of a home-coming
to their own world. Even the man who stood, pistol in hand, behind him
was, for the moment, forgotten.

Valley of a thousand fires!--scene of his former adventures! Each
fumerole was adding its smoky red to the fiery glow that illumined the
place. There were ragged mountains hemming it in; Chet's gaze passed
on to the valley's end.

Down there, where the fires ceased, there would be water; he would
land there! And the ship from Earth slipped down in a long slanting
line to cushion against its under exhausts, whose soft thunder echoed
back from a bare expanse of frozen lava. Then its roaring faded. The
silvery shape sank softly to its rocky bed, as Chet cut the motor that
had sung its song of power since the moment when Schwartzmann had
carried him off--taken him from that frozen, forgotten corner of an
incredibly distant Earth.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Iss there air?" Schwartzmann demanded. Chet came to himself again
with a start: he saw the man peering from the lookout to right and to
left as if he would see all that there was in the last light of day.

"Strange!" he was grumbling to himself. "A strange place! But those
hills--I saw their markings--there will be metals there. I will
explore; later I return: I will mine them. Many ships I must build to
establish a line. The first transportation line of space. Me, Jacob
Schwartzmann--I will do it. I will haff more than anyone else on
Earth; I will make them all come to me crawling on their bellies!"

Chet saw the hard shine of the narrowed eyes. For an instant only, he
dared to consider the chance of leaping upon the big, gloating figure.
One blow and a quick snatch for the pistol!... Then he knew the folly
of such a plan: Schwartzmann's men were armed; he would be downed in
another second, his body a shattered, jellied mass.

Schwartzmann's thoughts had come back to the matter of air; he
motioned Chet and Harkness toward the port.

Diane Delacouer had joined them and she thrust herself quickly between
the two men. And, though Schwartzmann made a movement as if he would
snatch her back, he thought better of it and motioned for the portal
to be swung. Chet felt him close behind as he followed the others out
into the gathering dark.

       *       *       *       *       *

The air was heavy with the fragrance of night-blooming trees. They
were close to the edge of the lava flow. The rock was black in the
light of a starry sky; it dropped away abruptly to a lower glade. A
stream made silvery sparklings in the night, while beyond it were
waving shadows of strange trees whose trunks were ghostly white.

It was all so familiar.... Chet smiled understandingly as he saw Walt
Harkness' arm go about the trim figure of Diane Delacouer. No mannish
attire could disguise Diane's charms; nor could nerve and cold courage
that any man might envy detract from her femininity. Her dark, curling
hair was blowing back from her upraised face as the scented breezes
played about her; and the soft beauty of that face was enhanced by the
very starlight that revealed it.

It was here that Walt and Diane had learned to love; what wonder that
the fragrant night brought only remembrance, and forgetfulness of
their present plight. But Chet Bullard, while he saw them and smiled
in sympathy, knew suddenly that other eyes were watching, too; he felt
the bulky figure of Herr Schwartzmann beside him grow tense and rigid.

But Schwartzmann's voice, when he spoke, was controlled. "All right,"
he called toward the ship; "all iss safe."

Yet Chet wondered at that sudden tensing, and an uneasy presentiment
found entrance to his thoughts. He must keep an eye on Schwartzmann,
even more than he had supposed.

Their captor had threatened to maroon them on the Dark Moon. Chet did
not question his intent. Schwartzmann would have nothing to gain by
killing them now. It would be better to leave them here, for he might
find them useful later on. But did he plan to leave them all or only
two? Behind the steady, expressionless eyes of the Master Pilot,
strange thoughts were passing....

       *       *       *       *       *

There were orders, at length, to return to the ship. "It is dark
already," Schwartzmann concluded: "nothing can be accomplished at
night."

"How long are the days and nights?" he asked Harkness.

"Six hours," Harkness told him; "our little world spins fast."

"Then for six hours we sleep," was the order. And again Herr
Schwartzmann conducted Mademoiselle Delacouer to her cabin, while Chet
Bullard watched until he saw the man depart and heard the click of the
lock on the door of Diane's room.

Then for six hours he listened to the sounds of sleeping men who were
sprawled about him on the floor; for six hours he saw the one man who
sat on guard beside a light that made any thought of attack absurd.
And he cursed himself for a fool, as he lay wakeful and vainly
planning--a poor, futile fool who was unable to cope with this man who
had bested him.

Nineteen seventy-three!--and here were Harkness and Diane and himself,
captured by a man who was mentally and morally a misfit in a modern
world. A throw-back--that was Schwartzmann: Harkness had said it. He
belonged back in nineteen fourteen.

Harkness was beyond the watching guard; from where he lay came sounds
of restless movement. Chet knew that he was not alone in this mood of
hopeless dejection. There was no opportunity for talk; only with the
coming of day did the two find a chance to exchange a few quick words.

The guard roused the others at the first light of sunlight beyond the
ports. Harkness sauntered slowly to where Chet was staring from a
lookout. He, too, leaned to see the world outside, and he spoke
cautiously in a half-whisper:

"Not a chance, Chet. No use trying to bluff this big crook any more.
He's here, and he's safe; and he knows it as well as we do. We'll let
him ditch us--you and Diane and me. Then, when we're on our own, we'll
watch our chance. He will go crazy with what he finds--may get
careless--then we'll seize the ship--" His words ended abruptly. As
Schwartzmann came behind them, he was casually calling Chet's
attention to a fumerole from which a jet of vapor had appeared.
Yellowish, it was; and the wind was blowing it.

Chet turned away; he hardly saw Schwartzmann or heard Harkness' words.
He was thinking of what Walt had said. Yes, it was all they could do;
there was no chance of a fight with them now. But later!

Diane Delacouer came into the control-room at the instant; her dark
eyes were still lovely with sleep, but they brightened to flash an
encouraging smile toward the two men. There were five of
Schwartzmann's men in the ship besides the pilot and the scientist,
Kreiss. They all crowded in after Diane.

They must have had their orders in advance; Schwartzmann merely
nodded, and they sprang upon Harkness and Chet. The two were caught
off their guard; their arms were twisted behind them before resistance
could be thought of. Diane gave a cry, started forward, and was
brushed back by a sweep of Schwartzmann's arm. The man himself stood
staring at them, unmoving, wordless. Only the flesh about his eyes
gathered into creases to squeeze the eyes to malignant slits. There
was no mistaking the menace in that look.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I think we do not need you any more," he said at last. "I think, Herr
Harkness, this is the end of our little argument--and, Herr Harkness,
you lose. Now, I will tell you how it iss that you pay.

"You haff thought, perhaps, I would kill you. But you were wrong, as
you many times have been. You haff not appreciated my kindness; you
haff not understood that mine iss a heart of gold.

"Even I was not sure before we came what it iss best to do. But now I
know. I saw oceans and many lands on this world. I saw islands in
those oceans.

"You so clever are--such a great thinker iss Herr Harkness--and on one
of those islands you will haff plenty of time to think--yess! You can
think of your goot friend, Schwartzmann and of his kindness to you."

"You are going to maroon us on an island?" asked Walt Harkness
hoarsely. Plainly his plans for seizing the ship were going awry. "You
are going to put the three of us off in some lost corner of this
world?"

Chet Bullard was silent until he saw the figure of Harkness struggling
to throw off his two guards. "Walt," he called loudly, "take it easy!
For God's sake, Walt, keep your head!"

This, Chet sensed, was no time for resistance. Let Schwartzmann go
ahead with his plans; let him think them complacent and unresisting;
let Max pilot the ship; then watch for an opening when they could land
a blow that would count! He heard Schwartzmann laughing now, laughing
as if he were enjoying something more pleasing than the struggles of
Walt.

       *       *       *       *       *

Chet was standing by the controls. The metal instrument-table was
beside him; above it was the control itself, a metal ball that hung
suspended in air within a cage of curved bars.

It was pure magic, this ball-control, where magnetic fields crossed
and recrossed; it was as if the one who held it were a genie who could
throw the ship itself where he willed. Glass almost enclosed the cage
of bars, and the whole instrument swung with the self-compensating
platform that adjusted itself to the "gravitation" of accelerated
speed. The pilot, Max, had moved across to the instrument-table, ready
for the take-off.

Schwartzmann's laughter died to a gurgling chuckle. He wiped his eyes
before he replied to Harkness' question.

"Leave you," he said, "in one place? _Nein!_ One here, the other
there. A thousand miles apart, it might be. And not all three of you.
That would be so unkind--"

He interrupted himself to call to Kreiss who was opening the port.

"No," he ordered; "keep it closed. We are not going outside; we are
going up."

But Kreiss had the port open. "I want a man to get some fresh water,"
he said; "he will only be a minute."

He shoved at a waiting man to hurry him through the doorway. It was
only a gentle push; Chet wondered as he saw the man stagger and grasp
at his throat. He was coughing--choking horribly for an instant
outside the open port--then fell to the ground, while his legs jerked
awkwardly, spasmodically.

Chet saw Kreiss follow. The scientist would have leaped to the side of
the stricken man, whose body was so still now on the sunlit rock; but
he, too, crumpled, then staggered back into the room. He pushed feebly
at the port and swung it shut. His face, as he turned, was drawn into
fearful lines.

"Acid!" He choked out the words between strangled breaths.
"Acid--sulfuric--fumes!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Chet turned quickly to the spectro-analyzer; the lines of oxygen and
nitrogen were merged with others, and that meant an atmosphere unfit
for human lungs! There had been a fumerole where yellowish vapor was
spouting; he remembered it now.

"So!" boomed Schwartzmann, and now his squinting eyes were full on
Chet. "You--you _schwein!_ You said when we opened the ports there
would be a surprise! Und this iss it! You thought to see us kill
ourselves!"

"Open the port!" he shouted. The men who held Chet released him and
sprang forward to obey. The pilot, Max, took their place. He put one
hand on Chet's shoulder, while his other hand brought up a
threatening, metal bar.

Schwartzmann's heavy face had lost its stolid look; it was alive with
rage. He thrust his head forward to glare at the men, while he stood
firmly, his feet far apart, two heavy fists on his hips. He whirled
abruptly and caught Diane by one arm. He pulled her roughly to him and
encircled the girl's trim figure with one huge arm.

"Put you _all_ on one island?" he shouted. "Did you think I would put
