substituted for the prussiate. If the characters be written with
a solution of sulphate of copper, they will at once turn blue on
exposing to the vapors of ammonia. Another sympathetic ink is afforded
by chloride of gold, which becomes of a reddish purple when acted upon
by a salt of tin. A red sympathetic ink may be made in the following
manner: Write with a very dilute solution of perchloride of iron--so
dilute, indeed, that the writing will be invisible when dry. By
holding the paper in the vapor arising from a long-necked glass
flask containing sulphuric acid and a few drops of a solution of
sulpho-cyanide of potassium, the characters will appear of a blood-red
color, which will again disappear on submitting them to the vapors of
caustic ammonia. This experiment can be repeated _ad infinitum_.

During the war in India, some years ago, important correspondence
was carried on by the English by means of the use of rice water as a
writing fluid. On the application of iodine the dispatches immediately
appeared in blue characters.

Sympathetic inks which are developed under the influence of heat only
are much easier to use than the foregoing. The liquids which possess
such a property are very numerous. Almost every one perhaps knows that
if writing be executed on paper with a clean quill pen dipped in onion
or turnip juice, it becomes absolutely invisible when dry; and that
when the paper is heated the writing at once makes its appearance
in characters of a brown color. All albuminoid, mucilaginous, and
saccharine vegetable juices make excellent sympathetic inks; we may
cite, as among the best, the juices of lemon, orange, apple, and pear.
A dilute solution of chloride of copper used for writing is invisible
until the paper is heated, when the letters are seen of a beautiful
yellow, disappearing again when the heat that developed them is
removed. The salts of cobalt, as the acetate, nitrate, sulphate, and
chloride, possess a like property. When a dilute solution of these
salts is used as an ink, the writing, although invisible when dry,
becomes blue when exposed to heat. The addition of chloride of iron,
or of a salt of nickel, renders them green, and this opens the way for
a very pretty experiment: If a winter landscape be drawn in India ink,
and the sky be painted with a wash of cobalt alone, and the branches
of the trees be clothed with leaves executed with a mixture of cobalt
and nickel, and the snow-clad earth be washed over with the same
mixture, a magic transformation at once takes place on the application
of heat, the winter landscape changing to a summer scene.

There is a well known proprietary article sold in Paris under the
name of _"Encre pour les Dames"_ (ink for ladies). Hager, in a recent
scientific journal, states that this consists of an aqueous solution
of iodide of starch, and is "specially intended for love letters." In
four weeks characters written with it disappear, preventing all abuse
of letters, and doing away with all documentary evidence of any kind
in the hands of the recipient. The signers of bills of exchange who
use this ink are of course freed from all obligations in the same
length of time.

       *       *       *       *       *




NEW WIRE CLOTHING FOR BURRING CYLINDERS.


Heretofore two kinds of clothing for cylinders for treating fibrous
material have been employed, one consisting of a set of serrated rings
cut from sheet steel and secured to the periphery of the cylinder, and
the other consisting of flat serrated iron wire. The serrated rings,
of necessity, entail a great loss of material in their manufacture,
and the iron wire clothing is so soft that it soon wears out or
becomes dull, necessitating the reclothing or sharpening of the
cylinder.

[Illustration: NEW WIRE CLOTHING FOR BURRING CYLINDERS.]

Our engraving represents a new form of steel wire clothing for such
cylinders, which was recently patented by Mr. Frank P. Pendleton, of
Philadelphia, Pa.

The improvement consists in notching or nicking the base of the teeth
or back of the wire, so as to admit of bending the wire around the
cylinders without breaking.

       *       *       *       *       *




PETROLEUM AND GOLD.


As one of the leading staples of American export, our petroleum wells
have been more valuable than gold mines. A recent discovery by Mr.
John Turnbridge, of Newark, N. J., indicates that in some cases
petroleum wells may be in fact, as well as in effect, real gold
mines. He says that while investigating the peculiar behavior of the
hydrocarbons and their singular quality of separating the precious
metals from aqueous solutions, assisted by constant application that
furnished evidence of the force of chemical action which could be
satisfactorily measured, there occurred to him the probability that
analogous effects might be traced in the operations of nature; more
particularly in certain geological formations peculiar to auriferous
soils. These ideas, he asserts, have been singularly verified in
subsequent research by the discovery of gold in many samples of crude
petroleum, also in the sediment or refuse of the distillation of that
substance. The attraction existing between the hydrocarbons and many
elementary bodies ought to create no surprise, especially if reference
is had to the reducing action of the hydrocarbons in contact with
metallic solutions. The procedure in the examples above referred to
consist in pouring crude petroleum on vegetable fiber or wood shavings
and firing it, collecting the ashes and making the usual fire assay.
The cupel disclosed a small pellet. After due examination with the
appropriate test it was found to be pure gold. The distillery refuse
when assayed gave $34.85 value per ton. It may be mentioned in the
last case considerable molybdenum was present, a substance resembling
plumbago. Mr. Turnbridge has no knowledge of the locality whence
these samples of crude petroleum were originally obtained. He infers,
however, that oil wells in the vicinity of auriferous deposits may
yield a larger quantity of gold than from oil wells situated
in carboniferous strata. There has been, he states, a practical
application of this discovery for the recovery of gold, applied in
cases where quicksilver has failed to be of service.

       *       *       *       *       *




REDUCTION OF NITRATE OF SILVER BY MEANS OF CHARCOAL.


A very simple method of reducing nitrate of silver, analagous to
that some years ago mentioned by the late Mr. Hadow, is given in the
_Archiv der Pharmacie_, by Mr. C. F. Chandler. If crystallized or
fused nitrate of silver be placed upon glowing charcoal, combustion
forthwith takes place, the silver remaining behind in a metallic
form, while nitrous oxide and carbonic acid are freely given off. The
nitrate of silver is fused by the heat developed by the reaction,
and is imbibed through the pores of the charcoal; as every atom of
consumed carbon is replaced by an atom of metallic silver, the original
form and structure of the charcoal are preserved intact in pure
silver. By proceeding in this manner it is possible to produce silver
structures of any desired size, possessing in every way the original
form of the wood. A crystal of nitrate of silver is in the first place
put upon a piece of charcoal, and a blowpipe flame is then applied in
the vicinity, in order to start the reaction in the first instance,
and as soon as combustion commences crystal after crystal may be
added as these, one after another, become consumed. The silver salt is
liquefied, and penetrates into the charcoal, where it becomes reduced.
Pieces of silver may in this way be prepared, of one or two ounces in
weight, which exhibit all the markings and rings of the original wood
to a most perfect and beautiful degree.

       *       *       *       *       *




NEW AGRICULTURAL INVENTIONS.


Mr. Charles E. Macarthy, of Forsyth, Ga., has patented an improved
Horse Power, designed more particularly to be located beneath a gin
house for ginning cotton, but applicable for all purposes for which a
horse power is ordinarily employed.

An improved Corn Planter has been patented by Mr. Thomas A. Sammons,
of Lewisburg, West Va. This corn planter is designed to plant the
corn in straight rows both ways and at varying distances apart. It
is constructed upon the general principle of a reciprocating slide,
passing alternately beneath a hopper, and carrying a number of grains
from beneath the same to a discharge outlet.

An improved machine for Cutting the Bands of Gavels or bundles of
grain, and feeding the same to the cylinder of a thrasher, has been
patented by Mr. James M. O'Neall, of Fort Worth, Texas.

An improved Sulky Breaking Plow has been patented by Mr. Edward T.
Hunter, of Hallsville, Ill. This is an improved sulky attachment for
breaking plows, which is so constructed as to receive any ordinary
plow; it may be adjusted to cause the plow to work deeper or shallower
in the ground, and will allow the plow to be turned to either side.

Mr. Osman C. Du Souchet, of Alexandria, Mo., has invented an improved
Check Row Corn Planter and Drill, which is so constructed that its
operating mechanism may be at all times under the control of the
driver. It will plant the corn in accurate check row, and is easily
controlled.

An improved Thrashing Machine has been patented by Mr. Peter Parrott,
of Red Bud, Ill. This is an improvement in the class of thrashing
machines having an attachment for removing dust from the space in
front of the cylinder, and having pickers for loosening or shaking the
grain from straw delivered from the cylinder.

An improved Corn Planter has been patented by Mr. John H. Zarley, of
Oakland, Ill. The object of this invention is to provide an efficient
and cheaply constructed corn planter, which may be drawn forward by
horses, but is arranged so that the seed valves may be operated by
hand.

Messrs. Clayton M. Van Orman and James M. Hagenbaugh, of Athens,
Mich., have patented an improved Grain Separator, in which the
arrangement of the screens, feedboard, and blast of a fanning mill
effect the thorough removal from the grain of all impurities. Only two
screens are employed.

An improved Churning Apparatus has been patented by Messrs. William
H. Foster and Isaac C. Roberts, of Louisburg, Kan. It is simple,
inexpensive, convenient, and effective in operation. It will bring the
butter very quickly, and at the same time gather it.

An improved Plow has been patented by Mr. Robert B. Mitchell, of
Minneapolis, Kan. The object of this invention is to improve the
construction of sod, stirring, and other plows, so that the cutter
may be moved forward as it is worn or ground off. It prevents roots,
grass, and other trash from gathering upon the share.

Messrs. John B. Martin and William T. Carothers, of Clarence, Mo.,
have patented an improved Hay Loader capable of placing hay upon
stacks or ricks, or upon wagons. It is simple in its construction and
effective in its operation.

       *       *       *       *       *




NAPHTHA AND BENZINE.


We have often been asked the difference between benzine and naphtha,
many people wanting to know whether naphtha didn't include benzine, or
whether it wasn't the same thing under a marketable name. A prominent
refiner says that benzine is the first product that arises from the
process of refining crude oil, and bears the same relation to naphtha
that that distillate does to refined oil. In other words, benzine
is crude naphtha. The reason it is not quotable under the name of
benzine, therefore, is because it has to be reduced to naphtha before
it is marketable in any extensive quantity.

The process that benzine is subject to, to produce naphtha, is not a
separate business, but is carried on by the regular oil refiners in
the same stills and retorts that the refined oil is produced. The
benzine is treated with sulphuric acid, and the result is naphtha,
which is in wide demand in Europe, especially in France, for the
purpose of producing aniline dyes, while it is also put to many other
purposes.

This demand is partially instrumental in keeping up its price, but its
rapid evaporation also has a tendency in that direction, as any large
seller of it has to take into consideration the depreciation that
might take place by the time he sells it on that account, and for
the same reason buyers give no more orders than immediate necessity
requires.

All refiners, however, do not produce naphtha, but some of them sell
the benzine, which is largely used for fuel purposes, for which it is
much better than coal, as it is not only absolutely cheaper, but gives
a steadier heat.--_Parker Daily_.

       *       *       *       *       *

For joining the porcelain heads to the metal spikes used for
ornamental nails, the _Prakt. Maschinen Construct._, recommends the
use of a thick paste made of a mixture of Portland cement and glue.

       *       *       *       *       *




TO INVENTORS.


An experience of more than thirty years, and the preparation of not
less than one hundred thousand applications for patents at home
and abroad, enable us to understand the laws and practice on both
continents, and to possess unequaled facilities for procuring patents
everywhere. In addition to our facilities for preparing drawings and
specifications quickly, the applicant can rest assured that his case
will be filed in the Patent Office without delay. Every application,
in which the fees have been paid, is sent complete--including the
model--to the Patent Office the same day the papers are signed at our
office, or received by mail, so there is no delay in filing the case,
a complaint we often hear from other sources. Another advantage to the
inventor in securing his patent through the Scientific American Patent
Agency, it insures a special notice of the invention in the SCIENTIFIC
AMERICAN, which publication often opens negotiations for the sale of
the patent or manufacture of the article. A synopsis of the patent
laws in foreign countries may be found on another page, and persons
contemplating the securing of patents abroad are invited to write to
this office for prices, which have been reduced in accordance with
the times, and our perfected facilities for conducting the business.
Address MUNN & CO., office SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN.

       *       *       *       *       *




BUSINESS AND PERSONAL.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The Charge for Insertion under this head is One Dollar a line for
each insertion; about eight words to a line. Advertisements must be
received at publication office as early as Thursday morning to appear
in next issue._

       *       *       *       *       *


Magic Lanterns and Stereopticons of all prices. Views illustrating
every subject for public exhibitions. Profitable business for a man
with a small capital. Also lanterns for college and home amusement. 74
page catalogue free. McAllister, Mf. Optician, 49 Nassau St., N. Y.

Chapman Valves and Hydrants received the highest award at Mass.
Mechanics Fair. Chapman Valve Manuf. Co., Boston, Mass.

Wanted, cheap.--2d hand Lathe Chuck to swing 17 in. Iron sheave.
Penfield Block Works, Lockport, N. Y.

To Manufacturers.--Messrs. Bignall & Ostrander, 806-808 N. 2d St.,
