Going down the hall, with the address, Jon increased his pace. His mind
carried an alien mind that had saved him from death once already. How
could he be free? The ... obligation? That couldn't be the word.

Around the corner he heard a voice. "And now would you please explain it
to me? It's not every day that I'm called on to declare war. I think I
did it rather eloquently. Now tell my why."

(Jon remembered the trick of acoustics which as a child enabled him to
stand in this spot and overhear his sister and her girlfriends'
conversation just as they came into the house.)

"It's your brother," came the other voice. "He's been kidnaped."

"He's been what?" asked the King. "And why? And by whom?"

"We don't know," answered the official. "But the council thought it was
best to get you to declare war."

"Oh," said the King. "So that's why I made that little speech in there.
What does mother say?"

"It wouldn't be polite to repeat, sir. She was locked in her room, and
very insulted."

"She would be," said Uske. "So, the enemy has infiltrated and gotten my
silly brother."

"Well," said the voice, "they can't be sure. But what with the planes
this morning, they thought it was best."

"Oh, well," said the King. There were footsteps. Then silence.

Coming round the corner, Jon saw the coat closet was ajar. He opened the
door, took out a great cape and hood, and wrapped it around him, pulling
the hood close over his head. He stepped into the foyer and went out
past the doorman.

       *       *       *       *       *

At the edge of the Devil's Pot, the woman with the birthmark on the left
side of her face was tapping a cane and holding out a tin cup. She had
put on a pair of dark glasses and wandered up one street and down
another. "Money for a poor blind woman," she said in a whiny voice.
"Money for the blind." As a coin clinked into her cup, she nodded,
smiled, and said, "Welcome to the New World. Good luck in the Island of
Opportunity."

The man who had given her the coin walked a step, and then turned back.
"Hey," he said to Rara. "If you're blind, how do you know I'm new here?"

"Strangers are generous," Rara explained, "while those who live here are
too frozen to give."

"Look," said the man, "I was told to watch out for blind beggars who
weren't blind. My cousin, he warned me ..."

"Not blind!" cried Rara. "Not blind? Why my license is right here. It
permits me to beg in specified areas because of loss of sight. If you
keep this up, I'll be obliged to show it to you." She turned away with a
huff and began in another direction. The man scratched his head, then
hurried off.

A few moments later, a man completely swathed in a gray cloak and hood
came around the corner and stopped in front of the woman.

"Money for the blind?"

"Can you use this?" the man said. From his cloak he held out a brocade
jacket, covered with fine metal work.

"Of course," said Rara softly. Then she coughed. "Er ... what is it?"

"It's a jacket," Jon said. "It's made pretty well. Maybe you can sell
it?"

"Oh, thank you. Thank you, sir."

       *       *       *       *       *

A few blocks later, a ragged boy, who looked completely amazed, was
handed a white silk shirt by the man in the gray cloak. In front of a
doorway two blocks on, a pair of open-toed black boots with gold disks
were left--and stolen from that doorway exactly forty seconds later by a
hairdresser who was returning to her home in Devil's Pot. She was
missing the little finger of her left hand. Once the gray cloaked figure
paused in an alley beneath a clothes line. Suddenly he flung up a ball
of gray cloth, which caught on the line, unrolled, and became
identifiable as a pair of dark gray trousers. A block later the last
minor articles of clothing were hurled unceremoniously through an open
window. As Jon turned another corner, he glimpsed a figure ducking into
a doorway down the dim street. The man was apparently following him.

Jon walked very slowly down the next block, ambling along in the shadow.
The hoodlum crept up behind him, then grabbed his cloak, ripped it away,
and leaped forward.

Only there wasn't anything there. The mugger stood for a moment, the
cape dangling from his hand, blinking at the place a man should have
been. Then something hit him in the jaw. He staggered back. Something
else hit him in the stomach. As he stumbled forward now, beneath the
street lamp, a transparent human figure suddenly formed in front of him.
Then it planted its quite substantial fist into his jaw again, and he
went back, down, and out.

Jon dragged the man back to the side of the alley, fading out completely
as he did so. Then he took the hoodlum's clothes, which were ragged,
smelly, and painfully nondescript. The shoes, which were too small for
him, he had to leave off. Then he flung the cape back around his
shoulders and pulled the hood over his head.

For the next six blocks he was lost because there were no street signs.
When he did find the next one, he realized he was only a block away from
the inn.

As he reached the stone building, he heard a thud in the tiny alleyway
beside it. A moment later a girl's voice called softly, "There. Just
like that. Only you better do exactly as I say or you'll break your arms
or legs, or back."

He walked to the edge of the building and peered into the alley.

Her white hair loose, Alter stood looking up at the roof. "All right,
Tel," she called. "You next."

Something came down from the roof, flipped over on the ground at her
feet, rolled away, and then suddenly unwound to standing position. The
black-haired boy ran his fingers through his hair. "Wow," he said. Then
he shook his head. "Wow."

"Are you all right?" Alter asked. "You didn't pull anything, did you?"

"No," he said. "I'm all right. I think. Yeah, everything's in place." He
looked up at the roof again, two stories above.

"Your turn, Let," Alter called up.

"It's high," came a childish voice from the roof.

"Hurry up," said Alter, her voice becoming authoritative. "When I count
three. And remember, knees up, chin down, and roll quick. One, two,
three!" There was the space of a breath, and then it fell, rolled,
bounced unsteadily to its feet, and resolved into another boy, this one
blond, and slighter than the first.

"Hey, you kids," Jon said.

They turned.

Jon looked at the smaller boy. His slight blond frame, less substantial
then even Alter's white-haired loveliness was definitely of the royal
family. "What are you doing out here, anyway?" Jon asked. "Especially
you, your Highness."

All three children jumped.

It looked like they might balk, and after that descent from the roof, he
wasn't sure where they might balk to. So he said, "Incidentally, the
Duchess of Petra sent me. How did you do that fall?"

His Highness was the only one to relax appreciably.

"And are you sure you're supposed to be outside?"

"We were supposed to stay on the top floor," Tel said. "But him," he
pointed to his ragged Highness, "he got restless, and we started telling
him about the tricks, and so we went up to the roof, and Alter said she
could get us down."

"Can you get them back up?" Jon asked.

"Sure," said Alter, "all we do is climb ..."

Jon held up his hand. "Wait a minute," he said. "We'll go inside and
talk to the man in charge. Don't worry. No one'll be mad."

"You mean talk to Geryn?" said Alter.

"I guess that's what his name is."

They started back out of the alley. "Tell me," Jon said, "just what sort
of person is Geryn?"

"He's a strange old man. He talks to himself all the time," said Alter.
"But he's smart."

Talks to himself, Jon reflected, and nodded. When they reached the door
of the inn, Jon pulled his cape off and stepped into the light. A few
people at the bar turned around, and when they saw the children, they
looked askance at one another.

"Geryn's probably upstairs," Alter said. They went to the second floor.
Jon let the children go ahead of him as they passed into the shadow of
the hall. He only stepped up to them when Alter pushed open the door at
the end of the hall and bright light from Geryn's room fell full across
them.

"What is it?" Geryn snapped. And then, "What is it, quick?" He whirled
around in the chair at the rough wooden desk when they entered. The
giant was standing by the window. Geryn's gray eyes fidgeted back and
forth. Finally he said, "Why are you out here? And who is he? What do
you want?"

"I'm from the Duchess of Petra," Jon said. "I've come to take Let to the
forest people."

"Yes," said the old man. "Yes." Then suddenly his face twisted as if he
were trying to remember something. Then shook his head. "Yes." Suddenly
he stood up. "Well, go on. I've done my part, I tell you. I've done.
Every minute he's in my house he endangers my boarders, my friends. Take
him. Go on."

The giant turned from the window. "I am to go with you. My name is
Arkor."

Jon frowned. For the first time the scarred giant's height struck him.
"Why...?" he started.

"It is my country that we go to," said Arkor. "I know how to get there.
I can take you through it. Geryn says it is part of the plan."

Jon felt a sudden knot of resentment tighten inside him. These
plans--the Duchess', Geryn's, even the plans of the triple beings who
inhabited them--they trapped him. Freedom. The word went in and out of
his mind like a shadow. He said, "When do we go then, if you know how to
get there?"

"In the morning," said Arkor.

"Alter, take him to a room. Get him out of here. Quick. Go on." They
backed from the room and Alter hurried them up the hall.

Jon was thinking. After delivering Let to the forest people, he was
going further. Yes. He would go on, try to get through the radiation
barrier. But all three of them had to get through if they were to do any
good. So why wasn't Geryn coming instead of sending the giant? If Geryn
came, then there'd be two people near the Lord of the Flames. But Geryn
was old. Maybe the Duchess could bring him with her when she came.
Mentally he smashed a fist into his thoughts and scattered them. Don't
think. Don't think. Thinking binds up your mind, and you can never be--
He stopped. Then another thought wormed into his skull, the thought of
five years of glittering hunger.

That night he slept well. Morning pried his eyes open with blades of
light that fell through the window. It was very early. He had been up
only a minute when there was a knock on his door. Then it opened, and
Arkor directed the dwarfed form of the Prince into Jon's room, then
turned and left.

"He says to meet him downstairs in five minutes," Let said.

"Sure," said Jon. He finished buttoning up the ragged shirt stolen from
the mugger the night before, and looked at the boy by the door. "I guess
you're not used to these sort of clothes," he said. "Once I wasn't
either. Pretty soon they begin to take."

"Huh?" said Let. Then, "Oh."

"Is something wrong?"

"Who are you?"

Jon thought for a moment. "Well," he said. "I'm sort of a friend of your
brother. An acquaintance, anyway. I'm supposed to take you to the
forest."

"Why?"

"You'll be safe there."

"Could we go to the sea instead?"

"My turn for a 'why'?" Jon asked.

"Because Tel told me all about it last night. He said it was fun. He
said there were rocks all different colors. And in the morning, he said,
you can see the sun come up like a burning blister behind the water. He
told me about the boats, too. I'd like to work on a boat. I really
would. They don't allow me to do anything at home. Mother says I might
get hurt. Will I get a chance to work someplace?"

"Maybe," Jon said.

"Tel had some good stories about fishing. Do you know any stories?"

"I don't know," Jon said. "I never tried telling any. Hey, come on. We
better get started."

"I like stories," Let said. "Come on. I'm just trying to be friendly."

Jon laughed, then thought a minute. "I can tell you a story, about a
prison mine. Do you know anything about the prison mines beyond the
forest?"

"Some," said Let.

"Well, once upon a time, there were three prisoners in that prison
camp." They started out in the hall. "They'd been there a long time,
and they wanted to get out. One was ... well, he looked like me, let's
pretend. Another had a limp ..."

"And the third one was chubby, sort of," interrupted Let. "I know that
story."

"You do?" asked Jon.

"Sure," Let said.

"Then you go on and tell it." Jon was a little annoyed.

Let told it to him.

They were outside waiting for Arkor when the boy finished. "See," Let
said. "I told you I knew it."

"Yeah," said Jon quietly. He stood very still. "You say the other
two ... didn't make it?"

"That's right," Let said. "The guards brought them back and dumped their
bodies in the mud so that ..."

"Shut up," Jon said.

"Huh?" asked Let.
