I can't imagine a connection, but still...."

He swung the little boat alongside the docked _Esperance_ and held out
his hand to help Deirdre to the dock. His hand was wholly steady again.
She accepted the help.

"We'll go to the tracking station?"

"Yes. Everybody seems to be there," said Terry.

They heard a babble of voices coming from the satellite-tracking
station. As they approached the buildings, Terry looked around. Off at
one side there was the very peculiar aerial system by which tiny
artificial moons circling the earth could be detected by their own
signals. Minute spheres and cylinders and spiky objects and
foolish-looking paddle-wheels, whirling in their man-appointed rounds,
sent down signals with powers of mere fractions of a watt. This system
of aerials picked up those miniature broadcasts and extracted
remarkable amounts of information from them. It was possible to
determine the satellites' distance more accurately, by a comparison of
phase-changes in their signals, than if steel tape measures were
stretched up to make physical contact with them. The accuracy was of the
order of inches at hundreds of miles. Floating where the stars were
bright and unwinking lights against blackness and the sun was a disk
with writhing arms of fire, the small objects sent back information that
men had never possessed before and did not wholly know what to do with
now that they did. And there were other objects in the heavens, too.
There were satellites which no longer signaled back to earth. Some had
their equipment worn out. Some objects were satellites which had failed
to function from the beginning. Some were mysteries.

The bolide of the night before was a mystery. As Terry and Deirdre
entered the wide verandah of the recreation building for the station's
personnel, they heard Dr. Morton protesting, "But that's out of the
question! I agree that we never know any more about what the Russians
throw out to space than what we find out for ourselves. That's true! But
this wasn't a terrestrial object! If it was a satellite that wasn't
launched right, it had to be sent up from Russian territory. It wasn't.
That's positive! If we assume it was a satellite that had already made
several orbital turns, we must admit it would be an impossible shift in
apogee for it to come down at the angle it did!"

Deirdre and Terry sat down as someone else said hotly, "Our observations
were wrong. They had to be! The earth's magnetic field couldn't affect
the speed of an object _outside_ the atmosphere! Our observations say it
slowed down. It couldn't!"

Davis lifted a hand in greeting. The argument stopped for a moment.
Deirdre was known, but Terry had to be introduced. He was sitting beside
a bald young man who explained in a low tone, as the argument resumed.
"They're having fun. They argued for days when our radar picked up an
empty second stage in orbit. They're still ready to dispute for hours
about a supposed retrograde satellite that was spotted last year, was
watched for four turns, and then disappeared. Beer?"

"Too early," said Terry. "Thanks just the same."

Davis said earnestly, at the other side of the room, "I'd feel a lot
better if that thing last night hadn't splashed where it did."

"The bolide," said a voice humorously, "is a free animal."

The discussion went on. Terry saw Deirdre talking to a middle-aged woman
with a splendid sun-tan and a placid expression on her face. Doug and
Tony sat watchfully on the side lines, listening. Doug had been offered,
and had accepted, a sandwich. He ate it methodically.

Terry had a sudden feeling of unreality. Less than half an hour before
he'd been in torment and, but for Deirdre, on his way to death. On the
_Esperance_ there'd been so much that was absorbing in the way of fish
behavior that he'd forgotten some people were interested in other
things. Here a dozen people squabbled over the behavior of a meteorite.
Nothing could be of less consequence to the outside world. But in the
outside world, people argued about baseball, or golf, or politics....

Doug excused himself and slipped outside. Terry joined him there a
little later. Doug was smoking a cigarette, looking at the sky and the
palms.

"Pretty heavy discussion," said Terry.

"It's over my head," said Doug. "I got lonesome. It made me think of my
girl. She likes to talk like this. That's why ..."

He stopped.

"Is there an aqualung outfit on the _Esperance_?" asked Terry.

"Sure! Two or three of them. Mr. Davis had an idea they'd be useful.
Used one of them last week to look at the _Esperance's_ bottom-planks.
Why?"

"I'd like to poke around the bottom of the lagoon a little," said Terry,
with unconscious grimness. "Would you help?"

"Sure!" said Doug.

They went back to the _Esperance_. Doug got out two aqualung outfits.
They checked the valves and tanks and connections. Doug brought out two
spring guns. In half an hour they were in the outboard, headed for what
Doug said was the deepest part of the lagoon.

Arrived there, Terry tested the water with his finger and then went
overside. Instead of a spring gun, he used one of the fish spears that
seemed to be standard equipment for fishing, here. Doug stayed in the
boat to watch.

Terry'd guessed that what he looked for would be in the deepest part of
the lagoon. He was right. Within half an hour he'd speared five fish of
types that had no business being within two thousand fathoms of the
surface. He ignored the lagoon's normal inhabitants. He picked on fish
of a dark-red color, which is predominant in the depths but not
elsewhere. When the fish had extremely small eyes or extremely large
ones, he hunted them determinedly, knowing they were deep-sea fish. He
caught five, which was a good haul, even considering his previous
suspicions.

Doug inspected the catch as the outboard went back to the yacht. Terry
replaced his spear under the gunwale.

"They're queer fish," observed Doug. "I wouldn't want to eat them."

"Neither would I," agreed Terry. "But I feel a certain sympathy for
them. I think we've shared an experience."

He did. Fish so far from their normal environment would not have
migrated unless they'd been forced to. So these fish must have been
driven up from the blissful utter blackness of the abyss, which was
their habitat. He had a vivid memory of the kind of urging they'd
received, because of his recent swim outside the reef opening. That was
the experience he believed they shared.

He got his catch onto the _Esperance's_ deck and found some sharp knives
in the galley, while Doug put the aqualungs away. When Doug came
abovedecks again, he looked distastefully at the work Terry had
undertaken.

"Do you like to do that sort of thing?" he asked.

"Hardly!" said Terry. "But I want to get it done."

Doug watched for a moment or two.

"I'm pretty keen about poetry. Sometimes I feel I've got to sweat over
a poem that I need to get written. It's hard work. There's no real sense
to it. But I feel it's got to be done. I guess that's the way you feel
now."

"Perhaps," said Terry.

It wouldn't have occurred to him to liken the writing of verses to the
dissection of dead deep-sea fish, but Doug had a point. He went away
presently, and Terry completed the highly unpleasant task. He had just
finished flushing the deck clean when Deirdre came back from the
tracking station. He was already at work on the recorder when she
stepped onto the deck.

"You didn't stay," said Deirdre. "I was waiting for a chance to tell my
father about the hum outside the lagoon, but he was as deep in the
meteor argument as any of them. I still haven't told him."

"There's something else to tell him now," Terry remarked. "I went down
with an aqualung. Doug was standing by," he added at her gesture of
protest, "and speared some fish that don't belong here. I've dissected
them. Their swim bladders had been very skillfully punctured, so if they
went or were driven into lesser pressure, they'd leak instead of
bursting. That's how they survived coming up from the depths. But the
main thing is this."

He held out a small plastic object in his hand. It was about an inch in
diameter and two in length, and there were inclusions in the clear
material. There were plates and threads of metal. They had that look of
mysterious purpose that highly-developed technical devices have.

"This was fastened to the fin of a fish that belongs as far down as a
fish can go," he said. "I've found out one of its purposes. When it is
in the water, it makes a sound more acute than a whistle every time
another sound strikes it. Try that on your piano!"

Deirdre stared.

"I'm saying," he repeated, "that it takes in one sound and gives out
another. It's ... it could be a relay. What is that for? What's it all
about? What does it mean? And I ask just those questions because I don't
dare ask who and why!"

"What ... what will you do?" asked Deirdre absurdly.

"I've no idea," Terry told her. "I've got a feeling that the wise thing
to do would be to settle down somewhere and buy a shop, and forget all
this. If I don't think about it, maybe it'll go away."

"I'll get my father and see what he says."

"Tell him," commanded Terry, "that I want to try out my fish-driving
horn. I'd like to have witnesses. If this foolishness has to be reported
to somebody, we need evidence of the facts. I want to drive fish and see
how many deep-sea ones there are in this lagoon, and how many of them
have spy-devices on them."

Deirdre turned away. Then she turned back.

"Spy-dev--"

"I slipped," said Terry. "I shouldn't have said that. Forget it. Just
tell your father I have an extremely urgent impulse to drive fish, and
would he come and help."

Deirdre looked at him strangely, and went onto the wharf to search for
her father.

Terry paced back and forth on the _Esperance's_ deck. In a few minutes
Davis and the crew-cuts appeared with Deirdre. But they were not alone.
Straggling behind them came nearly all the personnel of the tracking
station. There would be somebody on official duty, of course. But here
was the bespectacled Dr. Morton; the bald young man who'd offered Terry
beer; and the installation cook; a typist, and specialists in radar and
other abstruse subjects.

Deirdre said, "I told them about the fish-driving business and they want
to see. They stopped arguing about last night's bolide to take ringside
seats. All right?"

Terry shrugged. He had the recorder already set up. He'd taken a section
of the tape made where the sea was bright, at the place where the
loudest of the unpleasant humming noise was recorded. He'd made a loop
of it so it would play over and over.

He played the much-amplified sound through the underwater horn held in
the air. The result was a raucous bellowing noise. He lowered it into
the water. The horn touched the surface and went under.

Instantly, the fish of the lagoon seemed to go crazy. All the surface
broke and writhed and splashed. There was an incredible number of fish.
Terry turned the horn on one side. In this way, not all the water was
filled with the intolerable noise, but only a net-like beam of it raced
across the water. Within that line the fish continued to leap
frenziedly. The rest of the lagoon suddenly quieted down. In a little
while the beam's space, also, grew quiet. But that was because the fish
that had been previously caught in it had escaped.

"I'm afraid," said Terry, "that this isn't going to be very
entertaining. I'm going to sweep the beam across the lagoon, pushing the
fish ahead of it, until I should have them all in one small area."

It was curious that he felt uncomfortable as he set about his task. But
he'd experienced the sensation this sound produced. And it was not very
pleasant.

He turned the beam around, slightly. Again, there were sudden
splashings. They died away. He turned the beam again. It was a nasty,
snarling vibration in the water. So far as fish were concerned, it was
more like a wall than a net, because not even the tiniest living
creature could penetrate it. Not only fish fled before it. Shrimps and
crabs and all types of crustaceans jerked and crawled and swam ahead of
its motion. Jellyfish writhed when it touched them. Sea cucumbers
contorted themselves. Everything that lived in the lagoon and could swim
or crawl or writhe moved before the invisible barrier. Presently, the
effect of crowding could be seen, and fish began to leap out of water.

"This is a great advance in civilization," said Dr. Morton. "Men
invented guns and destroyed the buffalo and the passenger pigeon! You
may have made it possible to depopulate the sea!"

Terry did not answer. The morning sun shone brightly, a gentle breeze
made ripplings on the lagoon, the palms waved their fronds in languid
gestures, and the surf could be heard booming and splashing on the outer
reef. And about two dozen people stood on the wharf or on the
_Esperance's_ deck and watched a spliced section of recorder-tape go
through and through a recorder, which was set to make a sound underwater
that could not be heard by the people above.

The fish of the lagoon had crowded themselves into a minor embayment of
the shore. There were innumerable leapings there.

"There should be plenty of fish collected now," said Terry
distastefully. "I certainly can't herd them ashore."

The outboard boat pushed away from the yacht, its motor roaring. It
reached the area in which the water seemed to seethe and surge with the
motion of densely-crowded swimming creatures. The people in the boat
examined the surrounding water, then the boat came back at top speed.

"They're there!" called Davis. "And thick enough to walk on! I clearly
saw some freaks that must come up from the bottom! We want to collect
them!"

"I speared five just now," Terry told him, "and one of them was wearing
this."

He held up the plastic object he'd found. There was silence for a
moment. Then Dr. Morton said briskly, "We'll want fish spears. We'll
take all the boats and go after some more of these piscatory oddities.
Who's best with a spear?"

Davis would go. He could use the two fish spears that were standard
equipment for the outboard. The staff of the tracking station scattered
to launch other boats. Only Terry and Deirdre remained on the
_Esperance_. It was necessary for someone to stand by the recorder.

Boats moved away across the water. One stout member of the island's
staff trudged along the shore.

"You're driving them," said Deirdre. "You are right."

"I wish I weren't," said Terry.

"Why?"

"You know how these weird fish got here," he said impatiently. "They
were driven here. You know how they've been kept here. I experienced
that! I told you why they didn't die when they came up from thousands of
fathoms! Now, what's the only possible purpose for their being here? Put
it more scientifically! What is the consequence of these happenings, so
that to some biological entity it would be a favorable happening?" His
