
While Larkwell and Nagel prepared to lower the rocket Crag smoothed off
an area of the plain's surface and marked off a twenty-foot square. He
finished and looked at his handiwork with satisfaction. Richter's eyes
were filled with interest.

"Using it to chart the frequency of meteorite falls," Crag explained.
"We'd like to get an idea of the hazard."

"Plenty," Richter said succinctly. He started to add more and stopped.
Crag felt the urge to pump him but refrained. The least he became
involved the better, he thought. It didn't escape him that the German
seemed to have recovered to a remarkable extent. Well, that was
something else to remember. Richter injured was one thing. But Richter
recovered ...

He snapped the thought off and turned toward the base of the rocket,
indicating that the German should follow. Larkwell was testing the
winches and checking the cables when they arrived.

"About ready," he told Crag.

"Then let her go."

The construction boss nodded and barked a command to Prochaska and
Nagel, who were manning the restraining winches. When they acknowledged
they were ready he strode to the power winch.

"Okay." His voice was a terse crack in the interphones. The Aztec
shuddered on its base, teetering, then its nose began to cant downward.
It moved slowly in an arc across the sky.

"Take up," Larkwell barked into the mike. The guide lines tautened.

"Okay."

This time Prochaska and Nagel fed line through the winches more slowly.
The nose of the rocket had passed through sixty degrees of arc when its
tail began to inch backward, biting into the plain.

"Hold up!" Larkwell circled the rocket and approached the tailfins from
one side. He looked up at the body of the ship, then back at the base.
Satisfied it would hold he ordered the winches started. The nose moved
slowly toward the ground, swaying slightly from side to side. In another
moment it lay on its belly on the plain.

"Now the real work begins," Larkwell told Crag. "We gotta clean
everything out of that stovepipe and get the airlock rigged." His voice
was complaining but his face indicated the importance he attached to the
job.

"How long do you figure it'll take?"

Larkwell rubbed his faceplate thoughtfully. "About two days, with some
catnaps and some help."

"Good." Crag looked thoughtfully at Richter. "Any reason you can't
help?" he asked sharply.

"None at all," Richter answered solemnly.

While Larkwell and Nagel labored in the tail section, Crag and
Prochaska rearranged the space cabin. The chemical commode was placed in
one corner and a nylon curtain rigged around it--their one concession to
civilization. Crag was conscious of Richter's eyes following
them--weighing, analyzing, speculating. He caught himself swiveling
around at odd times to check on him, but Richter seemed unconcerned.

Electric power from the batteries was limited. For the most part they
would be living on space rations--food concentrates supplemented with
vitamin pills--and a square of chocolate daily per man. Later, when the
airlock was installed in the area now occupied by the afterburners and
machinery, they would be able to appreciably extend their living
quarters. Until then, Crag thought wryly, they would live like
sardines--with an enemy in their midst. An enemy and a saboteur, he
mentally corrected. Aside from that there was the constant danger from
meteorite falls. He shook his head despairingly. Life on the moon wasn't
all it could be. Not by a damn sight.

Nagel was becoming perturbed over their oxygen consumption. He had set
up the small tanks containing algae in a nutrient solution, tending them
like a mother hen. In time, if the cultivation were successful, the
small algae farm would convert the carbon dioxide from their respiration
into oxygen. At the present time the carbon dioxide was being absorbed
by chemical means. As things stood, it was necessary for the entire crew
to don spacesuits every time one of them left the cabin. Each time the
cabin air was lost in the vacuum of the moon. Crag pointed out there was
no alternative until the airlock was completed, a fact which didn't keep
Nagel from complaining.

       *       *       *       *       *

Otto Richter recovered fast. Before another day had passed--the Aztec
continued to operate by earth clock--he seemed to have completely
recovered. It was evident that concussion and shock had been the extent
of his injuries. Crag didn't know whether to be sorry or glad, he
didn't, in fact, know what to do with the man. He gave firm orders that
Richter was never to be left alone--not for a moment.

He told him: "You will not be allowed in the area of any of the
electronic equipment. First time you do ..." He looked meaningfully at
him.

"I understand," the German said. Thereafter, except for occasional trips
to the commode, or to help with work, he kept to the corner of the space
cabin allotted him.

Larkwell came up for the evening meal wearing a grim look. He extended
his hand toward Crag, holding a jagged chunk of rock nearly the size of
a baseball.

Crag took the hunk and hefted it thoughtfully. "Meteorite?" The others
clustered around.

"Yeah. I saw a hole in that cleared off section and reached down. There
she was, big as life."

"If that had hit this pipe we'd be dead ducks," Prochaska observed.

"But it didn't hit," Crag corrected, trying to allay any gathering
nervousness. "It just means that we're going to have to get going on the
rill airlock as soon as possible."

"How will loss of Able affect that?" Nagel asked curiously.

"Only in the matter of size," Crag explained. "The possible loss of a
drone was taken into account. The plastiblocks are constructed to make
any size shelter possible. We'll start immediately when Baker lands." He
looked thoughtfully at the men. "Let's not borrow any trouble."

"Yeah, there's plenty without borrowing any more," Prochaska agreed. He
smiled cheerfully. "I vote we all stop worrying and eat."

Another complication arose. Drone Baker would be in orbit the following
morning. Prochaska had to be prepared to bring it down. He was busy
moving his equipment into one compact corner opposite the commode. He
rigged a curtain around it, partly for privacy but mainly to mark off a
definite area prohibited to Richter.

The communicator was becoming another problem that harried Crag. A
government geologist wanted a complete description of Arzachel's rock
structure. A space medicine doctor had a lot of questions about the
working of the oxygen-carbon dioxide exchange system. Someone else--Crag
was never quite sure who--wanted an exact description of how the Aztec
had handled during letdown. In the end he got on the communicator and
curtly asked for Gotch.

"Keep these people off our backs until we land Drone Baker," he told
him. "It's not headquarters for some damned quiz program."

"You're big news," Gotch placated. "What you tell us will help with
future rockets."

"Like a mineral description of the terrain?"

"Even that. But cheer up, Commander. The worst is yet to come." He broke
off before Crag could snap a reply. Prochaska grinned at his
discomfiture.

"That's what comes of being famous," he said. "We're wheels."

"A wheel on the moon." Crag looked questioningly at him. "Is that good?"

"Damned if I know. I haven't been here long enough."

       *       *       *       *       *

Crag was surprised to see how rapidly work in the tail section was
progressing. Larkwell had loosened the giant engines and fuel tanks and
pulled them from the ship with power from one of the rocket's servo
motors. They lay on the dusty floor of the plain, incongruous in their
new setting. He thought it a harbinger of things to come. A rocket
garage on the floor of barren Arzachel. Four men attempting to build an
empire from the hull of a space ship. In time it would be replaced by an
airlock in a rill ... a military base ... a domed city. Pickering Field
would become a transportation center, perhaps the hub of the Solar
System's transportation empire. First single freighters, then ore
trains, would travel the highways of space between earth mother and her
long separated child. He sighed. The ore trains were a long way in the
future.

Larkwell crawled out from the cavern he had hollowed in the hull and
stretched. "Time for chow," he grunted. His voice over the interphones
sounded tired. Nagel followed him looking morose. He didn't acknowledge
Crag's presence.

At evening by earth clock they ate their scant fare. They were unusually
silent. The Chief seemed weary from his long vigil on the scope.
Larkwell's face was sweaty, smudged with grease. He ate quickly, with
the air of a man preoccupied with weighty problems. Nagel was clearly
bushed. Larkwell's fast pace had been too much for him. He wore a cross,
irritable expression and avoided all conversation. Richter sat alone,
seemingly unconcerned that he was a virtual prisoner, confined to one
small corner of the cabin barely large enough to provide sleeping space.
Crag had no feelings where he was concerned, neither resentment nor
sympathy. The German was just a happenstance, a castaway in the war for
Arzachel. Or, more probable, he thought, the war for the moon.

After chow the men took turns shaving with the single razor. It had been
supplied only because of the need to keep the oxygen ports in the
helmets free and to keep the lip mikes clear.

"Pure luxury," Prochaska said when his turn came. "Nothing's too good
for the spaceman."

"Amen," Crag agreed. "I hope the next crew is going to get a bar of
soap."

"For their sake I hope they pick something better than this crummy
planet," Larkwell grunted.

       *       *       *       *       *

Drone Baker had entered the moon's gravisphere at the precise time
spelled out by the earth computers. Its speed had dropped to a mere two
hundred miles per hour. It began to accelerate, pulled by the moon,
moving in a vast trajectory calculated to put it into a closing orbit
around the barren satellite. Prochaska picked it up and followed it on
the scope. Telemeter control from Alpine fired the first braking
rockets. The blast countered the moon's pull. Drone Baker was still a
speck on the scope--a solitary traveler rushing toward them through the
void.

"Seems incredible it took us that long," Crag mused, studying the
instrument panel. He reached over and activated the analog. Back on
earth saucers with faces lifted to the skies were tracking the drone's
flight. Their information was channeled into computer batteries,
integrated, analyzed, and sent back into space. The wave train ended in
a gridded scope--the analog Crag was viewing.

"Seemed a damned lot shorter when we were up there," he speculated
aloud.

"That's one experience that really telescopes time," the Chief agreed.
"I'd hate to have to sweat it out again."

"When do we take over?"

Prochaska glanced at the master chrono. "Not till 0810, give or take a
few minutes. It depends on the final computations from Alpine."

"Better catch some sleep," Crag suggested. "It's going to be touchy once
we get hold of it."

"We'll be damn lucky if we get it down in Arzachel."

"We'd better." Crag grinned. "Muff this and we might as well take out
lunar citizenship."

"No thanks. Not interested."

"What's the matter, Max, no pioneer spirit?"

"Go to hell," Prochaska answered amiably.

"Now, Mr. Prochaska, that's no way to speak to your commanding officer,"
Crag reproved with mock severity.

"Okay. Go to hell, Sir," he joked.

Richter was a problem. Someone had to be awake at all times. Crag
decided to break the crew into watches, and laid out a tentative
schedule. He would take the first watch, Larkwell would relieve him at
midnight, and Nagel would take over at 0300. That way Prochaska would
get a full night's sleep. He would need steady nerves come morning. He
outlined the schedule to the crew. Neither Larkwell nor Nagel appeared
enthusiastic over the prospect of initiating a watch regime, but neither
protested openly.

When the others were asleep, Crag cut off the light to preserve battery
power. He studied the lunar landscape out the port, thinking it must be
the bleakest spot in the universe. He twisted his head and looked
starward. The sky was a grab bag of suns. Off to one side giant Orion
looked across the gulf of space at Taurus and the Pleiades, the seven
daughters of Atlas.




CHAPTER 11


"Commander!" Crag came to with a start Prochaska was leaning over him.
Urgency was written across his face.

"Come quick!" The Chief stepped back and motioned with his head toward
the instrument corner. Crag sprang to his feet with a sense of alarm.
Richter and Larkwell were still asleep. He glanced at the master chrono,
0610, and followed him into the electronics corner. Nagel was standing
by the scope, a frightened look on his face.

"What's up?"

"Nagel woke me at six. I came in to get ready for Drone Baker ...."

"Get to the point," Crag snapped irritably.

"Sabotage." He indicated under the panel. "All the wiring under the main
console's been slashed."

Crag felt a sense of dread. "How long will it take to make repairs?"

"I don't know--don't know the full extent of the damage."

"Find out," Crag barked. "How about the communicator?"

"Haven't tried it," Prochaska admitted. "I woke you up as soon as I
found what had happened." He reached over and turned a knob. After a few
seconds a hum came from the console. "Works," he said.

"See how quickly you can make repairs," Crag ordered. "We've got to hook
onto the drone pretty quick."

He swung impatiently toward Nagel. "Was anyone up during your watch? Did
anyone go to the commode?"

Nagel said defensively: "No, and I was awake all the time." Too
defensive, Crag thought. But no one had stirred during his watch.
Therefore, the sabotage had occurred between midnight and the time Nagel
wakened Prochaska. But, wait ... Prochaska could have done the sabotage
in the few moments he was at the console after Nagel woke him. It would
have taken just one quick slash--the work of seconds. That left him in
the same spot he'd been in with regard to the time bomb.

He grated harshly at Nagel: "Wake Larkwell and get on with the airlock.
And don't chatter about what's happened," he added.

"I won't," Nagel promised nervously. He retreated as if glad to be rid
of Crag's scrutiny.

"A lousy mess," Prochaska grunted.

Crag didn't answer.

"If we don't solve this, we're going to wind up dead," he pursued.

Crag turned and faced him. "It could be anybody. You ... me."

"Yeah, I know." The Chief's face got a hard tight look. "Only it
isn't ... it isn't me."

"I don't know that," Crag countered.

Prochaska said bitterly: "You'd better find out."

"I will," Crag said shortly. He got on the communicator. It took several
minutes to raise Alpine. He wasn't surprised when Gotch answered, and
briefly related what had happened.

"Is there any possibility of telemetering her all the way in?" He knew
there wasn't, but he asked anyway.

"Impossible."

"Okay, well try and make it from here."

The Colonel added a few comments. They were colorful but definitely not
complimentary. He got the distinct impression the Colonel wasn't pleased
with events on the moon. When his cold voice faded from the
communicator, Crag tried the analog. The grid scope came to life but it
was blank. Of course, he thought, Drone Baker was cut off from earth by
the body of the moon. It could not be simulated on the analog until it
came from behind the blind side where the earth saucers could track its
flight.

"Morning," Larkwell said, sticking his head around the curtain. "How
about climbing into your suits so we can get out of this can?" Crag
studied his face. It seemed void of any guile. Nagel stood nervously
behind him.

"Okay," Crag said shortly. He hated to have Prochaska lose the precious
moments. They hurriedly donned their suits and Nagel decompressed the
cabin, Larkwell opened the hatch and they left. Crag closed it after
them and released fresh oxygen into the cabin. Richter took off his suit
and returned to his corner. His eyes were bright with interest. He
knows, Crag thought.

At 0630 the communicator came to life. A voice at the other end gave
