Watson. If I were only sure. I have pledged my word and my honour. What
did he know? I need all the reserve of character to hold up against
the Nervina. From the beginning she has been my opponent. What is her
interest in the Blind Spot and myself? Who is she? I cannot think of
her as evil. She is too beautiful, too tender; her concern is so real.
Sometimes I think of her as my protector, that it is she, and she alone
who holds back the power which would engulf me. Once she made a personal
appeal.

Jerome had gone. I was alone. I had dragged myself to the desk and my
notes and data. It was along toward spring and in the first shadows of
the early evening. I had turned on the lights. It was the first labour
I had done for several days. I had a great deal of work before me. I
had begun sometime before to take down my temperature. I was careful of
everything now, as much as I could be under the depression. So far I had
discerned nothing that could be classed as pathological.

There is something subtle about the Nervina. She is much like the
Rhamda. Perhaps they are the same. I hear no sound, I have no notion of
a door or entrance. Watson had said of the Rhamda, "Sometimes you see
him, sometimes you don't." It is so with the Nervina. I remember only
my working at the data and the sudden movement of a hand upon my desk--a
girl's hand. It was bewildering. I looked up.

I had not seen her since that night. It was now eight months--did I not
know, I would have recorded them as years. Her expression was a bit more
sad--and beautiful. The same wonderful glow of her eyes, night-black and
tender; the softness that comes from passion, and love, and virtue. The
same wistful droop of the perfect mouth. What a wondrous mass of hair
she had! I dropped my pen. She took my hand. I could sense the thrill of
contact; cool and magnetic.

"Harry!"

She said no more; I did not answer; I was too taken by surprise and
wonder. I could feel her concern as I would a mother's. What was her
interest in myself? The contact of her hand sent a strange pulse through
my vitals; she was so beautiful. Could it be? Watson said he loved her.
Could I blame him?

"Harry," she asked, "how long is it to continue?"

So that was it. Merely an envoy to accept surrender. I was worn utterly,
weary of the world, lonely. But I hadn't given up. I had strength still,
and will enough to hold out to the end. Perhaps I was wrong. If I gave
her the ring? what then?

"I am afraid," I answered, "that I must go on. I have given my word. It
has been much harder than I expected. This jewel? What has it to do with
the Blind Spot?"

"It controls it."

"Does the Rhamda desire it?"

"He does."

"Why doesn't he call for it personally? Why doesn't he make a clean
breast of it? It would be much easier. He knows and you know that I am
after Dr. Holcomb and Watson. I might even forego the secret. Would he
release the doctor?"

"No, Harry, he would not."

"I see. If I gave up the ring it would be merely for my personal safety.
I am a coward--"

"Oh," she said, "don't say that. You must give the ring to me--not to
the Rhamda. He must not control the Blind Spot."

"What is the Blind Spot? Tell me."

"Harry," she spoke, "I cannot. It is not for you or any other mortal. It
is a secret that should never have been uncovered. It might be the end.
In the hands of the Rhamda it would certainly be the end of mankind."

"Who is the Rhamda? Who are you? You are too beautiful to be merely
woman. Are you a spirit?"

She pressed my hand ever so slightly. "Do I feel like a spirit? I am
material as much as you are. We live, see--everything."

"But you are not of this world?"

Her eyes grew sadder; a soft longing.

"Not exactly, Harry, not exactly. It is a long story and a very strange
one. I may not tell you. It is for your own good. I am your friend"--her
eyes were moist--"I--don't you see? Oh, I would save you!"

I did not doubt it. Somehow she was like a girl of dreams, pure as an
angel; her wistfulness only deepened her beauty. It came like a shock
at the moment. I could love this woman. She was--what was I thinking?
My guilty mind ran back to Charlotte. I had loved her since boyhood. I
would be a coward--then a wild fear. Perhaps of jealousy.

"The Rhamda? Is he your husband? You are the same--"

"Oh," she answered, "why do you say it?" Her eyes snapped and she grew
rigid. "The Rhamda! My husband! If you only knew. I hate him! We are
enemies. It was he who opened the Blind Spot. I am here because he is
evil. To watch him. I love your world, I love it all. I would save it. I
love--"

She dropped her head. Whatever she was, she was not above sobbing.

I touched her hair; it was of the softest texture I have ever seen;
the lustre was like all the beauty of night woven into silk. She loved,
loved; I could love--I was on the point of surrender.

"Tell me," I asked, "just one thing more. If I gave you this ring would
you save the doctor and Chick Watson?"

She raised her head; her eyes glistened; but she did not answer.

"Would you?"

She shook her head. "I cannot," she answered. "That cannot be. I can
only save you for--for--Charlotte."

Was it vanity in myself? I don't know. It seemed to me that it was hard
for her to say it. Frankly, I loved her. I knew it. I loved Charlotte. I
loved them both. But I held to my purpose.

"Are the professor and Watson living?"

"They are."

"Are they conscious?"

She nodded. "Harry," she said, "I can tell you that. They are living and
conscious. You have seen them. They have only one enemy--the Rhamda.
But they must never come out of the Blind Spot. I am their friend and
yours."

A sudden courage came upon me. I remembered my word to Watson. I had
loved the old professor. I would save them. If necessary I would follow
to the end. Either myself or Fenton. One of us would solve it!

"I shall keep the ring," I said. "I shall avenge them. Somehow,
somewhere, I feel that I shall do it. Even if I must follow--"

She straightened at that. Her eyes were frightened.

"Oh," she said, "why do you say it? It must not be! You would perish!
You shall not do it! I must save you. You must not go alone. Three--it
may not be. If you go, I go with you. Perhaps--oh, Harry!"

She dropped her head again; her body shook with her sobbing; plainly
she was a girl. No real man is ever himself in the presence of a woman's
tears. I was again on the point of surrender. Suddenly she looked up.

"Harry," she spoke sadly, "I have just one thing to ask. You must see
Charlotte. You must forget me; we can never--you love Charlotte. I have
seen her; she's a beautiful girl. You haven't written. She is worried.
Remember what you mean to her happiness. Will you go?"

That I could promise.

"Yes, I shall see Charlotte."

She rose from her chair. I held her hand. Again, as in the restaurant, I
lifted it to my lips. She flushed and drew it away. She bit her lip. Her
beauty was a kind I could not understand.

"You must see Charlotte," she said, "and you must do as she says."

With that she was gone. There was a car waiting; the last I saw was its
winking tail-light dimming into the darkness.




XVI

CHARLOTTE


Left alone, I began thinking of Charlotte. I loved her; of that I was
certain. I could not compare her with the Nervina. She was like myself,
human. I had known her since boyhood. The other was out of the ether; my
love for her was something different; she was of dreams and moonbeams;
there was a film about her beauty, illusion; she was of spirit.

I wrote a note to the detective and left it upon my desk. After that I
packed a suitcase and hurried to the station. If I was going I would do
it at once, I could not trust myself too far. This visit had been like
a breath of air; for the moment I was away from the isolation. The
loneliness and the weariness! How I dreaded it! I was only free from
it for a few moments. On the train it came back upon me and in a manner
that was startling.

I had purchased my ticket. When the conductor came through he passed me.
He gathered tickets all about me; but he did not notice me. At first I
paid no attention; but when he had gone through the car several times I
held up my ticket. He did not stop. It was not until I had touched him
that he gave me a bit of attention.

"Where have you been sitting?" he asked.

I pointed to the seat. He frowned slightly.

"There?" he asked. "Did you say you were sitting in that seat? Where did
you get on?"

"At Townsend."

"Queer," he answered; he punched the ticket. "Queer. I passed that seat
several times. It was empty!"

Empty! It was almost a shock. Could it be that my isolation was becoming
physical as well as mental? What was this gulf that was widening between
myself and my fellows?

It was the beginning of another phase. I have noticed it many times; on
the street, in public places, everywhere. I thread in and out among men.
Sometimes they see me, sometimes they don't. It is strange. I feel at
times as though I might be vanishing out of the world!

It was late when I reached my old home; but the lights were still
burning. My favourite dog, Queen, was on the veranda. As I came up the
steps she growled slightly, but on recognition went into a series of
circles about the porch. My father opened the door. I stepped inside. He
touched me on the shoulder, his jaw dropped.

"Harry!" he exclaimed.

Was it as bad as that? How much meaning may be placed in a single
intonation! I was weary to the point of exhaustion. The ride upon the
train had been too much.

My mother came in. For some moments I was busy protesting my health.
But it was useless; it wasn't until I had partaken of a few of the old
nostrums that I could placate her.

"Work, work, work, my boy," said my father, "nothing but work. It
really won't do. You're a shadow. You must take a vacation. Go to the
mountains; forget your practice for a short time."

I didn't tell them. Why should I? I decided right then it was my own
battle. It was enough for me without casting the worry upon others. Yet
I could not see Charlotte without calling on my parents.

As soon as possible I crossed the street to the Fentons'. Someone had
seen me in town. Charlotte was waiting. She was the same beautiful girl
I had known so long; the blue eyes, the blonde, wavy mass of hair, the
laughing mouth and the gladness. But she was not glad now. It was
almost a repetition of what had happened at home, only here a bit more
personal. She clung to me almost in terror. I didn't realise I had gone
down so much. I knew my weariness; but I hadn't thought my appearance
so dejected. I remembered Watson. He had been wan, pale, forlorn.
After what brief explanation I could give, I proposed a stroll in the
moonlight.

It was a full moon; a wonderful night; we walked down the avenue under
the elm trees. Charlotte was beautiful, and worried; she clung to my
arm with the eagerness of possession. I could not but compare her
with Nervina. There was a contrast; Charlotte was fresh, tender,
affectionate, the girl of my boyhood. I had known her all my life; there
was no doubt of our love.

Who was the other? She was something higher, out of mystery, out of
life--almost--out of the moonbeams. I stopped and looked up. The great
full orb was shining. I didn't know that I spoke.

"Harry," asked Charlotte, "who is the Nervina?"

Had I spoken?

"What do you know about the Nervina?" I asked.

"She has been to see me. She told me. She said you would be here
tonight. I was waiting. She is very beautiful. I never saw anyone like
her. She is wonderful!"

"What did she say?"

"She! Oh, Harry. Tell me. I have waited. Something has happened. Tell
me. You have told me nothing. You are not like the old Harry."

"Tell me about the Nervina. What did she say? Charlotte, tell me
everything. Am I so much different from the old Harry?"

She clutched at my arm fearfully; she looked into my eyes.

"Oh," she said, "how can you say it? You haven't laughed once. You are
melancholy; you are pale, drawn, haggard. You keep muttering. You are
not the old Harry. Is it this Nervina? At first I thought she loved you;
but she does not. She wanted to know all about you, and about our love.
She was so interested. What is this danger?"

I didn't answer.

"You must tell me. This ring? She said that you must give it to me. What
is it?" she insisted.

"Did she ask that? She told you to take the ring? My dear," I asked, "if
it were the ring and it were so sinister would I be a man to give it to
my loved one?"

"It would not hurt me."

But I would not. Something warned me. It was a ruse to get it out of my
possession. The whole thing was haunting, weird, ghostly. Always I could
hear Watson. I still had a small quota of courage and will-power. I
clung steadfastly to my purpose.

It was a sad three hours. Poor Charlotte! I shall never forget it. It is
the hardest task on earth to deny one's loved one.

She had grown into my heart and into its possession. She clung to me
tenderly, tearfully. I could not tell her. Her feminine instinct sensed
disaster. In spite of her tears I insisted. When I kissed her goodnight
she did not speak. But she looked up at me through her tears. It was the
hardest thing of all for me to bear.




XVII

THE SHEPHERD


When I returned to the city next morning I took my dog. It was a strange
whim; but one which was to lead to a remarkable development. I have
always been a lover of dogs. I was lonely. There is a bond between a dog
and his master. It goes beyond definition; it roots down into nature. I
was to learn much.

She was an Australian shepherd. She was of a tawny black and bob-tailed
from birth.

What is the power that lies behind instinct? How far does it go? I had
a notion that the dog would be outside the sinister clutch that was
dragging me under.

Happily Jerome was fond of dogs. He was reading. When I entered with
Queen tugging at the chain he looked up. The dog recognised the heart
of the man; when he stooped to pet her she moved her stub tail in an
effusion of affectionate acceptance. Jerome had been reading Le Bon's
theory on the evolution of force. His researches after the mystery had
led him into the depths of speculation; he had become quite a scholar.
After our first greeting I unhooked the chain and let Queen have the
freedom of the house. I related what had happened. The detective closed
the book and sat down. The dog waited a bit for further petting; but
missing that she began sniffing about the room. There was nothing
strange about it of course. I myself paid not the slightest attention.
But the detective was watching. While I was telling my story he was
following every movement of the shepherd. Suddenly he held up one
finger. I turned.

It was Queen. A low growl, guttural and suspicious. She was standing
about a foot from the portieres that separated the library from the
other room--where we had lost Watson, and where Jerome had had his
experience with the old lady. Tense and rigid, one forepaw held up
stealthily, her stub tail erect and the hair along her back bristled.
Again the low growl. I caught Jerome's eyes. It was queer.

"What is it, Queen?" I spoke.

At the sound of my voice she wagged her tail and looked round, then
stepped between the curtains. Just her head. She drew back; her lips
drawn from her teeth, snarling. She was rigid, alert, vitalised. Somehow
it made me cold. She was a brave dog; she feared nothing. The detective
stepped forward and pulled the curtains apart. The room was empty. We
looked into each other's faces. What is there to instinct? What is its
range? We could see nothing.

But not to the dog. Her eyes glowed. Hate, fear, terror, her whole body
rigid.

"I wonder," I said. I stepped into the room. But I hadn't counted on the
dog. With a yelp she was upon me, had me by the calf of the leg and was
drawing me back. She stepped in front of me; a low, guttural growl of
warning. But there was nothing in that room; of that we were certain.

"Beats me," said the detective. "How does she know? Wonder if she would
stop me?" He stepped forward. It was merely a repetition. She caught
him by the trouser-leg and drew him back. She crowded us away from the
curtain. It was almost magnetic. We could see nothing, neither could we
feel; was it possible that the dog could see beyond us? The detective
spoke first:

"Take her out of the room. Put her in the hall; tie her up."

"What's the idea?"

"Merely this; I am going to examine the room. No, I am not afraid. I'll
be mighty glad if it does catch me. Anything so long as I get results."

But it did us no good. We examined the room many times that night; both
of us. In the end there was nothing, only the weirdness and uncertainty
and the magnetic undercurrent which we could feel, but could not fathom.
When we called in the dog she stepped to the portieres and commenced her
vigil. She crouched slightly behind the curtains, alert, ready, waiting,
at her post of honour. From that moment she never left the spot except
under compulsion. We could hear her at all times of the night; the low
growl, the snarl, the defiance.

But there was a great deal more that we were to learn from the dog. It
was Jerome who first called my attention. A small fact at the beginning;
but of a strange sequence. This time it was the ring. Queen had the
habit that is common to most dogs; she would lick my hand to show her
affection. It was nothing in itself; but for one fact--she always chose
the left hand. It was the detective who first noticed it. Always and
every opportunity she would lick the jewel. We made a little test to try
her. I would remove the ring from one hand to the other; then hold it
behind me. She would follow.

It was a strange fact; but of course not inexplicable. A scent or the
attraction of taste might account for it. However, these little tests
led to a rather remarkable discovery.

One night we had called the dog from her vigil. As usual she came to
the jewel; by chance I pressed the gem against her head. It was a mere
trifle; yet it was of consequence. A few minutes before I had dropped a
handkerchief on the opposite side of the room; I was just thinking about
picking it up. It was only a small thing, yet it put us on the track
of the gem's strangest potency. The dog walked to the handkerchief. She
brought it back in her mouth. At first I took it for a pure coincidence.
I repeated the experiment with a book. The same result. I looked up at
Jerome.

"What's the matter?" Then when I explained: "The dickens! Try it again."

Over and over again we repeated it, using different articles, pieces of
which I was certain she didn't know the name. There was a strange bond
between the gem and the intelligence, some strange force emanating from
its lustre. On myself it was depressing; on the dog it was life itself.
At last Jerome had an inspiration.

"Try the Rhamda," he said; "think of him. Perhaps--"

It was most surprising. Certainly it was remarkable. It was too much
like intelligence; a bit too uncanny. At the instant of the thought the
dog leaped backward.

Such a strange transformation; she was naturally gentle. In one
instant she had gone mad. Mad? Not in the literal interpretation; but
figuratively. She sprang back, snapping; her teeth bared, her hair
bristled. Her nostrils drawn. With one bound she leaped between the
curtains.

Jerome jumped up. With an exclamation he drew the portieres. I was
behind him. The dog was standing at the edge of the room, bristling.

The room was empty. What did she see? What?

One thing was certain. Though we were sure of nothing else we were
certain of the Rhamda. We could trust the canine's instinct. Every
previous experiment we had essayed had been crowned with success. We had
here a fact but no explanation. If we could only put things together and
extract the law.

It was late when we retired. I could not sleep. The restlessness of the
