on an average have absorbed at most 1/2000 of a grain of the salt. I
say at [page 139] most, for the papillae will have absorbed some small
amount, and so will perhaps the glands of the twelve excluded tentacles
which did not become inflected. The application of this principle leads
to remarkable conclusions with respect to the minuteness of the doses
causing inflection.

    On the Action of Distilled Water in Causing Inflection.

Although in all the more important experiments the difference between
the leaves simultaneously immersed in water and in the several
solutions will be described, nevertheless it may be well here to give a
summary of the effects of water. The fact, moreover, of pure water
acting on the glands deserves in itself some notice. Leaves to the
number of 141 were immersed in water at the same time with those in the
solutions, and their state recorded at short intervals of time.
Thirty-two other leaves were separately observed in water, making
altogether 173 experiments. Many scores of leaves were also immersed in
water at other times, but no exact record of the effects produced was
kept; yet these cursory observations support the conclusions arrived at
in this chapter. A few of the long-headed tentacles, namely from one to
about six, were commonly inflected within half an hour after immersion;
as were occasionally a few, and rarely a considerable number of the
exterior round-headed tentacles.  After an immersion of from 5 to 8
hrs. the short tentacles surrounding the outer parts of the disc
generally become inflected, so that their glands form a small dark ring
on the disc; the exterior tentacles not partaking of this movement.
Hence, excepting in a few cases hereafter to be specified, we can judge
whether a solution produces any effect only by observing the exterior
tentacles within the first 3 or 4 hrs. after immersion.

Now for a summary of the state of the 173 leaves after an immersion of
3 or 4 hrs. in pure water. One leaf had almost all its tentacles
inflected; three leaves had most of them sub-inflected; and thirteen
had on an average 36.5 tentacles inflected. Thus seventeen leaves out
of the 173 were acted on in a marked manner. Eighteen leaves had from
seven to nineteen tentacles inflected, the average being 9.3 tentacles
for each leaf. Forty-four leaves had from one to six tentacles
inflected, generally the long-headed ones. So that altogether of the
173 leaves carefully observed, seventy-nine were affected by the water
in some degree, though commonly to a very slight degree; and
ninety-four were not affected in the least degree. This [page 140]
amount of inflection is utterly insignificant, as we shall hereafter
see, compared with that caused by very weak solutions of several salts
of ammonia.

Plants which have lived for some time in a rather high temperature are
far more sensitive to the action of water than those grown out of
doors, or recently brought into a warm greenhouse. Thus in the above
seventeen cases, in which the immersed leaves had a considerable number
of tentacles inflected, the plants had been kept during the winter in a
very warm greenhouse; and they bore in the early spring remarkably fine
leaves, of a light red colour. Had I then known that the sensitiveness
of plants was thus increased, perhaps I should not have used the leaves
for my experiments with the very weak solutions of phosphate of
ammonia; but my experiments are not thus vitiated, as I invariably used
leaves from the same plants for simultaneous immersion in water. It
often happened that some leaves on the same plant, and some tentacles
on the same leaf, were more sensitive than others; but why this should
be so, I do not know.

FIG. 9.  (Drosera rotundifolia.) Leaf (enlarged) with all the tentacles
closely inflected, from immersion in a solution of phosphate of ammonia
(one part to 87,500 of water.)

Besides the differences just indicated between the leaves immersed in
water and in weak solutions of ammonia, the tentacles of the latter are
in most cases much more closely inflected. The appearance of a leaf
after immersion in a few drops of a solution of 1 grain of phosphate of
ammonia to 200 oz. of water (i.e. one part to 87,500) is here
reproduced: such energetic inflection is never caused by water alone.
With leaves in the weak solutions, the blade or lamina often becomes
inflected; and this is so rare a circumstance with leaves in water that
I have seen only two instances; and in both of these the inflection was
very feeble.  Again, with leaves in the weak solutions, the inflection
of the tentacles and blade often goes on steadily, though slowly,
increasing during many hours; and [page 141] this again is so rare a
circumstance with leaves in water that I have seen only three instances
of any such increase after the first 8 to 12 hrs.; and in these three
instances the two outer rows of tentacles were not at all affected.
Hence there is sometimes a much greater difference between the leaves
in water and in the weak solutions, after from 8 hrs. to 24 hrs., than
there was within the first 3 hrs.; though as a general rule it is best
to trust to the difference observed within the shorter time.

With respect to the period of the re-expansion of the leaves, when left
immersed either in water or in the weak solutions, nothing could be
more variable. In both cases the exterior tentacles not rarely begin to
re-expand, after an interval of only from 6 to 8 hrs.; that is just
about the time when the short tentacles round the borders of the disc
become inflected. On the other hand, the tentacles sometimes remain
inflected for a whole day, or even two days; but as a general rule they
remain inflected for a longer period in very weak solutions than in
water. In solutions which are not extremely weak, they never re-expand
within nearly so short a period as six or eight hours. From these
statements it might be thought difficult to distinguish between the
effects of water and the weaker solutions; but in truth there is not
the slightest difficulty until excessively weak solutions are tried;
and then the distinction, as might be expected, becomes very doubtful,
and at last disappears. But as in all, except the simplest, cases the
state of the leaves simultaneously immersed for an equal length of time
in water and in the solutions will be described, the reader can judge
for himself.]

                     CARBONATE OF AMMONIA.

This salt, when absorbed by the roots, does not cause the tentacles to
be inflected. A plant was so placed in a solution of one part of the
carbonate to 146 of water that the young uninjured roots could be
observed. The terminal cells, which were of a pink colour, instantly
became colourless, and their limpid contents cloudy, like a mezzo-tinto
engraving, so that some degree of aggregation was almost instantly
caused; but no further change ensued, and the absorbent hairs were not
visibly affected. The tentacles [page 142] did not bend. Two other
plants were placed with their roots surrounded by damp moss, in half an
ounce (14.198 ml.) of a solution of one part of the carbonate to 218 of
water, and were observed for 24 hrs.; but not a single tentacle was
inflected. In order to produce this effect, the carbonate must be
absorbed by the glands.

The vapour produces a powerful effect on the glands, and induces
inflection. Three plants with their roots in bottles, so that the
surrounding air could not have become very humid, were placed under a
bell-glass (holding 122 fluid ounces), together with 4 grains of
carbonate of ammonia in a watch-glass. After an interval of 6 hrs. 15
m. the leaves appeared unaffected; but next morning, after 20 hrs., the
blackened glands were secreting copiously, and most of the tentacles
were strongly inflected. These plants soon died. Two other plants were
placed under the same bell-glass, together with half a grain of the
carbonate, the air being rendered as damp as possible; and in 2 hrs.
most of the leaves were affected, many of the glands being blackened
and the tentacles inflected. But it is a curious fact that some of the
closely adjoining tentacles on the same leaf, both on the disc and
round the margins, were much, and some, apparently, not in the least
affected. The plants were kept under the bell-glass for 24 hrs., but no
further change ensued. One healthy leaf was hardly at all affected,
though other leaves on the same plant were much affected. On some
leaves all the tentacles on one side, but not those on the opposite
side, were inflected. I doubt whether this extremely unequal action can
be explained by supposing that the more active glands absorb all the
vapour as quickly as it is generated, so that none is left for the
others, for we shall meet with [page 143] analogous cases with air
thoroughly permeated with the vapours of chloroform and ether.

Minute particles of the carbonate were added to the secretion
surrounding several glands.  These instantly became black and secreted
copiously; but, except in two instances, when extremely minute
particles were given, there was no inflection. This result is analogous
to that which follows from the immersion of leaves in a strong solution
of one part of the carbonate to 109, or 146, or even 218 of water, for
the leaves are then paralysed and no inflection ensues, though the
glands are blackened, and the protoplasm in the cells of the tentacles
undergoes strong aggregation.

[We will now turn to the effects of solutions of the carbonate.
Half-minims of a solution of one part to 437 of water were placed on
the discs of twelve leaves; so that each received 1/960 of a grain or
.0675 mg. Ten of these had their tentacles well inflected; the blades
of some being also much curved inwards. In two cases several of the
exterior tentacles were inflected in 35 m.; but the movement was
generally slower. These ten leaves re-expanded in periods varying
between 21 hrs. and 45 hrs., but in one case not until 67 hrs. had
elapsed; so that they re-expanded much more quickly than leaves which
have caught insects.

The same-sized drops of a solution of one part to 875 of water were
placed on the discs of eleven leaves; six remained quite unaffected,
whilst five had from three to six or eight of their exterior tentacles
inflected; but this degree of movement can hardly be considered as
trustworthy. Each of these leaves received 1/1920 of a grain (.0337
mg.), distributed between the glands of the disc, but this was too
small an amount to produce any decided effect on the exterior
tentacles, the glands of which had not themselves received any of the
salt.

Minute drops on the head of a small pin, of a solution of one part of
the carbonate to 218 of water, were next tried in the manner above
described. A drop of this kind equals on an average 1/20 of a minim,
and therefore contains 1/4800 of a grain (.0135 mg.) of the carbonate.
I touched with it the viscid secretion round three glands, so that each
gland received only [page 144] 1/14400 of a grain (.00445 mg.).
Nevertheless, in two trials all the glands were plainly blackened; in
one case all three tentacles were well inflected after an interval of 2
hrs. 40 m.; and in another case two of the three tentacles were
inflected. I then tried drops of a weaker solution of one part to 292
of water on twenty-four glands, always touching the viscid secretion
round three glands with the same little drop. Each gland thus received
only the 1/19200 of a grain (.00337 mg.), yet some of them were a
little darkened; but in no one instance were any of the tentacles
inflected, though they were watched for 12 hrs. When a still weaker
solution (viz. one part to 437 of water) was tried on six glands, no
effect whatever was perceptible. We thus learn that the 1/14400 of a
grain (.00445 mg.) of carbonate of ammonia, if absorbed by a gland,
suffices to induce inflection in the basal part of the same tentacle;
but as already stated, I was able to hold with a steady hand the minute
drops in contact with the secretion only for a few seconds; and if more
time had been allowed for diffusion and absorption, a much weaker
solution would certainly have acted.

Some experiments were made by immersing cut-off leaves in solutions of
different strengths.  Thus four leaves were left for about 3 hrs. each
in a drachm (3.549 ml.) of a solution of one part of the carbonate to
5250 of water; two of these had almost every tentacle inflected, the
third had about half the tentacles and the fourth about one-third
inflected; and all the glands were blackened. Another leaf was placed
in the same quantity of a solution of one part to 7000 of water, and in
1 hr. 16 m. every single tentacle was well inflected, and all the
glands blackened. Six leaves were immersed, each in thirty minims
(1.774 ml.) of a solution of one part to 4375 of water, and the glands
were all blackened in 31 m. All six leaves exhibited some slight
inflection, and one was strongly inflected. Four leaves were then
immersed in thirty minims of a solution of one part to 8750 of water,
so that each leaf received the 1/320 of a grain (.2025 mg.). Only one
became strongly inflected; but all the glands on all the leaves were of
so dark a red after one hour as almost to deserve to be called black,
whereas this did not occur with the leaves which were at the same time
immersed in water; nor did water produce this effect on any other
occasion in nearly so short a time as an hour. These cases of the
simultaneous darkening or blackening of the glands from the action of
weak solutions are important, as they show that all the glands absorbed
the carbonate within the same time, which fact indeed there was not the
least reason to doubt. So again, whenever all the [page 145] tentacles
become inflected within the same time, we have evidence, as before
remarked, of simultaneous absorption. I did not count the number of
glands on these four leaves; but as they were fine ones, and as we know
that the average number of glands on thirty-one leaves was 192, we may
safely assume that each bore on an average at least 170; and if so,
each blackened gland could have absorbed only 1/54400 of a grain
(.00119 mg.) of the carbonate.

A large number of trials had been previously made with solutions of one
part of the nitrate and phosphate of ammonia to 43750 of water (i.e.
one grain to 100 ounces), and these were found highly efficient.
Fourteen leaves were therefore placed, each in thirty minims of a
solution of one part of the carbonate to the above quantity of water;
so that each leaf received 1/1600 of a grain (.0405 mg.). The glands
were not much darkened. Ten of the leaves were not affected, or only
very slightly so. Four, however, were strongly affected; the first
having all the tentacles, except forty, inflected in 47 m.; in 6 hrs.
30 m. all except eight; and after 4 hrs. the blade itself. The second
leaf after 9 m. had all its tentacles except nine inflected; after 6
hrs. 30 m. these nine were sub-inflected; the blade having become much
inflected in 4 hrs. The third leaf after 1 hr. 6 m. had all but forty
tentacles inflected. The fourth, after 2 hrs.  5 m., had about half its
tentacles and after 4 hrs. all but forty-five inflected. Leaves which
were immersed in water at the same time were not at all affected, with
the exception of one; and this not until 8 hrs. had elapsed. Hence
there can be no doubt that a highly sensitive leaf, if immersed in a
solution, so that all the glands are enabled to absorb, is acted on by
1/1600 of a grain of the carbonate. Assuming that the leaf, which was a
large one, and which had all its tentacles excepting eight inflected,
bore 170 glands, each gland could have absorbed only 1/268800 of a
grain (.00024 mg.); yet this sufficed to act on each of the 162
tentacles which were inflected. But as only four out of the above
fourteen leaves were plainly affected, this is nearly the minimum dose
which is efficient.

Aggregation of the Protoplasm from the Action of Carbonate of
Ammonia.--I have fully described in the third chapter the remarkable
effects of moderately strong doses of this salt in causing the
aggregation of the protoplasm within the cells of the glands and
tentacles; and here my object is merely to show what small doses
suffice. A leaf was immersed in twenty minims (1.183 ml.) of a solution
of one part to 1750 of water, [page 146] and another leaf in the same
quantity of a solution of one part to 3062; in the former case
aggregation occurred in 4 m., in the latter in 11 m. A leaf was then
immersed in twenty minims of a solution of one part to 4375 of water,
so that it received 1/240 of a grain (.27 mg.); in 5 m. there was a
slight change of colour in the glands, and in 15 m. small spheres of
protoplasm were formed in the cells beneath the glands of all the
tentacles. In these cases there could not be a shadow of a doubt about
the action of the solution.

A solution was then made of one part to 5250 of water, and I
experimented on fourteen leaves, but will give only a few of the cases.
Eight young leaves were selected and examined with care, and they
showed no trace of aggregation. Four of these were placed in a drachm
(3.549 ml.) of distilled water; and four in a similar vessel, with a
drachm of the solution.  After a time the leaves were examined under a
high power, being taken alternately from the solution and the water.
The first leaf was taken out of the solution after an immersion of 2
hrs. 40 m., and the last leaf out of the water after 3 hrs. 50 m.; the
examination lasting for 1 hr. 40 m. In the four leaves out of the water
there was no trace of aggregation except in one specimen, in which a
very few, extremely minute spheres of protoplasm were present beneath
some of the round glands. All the glands were translucent and red. The
four leaves which had been immersed in the solution, besides being
inflected, presented a widely different appearance; for the contents of
the cells of every single tentacle on all four leaves were
conspicuously aggregated; the spheres and elongated masses of
protoplasm in many cases extending halfway down the tentacles. All the
glands, both those of the central and exterior tentacles, were opaque
and blackened; and this shows that all had absorbed some of the
carbonate. These four leaves were of very nearly the same size, and the
glands were counted on one and found to be 167. This being the case,
and the four leaves having been immersed in a drachm of the solution,
each gland could have received on an average only 1/64128 of a grain
(.001009 mg.) of the salt; and this quantity sufficed to induce within
a short time conspicuous aggregation in the cells beneath all the
glands.

A vigorous but rather small red leaf was placed in six minims of the
same solution (viz. one part to 5250 of water), so that it received
1/960 of a grain (.0675 mg.). In 40 m. the glands appeared rather
darker; and in 1 hr. from four to six spheres of protoplasm were formed
in the cells beneath the glands of all the tentacles. I did not count
the tentacles, but we may [page 147] safely assume that there were at
least 140; and if so, each gland could have received only the 1/134400
of a grain, or .00048 mg.

A weaker solution was then made of one part to 7000 of water, and four
leaves were immersed in it; but I will give only one case. A leaf was
placed in ten minims of this solution; after 1 hr. 37 m. the glands
became somewhat darker, and the cells beneath all of them now contained
many spheres of aggregated protoplasm. This leaf received 1/768 of a
grain, and bore 166 glands. Each gland could, therefore, have received
only 1/127488 of a grain (.00507 mg.) of the carbonate.

Two other experiments are worth giving. A leaf was immersed for 4 hrs.
15 m. in distilled water, and there was no aggregation; it was then
placed for 1 hr. 15 m. in a little solution of one part to 5250 of
water; and this excited well-marked aggregation and inflection. Another
leaf, after having been immersed for 21 hrs. 15 m. in distilled water,
had its glands blackened, but there was no aggregation in the cells
beneath them; it was then left in six minims of the same solution, and
in 1 hr. there was much aggregation in many of the tentacles; in 2 hrs.
all the tentacles (146 in number) were affected--the aggregation
extending down for a length equal to half or the whole of the glands.
It is extremely improbable that these two leaves would have undergone
aggregation if they had been left for a little longer in the water,
namely for 1 hr. and 1 hr. 15 m., during which time they were immersed
in the solution; for the process of aggregation seems invariably to
supervene slowly and very gradually in water.]

Summary of the Results with Carbonate of Ammonia.--The roots absorb the
solution, as shown by their changed colour, and by the aggregation of
the contents of their cells. The vapour is absorbed by the glands;
these are blackened, and the tentacles are inflected. The glands of the
disc, when excited by a half-minim drop (.0296 ml.), containing 1/960
of a grain (.0675 mg.), transmit a motor impulse to the exterior
tentacles, causing them to bend inwards. A minute drop, containing
1/14400 of a grain (.00445 mg.), if held for a few seconds in contact
with a gland, soon causes the tentacle bearing it to be inflected. If a
leaf is left [page 148] immersed for a few hours in a solution, and a
gland absorbs the 1/134400 of a grain (.0048 mg.), its colour becomes
darker, though not actually black; and the contents of the cells
beneath the gland are plainly aggregated. Lastly, under the same
circumstances, the absorption by a gland of the 1/268800 of a grain
(.00024 mg.) suffices to excite the tentacle bearing this gland into
movement.

                     [NITRATE OF AMMONIA.

With the salt I attended only to the inflection of the leaves, for it
is far less efficient than the carbonate in causing aggregation,
although considerably more potent in causing inflection. I experimented
with half-minims (.0296 ml.) on the discs of fifty-two leaves, but will
give only a few cases. A solution of one part to 109 of water was too
strong, causing little inflection, and after 24 hrs. killing, or nearly
killing, four out of six leaves which were thus tried; each of which
received the 1/240 of a grain (or .27 mg.). A solution of one part to
218 of water acted most energetically, causing not only the tentacles
of all the leaves, but the blades of some, to be strongly inflected.
Fourteen leaves were tried with drops of a solution of one part to 875
of water, so that the disc of each received the 1/1920 of a grain
(.0337 mg.). Of these leaves, seven were very strongly acted on, the
edges being generally inflected; two were moderately acted on; and five
not at all. I subsequently tried three of these latter five leaves with
urine, saliva, and mucus, but they were only slightly affected; and
this proves that they were not in an active condition. I mention this
fact to show how necessary it is to experiment on several leaves. Two
of the leaves, which were well inflected, re-expanded after 51 hrs.

In the following experiment I happened to select very sensitive leaves.
Half-minims of a solution of one part to 1094 of water (i.e. 1 gr. to 2
1/2 oz.) were placed on the discs of nine leaves, so that each received
the 1/2400 of a grain (.027 mg.). Three of them had their tentacles
strongly inflected and their blades curled inwards; five were slightly
and somewhat doubtfully affected, having from three to eight of their
exterior tentacles inflected: one leaf was not at all affected, yet was
afterwards acted on by saliva. In six of these cases, a trace of action
was perceptible in [page 149] 7 hrs., but the full effect was not
produced until from 24 hrs. to 30 hrs. had elapsed. Two of the leaves,
which were only slightly inflected, re-expanded after an additional
interval of 19 hrs.

Half-minims of a rather weaker solution, viz. of one part to 1312 of
water (1 gr. to 3 oz.) were tried on fourteen leaves; so that each
received 1/2880 of a grain (.0225 mg.), instead of, as in the last
experiment, 1/2400 of a grain. The blade of one was plainly inflected,
as were six of the exterior tentacles; the blade of a second was
slightly, and two of the exterior tentacles well, inflected, all the
other tentacles being curled in at right angles to the disc; three
other leaves had from five to eight tentacles inflected; five others
only two or three, and occasionally, though very rarely, drops of pure
water cause this much action; the four remaining leaves were in no way
affected, yet three of them, when subsequently tried with urine, became
greatly inflected. In most of these cases a slight effect was
perceptible in from 6 hrs. to 7 hrs., but the full effect was not
produced until from 24 hrs. to 30 hrs. had elapsed.  It is obvious that
we have here reached very nearly the minimum amount, which, distributed
between the glands of the disc, acts on the exterior tentacles; these
having themselves not received any of the solution.

In the next place, the viscid secretion round three of the exterior
glands was touched with the same little drop (1/20 of a minim) of a
solution of one part to 437 of water; and after an interval of 2 hrs.
50 m. all three tentacles were well inflected. Each of these glands
could have received only the 1/28800 of a grain, or .00225 mg. A little
drop of the same size and strength was also applied to four other
glands, and in 1 hr. two became inflected, whilst the other two never
moved. We here see, as in the case of the half-minims placed on the
discs, that the nitrate of ammonia is more potent in causing inflection
than the carbonate; for minute drops of the latter salt of this
strength produced no effect. I tried minute drops of a still weaker
solution of the nitrate, viz. one part to 875 of water, on twenty-one
glands, but no effect whatever was produced, except perhaps in one
instance.

Sixty-three leaves were immersed in solutions of various strengths;
other leaves being immersed at the same time in the same pure water
used in making the solutions. The results are so remarkable, though
less so than with phosphate of ammonia, that I must describe the
experiments in detail, but I will give only a few. In speaking of the
successive periods when inflection occurred, I always reckon from the
time of first immersion.  [page 150]

Having made some preliminary trials as a guide, five leaves were placed
in the same little vessel in thirty minims of a solution of one part of
the nitrate to 7875 of water (1 gr. to 18 oz.); and this amount of
fluid just sufficed to cover them. After 2 hrs. 10 m. three of the
leaves were considerably inflected, and the other two moderately. The
glands of all became of so dark a red as almost to deserve to be called
black. After 8 hrs. four of the leaves had all their tentacles more or
less inflected; whilst the fifth, which I then perceived to be an old
leaf, had only thirty tentacles inflected. Next morning, after 23 hrs.
40 m., all the leaves were in the same state, excepting that the old
leaf had a few more tentacles inflected. Five leaves which had been
placed at the same time in water were observed at the same intervals of
time; after 2 hrs. 10 m. two of them had four, one had seven, one had
ten, of the long-headed marginal tentacles, and the fifth had four
round-headed tentacles, inflected. After 8 hrs. there was no change in
these leaves, and after 24 hrs. all the marginal tentacles had
re-expanded; but in one leaf, a dozen, and in a second leaf, half a
dozen, submarginal tentacles had become inflected. As the glands of the
five leaves in the solution were simultaneously darkened, no doubt they
had all absorbed a nearly equal amount of the salt: and as 1/288 of a
grain was given to the five leaves together, each got 1/1440 of a grain
(.045 mg.). I did not count the tentacles on these leaves, which were
moderately fine ones, but as the average number on thirty-one leaves
was 192, it would be safe to assume that each bore on an average at
least 160. If so, each of the darkened glands could have received only
1/230400 of a grain of the nitrate; and this caused the inflection of a
great majority of the tentacles.

This plan of immersing several leaves in the same vessel is a bad one,
as it is impossible to feel sure that the more vigorous leaves do not
rob the weaker ones of their share of the salt.  The glands, moreover,
must often touch one another or the sides of the vessel, and movement
may have been thus excited; but the corresponding leaves in water,
which were little inflected, though rather more so than commonly
occurs, were exposed in an almost equal degree to these same sources of
error. I will, therefore, give only one other experiment made in this
manner, though many were tried and all confirmed the foregoing and
following results. Four leaves were placed in forty minims of a
solution of one part to 10,500 of water; and assuming that they
absorbed equally, each leaf received 1/1152 of a grain (.0562 mg.).
After 1 hr. 20 m. many of the tentacles on all four leaves were
somewhat inflected. After [page 151] 5 hrs. 30 m. two leaves had all
their tentacles inflected; a third leaf all except the extreme
marginals, which seemed old and torpid; and the fourth a large number.
After 21 hrs. every single tentacle, on all four leaves, was closely
inflected. Of the four leaves placed at the same time in water, one
had, after 5 hrs. 45 m., five marginal tentacles inflected; a second,
ten; a third, nine marginals and submarginals; and the fourth, twelve,
chiefly submarginals, inflected. After 21 hrs. all these marginal
tentacles re-expanded, but a few of the submarginals on two of the
leaves remained slightly curved inwards. The contrast was wonderfully
great between these four leaves in water and those in the solution, the
latter having every one of their tentacles closely inflected. Making
the moderate assumption that each of these leaves bore 160 tentacles,
each gland could have absorbed only 1/184320 of a grain (.000351 mg.).
This experiment was repeated on three leaves with the same relative
amount of the solution; and after 6 hrs. 15 m. all the tentacles except
nine, on all three leaves taken together, were closely inflected. In
this case the tentacles on each leaf were counted, and gave an average
of 162 per leaf.

The following experiments were tried during the summer of 1873, by
placing the leaves, each in a separate watch-glass and pouring over it
thirty minims (1.775 ml.) of the solution; other leaves being treated
in exactly the same manner with the doubly distilled water used in
making the solutions. The trials above given were made several years
before, and when I read over my notes, I could not believe in the
results; so I resolved to begin again with moderately strong solutions.
Six leaves were first immersed, each in thirty minims of a solution of
one part of the nitrate to 8750 of water (1 gr. to 20 oz.), so that
each received 1/320 of a grain (.2025 mg.). Before 30 m. had elapsed,
four of these leaves were immensely, and two of them moderately,
inflected. The glands were rendered of a dark red. The four
corresponding leaves in water were not at all affected until 6 hrs. had
elapsed, and then only the short tentacles on the borders of the disc;
and their inflection, as previously explained, is never of any
significance.

Four leaves were immersed, each in thirty minims of a solution of one
part to 17,500 of water (1 gr. to 40 oz.), so that each received 1/640
of a grain (.101 mg.); and in less than 45 m.  three of them had all
their tentacles, except from four to ten, inflected; the blade of one
being inflected after 6 hrs., and the blade of a second after 21 hrs.
The fourth leaf was not at all affected. The glands of none were
darkened. Of the corresponding leaves [page 152] in water, only one had
any of its exterior tentacles, namely five, inflected; after 6 hrs. in
one case, and after 21 hrs. in two other cases, the short tentacles on
the borders of the disc formed a ring, in the usual manner.

Four leaves were immersed, each in thirty minims of a solution of one
part to 43,750 of water (1 gr. to 100 oz.), so that each leaf got
1/1600 of a grain (.0405 mg.). Of these, one was much inflected in 8
m., and after 2 hrs. 7 m. had all the tentacles, except thirteen,
inflected. The second leaf, after 10 m., had all except three
inflected. The third and fourth were hardly at all affected, scarcely
more than the corresponding leaves in water. Of the latter, only one
was affected, this having two tentacles inflected, with those on the
outer parts of the disc forming a ring in the usual manner. In the leaf
which had all its tentacles except three inflected in 10 m., each gland
(assuming that the leaf bore 160 tentacles) could have absorbed only
1/251200 of a grain, or .000258 mg.

Four leaves were separately immersed as before in a solution of one
part to 131,250 of water (1 gr. to 300 oz.), so that each received
1/4800 of a grain, or .0135 mg. After 50 m. one leaf had all its
tentacles except sixteen, and after 8 hrs. 20 m. all but fourteen,
inflected. The second leaf, after 40 m., had all but twenty inflected;
and after 8 hrs. 10 m. began to re-expand. The third, in 3 hrs. had
about half its tentacles inflected, which began to re-expand after 8
hrs. 15 m. The fourth leaf, after 3 hrs. 7 m., had only twenty-nine
tentacles more or less inflected. Thus three out of the four leaves
were strongly acted on. It is clear that very sensitive leaves had been
accidentally selected. The day moreover was hot. The four corresponding
leaves in water were likewise acted on rather more than is usual; for
after 3 hrs. one had nine tentacles, another four, and another two, and
the fourth none, inflected.  With respect to the leaf of which all the
