trusted friend.  Her hand slipped from the dagger's hilt.  Tario
came closer.  He spoke gentle, friendly words, and she answered
him in a voice that seemed hers and yet another's.

He was beside her now.  His hand was up her shoulder.  His eyes
were down-bent toward hers.  She looked up into his face.  His
gaze seemed to bore straight through her to some hidden spring of
sentiment within her.

Her lips parted in sudden awe and wonder at the strange revealment
of her inner self that was being laid bare before her consciousness.
She had known Tario for ever.  He was more than friend to her.
She moved a little closer to him.  In one swift flood of light she
knew the truth.  She loved Tario, Jeddak of Lothar!  She had always
loved him.

The man, seeing the success of his strategy, could not restrain a
faint smile of satisfaction.  Whether there was something in the
expression of his face, or whether from Carthoris of Helium in a
far chamber of the palace came a more powerful suggestion, who may
say?  But something there was that suddenly dispelled the strange,
hypnotic influence of the man.

As though a mask had been torn from her eyes, Thuvia suddenly saw
Tario as she had formerly seen him, and, accustomed as she was to
the strange manifestations of highly developed mentality which are
common upon Barsoom, she quickly guessed enough of the truth to
know that she was in grave danger.

Quickly she took a step backward, tearing herself from his grasp.
But the momentary contact had aroused within Tario all the long-buried
passions of his loveless existence.

With a muffled cry he sprang upon her, throwing his arms about her
and attempting to drag her lips to his.

"Woman!" he cried.  "Lovely woman!  Tario would make you queen of
Lothar.  Listen to me!  Listen to the love of the last of the
jeddaks of Barsoom."

Thuvia struggled to free herself from his embrace.

"Stop, creature!" she cried.  "Stop!  I do not love you.  Stop, or
I shall scream for help!"

Tario laughed in her face.

"'Scream for help,'" he mimicked.  "And who within the halls of
Lothar is there who might come in answer to your call?  Who would
dare enter the presence of Tario, unsummoned?"

"There is one," she replied, "who would come, and, coming, dare
to cut you down upon your own throne, if he thought that you had
offered affront to Thuvia of Ptarth!"

"Who, Jav?" asked Tario.

"Not Jav, nor any other soft-skinned Lotharian," she replied; "but
a real man, a real warrior--Carthoris of Helium!"

Again the man laughed at her.

"You forget the bowmen," he reminded her.  "What could your red
warrior accomplish against my fearless legions?"

Again he caught her roughly to him, dragging her towards his couch.

"If you will not be my queen," he said, "you shall be my slave."

"Neither!" cried the girl.

As she spoke the single word there was a quick move of her right
hand; Tario, releasing her, staggered back, both hands pressed to
his side.  At the same instant the room filled with bowmen, and
then the jeddak of Lothar sank senseless to the marble floor.

At the instant that he lost consciousness the bowmen were about to
release their arrows into Thuvia's heart.  Involuntarily she gave
a single cry for help, though she knew that not even Carthoris of
Helium could save her now.

Then she closed her eyes and waited for the end.  No slender shafts
pierced her tender side.  She raised her lids to see what stayed
the hand of her executioners.

The room was empty save for herself and the still form of the jeddak
of Lothar lying at her feet, a little pool of crimson staining the
white marble of the floor beside him.  Tario was unconscious.

Thuvia was amazed.  Where were the bowmen?  Why had they not loosed
their shafts?  What could it all mean?

An instant before the room had been mysteriously filled with
armed men, evidently called to protect their jeddak; yet now, with
the evidence of her deed plain before them, they had vanished as
mysteriously as they had come, leaving her alone with the body of
their ruler, into whose side she had slipped her long, keen blade.

The girl glanced apprehensively about, first for signs of the return
of the bowmen, and then for some means of escape.

The wall behind the dais was pierced by two small doorways, hidden
by heavy hangings.  Thuvia was running quickly towards one of
these when she heard the clank of a warrior's metal at the end of
the apartment behind her.

Ah, if she had but an instant more of time she could have reached
that screening arras and, perchance, have found some avenue of
escape behind it; but now it was too late--she had been discovered!

With a feeling that was akin to apathy she turned to meet her fate,
and there, before her, running swiftly across the broad chamber to
her side, was Carthoris, his naked long-sword gleaming in his hand.

For days she had doubted the intentions of the Heliumite.  She
had thought him a party to her abduction.  Since Fate had thrown
them together she had scarce favoured him with more than the most
perfunctory replies to his remarks, unless at such times as the
weird and uncanny happenings at Lothar had surprised her out of
her reserve.

She knew that Carthoris of Helium would fight for her; but whether
to save her for himself or another, she was in doubt.

He knew that she was promised to Kulan Tith, Jeddak of Kaol, but
if he had been instrumental in her abduction, his motives could
not be prompted by loyalty to his friend, or regard for her honour.

And yet, as she saw him coming across the marble floor of the audience
chamber of Tario of Lothar, his fine eyes filled with apprehension
for her safety, his splendid figure personifying all that is finest
in the fighting men of martial Mars, she could not believe that
any faintest trace of perfidy lurked beneath so glorious an exterior.

Never, she thought, in all her life had the sight of any man been
so welcome to her.  It was with difficulty that she refrained from
rushing forward to meet him.

She knew that he loved her; but, in time, she recalled that she was
promised to Kulan Tith.  Not even might she trust herself to show
too great gratitude to the Heliumite, lest he misunderstand.

Carthoris was by her side now.  His quick glance had taken in the
scene within the room--the still figure of the jeddak sprawled upon
the floor--the girl hastening toward a shrouded exit.

"Did he harm you, Thuvia?" he asked.

She held up her crimsoned blade that he might see it.

"No," she said, "he did not harm me."

A grim smile lighted Carthoris' face.

"Praised be our first ancestor!" he murmured.  "And now let us see
if we may not make good our escape from this accursed city before
the Lotharians discover that their jeddak is no more."

With the firm authority that sat so well upon him in whose veins
flowed the blood of John Carter of Virginia and Dejah Thoris
of Helium, he grasped her hand and, turning back across the hall,
strode toward the great doorway through which Jav had brought them
into the presence of the jeddak earlier in the day.

They had almost reached the threshold when a figure sprang into the
apartment through another entrance.  It was Jav.  He, too, took in
the scene within at a glance.

Carthoris turned to face him, his sword ready in his hand, and his
great body shielding the slender figure of the girl.

"Come, Jav of Lothar!" he cried.  "Let us face the issue at once,
for only one of us may leave this chamber alive with Thuvia of
Ptarth."  Then, seeing that the man wore no sword, he exclaimed:
"Bring on your bowmen, then, or come with us as my prisoner until
we have safely passed the outer portals of thy ghostly city."

"You have killed Tario!" exclaimed Jav, ignoring the other's
challenge.  "You have killed Tario!  I see his blood upon the
floor--real blood--real death.  Tario was, after all, as real as I.
Yet he was an etherealist.  He would not materialize his sustenance.
Can it be that they are right?  Well, we, too, are right.  And all
these ages we have been quarrelling--each saying that the other
was wrong!

"However, he is dead now.  Of that I am glad.  Now shall Jav come
into his own.  Now shall Jav be Jeddak of Lothar!"

As he finished, Tario opened his eyes and then quickly sat up.

"Traitor!  Assassin!" he screamed, and then:  "Kadar!  Kadar!"
which is the Barsoomian for guard.

Jav went sickly white.  He fell upon his belly, wriggling toward
Tario.

"Oh, my Jeddak, my Jeddak!" he whimpered.  "Jav had no hand in
this.  Jav, your faithful Jav, but just this instant entered the
apartment to find you lying prone upon the floor and these two
strangers about to leave. How it happened I know not.  Believe me,
most glorious Jeddak!"

"Cease, knave!" cried Tario.  "I heard your words: 'However, he
is dead now.  Of that I am glad.  Now shall Jav come into his own.
Now shall Jav be Jeddak of Lothar.'

"At last, traitor, I have found you out.  Your own words have
condemned you as surely as the acts of these red creatures have
sealed their fates--unless--" He paused.  "Unless the woman--"

But he got no further.  Carthoris guessed what he would have said,
and before the words could be uttered he had sprung forward and
struck the man across the mouth with his open palm.

Tario frothed in rage and mortification.

"And should you again affront the Princess of Ptarth," warned the
Heliumite, "I shall forget that you wear no sword--not for ever
may I control my itching sword hand."

Tario shrank back toward the little doorways behind the dais.  He
was trying to speak, but so hideously were the muscles of his face
working that he could utter no word for several minutes.  At last
he managed to articulate intelligibly.

"Die!" he shrieked.  "Die!" and then he turned toward the exit at
his back.

Jav leaped forward, screaming in terror.

"Have pity, Tario!  Have pity!  Remember the long ages that I have
served you faithfully.  Remember all that I have done for Lothar.
Do not condemn me now to the death hideous.  Save me!  Save me!"

But Tario only laughed a mocking laugh and continued to back toward
the hangings that hid the little doorway.

Jav turned toward Carthoris.

"Stop him!" he screamed.  "Stop him!  If you love life, let him
not leave this room," and as he spoke he leaped in pursuit of his
jeddak.

Carthoris followed Jav's example, but the "last of the jeddaks
of Barsoom" was too quick for them.  By the time they reached the
arras behind which he had disappeared, they found a heavy stone
door blocking their further progress.

Jav sank to the floor in a spasm of terror.

"Come, man!" cried Carthoris.  "We are not dead yet.  Let us
hasten to the avenues and make an attempt to leave the city.  We
are still alive, and while we live we may yet endeavour to direct
our own destinies.  Of what avail, to sink spineless to the floor?
Come, be a man!"

Jav but shook his head.

"Did you not hear him call the guards?" he moaned.  "Ah, if we
could have but intercepted him!  Then there might have been hope;
but, alas, he was too quick for us."

"Well, well," exclaimed Carthoris impatiently.  "What if he did
call the guards?  There will be time enough to worry about that
after they come--at present I see no indication that they have any
idea of over-exerting themselves to obey their jeddak's summons."

Jav shook his head mournfully.

"You do not understand," he said.  "The guards have already
come--and gone.  They have done their work and we are lost.  Look
to the various exits."

Carthoris and Thuvia turned their eyes in the direction of the
several doorways which pierced the walls of the great chamber.
Each was tightly closed by huge stone doors.

"Well?" asked Carthoris.

"We are to die the death," whispered Jav faintly.

Further than that he would not say.  He just sat upon the edge of
the jeddak's couch and waited.

Carthoris moved to Thuvia's side, and, standing there with naked
sword, he let his brave eyes roam ceaselessly about the great
chamber, that no foe might spring upon them unseen.

For what seemed hours no sound broke the silence of their living
tomb.  No sign gave their executioners of the time or manner of
their death.  The suspense was terrible.  Even Carthoris of Helium
began to feel the terrible strain upon his nerves.  If he could
but know how and whence the hand of death was to strike, he could
meet it unafraid, but to suffer longer the hideous tension of this
blighting ignorance of the plans of their assassins was telling
upon him grievously.

Thuvia of Ptarth drew quite close to him.  She felt safer with the
feel of his arm against hers, and with the contact of her the man
took a new grip upon himself.  With his old-time smile he turned
toward her.

"It would seem that they are trying to frighten us to death," he
said, laughing; "and, shame be upon me that I should confess it,
I think they were close to accomplishing their designs upon me."

She was about to make some reply when a fearful shriek broke from
the lips of the Lotharian.

"The end is coming!" he cried.  "The end is coming!  The floor!
The floor!  Oh, Komal, be merciful!"

Thuvia and Carthoris did not need to look at the floor to be aware
of the strange movement that was taking place.

Slowly the marble flagging was sinking in all directions toward
the centre.  At first the movement, being gradual, was scarce
noticeable; but presently the angle of the floor became such that
one might stand easily only by bending one knee considerably.

Jav was shrieking still, and clawing at the royal couch that had
already commenced to slide toward the centre of the room, where both
Thuvia and Carthoris suddenly noted a small orifice which grew in
diameter as the floor assumed more closely a funnel-like contour.

Now it became more and more difficult to cling to the dizzy
inclination of the smooth and polished marble.

Carthoris tried to support Thuvia, but himself commenced to slide
and slip toward the ever-enlarging aperture.

Better to cling to the smooth stone he kicked off his sandals
