if they attempt crawling over its polished upper surface. To fly upward
in a perpendicular line, once their wings are wet, is additionally
hopeless, because of the hairs that guard the mouth of the trap; and
so, after vain attempts to fly or crawl out of the prison, they usually
sink exhausted into a watery grave.

When certain plants live in soil that is so poor in nitrogen compounds
that proteid formation is interfered with, they have come to depend more
or less on a carnivorous diet. The sundew actually digests its prey with
the help of a gastric juice similar to what is found in the stomach of
animals; but the bladderwort and pitcher-plants can only absorb in the
form of soup the products of their victims' decay. Flies and gnats
drowned in these pitchers quickly yield their poor little bodies; but
owing to the beetle's hard shell covering, many a rare specimen may be
rescued intact to add to a collection.

A similar ogre plant is the yellow-flowered Trumpet-leaf (_S. flava_)
found in bogs in the Southern states.




SUNDEW FAMILY _(Droseraceae)_


Round-leaved Sundew; Dew-plant

_Drosera rotundifolia_

_Flowers_--Small, white, growing in a 1-sided, curved raceme of buds
chiefly. Calyx usually 5-parted; usually 5 petals, and as many stamens
as petals; usually 3 styles, but 2-cleft, thus appearing to be twice as
many. _Scape:_ 4 to 10 in. high. _Leaves:_ Growing in an open rosette on
the ground; round or broader, clothed with reddish bristly hairs tipped
with purple glands, and narrowed into long, flat, hairy petioles; young
leaves curled like fern fronds.

_Preferred Habitat_--Bogs, sandy and sunny marshes.

_Flowering Season_--July-August.

_Distribution_--Labrador to the Gulf of Mexico and westward. From Alaska
to California. Europe and Asia.

Here is a bloodthirsty little miscreant that lives by reversing the
natural order of higher forms of life preying upon lower ones, an
anomaly in that the vegetable actually eats the animal. The dogbane, as
we shall see, simply catches the flies that dare trespass upon the
butterflies' preserves, for excellent reasons of its own; the Silenes
and phloxes, among others, spread their calices with a sticky gum that
acts as limed twigs do to birds, in order to guard the nectar secreted
for flying benefactors from pilfering ants; the honey bee being an
imported, not a native, insect, and therefore not perfectly adapted to
the milkweed, occasionally gets entrapped by it; the big bumblebee is
sometimes fatally imprisoned in the moccasin flower's gorgeous tomb--the
punishment of insects that do not benefit the flowers is infinite in its
variety. But the local Venus's flytrap (_Dionaea muscipula_), gathered
only from the low savannas in North Carolina to entertain the owners of
hothouses as it promptly closes the crushing trap at the end of its
sensitive leaves over a hapless fly, and the common sundew that tinges
the peat-bogs of three continents with its little reddish leaves, belong
to a distinct class of carnivorous plants which actually masticate their
animal food, depending upon it for nourishment as men do upon cattle
slaughtered in an abattoir. Darwin's luminous account of these two
species alone, which occupies more than three hundred absorbingly
interesting pages of his "Insectivorous Plants," should be read by
every one interested in these freaks of nature.

When we go to some sunny cranberry bog to look for these sundews,
nothing could be more innocent looking than the tiny plant, its nodding
raceme of buds, usually with only a solitary little blossom (that opens
only in the sunshine) at the top of the curve, its leaves glistening
with what looks like dew, though the midsummer sun may be high in the
heavens. A little fly or gnat, attracted by the bright jewels, alights
on a leaf only to find that the clear drops, more sticky than honey,
instantly glue his feet, that the pretty reddish hairs about him act
like tentacles, reaching inward, to imprison him within their slowly
closing embrace. Here is one of the horrors of the Inquisition
operating in this land of liberty before our very eyes! Excited by the
struggles of the victim, the sensitive hairs close only the faster,
working on the same principle that a vine's tendrils do when they come
in contact with a trellis. More of the sticky fluid pours upon the
hapless fly, plastering over his legs and wings and the pores on his
body through which he draws his breath. Slowly, surely, the leaf rolls
inward, making a temporary stomach; the cruel hairs bind, the glue
suffocates and holds him fast. Death alone releases him. And now the
leaf's orgy begins: moistening the fly with a fresh peptic fluid, which
helps in the assimilation, the plant proceeds to digest its food.
Curiously enough, chemical analysis proves that this sundew secrets a
complex fluid corresponding almost exactly to the gastric juice in the
stomach of animals.

Darwin, who fed these leaves with various articles, found that they
could dissolve matter out of pollen, seeds, grass, etc.; yet without a
human caterer, how could a leaf turn vegetarian? When a bit of any
undesirable substance, such as chalk or wood, was placed on the hairs
and excited them, they might embrace it temporarily; but as soon as the
mistake was discovered, it would be dropped! He also poisoned the plants
by administering acids, and gave them fatal attacks of indigestion by
overfeeding them with bits of raw beef!




SAXIFRAGE FAMILY _(Saxifragaceae)_


Early Saxifrage

_Saxifraga virginiensis_

_Flowers_--White, small, numerous, perfect, spreading into a loose
panicle. Calyx 5-lobed; 5 petals; 10 stamens; 1 pistil with 2
styles. _Scape:_ 4 to 12 in. high, naked, sticky-hairy. _Leaves:_
Clustered at the base, rather thick, obovate, toothed, and narrowed
into spatulate-margined petioles. _Fruit:_ Widely spread, purplish
brown pods.

_Preferred Habitat_--Rocky woodlands, hillsides.

_Flowering Season_--March-May.

_Distribution_--New Brunswick to Georgia, and westward a thousand
miles or more.

Rooted in clefts of rock that, therefore, appears to be broken by this
vigorous plant, the saxifrage shows rosettes of fresh green leaves in
earliest spring, and soon whitens with its blossoms the most forbidding
niches. (_Saxum_ = a rock; _frango_ = I break.) At first a small ball of
green buds nestles in the leafy tuffet, then pushes upward on a bare
scape, opening its tiny, white, five-pointed star flowers as it ascends,
until, having reached the allotted height, it scatters them in spreading
clusters that last a fortnight.


Foam-flower; False Miterwort; Cool wort; Nancy-over-the-Ground

_Tiarella cordifolia_

_Flowers_--White, small, feathery, borne in a close raceme at the top of
a scape 6 to 12 in. high. Calyx white, 5-lobed; 5 clawed petals; 10
stamens, long-exserted; 1 pistil with 2 styles. _Leaves_: Long-petioled
from the rootstock or runners, rounded or broadly heart-shaped, 3 to
7-lobed, toothed, often downy along veins beneath.

_Preferred Habitat_--Rich, moist woods, especially along mountains.

_Flowering Season_--April-May.

_Distribution_--Nova Scotia to Georgia, and westward scarcely to the
Mississippi.

Fuzzy, bright white foam-flowers are most conspicuous in the forest when
seen against their unevenly colored leaves that carpet the ground. A
relative, the true Miterwort or Bishop's Cap (_Mittella diphylla_), with
similar foliage, except that two opposite leaves may be found almost
seated near the middle of its hairy stem, has its flowers rather
distantly scattered on the raceme, and their fine petals deeply cut like
fringe. Both species may be found in bloom at the same time, offering an
opportunity for comparison to the confused novice. Now, _tiarella_,
meaning a little tiara, and _mitella_, a little miter, refer, of
course, to the odd forms of their seed-cases; but all of us are not
gifted with the imaginative eyes of Linnaeus, who named the plants.
Xenophon's assertion that the royal tiara or turban of the Persians was
encircled with a crown helps us no more to see what Linnaeus saw in the
one case than the fact that the papal miter is encircled by three crowns
helps in the other. And as for the lofty, two-peaked cap worn by Bishops
in the Roman Church, a dozen plants, with equal propriety, might be said
to wear it.


Grass of Parnassus

_Parnassia caroliniana_

_Flowers_--Creamy white, delicately veined with greenish, solitary, 1
in. broad or over, at the end of a scape 8 in. to 2 ft. high, 1 ovate
leaf clasping it. Calyx deeply 5-lobed; corolla of 5 spreading, parallel
veined petals; 5 fertile stamens alternating with them, and 3 stout
imperfect stamens clustered at base of each petal; 1 very short pistil
with 4 stigmas. _Leaves:_ From the root, on long petioles, broadly oval
or rounded, heart-shaped at base, rather thick.

_Preferred Habitat_--Wet ground, low meadows, swamps.

_Flowering Season_--July-September.

_Distribution_--New Brunswick to Virginia, west to Iowa.

What's in a name? Certainly our common grass of Parnassus, which is no
grass at all, never starred the meadows round about the home of the
Muses, nor sought the steaming savannas of the Carolinas. The European
counterpart (_P. palustris_), fabled to have sprung up on Mount
Parnassus, is at home here only in the Canadian border states and
northward.




WITCH-HAZEL FAMILY _(Hamamelidaceae)_


Witch-hazel

_Hamamelis virginiana_

_Flowers_--Yellow, fringy, clustered in the axils of branches. Calyx
4-parted; 4 very narrow curving petals about 3/4 in. long; 4 short
stamens, also 4 that are scale-like; 2 styles. _Stem_: A tall, crooked
shrub. _Leaves_: Broadly oval, thick, wavy-toothed, mostly fallen at
flowering time. _Fruit_: Woody capsules maturing the next season and
remaining with flowers of the succeeding year (_Hama_ = together with;
_mela_ = fruit).

The literature of Europe is filled with allusions to the witch-hazel,
which, however, is quite distinct from our shrub. Swift wrote:

  "They tell us something strange and odd
  About a certain magic rod
  That, bending down its top divines
  Where'er the soil has hidden mines;
  Where there are none, it stands erect
  Scorning to show the least respect."

A good story is told on Linnaeus in Baring-Gould's "Curious Myths of
the Middle Ages": "When the great botanist was on one of his voyages,
hearing his secretary highly extol the virtues of his divining-wand,
he was willing to convince him of its insufficiency, and for that
purpose concealed a purse of one hundred ducats under a ranunculus,
which grew by itself in a meadow, and bid the secretary find it if he
could. The wand discovered nothing, and Linnaeus's mark was soon
trampled down by the company present, so that when he went to finish
the experiment by fetching the gold himself, he was utterly at a loss
where to find it. The man with the wand assisted him, and informed him
that it could not lie in the way they were going, but quite the
contrary; so they pursued the direction of the wand, and actually dug
out the gold. Linnaeus said that another such experiment would be
sufficient to make a proselyte of him."

Many a well has been dug even in this land of liberty where our
witch-hazel indicated; but here its kindly magic is directed chiefly
through the soothing extract distilled from its juices. Its yellow,
thread-like blossoms are the latest to appear in the autumn woods.




ROSE FAMILY _(Rosaceae)_


Hardhack; Steeple Bush

_Spiraea tomentosa_

_Flowers_--Pink or magenta, rarely white, very small, in dense,
pyramidal clusters. Calyx of 5 sepals; corolla of 5 rounded petals;
stamens, 20 to 60; usually 5 pistils, downy. _Stem:_ 2 to 3 ft. high,
erect, shrubby, simple, downy. _Leaves:_ Dark green above, covered with
whitish woolly hairs beneath; oval, saw-edged, 1 to 2 in. long.

_Preferred Habitat_--Low, moist ground, roadside ditches, swamps.

_Flowering Season_--July-September.

_Distribution_--Nova Scotia westward, and southward to Georgia and
Kansas.

An instant's comparison shows the steeple bush to be closely related to
the fleecy, white meadow-sweet, often found growing near. The pink
spires, which bloom from the top downward, have pale brown tips where
the withered flowers are, toward the end of summer.

Why is the underside of the leaves so woolly? Not as a protection
against wingless insects crawling upward, that is certain; for such
could only benefit these tiny clustered flowers. Not against the sun's
rays, for it is only the under surface that is coated. When the upper
leaf surface is hairy, we know that the plant is protected in this way
from perspiring too freely. Doubtless these leaves of the steeple bush,
like those of other plants that choose a similar habitat, have woolly
hairs beneath as an absorbent to protect their pores from clogging with
the vapors that must rise from the damp ground where the plant grows. If
these pores were filled with moisture from without, how could they
possibly throw off the waste of the plant? All plants are largely
dependent upon free perspiration for health, but especially those whose
roots, struck in wet ground, are constantly sending up moisture through
the stem and leaves.


Meadow-sweet; Quaker Lady; Queen-of-the-Meadow

_Spiraea salicifolia_

_Flowers_--Small, white, or flesh pink, clustered in dense, pyramidal
terminal panicles. Calyx 5 cleft; corolla of 5 rounded petals; stamens
numerous; pistils 5 to 8. _Stem:_ 2 to 4 ft. high, simple or bushy,
smooth, usually reddish. _Leaves:_ Alternate, oval, or oblong,
saw-edged.

_Preferred Habitat_--Low meadows, swamps, fence-rows, ditches.

_Flowering Season_--June-August.

_Distribution_--Newfoundland to Georgia, west to Rocky Mountains.
Europe and Asia.

Fleecy white plumes of meadow-sweet, the "spires of closely clustered
bloom" sung by Dora Read Goodale, are surely not frequently found near
dusty "waysides scorched with barren heat," even in her Berkshires;
their preference is for moister soil, often in the same habitat with a
first cousin, the pink steeple-bush. But plants, like humans, are
capricious creatures. If the meadow-sweet always elected to grow in damp
ground whose rising mists would clog the pores of its leaves, doubtless
they would be protected with a woolly absorbent, as its cousins are.

Inasmuch as perfume serves as an attraction to the more highly
specialized, aesthetic insects, not required by the spiraeas, our
meadow-sweet has none, in spite of its misleading name. Small bees,
flies, and beetles, among other visitors, come in great numbers, seeking
the accessible pollen, and, in this case, nectar also, secreted in a
conspicuous orange-colored disk.


Common Hawthorn; White Thorn; Scarlet-fruited Thorn; Red Haw;
Mayflower

_Crataegus coccinea_

_Flowers_--White, rarely pinkish, usually less than 1 in. across,
numerous, in terminal corymbs. Calyx 5-lobed; 5 spreading petals
inserted in its throat; numerous stamens; styles 3 to 5. _Stem:_ A
shrub or small tree, rarely attaining 30 ft. in height (_Kratos_ =
strength, in reference to hardness and toughness of the wood); branches
spreading, and beset with stout spines (thorns) nearly 2 in. long.
_Leaves:_ Alternate, petioled, 2 to 3 in. long, ovate, very sharply cut
or lobed, the teeth glandular-tipped. _Fruit:_ Coral red, round or
oval; not edible.
