chalcedony forming a bason round its base. The heat of this water before
it rose out of the earth could not be ascertained, as water looses all
its heat above 212 (as soon as it is at liberty to expand) by the
exhalation of a part, but the flinty bason which is deposited from it
shews that water with great degrees of heat will dissolve siliceous
matter. Van Troil's Letters on Iceland. Since the above account in the
year 1780 this part of Iceland has been destroyed by an earthquake or
covered with lava, which was probably effected by the force of aqueous
steam, a greater quantity of water falling on the subterraneous fires
than could escape by the antient outlets and generating an increased
quantity of vapour. For the dispersion of contagious vapours from
volcanos see an account of the Harmattan in the notes on Chunda, Vol. II.]


       2. "Where with soft fires in unextinguish'd urns,
     Cauldron'd in rock, innocuous Lava burns;
     On the bright lake YOUR gelid hands distil
160  In pearly mowers the parsimonious rill;
     And, as aloft the curling vapours rise
     Through the cleft roof, ambitious for the skies,
     In vaulted hills condense the tepid steams,
     And pour to HEALTH the medicated streams.
165  --So in green vales amid her mountains bleak
     BUXTONIA smiles, the Goddess-Nymyh of Peak;
     Deep in warm waves, and pebbly baths she dwells,
     And calls HYGEIA to her sainted wells.


[_Buxtonia smiles_. l. 166. Some arguments are mentioned in the note on
Fucus Vol. II. to shew that the warm springs of this country do not
arise from the decomposition of pyrites near the surface of the earth,
but that they are produced by steam rising up the fissures of the
mountains from great depths, owing to water falling on subterraneous
fires, and that this steam is condensed between the strata of the
incumbent mountains and collected into springs. For further proofs on
this subject the reader is referred to a Letter from Dr. Darwin in Mr.
Pilkington's View of Derbyshire, Vol I. p. 256.]


       "Hither in sportive bands bright DEVON leads
170  Graces and Loves from Chatsworth's flowery meads.--
     Charm'd round the NYMPH, they climb the rifted rocks;
     And steep in mountain-mist their golden locks;
     On venturous step her sparry caves explore,
     And light with radiant eyes her realms of ore;
175  --Oft by her bubbling founts, and shadowy domes,
     In gay undress the fairy legion roams,
     Their dripping palms in playful malice fill,
     Or taste with ruby lip the sparkling rill;
     Croud round her baths, and, bending o'er the side,
180  Unclasp'd their sandals, and their zones untied,
     Dip with gay fear the shuddering foot undress'd,
     And quick retract it to the fringed vest;
     Or cleave with brandish'd arms the lucid stream,
     And sob, their blue eyes twinkling in the steam.
185  --High o'er the chequer'd vault with transient glow
     Bright lustres dart, as dash the waves below;
     And Echo's sweet responsive voice prolongs
     The dulcet tumult of their silver tongues.--
     O'er their flush'd cheeks uncurling tresses flow,
190  And dew-drops glitter on their necks of snow;
     Round each fair Nymph her dropping mantle clings,
     And Loves emerging shake their showery wings.


[_And sob, their blue eyes_. l. 184. The bath at Buxton being of 82
degrees of heat is called a warm bath, and is so compared with common
spring-water which possesses but 48 degrees of heat, but is nevertheless
a cold bath compared to the heat of the body which is 98. On going into
this bath there is therefore always a chill perceived at the first
immersion, but after having been in it a minute the chill ceases and a
sensation of warmth succeeds though the body continues to be immersed in
the water. The cause of this curious phenomenon is to be looked for in
the laws of animal sensation and not from any properties of heat. When a
person goes from clear day-light into an obscure room for a while it
appears gloomy, which gloom however in a little time ceases, and the
deficiency of light becomes no longer perceived. This is not solely
owing to the enlargement of the iris of the eye, since that is performed
in an instant, but to this law of sensation, that when a less stimulus
is applied (within certain bounds) the sensibility increases. Thus at
going into a bath as much colder than the body as that of Buxton, the
diminution of heat on the skin is at first perceived, but in about a
minute the sensibility to heat increases and the nerves of the skin are
equally excited by the lessened stimulus. The sensation of warmth at
emerging from a cold-bath, and the pain called the hot-ach, after the
hands have been immersed in snow, depend on the same principle, viz. the
increased sensibility of the skin after having been previously exposed
to a stimulus less than usual.]


        "Here oft her LORD surveys the rude domain,
     Fair arts of Greece triumphant in his train;
195  LO! as he steps, the column'd pile ascends,
     The blue roof closes, or the crescent bends;
     New woods aspiring clothe their hills with green,
     Smooth slope the lawns, the grey rock peeps between;
     Relenting Nature gives her hand to Taste,
200  And Health and Beauty crown the laughing waste.


[_Here oft her Lord_. l. 193. Alluding to the magnificent and beautiful
crescent, and superb stables lately erected at Buxton for the
accomodation of the company by the Duke of Devonshire; and to the
plantations with which he has decorated the surrounding mountains.]

        VI. "NYMPHS! YOUR bright squadrons watch with chemic eyes
     The cold-elastic vapours, as they rise;
     With playful force arrest them as they pass,
     And to _pure_ AIR betroth the _flaming_ GAS.
205  Round their translucent forms at once they fling
     Their rapturous arms, with silver bosoms cling;
     In fleecy clouds their fluttering wings extend,
     Or from the skies in lucid showers descend;
     Whence rills and rivers owe their secret birth,
210  And Ocean's hundred arms infold the earth.


[_And to pure air_. l. 204. Until very lately water was esteemed a
simple element, nor are all the most celebrated chemists of Europe yet
converts to the new opinion of its decomposition. Mr. Lavoisier and
others of the French school have most ingeniously endeavoured to shew
that water consists of pure air, called by them oxygene, and of
inflammable air, called hydrogene, with as much of the matter of heat,
or calorique, as is necessary to preserve them in the form of gas. Gas
is distinguished from steam by its preserving its elasticity under the
pressure of the atmosphere, and in the greatest degrees of cold yet
known. The history of the progress of this great discovery is detailed
in the Memoires of the Royal Academy for 1781, and the experimental
proofs of it are delivered in Lavoisier's Elements of Chemistry. The
results of which are that water consists of eighty-five parts by weight
of oxygene, and fifteen parts by weight of hydrogene, with a sufficient
quantity of Calorique. Not only numerous chemical phenomena, but many
atmospherical and vegetable facts receive clear and beautiful
elucidation from this important analysis. In the atmosphere inflammable
air is probably perpetually uniting with vital air and producing
moisture which descends in dews and showers, while the growth of
vegetables by the assistance of light is perpetually again decomposing
the water they imbibe from the earth, and while they retain the
inflammable air for the formation of oils, wax, honey, resin, &c. they
give up the vital air to replenish the atmosphere.]


        "So, robed by Beauty's Queen, with softer charms
     SATURNIA woo'd the Thunderer to her arms;
     O'er her fair limbs a veil of light she spread,
     And bound a starry diadem on her head;
215  Long braids of pearl her golden tresses grac'd,
     And the charm'd CESTUS sparkled round her waist.
     --Raised o'er the woof, by Beauty's hand inwrought,
     Breathes the soft Sigh, and glows the enamour'd Thought;
     Vows on light wings succeed, and quiver'd Wiles,
220  Assuasive Accents, and seductive Smiles.
     --Slow rolls the Cyprian car in purple pride,
     And, steer'd by LOVE, ascends admiring Ide;
     Climbs the green slopes, the nodding woods pervades,
     Burns round the rocks, or gleams amid the shades.
225  --Glad ZEPHYR leads the train, and waves above
     The barbed darts, and blazing torch of Love;
     Reverts his smiling face, and pausing flings
     Soft showers of roses from aurelian wings.
     Delighted Fawns, in wreathes of flowers array'd,
230  With tiptoe Wood-Boys beat the chequer'd glade;
     Alarmed Naiads, rising into air,
     Lift o'er their silver urns their leafy hair;
     Each to her oak the bashful Dryads shrink,
     And azure eyes are seen through every chink.
235  --LOVE culls a flaming shaft of broadest wing,
     And rests the fork upon the quivering string;
     Points his arch eye aloft, with fingers strong
     Draws to his curled ear the silken thong;
     Loud twangs the steel, the golden arrow flies,
240  Trails a long line of lustre through the skies;
     "'Tis done!" he shouts, "the mighty Monarch feels!"
     And with loud laughter shakes the silver wheels;
     Bends o'er the car, and whirling, as it moves,
     His loosen'd bowstring, drives the rising doves.
245  --Pierced on his throne the slarting Thunderer turns,
     Melts with soft sighs, with kindling rapture burns;
     Clasps her fair hand, and eyes in fond amaze
     The bright Intruder with enamour'd gaze.
     "And leaves my Goddess, like a blooming bride,
250  "The fanes of Argos for the rocks of Ide?
     "Her gorgeous palaces, and amaranth bowers,
     "For cliff-top'd mountains, and aerial towers?"
     He said; and, leading from her ivory seat
     The blushing Beauty to his lone retreat,
255  Curtain'd with night the couch imperial shrouds,
     And rests the crimson cushions upon clouds.--
     Earth feels the grateful influence from above,
     Sighs the soft Air, and Ocean murmurs love;
     Etherial Warmth expands his brooding wing,
260  And in still showers descends the genial Spring.


[_And steer'd by love_. l. 222. The younger love, or Cupid, the son of
Venus, owes his existence and his attributes to much later times than
the Eros, or divine love, mentioned in Canto I. since the former is no
where mentioned by Homer, though so many apt opportunities of
introducing him occur in the works of that immortal bard. Bacon.]

[_And in still showers._ l. 260. The allegorical interpretation of the
very antient mythology which supposes Jupiter to represent the superior
part of the atmosphere or ether, and Juno the inferior air, and that the
conjunction of these two produces vernal showers, as alluded to in
Virgil's Georgics, is so analogous to the present important discovery of
the production of water from pure air, or oxygene, and inflammable air,
or hydrogene, (which from its greater levity probably resides over the
former,) that one should be tempted to believe that the very antient
chemists of Egypt had discovered the composition of water, and thus
represented it in their hieroglyphic figures before the invention of
letters.

In the passage of Virgil Jupiter is called ether, and descends in
prolific showers on the bosom of Juno, whence the spring succeeds and
all nature rejoices.

    Tum pater omnipotens foecundis imbribus Aether
    Conjugis in gremium laetae descendit, et omnes
    Magnus alit, magno commixtus corpore, faetus.

                                    Virg. Georg. Lib. II. l. 325.]


       VII. "NYMPHS OF AQUATIC TASTE! whose placid smile
     Breathes sweet enchantment o'er BRITANNIA'S isle;
     Whose sportive touch in showers resplendent flings
     Her lucid cataracts, and her bubbling springs;
265  Through peopled vales the liquid silver guides,
     And swells in bright expanse her freighted tides.
     YOU with nice ear, in tiptoe trains, pervade
     Dim walks of morn or evening's silent shade;
     Join the lone Nightingale, her woods among,
270  And roll your rills symphonious to her song;
     Through fount-full dells, and wave-worn valleys move,
     And tune their echoing waterfalls to love;
     Or catch, attentive to the distant roar,
     The pausing murmurs of the dashing shore;
275  Or, as aloud she pours her liquid strain,
     Pursue the NEREID on the twilight main.
     --Her playful Sea-horse woos her soft commands,
     Turns his quick ears, his webbed claws expands,
     His watery way with waving volutes wins,
280  Or listening librates on unmoving fins.
     The Nymph emerging mounts her scaly seat,
     Hangs o'er his glossy sides her silver feet,
     With snow-white hands her arching veil detains,
     Gives to his slimy lips the slacken'd reins,
285  Lifts to the star of Eve her eye serene,
     And chaunts the birth of Beauty's radiant Queen.--
     O'er her fair brow her pearly comb unfurls
     Her beryl locks, and parts the waving curls,
     Each tangled braid with glistening teeth unbinds
290  And with the floating treasure musks the winds.--
     Thrill'd by the dulcet accents, as she sings,
     The rippling wave in widening circles rings;
     Night's shadowy forms along the margin gleam
     With pointed ears, or dance upon the stream;
295  The Moon transported stays her bright career,
     And maddening Stars shoot headlong from the sphere.


[_Her playful seahorse._ l. 277. Described form an antique gem.]


        VIII. "NYMPHS! whose fair eyes with vivid lustres glow
     For human weal, and melt at human woe;
     Late as YOU floated on your silver shells,
300  Sorrowing and slow by DERWENT'S willowy dells;
     Where by tall groves his foamy flood he steers
     Through ponderous arches o'er impetuous wears,
     By DERBY'S shadowy towers reflective sweeps,
     And gothic grandeur chills his dusky deeps;
305  You pearl'd with Pity's drops his velvet sides,
     Sigh'd in his gales, and murmur'd in his tides,
     Waved o'er his fringed brink a deeper gloom,
     And bow'd his alders o'er MILCENA'S tomb.


[_O'er Milcena's tomb_. l. 308. In memory of Mrs. French, a lady who to
many other elegant accomplishments added a proficiency in botany and
natural history.]


        "Oft with sweet voice She led her infant-train,
310  Printing with graceful step his spangled plain,
     Explored his twinkling swarms, that swim or fly,
     And mark'd his florets with botanic eye.--
     "Sweet bud of Spring! how frail thy transient bloom,
     "Fine film," she cried, "of Nature's fairest loom!
315  "Soon Beauty fades upon its damask throne!"--
     --Unconscious of the worm, that mined her own!--
     --Pale are those lips, where soft caresses hung,
     Wan the warm cheek, and mute the tender tongue,
     Cold rests that feeling heart on Derwent's shore,
320  And those love-lighted eye-balls roll no more!

       --HERE her sad Consort, stealing through the gloom
     Of
     Hangs in mute anguish o'er the scutcheon'd hearse,
     Or graves with trembling style the votive verse.

325    "Sexton! oh, lay beneath this sacred shrine,
     When Time's cold hand shall close my aching eyes,
     Oh, gently lay this wearied earth of mine,
     Where wrap'd in night my loved MILCENA lies.

       "So shall with purer joy my spirit move,
330  When the last trumpet thrills the caves of Death,
     Catch the first whispers of my waking love,
     And drink with holy kiss her kindling breath.

       "The spotless Fair, with blush ethereal warm,
     Shall hail with sweeter smile returning day,
335  Rise from her marble bed a brighter form,
     And win on buoyant step her airy way.

       "Shall bend approved, where beckoning hosts invite,
     On clouds of silver her adoring knee,
     Approach with Seraphim the throne of light,
340  --And BEAUTY plead with angel-tongue for Me!"

        IX. "YOUR virgin trains on BRINDLEY'S cradle smiled,
     And nursed with fairy-love the unletter'd child,
     Spread round his pillow all your secret spells,
     Pierced all your springs, and open'd all your wells.--
345  As now on grass, with glossy folds reveal'd,
     Glides the bright serpent, now in flowers conceal'd;
     Far shine the scales, that gild his sinuous back,
     And lucid undulations mark his track;
     So with strong arm immortal BRINDLEY leads
350  His long canals, and parts the velvet meads;
     Winding in lucid lines, the watery mass
     Mines the firm rock, or loads the deep morass,
     With rising locks a thousand hills alarms,
     Flings o'er a thousand streams its silver arms,
355  Feeds the long vale, the nodding woodland laves,
     And Plenty, Arts, and Commerce freight the waves.
     --NYMPHS! who erewhile round BRINDLEY'S early bier
     On show-white bosoms shower'd the incessant tear,
     Adorn his tomb!--oh, raise the marble bust,
360  Proclaim his honours, and protect his dust!
     With urns inverted, round the sacred shrine
     Their ozier wreaths let weeping Naiads twine;
     While on the top MECHANIC GENIUS stands,
     Counts the fleet waves, and balances the lands.


[_On Brindley's cradle smiled_. l. 341. The life of Mr. Brindley, whose
great abilities in the construction of canal navigation were called
forth by the patronage of the Duke of Bridgwater, may be read in Dr.
Kippis's Biographia Britannica, the excellence of his genius is visible
in every part of this island. He died at Turnhurst in Staffordshire in
1772, and ought to have a monument in the cathedral church at
Lichfield.]


365    X. "NYMPHS! YOU first taught to pierce the secret caves
     Of humid earth, and lift her ponderous waves;
     Bade with quick stroke the sliding piston bear
     The viewless columns of incumbent air;--
     Press'd by the incumbent air the floods below,
370  Through opening valves in foaming torrents flow,
     Foot after foot with lessen'd impulse move,
     And rising seek the vacancy above.--
     So when the Mother, bending o'er his charms,
     Clasps her fair nurseling in delighted arms;
375  Throws the thin kerchief from her neck of snow,
     And half unveils the pearly orbs below;
     With sparkling eye the blameless Plunderer owns
     Her soft embraces, and endearing tones,
     Seeks the salubrious fount with opening lips,
380  Spreads his inquiring hands, and smiles, and sips.


[_Lift her ponderous waves_. l. 366. The invention of the pump is of
very antient date, being ascribed to one Ctesebes an Athenian, whence it
was called by the Latins machina Ctesebiana; but it was long before it
was known that the ascent of the piston lifted the superincumbent column
of the atmosphere, and that then the pressure of the surrounding air on
the surface of the well below forced the water up into the vacuum, and
that on that account in the common lifting pump the water would rise
only about thirty-five feet, as the weight of such a column of water was
in general an equipoise to the surrounding atmosphere. The foamy
appearance of water, when the pressure of the air over it is diminished,
is owing to the expansion and escape of the air previously dissolved by
it, or existing in its pores. When a child first sucks it only presses
or champs the teat, as observed by the great Harvey, but afterwards it
learns to make an incipient vacuum in its mouth, and acts by removing
the pressure of the atmosphere from the nipple, like a pump.]


       "CONNUBIAL FAIR! whom no fond transport warms
     To lull your infant in maternal arms;
     Who, bless'd in vain with tumid bosoms, hear
     His tender wailings with unfeeling ear;
385  The soothing kiss and milky rill deny
     To the sweet pouting lip, and glistening eye!--
     Ah! what avails the cradle's damask roof,
     The eider bolster, and embroider'd woof!--
     Oft hears the gilded couch unpity'd plains,
390  And many a tear the tassel'd cushion stains!
     No voice so sweet attunes his cares to rest,
     So soft no pillow, as his Mother's breast!--
     --Thus charm'd to sweet repose, when twilight hours
     Shed their soft influence on celestial bowers,
395  The Cherub, Innocence, with smile divine
     Shuts his white wings, and sleeps on Beauty's shrine.


[_Ah! what avails_. l. 387. From an elegant little poem of Mr.
Jerningham's intitled Il Latte, exhorting ladies to nurse their own
children.]


       XI. "From dome to dome when flames infuriate climb,
     Sweep the long street, invest the tower sublime;
     Gild the tall vanes amid the astonish'd night,
400  And reddening heaven returns the sanguine light;
     While with vast strides and bristling hair aloof
     Pale Danger glides along the falling roof;
     And Giant Terror howling in amaze
     Moves his dark limbs across the lurid blaze.
405  NYMPHS! you first taught the gelid wave to rise
     Hurl'd in resplendent arches to the skies;
     In iron cells condensed the airy spring,
     And imp'd the torrent with unfailing wing;
     --On the fierce flames the shower impetuous falls,
410  And sudden darkness shrouds the shatter'd walls;
     Steam, smoak, and dust in blended volumes roll,
     And Night and Silence repossess the Pole.--


[_Hurl'd in resplendent arches_. l. 406. The addition of an air-cell to
machines for raising water to extinguish fire was first introduced by
Mr. Newsham of London, and is now applied to similar engines for washing
wall-trees in gardens, and to all kinds of forcing pumps, and might be
applied with advantage to lifting pumps where the water is brought from
a great distance horizontally. Another kind of machine was invented by
one Greyl, in which a vessel of water was every way dispersed by the
explosion of gun-powder lodging in the centre of it, and lighted by an
adapted match; from this idea Mr. Godfrey proposed a water-bomb of
similar construction. Dr. Hales to prevent the spreading of fire
proposed to cover the floors and stairs of the adjoining houses with
earth; Mr. Hartley proposed to prevent houses from taking fire by
covering the cieling with thin iron-plates, and Lord Mahon by a bed of
coarse mortar or plaister between the cieling and floor above it. May
not this age of chemical science discover some method of injecting or
soaking timber with lime-water and afterwards with vitriolic acid, and
thus fill its pores with alabaster? or of penetrating it with siliceous
matter, by processes similar to those of Bergman and Achard? See
Cronstadt's Mineral. 2d. edit. Vol. I. p. 222.]


       "Where were ye, NYMPHS! in those disasterous hours,
