Project Gutenberg's The Star-Chamber, Volume 2, by W. Harrison Ainsworth

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Star-Chamber, Volume 2
       An Historical Romance

Author: W. Harrison Ainsworth

Release Date: May 20, 2004 [EBook #12397]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STAR-CHAMBER, VOLUME 2 ***




Produced by Charles Franks and the Distributed Proofreaders Team




THE STAR-CHAMBER;


AN HISTORICAL ROMANCE,


BY W. HARRISON AINSWORTH, ESQ.

AUTHOR OF "WINDSOR CASTLE," &C.


IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. II.


LEIPZIG

BERNHARD TAUCHNITZ

1854.




CONTENTS OF VOLUME II.

CHAPTER

     I. Poison
    II. Counter-Poison
   III. Showing that "our pleasant vices are made the whips to scourge us."
    IV. How the forged Confession was produced
     V. A visit to Sir Giles Mompesson's habitation near the fleet
    VI. Of the Wager between the Conde de Gondomar and the Marquis
        of Buckingham
   VII. A Cloud in the Horizon
  VIII. Whitehall
    IX. Prince Charles
     X. The old Palace-Yard of Westminster
    XI. The Tilt-Yard
   XII. The Tilting-Match
  XIII. The Felon Knight
   XIV. The private Cabinet of Sir Giles Mompesson
    XV. Clement Lanyere's Story
   XVI. Sir Jocelyn's rupture with de Gondomar
  XVII. Disgrace
 XVIII. How Sir Jocelyn's cause was espoused by the 'prentices
   XIX. A Noble Revenge
    XX. A Place of Refuge
   XXI. The Arrest
  XXII. The Old Fleet Prison
 XXIII. How Sir Jocelyn was brought to the Fleet
  XXIV. The Abduction
   XXV. The "Stone Coffin."
  XXVI. A Secret Friend
 XXVII. Showing how judgment was given by King James in the Star-Chamber
        in the great cause of the Countess of Exeter against Sir Thomas
        and Lady Lake
XXVIII. The two warrants
  XXIX. The Silver Coffer
   XXX. How the Marriage was interrupted
  XXXI. Accusations
 XXXII. Judgment

CONCLUDING CHAPTER.--Retribution




CHAPTER I.

Poison.


The execution of Lady Lake's criminal and vindictive project would not
have been long deferred, after the defeat she had sustained from Lord
Roos, but for her husband's determined opposition. This may appear
surprising in a man so completely under his wife's governance as was Sir
Thomas; but the more he reflected upon the possible consequences of the
scheme, the more averse to it he became; and finding all arguments
unavailing to dissuade his lady from her purpose, he at last summoned up
resolution enough positively to interdict it.

But the project was only deferred, and not abandoned. The forged
confession was kept in readiness by Lady Lake for production on the
first favourable opportunity.

Not less disinclined to the measure than her father was Lady Roos,
though the contrary had been represented to Sir Thomas by his lady; but
accustomed to yield blind obedience to her mother's wishes, she had been
easily worked upon to acquiesce in the scheme, especially as the
fabricated confession did not appear to hurt her husband, for whom
(though she did not dare to exhibit it) she maintained a deep and
unchanging affection. So utterly heart-broken was she by the prolonged
and painful struggle she had undergone, that she was now almost
indifferent to its issue.

For some time her health had given way under the severe shocks she had
endured; but all at once more dangerous symptoms began to manifest
themselves, and she became so greatly indisposed that she could not
leave her room. Extremely distressing in its effects, the attack
resembled fever. Inextinguishable thirst tormented her; burning pains;
throbbing in the temples; and violent fluttering of the heart. No
alleviation of her sufferings could be obtained from the remedies
administered by Luke Hatton, who was in constant attendance upon her;
nor will this be wondered at, since we are in the secret of his dark
doings. On the contrary, the fever increased in intensity; and at the
end of four days of unremitting agony,--witnessed with cynical
indifference by the causer of the mischief,--it was evident that her
case was desperate.

From the first Lady Lake had been greatly alarmed, for with all her
faults she was an affectionate mother, though she had a strange way of
showing her affection; and she was unremitting in her attentions to the
sufferer, scarcely ever quitting her bedside. After a few days, however,
thus spent in nursing her daughter, she herself succumbed to a like
malady. The same devouring internal fire scorched her up, and raged
within her veins; the same unappeasable thirst tormented her; and unable
longer to fulfil her task, she confided it to Sarah Swarton, and
withdrew to another chamber, communicating by a side door, masked by
drapery, with that of Lady Roos.

Devoted to her mistress, Sarah Swarton would have sacrificed her life to
restore her to health; and she cared not though the fever might be
infectious. The gentleness and resignation of the ill-fated lady, which
failed to move Luke Hatton, melted her to tears; and it was with
infinite grief that she saw her, day by day, sinking slowly but surely
into the grave. To Lady Roos, the presence of Sarah Swarton was an
inexpressible comfort. The handmaiden was far superior to her station,
with a pleasing countenance, and prepossessing manner, and possessed of
the soft voice so soothing to the ear of pain. But the chief comfort
derived by Lady Roos from the society of Sarah Swarton, was the power of
unbosoming herself to her respecting her husband, and of pouring her
sorrows into a sympathising ear. Lord Roos had never been near his wife
since her seizure--nor, that she could learn, had made any inquiries
about her; but notwithstanding his heartless conduct, her great desire
was to behold him once more before she died, and to breathe some last
words into his ear; and she urged the wish so strongly upon her
confidante, that the latter promised, if possible, to procure its
accomplishment.

A week had now nearly elapsed--the fatal term appointed by Luke
Hatton--and it could be no longer doubted that, if the last
gratification sought by Lady Roos were to be afforded her, it must not
be delayed.

The poor sufferer was wasted to a skeleton; her cheeks hollow; eyes sunk
in deep cavities, though the orbs were unnaturally bright; and her frame
so debilitated, that she could scarcely raise herself from the pillow.

Sarah Swarton accordingly resolved to set out upon her errand; but
before doing so, she sought an interview with Lady Lake, for the purpose
of revealing certain fearful suspicions she had begun to entertain of
Luke Hatton. She would have done this before, but there was almost
insuperable difficulty in obtaining a few words in private of her
ladyship. The apothecary was continually passing from room to room,
hovering nigh the couches of his patients, as if afraid of leaving them
for a moment, and he seemed to regard Sarah herself with distrust. But
he had now gone forth, and she resolved to take advantage of his absence
to make her communication.




CHAPTER II.

Counter-Poison.


The physical tortures endured by Lady Lake were exceeded by her mental
anguish. While the poison raged within her veins, the desire of
vengeance inflamed her breast; and her fear was lest she should expire
without gratifying it. Bitterly did she now upbraid herself for having
delayed her vindictive project. More than once she consulted Luke Hatton
as he stood beside her couch, with the habitual sneer upon his lips,
watching the progress of his own infernal work, as to the possibility of
renovating her strength, if only for an hour, in order that she might
strike the blow. But he shook his head, and bade her wait. Wait,
however, she would not, and she became at length so impatient, that he
agreed to make the experiment, telling her he would prepare a draught
which should stimulate her into new life for a short time, but he would
not answer for the after consequences. This was enough. She eagerly
grasped at the offer. Revenge must be had, cost what it would. And it
was to prepare the potion which was to effect her brief cure that Luke
Hatton had quitted her chamber, and left the coast clear for Sarah
Swarton.

Startled by the abrupt entrance and looks of the handmaiden, Lady Lake
anxiously inquired if all was well with her daughter.

"As well as it, seems ever likely to be with her, my lady," replied
Sarah Swarton. "She is somewhat easier now. But has your ladyship
courage to listen to what I have to tell you?"

"Have I ever shown want of courage, Sarah, that you should put such a
question?" rejoined Lady Lake, sharply.

"But this is something frightful, my lady."

"Then do not hesitate to disclose it."

"Has your ladyship never thought it a strange illness by which you and
my Lady Roos have been seized?" said Sarah, coming close up to her, and
speaking in a low, hurried tone, as if afraid of being overheard, or
interrupted.

"Why should I think it strange, Sarah?" returned Lady Lake, regarding
her fixedly. "It is a dreadful and infectious fever which I have taken
from my daughter; and that is the reason why Sir Thomas, and all others,
except Luke Hatton and yourself, are forbidden to come near us. What we
should have done without you, Sarah, I know not, for Luke Hatton tells
me the rest of the household shun us as they would a pestilence. I trust
you will escape the disorder, and if I am spared your devotion shall be
adequately requited. As to Luke Hatton, he seems to have no fear of it."

"He has no reason to be afraid," replied Sarah, significantly. "This is
no fever, my lady."

"How!" cried Lady Lake. "Would you set up your ignorance against the
skill and science of Luke Hatton? Or do you mean to insinuate--"

"I insinuate nothing, my lady," interrupted Sarah; "but I beseech you to
bear with fortitude the disclosure I am about to make to you. In a word,
my lady, I am as certain as I am of standing here, that poison has been
administered both to you and to my Lady Roos."

At this terrible communication, a mortal sickness came over Lady Lake.
Thick damps gathered upon her brow, and she fixed her haggard eyes upon
Sarah.

"Poisoned!" she muttered; "poisoned! If so, there is but one person who
can have done it--but one--except yourself, Sarah!"

"If I had committed the crime, should I have come hither to warn you, my
lady?" rejoined Sarah.

"Then it must be Luke Hatton."

"Ay," replied Sarah, looking round anxiously. "It is he. When he did not
think I noticed him, I chanced to see him pour a few drops from a phial
into the drink he prepares for your ladyship and my Lady Roos; and my
suspicions being aroused by his manner as much as by the circumstance, I
watched him narrowly, and found that this proceeding was repeated with
every draught; with this difference merely, that the dose was increased
in strength by one additional drop; the potion administered to your
ladyship being some degrees less powerful than that given to my dear
lady, and no doubt being intended to be slower in its effects. That it
was poison, I am certain, since I have tested it upon myself, by sipping
a small quantity of the liquid; and I had reason to repent my rashness,
for I soon perceived I had the same symptoms of illness as those which
distress your ladyship."

"Why did you not caution me sooner, Sarah?" said Lady Lake,
horror-stricken by this narration.

"I could not do so, my lady," she replied. "It was only yesterday that I
arrived at a positive certainty in the matter, and after my imprudence
in tasting the drink, I was very ill--indeed I am scarcely well yet;
and, to tell truth, I was afraid of Luke Hatton, as I am sure he would
make away with me, without a moment's hesitation, if he fancied I had
discovered his secret. Oh, I hope he will not come back and find me
here."

"Who can have prompted him to the deed?" muttered Lady Lake. "But why
ask, since I know my enemies, and therefore know his employers! Not a
moment must be lost, Sarah. Let Sir Thomas Lake be summoned to me
immediately. If he be at Theobalds, at Greenwich, or Windsor, let
messengers be sent after him, praying him to use all possible dispatch
in coming to me. I cannot yet decide what I will do, but it shall be
something terrible. Oh, that I could once more confront the guilty pair!
And I will do it--I will do it! Revenge will give me strength."

"I cannot undertake to bring the Countess hither, my lady," said Sarah.
"But I may now venture to inform you that I am charged with a message
from my dear lady to her cruel husband, with which I am persuaded he
will comply, and come to her."

"Lure him hither, and speedily, by any means you can, Sarah," rejoined
Lady Lake. "Before you go, help to raise me from my couch, and place me
in that chair. It is well," she cried, as her wishes were complied with.
"I do not feel so feeble as I expected. I was sure revenge would give me
strength. Now give me my black velvet robe, and my coif. Even in this
extremity I would only appear as beseems me. And hark ye, Sarah, open
that drawer, and take out the weapon you will find within it. Do as I
bid you quickly, wench. I may need it."

"Here it is, my lady," replied Sarah, taking out a dagger, and giving it
to Lady Lake, who immediately concealed it in the folds of her robe.

"Now go," pursued the lady; "I am fully prepared. Let not a moment be
lost in what you have to do. Do not give any alarm. But bid two of the
trustiest of the household hold themselves in readiness without, and if
I strike upon the bell to rush in upon the instant. Or if Luke Hatton
should come forth, let him be detained. You understand?"

"Perfectly, my lady," replied Sarah, "and I make no doubt they will
obey. I am sure it has only been Luke Hatton who, by his false
representations, has kept them away, and I will remove the impression he
has produced."

"Do not explain more than is needful at present," said Lady Lake. "We
know not precisely how this plot may have been laid, and must take its
authors by surprise. You were once more intimate than I liked with that
Spanish knave, Diego. Breathe not a word to him, or all will be repeated
to his master."

"Rest assured I will be careful, my lady. I have seen nothing whatever
of Diego of late, and care not if I never behold him again. But what is
to happen to my dear lady?"

"Leave her to me," replied Lady Lake. "I hope yet to be able to save
her. Ha! here comes the villain. Away with you, Sarah, and see that my
orders are obeyed."

The handmaiden did not require the command to be repeated, but hastily
quitted the room, casting a terrified look at the apothecary, who
entered it at the same moment.

Luke Hatton appeared greatly surprised on finding Lady Lake risen from
her couch, and could not help exclaiming, as he quickly advanced towards
her--"You up, my lady! This is very imprudent, and may defeat my plans."

"No doubt you think so," rejoined Lady Lake; "but knowing you would
oppose my inclination, I got Sarah to lift me from the couch, and tire
me during your absence. Have you prepared the mixture?"

"I have, my lady," he replied, producing a small phial.

"Give it me," she cried, taking it from him.

After examining the pale yellow fluid it contained for a moment, she
took out the glass stopper, and, smelling at it, perceived it to be a
very subtle and volatile spirit.

"Is this poison?" she demanded, fixing her eyes keenly upon Luke Hatton.

"On the contrary, my lady," he replied, without expressing any
astonishment at the question, "it would be an antidote to almost any
poison. It is the rarest cordial that can be prepared, and the secret of
its composition is only known to myself. When I said your ladyship would
incur great risk in taking it, I meant that the reaction from so
powerful a stimulant would be highly dangerous. But you declared you
did not heed the consequences."

"Nor do I," she rejoined. "Yet I would see it tasted."

"Your mind shall be made easy on that score in a moment, my lady," said
Luke Hatton.

And taking a small wine-glass that stood by, he rinsed it with water and
carefully wiped it; after which he poured a few drops of the liquid into
it and swallowed them.

During this proceeding Lady Lake's gaze never quitted him for a second.
Apparently satisfied with the test, she bade him return the phial to
her.

"You had better let me pour it out for you, my lady," he replied,
cleansing the glass as before. "The quantity must be exactly observed.
