The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Aeneid of Virgil, by Virgil

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Aeneid of Virgil
       Translated into English Verse by E. Fairfax Taylor

Author: Virgil

Editor: Ernest Rhys

Commentator: Maine J. P.

Translator: Edward Fairfax Taylor

Release Date: May 28, 2006 [EBook #18466]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AENEID OF VIRGIL ***




Produced by Ron Swanson





EVERYMAN'S LIBRARY
EDITED BY ERNEST RHYS

CLASSICAL

THE AENEID OF VIRGIL

THE SAGES OF OLD LIVE AGAIN IN US.
                             GLANVILL




The AENEID OF VIRGIL

TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH VERSE BY
E. FAIRFAX TAYLOR




LONDON: PUBLISHED by J. M. DENT & SONS LTD.
AND IN NEW YORK BY E. P. DUTTON & CO.




_First issue of this Edition 1907._
_Reprinted 1910._




INTRODUCTION


Virgil--Publius Vergilius Maro--was born at Andes near Mantua, in
the year 70 B.C. His life was uneventful, though he lived in stirring
times, and he passed by far the greater part of it in reading his
books and writing his poems, undisturbed by the fierce civil strife
which continued to rage throughout the Roman Empire, until Octavian,
who afterwards became the Emperor Augustus, defeated Antony at the
battle of Actium. Though his father was a man of humble origin, Virgil
received an excellent education, first at Cremona and Milan, and
afterwards at Rome. He was intimate with all the distinguished men
of his time, and a personal friend of the Emperor. After the
publication of his second work, the _Georgics_, he was recognized
as being the greatest poet of his age, and the most striking figure
in the brilliant circle of literary men, which was centred at the
Court. He died at Brindisi in the spring of 19 B.C. whilst returning
from a journey to Greece, leaving his greatest work, the _Aeneid_,
written but unrevised. It was published by his executors, and
immediately took its place as the great national Epic of the Roman
people. Virgil seems to have been a man of simple, pure, and loveable
character, and the references to him in the works of Horace clearly
show the affection with which he was regarded by his friends.

Like every cultivated Roman of that age, Virgil was a close student
of the literature and philosophy of the Greeks, and his poems bear
eloquent testimony to the profound impression made upon him by his
reading of the Greek poets. His first important work, the _Eclogues_,
was directly inspired by the pastoral poems of Theocritus, from whom
he borrowed not only much of his imagery but even whole lines; in
the _Georgics_ he took as his model the _Works and Days_ of Hesiod,
and though in the former case it must be confessed that he suffers
from the weakness inherent in all imitative poetry, in the latter
he far surpasses the slow and simple verses of the Boeotian. But here
we must guard ourselves against a misapprehension. We moderns look
askance at the writer who borrows without acknowledgment the
thoughts and phrases of his forerunners, but the Roman critics of
the Augustan Age looked at the matter from a different point of view.
They regarded the Greeks as having set the standard of the highest
possible achievement in literature, and believed that it should be
the aim of every writer to be faithful, not only to the spirit, but
even to the letter of their great exemplars. Hence it was only natural
that when Virgil essayed the task of writing the national Epic of
his country, he should be studious to embody in his work all that
was best in Greek Epic poetry.

It is difficult in criticizing Virgil to avoid comparing him to some
extent with Homer. But though Virgil copied Homer freely, any
comparison between them is apt to be misleading. A primitive epic,
like the _Iliad_ or the _Nibelungenlied_, produced by an imaginative
people at an early stage in its development, telling its stories
simply for the sake of story telling, cannot be judged by the same
canons of criticism as a literary epic like the _Aeneid_ or _Paradise
Lost_, which is the work of a great poet in an age of advanced culture,
and sets forth a great idea in a narrative form. The Greek writer
to whom Virgil owes most perhaps, is Apollonius of Rhodes, from whose
_Argonautica_ he borrowed the love interest of the _Aeneid_. And
though the Roman is a far greater poet, in this instance the advantage
is by no means on his side, for, as Professor Gilbert Murray has so
well said, 'the Medea and Jason of the _Argonautica_ are at once more
interesting and more natural than their copies, the Dido and Aeneas
of the _Aeneid_. The wild love of the witch-maiden sits curiously
on the queen and organizer of industrial Carthage; and the two
qualities which form an essential part of Jason--the weakness which
makes him a traitor, and the deliberate gentleness which contrasts
him with Medea--seem incongruous in the father of Rome.' But though
Virgil turned to the Greek epics for the general framework and many
of the details of his poem, he always remains master of his materials,
and stamps them with the impress of his own genius. The spirit which
inspires the _Aeneid_ is wholly Roman, and the deep faith in the
National Destiny, and stern sense of duty to which it gives
expression, its profoundly religious character and stately and
melodious verse, have always caused it to be recognized as the
loftiest expression of the dignity and greatness of Rome at her best.
But the sympathetic reader will be conscious of a deeper and more
abiding charm in the poetry of Virgil. Even in his most splendid
passages his verses thrill us with a strange pathos, and his
sensitiveness to unseen things--things beautiful and sad--has
caused a great writer, himself a master of English prose, to speak
of 'his single words and phrases, his pathetic half lines, giving
utterance as the voice of Nature herself to that pain and weariness,
yet hope of better things, which is the experience of her children
in every age.'

The task of translating such a writer at all adequately may well seem
to be an almost impossible one; and how far any of the numerous
attempts to do so have succeeded, is a difficult question. For not
only does the stated ideal at which the translator should aim, vary
with each generation, but perhaps no two lovers of Virgil would agree
at any period as to what this ideal should be. Two general principles
stand out from the mass of conflicting views on this point. The
translation should read as though it were an original poem, and it
should produce on the modern reader as far as possible the same effect
as the original produced on Virgil's contemporaries. And here we
reach the real difficulty, for the scholar who can alone judge what
that effect may have been, is too intimate with the original to see
clearly the merits of a translation, and the man who can only read
the translation can form no opinion. However, it seems clear that
a prose translation can never really satisfy us, because it must
always be wanting in the musical quality of continuous verse. And
our critical experience bears this out, since even Professor Mackail
with all his literary skill and insight has failed to make his version
of the _Aeneid_ more than a very valuable aid to the student of the
original. The meaning of the poet is fully expressed, but his music
has been lost. That oft-quoted line--

   'Sunt lacrimae rerum et mentem mortalia tangunt'

haunts us like Tennyson's

                          'When unto dying eyes
    The casement slowly grows a glimmering square,'

and no prose rendering can hope to convey the poignancy and pathos
of the original. The ideal translation, then, must be in verse, and
perhaps the best way for us to determine which style and metre are
most suited to convey to the modern reader an impression of the charm
of Virgil, will be to take a brief glance at some of the best-known
of the verse translations which have appeared.

The first translation of the _Aeneid_ into English verse was that
of Gawin Douglas, bishop of Dunkeld in Scotland, which was published
in 1553. It is a spirited translation, marked by considerable native
force and verisimilitude, and it was certainly unsurpassed until
that of Dryden appeared. In the best passages it renders the tone
and feeling of the original with extreme felicity--indeed, all but
perfectly. Take for instance this passage from the Sixth Book--

   'Thai walking furth fa dyrk, oneth thai wyst
    Quhidder thai went, amyd dym schaddowys thar,
    Quhar evir is nycht, and nevir lyght dois repar,
    Throwout the waist dongion of Pluto Kyng,
    Thai voyd boundis, and that gowsty ryng:
    Siklyke as quha wold throw thik woddis wend
    In obscure licht, quhen moyn may nocht be kenned;
    As Jupiter the kyng etheryall,
    With erdis skug hydis the hevynnys all
    And the myrk nycht, with her vissage gray,
    From every thing hes reft the hew away.'

But in spite of its merits, its dialect wearies the modern reader,
and gives it an air of grotesqueness which is very alien to the spirit
of the Latin. One other sixteenth-century translation deserves
notice, as it was written by one who was himself a distinguished poet;
namely, the version of the second and fourth books of the _Aeneid_
written by Henry, Earl of Surrey. It gained the commendation of that
stern critic Ascham, who praises Surrey for avoiding rhyme, but
considers that he failed to 'fully hit perfect and true versifying';
which is hardly a matter for wonder since English blank verse was
then in its infancy. But it has some fine passages--notably the one
which relates the death of Dido--

   'As she had said, her damsell might perceue
    Her with these wordes fal pearced on a sword
    The blade embrued and hands besprent with gore.
    The clamor rang unto the pallace toppe,
    The brute ranne throughout al thastoined towne,
    With wailing great, and women's shrill yelling,
    The roofs gan roare, the aire resound with plaint,
    As though Cartage, or thauncient town of Tyre
    With prease of entred enemies swarmed full,
    Or when the rage of furious flame doth take
    The temples toppes, and mansions eke of men.'

Of the translations into modern English, that of Dryden may still
be said to stand first, in spite of its lack of fidelity. It owes
its place to its sustained vigour, and the fact that the heroic
couplet is in the hands of a master. In its way nothing could be better
than--

   'Just in the gate, and in the jaws of hell,
    Revengeful cares, and sullen sorrows dwell,
    And pale diseases, and repining age--
    Want, fear, and famine's unresisted rage,
    Here toils and death, and death's half-brother sleep,
    Forms terrible to view, their sentry keep.
    With anxious pleasures of a guilty mind,
    Deep frauds, before, and open force behind;
    The Furies' iron beds, and strife that shakes
    Her hissing tresses, and unfolds her snakes.'

But though the heroic couplet may have conveyed to Dryden's age
something of the effect of the Virgilian hexameter, it does nothing
of the kind to us. Probably we are prejudiced in the matter by Pope's
Homer.

Professor Conington's translation certainly has spirit and energy,
but he was decidedly unfortunate in his choice of metre. To attempt
to render 'the stateliest measure ever moulded by the lips of man'
by fluent octosyllabics was bound to result in incongruity, as in
the following passage, where the sombre warning of the Sibyl to
Aeneas becomes merely a sprightly reminder that--

   'The journey down to the abyss
      Is prosperous and light,
    The palace gates of gloomy Dis
      Stand open day and night;
    But upward to retrace the way
    And pass into the light of day,
    There comes the stress of labour; this
      May task a hero's might.'

The various attempts that have been made to translate the poem in
the metre of the original have all been sad failures. And from Richard
Stanyhurst, whom Thomas Nash described as treading 'a foul,
lumbering, boistrous, wallowing measure, in his translation of
Virgil,' down to our own time, no one has succeeded in avoiding faults
of monotony and lack of poetical quality. A short extract from Dr.
Crane's translation will illustrate this very clearly--

                                    'No species of hardships,
    Longer, O maiden, arises before me as strange and unlooked for:
    All things have I foreknown, and in soul have already endured them.
    One special thing I crave, since here, it is said, that the gateway
    Stands of the monarch infernal, and refluent Acheron's dark pool:
    Let it be mine to go down to the sight and face of my cherished
    Father, and teach me the way, and the sacred avenues open.'

Nor is William Morris' attempt to devise a new metre anything but
disappointing. It is surprising that so delightfully endowed a poet
should have so often missed the music of Virgil's verse as he has
done in his translation, and the archaisms with which his work
abounds, though they might be suitable in a translation of Homer,
are only a source of irritation in the case of Virgil.

For the best metre to use we must look in a different direction.
Virgil made use of the dactylic hexameter because it was the literary
tradition of his day that epics should be written in that metre. In
the same way it might be argued, the English tradition points to blank
verse as the correct medium. This may be so, but its use demands that
the translator should be as great a poet as Virgil. Had Tennyson ever
translated the _Aeneid_, it would doubtless have been as nearly
faultless as any translation could be, as is shown by the version
of Sir Theodore Martin, which owes so much of its stately charm to
its close adherence to the manner of Tennyson. A typical passage is
the description of Dido's love for Aeneas--

   'Soothsayers, ah! how little do they know!
    Of what avail are temples, vows, and prayers,
    To quell a raging passion? All the while
    A subtle flame is smouldering in her veins,
    And in her heart a silent aching wound.

       *       *       *       *       *

                             Now Dido leads
    Aeneas round the ramparts, to him shows
    The wealth of Sidon, all the town laid out,
    Begins to speak, then stops, she knows not why.
    Now, as day wanes, the feast of yesterday
    She gives again, again with fevered lips
    Begs for the tale of Troy and all its woes,
    And hangs upon his lips, who tells the tale.
    Then, when the guests are gone and in her turn
    The wan moon pales her light, and waning stars
    Persuade to sleep, she in her empty halls
    Mourns all alone, and throws herself along
    The couch where he had lain: though he be gone
    Far from her side, she hears and sees him still.'

Of the merits of the present translation the reader will judge for
himself; but it may perhaps be said of the usual objections urged
against the Spenserian stanza--that it is cumbrous and monotonous,
and presents difficulties of construction--that the two former
criticisms will be just or the reverse, according to the skill of
the writer, while it is quite possible that the last is really an
advantage, for the intricate machinery imposes a restraint on
careless or hasty composition. And finally we must turn a deaf ear,
even to so high an authority as Matthew Arnold, when he says that
it is not suited to the grand manner. When he said this he cannot
have remembered either the lament of Florimell in the _Faerie Queene_
or the conclusion of _Childe Harold_.

                                              J. P. MAINE.




Edward Fairfax Taylor, whose translation of the _Aeneid_ is now
published, was descended from the Taylors of Norwich, a family well
known for their culture and intellectual gifts. He was the only son
of John Edward Taylor, himself an accomplished German and Italian
scholar, and the first translator of the _Pentamerone_ into English,
who lived at Weybridge near his aunt, Mrs. Sarah Austin. Brought up
among books, young Taylor early showed an intense love for classical
literature, and soon after going to Marlborough he began the present
translation as a boy of sixteen. His admiration for Spenser led him
to adopt the Spenserian stanza, and in the preface to his translation
of the first two books he gives detailed reasons for considering it
peculiarly well adapted for the _Aeneid_. He was a favourite pupil
of the late Dr. Bradley, Dean of Westminster, at that time headmaster
of Marlborough, and who much wished that he should follow in the
footsteps of 'that brilliant band of Marlborough men,' as they have
been called, who at that time, year after year, gained the Balliol
scholarship. But circumstances made him decide otherwise, and in
1865 he passed the necessary examination for a clerkship in the House
of Lords. The long vacations gave him time to continue this labour
of love, and in the intervals of much other literary work, and in
spite of ill health, he completed the translation of the twelve books
of the _Aeneid_. He looked forward to re-editing it and bringing it
out when he should have retired from his work in the House of Lords,
but this day never came, and he died from heart disease in January
1902. His was a singularly charming disposition, and he was beloved
by all who knew him; while the courage and patience with which he
bore ever-increasing suffering, and the stoicism he showed in
fulfilling his duties in the House of Lords, have left a deep
impression on all his friends.

                                                    L. M.




The _Edisso Princeps_, of Virgil is that printed at Rome by Sweynham
and Pannartz. It was not dated, but it is almost certain that it was
printed before the Venice folio edition of V. de Spira, which was
issued in 1470. The best modern critical editions of the text are
those of Ribbeck (4 vols. 1895) and F. A. Hirtzel (_Scriptorum
Classicorum Bibliotheca Oxoniensis_, 1900). Of the editions
containing explanatory notes, that of Conington and Nettleship,
revised by Haverfield, is the standard English commentary. That of
A. Sidgwick (2 vols. Cambridge) is more elementary, but will be found
valuable. Those of Kennedy (London, 1879) and of Papillon and Haigh
(Oxford, 2 vols. 1890-91) may also be referred to.

Virgil was first introduced to English readers by William Caxton in
1490. But his _Eneydos_ was based, not on the _Aeneid_ itself, but
on a French paraphrase, the _liure des eneydes_, printed at Lyons
in 1483.

The best modern prose translations are those of Mackail (London,
1885) and Conington (London, 1870).

The following is a list of the more important verse translations of
the _Aeneid_ which have appeared. The name of the translator, and
the date at which his translation appeared, are given:--Gawin
Douglas, 1553 (see Introduction, p. xi); Henry, Earl of Surrey, 1557
(Books II. and IV. only); J. Dryden, 1697; C. R. Kennedy, 1861; J.
Conington, 1866; W. Morris, 1876; W. J. Thornhill, 1886; Sir Charles
Bowen, 1887 (Books I.-VI. only); J. Rhoades, 1893 (Books I.-VI.
only); Sir Theodore Martin, 1896 (Books I.-VI. only); T. H. D. May,
1903; E. Fairfax Taylor, 1903.

Students of Virgil would also do well to consult Sellar, _Poets of
the Augustan Age_ (Oxford, 1883), and Nettleship, _Introduction to
the Study of Vergil_.




THE AENEID OF VIRGIL




BOOK ONE


ARGUMENT

Fate sends AEneas to Latium to found Rome, but Juno's hostility long
delays his success (1-45). Descrying him and his Trojans in sight
of Italy, she bribes AEolus to raise a storm for their destruction
(46-99). The tempest (100-116). The despair of AEneas (117-126). One
Trojan ship is already lost, when Neptune learns the plot and lays
the storm (127-189). AEneas escapes, lands in Libya, and heartens
his men (190-261). Venus appeals to Jupiter, who comforts her with
assurance that AEneas shall yet be great in Italy. His son shall found
Alba and his son's sons Rome. Juno shall eventually relent, and Rome
under Augustus shall be empress of the world (262-351). Mercury is
sent to secure from Dido, Queen of Libya, a welcome for AEneas. AEneas
and Achates, while reconnoitring, meet Venus in the forest disguised
as a nymph. She tells them Dido's story. AEneas in reply bewails his
own troubles, but is interrupted with promises of success. Let him
but persist, all will be well (352-478). Venus changes before their
eyes from nymph to goddess, and vanishes before AEneas can utter his
reproaches. Hidden in a magic mist, the pair approach Carthage, which
they find still building. They reach the citadel unobserved, and are
encouraged on seeing pictures of scenes from the Trojan war (479-576).
Dido appears and takes her state. To her enter, as suppliants, Trojan
leaders, whom AEneas had imagined dead. Ilioneus, their spokesman,
tells the story of the storm and asks help. "If only AEneas were
here!" (577-661). Dido speaks him fair and echoes his words, "If
AEneas were here!" The mist scatters. AEneas appears; thanks Dido,
and greets Ilioneus (662-723). Dido welcomes AEneas to Carthage and
prepares a festival in his honour. AEneas sends Achates to summon
his son and bring gifts for Dido (724-774). Cupid, persuaded by Venus
to personate Ascanius and inspire Dido with love for AEneas, comes
with the gifts to Dido's palace, while Ascanius is carried away to
Idalia. The night is passed in feasting. After the feast Iopas sings
the wonders of the firmament, and Dido, bewitched by Cupid, begs
AEneas to tell the whole story of his adventures (775-891).


I.  Of arms I sing, and of the man, whom Fate
    First drove from Troy to the Lavinian shore.
    Full many an evil, through the mindful hate
    Of cruel Juno, from the gods he bore,
    Much tost on earth and ocean, yea, and more
    In war enduring, ere he built a home,
    And his loved household-deities brought o'er
    To Latium, whence the Latin people come,
Whence rose the Alban sires, and walls of lofty Rome.

II. O Muse, assist me and inspire my song,
    The various causes and the crimes relate,
    For what affronted majesty, what wrong
    To injured Godhead, what offence so great
    Heaven's Queen resenting, with remorseless hate,
    Could one renowned for piety compel
    To brave such troubles, and endure the weight
    Of toils so many and so huge. O tell
How can in heavenly minds such fierce resentment dwell?

III. There stood a city, fronting far away
    The mouths of Tiber and Italia's shore,
    A Tyrian settlement of olden day,
    Rich in all wealth, and trained to war's rough lore,
    Carthage the name, by Juno loved before
    All places, even Samos. Here were shown
    Her arms, and here her chariot; evermore
    E'en then this land she cherished as her own,
And here, should Fate permit, had planned a world-wide throne.

IV. But she had heard, how men of Trojan seed
    Those Tyrian towers should level, how again
    From these in time a nation should proceed,
    Wide-ruling, tyrannous in war, the bane
    (So Fate was working) of the Libyan reign.
    This feared she, mindful of the war beside
    Waged for her Argives on the Trojan plain;
    Nor even yet had from her memory died
The causes of her wrath, the pangs of wounded pride,--
