The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Vicomte de Bragelonne, by Alexandre Dumas

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Vicomte de Bragelonne
       Or Ten Years Later being the completion of "The Three
       Musketeers" And "Twenty Years After"

Author: Alexandre Dumas

Release Date: August 9, 2006 [EBook #18997]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VICOMTE DE BRAGELONNE ***




Produced by Frank van Drogen, Janet Blenkinship and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by the Canadian Institute for Historical
Microreproductions (www.canadiana.org))







[Illustration: HARDLY HAD THE LADDER BEEN PROPERLY PLACED THAN THE
KING BEGAN TO ASCEND.--_Page 155._]




THE WORKS

OF

ALEXANDRE DUMAS


THE VICOMTE DE BRAGELONNE

OR

TEN YEARS LATER

BEING THE COMPLETION OF

"THE THREE MUSKETEERS" AND "TWENTY YEARS AFTER"

_PART II_


       *       *       *       *       *


_Copiously Illustrated with elegant Pen and Ink and Wood Engravings,
specially drawn for this edition by eminent French and American Artists._


       *       *       *       *       *


COMPLETE IN NINE VOLUMES

VOLUME FOUR


       *       *       *       *       *


NEW YORK
PETER FENELON COLLIER, PUBLISHER.
1893


       *       *       *       *       *




  CONTENTS.


  THE VICOMTE DE BRAGELONNE.

  (PART II.)


  I. Showing what neither the Naiad
  nor Dryad had anticipated                                            5

  II. The new General of the Jesuits                                   9

  III. The Storm                                                      14

  IV. The Shower of Rain                                              18

  V. Toby                                                             25

  VI. Madame's four Chances                                           29

  VII. The Lottery                                                    33

  VIII. Malaga                                                        37

  IX. A Letter from M. de Baisemeaux                                  44

  X. In which the Reader will be
  delighted to find that Porthos
  has lost nothing of his
  Strength                                                            46

  XI. The Rat and the Cheese                                          55

  XII. Planchet's Country-House                                       59

  XIII. Showing what could be seen from
  Planchet's House                                                    62

  XIV. How Porthos, Truechen, and Planchet
  parted with each other
  on friendly terms, thanks to
  D'Artagnan                                                          65

  XV. The Presentation of Porthos at
  Court                                                               67

  XVI. Explanations                                                   69

  XVII. Madame and Guiche                                             73

  XVIII. Montalais and Malicorne                                      77

  XIX. How De Wardes was received at
  Court                                                               81

  XX. The Combat                                                      87

  XXI. The King's Supper                                              93

  XXII. After Supper                                                  96

  XXIII. Showing in what way D'Artagnan
  discharged the Mission with
  which the King had intrusted
  him                                                                 98

  XXIV. The Encounter                                                101

  XXV. The Physician                                                 104

  XXVI. Wherein D'Artagnan perceives
  that it was he who was mistaken,
  and Manicamp who was
  right                                                              106

  XXVII. Showing the advantage of having
  two Strings to one's Bow                                           109

  XXVIII. M. Malicorne the Keeper of the
  Records of the Realm of France                                     115

  XXIX. The Journey                                                  118

  XXX. Triumfeminate                                                 121

  XXXI. The First Quarrel                                            124

  XXXII. Despair                                                     129

  XXXIII. The Flight                                                 132

  XXXIV. Showing how Louis, on his side,
  had passed the time from Ten
  to half-past Twelve at Night                                       135

  XXXV. The Ambassadors                                              138

  XXXVI. Chaillot                                                    142

  XXXVII. Madame                                                     147

  XXXVIII. Mademoiselle de la Valliere's
  Pocket-Handkerchief                                                151

  XXXIX. Which treats of Gardeners, of
  Ladders, and Maids of Honor                                        153

  XL. Which treats of Carpentry Operations,
  and furnishes Details
  upon the Mode of constructing
  Staircases                                                         157

  XLI. The Promenade by Torchlight                                   161

  XLII. The Apparition                                               166

  XLIII. The Portrait                                                170

  XLIV. Hampton Court                                                174

  XLV. The Courier from Madame                                       180

  XLVI. Saint-Aignan follows Malicorne's
  Advice                                                             185

  XLVII. Two Old Friends                                             188

  XLVIII. Wherein may be seen that a
  Bargain which cannot be made
  with one Person, can be carried
  out with Another                                                   196

  XLIX. The Skin of the Bear                                         201

  L. An Interview with the Queen-Mother                              204

  LI. Two Friends                                                    209

  LII. How Jean de la Fontaine wrote
  his first Tale                                                     213

  LIII. La Fontaine in the Character of
  a Negotiator                                                       215

  LIV. Madame de Belliere's Plate and
  Diamonds                                                           219

  LV. M. de Mazarin's Receipt                                        221

  LVI. Monsieur Colbert's rough Draft                                225

  LVII. In which the Author thinks it is
  now time to return to the
  Vicomte de Bragelonne                                              231

  LVIII. Bragelonne continues his Inquiries                          234

  LIX. Two Jealousies                                                236

  LX. A Domiciliary Visit                                            239

  LXI. Porthos' Plan of Action                                       243

  LXII. The Change of Residence, the
  Trap-Door, and the Portrait                                        247

  LXIII. Rival Politics                                              253

  LXIV. Rival Affections                                             255

  LXV. King and Nobility                                             259

  LXVI. After the Storm                                              264

  LXVII. Heu! Miser!                                                 267

  LXVIII. Wounds upon Wounds                                         269

  LXIX. What Raoul had Guessed                                       272

  LXX. Three Guests astonished to find
  themselves at Supper together                                      275

  LXXI. What took place at the Louvre
  during the Supper at the
  Bastille                                                           278

  LXXII. Political Rivals                                            282

  LXXIII. In which Porthos is convinced
  without having understood
  anything                                                           286

  LXXIV. M. de Baisemeaux's "Society"                                289

  LXXV. The Prisoner                                                 293

  LXXVI. How Mouston had become fatter
  without giving Porthos notice
  thereof, and of the
  Troubles which consequently
  befell that worthy Gentleman                                       307

  LXXVII. Who Messire John Percerin
  was                                                                311

  LXXVIII. The Patterns                                              315

  LXXIX. Where, probably, Moliere formed
  his first Idea of the Bourgeois
  Gentilhomme                                                        319

  LXXX. The Beehive, the Bees, and the Honey                         323

  LXXXI. Another Supper at the Bastille                              328

  LXXXII. The General of the Order                                   331

  LXXXIII. The Tempter                                               336

  LXXXIV. Crown and Tiara                                            340

  LXXXV. The Chateau de Vaux-le-Vicomte                              344

  LXXXVI. The Wine of Melun                                          347

  LXXXVII. Nectar and Ambrosia                                       350

  LXXXVIII. A Gascon, and a Gascon and a
  half                                                               352

  LXXXIX. Colbert                                                    359

  XC. Jealousy                                                       362

  XCI. High Treason                                                  366

  XCII. A Night at the Bastille                                      371

  XCIII. The Shadow of M. Fouquet                                    374

  XCIV. The Morning                                                  383

  XCV. The King's Friend                                             387

  XCVI. Showing how the Countersign
  was respected at the Bastille                                      395

  XCVII. The King's Gratitude                                        400

  XCVIII. The False King                                             404

  XCIX. In which Porthos thinks he is
  pursuing a Duchy                                                   409

  C. The Last Adieux                                                 412

  CI. Monsieur de Beaufort                                           415

  CII. Preparations for Departure                                    419

  CIII. Planchet's Inventory                                         423

  CIV. The Inventory of M. de Beaufort                               426

  CV. The Silver Dish                                                429

  CVI. Captive and Jailers                                           433

  CVII. Promises                                                     438

  CVIII. Among Women                                                 444

  CIX. The Last Supper                                               449

  CX. In the Carriage of M. Colbert                                  453

  CXI. The Two Lighters                                              456

  CXII. Friendly Advice                                              460

  CXIII. How the King, Louis XIV.,
  played his little Part                                             463

  CXIV. The White Horse and the Black Horse                          468

  CXV. In which the Squirrel falls--in
  which the Adder flies                                              472

  CXVI. Belle-Isle-en-Mer                                            477

  CXVII. The Explanations of Aramis                                  482

  CXVIII. Result of the Ideas of the King,
  and the Ideas of D'Artagnan                                        487

  CXIX. The Ancestors of Porthos                                     489

  CXX. The Son of Biscarrat                                          491

  CXXI. The Grotto of Locmaria                                       494

  CXXII. The Grotto                                                  497

  CXXIII. An Homeric Song                                            501

  CXXIV. The Death of a Titan                                        504

  CXXV. The Epitaph of Porthos                                       508

  CXXVI. The Round of M. de Gesvres                                  511

  CXXVII. King Louis XIV.                                            514

  CXXVIII. The Friends of M. Fouquet                                 518

  CXXIX. Porthos' Will                                               522

  CXXX. The Old Age of Athos                                         525

  CXXXI. The Vision of Athos                                         527

  CXXXII. The Angel of Death                                         531

  CXXXIII. The Bulletin                                              533

  CXXXIV. The last Canto of the Poem                                 536


  EPILOGUE                                                           539

  THE DEATH OF D'ARTAGNAN                                            549


         *       *       *       *       *


  LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


I.--_Frontispiece._--Hardly had the ladder been properly placed
than the king began to ascend.

II.--As the rain dripped more and more through the foliage of the oak,
the king held his hat over the head of the young girl.

III.--D'Artagnan, reclining upon an immense straight-backed chair, with
his legs not stretched out, but simply placed upon a stool, formed an
angle of the most obtuse form that could possibly be seen.

IV.--De Guiche turned round also, and, at the moment the horse was quiet
again, he fired, and the ball carried off De Wardes' hat from his head.

V.--Athos broke his sword across his knee, slowly placed the two pieces
upon the floor, and saluting the king, who was almost choking from rage
and shame, he quitted the cabinet.

VI.--Raoul, presenting his pistol, threw himself on the leader,
commanding the coachman to stop.

VII.--Aramis saw that the young man was stretched upon his bed, his face
half-concealed by his arms.

VIII.--"You will look through the opening, which answers to one of the
false windows made in the dome of the king's apartment. Can you see?"

IX.--"What is this, monsieur, and what is the meaning of this jest?" "It
is no jest," replied in a deep voice the masked figure that held the
lantern.

X.--The king entered into the cell without pronouncing a single word: he
was pale and haggard.

XI.--They saw, by the red flashes of the lightning against the violet
fog which the wind stamped upon the bankward sky, they saw pass gravely
at six paces behind the governor, a man clothed in black and masked by a
visor of polished steel, soldered to a helmet of the same nature, which
altogether enveloped the whole of his head.

XII.--The Deathbed of Athos--"Here I am!"




THE

VICOMTE DE BRAGELONNE.




CHAPTER I.

SHOWING WHAT NEITHER THE NAIAD NOR DRYAD HAD ANTICIPATED.


Saint-Aignan stopped at the foot of the staircase which led to the
_entresol_, where the maids of honor were lodged, and to the first
floor, where Madame's apartments were situated. Then, by means of one of
the servants who was passing, he sent to apprise Malicorne, who was
still with Monsieur. After having waited ten minutes, Malicorne arrived,
looking full of suspicion and importance. The king drew back toward the
darkest part of the vestibule. Saint-Aignan, on the contrary, advanced
to meet him, but at the first words, indicating his wish, Malicorne drew
back abruptly.

"Oh! oh!" he said, "you want me to introduce you into the rooms of the
maids of honor?"

"Yes."

"You know very well that I cannot do anything of the kind, without being
made acquainted with your object."

"Unfortunately, my dear Monsieur Malicorne, it is quite impossible for
me to give you any explanation: you must therefore confide in me as in a
friend who got you out of a great difficulty yesterday, and who now begs
you to draw him out of one to-day."

"Yet, I told you, monsieur, what my object was; that my object was not
to sleep out in the open air, and any man might express the same wish,
while you, however, admit nothing."

"Believe me, my dear Monsieur Malicorne," Saint-Aignan persisted, "that
if I were permitted to explain myself, I would do so."

"In that case, my dear monsieur, it is impossible for me to allow you to
enter Mademoiselle de Montalais's apartment."

"Why so?"

"You know why better than any one else, since you caught me on the wall
paying my addresses to Mademoiselle de Montalais; it would, therefore,
be an excess of kindness, on my part, you will admit, since I am paying
my attentions to her, to open the door of her room to you."

"But who told you it was on her account I asked you for the key?"

"For whom, then?"

"She does not lodge there alone, I suppose?"

"No, certainly; for Mademoiselle de la Valliere shares her rooms with
her; but, really, you have nothing more to do with Mademoiselle de la
Valliere than with Mademoiselle de Montalais, and there are only two men
to whom I would give this key; to M. de Bragelonne, if he begged me to
give it him, and to the king if he ordered me to do so."

"In that case, give me the key, monsieur, I order you to do so," said
the king, advancing from the obscurity, and partially opening his cloak.
"Mademoiselle de Montalais will step down to talk with you, while we go
upstairs to Mademoiselle de la Valliere, for, in fact, it is she only
whom we require."

"The king," exclaimed Malicorne, bowing down to the very ground.

"Yes, the king," said Louis, smiling, "the king, who is as pleased with
your resistance as with your capitulation. Rise, monsieur, and render
us the service we request of you."

"I obey your majesty," said Malicorne, leading the way up the staircase.

"Get Mademoiselle de Montalais to come down," said the king, "and do not
breathe a word to her of my visit."

Malicorne bowed in sign of obedience, and proceeded up the staircase.
But the king, after a hasty reflection, followed him, and that, too,
with such rapidity, that although Malicorne was already more than
half-way up the staircase, the king reached the room at the same moment
he did. He then observed by the door which remained half-opened behind
Malicorne, La Valliere, sitting in an armchair with her head thrown
back, and in the opposite corner Montalais, who, in her dressing-gown,
was standing before a looking-glass, engaged in arranging her hair, and
parleying all the while with Malicorne. The king hurriedly opened the
door, and entered the room. Montalais called out at the noise made by
the opening of the door, and, recognizing the king, made her escape. La
Valliere rose from her seat, like a dead person who had been galvanized,
and then fell back again in her armchair. The king advanced slowly
toward her.

"You wished for an audience, I believe," he said, coldly; "I am ready to
hear you. Speak."

Saint-Aignan, faithful to his character of being deaf, blind, and dumb,
had stationed himself in a corner of the door, upon a stool which he
fortuitously found there. Concealed by the tapestry which covered the
doorway, and leaning his back against the wall, he could in this way
listen without been seen; resigning himself to the post of a good
watch-dog, who patiently waits and watches without ever getting in his
master's way.

La Valliere, terror-stricken at the king's irritated aspect, again rose
a second time, and assuming a posture of humility and entreaty,
murmured, "Forgive me, sire."

"What need is there for my forgiveness?" asked Louis.

"Sire, I have been guilty of a great fault; nay, more than a great
fault, a great crime."

"You?"

"Sire, I have offended your majesty."

"Not the slightest degree in the world," replied Louis XIV.

"I implore you, sire, not to maintain toward me that terrible
seriousness of manner which reveals your majesty's just anger. I feel I
have offended you, sire; but I wish to explain to you how it was that I
have not offended you of my own accord."

"In the first place," said the king, "in what way can you possibly have
offended me? I cannot perceive how. Surely not on account of a young
girl's harmless and very innocent jest? You turned the credulity of a
young man into ridicule--it was very natural to do so; any other woman
in your place would have done the same."

"Oh! your majesty overwhelms me by your remark."

"Why so?"

"Because if I had been the author of the jest, it would not have been
innocent."

"Well! is that all you had to say to me in soliciting an audience?" said
the king, as though about to turn away.

Thereupon, La Valliere, in an abrupt and broken voice, her eyes dried up
by the fire of her tears, made a step toward the king, and said, "Did
your majesty hear everything?"

"Everything, what?"

"Everything I said beneath the royal oak."

"I did not lose a syllable."

"And when your majesty heard me, you were able to think I had abused
your credulity."

"Credulity; yes, indeed you have selected the very word."

"And your majesty did not suppose that a poor girl like myself might
possibly be compelled to submit to the will of others."

"Forgive me," returned the king; "but I shall never be able to
understand that she, who of her own free will could express herself so
unreservedly beneath the royal oak, would allow herself to be
influenced to such an extent by the direction of others."

"But the threat held out against me, sire."

"Threat! who threatened you--who dared to threaten you?"

"They who have the right to do so, sire."

"I do not recognize any one as possessing the right to threaten in my
kingdom."

"Forgive me, sire, but near your majesty, even, there are persons
sufficiently high in position to have, or to believe that they possess,
the right of injuring a young girl, without fortune, and possessing only
her reputation."

"In what way injure her?"

"In depriving her of her reputation, by disgracefully expelling her from
the court."

"Oh! Mademoiselle de la Valliere," said the king, bitterly, "I prefer
those persons who exculpate themselves without incriminating others."

"Sire!"

"Yes; and I confess that I greatly regret to perceive that an easy
justification, as your own might be, should have been complicated in my
presence by a tissue of reproaches and imputations against others."

"And which you do not believe?" exclaimed La Valliere. The king remained
silent.

"Nay, but tell me!" repeated La Valliere, vehemently.

"I regret to confess it," replied the king, bowing coldly.

The young girl uttered a deep groan, striking her hands together in
despair. "You do not believe me, then," she said to the king, who still
remained silent, while poor La Valliere's features became visibly
changed at his continued silence. "Therefore, you believe," she said,
"that I settled this ridiculous, this infamous plot, of trifling, in so
shameless a manner, with your majesty."

"Nay," said the king, "it is neither ridiculous nor infamous, it is not
even a plot; it is merely a jest, more or less amusing, and nothing
more."

"Oh!" murmured the young girl, "the king does not, and will not,
believe me, then?"

"No, indeed, I will not believe you," said the king. "Besides, in point
of fact, what can be more natural? The king, you argue, follows me,
listens to me, watches me; the king wishes perhaps to amuse himself at
my expense, I will amuse myself at his, and as the king is very
tender-hearted, I will take his heart by storm."

La Valliere hid her face in her hands, as she stifled her sobs. The king
continued most pitilessly, he revenged himself upon the poor victim
before him for all that he had himself suffered.

"Let us invent, then, this story of my loving him and preferring him to
others. The king is so simple and so conceited that he will believe me;
and then we can go and tell others how credulous the king is, and can
enjoy a laugh at his expense."

"Oh!" exclaimed La Valliere, "to think that, to believe that! it is
frightful."

"And," pursued the king, "that is not all; if this self-conceited prince
should take our jest seriously, if he should be imprudent enough to
exhibit before others anything like delight at it, well, in that case,
the king will be humiliated before the whole court; and what a
delightful story it will be, too, for him to whom I am really attached,
a part of my dowry for my husband, to have the adventure to relate of
the king who was so amusingly deceived by a young girl."

"Sire!" exclaimed La Valliere, her mind bewildered, almost wandering,
indeed, "not another word, I implore you; do you not see that you are
killing me?"

"A jest, nothing but a jest," murmured the king, who, however, began to
be somewhat affected.

La Valliere fell upon her knees, and that so violently, that their sound
could be heard upon the hard floor. "Sire," she said, "I prefer shame to
disloyalty."

"What do you mean?" inquired the king, without moving a step to raise
the young girl from her knees.

"Sire, when I shall have sacrificed my honor and my reason both to you,
you will perhaps believe in my loyalty. The tale which was related to
you in Madame's apartments, and by Madame herself, is utterly false; and
that which I said beneath the great oak--"

"Well!"

"That only is the truth."

"What!" exclaimed the king.

"Sire," exclaimed La Valliere, hurried away by the violence of her
emotions, "were I to die of shame on the very spot where my knees are
fixed, I would repeat it until my latest breath; I said that I loved
you, and it is true; I do love you."

"You!"

"I have loved you, sire, from the very day first I saw you; from the
moment when at Blois, where I was pining away my existence, your royal
looks, full of light and life, were first bent upon me. I love you
still, sire; it is a crime of high treason, I know, that a poor girl
like myself should love her sovereign and should presume to tell him so.
Punish me for my audacity, despise me for my shameless immodesty; but do
not ever say, do not ever think, that I have jested with or deceived
you. I belong to a family whose loyalty has been proved, sire; and I,
too, love my king."

Suddenly her strength, voice, and respiration ceased, and she fell
forward, like the flower Virgil alludes to, which the scythe of the
reaper touched as it passed over. The king, at these words, at this
vehement entreaty, no longer retained either ill-will or doubt in his
mind; his whole heart seemed to expand at the glowing breath of an
affection which proclaimed itself in such a noble and courageous
language. When, therefore, he heard the passionate confession of that
young girl's affection, his strength seemed to fail him, and he hid his
face in his hands. But when he felt La Valliere's hands clinging to his
own, when their warm pressure fired his blood, he bent forward, and
passing his arm round La Valliere's waist, he raised her from the ground
and pressed her against his heart. But she, her drooping head fallen
forward on her bosom, seemed to have ceased to live. The king,
terrified, called out for Saint-Aignan. Saint-Aignan, who had carried
his discretion so far as to remain without stirring in his corner,
pretending to wipe away a tear, ran forward at the king's summons. He
then assisted Louis to seat the young girl upon a couch, slapped her
hands, sprinkled some Hungary water over her face, calling out all the
while, "Come, come, it is all over; the king believes you, and forgives
you. There, there now! take care, or you will agitate his majesty too
much; his majesty is so sensitive, so tender-hearted. Now, really,
Mademoiselle de la Valliere, you must pay attention, for the king is
very pale."

The fact was, the king was visibly losing color. But La Valliere did not
move.

"Do pray recover," continued Saint-Aignan, "I beg, I implore you; it is
really time you should; think only of one thing, that if the king should
become unwell, I should be obliged to summon his physician. What a state
of things that would be! So do pray rouse yourself; make an effort, pray
do, and do it at once, too."

It was difficult to display more persuasive eloquence than Saint-Aignan
did, but something still more powerful and of a more energetic nature
than this eloquence aroused La Valliere. The king, who was kneeling
before her, covered the palms of her hands with those burning kisses
which are to the hands what a kiss upon the lips is to the face. La
Valliere's senses returned to her; she languidly opened her eyes, and,
with a dying look, murmured, "Oh! sire, has your majesty pardoned me,
then?"

The king did not reply, for he was still too much overcome. Saint-Aignan
thought it his duty again to retire, for he observed the passionate
devotion which was displayed in the king's gaze. La Valliere arose.

"And now, sire, that I have justified myself, at least I trust so in
your majesty's eyes, grant me leave to retire into a convent. I shall
bless your majesty all my life, and I shall die there thanking and
loving Heaven for having granted me one day of perfect happiness."

"No, no," replied the king, "you will live here blessing Heaven, on the
contrary, but loving Louis, who will make your existence one of perfect
felicity--Louis who loves you--Louis who swears it."

"Oh! sire, sire!"

And upon this doubt of La Valliere, the king's kisses became so warm
that Saint-Aignan thought it his duty to retire behind the tapestry.
These kisses however, which she had not had the strength at first to
resist, began to intimidate the young girl.

"Oh! sire," she exclaimed, "do not make me repent my loyalty, for it
would show me that your majesty despises me still."

"Mademoiselle de la Valliere," said the king, suddenly, drawing back
with an air full of respect, "there is nothing in the world that I love
and honor more than yourself, and nothing in my court, I call Heaven to
witness, shall be so highly regarded as you shall be henceforward. I
entreat your forgiveness for my transport; it arose from an excess of
affection, but I can prove to you that I shall love still more than ever
by respecting you as much as you can possibly desire." Then bending
before her, and taking her by the hand, he said to her, "Will you honor
me by accepting the kiss I press upon your hand?" And the king's lips
were pressed respectfully and lightly upon the young girl's trembling
hand. "Henceforth," added Louis, rising and bending his glance upon La
Valliere, "henceforth you are under my safeguard. Do not speak to any
one of the injury I have done you, forgive others that which they may
have been able to do you. For the future you shall be so far above all
those, that, far from inspiring you with fear, they shall be even
beneath your pity." And he bowed as reverently as though he were leaving
a place of worship. Then calling to Saint-Aignan, who approached with
great humility, he said, "I hope, comte, that Mademoiselle de la
Valliere will kindly confer a little of her friendship upon you, in
return for that which I have vowed to her eternally."

Saint-Aignan bent his knee before La Valliere, saying, "How happy,
indeed, would such an honor make me!"

"I shall send your companion back to you," said the king. "Farewell! or,
rather, adieu till we meet again; do not forget me in your prayers, I
entreat."

"Oh! no," said La Valliere, "be assured that you and heaven are in my
heart together."

These words of Louise elated the king, who, full of happiness, hurried
Saint-Aignan down the stairs. Madame had not anticipated this
termination, and neither the Naiad nor the Dryad had said a word about
it.




CHAPTER II.

THE NEW GENERAL OF THE JESUITS.


While La Valliere and the king were mingling together, in their first
confession of love, all the bitterness of the past, all the happiness of
the present, and all the hopes of the future, Fouquet had retired to the
apartments which had been assigned to him in the chateau, and was
conversing with Aramis precisely upon the very subjects which the king
at that moment was forgetting.

"Now tell me," began Fouquet, after having installed his guest in an
armchair, and seated himself by his side, "tell me, Monsieur d'Herblay,
what is our position with regard to the Belle-Isle affair, and whether
you have received any news about it."

"Everything is going on in that direction as we wish," replied Aramis;
"the expenses have been paid, and nothing has transpired of our
designs."

"But what about the soldiers whom the king wished to send there?"

"I have received news this morning that they had arrived there fifteen
days ago."

"And how have they been treated?"

"In the best manner possible."

"What has become of the former garrison?"

"The soldiers were landed at Sarzeau, and were sent off at once toward
Quimper."

"And the new garrison?"

"Belongs to us from this very moment."

"Are you sure of what you say, my dear Monsieur de Vannes?"

"Quite sure, and, moreover, you will see by-and-by how matters have
turned out."

"Still you are very well aware that, of all the garrison towns,
Belle-Isle is precisely the very worst."

"I know it, and have acted accordingly; no space to move about, no
communications, no cheerful society, no gambling permitted; well, it is
a great pity," added Aramis, with one of those smiles so peculiar to
him, "to see how much young people at the present day seek amusement,
and how much, consequently, they incline toward the man who procures and
pays for such amusements for them."

"But if they amuse themselves at Belle-Isle?"

"If they amuse themselves through the king's means, they will attach
themselves to the king; but if they get bored to death through the
king's means, and amuse themselves through M. Fouquet, they will attach
themselves to M. Fouquet."

"And you informed my intendant, of course, so that immediately on their
arrival--"

"By no means; they were left alone a whole week, to weary themselves at
their ease; but, at the end of the week, they cried out, saying that the
last officers amused themselves more than they did. Whereupon they were
told that the old officers had been able to make a friend of M. Fouquet,
and that M. Fouquet, knowing them to be friends of his, had from that
moment done all he possibly could to prevent their getting wearied or
bored upon his estates. Upon this they began to reflect. Immediately
afterward, however, the intendant added, that without anticipating M.
Fouquet's orders, he knew his master sufficiently well to be aware that
he took an interest in every gentleman in the king's service, and that,
although he did not know the new comers, he would do as much for them as
he had done for the others."

"Excellent! and I trust that the promises were followed up; I desire, as
you know, that no promise should ever be made in my name without being
kept."

"Without a moment's loss of time, our two privateers, and your own
horses, were placed at the disposal of the officers; the keys of the
principal mansion were handed over to them, so that they made up
hunting-parties, and walking-excursions with such ladies as are to be
found in Belle-Isle; and such others as they are enabled to enlist from
the neighborhood, who have no fear of sea-sickness."

"And there is a fair sprinkling to be met with at Sarzeau and Vannes, I
believe, your eminence?"

"Yes; all along the coast," said Aramis, quietly.

"And now, for the soldiers?"

"Everything is precisely the same, in a relative degree, you understand;
the soldiers have plenty of wine, excellent provisions, and good pay."

"Very good; so that?--"

"So that this garrison can be depended upon, and it is a better one than
the last."

"Good."

"The result is, if Fortune favors us, so that the garrisons are changed
in this manner, only every two months, that at the end of every three
years, the whole army will, in its turn, have been there; and,
therefore, instead of having one regiment in our favor, we shall have
fifty thousand men."

"Yes, yes; I knew perfectly well," said Fouquet, "that no friend could
be more incomparable and invaluable than yourself, my dear Monsieur
d'Herblay; but," he added, laughing, "all this time we are forgetting
our friend De Vallon; what has become of him? During the three days I
have spent at Saint-Mande, I confess I have forgotten him completely."

"I do not forget him, however," returned Aramis. "Porthos is at
Saint-Mande; all his joints are kept well greased, the greatest care is
being taken of him with regard to the food he eats, and to the wines he
drinks; I advise him to take daily airings in the small park, which you
have kept for your own use, and he makes use of it accordingly. He
begins to walk again, he exercises his muscular powers by bending down
young elm trees, or making the old oaks fly into splinters, as Milo of
Crotona used to do; and, as there are no lions in the park, it is not
unlikely we shall find him alive. Porthos is a brave fellow."

"Yes, but in the meantime he will get wearied to death."

"He never does that."

"He will be asking questions?"

"He sees no one."

"At all events, he is looking or hoping for something or another?"

"I have inspired in him a hope which we will realize some fine morning,
and he subsists on that."

"What is it?"

"That of being presented to the king."

"Oh! oh! in what character?"

"As the engineer of Belle-Isle, of course."

"Is it possible?"

"Quite true."

"Shall we not be obliged, then, to send him back to Belle-Isle?"

"Most certainly; I am even thinking of sending him back as soon as
possible. Porthos is very fond of display; he is a man whose weaknesses
D'Artagnan, Athos and myself are alone acquainted with; he never commits
himself in any way; he is dignity itself; to the officers there, he
would seem like a Paladin of the time of the Crusades. He would make the
whole staff drunk, without getting so himself, and every one will regard
him as an object of admiration and sympathy; if, therefore, it should
happen that we should have any orders requiring to be carried out,
Porthos is an incarnation of the order itself, and whatever he chose to
do, others would find themselves obliged to submit to."

"Send him back then."

"That is what I intend to do; but in a few days only, for I must not
omit to tell you one thing."

"What is it?"

"I begin to suspect D'Artagnan. He is not at Fontainebleau, as you may
have noticed, and D'Artagnan is never absent, or apparently idle,
without some object in view. And now that my own affairs are settled, I
am going to try and ascertain what the affairs are in which D'Artagnan
is engaged."

"Your own affairs are settled, you say?"

"Yes."

"You are very fortunate, in that case, then, and I should like to be
able to say the same."

"I hope you do not make yourself uneasy."

"Hum!"

"Nothing could be better than the king's reception of you."

"True."

"And Colbert lets you be quiet."

"Almost so."

"In that case," said Aramis, with that connection of ideas which marked
him, "in that, case, then, we can bestow a thought upon the young girl I
was speaking to you about yesterday."

"Whom do you mean?"

"What, have you forgotten already? I mean La Valliere."

"Ah! of course, of course."

"Do you object, then, to try and make a conquest of her?"

"In one respect only, my heart is engaged in another direction; and I
positively do not care about the girl in the least."

"Oh! oh!" said Aramis, "your heart is engaged, you say. The deuce! we
must take care of that!"

"Why?"

"Because it is terrible to have the heart occupied, when others, beside
yourself, have so much need of the head."

"You are right. So, you see, at your first summons, I left everything.
But to return to this girl. What good do you see in my troubling myself
about her?"

"This.--The king, it is said, has taken a fancy to her; at least, so it
is supposed."

"But you, who know everything, know very differently."

"I know that the king has changed with great rapidity; that the day
before yesterday, he was mad about Madame; that a few days ago, Monsieur
complained of it, even to the queen-mother; and that some conjugal
misunderstandings and maternal scoldings were the consequence."

"How do you know all that?"

"I do know it; at all events, since these misunderstandings and
scoldings the king has not addressed a word, has not paid the slightest
attention, to her royal highness."

"Well, what next?"

"Since then, he has been taken up with Mademoiselle de la Valliere. Now,
Mademoiselle de la Valliere is one of Madame's maids of honor. You
happen to know, I suppose, what is called a _chaperon_ in matters of
love. Well, then, Mademoiselle de la Valliere is Madame's _chaperon_. It
is for you, therefore, to take advantage of this state of things. You
have no occasion for me to tell you that. But, at all events, wounded
vanity will render the conquest an easier one; the girl will get hold of
the king, and Madame's secret, and you can hardly tell what a man of
intelligence can do with a secret."

"But how to get at her?"

"Nay, you, of all men, to ask me such a question?" said Aramis.

"Very true. I shall not have any time to take any notice of her."

"She is poor and unassuming, you will create a position for her, and,
whether she becomes the king's master, or his mistress, or whether she
only becomes his confidant, you will only have made a new proficient."

"Very good," said Fouquet. "What is to be done, then, with regard to
this girl?"

"Whenever you have taken a fancy to any lady, Monsieur Fouquet, what
steps have you taken?"

"I have written to her, protesting my devotion to her. I have added, how
happy I should be to render her any service in my power, and have signed
'Fouquet' at the end of the letter."

"And has any one offered any resistance?"

"One person only," replied Fouquet. "But, four days ago, she yielded, as
the others had done."

"Will you take the trouble to write?" said Aramis, holding a pen toward
him, which Fouquet took, saying:

"I will write at your dictation. My head is so taken up in another
direction that I should not be able to write a couple of lines."

"Very well," said Aramis, "write."

And he dictated as follows: "I have seen, and you will not be surprised
to learn, how beautiful I have found you. But, for want of the position
you merit at the court, your presence there is a waste of time. The
devotion of a man of honor, should ambition of any kind inspire you,
might possibly serve as a means of display for your talents and beauty.
I place my devotion at your feet; but, as an affection, however reserved
and unpresuming it may be, might possibly compromise the object of its
worship, it would ill-become a person of your merit running the risk of
being compromised, without her future being insured. If you would deign
to accept and reply to my affection, my affection shall prove its
gratitude to you in making you free and independent forever." Having
finished writing, Fouquet looked at Aramis.

"Sign it," said the latter.

"Is it absolutely necessary?"

"Your signature at the foot of that letter is worth a million; you
forget that." Fouquet signed.

"Now, by whom do you intend to send the letter?" asked Aramis.

"By an excellent servant of mine."

"Can you rely on him?"

"He is a man who has been with me all my life."

"Very well. Besides, in this case, we are not playing for very heavy
stakes."

"How so? For if what you say be true of the accommodating disposition of
this girl for the king and Madame, the king will give her all the money
she can ask for."

"The king has money, then?" asked Aramis.

"I suppose so, for he has not asked me for any more."

"Be easy; he will ask for some soon."

"Nay, more than that, I had thought he would have spoken to me about the
_fete_ at Vaux, but he never said a word about it."

"He will be sure to do so, though."

"You must think the king's disposition a very cruel one, Monsieur
d'Herblay."

"It is not he who is so."

"He is young, and therefore his disposition is a kind one."

"He is young, and either he is weak, or his passions are strong; and
Monsieur Colbert holds his weaknesses and his passions in his villainous
grasp."

"You admit that you fear him?--"

"I do not deny it."

"In that case I am lost."

"Why so?"

"My only influence with the king has been through the money I commanded,
and now I am a ruined man."

"Not so."

"What do you mean by 'not so?' Do you know my affairs better than
myself?"

"That is not unlikely."

"If he were to request this _fete_ to be given?"

"You will give it, of course."

"But where is the money to come from?"

"Have you ever been in want of any?"

"Oh, if you only knew at what a cost I procured the last supply!"

"The next shall cost you nothing."

"But who will give it me?"

"I will."

"What! give me six millions?"

"Ten, if necessary."

"Upon my word, D'Herblay," said Fouquet, "your confidence alarms me more
than the king's displeasure. Who can you possibly be, after all?"

"You know me well enough, I should think."

"Of course; but what is it you are aiming at?"

"I wish to see upon the throne of France a king devoted to Monsieur
Fouquet, and I wish Monsieur Fouquet to be devoted to me."

"Oh!" exclaimed Fouquet, pressing his hand, "as for belonging to you. I
am yours entirely: but believe me, my dear D'Herblay, you are deceiving
yourself."

"In what respect?"

"The king will never become devoted to me."

"I do not remember to have said that the king would be devoted to you."

"Why, on the contrary, you have this moment said so."

"I did not say the king: I said a king."

"Is it not all the same?"

"No, on the contrary, it is quite different."

"I do not understand you."

"You will do so shortly then. Suppose, for instance, the king in
question were to be a very different person to Louis XIV."

"Another person?"

"Yes, who is indebted for everything to you."

"Impossible!"

"His very throne even."

"You are mad, D'Herblay! There is no man living besides Louis XIV. who
can sit on the throne of France. I see none, not one."

"Unless it be Monsieur," said Fouquet, looking at Aramis uneasily, "yet
Monsieur--"

"It is not Monsieur."

"But how can it be that a prince not of the royal line, that a prince
without any right--"

"My king, or rather your king, will be everything that is necessary, be
assured of that."

"Be careful, Monsieur d'Herblay; you make my blood run cold, and my head
swim."

Aramis smiled. "There is but little occasion for that," he replied.

"Again, I repeat, you terrify me!" said Fouquet.

Aramis smiled.

"You laugh," said Fouquet.

"The day will come when you will laugh too; only at the present moment I
must laugh alone."

"But explain yourself."

"When the proper day shall have arrived, I will explain all. Fear
nothing; have faith in me, and doubt nothing."

"The fact is, I cannot but doubt, because I do not see clearly, or at
all even."

"That is because of your blindness: but a day will come when you will be
enlightened."

"Oh," said Fouquet, "how willingly would I believe!"

"You without belief! You who, through my means, have ten times crossed
the abyss yawning at your feet, and in which, had you been alone, you
would have been irretrievably swallowed up! You without belief! you who,
from procureur-general, attained the rank of intendant, from the rank of
intendant that of first minister of the crown, and who, from the rank of
first minister, will pass to that of mayor of the palace! But no," he
said, with the same unaltered smile, "no, no, you cannot see, and
consequently cannot believe that." And Aramis rose to withdraw.

"One word more," said Fouquet. "You have never yet spoken to me in this
manner, you have never yet shown yourself so confident--I should rather
say so daring."

"Because it is necessary, in order to speak confidently, to have the
lips unfettered."

"And that is now your case?"

"Yes."

"Since a very short time, then?"

"Since yesterday only."

"Oh, Monsieur d'Herblay, take care; your confidence is becoming
audacity."

"One can well be audacious when one is powerful."

"And you are powerful?"

"I have already offered you ten millions: I offer them again to you."

Fouquet rose, much agitated and disturbed.

"Come," he said, "come; you spoke of overthrowing kings and replacing
them by others. If, indeed, I am not really out of my senses, is or is
not that what you said just now?"

"You are by no means out of your senses, for it is perfectly true I did
say all that just now."

"And why did you say so?"

"Because it is easy to speak in this manner of thrones being cast down,
and kings being raised up, when one is, one's self, far above all king's
and thrones, of this world at least."

"Your power is infinite, then?" cried Fouquet.

"I have told you so already, and I repeat it," replied Aramis, with
glistening eyes and trembling lips.

Fouquet threw himself back in his chair and buried his face in his
hands. Aramis looked at him for a moment, as the angel of human
destinies might have looked upon a simple mortal being.

"Adieu," he said to him, "sleep undisturbed, and send your letter to La
Valliere. To-morrow we shall see each other again."

"Yes, to-morrow," said Fouquet, shaking his hand like a man returning to
his senses. "But where shall we see each other?"

"At the king's promenade, if you like."

"Agreed." And they separated.




CHAPTER III.

THE STORM.


The dawn of the following day was dark and gloomy, and as every one knew
that the promenade was set down in the royal programme, every one's
gaze, as his eyes were opened, was directed toward the sky. Just above
the tops of the trees a thick, suffocating vapor seemed to remain
suspended, with hardly sufficient power to rise thirty feet above the
ground under the influence of the sun's rays, which could barely be seen
through the veil of a heavy and thick mist. No dew had fallen in the
morning; the turf was dried up for want of moisture, the flowers were
withered. The birds sung less inspiritingly than usual amid the boughs,
which remained as motionless as death. The strange confused and animated
murmurs, which seemed born of, and to exist by the sun, that respiration
of nature which is unceasingly heard amid all other sounds, could not
be heard now, and never had the silence been so profound. The king had
noticed the cheerless aspect of the heavens as he approached the window
immediately after rising. But as all the necessary directions had been
given respecting the promenade, and every preparation had been made
accordingly, and as, which was far more imperious than everything else,
Louis relied upon this promenade to satisfy the cravings of his
imagination, and we will even already say, the clamorous desires of his
heart--the king unhesitatingly decided that the appearance of the
heavens had nothing whatever to do with the matter; that the promenade
was arranged, and that, whatever the state of the weather might be, the
promenade should take place. Besides there are certain terrestrial
sovereigns who seem to have accorded them privileged existences, and
there are certain times when it might almost be supposed that the
expressed wish of an earthly monarch has its influence over the Divine
will. It was Virgil who observed of Augustus: _Nocte placet tota redeunt
spectacula mane_. Louis attended mass as usual, but it was evident that
his attention was somewhat distracted from the presence of the Creator
by the remembrance of the creature. His mind was occupied during the
service in reckoning more than once the number of minutes, then of
seconds, which separated him from the blissful moment when the promenade
would begin, that is to say, the moment when Madame would set out with
her maids of honor.

Besides, as a matter of course, everybody at the chateau was ignorant of
the interview which had taken place between La Valliere and the king.
Montalais, perhaps, with her usual chattering propensity, might have
been disposed to talk about it; but Montalais on this occasion was held
in check by Malicorne, who had placed upon her lips the padlock of
mutual interest. As for Louis XIV., his happiness was so extreme that he
had forgiven Madame, or nearly so, her little piece of ill-nature of the
previous evening. In fact, he had occasion to congratulate himself
about it rather than to complain of it. Had it not been for her
ill-natured action, he would not have received the letter from La
Valliere; had it not been for the letter, he would have had no
interview; and had it not been for the interview he would have remained
undecided. His heart was filled with too much happiness for any
ill-feeling to remain in it, at that moment at least. Instead,
therefore, of knitting his brows into a frown when he perceived his
sister-in-law, Louis resolved to receive her in a more friendly and
gracious manner than usual. But on one condition only, that she would be
ready to set out early. Such was the nature of Louis's thoughts during
mass, and which made him, during the ceremony, forget matters, which, in
his character of Most Christian King and of the oldest son of the
Church, ought to have occupied his attention. He returned to the
chateau, and as the promenade was fixed for mid-day only, and it was at
present just ten o'clock, he set to work most desperately with Colbert
and Lyonne. But even while he worked, Louis went from the table to the
window, inasmuch as the window looked out upon Madame's pavilion; he
could see M. Fouquet in the courtyard, to whom the courtiers, since the
favor shown toward him on the previous evening, paid greater attention
than ever. The king, instinctively, on noticing Fouquet, turned toward
Colbert, who was smiling, and seemed full of benevolence and delight, a
state of feeling which had arisen from the very moment one of his
secretaries had entered and handed him a pocket-book, which he had put
unopened into his pocket. But, as there was always something sinister at
the bottom of any delight expressed by Colbert, Louis preferred of the
smiles of the two men that of Fouquet. He beckoned to the surintendant
to come up, and then, turning toward Lyonne and Colbert, he said:
"Finish this matter, place it on my desk, and I will read it at my
leisure." And he left the room. At the sign the king had made to him,
Fouquet had hastened up the staircase, while Aramis, who was with the
surintendant, quietly retired among the group of courtiers, and
disappeared without having been even observed by the king. The king and
Fouquet met at the top of the staircase.

"Sire," said Fouquet, remarking the gracious manner in which Louis was
about to receive him, "your majesty has overwhelmed me with kindness
during the last few days. It is not a youthful monarch, but a being of a
higher order, who reigns over France--one whom pleasure, happiness, and
love acknowledge as their master." The king colored. The compliment,
although flattering, was not the less somewhat direct. Louis conducted
Fouquet to a small room which separated his study from his sleeping
apartment.

"Do you know why I summoned you?" said the king, as he seated himself
upon the edge of the window, so as not to lose anything that might be
passing in the gardens which fronted the opposite entrance to Madame's
pavilion.

"No, sire," replied Fouquet; "but I am sure for something agreeable, if
I am to judge from your majesty's gracious smile."

"You are mistaken, then."

"I, sire?"

"For I summoned you, on the contrary, to pick a quarrel with you."

"With me, sire?"

"Yes, and that a serious one."

"Your majesty alarms me; and yet I wait most confident in your justice
and goodness."

"Do you know I am told, Monsieur Fouquet, that you are preparing a grand
_fete_ at Vaux."

Fouquet smiled, as a sick man would do at the first shiver of a fever
which has left him but returns again.

"And that you have not invited me!" continued the king.

"Sire," replied Fouquet, "I have not even thought of the _fete_ you
speak of, and it was only yesterday evening that one of my _friends_"
(Fouquet laid a stress upon the word) "was kind enough to make me think
of it."

"Yet I saw you yesterday evening, Monsieur Fouquet, and you said nothing
to me about it."

"How dared I hope that your majesty would so greatly descend from your
own exalted station as to honor my dwelling with your royal presence?"

"Excuse me, Monsieur Fouquet, you did not speak to me about your
_fete_."

"I did not allude to the _fete_ to your majesty, I repeat, in the first
place, because nothing had been decided with regard to it, and,
secondly, because I feared a refusal."

"And something made you fear a refusal, Monsieur Fouquet? You see I am
determined to push you hard."

"The profound wish I had that your majesty should accept my
invitation--"

"Well, Monsieur Fouquet, nothing is easier, I perceive, than our coming
to an understanding. Your wish is to invite me to your _fete_--my own is
to be present at it; invite me, and I will go."

"Is it possible that your majesty will deign to accept?" murmured the
surintendant.

"Why, really, monsieur," said the king, laughing, "I think I do more
than accept--I think I invite myself."

"Your majesty overwhelms me with honor and delight!" exclaimed Fouquet;
"but I shall be obliged to repeat what M. de Vieuville said to your
ancestor Henry the Fourth, '_Domine non sum dignus_.'"

"To which I reply, Monsieur Fouquet, that if you give a _fete_, I will
go whether I am invited or not."

"I thank your majesty deeply," said Fouquet, as he raised his head
beneath this favor, which he was convinced would be his ruin.

"But how could your majesty have been informed of it?"

"By public rumor, Monsieur Fouquet, which says such wonderful things of
yourself and of the marvels of your house. Would you become proud,
Monsieur Fouquet, if the king were to be jealous of you?"

"I should be the happiest man in the world, sire, since the very day on
which your majesty were to be jealous of Vaux, I should possess
something worthy of being offered to you."

"Very well, Monsieur Fouquet, prepare your _fete_, and open the doors
of your house as wide as possible."


[Illustration: AS THE RAIN DRIPPED MORE AND MORE THROUGH THE FOLIAGE
OF THE OAK, THE KING HELD HIS HAT OVER THE HEAD OF THE YOUNG
GIRL.--_Page 22._]


"It is for your majesty to fix the day."

"This day month, then."

"Has your majesty any further commands?"

"Nothing, Monsieur Fouquet, except from the present moment until then to
have you near me as much as possible."

"I have the honor to form one of your majesty's party for the
promenade."

"Very good. I am now going out indeed, for there are the ladies, I see,
who are going to start."

With this remark, the king, with all the eagerness, not only of a young
man, but of a young man in love, withdrew from the window, in order to
take his gloves and cane, which his valet held ready for him. The
neighing of the horses and the rumbling of the wheels on the gravel of
the courtyard could be distinctly heard. The king descended the stairs,
and at the moment he made his appearance upon the flight of steps every
one stopped. The king walked straight up to the young queen. The
queen-mother, who was still suffering more than ever from the illness
with which she was afflicted, did not wish to go out. Maria Theresa
accompanied Madame in her carriage, and asked the king in what direction
he wished the promenade to take place. The king, who had just seen La
Valliere, still pale from the events of the previous evening, get into a
carriage with three of her companions, told the queen that he had no
preference, and wherever she would wish to go, there would he be with
her. The queen then desired that the out-riders should proceed in the
direction of Apremont. The out-riders set off, accordingly, before the
others. The king rode on horseback, and for a few minutes accompanied
the carriage of the queen and Madame, with his hand resting upon the
door. The weather had cleared up a little, but a kind of veil of dust,
like a thick gauze, was still spread over the surface of the heavens,
and the sun made every glittering atom of dust glisten again within the
circuit of its rays. The heat was stifling; but as the king did not seem
