The Project Gutenberg EBook of Roman Britain in 1914, by F. Haverfield

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Roman Britain in 1914

Author: F. Haverfield

Release Date: August 25, 2006 [EBook #19115]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ROMAN BRITAIN IN 1914 ***




Produced by Ted Garvin, David Garcia and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







[Illustration: FIG. 1.  POTTERY STAMPS AND STAMPED POTTERY FROM HOLT.

(A) Head of Silenus (1/1). Probably an artist's die, for casting stamps
    for stamped ware (p. 20)

(B) Fragment of stamped ware (1/1), with ornament imitated from Samian
    (p. 19)

(C) STAMP FOR MORTARIUM (1/1)]






                         THE BRITISH ACADEMY
                       SUPPLEMENTAL PAPERS. III




                        Roman Britain in 1914



                      By Professor F. Haverfield

                        Fellow of the Academy



                             London: 1915
                  Published for the British Academy
             By Humphrey Milford, Oxford University Press
                          Amen Corner, E.C.


[Transcribers Note: Professor Francis Haverfield]




TABLE OF CONTENTS


                                                                     PAGE

  LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS                                                 4

  PREFACE                                                               5

  A. RETROSPECT OF FINDS MADE IN 1914                                   7

      (_a_) Raedykes, near Stonehaven; Wall of Pius; Traprain Law;
      Northumberland (Featherwood, Chesterholm, Corbridge);
      Weardale (co. Durham); Appleby; Ambleside (fort at Borrans);
      Lancaster; Ribchester; Slack (near Huddersfield); Holt;
      Cardiff; Richborough.

      (_b_) Wroxeter; Lincoln; Gloucester; London; country houses
      and farms; Lowbury (Berkshire); Beachy Head, Eastbourne;
      Parc-y-Meirch (North Wales)                                      21

  B. ROMAN INSCRIPTIONS FOUND IN 1914                                  29

      Balmuildy (Wall of Pius); Traprain Law; Featherwood (altar);
      Chesterholm (two altars); Corbridge (inscribed tile); Weardale
      (bronze _paterae_); Holt (centurial stone and tile); Lincoln;
      London; rediscovered milestone near Appleby.

  C. PUBLICATIONS RELATING TO ROMAN BRITAIN IN 1914.

      1. General                                                       38

      2. Special sites or districts                                    41


  APPENDIX: LIST OF PERIODICALS HAVING REFERENCE TO ROMAN BRITAIN      64

  INDEX OF PLACES                                                      67




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                                     PAGE

   1. Pottery-stamps and stamped pottery from Holt
      (see p. 19)                                          _Frontispiece_

   2. Plan of Roman Fort at Borrans, Ambleside. From a plan
      by Mr. R. G. Collingwood                                         10

   3. Sketch plan of Principia (Praetorium) of Roman Fort at
      Ribchester. After a plan by Mr. D. Atkinson and
      Prof. W. B. Anderson                                             13

   4. Sketch plan of part of the Roman Fort at Slack. From a plan
     by Messrs. A. Woodward and P. Ross                                14

   5. Holt, plan of site                                               16

   6. Holt, plan of barracks                                           17

   7. Holt, plan of dwelling-house and bath-house                      17

   8. Holt, plan of kilns                                              18

   9. Holt, reconstruction of the kilns shown in fig. 8                18

  10, 11. Holt, stamped 'imitation Samian' ware                        20

      (Figs. 1 and 5-11 are from photographs or drawings lent by
      Mr. A. Acton, of Wrexham)

  12. Sketch plan of Roman bath-house at East Grimstead, after
      a plan by Mr. Heywood Sumner                                     24

  13. Sketch plan of Romano-British house at North Ash, after a
      plan prepared by the Dartford Antiquarian Society                25

  14. Plan of Romano-British house at Clanville. After a plan by
      the Rev. G. Engleheart, in _Archaeologia_                        26

  15. Fragment of inscription found at Balmuildy                       29

  16. Altar found at Chesterholm, drawn from a photograph              31

  17-19. Graves and grave-nails, Infirmary Field, Chester.
     From drawings and photographs by Prof. Newstead                 41-2

  20-22. The Mersea grave-mound.  From the Report of the Morant
     Club and Essex Archaeological Society                             43

  23, 24. Margidunum, plan and seal-box. From the _Antiquary_          51

  25-28. Plan, section and views of the podium of the temple at
     Wroxeter. From the Report by Mr. Bushe-Fox                        53

  29. General plan of the Roman fort and precincts at Gellygaer.
      After plans by Mr. J. Ward                                       59

  30. Postholes at Gellygaer                                           63


For the loan of blocks 14, 17-20, 21-2, and 23-4, I am indebted
respectively to the Delegates of the Clarendon Press, Prof. Newstead,
and the Liverpool University Press, the Morant Club and the Essex
Archaeological Society, and the publisher of the _Antiquary_.




PREFACE


The contents of the present volume are of much the same character as
those of its predecessor, 'Roman Britain in 1913'. The first section
gives a retrospect of the chief finds made in 1914, so far as they are
known to me. The second section is a more detailed and technical survey
of the inscriptions found in Britain during that year. The third and
longest section is a summary, with some attempt at estimate and
criticism, of books and articles dealing with Roman Britain which
appeared in 1914 or at least bear that date on cover or title-page.
At the end I have added, for convenience, a list of the English
archaeological and other publications which at least sometimes contain
noteworthy articles relating to Roman Britain.

The total, both of finds and of publications, is smaller than in 1913.
In part the outbreak of war in August called off various supervisors
and not a few workmen from excavations then in progress; in one case
it prevented a proposed excavation from being begun. It also seems to
have retarded the issue of some archaeological periodicals. But the
scarcity of finds is much more due to natural causes. The most extensive
excavations of the year, those of Wroxeter and Corbridge, yielded
little; they were both concerned with remains which had to be explored
in the course of a complete uncovering of those sites but which were not
in themselves very interesting. The lesser sites, too, were somewhat
unproductive, though at least one, Traprain Law, is full of promise for
the future, and good work has been done in the systematic examination
of the fort at Ambleside and of certain rubbish-pits in London. In one
case, that of Holt (pp. 15-21), where excavations have for the present
come to an end, I have thought it well to include a brief retrospect
of the whole of a very interesting series of finds and, aided by the
kindness of the excavator, Mr. Arthur Acton of Wrexham, to add some
illustrations of notable objects which have not yet appeared elsewhere
in print.




A. RETROSPECT OF FINDS MADE IN 1914

i-xiv. FINDS RELATING TO THE ROMAN MILITARY OCCUPATION.


(i) The exploration of the Roman-seeming earthworks in northern Scotland
which Dr. Macdonald and I began in 1913 at Ythan Wells, in Aberdeenshire
(Report for 1913, p. 7), was continued in 1914 by Dr. Macdonald at
Raedykes, otherwise called Garrison Hill, three miles inland from
Stonehaven. Here Roy saw and planned a large camp of very irregular
outline, which he took to be Roman.[1] Since his time the ramparts have
been somewhat ploughed down, but Dr. Macdonald could trace them round,
identify the six gateways, and generally confirm Roy's plan, apart from
its hill-shading. The ramparts proved to be of two kinds: part was built
solidly of earth, with a deep ditch of Roman shape strengthened in
places with clay, in front of it, while part was roughly piled with
stones and defended only by a shallow rounded ditch. This difference
seemed due to the differing nature of the ground; ditch and rampart were
slighter where attack was less easy. The gateways were wide and provided
with traverses (_tituli_ or _tutuli_), as at Ythan Wells. No small finds
were secured. The general character of the gateways and ramparts seemed
to show Roman workmanship, but the exact date within the Roman period
remained doubtful. It has been suggested that the traverses indicate
Flavian rather than Antonine fortifying. But these devices are met with
in Britain at Bar Hill, which presumably dates from about A.D. 140, and
on Hadrian's Wall in third-century work.

[Footnote 1: _Antiquities_, plate 50. Roy does not notice it in his
text, any more than he notices plate 51 (Ythan Wells camp). They are the
two last plates in his volume; as this was issued posthumously in 1793
(he died in 1790), perhaps the omission is intelligible.]

(ii) _Wall of Pius and its forts._ At Balmuildy, north of Glasgow
(see Report for 1913, p. 10), Mr. Miller has further cleared the baths
outside the south-east corner of the fort and the adjacent ditches.
The plan which I gave last year has now to be corrected so as to show
a triple ditch between the south gate and the south-east corner and a
double ditch from the south-east corner to the east gate. This latter
section of ditch was, however, filled up at some time with clay, and the
bath planted on top of it. At presumably the same time a ditch was run
out from the south-east corner so as to enclose the bath and form an
annexe; in this annexe was found a broken altar-top with a few letters
on it (below, p. 29). Search was also made for rubbish-pits on the north
side of the fort, but without any result.

On other parts of the Wall Dr. Macdonald has gained further successes.
Evidence seems to be coming out as to the hitherto missing forts of
Kirkintilloch and Inveravon. More details have been secured of the fort
at Mumrills--fully 4-1/2 acres in area and walled with earth, not with
the turf or stone employed in the ramparts of the other forts of the
Wall. The line of the Wall from Falkirk to Inveravon, a distance of four
miles, has also been traced; it proved to be built of earth and clay,
not of the turf used in the Wall westwards. Dr. Macdonald suggests that
the eastern section of the Wall lay through heavily wooded country,
where turf was naturally awanting.

(iii) _Traprain Law._ Very interesting, too, are the preliminary
results secured by Mr. A. O. Curie on Traprain Law. This is an isolated
hill in Haddingtonshire, some twenty miles east of Edinburgh, on the
Whittingehame estate of Mr. Arthur Balfour. Legends cluster round it--of
varying antiquity. It itself shows two distinct lines of fortification,
one probably much older than the other, enclosing some 60 acres. The
area excavated in 1914 was a tiny piece, about 30 yards square; the
results were most promising. Five levels of stratification could be
distinguished. The lowest and earliest yielded small objects of native
work and Roman potsherds of the late first century: higher up, Roman
coins and pottery of the second century appeared, and in the top level,
Roman potsherds assigned to the fourth century. One Roman potsherd, from
a second-century level, bore three Roman letters IRI, the meaning of
which is likely to remain obscure. As the inscribed surface came from
the inside of an urn, the writing must have been done after the pot was
broken, and presumably on the hill itself. Among the native finds were
stone and clay moulds for casting metal objects. The site, on a whole,
seems to be native rather than Roman; it may be our first clue to the
character of native _oppida_ in northern Britain under Roman rule;
its excavation is eminently worth pursuing.

(iv) _Northumberland, Hadrian's Wall._ On Hadrian's Wall no excavations
have been carried out. But at Chesterholm two inscribed altars were
found in the summer. One was dedicated to Juppiter Optimus Maximus;
the rest of the lettering was illegible. The other, dedicated to Vulcan
on behalf of the Divinity of the Imperial House by the people of the
locality, possesses much interest. The dedicators describe themselves as
_vicani Vindolandenses_, and thus give proof that the civilians living
outside the fort at Chesterholm formed a _vicus_ or something that could
plausibly be described as such; further, they teach the proper name of
the place, which we have been wont to call Vindolana. See further below,
p. 31.

North of the Wall, at Featherwood near High Rochester (the fort
Bremenium) an altar has been found, dedicated to Victory (see p. 30).

(v) _Corbridge._ The exploration of Corbridge was carried through its
ninth season by Mr. R. H. Forster. As in 1913, the results were somewhat
scanty. The area examined, which lay on the north-east of the site,
adjacent to the areas examined in 1910 and 1913, seems, like them, to
have been thinly occupied in Roman times; at any rate the structures
actually unearthed consisted only of a roughly built foundation (25 feet
diam.) of uncertain use, which there is no reason to call a temple, some
other even more indeterminate foundations, and two bits of road. More
interest may attach to three ditches (one for sewage) and the clay base
of a rampart, which belong in some way to the northern defences of the
place in various times. The full meaning of these will, however, not be
discernible till complete plans are available and probably not till
further excavations have been made; Mr. Forster inclines to explain
parts of them as ditches of a fort held in the age of Trajan, about A.D.
90-110. Several small finds merit note. An inscribed tile seems to have
served as a writing lesson or rather, perhaps, as a reading lesson: see
below, p. 32. The Samian pottery included a very few pieces of '29', a
good deal of early '37', which most archaeologists would ascribe to the
late first or the opening second century, and some other pieces which
perhaps belong to a rather later part of the same century. The coins
cover much the same period; few are later than Hadrian. Among them was
