The Project Gutenberg EBook of An Egyptian Princess, Complete, by Georg Ebers

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: An Egyptian Princess, Complete

Author: Georg Ebers

Last Updated: March 8, 2009
Release Date: October 16, 2006 [EBook #5460]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AN EGYPTIAN PRINCESS, COMPLETE ***



Produced by David Widger





AN EGYPTIAN PRINCESS, Complete

By Georg Ebers


Translated from the German by Eleanor Grove




PREFACE TO THE SECOND GERMAN EDITION

          Aut prodesse volunt ant delectare poetae,
          Aut simul et jucunda et idonea dicere vitae.
               Horat. De arte poetica v. 333.

It is now four years since this book first appeared before the public,
and I feel it my duty not to let a second edition go forth into the
world without a few words of accompaniment. It hardly seems necessary to
assure my readers that I have endeavored to earn for the following pages
the title of a "corrected edition." An author is the father of his book,
and what father could see his child preparing to set out on a new
and dangerous road, even if it were not for the first time, without
endeavoring to supply him with every good that it lay in his power to
bestow, and to free him from every fault or infirmity on which the world
could look unfavorably? The assurance therefore that I have repeatedly
bestowed the greatest possible care on the correction of my Egyptian
Princess seems to me superfluous, but at the same time I think it
advisable to mention briefly where and in what manner I have found
it necessary to make these emendations. The notes have been revised,
altered, and enriched with all those results of antiquarian research
(more especially in reference to the language and monuments of ancient
Egypt) which have come to our knowledge since the year 1864, and which
my limited space allowed me to lay before a general public. On the
alteration of the text itself I entered with caution, almost with
timidity; for during four years of constant effort as academical tutor,
investigator and writer in those severe regions of study which exclude
the free exercise of imagination, the poetical side of a man's nature
may forfeit much to the critical; and thus, by attempting to remodel my
tale entirely, I might have incurred the danger of removing it from the
more genial sphere of literary work to which it properly belongs. I have
therefore contented myself with a careful revision of the style, the
omission of lengthy passages which might have diminished the interest of
the story to general readers, the insertion of a few characteristic or
explanatory additions, and the alteration of the proper names. These
last I have written not in their Greek, but in their Latin forms, having
been assured by more than one fair reader that the names Ibykus and
Cyrus would have been greeted by them as old acquaintances, whereas the
"Ibykos" and "Kyros" of the first edition looked so strange and learned,
as to be quite discouraging. Where however the German k has the same
worth as the Roman c I have adopted it in preference. With respect
to the Egyptian names and those with which we have become acquainted
through the cuneiform inscriptions, I have chosen the forms most adapted
to our German modes of speech, and in the present edition have placed
those few explanations which seemed to me indispensable to the right
understanding of the text, at the foot of the page, instead of among the
less easily accessible notes at the end.

The fact that displeasure has been excited among men of letters by this
attempt to clothe the hardly-earned results of severer studies in an
imaginative form is even clearer to me now than when I first sent this
book before the public. In some points I agree with this judgment, but
that the act is kindly received, when a scholar does not scorn to render
the results of his investigations accessible to the largest number of
the educated class, in the form most generally interesting to them, is
proved by the rapid sale of the first large edition of this work. I
know at least of no better means than those I have chosen, by which to
instruct and suggest thought to an extended circle of readers. Those who
read learned books evince in so doing a taste for such studies; but it
may easily chance that the following pages, though taken up only for
amusement, may excite a desire for more information, and even gain a
disciple for the study of ancient history.

Considering our scanty knowledge of the domestic life of the Greeks and
Persians before the Persian war--of Egyptian manners we know more--even
the most severe scholar could scarcely dispense with the assistance
of his imagination, when attempting to describe private life among the
civilized nations of the sixth century before Christ. He would however
escape all danger of those anachronisms to which the author of such a
work as I have undertaken must be hopelessly liable. With attention and
industry, errors of an external character may be avoided, but if I had
chosen to hold myself free from all consideration of the times in which
I and my readers have come into the world, and the modes of thought at
present existing among us, and had attempted to depict nothing but the
purely ancient characteristics of the men and their times, I should have
become unintelligible to many of my readers, uninteresting to all, and
have entirely failed in my original object. My characters will therefore
look like Persians, Egyptians, &c., but in their language, even more
than in their actions, the German narrator will be perceptible, not
always superior to the sentimentality of his day, but a native of the
world in the nineteenth century after the appearance of that heavenly
Master, whose teaching left so deep an impression on human thought and
feeling.

The Persians and Greeks, being by descent related to ourselves,
present fewer difficulties in this respect than the Egyptians, whose
dwelling-place on the fruitful islands won by the Nile from the Desert,
completely isolated them from the rest of the world.

To Professor Lepsius, who suggested to me that a tale confined entirely
to Egypt and the Egyptians might become wearisome, I owe many thanks;
and following his hint, have so arranged the materials supplied by
Herodotus as to introduce my reader first into a Greek circle. Here he
will feel in a measure at home, and indeed will entirely sympathize with
them on one important point, viz.: in their ideas on the Beautiful and
on Art. Through this Hellenic portico he reaches Egypt, from thence
passes on to Persia and returns finally to the Nile. It has been my
desire that the three nations should attract him equally, and I have
therefore not centred the entire interest of the plot in one hero, but
have endeavored to exhibit each nation in its individual character, by
means of a fitting representative. The Egyptian Princess has given
her name to the book, only because the weal and woe of all my other
characters were decided by her fate, and she must therefore be regarded
as the central point of the whole.

In describing Amasis I have followed the excellent description of
Herodotus, which has been confirmed by a picture discovered on an
ancient monument. Herodotus has been my guide too in the leading
features of Cambyses' character; indeed as he was born only forty or
fifty years after the events related, his history forms the basis of my
romance.

"Father of history" though he be, I have not followed him blindly, but,
especially in the development of my characters, have chosen those paths
which the principles of psychology have enabled me to lay down for
myself, and have never omitted consulting those hieroglyphic and
cuneiform inscriptions which have been already deciphered. In most cases
these confirm the statements of Herodotus.

I have caused Bartja's murder to take place after the conquest of Egypt,
because I cannot agree with the usually received translation of the
Behistun inscription. This reads as follows: "One named Cambujiya, son
of Curu, of our family, was king here formerly and had a brother named
Bartiya, of the same father and the same mother as Cambujiya. Thereupon
Cambujiya killed that Bartiya." In a book intended for general readers,
it would not be well to enter into a discussion as to niceties of
language, but even the uninitiated will see that the word "thereupon"
has no sense in this connection. In every other point the inscription
agrees with Herodotus' narrative, and I believe it possible to bring it
into agreement with that of Darius on this last as well; but reserve my
proofs for another time and place.

It has not been ascertained from whence Herodotus has taken the name
Smerdis which he gives to Bartja and Gaumata. The latter occurs again,
though in a mutilated form, in Justin.

My reasons for making Phanes an Athenian will be found in Note 90. Vol.
I. This coercion of an authenticated fact might have been avoided in the
first edition, but could not now be altered without important changes in
the entire text. The means I have adopted in my endeavor to make Nitetis
as young as possible need a more serious apology; as, notwithstanding
Herodotus' account of the mildness of Amasis' rule, it is improbable
that King Hophra should have been alive twenty years after his fall.
Even this however is not impossible, for it can be proved that his
descendants were not persecuted by Amasis.

On a Stela in the Leyden Museum I have discovered that a certain
Psamtik, a member of the fallen dynasty, lived till the 17th year of
Amasis' reign, and died at the age of seventy-five.

Lastly let me be permitted to say a word or two in reference to
Rhodopis. That she must have been a remarkable woman is evident from the
passage in Herodotus quoted in Notes 10, and 14, Vol. I., and from the
accounts given by many other writers. Her name, "the rosy-cheeked one,"
tells us that she was beautiful, and her amiability and charm of manner
are expressly praised by Herodotus. How richly she was endowed with
gifts and graces may be gathered too from the manner in which tradition
and fairy lore have endeavored to render her name immortal. By many she
is said to have built the most beautiful of the Pyramids, the Pyramid of
Mycerinus or Menkera. One tale related of her and reported by Strabo and
AElian probably gave rise to our oldest and most beautiful fairy tale,
Cinderella; another is near akin to the Loreley legend. An eagle,
according to AElian--the wind, in Strabo's tale,--bore away Rhodopis'
slippers while she was bathing in the Nile, and laid them at the feet of
the king, when seated on his throne of justice in the open market.
The little slippers so enchanted him that he did not rest until he had
discovered their owner and made her his queen.

The second legend tells us how a wonderfully beautiful naked woman
could be seen sitting on the summit of one of the pyramids (ut in una ex
pyramidibus); and how she drove the wanderers in the desert mad through
her exceeding loveliness.

Moore borrowed this legend and introduces it in the following verse:

       "Fair Rhodope, as story tells--
        The bright unearthly nymph, who dwells
        'Mid sunless gold and jewels hid,
        The lady of the Pyramid."

Fabulous as these stories sound, they still prove that Rhodopis must
have been no ordinary woman. Some scholars would place her on a level
with the beautiful and heroic Queen Nitokris, spoken of by Julius
Africanus, Eusebius and others, and whose name, (signifying the
victorious Neith) has been found on the monuments, applied to a queen
of the sixth dynasty. This is a bold conjecture; it adds however to the
importance of our heroine; and without doubt many traditions referring
to the one have been transferred to the other, and vice versa.
Herodotus lived so short a time after Rhodopis, and tells so many exact
particulars of her private life that it is impossible she should have
been a mere creation of fiction. The letter of Darius, given at the
end of Vol. II., is intended to identify the Greek Rhodopis with the
mythical builder of the Pyramid. I would also mention here that she
is called Doricha by Sappho. This may have been her name before she
received the title of the "rosy-cheeked one."

I must apologize for the torrent of verse that appears in the
love-scenes between Sappho and Bartja; it is also incumbent upon me to
say a few words about the love-scenes themselves, which I have altered
very slightly in the new edition, though they have been more severely
criticised than any other portion of the work.

First I will confess that the lines describing the happy love of a
handsome young couple to whom I had myself become warmly attached,
flowed from my pen involuntarily, even against my will (I intended to
write a novel in prose) in the quiet night, by the eternal Nile, among
the palms and roses. The first love-scene has a story of its own to me.
I wrote it in half an hour, almost unconsciously. It may be read in my
book that the Persians always reflected in the morning, when sober, upon
the resolutions formed the night before, while drunk. When I examined in
the sunshine what had come into existence by lamplight, I grew doubtful
of its merits, and was on the point of destroying the love-scenes
altogether, when my dear friend Julius Hammer, the author of "Schau
in Dich, und Schau um Dich," too early summoned to the other world by
death, stayed my hand. Their form was also approved by others, and I
tell myself that the 'poetical' expression of love is very similar in
all lands and ages, while lovers' conversations and modes of intercourse
vary according to time and place. Besides, I have to deal with one of
those by no means rare cases, where poetry can approach nearer the truth
than prudent, watchful prose. Many of my honored critics have censured
these scenes; others, among whom are some whose opinion I specially
value, have lavished the kindest praise upon them. Among these gentlemen
I will mention A. Stahr, C. V. Holtei, M. Hartmann, E. Hoefer, W.
Wolfsohn, C. Leemans, Professor Veth of Amsterdam, etc. Yet I will not
conceal the fact that some, whose opinion has great weight, have asked:
"Did the ancients know anything of love, in our sense of the word?
Is not romantic love, as we know it, a result of Christianity?" The
following sentence, which stands at the head of the preface to my first
edition, will prove that I had not ignored this question when I began my
task.

   "It has often been remarked that in Cicero's letters and those of
   Pliny the younger there are unmistakable indications of sympathy
   with the more sentimental feeling of modern days. I find in them
   tones of deep tenderness only, such as have arisen and will arise
   from sad and aching hearts in every land and every age."

               A. v. HUMBOLDT. Cosmos II. P. 19.

This opinion of our great scholar is one with which I cheerfully
coincide and would refer my readers to the fact that love-stories were
written before the Christian era: the Amor and Psyche of Apuleius for
instance. Indeed love in all its forms was familiar to the ancients.
Where can we find a more beautiful expression of ardent passion than
glows in Sappho's songs? or of patient faithful constancy than in
Homer's Penelope? Could there be a more beautiful picture of the union
of two loving hearts, even beyond the grave, than Xenophon has preserved
for us in his account of Panthea and Abradatas? or the story of Sabinus
the Gaul and his wife, told in the history of Vespasian? Is there
anywhere a sweeter legend than that of the Halcyons, the ice-birds, who
love one another so tenderly that when the male becomes enfeebled by
age, his mate carries him on her outspread wings whithersoever he will;
and the gods, desiring to reward such faithful love, cause the sun to
shine more kindly, and still the winds and waves on the "Halcyon days"
during which these birds are building their nest and brooding over their
young? There can surely have been no lack of romantic love in days when
a used-up man of the world, like Antony, could desire in his will that
wherever he died his body might be laid by the side of his beloved
Cleopatra: nor of the chivalry of love when Berenice's beautiful hair
was placed as a constellation in the heavens. Neither can we believe
that devotion in the cause of love could be wanting when a whole
nation was ready to wage a fierce and obstinate war for the sake of one
beautiful woman. The Greeks had an insult to revenge, but the Trojans
fought for the possession of Helen. Even the old men of Ilium were ready
"to suffer long for such a woman." And finally is not the whole question
answered in Theocritus' unparalleled poem, "the Sorceress?" We see the
poor love-lorn girl and her old woman-servant, Thestylis, cowering over
the fire above which the bird supposed to possess the power of bringing
back the faithless Delphis is sitting in his wheel. Simoetha has learnt
many spells and charms from an Assyrian, and she tries them all. The
distant roar of the waves, the stroke rising from the fire, the dogs
howling in the street, the tortured fluttering bird, the old woman, the
broken-hearted girl and her awful spells, all join in forming a night
scene the effect of which is heightened by the calm cold moonshine.
The old woman leaves the girl, who at once ceases to weave her spells,
allows her pent-up tears to have their way, and looking up to Selene the
moon, the lovers' silent confidante, pours out her whole story: how when
she first saw the beautiful Delphis her heart had glowed with love, she
had seen nothing more of the train of youths who followed him, "and,"
(thus sadly the poet makes her speak)

               "how I gained my home
        I knew not; some strange fever wasted me.
        Ten days and nights I lay upon my bed.
        O tell me, mistress Moon, whence came my love!"

"Then" (she continues) when Delphis at last crossed her threshold:

                         "I
        Became all cold like snow, and from my brow
        Brake the damp dewdrops: utterance I had none,
        Not e'en such utterance as a babe may make
        That babbles to its mother in its dreams;
        But all my fair frame stiffened into wax,--
        O tell me mistress Moon, whence came my love!"

Whence came her love? thence, whence it comes to us now. The love of the
creature to its Creator, of man to God, is the grand and yet gracious
gift of Christianity. Christ's command to love our neighbor called
into existence not only the conception of philanthropy, but of humanity
itself, an idea unknown to the heathen world, where love had been at
widest limited to their native town and country. The love of man and
wife has without doubt been purified and transfigured by Christianity;
still it is possible that a Greek may have loved as tenderly and
longingly as a Christian. The more ardent glow of passion at least
cannot be denied to the ancients. And did not their love find vent
in the same expressions as our own? Who does not know the charming
roundelay:

          "Drink the glad wine with me,
          With me spend youth's gay hours;
          Or a sighing lover be,
          Or crown thy brow with flowers.
          When I am merry and mad,
          Merry and mad be you;
          When I am sober and sad,
          Be sad and sober too!"
--written however by no poet of modern days, but by Praxilla, in the
fifth century before Christ. Who would guess either that Moore's little
song was modelled on one written even earlier than the date of our
story?

          "As o'er her loom the Lesbian maid
          In love-sick languor hung her head.
          Unknowing where her fingers stray'd,
          She weeping turned away and said,'
          Oh, my sweet mother, 'tis in vain,

          I cannot weave as once I wove;
          So wilder'd is my heart and brain
          With thinking of that youth I love.'"

If my space allowed I could add much more on this subject, but will
permit myself only one remark in conclusion. Lovers delighted in nature
then as now; the moon was their chosen confidante, and I know of no
modern poem in which the mysterious charm of a summer night and the
magic beauty which lies on flowers, trees and fountains in those silent
hours when the world is asleep, is more exquisitely described than in
the following verses, also by Sappho, at the reading of which we seem
forced to breathe more slowly, "kuhl bis an's Herz hinan."

          "Planets, that around the beauteous moon
          Attendant wait, cast into shade
          Their ineffectual lustres, soon
          As she, in full-orb'd majesty array'd,
          Her silver radiance pours
          Upon this world of ours."

and:--

          "Thro' orchard plots with fragrance crown'd,
          The clear cold fountain murm'ring flows;
          And forest leaves, with rustling sound,
          Invite to soft repose."

The foregoing remarks seemed to me due to those who consider a love such
as that of Sappho and Bartja to have been impossible among the ancients.
Unquestionably it was much rarer then than in these days: indeed I
confess to having sketched my pair of lovers in somewhat bright colors.
But may I not be allowed, at least once, to claim the poet's freedom?

How seldom I have availed myself of this freedom will be evident from
the notes included in each volume. They seemed to me necessary, partly
in order to explain the names and illustrate the circumstances mentioned
in the text, and partly to vindicate the writer in the eyes of the
learned. I trust they may not prove discouraging to any, as the text
will be found easily readable without reference to the explanations.

   Jena, November 23, 1868.
               GEORG EBERS, DR.




PREFACE TO THE FOURTH GERMAN EDITION.

Two years and a half after the appearance of the third edition of "An
Egyptian Princess," a fourth was needed. I returned long since from
the journey to the Nile, for which I was preparing while correcting the
proof-sheets of the third edition, and on which I can look back with
special satisfaction. During my residence in Egypt, in 1872-73, a
lucky accident enabled me to make many new discoveries; among them one
treasure of incomparable value, the great hieratic manuscript, which
bears my name. Its publication has just been completed, and it is now in
the library of the Leipzig University.

The Papyrus Ebers, the second in size and the best preserved of all the
ancient Egyptian manuscripts which have come into our possession,
was written in the 16th century B. C., and contains on 110 pages the
hermetic book upon the medicines of the ancient Egyptians, known also to
the Alexandrine Greeks. The god Thoth (Hermes) is called "the guide" of
physicians, and the various writings and treatises of which the work is
composed are revelations from him. In this venerable scroll diagnoses
are made and remedies suggested for the internal and external diseases
of most portions of the human body. With the drugs prescribed are
numbers, according to which they are weighed with weights and measured
with hollow measures, and accompanying the prescriptions are noted the
pious axioms to be repeated by the physician, while compounding and
giving them to the patient. On the second line of the first page of our
manuscript, it is stated that it came from Sais. A large portion of
this work is devoted to the visual organs. On the twentieth line of the
fifty-fifth page begins the book on the eyes, which fills eight large
pages. We were formerly compelled to draw from Greek and Roman authors
what we knew about the remedies used for diseases of the eye among the
ancient Egyptians. The portion of the Papyrus Ebers just mentioned
is now the only Egyptian source from whence we can obtain instruction
concerning this important branch of ancient medicine.

All this scarcely seems to have a place in the preface of a historical
romance, and yet it is worthy of mention here; for there is something
almost "providential" in the fact that it was reserved for the author
of "An Egyptian Princess" to bestow the gift of this manuscript upon the
scientific world. Among the characters in the novel the reader will meet
an oculist from Sais, who wrote a book upon the diseases of the visual
organs. The fate of this valuable work exactly agrees with the course
of the narrative. The papyrus scroll of the Sais oculist, which a short
time ago existed only in the imagination of the author and readers of
"An Egyptian Princess," is now an established fact. When I succeeded in
bringing the manuscript home, I felt like the man who had dreamed of a
treasure, and when he went out to ride found it in his path.

A reply to Monsieur Jules Soury's criticism of "An Egyptian Princess" in
the Revue des deux Mondes, Vol. VII, January 1875, might appropriately
be introduced into this preface, but would scarcely be possible without
entering more deeply into the ever-disputed question, which will be
answered elsewhere, whether the historical romance is ever justifiable.
Yet I cannot refrain from informing Monsieur Soury here that "An
Egyptian Princess" detained me from no other work. I wrote it in my
sick-room, before entering upon my academic career, and while composing
it, found not only comfort and pleasure, but an opportunity to give dead
scientific material a living interest for myself and others.

Monsieur Soury says romance is the mortal enemy of history; but this
sentence may have no more justice than the one with which I think myself
justified in replying: Landscape painting is the mortal enemy of botany.
The historical romance must be enjoyed like any other work of art.
No one reads it to study history; but many, the author hopes, may be
aroused by his work to make investigations of their own, for which the
notes point out the way. Already several persons of excellent mental
powers have been attracted to earnest Egyptological researches by
"An Egyptian Princess." In the presence of such experiences, although
Monsieur Soury's clever statements appear to contain much that is true,
I need not apply his remark that "historical romances injure the cause
of science" to the present volume.

     Leipzig, April 19, 1875.

                    GEORG EBERS.




PREFACE TO THE FIFTH GERMAN EDITION.

Again a new edition of "An Egyptian Princess" has been required, and
again I write a special preface because the printing has progressed so
rapidly as unfortunately to render it impossible for me to correct
some errors to which my attention was directed by the kindness of
the well-known botanist, Professor Paul Ascherson of Berlin, who has
travelled through Egypt and the Oases.

In Vol. I, page 7, I allow mimosas to grow among other plants in
Rhodopis' garden. I have found them in all the descriptions of the Nile
valley, and afterwards often enjoyed the delicious perfume of the golden
yellow flowers in the gardens of Alexandria and Cairo. I now learn that
this very mimosa (Acacia farnesiana) originates in tropical America, and
was undoubtedly unknown in ancient Egypt. The bananas, which I mentioned
in Vol. I, p. 64, among other Egyptian plants, were first introduced
into the Nile valley from India by the Arabs. The botanical errors
occurring in the last volume I was able to correct. Helm's admirable
work on "Cultivated Plants and Domestic Animals" had taught me to notice
such things. Theophrastus, a native of Asia Minor, gives the first
description of a citron, and this proves that he probably saw the
so-called paradise-apple, but not our citron, which I am therefore not
permitted to mention among the plants cultivated in ancient Lydia. Palms
and birches are both found in Asia Minor; but I permitted them to grow
side by side, thereby committing an offense against the geographical
possibility of vegetable existence. The birch, in this locality,
flourishes in the mountainous region, the palm, according to Griesbach
(Vegetation of the Earth, Vol. I, p. 319) only appears on the southern
coast of the peninsula. The latter errors, as I previously mentioned,
will be corrected in the new edition. I shall of course owe special
thanks to any one who may call my attention to similar mistakes.

   Leipzig, March 5, 1877

                  GEORG EBERS




PREFACE TO THE NINTH GERMAN EDITION.

I have nothing to add to the ninth edition of "An Egyptian Princess"
except that it has been thoroughly revised. My sincere thanks are due
to Dr. August Steitz of Frankfort on the Main, who has travelled through
Egypt and Asia Minor, for a series of admirable notes, which he kindly
placed at my disposal. He will find that they have not remained unused.

   Leipzig, November 13, 1879.
                    GEORG EBERS





AN EGYPTIAN PRINCESS.

By Georg Ebers




BOOK 1.




CHAPTER I.

The Nile had overflowed its bed. The luxuriant corn-fields and blooming
gardens on its shores were lost beneath a boundless waste of waters; and
only the gigantic temples and palaces of its cities, (protected from the
force of the water by dikes), and the tops of the tall palm-trees and
acacias could be seen above its surface. The branches of the sycamores
and plane-trees drooped and floated on the waves, but the boughs of the
tall silver poplars strained upward, as if anxious to avoid the watery
world beneath. The full-moon had risen; her soft light fell on the
Libyan range of mountains vanishing on the western horizon, and in the
north the shimmer of the Mediterranean could faintly be discerned. Blue
and white lotus-flowers floated on the clear water, bats of all
kinds darted softly through the still air, heavy with the scent of
acacia-blossom and jasmine; the wild pigeons and other birds were at
roost in the tops of the trees, while the pelicans, storks and cranes
squatted in groups on the shore under the shelter of the papyrus-reeds
and Nile-beans. The pelicans and storks remained motionless, their long
bills hidden beneath their wings, but the cranes were startled by the
mere beat of an oar, stretching their necks, and peering anxiously into
the distance, if they heard but the song of the boatmen. The air was
perfectly motionless, and the unbroken reflection of the moon, lying
like a silver shield on the surface of the water, proved that, wildly as
the Nile leaps over the cataracts, and rushes past the gigantic temples
of Upper Egypt, yet on approaching the sea by different arms, he can
abandon his impetuous course, and flow along in sober tranquillity.

On this moonlight night in the year 528 B. C. a bark was crossing the
almost currentless Canopic mouth of the Nile. On the raised deck at
the stern of this boat an Egyptian was sitting to guide the long
pole-rudder, and the half-naked boatmen within were singing as
they rowed. In the open cabin, which was something like a wooden
summer-house, sat two men, reclining on low cushions. They were
evidently not Egyptians; their Greek descent could be perceived even by
the moonlight. The elder was an unusually tall and powerful man of
more than sixty; thick grey curls, showing very little attempt at
arrangement, hung down over his short, firm throat; he wore a simple,
homely cloak, and kept his eyes gloomily fixed on the water. His
companion, on the contrary, a man perhaps twenty years younger, of a
slender and delicate build, was seldom still. Sometimes he gazed into
the heavens, sometimes made a remark to the steersman, disposed his
beautiful purple chlanis in fresh folds, or busied himself in the
arrangement of his scented brown curls, or his carefully curled beard.

   [The chlanis was a light summer-mantle, worn especially by the more
   elegant Athenians, and generally made of expensive materials. The
   simpler cloak, the himation, was worn by the Doric Greeks, and
   principally by the Spartans.]

The boat had left Naukratis, at that time the only Hellenic port in
Egypt, about half an hour before.

   [This town, which will form the scene of a part of our tale, lies in
   the northwest of the Nile Delta, in the Saitic Nomos or district, on
   the left bank of the Canopic mouth of the river. According to
   Strabo and Eusebius it was founded by Milesians, and Bunsen reckons
   749 B. C. It seems that in the earliest times Greek ships were only
   allowed to enter this mouth of the Nile in case of necessity. The
   entire intercourse of the Egyptians with the hated strangers was, at
   that time, restricted to the little island of Pharos lying opposite
   to the town of Thonis.]

During their journey, the grey-haired, moody man had not spoken one
word, and the other had left him to his meditations. But now, as the
boat neared the shore, the restless traveller, rising from his couch,
called to his companion: "We are just at our destination, Aristomachus!
That pleasant house to the left yonder, in the garden of palms which you
can see rising above the waters, is the dwelling of my friend Rhodopis.
It was built by her husband Charaxus, and all her friends, not excepting
the king himself, vie with one another in adding new beauties to it
year by year. A useless effort! Let them adorn that house with all the
treasures in the world, the woman who lives within will still remain its
best ornament!"

   [We are writing of the month of October, when the Nile begins to
   sink. The inundations can now be accurately accounted for,
   especially since the important and laborious synoptical work of H.
   Barth and S. Baker. They are occasioned by the tropical rains, and
   the melting of the snows on the high mountain-ranges at the Equator.
   In the beginning of June a gradual rising of the Nile waters can be
   perceived; between the 15th and 20th June, this changes to a rapid
   increase; in the beginning of October the waters reach their highest
   elevation, a point, which, even after having begun their retreat,
   they once more attempt to attain; then, at first gradually, and
   afterwards with ever increasing rapidity, they continue to sink. In
   January, February and March, the Nile is still drying up; and in May
   is at its lowest point, when the volume of its waters is only one-
   twentieth of that in October.]

The old man sat up, threw a passing glance at the building, smoothed the
thick grey beard which clothed his cheeks and chin, but left the lips
free,--[The Spartans were not in the habit of wearing a beard on the
upper lip.]--and asked abruptly: "Why so much enthusiasm, Phanes,
for this Rhodopis? How long have the Athenians been wont to extol
old women?" At this remark the other smiled, and answered in a
self-satisfied tone, "My knowledge of the world, and particularly of
women, is, I flatter myself, an extended one, and yet I repeat, that in
all Egypt I know of no nobler creature than this grey-haired woman. When
you have seen her and her lovely grandchild, and heard your favorite
melodies sung by her well-practised choir of slave-girls, I think you
will thank me for having brought you hither."--"Yet," answered the
Spartan gravely, "I should not have accompanied you, if I had not hoped
to meet Phryxus, the Delphian, here."

"You will find him here; and besides, I cannot but hope that the songs
will cheer you, and dispel your gloomy thoughts." Aristomachus shook his
head in denial, and answered: "To you, sanguine Athenians, the melodies
of your country may be cheering: but not so to me; as in many a
sleepless night of dreams, my longings will be doubled, not stilled by
the songs of Alkman."

   [Alkman (Attic, Alkmaeon) flourished in Sparta about 650 B. C. His
   mother was a Lydian slave in Sardes, and he came into the possession
   of Agesides, who gave him his freedom. His beautiful songs soon
   procured him the rights of a Lacedaemonian citizen. He was
   appointed to the head-directorship in the entire department of music
   in Lacedaemon and succeeded in naturalizing the soft Lydian music.
   His language was the Doric-Laconian. After a life devoted to song,
   the pleasures of the table and of love, he is said to have died of
   a fearful disease. From the frequent choruses of virgins
