Project Gutenberg's The Bride of the Nile, Complete, by Georg Ebers

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Bride of the Nile, Complete

Author: Georg Ebers

Last Updated: March 9, 2009
Release Date: October 17, 2006 [EBook #5529]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BRIDE OF THE NILE, COMPLETE ***



Produced by David Widger





THE BRIDE OF THE NILE

By Georg Ebers


Translated from the German by Clara Bell




PREFACE.

The "Bride of the Nile" needs no preface. For the professional student I
may observe that I have relied on the authority of de Goeje in adhering
to my own original opinion that the word Mukaukas is not to be regarded
as a name but as a title, since the Arab writers to which I have made
reference apply it to the responsible representatives of the Byzantine
Emperor in antagonism to the Moslem power. I was unfortunately unable to
make further use of Karabacek's researches as to the Mukaukas.

I shall not be held justified in placing the ancient Horus Apollo
(Horapollo) in the seventh century after Christ by any one who
regards the author of the Hieroglyphica as identical with the Egyptian
philosopher of the same name who, according to Suidas, lived under
Theodosius, and to whom Stephanus of Byzantium refers, writing so
early as at the end of the fifth century. But the lexicographer Suidas
enumerates the works of Horapollo, the philologer and commentator
on Greek poetry, without naming the Hieroglyphica, which is the only
treatise alluded to by Stephanus. Besides, all the other ancient writers
who mention Horapollo at all leave us quite free to suppose that there
may have been two sages of the same name--as does C. Leemans, who is
most intimately versed in the Hieroglyphica--and the second certainly
cannot have lived earlier than the VIIth century, since an accurate
knowledge of hieroglyphic writing must have been lost far more
completely in his time than we can suppose possible in the IVth century.
It must be remembered that we still possess well-executed hieroglyphic
inscriptions dating from the time of Decius, 250 years after Christ.
Thus the Egyptian commentator on Greek poetry could hardly have needed a
translator, whereas the Hieroglyphica seems to have been first rendered
into Greek by Philippus. The combination by which the author called
in Egyptian Horus (the son of Isis) is supposed to have been born in
Philae, where the cultus of the Egyptian heathen was longest practised,
and where some familiarity with hieroglyphics must have been preserved
to a late date, takes into due account the real state of affairs at the
period I have selected for my story.

                       GEORG EBERS.
   October 1st, 1886.





BOOK 1.




CHAPTER I.

Half a lustrum had elapsed since Egypt had become subject to the
youthful power of the Arabs, which had risen with such unexampled vigor
and rapidity. It had fallen an easy prey, cheaply bought, into the
hands of a small, well-captained troop of Moslem warriors; and the fair
province, which so lately had been a jewel of the Byzantine Empire and
the most faithful foster-mother to Christianity, now owned the sway of
the Khalif Omar and saw the Crescent raised by the side of the Cross.

It was long since a hotter season had afflicted the land; and the Nile,
whose rising had been watched for on the Night of Dropping--the 17th of
June--with the usual festive preparations, had cheated the hopes of the
Egyptians, and instead of rising had shrunk narrower and still narrower
in its bed.--It was in this time of sore anxiety, on the 10th of July,
A.D. 643, that a caravan from the North reached Memphis.

It was but a small one; but its appearance in the decayed and deserted
city of the Pyramids--which had grown only lengthwise, like a huge
reed-leaf, since its breadth was confined between the Nile and the
Libyan Hills--attracted the gaze of the passers-by, though in former
years a Memphite would scarcely have thought it worth while to turn his
head to gaze at an interminable pile of wagons loaded with merchandise,
an imposing train of vehicles drawn by oxen, the flashing maniples of
the imperial cavalry, or an endless procession wending its way down the
five miles of high street.

The merchant who, riding a dromedary of the choicest breed, conducted
this caravan, was a lean Moslem of mature age, robed in soft silk. A
vast turban covered his small head and cast a shadow over his delicate
and venerable features.

The Egyptian guide who rode on a brisk little ass by his side, looked
up frequently and with evident pleasure at the merchant's face--not in
itself a handsome one with its hollow cheeks, meagre beard and large
aquiline nose--for it was lighted up by a pair of bright eyes, full
of attractive thoughtfulness and genuine kindness. But that this
fragile-looking man, in whose benevolent countenance grief and
infirmities had graven many a furrow, could not only command but compel
submission was legible alike in his thin, firmly-closed lips and in the
zeal with which his following of truculent and bearded fighting men,
armed to the teeth, obeyed his slightest sign.

His Egyptian attendant, the head of the Hermeneutai--the guild of the
Dragomans of that period--was a swarthy and surly native of Memphis;
whenever he accidentally came too close to the fierce-looking riders of
the dromedaries he shrunk his shoulders as if he expected a blow or a
push, while he poured out question and answer to the Merchant Haschim,
the owner of the caravan, without timidity and with the voluble
garrulity of his tribe.

"You seem very much at home here in Memphis," he observed, when the old
man had expressed his surprise at the decadence and melancholy change in
the city.

"Thirty years ago," replied the merchant, "my business often brought me
hither. How many houses are now empty and in ruins where formerly only
heavy coin could secure admittance! Ruins on all sides!--Who has so
cruelly mutilated that fine church? My fellow-believers left every
Christian fane untouched--that I know from our chief Amru himself."

"It was the principal church of the Melchites, the Emperor's minions,"
cried the guide, as if that were ample explanation of the fact. The
merchant, however, did not take it so.

"Well," he said, "and what is there so dreadful in their creed?"

"What?" said the Egyptian, and his eye flashed wrathfully. "What?--They
dismember the divine person of the Saviour and attribute to it two
distinct natures. And then!--All the Greeks settled here, and encouraged
by the protection of the emperor, treated us, the owners of the land,
like slaves, till your nation came to put an end to their oppression.
They drove us by force into their churches, and every true-born Egyptian
was punished as a rebel and a leper. They mocked at us and persecuted us
for our faith in the one divine nature of our Lord."

"And so," interrupted the merchant, "as soon as we drove out the
Greeks you behaved more unmercifully to them and their sanctuaries than
we--whom you scorn as infidels--did to you!"

"Mercy?--for them!" cried the Egyptian indignantly, as he cast an evil
eye on the demolished edifice. "They have reaped what they sowed; and
now every one in Egypt who does not believe in your One God--blessed be
the Saviour!--confesses the one sole nature of our Lord Jesus Christ.
You drove out the Melchite rabble, and then it was our part to demolish
the temples of their wretched Saviour, who lost His divine Unity at the
synod of Chalcedon--damnation wait upon it!"

"But still the Melchites are fellow-believers with you--they are
Christians," said the merchant.

"Christians?" echoed the guide with a contemptuous shrug. "They may
regard themselves as Christians; but I, with every one else great and
small in this land, am of opinion that they have no right whatever to
call themselves our fellow-believers and Christians. They all are
and shall be for ever accursed with their hundreds--nay thousands of
devilish heresies, by which they degrade our God and Redeemer to the
level of that idol on the stone pillar. Half a cow and half a man! Why,
what rational being, I ask you, could pray to such a mongrel thing? We
Jacobites or Monophysites or whatever they choose to call us will not
yield a jot or tittle of the divine nature of our Lord and Saviour; and
if the old faith must die out, I will turn Moslem and be converted
to your One Omnipotent God; for before I confess the heresies of the
Melchites I will be hewn in pieces, and my wife and children with me.
Who knows what may be coming to pass? And there are many advantages in
going over to your side: for the power is in your hands, and long may
you keep it! We have got to be ruled by strangers; and who would not
rather pay small tribute to the wise and healthy Khalif at Medina than
a heavy one to the sickly imperial brood of Melchites at Constantinople.
The Mukaukas George, to be sure, is not a bad sort of man, and as he so
soon gave up all idea of resisting you he was no doubt of my opinion.
Regarding you as just and pious folks, as our next neighbors, and
perhaps even of our own race and blood, he preferred you--my brother
told me so--to those Byzantine heretics, flayers of men and thirsting
for blood, but yet, the Mukaukas is as good a Christian as breathes."

The Arab had listened attentively and with a subtle smile to the
Memphite, whose duties as guide now compelled him to break off. The
Egyptian made the whole caravan turn down an alley that led into a
street running parallel to the river, where a few fine houses still
stood in the midst of their gardens. When men and beasts were making
their way along a better pavement the merchant observed: "I knew the
father of the man you were speaking of, very well. He was wealthy
and virtuous; of his son too I hear nothing but good. But is he
still allowed to bear the title of governor, or, what did you call
him?--Mukaukas?"

"Certainly, Master," said the guide. "There is no older family than his
in all Egypt, and if old Menas was rich the Mukaukas is richer, both
by inheritance and by his wife's dower. Nor could we wish for a more
sensible or a juster governor! He keeps his eye on his underlings too;
still, business is not done now as briskly as formerly, for though he
is not much older than I am--and I am not yet sixty--he is always ailing
and has not been seen out of the house for months. Even when your chief
wants to see him he comes over to this side of the river. It is a pity
with such a man as he; and who was it that broke down his stalwart
strength? Why, those Melchite dogs; you may ask all along the Nile, long
as it is, who was at the bottom of any misfortune, and you will always
get the same answer: Wherever the Melchite or the Greek sets foot the
grass refuses to grow."

"But the Mukaukas, the emperor's representative... the Arab began. The
Egyptian broke in however:

"He, you think, must be safe from them? They did not certainly injure
his person; but they did worse, for when the Melchites rose up against
our party--it was at Alexandria, and the late Greek patriarch Cyrus
had a finger in that pie--they killed his two sons, two fine, splendid
men--killed them like dogs; and it crushed him completely."

"Poor man!" sighed the Arab. "And has he no child left?"

"Oh, yes. One son, and the widow of his eldest. She went into a convent
after her husband's death, but she left her child, her little Mary--she
must be ten years old now--to live with her grandparents."

"That is well," said the old man, "that will bring some sunshine into
the house."

"No doubt, Master. And just lately they have had some cause for
rejoicing. The only surviving son--Orion is his name--came home only the
day before yesterday from Constantinople where he has been for a long
time. There was a to-do! Half the city went crazy. Thousands went out to
meet him, as though he were the Saviour; they erected triumphal arches,
even folks of my creed--no one thought of hanging back. One and all
wanted to see the son of the great Mukaukas, and the women of course
were first and foremost!"

"You speak, however," said the Arab, "as though the returning hero were
not worthy of so much honor."

"That is as folks think," replied the Egyptian shrugging his shoulders.
"At any rate he is the only son of the greatest man in the land."

"But he does not promise to be like the old man?"

"Oh, yes, indeed," said the guide. "My brother, a priest, and the head
of one of our great schools, was his tutor, and he never met such a
clever head as Orion's, he tells me. He learnt everything without any
trouble and at the same time worked as hard as a poor man's son. We may
expect him to win fame and honor--so Marcus says--for his parents and
for the city of Memphis: but for my part, I can see the shady side, and
I tell you the women will turn his head and bring him to a bad end. He
is handsome, taller even than the old man in his best days, and he knows
how to make the most of himself when he meets a pretty face--and pretty
faces are always to be met in his path..."

"And the young rascal takes what he finds!" said the Moslem laughing.
"If that is all you are alarmed at I am glad for the youth. He is young
and such things are allowable."

"Nay, Sir, even my brother--he lives now in Alexandria, and is blind and
foolish enough still in all that concerns his former pupil--and even
he thinks this is a dangerous rock ahead. If he does not change in this
respect he will wander further and further from the law of the Lord,
and imperil his soul, for dangers surround him on all sides like roaring
lions. The noble gifts of a handsome and engaging person will lead him
to his ruin; and though I do not desire it, I suspect...."

"You look on the dark side and judge hardly," replied the old man. "The
young...."

"Even the young, or at least the Christian young, ought to control
themselves, though I, if any one, am inclined to make the utmost
allowance for the handsome lad--nay, and I may confess: when he smiles
at me I feel at once as if I had met with some good-luck; and there are
a thousand other men in Memphis who feel the same, and still more the
women you may be sure--but many a one has shed bitter tears on his
account for all that.--But, by all the saints!--Talk of the wolf and you
see his tail! Look, there he is!--Halt! Stop a minute, you men; it is
worth while, Sir, to tarry a moment."

"Is that his fine quadriga in front of the high garden gate yonder?"

"Those are the Pannonian horses he brought with him, as swift as
lightning and as.... But look! Ah, now they have disappeared behind the
hedge; but you, high up on your dromedary, must be able to see them. The
little maid by his side is the widow Susannah's daughter. This garden
and the beautiful mansion behind the trees belong to her."

"A very handsome property!" said the Arab.

"I should think so indeed!" replied the Memphite. "The garden goes down
to the Nile, and then, what care is taken of it!"

"Was it not here that Philommon the corn-merchant lived formerly?" asked
the old man, as though some memories were coming back to him.

"To be sure. He was Susannah's husband and must have been a man of fifty
when he first wooed her. The little girl is their only child and the
richest heiress in the whole province; but she is not altogether grown
up though she is sixteen years old--an old man's child, you understand,
but a pretty, merry creature, a laughing dove in human form, and so
quick and lively. Her own people call her the little water-wagtail."

"Good!--Good and very appropriate," said the merchant well pleased. "She
is small too, a child rather than a maiden; but the graceful, gladsome
creature takes my fancy. And the governor's son--what is his name?"

"Orion, Sir," replied the guide.

"And by my beard," said the old man smiling. "You have not over-praised
him, man! Such a youth as this Orion is not to be seen every day. What
a tall fellow, and how becoming are those brown curls. Such as he are
spoilt to begin with by their mothers, and then all the other women
follow suit. And he has a frank, shrewd face with something behind it.
If only he had left his purple coat and gold frippery in Constantinople!
Such finery is out of place in this dismal ruinous city."

While he was yet speaking the Memphite urged his ass forward, but the
Arab held him back, for his attention was riveted by what was taking
place within the enclosure. He saw handsome Orion place a small white
dog, a silky creature of great beauty that evidently belonged to him--in
the little maiden's arms saw her kiss it and then put a blade of grass
round its neck as if to measure its size. The old man watched them as,
both laughing gaily, they looked into each other's eyes and presently
bid each other farewell. The girl stood on tiptoe in front of some rare
shrub to reach two exquisite purple flowers that blossomed at the top,
hastily plucked them and offered them to him with a deep blush; she
pushed away the hand he had put out to support her as she stretched
up for the flowers with a saucy slap; and a bright glance of happiness
lighted up her sweet face as the young man kissed the place her fingers
had hit, and then pressed the flowers to his lips. The old man looked on
with sympathetic pleasure, as though it roused the sweetest memories in
his mind; and his kind eyes shone as Orion, no less mischievously happy
than the young girl, whispered something in her ear; she drew the long
stem of grass out of her waist-belt to administer immediate and condign
punishment withal, struck it across his face, and then fled over
grass-plot and flower-bed, as swift as a roe, without heeding his
repeated shouts of "Katharina! bewitching, big damsel, Katharina!" till
she reached the house.

It was a charming little interlude. Old Haschim was still pondering it
in his memory with much satisfaction when he and his caravan had gone
some distance further. He felt obliged to Orion for this pretty scene,
and when he heard the young man's quadriga approaching at an easy trot
behind him, he turned round to gaze. But the Arab's face had lost its
contentment by the time the four Pannonians and the chariot, overlaid
with silver ornamentation and forming, with its driver, a picture of
rare beauty and in perfect taste, had slowly driven past, to fly on
like the wind as soon as the road was clear, and to vanish presently
in clouds of dust. There was something of melancholy in his voice as he
desired his young camel-driver to pick up the flowers, which now lay in
the dust of the road, and to bring them to him. He himself had observed
the handsome youth as, with a glance and a gesture of annoyance with
himself, he flung the innocent gift on the hot, sandy highway.

"Your brother is right," cried the old man to the Memphite. "Women are
indeed the rock ahead in this young fellow's life--and he in theirs, I
fear! Poor little girl!"

"The little water-wagtail do you mean? Oh! with her it may perhaps turn
to real earnest. The two mothers have settled the matter already. They
are both rolling in gold, and where doves nest doves resort.--Thank God,
the sun is low down over the Pyramids! Let your people rest at the
large inn yonder; the host is an honest man and lacks nothing, not even
shade!"

"So far as the beasts and drivers are concerned," said the merchant,
"they may stop here. But I, and the leader of the caravan, and some of
my men will only take some refreshment, and then you must guide us to
the governor; I have to speak with him. It is growing late..."

"That does not matter," said the Egyptian. "The Mukaukas prefers to
see strangers after sundown on such a scorching day. If you have any
dealings with him I am the very man for you. You have only to make
play with a gold piece and I can obtain you an audience at once through
Sebek, the house-steward he is my cousin. While you are resting here
I will ride on to the governor's palace and bring you word as to how
matters stand."




CHAPTER II.

The caravansary into which Haschim and his following now turned off
stood on a plot of rising ground surrounded by palm-trees. Before the
destruction of the heathen sanctuaries it had been a temple of Imhotep,
the Egyptian Esculapius, the beneficient god of healing, who had had
his places of special worship even in the city of the dead. It was half
relined, half buried in desert sand when an enterprising inn-keeper had
bought the elegant structure with the adjacent grove for a very moderate
sum. Since then it had passed to various owners, a large wooden building
for the accommodation of travellers had been added to the massive
edifice, and among the palm-trees, which extended as far as the
ill-repaired quay, stables were erected and plots of ground fenced in
for beasts of all kinds. The whole place looked like a cattle-fair, and
indeed it was a great resort of the butchers and horse-dealers of the
town, who came there to purchase. The palm-grove, being one of the
few remaining close to the city, also served the Memphites as a
pleasure-ground where they could "sniff fresh air" and treat themselves
in a pleasant shade. 'Tables and seats had been set out close to the
river, and there were boats on hire in mine host's little creek; and
those who took their pleasure in coming thither by water were glad to
put in and refresh themselves under the palms of Nesptah.

Two rows of houses had formerly divided this rendezvous for the sober
and the reckless from the highroad, but they had long since been pulled
down and laid level with the ground by successive landlords. Even now
some hundreds of laborers might be seen, in spite of the scorching heat,
toiling under Arab overseers to demolish a vast ruin of the date of the
Ptolemies and transporting the huge blocks of limestone and marble, and
the numberless columns which once had supported the roof of the temple
of Zeus, to the eastern shore of the Nile-loading them on to trucks
drawn by oxen which hauled them down to the quay to cross the river in
flat-bottomed boats.

Amru, the Khaliff's general and representative, was there building his
new capital. For this the temples of the old gods were used as quarries,
and they supplied not only finely-squared blocks of the most durable
stone, but also myriads of Greek columns of every order, which had only
to be ferried over and set up again on the other shore; for the Arabs
disdained nothing in the way of materials, and made indiscriminate use
of blocks and pillars in their own sanctuaries, whether they took them
from heathen temples or Christian churches.

The walls of the temple of Imhotep had originally been completely
covered with pictures of the gods, and hieroglyphic inscriptions; but
the smoke of reeking hearths had long since blackened them, fanatical
hands had never been wanting to deface them, and in many places they had
been lime-washed and scrawled with Christian symbols or very unchristian
mottoes, in Greek and the spoken dialect of the Egyptians. The Arab
and his men took their meal in what had been the great hall of the
temple--none of them drinking wine excepting the captain of the caravan,
who was no Moslem but belonged to the Parsee sect of the Masdakites.

When the old merchant, sitting at a table by himself, had satisfied his
hunger, he called this chief and desired him to load the bale containing
the hanging on a litter between the two largest baggage camels, and to
fasten it securely but so that it could easily be removed.

"It is done," replied the Persian, as he wiped his thick moustache--he
was a magnificent man as tall and stalwart as an oak, with light flowing
hair like a lion's mane.

"So much the better," said Haschim. "Then come out with me." And he led
the way to the palmgrove.

The sun had sunk to rest behind the pyramids, the Necropolis, and the
Libyan hills; the eastern sky, and the bare limestone rock of Babylon on
the opposite shore were shining with hues of indescribable diversity and
beauty. It seemed as though every variety of rose reared by the skilled
gardeners of Arsinoe or Naukratis had yielded its hues, from golden buff
to crimson and the deepest wine-tinted violet, to shed their magic glow
on the plains, the peaks and gorges of the hills, with the swiftness of
thought.

The old man's heart beat high as he gazed at the scene; he drew a deep
breath, and laying his slender hand on the Persian's mighty arm he said:
"Your prophet, Masdak, taught that it was God's will that no one should
think himself more or less chosen than another, and that there should be
neither rich nor poor on earth, but that every possession should belong
to all in common. Well, look around you here as I do. The man who has
not seen this has seen nothing. There is no fairer scene here below and
to whom does it belong? To poor simple Salech yonder, whom we allowed to
tramp half naked at our camels' heels out of pity.--It is his as much
as it is yours or mine or the Khaliff's. God has given us all an equal
share in the glory of his works, as your prophet would have it. How much
beauty is the common possession of our race! Let us be thankful for it,
Rustem, for indeed it is no small matter.--But as to property, such as
man may win or lose, that is quite a different matter. We all start on
the same race-course, and what you Masdakites ask is that lead should
be tied to the feet of the swift so that no one should outstrip another;
but that would be.... Well, well! Let us feast our eyes now on the
marvellous beauty before us. Look: What just now was the purple of this
flower is now deep ruby red; what before was a violet gleam now is the
richest amethyst. Do you see the golden fringe to those clouds? It is
like a setting.--And all this is ours--is yours and mine--so long as we
have eyes and heart to enjoy and be uplifted by it!"

The Masdakite laughed, a fresh, sonorous laugh, and said: "Yes, Master,
for those who see as you see. The colors are bright no doubt over the
sky and the hills, and we do not often see such a red as that at home in
my country; but of what use is all that magic show? You see rubies and
amethysts--but as for me! The gems in your hanging stand for something
more than that shining show. I mean no harm, Master, but I would give
all the sunsets that ever glowed on earth for your bales and never
repent of the bargain!" He laughed more heartily than before and added:
"But you, worthy Father, would think twice before you signed it.--As to
what we Masdakites hope for, our time is not yet come."

"And suppose it were, and that the hanging were yours?"

"I should sell it and add the price to my savings, and go home and buy
some land, and take a pretty wife, and breed camels and horses."

"And next day would come the poorer men who had laid nothing by, and
had made no bargain over hangings and sunsets; and they would ask for
a share of your land, and a camel and a foal each, and you would not
be able ever to see a sunset again but must wander about the world, and
your pretty wife with you to help you share everything with others.--Let
us abide by the old order, my Rustem, and may the Most High preserve you
your good heart, for you have but a foolish and crotchety head."

The big man bent over his master and gratefully kissed his arm; at this
moment the guide rejoined them, but with a long face for he had promised
more than he could perform. The Mukaukas George had set out--a quite
unheard of event--for an excursion on the river in his barge, with
his son and the ladies of the house just as he was hoping to secure an
audience for the Arab. Orion's return--the steward had explained--had
made the old man quite young again. Haschim must now wait till the
morrow, and he, the guide, would counsel him to pass the night in the
city at an inn kept by one Moschion, where he would be well cared for.

But the merchant preferred to remain where he was. He did not care
about the delay, more particularly as he wished to consult an Egyptian
physician with regard to an old standing complaint he suffered from,
and there was no more skilful or learned leech in the whole land, the
Egyptian guide assured him, than the famous Philip of Memphis. The
situation here, outside the town, was very pleasant, and from the
river's bank he might observe the comet which had been visible for some
nights past--a portent of evil no doubt. The natives of the city
had been paralysed with terror; that indeed was evident even here in
Nesptah's caravansary, for usually as the evening grew cool, the tables
and benches under the palms were crowded with guests; but who would care
to think of enjoyment in those days of dread?

So he remounted his ass to fetch the physician, while old Haschim,
leaning on the Masdakite's arm, betook himself to a bench by the river.
There he sat gazing thoughtfully at the starry sky, and his companion
dreamed of home and of buying a meadow, even without the price of the
gorgeous hanging, of building a house, and of choosing a pretty little
wife to manage it. Should she be fair or dark? He would rather she
should be fair.

But his castle in the air was shattered at this point, for an object was
approaching across the Nile which attracted his attention, and which he
pointed out to his chief. The stream lay before them like a broad belt
of black and silver brocade. The waxing moon was mirrored in the almost
unruffled surface and where a ripple curled it the tiny crest glittered
like white flame. Bats swooped to and fro in the gloom from the city of
the dead to the river, and flitted above it like shadows blown about by
the wind. A few lateen sails moved like pale, gigantic birds over the
dark waters; but now from the north--and from the city--a larger mass
came towards the palm-grove with bright, gleaming eyes of light.

"A fine boat,--the governor's no doubt," said the merchant, as it slowly
came towards the grove from the middle of the stream. At the same
time the clatter of hoofs became audible from the road behind the inn.
Haschim turned round and was aware of torchbearers running ahead of a
chariot.

"The sick man has come so far by water," said the Arab, "and now, he is
to be driven home.--Strange! this is the second time to-day that I have
met his much-talked-of son!"

The governor's pleasure-barge was nearing the palm-grove. It was a large
and handsome boat, built of cedar-wood and richly gilt, with an image
of John, the patron-saint of the family, for a figure-head. The nimbus
round the head was a crown of lamps, and large lanterns shone both at
the bows and stern of the vessel. The Mukaukas George was reclining
under an awning, his wife Neforis by his side. Opposite to them sat
their son and a tall young girl, at whose feet a child of ten sat on the
ground, leaning her pretty head against her knees. An older Greek woman,
the child's governess, had a place by the side of a very tall man, on an
ottoman beyond the verge of the awning. This man was Philip the leech.
The cheerful sound of the lute accompanied the barge, and the performer
was the returned wanderer Orion, who touched the strings with skill and
deep feeling.

It was altogether a pleasing scene--a fair picture of a wealthy and
united family. But who was the damsel sitting by Orion's side? He was
devoting his whole attention to her; as he struck the strings with
deeper emphasis his eyes sought hers, and it seemed as though he were
playing for her alone. Nor did she appear unworthy of such homage, for
when the barge ran into the little haven and Haschim could distinguish
her features he was startled by her noble and purely Greek beauty.

A few handsomely-dressed slaves, who must have come with the vehicle by
the road, now went on board the boat to carry their invalid lord to his
chariot; and it then became apparent that the seat in which he reclined
was provided with arms by which it could be lifted and moved. A burly
negro took this at the back, but just as another was stooping to lift it
in front Orion pushed him away and took his place, raised the couch with
his father on it, and carried him across the landing-stage between the
deck and the shore, past Haschim to the chariot. The young man did the
work of bearer with cheerful ease, and looked affectionately at his
father while he shouted to the ladies--for only his mother and the
physician accompanied the invalid after carefully wrapping him in
shawls--to get out of the barge and wait for him. Then he went forward,
lighted by the torches which were carried before them.

"Poor man!" thought the merchant as he looked after the Mukaukas. "But
to a man who has such a son to carry him the saddest and hardest lot
floats by like a cloud before the wind."

He was now ready to forgive Orion even the rejected flowers; and when
the young girl stepped on shore, the child clinging fondly to her arm,
he confessed to himself that Dame Susannah's little daughter would find
it hard indeed to hold her own by the side of this tall and royal vision
of beauty. What a form was this maiden's, and what princely bearing;
and how sweet and engaging the voice in which she named some of the
constellations to her little companion, and pointed out the comet which
was just rising!

Haschim was sitting in shadow; he could see without being seen, and
note all that took place on the bench, which was lighted by one of the
barge's lanterns. The unexpected entertainment gave him pleasure, for
everything that affected the governor's son roused his sympathy and
interest. The idea of forming an opinion of this remarkable young man
smiled on his fancy, and the sight of the beautiful girl who sat on the
bench yonder warmed his old heart. The child must certainly be Mary, the
governor's granddaughter.

Then the chariot started off, clattering away down the road, and in a
few minutes Orion came back to the rest of the party.

Alas! Poor little heiress of Susannah's wealth! How different was his
demeanor to this beautiful damsel from his treatment of that little
thing! His eyes rested on her face in rapture, his speech failed him now
and again as he addressed her, and what he said must be sometimes grave
and captivating and sometimes witty, for not she alone but the little
maid's governess listened to him eagerly, and when the fair one laughed
it was in particularly sweet, clear tones. There was something so
lofty in her mien that this frank expression of contentment was almost
startling; like a breath of perfume from some gorgeous flower which
seems created to rejoice the eye only. And she, to whom all that Orion
had to say was addressed, listened to him not only with deep attention,
but in a way which showed the merchant that she cared even more for
the speaker than for what he was so eager in expressing. If this maiden
wedded the governor's son, they would indeed be a pair! Taus, the
innkeeper's wife, now came out, a buxom and vigorous Egyptian woman of
middle age, carrying some of the puffs for which she was famous, and
which she had just made with her own hands. She also served them with
milk, grapes and other fruit, her eyes sparkling with delight and
gratified ambition; for the son of the great Mukaukas, the pride of the
city, who in former years had often been her visitor, and not only for
the sake of her cakes, in water parties with his gay companions--mostly
Greek officers who now were all dead and gone or exiles from the
country--now did her the honor to come here so soon after his return.
Her facile tongue knew no pause as she told him that she and her husband
had gone forth with the rest to welcome him at the triumphal arch near
Menes' Gate, and Emau with them, and the little one. Yes, Emau was
married now, and had called her first child Orion. And when the young
man asked Dame Taus whether Emau was as charming as ever and as like her
mother as she used to be, she shook her finger at him and asked in her
turn, as she pointed towards the young lady, whether the fickle bird at
whose departure so many had sighed, was to be caged at last, and whether
yon fair lady....

But Orion cut her short, saying that he was still his own master though
he already felt the noose round his neck; and the fair lady blushed even
more deeply than at the good woman's first question. He however soon
got over his awkwardness and gaily declared that the worthy Taus' little
daughter was one of the prettiest girls in Memphis, and had had quite as
many admirers as her excellent mother's puff-pastry. Taus was to greet
her kindly from him.

The landlady departed, much touched and flattered; Orion took up his
lute, and while the ladies refreshed themselves he did the maiden's
bidding and sang the song by Alcaeus which she asked for, in a rich
though subdued voice to the lute, playing it like a master. The young
girl's eyes were fixed on his lips, and again, he seemed to be making
music for her alone. When it was time to start homewards, and the ladies
returned to the barge, he went up to the inn to pay the reckoning. As
he presently returned alone the Arab saw him pick up a handkerchief that
the young lady had left on the table, and hastily press it to his lips
as he went towards the barge.

The gorgeous red blossoms had fared worse in the morning. The young
man's heart was given to that maiden on the water. She could not be his
sister; what then was the connection between them?

The merchant soon gained this information, for the guide on his return
could give it him. She was Paula, the daughter of Thomas, the famous
Greek general who had defended the city of Damascus so long and so
bravely against the armies of Islam. She was Mukaukas George's niece,
but her fortune was small; she was a poor relation of the family, and
after her father's disappearance--for his body had never been
found--she had been received into the governor's house out of pity
and charity--she, a Melchite! The interpreter had little to say in her
favor, by reason of her sect; and though he could find no flaw in
her beauty, he insisted on it that she was proud and ungracious, and
incapable of winning any man's love; only the child, little Mary--she,
to be sure, was very fond of her. It was no secret that even her uncle's
wife, worthy Neforis, did not care for her haughty niece and only
suffered her to please the invalid. And what business had a Melchite
at Memphis, under the roof of a good Jacobite? Every word the dragoman
spoke breathed the scorn which a mean and narrow-minded man is always
ready to heap on those who share the kindness of his own benefactors.

But this beautiful and lofty-looking daughter of a great man had
conquered the merchant's old heart, and his opinion of her was quite
unmoved by the Memphite's strictures. It was ere long confirmed indeed,
for Philip, the leech whom the guide had been to find, and whose
dignified personality inspired the Arab with confidence, was a daily
visitor to the governor, and he spoke of Paula as one of the most
perfect creatures that Heaven had ever formed in a happy hour. But the
Almighty seemed to have forgotten to care for his own masterpiece; for
years her life had been indeed a sad one.

The physician could promise the old man some mitigation of his
sufferings, and they liked each other so well that they parted the best
of friends, and not till a late hour.




CHAPTER III.

The Mukaukas' barge, urged forward by powerful rowers, made its way
smoothly down the river. On board there was whispering, and now and
again singing. Little Mary had dropped asleep on Paula's shoulder; the
Greek duenna gazed sometimes at the comet which filled her with terrors,
sometimes at Orion, whose handsome face had bewitched her mature heart,
and sometimes at the young girl whom she was ill-pleased to see thus
preferred by this favorite of the gods. It was a deliciously warm, still
night, and the moon, which makes the ocean swell and flow, stirs the
tide of feeling to rise in the human breast.

Whatever Paula asked for Orion sang, as though nothing was unknown to
him that had ever sounded on a Greek lute; and the longer they went on
the clearer and richer his voice grew, the more melting and seductive
its expression, and the more urgently it appealed to the young girl's
heart. Paula gave herself up to the sweet enchantment, and when he laid
down the lute and asked in low tones if his native land was not lovely
on such a night as this, or which song she liked best, and whether she
had any idea of what it had been to him to find her in his parents'
house, she yielded to the charm and answered him in whispers like his
own.

Under the dense foliage of the sleeping garden he pressed her hand to
his lips, and she, tremulous, let him have his way.--Bitter, bitter
years lay behind her. The physician had spoken only too truly. The
hardest blows of fate had brought her--the proud daughter of a noble
father--to a course of cruel humiliations. The life of a friendless
though not penniless relation, taken into a wealthy house out of
charity, had proved a thorny path to tread, but now-since the day before
