The Project Gutenberg eBook, A Child's History of England, by Charles
Dickens, Illustrated by F. H. Townsend


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: A Child's History of England


Author: Charles Dickens



Release Date: May 6, 2007  [eBook #699]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A CHILD'S HISTORY OF ENGLAND***




Transcribed from the 1905 Chapman & Hall "Works of Charles Dickens"
edition by David Price, email ccx074@pglaf.org





A CHILD'S HISTORY OF ENGLAND


By CHARLES DICKENS

With Illustrations by F. H. Townsend and others

LONDON: CHAPMAN & HALL, LD.
NEW YORK: CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS
1905




CHAPTER I--ANCIENT ENGLAND AND THE ROMANS


If you look at a Map of the World, you will see, in the left-hand upper
corner of the Eastern Hemisphere, two Islands lying in the sea.  They are
England and Scotland, and Ireland.  England and Scotland form the greater
part of these Islands.  Ireland is the next in size.  The little
neighbouring islands, which are so small upon the Map as to be mere dots,
are chiefly little bits of Scotland,--broken off, I dare say, in the
course of a great length of time, by the power of the restless water.

In the old days, a long, long while ago, before Our Saviour was born on
earth and lay asleep in a manger, these Islands were in the same place,
and the stormy sea roared round them, just as it roars now.  But the sea
was not alive, then, with great ships and brave sailors, sailing to and
from all parts of the world.  It was very lonely.  The Islands lay
solitary, in the great expanse of water.  The foaming waves dashed
against their cliffs, and the bleak winds blew over their forests; but
the winds and waves brought no adventurers to land upon the Islands, and
the savage Islanders knew nothing of the rest of the world, and the rest
of the world knew nothing of them.

It is supposed that the Phoenicians, who were an ancient people, famous
for carrying on trade, came in ships to these Islands, and found that
they produced tin and lead; both very useful things, as you know, and
both produced to this very hour upon the sea-coast. The most celebrated
tin mines in Cornwall are, still, close to the sea.  One of them, which I
have seen, is so close to it that it is hollowed out underneath the
ocean; and the miners say, that in stormy weather, when they are at work
down in that deep place, they can hear the noise of the waves thundering
above their heads.  So, the Phoenicians, coasting about the Islands,
would come, without much difficulty, to where the tin and lead were.

The Phoenicians traded with the Islanders for these metals, and gave the
Islanders some other useful things in exchange.  The Islanders were, at
first, poor savages, going almost naked, or only dressed in the rough
skins of beasts, and staining their bodies, as other savages do, with
coloured earths and the juices of plants.  But the Phoenicians, sailing
over to the opposite coasts of France and Belgium, and saying to the
people there, 'We have been to those white cliffs across the water, which
you can see in fine weather, and from that country, which is called
BRITAIN, we bring this tin and lead,' tempted some of the French and
Belgians to come over also.  These people settled themselves on the south
coast of England, which is now called Kent; and, although they were a
rough people too, they taught the savage Britons some useful arts, and
improved that part of the Islands.  It is probable that other people came
over from Spain to Ireland, and settled there.

Thus, by little and little, strangers became mixed with the Islanders,
and the savage Britons grew into a wild, bold people; almost savage,
still, especially in the interior of the country away from the sea where
the foreign settlers seldom went; but hardy, brave, and strong.

The whole country was covered with forests, and swamps.  The greater part
of it was very misty and cold.  There were no roads, no bridges, no
streets, no houses that you would think deserving of the name.  A town
was nothing but a collection of straw-covered huts, hidden in a thick
wood, with a ditch all round, and a low wall, made of mud, or the trunks
of trees placed one upon another.  The people planted little or no corn,
but lived upon the flesh of their flocks and cattle.  They made no coins,
but used metal rings for money.  They were clever in basket-work, as
savage people often are; and they could make a coarse kind of cloth, and
some very bad earthenware.  But in building fortresses they were much
more clever.

They made boats of basket-work, covered with the skins of animals, but
seldom, if ever, ventured far from the shore.  They made swords, of
copper mixed with tin; but, these swords were of an awkward shape, and so
soft that a heavy blow would bend one.  They made light shields, short
pointed daggers, and spears--which they jerked back after they had thrown
them at an enemy, by a long strip of leather fastened to the stem.  The
butt-end was a rattle, to frighten an enemy's horse.  The ancient
Britons, being divided into as many as thirty or forty tribes, each
commanded by its own little king, were constantly fighting with one
another, as savage people usually do; and they always fought with these
weapons.

They were very fond of horses.  The standard of Kent was the picture of a
white horse.  They could break them in and manage them wonderfully well.
Indeed, the horses (of which they had an abundance, though they were
rather small) were so well taught in those days, that they can scarcely
be said to have improved since; though the men are so much wiser.  They
understood, and obeyed, every word of command; and would stand still by
themselves, in all the din and noise of battle, while their masters went
to fight on foot.  The Britons could not have succeeded in their most
remarkable art, without the aid of these sensible and trusty animals.  The
art I mean, is the construction and management of war-chariots or cars,
for which they have ever been celebrated in history.  Each of the best
sort of these chariots, not quite breast high in front, and open at the
back, contained one man to drive, and two or three others to fight--all
standing up.  The horses who drew them were so well trained, that they
would tear, at full gallop, over the most stony ways, and even through
the woods; dashing down their masters' enemies beneath their hoofs, and
cutting them to pieces with the blades of swords, or scythes, which were
fastened to the wheels, and stretched out beyond the car on each side,
for that cruel purpose.  In a moment, while at full speed, the horses
would stop, at the driver's command.  The men within would leap out, deal
blows about them with their swords like hail, leap on the horses, on the
pole, spring back into the chariots anyhow; and, as soon as they were
safe, the horses tore away again.

The Britons had a strange and terrible religion, called the Religion of
the Druids.  It seems to have been brought over, in very early times
indeed, from the opposite country of France, anciently called Gaul, and
to have mixed up the worship of the Serpent, and of the Sun and Moon,
with the worship of some of the Heathen Gods and Goddesses.  Most of its
ceremonies were kept secret by the priests, the Druids, who pretended to
be enchanters, and who carried magicians' wands, and wore, each of them,
about his neck, what he told the ignorant people was a Serpent's egg in a
golden case.  But it is certain that the Druidical ceremonies included
the sacrifice of human victims, the torture of some suspected criminals,
and, on particular occasions, even the burning alive, in immense wicker
cages, of a number of men and animals together.  The Druid Priests had
some kind of veneration for the Oak, and for the mistletoe--the same
plant that we hang up in houses at Christmas Time now--when its white
berries grew upon the Oak.  They met together in dark woods, which they
called Sacred Groves; and there they instructed, in their mysterious
arts, young men who came to them as pupils, and who sometimes stayed with
them as long as twenty years.

These Druids built great Temples and altars, open to the sky, fragments
of some of which are yet remaining.  Stonehenge, on Salisbury Plain, in
Wiltshire, is the most extraordinary of these.  Three curious stones,
called Kits Coty House, on Bluebell Hill, near Maidstone, in Kent, form
another.  We know, from examination of the great blocks of which such
buildings are made, that they could not have been raised without the aid
of some ingenious machines, which are common now, but which the ancient
Britons certainly did not use in making their own uncomfortable houses.  I
should not wonder if the Druids, and their pupils who stayed with them
twenty years, knowing more than the rest of the Britons, kept the people
out of sight while they made these buildings, and then pretended that
they built them by magic.  Perhaps they had a hand in the fortresses too;
at all events, as they were very powerful, and very much believed in, and
as they made and executed the laws, and paid no taxes, I don't wonder
that they liked their trade.  And, as they persuaded the people the more
Druids there were, the better off the people would be, I don't wonder
that there were a good many of them.  But it is pleasant to think that
there are no Druids, _now_, who go on in that way, and pretend to carry
Enchanters' Wands and Serpents' Eggs--and of course there is nothing of
the kind, anywhere.

Such was the improved condition of the ancient Britons, fifty-five years
before the birth of Our Saviour, when the Romans, under their great
General, Julius Caesar, were masters of all the rest of the known world.
Julius Caesar had then just conquered Gaul; and hearing, in Gaul, a good
deal about the opposite Island with the white cliffs, and about the
bravery of the Britons who inhabited it--some of whom had been fetched
over to help the Gauls in the war against him--he resolved, as he was so
near, to come and conquer Britain next.

So, Julius Caesar came sailing over to this Island of ours, with eighty
vessels and twelve thousand men.  And he came from the French coast
between Calais and Boulogne, 'because thence was the shortest passage
into Britain;' just for the same reason as our steam-boats now take the
same track, every day.  He expected to conquer Britain easily: but it was
not such easy work as he supposed--for the bold Britons fought most
bravely; and, what with not having his horse-soldiers with him (for they
had been driven back by a storm), and what with having some of his
vessels dashed to pieces by a high tide after they were drawn ashore, he
ran great risk of being totally defeated.  However, for once that the
bold Britons beat him, he beat them twice; though not so soundly but that
he was very glad to accept their proposals of peace, and go away.

But, in the spring of the next year, he came back; this time, with eight
hundred vessels and thirty thousand men.  The British tribes chose, as
their general-in-chief, a Briton, whom the Romans in their Latin language
called CASSIVELLAUNUS, but whose British name is supposed to have been
CASWALLON.  A brave general he was, and well he and his soldiers fought
the Roman army!  So well, that whenever in that war the Roman soldiers
saw a great cloud of dust, and heard the rattle of the rapid British
chariots, they trembled in their hearts.  Besides a number of smaller
battles, there was a battle fought near Canterbury, in Kent; there was a
battle fought near Chertsey, in Surrey; there was a battle fought near a
marshy little town in a wood, the capital of that part of Britain which
belonged to CASSIVELLAUNUS, and which was probably near what is now Saint
Albans, in Hertfordshire.  However, brave CASSIVELLAUNUS had the worst of
it, on the whole; though he and his men always fought like lions.  As the
other British chiefs were jealous of him, and were always quarrelling
with him, and with one another, he gave up, and proposed peace.  Julius
Caesar was very glad to grant peace easily, and to go away again with all
his remaining ships and men.  He had expected to find pearls in Britain,
and he may have found a few for anything I know; but, at all events, he
found delicious oysters, and I am sure he found tough Britons--of whom, I
dare say, he made the same complaint as Napoleon Bonaparte the great
French General did, eighteen hundred years afterwards, when he said they
were such unreasonable fellows that they never knew when they were
beaten.  They never _did_ know, I believe, and never will.

Nearly a hundred years passed on, and all that time, there was peace in
Britain.  The Britons improved their towns and mode of life: became more
civilised, travelled, and learnt a great deal from the Gauls and Romans.
At last, the Roman Emperor, Claudius, sent AULUS PLAUTIUS, a skilful
general, with a mighty force, to subdue the Island, and shortly
afterwards arrived himself.  They did little; and OSTORIUS SCAPULA,
another general, came.  Some of the British Chiefs of Tribes submitted.
Others resolved to fight to the death.  Of these brave men, the bravest
was CARACTACUS, or CARADOC, who gave battle to the Romans, with his army,
among the mountains of North Wales.  'This day,' said he to his soldiers,
'decides the fate of Britain!  Your liberty, or your eternal slavery,
dates from this hour.  Remember your brave ancestors, who drove the great
Caesar himself across the sea!'  On hearing these words, his men, with a
great shout, rushed upon the Romans.  But the strong Roman swords and
armour were too much for the weaker British weapons in close conflict.
The Britons lost the day.  The wife and daughter of the brave CARACTACUS
were taken prisoners; his brothers delivered themselves up; he himself
was betrayed into the hands of the Romans by his false and base
stepmother: and they carried him, and all his family, in triumph to Rome.

But a great man will be great in misfortune, great in prison, great in
chains.  His noble air, and dignified endurance of distress, so touched
the Roman people who thronged the streets to see him, that he and his
family were restored to freedom.  No one knows whether his great heart
broke, and he died in Rome, or whether he ever returned to his own dear
country.  English oaks have grown up from acorns, and withered away, when
they were hundreds of years old--and other oaks have sprung up in their
places, and died too, very aged--since the rest of the history of the
brave CARACTACUS was forgotten.

Still, the Britons _would not_ yield.  They rose again and again, and
died by thousands, sword in hand.  They rose, on every possible occasion.
SUETONIUS, another Roman general, came, and stormed the Island of
Anglesey (then called MONA), which was supposed to be sacred, and he
burnt the Druids in their own wicker cages, by their own fires.  But,
even while he was in Britain, with his victorious troops, the BRITONS
rose.  Because BOADICEA, a British queen, the widow of the King of the
Norfolk and Suffolk people, resisted the plundering of her property by
the Romans who were settled in England, she was scourged, by order of
CATUS a Roman officer; and her two daughters were shamefully insulted in
her presence, and her husband's relations were made slaves.  To avenge
this injury, the Britons rose, with all their might and rage.  They drove
CATUS into Gaul; they laid the Roman possessions waste; they forced the
Romans out of London, then a poor little town, but a trading place; they
hanged, burnt, crucified, and slew by the sword, seventy thousand Romans
in a few days.  SUETONIUS strengthened his army, and advanced to give
them battle.  They strengthened their army, and desperately attacked his,
on the field where it was strongly posted.  Before the first charge of
the Britons was made, BOADICEA, in a war-chariot, with her fair hair
streaming in the wind, and her injured daughters lying at her feet, drove
among the troops, and cried to them for vengeance on their oppressors,
the licentious Romans.  The Britons fought to the last; but they were
vanquished with great slaughter, and the unhappy queen took poison.

Still, the spirit of the Britons was not broken.  When SUETONIUS left the
country, they fell upon his troops, and retook the Island of Anglesey.
AGRICOLA came, fifteen or twenty years afterwards, and retook it once
more, and devoted seven years to subduing the country, especially that
part of it which is now called SCOTLAND; but, its people, the
Caledonians, resisted him at every inch of ground.  They fought the
bloodiest battles with him; they killed their very wives and children, to
prevent his making prisoners of them; they fell, fighting, in such great
numbers that certain hills in Scotland are yet supposed to be vast heaps
of stones piled up above their graves.  HADRIAN came, thirty years
afterwards, and still they resisted him.  SEVERUS came, nearly a hundred
years afterwards, and they worried his great army like dogs, and rejoiced
to see them die, by thousands, in the bogs and swamps.  CARACALLA, the
son and successor of SEVERUS, did the most to conquer them, for a time;
but not by force of arms.  He knew how little that would do.  He yielded
up a quantity of land to the Caledonians, and gave the Britons the same
privileges as the Romans possessed.  There was peace, after this, for
seventy years.

Then new enemies arose.  They were the Saxons, a fierce, sea-faring
people from the countries to the North of the Rhine, the great river of
Germany on the banks of which the best grapes grow to make the German
wine.  They began to come, in pirate ships, to the sea-coast of Gaul and
Britain, and to plunder them.  They were repulsed by CARAUSIUS, a native
either of Belgium or of Britain, who was appointed by the Romans to the
command, and under whom the Britons first began to fight upon the sea.
But, after this time, they renewed their ravages.  A few years more, and
the Scots (which was then the name for the people of Ireland), and the
Picts, a northern people, began to make frequent plundering incursions
into the South of Britain.  All these attacks were repeated, at
intervals, during two hundred years, and through a long succession of
Roman Emperors and chiefs; during all which length of time, the Britons
rose against the Romans, over and over again.  At last, in the days of
the Roman HONORIUS, when the Roman power all over the world was fast
declining, and when Rome wanted all her soldiers at home, the Romans
abandoned all hope of conquering Britain, and went away.  And still, at
last, as at first, the Britons rose against them, in their old brave
manner; for, a very little while before, they had turned away the Roman
magistrates, and declared themselves an independent people.

Five hundred years had passed, since Julius Caesar's first invasion of
the Island, when the Romans departed from it for ever.  In the course of
that time, although they had been the cause of terrible fighting and
bloodshed, they had done much to improve the condition of the Britons.
They had made great military roads; they had built forts; they had taught
them how to dress, and arm themselves, much better than they had ever
known how to do before; they had refined the whole British way of living.
AGRICOLA had built a great wall of earth, more than seventy miles long,
extending from Newcastle to beyond Carlisle, for the purpose of keeping
out the Picts and Scots; HADRIAN had strengthened it; SEVERUS, finding it
much in want of repair, had built it afresh of stone.

Above all, it was in the Roman time, and by means of Roman ships, that
the Christian Religion was first brought into Britain, and its people
first taught the great lesson that, to be good in the sight of GOD, they
must love their neighbours as themselves, and do unto others as they
would be done by.  The Druids declared that it was very wicked to believe
in any such thing, and cursed all the people who did believe it, very
heartily.  But, when the people found that they were none the better for
the blessings of the Druids, and none the worse for the curses of the
Druids, but, that the sun shone and the rain fell without consulting the
Druids at all, they just began to think that the Druids were mere men,
and that it signified very little whether they cursed or blessed.  After
which, the pupils of the Druids fell off greatly in numbers, and the
Druids took to other trades.

Thus I have come to the end of the Roman time in England.  It is but
little that is known of those five hundred years; but some remains of
them are still found.  Often, when labourers are digging up the ground,
to make foundations for houses or churches, they light on rusty money
that once belonged to the Romans.  Fragments of plates from which they
ate, of goblets from which they drank, and of pavement on which they
trod, are discovered among the earth that is broken by the plough, or the
dust that is crumbled by the gardener's spade.  Wells that the Romans
sunk, still yield water; roads that the Romans made, form part of our
highways.  In some old battle-fields, British spear-heads and Roman
armour have been found, mingled together in decay, as they fell in the
thick pressure of the fight.  Traces of Roman camps overgrown with grass,
and of mounds that are the burial-places of heaps of Britons, are to be
seen in almost all parts of the country.  Across the bleak moors of
Northumberland, the wall of SEVERUS, overrun with moss and weeds, still
stretches, a strong ruin; and the shepherds and their dogs lie sleeping
on it in the summer weather.  On Salisbury Plain, Stonehenge yet stands:
a monument of the earlier time when the Roman name was unknown in
Britain, and when the Druids, with their best magic wands, could not have
written it in the sands of the wild sea-shore.




CHAPTER II--ANCIENT ENGLAND UNDER THE EARLY SAXONS


The Romans had scarcely gone away from Britain, when the Britons began to
wish they had never left it.  For, the Romans being gone, and the Britons
being much reduced in numbers by their long wars, the Picts and Scots
came pouring in, over the broken and unguarded wall of SEVERUS, in
swarms.  They plundered the richest towns, and killed the people; and
came back so often for more booty and more slaughter, that the
unfortunate Britons lived a life of terror.  As if the Picts and Scots
were not bad enough on land, the Saxons attacked the islanders by sea;
and, as if something more were still wanting to make them miserable, they
quarrelled bitterly among themselves as to what prayers they ought to
say, and how they ought to say them.  The priests, being very angry with
one another on these questions, cursed one another in the heartiest
manner; and (uncommonly like the old Druids) cursed all the people whom
they could not persuade.  So, altogether, the Britons were very badly
off, you may believe.

They were in such distress, in short, that they sent a letter to Rome
entreating help--which they called the Groans of the Britons; and in
which they said, 'The barbarians chase us into the sea, the sea throws us
back upon the barbarians, and we have only the hard choice left us of
perishing by the sword, or perishing by the waves.'  But, the Romans
could not help them, even if they were so inclined; for they had enough
to do to defend themselves against their own enemies, who were then very
fierce and strong.  At last, the Britons, unable to bear their hard
condition any longer, resolved to make peace with the Saxons, and to
invite the Saxons to come into their country, and help them to keep out
the Picts and Scots.

It was a British Prince named VORTIGERN who took this resolution, and who
made a treaty of friendship with HENGIST and HORSA, two Saxon chiefs.
Both of these names, in the old Saxon language, signify Horse; for the
Saxons, like many other nations in a rough state, were fond of giving men
the names of animals, as Horse, Wolf, Bear, Hound.  The Indians of North
America,--a very inferior people to the Saxons, though--do the same to
this day.

HENGIST and HORSA drove out the Picts and Scots; and VORTIGERN, being
grateful to them for that service, made no opposition to their settling
themselves in that part of England which is called the Isle of Thanet, or
to their inviting over more of their countrymen to join them.  But
HENGIST had a beautiful daughter named ROWENA; and when, at a feast, she
filled a golden goblet to the brim with wine, and gave it to VORTIGERN,
saying in a sweet voice, 'Dear King, thy health!' the King fell in love
with her.  My opinion is, that the cunning HENGIST meant him to do so, in
order that the Saxons might have greater influence with him; and that the
fair ROWENA came to that feast, golden goblet and all, on purpose.

At any rate, they were married; and, long afterwards, whenever the King
was angry with the Saxons, or jealous of their encroachments, ROWENA
would put her beautiful arms round his neck, and softly say, 'Dear King,
they are my people!  Be favourable to them, as you loved that Saxon girl
who gave you the golden goblet of wine at the feast!'  And, really, I
don't see how the King could help himself.

Ah!  We must all die!  In the course of years, VORTIGERN died--he was
dethroned, and put in prison, first, I am afraid; and ROWENA died; and
generations of Saxons and Britons died; and events that happened during a
long, long time, would have been quite forgotten but for the tales and
songs of the old Bards, who used to go about from feast to feast, with
their white beards, recounting the deeds of their forefathers.  Among the
histories of which they sang and talked, there was a famous one,
concerning the bravery and virtues of KING ARTHUR, supposed to have been
a British Prince in those old times.  But, whether such a person really
lived, or whether there were several persons whose histories came to be
confused together under that one name, or whether all about him was
invention, no one knows.

I will tell you, shortly, what is most interesting in the early Saxon
times, as they are described in these songs and stories of the Bards.

In, and long after, the days of VORTIGERN, fresh bodies of Saxons, under
various chiefs, came pouring into Britain.  One body, conquering the
Britons in the East, and settling there, called their kingdom Essex;
another body settled in the West, and called their kingdom Wessex; the
Northfolk, or Norfolk people, established themselves in one place; the
Southfolk, or Suffolk people, established themselves in another; and
gradually seven kingdoms or states arose in England, which were called
the Saxon Heptarchy.  The poor Britons, falling back before these crowds
of fighting men whom they had innocently invited over as friends, retired
into Wales and the adjacent country; into Devonshire, and into Cornwall.
Those parts of England long remained unconquered.  And in Cornwall
now--where the sea-coast is very gloomy, steep, and rugged--where, in the
dark winter-time, ships have often been wrecked close to the land, and
every soul on board has perished--where the winds and waves howl drearily
and split the solid rocks into arches and caverns--there are very ancient
ruins, which the people call the ruins of KING ARTHUR'S Castle.

Kent is the most famous of the seven Saxon kingdoms, because the
Christian religion was preached to the Saxons there (who domineered over
the Britons too much, to care for what _they_ said about their religion,
or anything else) by AUGUSTINE, a monk from Rome.  KING ETHELBERT, of
Kent, was soon converted; and the moment he said he was a Christian, his
courtiers all said _they_ were Christians; after which, ten thousand of
his subjects said they were Christians too.  AUGUSTINE built a little
church, close to this King's palace, on the ground now occupied by the
beautiful cathedral of Canterbury.  SEBERT, the King's nephew, built on a
muddy marshy place near London, where there had been a temple to Apollo,
a church dedicated to Saint Peter, which is now Westminster Abbey.  And,
in London itself, on the foundation of a temple to Diana, he built
another little church which has risen up, since that old time, to be
Saint Paul's.

After the death of ETHELBERT, EDWIN, King of Northumbria, who was such a
good king that it was said a woman or child might openly carry a purse of
gold, in his reign, without fear, allowed his child to be baptised, and
held a great council to consider whether he and his people should all be
Christians or not.  It was decided that they should be.  COIFI, the chief
priest of the old religion, made a great speech on the occasion.  In this
