Project Gutenberg's The Companions of Jehu, by Alexandre Dumas, pere

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Companions of Jehu

Author: Alexandre Dumas, pere

Release Date: December, 2004 [EBook #7079]
Posting Date: March 21, 2009

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COMPANIONS OF JEHU ***




Produced by Robert J. Hall





THE COMPANIONS OF JEHU

By Alexandre Dumas, pere



CONTENTS

  An Introductory Word to the Reader.
  Prologue--The City of Avignon.
        I. A Table d'Hote.
       II. An Italian Proverb.
      III. The Englishman.
       IV. The Duel.
        V. Roland.
       VI. Morgan.
      VII. The Chartreuse of Seillon.
     VIII. How the Money of the Directory was Used.
       IX. Romeo and Juliet
        X. The Family of Roland.
       XI. Chateau des Noires-Fontaines.
      XII. Provincial Pleasures.
     XIII. The Wild-Boar.
      XIV. An Unpleasant Commission.
       XV. The Strong-Minded Man.
      XVI. The Ghost.
     XVII. Investigations.
    XVIII. The Trial.
      XIX. The Little House in the Rue de la Victoire.
       XX. The Guests of General Bonaparte.
      XXI. The Schedule of the Directory.
     XXII. The Outline of a Decree.
    XXIII. Alea Jacta Est.
     XXIV. The Eighteenth Brumaire.
      XXV. An Important Communication.
     XXVI. The Ball of the Victims.
    XXVII. The Bear's Skin.
   XXVIII. Family Matters.
     XXIX. The Geneva Diligence.
      XXX. Citizen Fouche's Report.
     XXXI. The Son of the Miller of Guerno.
    XXXII. White and Blue.
   XXXIII. The Law of Retaliation.
    XXXIV. The Diplomacy of Georges Cadoudal.
     XXXV. A Proposal of Marriage.
    XXXVI. Sculpture and Painting.
   XXXVII. The Ambassador.
  XXXVIII. The Two Signals.
    XXXIX. The Grotto of Ceyzeriat.
       XL. A False Scent.
      XLI. The Hotel de la Poste.
     XLII. The Chambery Mail-Coach.
    XLIII. Lord Grenville's Reply.
     XLIV. Change of Residence.
      XLV. The Follower of Trails.
     XLVI. An Inspiration.
    XLVII. A Reconnoissance.
   XLVIII. In which Morgan's Presentiments are Verified.
     XLIX. Roland's Revenge.
        L. Cadoudal at the Tuileries.
       LI. The Army of the Reserves.
      LII. The Trial.
     LIII. In which Amelie Keeps Her Word.
      LIV. The Confession.
       LV. Invulnerable.
      LVI. Conclusion.




AN INTRODUCTORY WORD TO THE READER

Just about a year ago my old friend, Jules Simon, author of "Devoir,"
came to me with a request that I write a novel for the "Journal pour
Tous." I gave him the outline of a novel which I had in mind. The
subject pleased him, and the contract was signed on the spot.

The action occurred between 1791 and 1793, and the first chapter opened
at Varennes the evening of the king's arrest.

Only, impatient as was the "Journal pour Tous," I demanded a fortnight
of Jules Simon before beginning my novel. I wished to go to Varennes; I
was not acquainted with the locality, and I confess there is one thing I
cannot do; I am unable to write a novel or a drama about localities with
which I am not familiar.

In order to write "Christine" I went to Fontainebleau; in writing "Henri
III." I went to Blois; for "Les Trois Mousquetaires" I went to Boulogne
and Bethune; for "Monte-Cristo" I returned to the Catalans and the
Chateau d'If; for "Isaac Laquedem" I revisited Rome; and I certainly
spent more time studying Jerusalem and Corinth from a distance than if I
had gone there.

This gives such a character of veracity to all that I write, that the
personages whom I create become eventually such integral parts of the
places in which I planted them that, as a consequence, many end by
believing in their actual existence. There are even some people who
claim to have known them.

In this connection, dear readers, I am going to tell you something
in confidence--only do not repeat it. I do not wish to injure honest
fathers of families who live by this little industry, but if you go to
Marseilles you will be shown there the house of Morel on the Cours, the
house of Mercedes at the Catalans, and the dungeons of Dantes and Faria
at the Chateau d'If.

When I staged "Monte-Cristo" at the Theatre-Historique, I wrote to
Marseilles for a plan of the Chateau d'If, which was sent to me. This
drawing was for the use of the scene painter. The artist to whom I had
recourse forwarded me the desired plan. He even did better than I would
have dared ask of him; he wrote beneath it: "View of the Chateau d'If,
from the side where Dantes was thrown into the sea."

I have learned since that a worthy man, a guide attached to the Chateau
d'If, sells pens made of fish-bone by the Abbe Faria himself.

There is but one unfortunate circumstance concerning this; the fact is,
Dantes and the Abbe Faria have never existed save in my imagination;
consequently, Dantes could not have been precipitated from the top to
the bottom of the Chateau d'If, nor could the Abbe Faria have made pens.
But that is what comes from visiting these localities in person.

Therefore, I wished to visit Varennes before commencing my novel,
because the first chapter was to open in that city. Besides,
historically, Varennes worried me considerably; the more I perused the
historical accounts of Varennes, the less I was able to understand,
topographically, the king's arrest.

I therefore proposed to my young friend, Paul Bocage, that he accompany
me to Varennes. I was sure in advance that he would accept. To merely
propose such a trip to his picturesque and charming mind was to make him
bound from his chair to the tram. We took the railroad to Chalons.
There we bargained with a livery-stable keeper, who agreed, for a
consideration of ten francs a day, to furnish us with a horse and
carriage. We were seven days on the trip, three days to go from Chalons
to Varennes, one day to make the requisite local researches in the city,
and three days to return from Varennes to Chalons.

I recognized with a degree of satisfaction which you will easily
comprehend, that not a single historian had been historical, and with
still greater satisfaction that M. Thiers had been the least accurate of
all these historians. I had already suspected this, but was not certain.
The only one who had been accurate, with absolute accuracy, was Victor
Hugo in his book called "The Rhine." It is true that Victor Hugo is a
poet and not a historian. What historians these poets would make, if
they would but consent to become historians!

One day Lamartine asked me to what I attributed the immense success of
his "Histoire des Girondins."

"To this, because in it you rose to the level of a novel," I answered
him. He reflected for a while and ended, I believe, by agreeing with me.

I spent a day, therefore, at Varennes and visited all the localities
necessary for my novel, which was to be called "Rene d'Argonne." Then
I returned. My son was staying in the country at Sainte-Assise, near
Melun; my room awaited me, and I resolved to go there to write my novel.

I am acquainted with no two characters more dissimilar than Alexandre's
and mine, which nevertheless harmonize so well. It is true we pass many
enjoyable hours during our separations; but none I think pleasanter than
those we spend together.

I had been installed there for three or four days endeavoring to begin
my "Rene d'Argonne," taking up my pen, then laying it aside almost
immediately. The thing would not go. I consoled myself by telling
stories. Chance willed that I should relate one which Nodier had told
me of four young men affiliated with the Company of Jehu, who had been
executed at Bourg in Bresse amid the most dramatic circumstances. One of
these four young men, he who had found the greatest difficulty in dying,
or rather he whom they had the greatest difficulty in killing, was but
nineteen and a half years old.

Alexandre listened to my story with much interest. When I had finished:
"Do you know," said he, "what I should do in your place?"

"What?"

"I should lay aside 'Rene d'Argonne,' which refuses to materialize, and
in its stead I should write 'The Companions of Jehu.'"

"But just think, I have had that other novel in mind for a year or two,
and it is almost finished."

"It never will be since it is not finished now."

"Perhaps you are right, but I shall lose six months regaining my present
vantage-ground."

"Good! In three days you will have written half a volume."

"Then you will help me."

"Yes, for I shall give you two characters."

"Is that all?"

"You are too exacting! The rest is your affair; I am busy with my
'Question d'Argent.'"

"Well, who are your two characters, then?"

"An English gentleman and a French captain."

"Introduce the Englishman first."

"Very well." And Alexandre drew Lord Tanlay's portrait for me.

"Your English gentleman pleases me," said I; "now let us see your French
captain."

"My French captain is a mysterious character, who courts death with all
his might, without being able to accomplish his desire; so that each
time he rushes into mortal danger he performs some brilliant feat which
secures him promotion."

"But why does he wish to get himself killed?"

"Because he is disgusted with life."

"Why is he disgusted with life?"

"Ah! That will be the secret of the book."

"It must be told in the end."

"On the contrary, I, in your place, would not tell it."

"The readers will demand it."

"You will reply that they have only to search for it; you must leave
them something to do, these readers of yours."

"Dear friend, I shall be overwhelmed with letters."

"You need not answer them."

"Yes, but for my personal gratification I, at least, must know why my
hero longs to die."

"Oh, I do not refuse to tell you."

"Let me hear, then."

"Well, suppose, instead of being professor of dialectics, Abelard had
been a soldier."

"Well?"

"Well, let us suppose that a bullet--"

"Excellent!"

"You understand? Instead of withdrawing to Paraclet, he would have
courted death at every possible opportunity."

"Hum! That will be difficult."

"Difficult! In what way?"

"To make the public swallow that."

"But since you are not going to tell the public."

"That is true. By my faith, I believe you are right. Wait."

"I am waiting."

"Have you Nodier's 'Souvenirs de la Revolution'? I believe he wrote one
or two pages about Guyon, Lepretre, Amiet and Hyvert."

"They will say, then, that you have plagiarized from Nodier."

"Oh! He loved me well enough during his life not to refuse me whatever
I shall take from him after his death. Go fetch me the 'Souvenirs de la
Revolution.'"

Alexandre brought me the book. I opened it, turned over two or three
pages, and at last discovered what I was looking for. A little of
Nodier, dear readers, you will lose nothing by it. It is he who is
speaking:


The highwaymen who attacked the diligences, as mentioned in the article
on Amiet, which I quoted just now, were called Lepretre, Hyvert, Guyon
and Amiet.

Lepretre was forty-eight years old. He was formerly a captain of
dragoons, a knight of St. Louis, of a noble countenance, prepossessing
carriage and much elegance of manner. Guyon and Amiet have never been
known by their real names. They owe that to the accommodating spirit
prevailing among the vendors of passports of those days. Let the reader
picture to himself two dare-devils between twenty and thirty years of
age, allied by some common responsibility, the sequence, perhaps of
some misdeed, or, by a more delicate and generous interest, the fear of
compromising their family name. Then you will know of Guyon and Amiet
all that I can recall. The latter had a sinister countenance, to which,
perhaps, he owes the bad reputation with which all his biographers have
credited him. Hyvert was the son of a rich merchant of Lyons, who had
offered the sub-officer charged with his deportation sixty thousand
francs to permit his escape. He was at once the Achilles and the Paris
of the band. He was of medium height but well formed, lithe, and of
graceful and pleasing address. His eyes were never without animation nor
his lips without a smile. His was one of those countenances which
are never forgotten, and which present an inexpressible blending of
sweetness and strength, tenderness and energy. When he yielded to the
eloquent petulance of his inspirations he soared to enthusiasm. His
conversation revealed the rudiments of an excellent early education and
much natural intelligence. That which was so terrifying in him was his
tone of heedless gayety, which contrasted so horribly with his position.
For the rest, he was unanimously conceded to be kind, generous, humane,
lenient toward the weak, while with the strong he loved to display a
vigor truly athletic which his somewhat effeminate features were far
from indicating. He boasted that he had never been without money, and
had no enemies. That was his sole reply to the charges of theft and
assassination. He was twenty-two years old.

To these four men was intrusted the attack upon a diligence conveying
forty thousand francs of government money. This deed was transacted
in broad daylight, with an exchange of mutual courtesy almost; and the
travellers, who were not disturbed by the attack, gave little heed to
it. But a child of only ten years of age, with reckless bravado,
seized the pistol of the conductor and fired it into the midst of the
assailants. As this peaceful weapon, according to the custom, was only
charged with powder, no one was injured; but the occupants of the coach
quite naturally experienced a lively fear of reprisals. The little
boy's mother fell into violent hysterics. This new disturbance created
a general diversion which dominated all the preceding events and
particularly attracted the attention of the robbers. One of them flew to
the woman's side, reassuring her in the most affectionate manner, while
complimenting her upon her son's precocious courage, and courteously
pressed upon her the salts and perfumes with which these gentlemen were
ordinarily provided for their own use. She regained consciousness. In
the excitement of the moment her travelling companions noticed that the
highwayman's mask had fallen off, but they did not see his face.

The police of those days, restricted to mere impotent supervision, were
unable to cope with the depredations of these banditti, although they
did not lack the means to follow them up. Appointments were made at the
cafes, and narratives relating to deeds carrying with them the penalty
of death circulated freely through all the billiard-halls in the land.
Such was the importance which the culprits and the public attached to
the police.

These men of blood and terror assembled in society in the evening,
and discussed their nocturnal expeditions as if they had been mere
pleasure-parties.

Lepretre, Hyvert, Amiet and Guyon were arraigned before the tribunal
of a neighboring department. No one save the Treasury had suffered from
their attack, and there was no one to identify them save the lady
who took very good care not to do so. They were therefore acquitted
unanimously.

Nevertheless, the evidence against them so obviously called for
conviction, that the Ministry was forced to appeal from this decision.
The verdict was set aside; but such was the government's vacillation,
that it hesitated to punish excesses that might on the morrow be
regarded as virtues. The accused were cited before the tribunal of
Ain, in the city of Bourg, where dwelt a majority of their friends,
relatives, abettors and accomplices. The Ministry sought to propitiate
the one party by the return of its victims, and the other by the almost
inviolate safeguards with which it surrounded the prisoners. The return
to prison indeed resembled nothing less than a triumph.

The trial recommenced. It was at first attended by the same results as
the preceding one. The four accused were protected by an alibi, patently
false, but attested by a hundred signatures, and for which they could
easily have obtained ten thousand. All moral convictions must fail
in the presence of such authoritative testimony. An acquittal seemed
certain, when a question, perhaps involuntarily insidious, from the
president, changed the aspect of the trial.

"Madam," said he to the lady who had been so kindly assisted by one
of the highwaymen, "which of these men was it who tendered you such
thoughtful attention?"

This unexpected form of interrogation confused her ideas. It is probable
that she believed the facts to be known, and saw in this a means of
modifying the fate of the man who interested her.

"It was that gentleman," said she, pointing to Lepretre. The four
accused, who were included in a common alibi, fell by this one admission
under the executioner's axe. They rose and bowed to her with a smile.

"Faith!" said Hyvert, falling back upon his bench with a burst of
laughter, "that, Captain, will teach you to play the gallant."

I have heard it said that the unhappy lady died shortly after of
chagrin.

The customary appeal followed; but, this time, there was little hope.
The Republican party, which Napoleon annihilated a month later, was in
the ascendency. That of the Counter-Revolution was compromised by its
odious excesses. The people demanded examples, and matters were arranged
accordingly, as is ordinarily the custom in strenuous times; for it is
with governments as with men, the weakest are always the most cruel. Nor
had the Companies of Jehu longer an organized existence. The heroes of
these ferocious bands, Debeauce, Hastier, Bary, Le Coq, Dabri, Delbourbe
and Storkenfeld, had either fallen on the scaffold or elsewhere. The
condemned could look for no further assistance from the daring courage
of these exhausted devotees, who, no longer capable of protecting their
own lives, coolly sacrificed them, as did Piard, after a merry supper.
Our brigands were doomed to die.

Their appeal was rejected, but the municipal authorities were not the
first to learn of this. The condemned men were warned by three shots
fired beneath the walls of their dungeon. The Commissioner of the
Executive Directory, who had assumed the role of Public Prosecutor at
the trial, alarmed at this obvious sign of connivance, requisitioned a
squad of armed men of whom my uncle was then commander. At six o'clock
in the morning sixty horsemen were drawn up before the iron gratings of
the prison yard.

Although the jailers had observed all possible precautions in entering
the dungeon where these four unfortunate men were confined, and whom
they had left the preceding day tightly pinioned and heavily loaded
with chains, they were unable to offer them a prolonged resistance.
The prisoners were free and armed to the teeth. They came forth without
difficulty, leaving their guardians under bolts and bars, and, supplied
with the keys, they quickly traversed the space that separated them
from the prison yard. Their appearance must have been terrifying to the
populace awaiting them before the iron gates.

To assure perfect freedom of action, or perhaps to affect an appearance
of security more menacing even than the renown for strength and
intrepidity with which their names were associated, or possibly even to
conceal the flow of blood which reveals itself so readily beneath white
linen, and betrays the last agonies of a mortally wounded man, their
breasts were bared. Their braces crossed upon the chest--their wide red
belts bristling with arms--their cry of attack and rage, all that must
have given a decidedly fantastic touch to the scene. Arrived in the
square, they perceived the gendarmerie drawn up in motionless ranks,
through which it would have been impossible to force a passage. They
halted an instant and seemed to consult together. Lepretre, who was, as
I have said, their senior and their chief, saluted the guard with his
hand, saying with that noble grace of manner peculiar to him:

"Very well, gentlemen of the gendarmerie!"

Then after a brief, energetic farewell to his comrades, he stepped in
front of them and blew out his brains. Guyon, Amiet and Hyvert assumed
a defensive position, their double-barrelled pistols levelled upon their
armed opponents. They did not fire; but the latter, considering this
demonstration as a sign of open hostility, fired upon them. Guyon fell
dead upon Lepretre's body, which had not moved. Amiet's hip was broken
near the groin. The "Biographie des Contemporains" says that he was
executed. I have often heard it said that he died at the foot of the
scaffold. Hyvert was left alone, his determined brow, his terrible eye,
the pistol in each practiced and vigorous hand threatening death to
the spectators. Perhaps it was involuntary admiration, in his desperate
plight, for this handsome young man with his waving locks, who was
known never to have shed blood, and from whom the law now demanded the
expiation of blood; or perhaps it was the sight of those three corpses
over which he sprang like a wolf overtaken by his hunters, and the
frightful novelty of the spectacle, which for an instant restrained
the fury of the troop. He perceived this and temporized with them for a
compromise.

"Gentlemen," said he, "I go to my death! I die with all my heart! But
let no one approach me or I shall shoot him--except this gentleman," he
continued, pointing to the executioner. "This is an affair that concerns
us alone and merely needs a certain understanding between us."

This concession was readily accorded, for there was no one present who
was not suffering from the prolongation of this horrible tragedy, and
anxious to see it finished. Perceiving their assent, he placed one
of his pistols between his teeth, and drawing a dagger from his belt,
plunged it in his breast up to the hilt. He still remained standing and
seemed greatly surprised. There was a movement toward him.

"Very well, gentlemen!" cried he, covering the men who sought to
surround him with his pistols, which he had seized again, while the
blood spurted freely from the wound in which he had left his poniard.
"You know our agreement; either I die alone or three of us will die
together. Forward, march!" He walked straight to the guillotine, turning
the knife in his breast as he did so.

"Faith," said he, "my soul must be centred in my belly! I cannot die.
See if you can fetch it out."

This last was addressed to his executioner. An instant later his head
fell. Be it accident or some peculiar phenomenon of the vitality, it
rebounded and rolled beyond the circle of the scaffolding, and they will
still tell you at Bourg, that Hyvert's head spoke.


Before I had finished reading I had decided to abandon Rene d'Argonne
for the Companions of Jehu. On the morrow I came down with my travelling
bag under my arm.

"You are leaving?" said Alexandre to me.

"Yes."

"Where are you going?"

"To Bourg, in Bresse."

"What are you going to do there?"

"Study the neighborhood and consult with the inhabitants who saw
Lepretre, Amiet, Guyon and Hyvert executed."

       *       *       *       *       *

There are two roads to Bourg--from Paris, of course; one may leave the
train at Macon, and take stage from Macon to Bourg, or, continuing as
far as Lyons, take train again from Lyons to Bourg.

I was hesitating between these two roads when one of the travellers who
was temporarily occupying my compartment decided me. He was going to
Bourg, where he frequently had business. He was going by way of Lyons;
therefore, Lyons was the better way.

I resolved to travel by the same route. I slept at Lyons, and on the
morrow by ten in the morning I was at Bourg.

A paper published in the second capital of the kingdom met my eye. It
contained a spiteful article about me. Lyons has never forgiven me since
1833, I believe, some twenty-four years ago, for asserting that it was
not a literary city. Alas! I have in 1857 the same opinion of Lyons as I
had in 1833. I do not easily change my opinion. There is another city
in France that is almost as bitter against me as Lyons, that is Rouen.
Rouen has hissed all my plays, including Count Hermann.

One day a Neapolitan boasted to me that he had hissed Rossini and
Malibran, "The Barbiere" and "Desdemona."

"That must be true," I answered him, "for Rossini and Malibran on their
side boast of having been hissed by Neapolitans."

So I boast that the Rouenese have hissed me. Nevertheless, meeting a
full-blooded Rouenese one day I resolved to discover why I had been
hissed at Rouen. I like to understand these little things.

My Rouenese informed me: "We hiss you because we are down on you."

Why not? Rouen was down on Joan of Arc. Nevertheless it could not be
for the same reason. I asked my Rouenese why he and his compatriots were
ill-disposed to me; I had never said anything evil of apple sugar, I
had treated M. Barbet with respect during his entire term as mayor,
and, when a delegate from the Society of Letters at the unveiling of the
statue of the great Corneille, I was the only one who thought to bow to
him before beginning my speech. There was nothing in that which could
have reasonably incurred the hatred of the Rouenese.

Therefore to this haughty reply, "We hiss you because we have a grudge
against you," I asked humbly:

"But, great Heavens! why are you down on me?"

"Oh, you know very well," replied my Rouenese.

"I?" I exclaimed.

"Yes, you."

"Well, never mind; pretend I do not know."

"You remember the dinner the city gave you, in connection with that
statue of Corneille?"

"Perfectly. Were they annoyed because I did not return it?"

"No, it is not that."

"What is it then?"

"Well, at that dinner they said to you: 'M. Dumas, you ought to write a
play for Rouen based upon some subject taken from its own history.'"

"To which I replied: 'Nothing easier; I will come at your first summons
and spend a fortnight in Rouen. You can suggest the subject, and during
that fortnight I will write the play, the royalties of which I shall
devote to the poor.'"

"That is true, you said that."

"I see nothing sufficiently insulting in that to incur the hatred of the
Rouenese."

"Yes, but they added: 'Will you write it in prose?' To which you
replied--Do you remember what you answered?"

"My faith! no."

"You replied: 'I will write it in verse; it is soonest done.'"

"That sounds like me. Well, what then?"

"Then! That was an insult to Corneille, M. Dumas; that is why the
Rouenese are down on you, and will be for a long time."

Verbatim!

Oh, worthy Rouenese! I trust that you will never serve me so ill as to
forgive and applaud me.

The aforesaid paper observed that M. Dumas had doubtless spent but one
night in Lyons because a city of such slight literary standing was not
worthy of his longer sojourn. M. Dumas had not thought about this at
all. He had spent but one night at Lyons because he was in a hurry to
reach Bourg. And no sooner had M. Dumas arrived at Bourg than he asked
to be directed to the office of its leading newspaper.

I knew that it was under the management of a distinguished archeologist,
who was also the editor of my friend Baux's work on the church of Brou.

I asked for M. Milliet. M. Milliet appeared. We shook hands and I
explained the object of my visit.

"I can fix you perfectly," said he to me. "I will take you to one of
our magistrates, who is at present engaged upon a history of the
department."

"How far has he got in this history?"

"1822."

"Then that's all right. As the events I want to relate occurred in 1799,
and my heroes were executed in 1800, he will have covered that epoch,
and can furnish me with the desired information. Let us go to your
magistrate."

On the road, M. Milliet told me that this same magisterial historian was
also a noted gourmet. Since Brillat-Savarin it has been the fashion
for magistrates to be epicures. Unfortunately, many are content to be
gourmands, which is not at all the same thing.

We were ushered into the magistrate's study. I found a man with a shiny
face and a sneering smile. He greeted me with that protecting air which
historians deign to assume toward poets.

"Well, sir," he said to me, "so you have come to our poor country in
search of material for your novel?"

"No, sir; I have my material already. I have come simply to consult your
historical documents."

"Good! I did not know that it was necessary to give one's self so much
trouble in order to write novels."

"There you are in error, sir; at least in my instance. I am in the habit
of making exhaustive researches upon all the historical events of which
I treat."

"You might at least have sent some one else."

"Any person whom I might send, sir, not being so completely absorbed
in my subject, might have overlooked many important facts. Then, too, I
make use of many localities which I cannot describe unless I see them."

"Oh, then this is a novel which you intend writing yourself?"

"Yes, certainly, sir. I allowed my valet to write my last; but he had
such immense success that the rogue asked so exorbitant an increase of
wages that, to my great regret, I was unable to keep him."

The magistrate bit his lips. Then, after a moment's silence, he said:

"Will you kindly tell me, sir, how I can assist you in this important
work?"

"You can direct my researches, sir. As you have compiled the history of
the department, none of the important event which have occurred in its
capital can be unknown to you."

"Truly, sir, I believe that in this respect I am tolerably well
informed."

"Then, sir, in the first place, your department was the centre of the
operations of the Company of Jehu."

"Sir, I have heard speak of the Companions of Jesus," replied the
magistrate with his jeering smile.

"The Jesuits, you mean? That is not what I am seeking, sir."

"Nor is it of them that I am speaking. I refer to the stage robbers who
infested the highroads from 1797 to 1800."

"Then, sir, permit me to tell you they are precisely the ones I have
come to Bourg about, and that they were called the Companions of Jehu,
and not the Companions of Jesus."

"What is the meaning of this title 'Companions of Jehu'? I like to get
at the bottom of everything."

"So do I, sir; that is why I did not wish to confound these highwaymen
with the Apostles."

"Truly, that would not have been very orthodox."

"But it is what you would have done, nevertheless, sir, if I, a poet,
had not come here expressly to correct the mistake you, as historian,
have made."

"I await your explanation, sir," resumed the magistrate, pursing his
lips.

"It is short and simple. Elisha consecrated Jehu, King of Israel,
on condition that he exterminate the house of Ahab; Elisha was Louis
XVIII.; Jehu was Cadoudal; the house of Ahab, the Revolution. That is
why these pillagers of diligences, who filched the government money to
support the war in the Vendee, were called the Companions of Jehu."

"Sir, I am happy to learn something at my age."

"Oh, sir! One can always learn, at all times and at all ages; during
life one learns man; in death one learns God."

"But, after all," my interlocutor said to me with a gesture of
impatience, "may I know in what I can assist you?"

"Thus, sir. Four of these young men, leaders of the Companions of Jehu,
were executed at Bourg, on the Place du Bastion."

"In the first place, sir, in Bourg executions do not take place at the
Bastion; they execute on the Fair grounds."

"Now, sir--these last fifteen or twenty years, it is true--since Peytel.
But before, especially during the Revolution, they executed on the Place
du Bastion."

"That is possible."

"It is so. These four young men were called Guyon, Lepretre, Amiet, and
Hyvert."

"This is the first time I have heard those names."

"Yet their names made a certain noise at Bourg."

"Are you sure, sir, that these men were executed here?"

"I am positive."

"From whom have you derived your information?"

"From a man whose uncle, then in command of the gendarmerie, was present
at the execution."

"Will you tell me this man's name?"

"Charles Nodier."

"Charles Nodier, the novelist, the poet?"

"If he were a historian I would not be so insistent, sir. Recently,
during a trip to Varennes, I learned what dependence to place upon
historians. But precisely because he is a poet, a novelist, I do
insist."

"You are at liberty to do so; but I know nothing of what you desire to
learn, and I dare even assert that, if you have come to Bourg solely to
obtain information concerning the execution of--what did you call them?"

"Guyon, Lepretre, Amiet, and Hyvert."

"You have undertaken a futile voyage. For these last twenty years, sir,
I have been searching the town archives, and I have never seen anything
relating to what you have just told me."

"The town archives are not those of the registrar, sir; perhaps at the
record office I may be able to find what I am seeking."

"Ah! sir, if you can find anything among those archives you will be a
very clever man! The record office is a chaos, a veritable chaos. You
would have to spend a month here, and then--then--"

"I do not expect to stay here more than a day, sir; but if in that day I
should find what I am seeking will you permit me to impart it to you?"

"Yes, sir; yes, sir; and you will render me a great service by doing
so."

"No greater than the one I asked of you. I shall merely give you some
information about a matter of which you were ignorant, that is all."

You can well understand that on leaving my magistrate, my honor was
piqued. I determined, cost what it might, to procure this information
about the Companions of Jehu. I went back to Milliet, and cornered him.

"Listen," he said. "My brother-in-law is a lawyer."

"He's my man! Let's go find the brother-in-law."

"He's in court at this hour."

"Then let us go to court."

"Your appearance will create a sensation, I warn you."

"Then go alone--tell him what we want, and let him make a search. I will
visit the environs of the town to base my work on the localities. We
will meet at four o'clock at the Place du Bastion, if you are agreed."

"Perfectly."

"It seems to me that I saw a forest, coming here."

"The forest of Seillon."

"Bravo!"

"Do you need a forest?"

"It is absolutely indispensable to me."

"Then permit me--"

"What?"

"I am going to take you to a friend of mine, M. Leduc, a poet who in his
spare moments is an inspector."

"Inspector of what?"
