The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Virginians, by William Makepeace Thackeray

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Virginians

Author: William Makepeace Thackeray

Release Date: May, 2005 [EBook #8123]
Posting Date: July 24, 2009

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VIRGINIANS ***




Produced by Tapio Riikonen





THE VIRGINIANS

A TALE OF THE LAST CENTURY


By William Makepeace Thackeray



TO SIR HENRY MADISON, Chief Justice of Madras, this book is inscribed by
an affectionate old friend.

London, September 7, 1859.



CONTENTS

  CHAPTER
      I  In which one of the Virginians visits Home
     II  In which Harry has to pay for his Supper
    III  The Esmonds in Virginia
     IV  In which Harry finds a New Relative
      V  Family Jars
     VI  The Virginians begin to see the World
    VII  Preparations for War
   VIII  In which George suffers from a common Disease
     IX  Hospitalities
      X  A Hot Afternoon
     XI  Wherein the two Georges prepare for Blood
    XII  News from the Camp
   XIII  Profitless Quest
    XIV  Harry in England
     XV  A Sunday at Castlewood
    XVI  In which Gumbo shows Skill with the Old English Weapon
   XVII  On the Scent
  XVIII  An Old Story
    XIX  Containing both Love and Luck
     XX  Facilis Descensus
    XXI  Samaritans
   XXII  In Hospital
  XXIII  Holydays
   XXIV  From Oakhurst to Tunbridge
    XXV  New Acquaintances
   XXVI  In which we are at a very great distance from Oakhurst
  XXVII  Plenum Opus Aleae
 XXVIII  The Way of the World
   XXIX  In which Harry continues to enjoy Otium sine Dignitate
    XXX  Contains a Letter to Virginia
   XXXI  The Bear and the Leader
  XXXII  In which a Family Coach is ordered
 XXXIII  Contains a Soliloquy by Hester
  XXXIV  In which Mr. Warrington treats the Company with Tea and a Ball
   XXXV  Entanglements
  XXXVI  Which seems to mean Mischief
 XXXVII  In which various Matches are fought
XXXVIII Sampson and the Philistines  XXXIX  Harry to the Rescue
     XL  In which Harry pays off an Old Debt, and incurs some New Ones
    XLI  Rake's Progress
   XLII  Fortunatus Nimium
  XLIII  In which Harry flies high
   XLIV  Contains what might, perhaps, have been expected
    XLV  In which Harry finds two Uncles
   XLVI  Chains and Slavery
  XLVII  Visitors in Trouble
 XLVIII  An Apparition
   XLIX  Friends in Need
      L  Contains a Great deal of the Finest Morality
     LI  Conticuere Omnes
    LII  Intentique Ora tenebant
   LIII  Where we remain at the Court End of the Town
    LIV  During which Harry sits smoking his Pipe at Home
     LV  Between Brothers
    LVI  Ariadne
   LVII  In which Harry's Nose continues to be put out of joint
  LVIII  Where we do what Cats may do
    LIX  In which we are treated to a Play
     LX  Which treats of Macbeth, a Supper, and a Pretty Kettle of Fish
    LXI  In which the Prince marches up the Hill and down again
   LXII  Arma Virumque
  LXIII  Melpomene
   LXIV  In which Harry lives to fight another day
    LXV  Soldier's Return
   LXVI  In which we go a-courting
  LXVII  In which a Tragedy is acted, and two more begun
 LXVIII  In which Harry goes Westward
   LXIX  A Little Innocent
    LXX  In which Cupid plays a considerable part
   LXXI  With Favours
  LXXII  (From the Warrington MS.) In which my Lady is on the Top
           of the Ladder
 LXXIII  We keep Christmas at Castlewood. 1759
  LXXIV  News from Canada
   LXXV  The Course of True Love
  LXXVI  Informs us how Mr. Warrington jumped into a Landau
 LXXVII  And how everybody got out again
LXXVIII Pyramus and Thisbe
LXXIX  Containing both Comedy and Tragedy
   LXXX  Pocahontas
  LXXXI  Res Angusta Domi
 LXXXII  Mile's Moidore
LXXXIII Troubles and Consolations
 LXXXIV  In which Harry submits to the Common Lot
  LXXXV  Inveni Portum
 LXXXVI  At Home
LXXXVII The Last of God Save the King LXXXVIII Yankeee Doodle comes to
Town LXXXIX  A Colonel without a Regiment
     XC  In which we both fight and run away
    XCI  Satis Pugnae
   XCII  Under Vine and Fig-Tree





THE VIRGINIANS




CHAPTER I. In which one of the Virginians visits home


On the library wall of one of the most famous writers of America, there
hang two crossed swords, which his relatives wore in the great War of
Independence. The one sword was gallantly drawn in the service of
the king, the other was the weapon of a brave and honoured republican
soldier. The possessor of the harmless trophy has earned for himself a
name alike honoured in his ancestors' country and his own, where genius
such as his has always a peaceful welcome.

The ensuing history reminds me of yonder swords in the historian's study
at Boston. In the Revolutionary War, the subjects of this story, natives
of America, and children of the Old Dominion, found themselves engaged
on different sides in the quarrel, coming together peaceably at its
conclusion, as brethren should, their love ever having materially
diminished, however angrily the contest divided them. The colonel in
scarlet, and the general in blue and buff, hang side by side in the
wainscoted parlour of the Warringtons, in England, where a descendant
of one of the brothers has shown their portraits to me, with many of
the letters which they wrote, and the books and papers which belonged
to them. In the Warrington family, and to distinguish them from other
personages of that respectable race, these effigies have always gone
by the name of "The Virginians"; by which name their memoirs are
christened.

They both of them passed much time in Europe. They lived just on the
verge of that Old World from which we are drifting away so swiftly. They
were familiar with many varieties of men and fortune. Their lot brought
them into contact with personages of whom we read only in books, who
seem alive, as I read in the Virginians' letters regarding them, whose
voices I almost fancy I hear, as I read the yellow pages written scores
of years since, blotted with the boyish tears of disappointed passion,
dutifully despatched after famous balls and ceremonies of the grand Old
World, scribbled by camp-fires, or out of prison; nay, there is one that
has a bullet through it, and of which a greater portion of the text is
blotted out with the blood of the bearer.

These letters had probably never been preserved, but for the
affectionate thrift of one person, to whom they never failed in their
dutiful correspondence. Their mother kept all her sons' letters, from
the very first, in which Henry, the younger of the twins, sends his
love to his brother, then ill of a sprain at his grandfather's house of
Castlewood, in Virginia, and thanks his grandpapa for a horse which he
rides with his tutor, down to the last, "from my beloved son," which
reached her but a few hours before her death. The venerable lady never
visited Europe, save once with her parents in the reign of George the
Second; took refuge in Richmond when the house of Castlewood was burned
down during the war; and was called Madam Esmond ever after that event;
never caring much for the name or family of Warrington, which she held
in very slight estimation as compared to her own.

The letters of the Virginians, as the reader will presently see, from
specimens to be shown to him, are by no means full. They are hints
rather than descriptions--indications and outlines chiefly: it may be,
that the present writer has mistaken the forms, and filled in the colour
wrongly: but, poring over the documents, I have tried to imagine the
situation of the writer, where he was, and by what persons surrounded. I
have drawn the figures as I fancied they were; set down conversations
as I think I might have heard them; and so, to the best of my ability,
endeavoured to revivify the bygone times and people. With what success
the task has been accomplished, with what profit or amusement to
himself, the kind reader will please to determine.

One summer morning in the year 1756, and in the reign of his Majesty
King George the Second, the Young Rachel, Virginian ship, Edward Franks
master, came up the Avon river on her happy return from her annual
voyage to the Potomac. She proceeded to Bristol with the tide, and
moored in the stream as near as possible to Trail's wharf, to which she
was consigned. Mr. Trail, her part owner, who could survey his ship from
his counting-house windows, straightway took boat and came up her side.
The owner of the Young Rachel, a large grave man in his own hair, and of
a demure aspect, gave the hand of welcome to Captain Franks, who stood
on his deck, and congratulated the captain upon the speedy and fortunate
voyage which he had made. And, remarking that we ought to be thankful
to Heaven for its mercies, he proceeded presently to business by asking
particulars relative to cargo and passengers.

Franks was a pleasant man, who loved a joke. "We have," says he, "but
yonder ugly negro boy, who is fetching the trunks, and a passenger who
has the state cabin to himself."

Mr. Trail looked as if he would have preferred more mercies from Heaven.
"Confound you, Franks, and your luck! The Duke William, which came in
last week, brought fourteen, and she is not half of our tonnage."

"And this passenger, who has the whole cabin, don't pay nothin',"
continued the Captain. "Swear now, it will do you good, Mr. Trail,
indeed it will. I have tried the medicine."

"A passenger take the whole cabin and not pay? Gracious mercy, are you a
fool, Captain Franks?"

"Ask the passenger himself, for here he comes." And, as the master
spoke, a young man of some nineteen years of age came up the hatchway.
He had a cloak and a sword under his arm, and was dressed in deep
mourning, and called out, "Gumbo, you idiot, why don't you fetch the
baggage out of the cabin? Well, shipmate, our journey is ended. You will
see all the little folks to-night whom you have been talking about. Give
my love to Polly, and Betty, and Little Tommy; not forgetting my duty to
Mrs. Franks. I thought, yesterday, the voyage would never be done, and
now I am almost sorry it is over. That little berth in my cabin looks
very comfortable now I am going to leave it."

Mr. Trail scowled at the young passenger who had paid no money for
his passage. He scarcely nodded his head to the stranger, when Captain
Franks said, "This here gentleman is Mr. Trail, sir, whose name you have
a-heerd of."

"It's pretty well known in Bristol, sir," says Mr. Trail, majestically.

"And this is Mr. Warrington, Madam Esmond Warrington's son, of
Castlewood," continued the Captain.

The British merchant's hat was instantly off his head, and the owner of
the beaver was making a prodigious number of bows as if a crown prince
were before him.

"Gracious powers, Mr. Warrington! This is a delight, indeed! What a
crowning mercy that your voyage should have been so prosperous! You must
have my boat to go on shore. Let me cordially and respectfully welcome
you to England: let me shake your hand as the son of my benefactress and
patroness, Mrs. Esmond Warrington, whose name is known and honoured on
Bristol 'Change, I warrant you. Isn't it, Franks?"

"There's no sweeter tobacco comes from Virginia, and no better brand
than the Three Castles," says Mr. Franks, drawing a great brass
tobacco-box from his pocket, and thrusting a quid into his jolly mouth.
"You don't know what a comfort it is, sir! you'll take to it, bless you,
as you grow older. Won't he, Mr. Trail? I wish you had ten shiploads of
it instead of one. You might have ten shiploads: I've told Madam Esmond
so; I've rode over her plantation; she treats me like a lord when I go
to the house; she don't grudge me the best of wine, or keep me cooling
my heels in the counting-room as some folks does" (with a look at Mr.
Trail). "She is a real born lady, she is; and might have a thousand
hogsheads as easy as her hundreds, if there were but hands enough."

"I have lately engaged in the Guinea trade, and could supply her
ladyship with any number of healthy young negroes before next fall,"
said Mr. Trail, obsequiously.

"We are averse to the purchase of negroes from Africa," said the young
gentleman, coldly. "My grandfather and my mother have always objected to
it, and I do not like to think of selling or buying the poor wretches."

"It is for their good, my dear young sir! for their temporal and their
spiritual good!" cried Mr. Trail. "And we purchase the poor creatures
only for their benefit; let me talk this matter over with you at my own
house. I can introduce you to a happy home, a Christian family, and a
British merchant's honest fare. Can't I, Captain Franks?"

"Can't say," growled the Captain. "Never asked me to take bite or sup at
your table. Asked me to psalm-singing once, and to hear Mr. Ward preach:
don't care for them sort of entertainments."

Not choosing to take any notice of this remark, Mr. Trail continued in
his low tone: "Business is business, my dear young sir, and I know,
'tis only my duty, the duty of all of us, to cultivate the fruits of the
earth in their season. As the heir of Lady Esmond's estate--for I speak,
I believe, to the heir of that great property?--"

The young gentleman made a bow.

"--I would urge upon you, at the very earliest moment, the propriety,
the duty of increasing the ample means with which Heaven has blessed
you. As an honest factor, I could not do otherwise; as a prudent man,
should I scruple to speak of what will tend to your profit and mine? No,
my dear Mr. George."

"My name is not George; my name is Henry," said the young man as he
turned his head away, and his eyes filled with tears.

"Gracious powers! what do you mean, sir? Did you not say you were my
lady's heir? and is not George Esmond Warrington, Esq.----"

"Hold your tongue, you fool!" cried Mr. Franks, striking the merchant a
tough blow on his sleek sides, as the young lad turned away. "Don't
you see the young gentleman a-swabbing his eyes, and note his black
clothes?"

"What do you mean, Captain Franks, by laying your hand on your owners?
Mr. George is the heir; I know the Colonel's will well enough."

"Mr. George is there," said the Captain, pointing with his thumb to the
deck.

"Where?" cries the factor.

"Mr. George is there!" reiterated the Captain, again lifting up his
finger towards the topmast, or the sky beyond. "He is dead a year, sir,
come next 9th of July. He would go out with General Braddock on that
dreadful business to the Belle Riviere. He and a thousand more never
came back again. Every man of them was murdered as he fell. You know
the Indian way, Mr. Trail?" And here the Captain passed his hand rapidly
round his head. "Horrible! ain't it, sir? horrible! He was a fine young
man, the very picture of this one; only his hair was black, which is now
hanging in a bloody Indian wigwam. He was often and often on board of
the Young Rachel, and would have his chests of books broke open on deck
before they was landed. He was a shy and silent young gent: not like
this one, which was the merriest, wildest young fellow, full of his
songs and fun. He took on dreadful at the news; went to his bed, had
that fever which lays so many of 'em by the heels along that swampy
Potomac, but he's got better on the voyage: the voyage makes every one
better; and, in course, the young gentleman can't be for ever a-crying
after a brother who dies and leaves him a great fortune. Ever since we
sighted Ireland he has been quite gay and happy, only he would go off at
times, when he was most merry, saying, 'I wish my dearest Georgy
could enjoy this here sight along with me, and when you mentioned
the t'other's name, you see, he couldn't stand it.'" And the honest
Captain's own eyes filled with tears, as he turned and looked towards
the object of his compassion.

Mr. Trail assumed a lugubrious countenance befitting the tragic
compliment with which he prepared to greet the young Virginian; but the
latter answered him very curtly, declined his offers of hospitality, and
only stayed in Mr. Trail's house long enough to drink a glass of wine
and to take up a sum of money of which he stood in need. But he and
Captain Franks parted on the very warmest terms, and all the little crew
of the Young Rachel cheered from the ship's side as their passenger left
it.

Again and again Harry Warrington and his brother had pored over the
English map, and determined upon the course which they should take
upon arriving at Home. All Americans who love the old country--and what
gently-nurtured man or woman of Anglo-Saxon race does not?--have ere
this rehearsed their English travels, and visited in fancy the spots
with which their hopes, their parents' fond stories, their friends'
descriptions, have rendered them familiar. There are few things to me
more affecting in the history of the quarrel which divided the two great
nations than the recurrence of that word Home, as used by the younger
towards the elder country. Harry Warrington had his chart laid out.
Before London, and its glorious temples of St. Paul's and St. Peter's;
its grim Tower, where the brave and loyal had shed their blood, from
Wallace down to Balmerino and Kilmarnock, pitied by gentle hearts;
before the awful window of Whitehall, whence the martyr Charles
had issued, to kneel once more, and then ascend to Heaven;--before
Playhouses, Parks, and Palaces, wondrous resorts of wit, pleasure, and
splendour;--before Shakspeare's Resting-place under the tall spire which
rises by Avon, amidst the sweet Warwickshire pastures;--before Derby,
and Falkirk, and Culloden, where the cause of honour and loyalty had
fallen, it might be to rise no more:--before all these points of their
pilgrimage there was one which the young Virginian brothers held even
more sacred, and that was the home of their family,--that old Castlewood
in Hampshire, about which their parents had talked so fondly. From
Bristol to Bath, from Bath to Salisbury, to Winchester, to Hexton, to
Home; they knew the way, and had mapped the journey many and many a
time.

We must fancy our American traveller to be a handsome young fellow,
whose suit of sables only made him look the more interesting. The plump
landlady from her bar, surrounded by her china and punch-bowls, and
stout gilded bottles of strong waters, and glittering rows of silver
flagons, looked kindly after the young gentleman as he passed through
the inn-hall from his post-chaise, and the obsequious chamberlain bowed
him upstairs to the Rose or the Dolphin. The trim chambermaid dropped
her best curtsey for his fee, and Gumbo, in the inn-kitchen, where the
townsfolk drank their mug of ale by the great fire, bragged of his young
master's splendid house in Virginia, and of the immense wealth to which
he was heir. The postchaise whirled the traveller through the most
delightful home-scenery his eyes had ever lighted on. If English
landscape is pleasant to the American of the present day, who must needs
contrast the rich woods and glowing pastures, and picturesque ancient
villages of the old country with the rough aspect of his own, how much
pleasanter must Harry Warrington's course have been, whose journeys had
lain through swamps and forest solitudes from one Virginian ordinary
to another log-house at the end of the day's route, and who now lighted
suddenly upon the busy, happy, splendid scene of English summer? And the
highroad, a hundred years ago, was not that grass-grown desert of the
present time. It was alive with constant travel and traffic: the country
towns and inns swarmed with life and gaiety. The ponderous waggon, with
its bells and plodding team; the light post-coach that achieved the
journey from the White Hart, Salisbury, to the Swan with Two Necks,
London, in two days; the strings of packhorses that had not yet left the
road; my lord's gilt postchaise-and-six, with the outriders galloping
on ahead; the country squire's great coach and heavy Flanders mares; the
farmers trotting to market, or the parson jolting to the cathedral town
on Dumpling, his wife behind on the pillion--all these crowding sights
and brisk people greeted the young traveller on his summer journey.
Hodge, the farmer's boy, took off his hat, and Polly, the milkmaid,
bobbed a curtsey, as the chaise whirled over the pleasant village-green,
and the white-headed children lifted their chubby faces and cheered.
The church-spires glistened with gold, the cottage-gables glared in
sunshine, the great elms murmured in summer, or cast purple shadows over
the grass. Young Warrington never had such a glorious day, or witnessed
a scene so delightful. To be nineteen years of age, with high health,
high spirits, and a full purse, to be making your first journey, and
rolling through the country in a postchaise at nine miles an hour--O
happy youth! almost it makes one young to think of him! But Harry was
too eager to give more than a passing glance at the Abbey at Bath,
or gaze with more than a moment's wonder at the mighty Minster at
Salisbury. Until he beheld Home it seemed to him he had no eyes for any
other place.

At last the young gentleman's postchaise drew up at the rustic inn on
Castlewood Green, of which his grandsire had many a time talked to him,
and which bears as its ensign, swinging from an elm near the inn porch,
the Three Castles of the Esmond family. They had a sign, too, over the
gateway of Castlewood House, bearing the same cognisance. This was the
hatchment of Francis, Lord Castlewood, who now lay in the chapel hard
by, his son reigning in his stead.

Harry Warrington had often heard of Francis, Lord Castlewood. It was
for Frank's sake, and for his great love towards the boy, that Colonel
Esmond determined to forgo his claim to the English estates and rank of
his family, and retired to Virginia. The young man had led a wild youth;
he had fought with distinction under Marlborough; he had married a
foreign lady, and most lamentably adopted her religion. At one time he
had been a Jacobite (for loyalty to the sovereign was ever hereditary
in the Esmond family), but had received some slight or injury from the
Prince, which had caused him to rally to King George's side. He had,
on his second marriage, renounced the errors of Popery which he had
temporarily embraced, and returned to the Established Church again. He
had, from his constant support of the King and the Minister of the time
being, been rewarded by his Majesty George II., and died an English
peer. An earl's coronet now figured on the hatchment which hung over
Castlewood gate--and there was an end of the jolly gentleman. Between
Colonel Esmond, who had become his stepfather, and his lordship there
had ever been a brief but affectionate correspondence--on the Colonel's
part especially, who loved his stepson, and had a hundred stories to
tell about him to his grandchildren. Madam Esmond, however, said she
could see nothing in her half-brother. He was dull, except when he drank
too much wine, and that, to be sure, was every day at dinner. Then
he was boisterous, and his conversation not pleasant. He was
good-looking--yes--a fine tall stout animal; she had rather her boys
should follow a different model. In spite of the grandfather's encomium
of the late lord, the boys had no very great respect for their kinsman's
memory. The lads and their mother were staunch Jacobites, though having
every respect for his present Majesty; but right was right, and nothing
could make their hearts swerve from their allegiance to the descendants
of the martyr Charles.

With a beating heart Harry Warrington walked from the inn towards
the house where his grandsire's youth had been passed. The little
village-green of Castlewood slopes down towards the river, which is
spanned by an old bridge of a single broad arch, and from this the
ground rises gradually towards the house, grey with many gables and
buttresses, and backed by a darkling wood. An old man sate at the wicket
on a stone bench in front of the great arched entrance to the house,
over which the earl's hatchment was hanging. An old dog was crouched at
the man's feet. Immediately above the ancient sentry at the gate was an
open casement with some homely flowers in the window, from behind which
good-humoured girls' faces were peeping. They were watching the young
traveller dressed in black as he walked up gazing towards the castle,
and the ebony attendant who followed the gentleman's steps also
accoutred in mourning. So was he at the gate in mourning, and the girls
when they came out had black ribbons.

To Harry's surprise, the old man accosted him by his name. "You have had
a nice ride to Hexton, Master Harry, and the sorrel carried you well."

"I think you must be Lockwood," said Harry, with rather a tremulous
voice, holding out his hand to the old man. His grandfather had often
told him of Lockwood, and how he had accompanied the Colonel and the
young Viscount in Marlborough's wars forty years ago. The veteran seemed
puzzled by the mark of affection which Harry extended to him. The old
dog gazed at the new-comer, and then went and put his head between his
knees. "I have heard of you often. How did you know my name?"

"They say I forget most things," says the old man, with a smile; "but
I ain't so bad as that quite. Only this mornin', when you went out, my
darter says, 'Father, do you know why you have a black coat on?' 'In
course I know why I have a black coat,' says I. 'My lord is dead. They
say 'twas a foul blow, and Master Frank is my lord now, and Master
Harry'--why, what have you done since you've went out this morning? Why,
you have a-grow'd taller and changed your hair--though I know--I know
you."

One of the young women had tripped out by this time from the porter's
lodge, and dropped the stranger a pretty curtsey. "Grandfather sometimes
does not recollect very well," she said, pointing to her head. "Your
honour seems to have heard of Lockwood?"

"And you, have you never heard of Colonel Francis Esmond?"

"He was Captain and Major in Webb's Foot, and I was with him in two
campaigns, sure enough," cries Lockwood. "Wasn't I, Ponto?"

"The Colonel as married Viscountess Rachel, my late lord's mother? and
went to live amongst the Indians? We have heard of him. Sure we have his
picture in our gallery, and hisself painted it."

"Went to live in Virginia, and died there seven years ago, and I am his
grandson."

"Lord, your honour! Why, your honour's skin's as white as mine," cries
Molly. "Grandfather, do you hear this? His honour is Colonel Esmond's
grandson that used to send you tobacco, and his honour have come all the
way from Virginia."

"To see you, Lockwood," says the young man, "and the family. I only set
foot on English ground yesterday, and my first visit is for home. I may
see the house, though the family are from home?" Molly dared to say Mrs.
Barker would let his honour see the house, and Harry Warrington made
his way across the court, seeming to know the place as well as if he had
been born there, Miss Molly thought, who followed, accompanied by Mr.
Gumbo making her a profusion of polite bows and speeches.




CHAPTER II. In which Harry has to pay for his Supper


Colonel Esmond's grandson rang for a while at his ancestors' house of
Castlewood, before any one within seemed inclined to notice his summons.
The servant, who at length issued from the door, seemed to be very
little affected by the announcement that the visitor was a relation of
the family. The family was away, and in their absence John cared very
little for their relatives, but was eager to get back to his game at
cards with Thomas in the window-seat. The housekeeper was busy getting
ready for my lord and my lady, who were expected that evening. Only by
strong entreaties could Harry gain leave to see my lady's sitting-room
and the picture-room, where, sure enough, was a portrait of his
grandfather in periwig and breastplate, the counterpart of their picture
in Virginia, and a likeness of his grandmother, as Lady Castlewood, in a
yet earlier habit of Charles II.'s time; her neck bare, her fair golden
hair waving over her shoulders in ringlets which he remembered to have
seen snowy white. From the contemplation of these sights the sulky
housekeeper drove him. Her family was about to arrive. There was my lady
the Countess, and my lord and his brother, and the young ladies, and the
Baroness, who was to have the state bedroom. Who was the Baroness? The
Baroness Bernstein, the young ladies' aunt. Harry wrote down his name
on a paper from his own pocket-book, and laid it on a table in the hall.
"Henry Esmond Warrington, of Castlewood, in Virginia, arrived in England
yesterday--staying at the Three Castles in the village." The lackeys
rose up from their cards to open the door to him, in order to get their
"wails," and Gumbo quitted the bench at the gate, where he had been
talking with old Lockwood, the porter, who took Harry's guinea, hardly
knowing the meaning of the gift. During the visit to the home of his
fathers, Harry had only seen little Polly's countenance that was
the least unselfish or kindly: he walked away, not caring to own how
disappointed he was, and what a damp had been struck upon him by the
aspect of the place. They ought to have known him. Had any of them
ridden up to his house in Virginia, whether the master were present or
absent, the guests would have been made welcome, and, in sight of his
ancestors' hall, he had to go and ask for a dish of bacon and eggs at a
country alehouse!

After his dinner, he went to the bridge and sate on it, looking towards
the old house, behind which the sun was descending as the rooks came
cawing home to their nests in the elms. His young fancy pictured to
itself many of the ancestors of whom his mother and grandsire had told
him. He fancied knights and huntsmen crossing the ford;--cavaliers
of King Charles's days; my Lord Castlewood, his grandmother's first
husband, riding out with hawk and hound. The recollection of his dearest
lost brother came back to him as he indulged in these reveries, and
smote him with a pang of exceeding tenderness and longing, insomuch that
the young man hung his head and felt his sorrow renewed for the dear
friend and companion with whom, until of late, all his pleasures and
griefs had been shared. As he sate plunged in his own thoughts, which
were mingled up with the mechanical clinking of the blacksmith's forge
hard by, the noises of the evening, the talk of the rooks, and the
calling of the birds round about--a couple of young men on horseback
dashed over the bridge. One of them, with an oath, called him a fool,
and told him to keep out of the way--the other, who fancied he might
have jostled the foot-passenger, and possibly might have sent him over
the parapet, pushed on more quickly when he reached the other side of
the water, calling likewise to Tom to come on; and the pair of young
gentlemen were up the hill on their way to the house before Harry had
recovered himself from his surprise at their appearance, and wrath at
their behaviour. In a minute or two, this advanced guard was followed by
two livery servants on horseback, who scowled at the young traveller
on the bridge a true British welcome of Curse you, who are you? After
these, in a minute or two, came a coach-and-six, a ponderous vehicle
having need of the horses which drew it, and containing three ladies, a
couple of maids, and an armed man on a seat behind the carriage. Three
handsome pale faces looked out at Harry Warrington as the carriage
passed over the bridge, and did not return the salute which, recognising
the family arms, he gave it. The gentleman behind the carriage glared at
him haughtily. Harry felt terribly alone. He thought he would go back to
Captain Franks. The Rachel and her little tossing cabin seemed a cheery
spot in comparison to that on which he stood. The inn-folks did not know
his name of Warrington. They told him that was my lady in the coach,
with her stepdaughter, my Lady Maria, and her daughter, my Lady Fanny;
and the young gentleman in the grey frock was Mr. William, and he with
powder on the chestnut was my lord. It was the latter had sworn the
loudest, and called him a fool; and it was the grey frock which had
nearly galloped Harry into the ditch.

The landlord of the Three Castles had shown Harry a bedchamber, but
he had refused to have his portmanteaux unpacked, thinking that, for a
certainty, the folks of the great house would invite him to theirs. One,
two, three hours passed, and there came no invitation. Harry was fain
to have his trunks open at last, and to call for his slippers and
gown. Just before dark, about two hours after the arrival of the first
carriage, a second chariot with four horses had passed over the bridge,
and a stout, high-coloured lady, with a very dark pair of eyes, had
looked hard at Mr. Warrington. That was the Baroness Bernstein, the
landlady said, my lord's aunt, and Harry remembered the first Lady
Castlewood had come of a German family. Earl, and Countess, and
Baroness, and postillions, and gentlemen, and horses, had all
disappeared behind the castle gate, and Harry was fain to go to bed at
last, in the most melancholy mood and with a cruel sense of neglect and
loneliness in his young heart. He could not sleep, and, besides, ere
long, heard a prodigious noise, and cursing, and giggling, and screaming
from my landlady's bar, which would have served to keep him awake.

Then Gumbo's voice was heard without, remonstrating, "You cannot go in,
sar--my master asleep, sar!" but a shrill voice, with many oaths,
which Harry Warrington recognised, cursed Gumbo for a stupid, negro
woolly-pate, and he was pushed aside, giving entrance to a flood of
oaths into the room, and a young gentleman behind them.

"Beg your pardon, Cousin Warrington," cried the young blasphemer, "are
you asleep? Beg your pardon for riding you over on the bridge. Didn't
know you--course shouldn't have done it--thought it was a lawyer with a
writ--dressed in black, you know. Gad! thought it was Nathan come to nab
me." And Mr. William laughed incoherently. It was evident that he was
excited with liquor.

"You did me great honour to mistake me for a sheriff's-officer, cousin,"
says Harry, with great gravity, sitting up in his tall nightcap.

"Gad! I thought it was Nathan, and was going to send you souse into the
river. But I ask your pardon. You see I had been drinking at the Bell at
Hexton, and the punch is good at the Bell at Hexton. Hullo! you, Davis!
a bowl of punch; d'you hear?"

"I have had my share for to-night, cousin, and I should think you have,"
Harry continues, always in the dignified style.

"You want me to go, Cousin What's-your-name, I see," Mr. William said,
with gravity. "You want me to go, and they want me to come, and I didn't
want to come. I said, I'd see him hanged first,--that's what I said. Why
should I trouble myself to come down all alone of an evening, and look
after a fellow I don't care a pin for? Zackly what I said. Zackly what
Castlewood said. Why the devil should he go down? Castlewood says,
and so said my lady, but the Baroness would have you. It's all the
Baroness's doing, and if she says a thing, it must be done; so you must
just get up and come." Mr. Esmond delivered these words with the most
amiable rapidity and indistinctness, running them into one another, and
tacking about the room as he spoke. But the young Virginian was in
great wrath. "I tell you what, cousin," he cried, "I won't move for the
Countess, or for the Baroness, or for all the cousins in Castlewood."
And when the landlord entered the chamber with the bowl of punch, which
Mr. Esmond had ordered, the young gentleman in bed called out fiercely
to the host, to turn that sot out of the room.

"Sot, you little tobacconist! Sot, you Cherokee!" screams out Mr.
William. "Jump out of bed, and I'll drive my sword through your body.
Why didn't I do it to-day when I took you for a bailiff--a confounded
pettifogging bum-bailiff!" And he went on screeching more oaths and
incoherencies, until the landlord, the drawer, the hostler, and all the
folks of the kitchen were brought to lead him away. After which Harry
Warrington closed his tent round him in sulky wrath, and, no doubt,
finally went fast to sleep.


My landlord was very much more obsequious on the next morning when he
met his young guest, having now fully learned his name and quality.
Other messengers had come from the castle on the previous night to bring
both the young gentlemen home, and poor Mr. William, it appeared, had
returned in a wheelbarrow, being not altogether unaccustomed to that
mode of conveyance. "He never remembers nothin' about it the next day.
He is of a real kind nature, Mr. William," the landlord vowed, "and
the men get crowns and half-crowns from him by saying that he beat them
overnight when he was in liquor. He's the devil when he's tipsy,
Mr. William, but when he is sober he is the very kindest of young
gentlemen."

As nothing is unknown to writers of biographies of the present kind, it
may be as well to state what had occurred within the walls of Castlewood
House, whilst Harry Warrington was without, awaiting some token of
recognition from his kinsmen. On their arrival at home the family
had found the paper on which the lad's name was inscribed, and his
appearance occasioned a little domestic council. My Lord Castlewood
supposed that must have been the young gentleman whom they had seen on
the bridge, and as they had not drowned him they must invite him. Let a
man go down with the proper messages, let a servant carry a note. Lady
Fanny thought it would be more civil if one of the brothers would go to
their kinsman, especially considering the original greeting which
they had given. Lord Castlewood had not the slightest objection to his
brother William going--yes, William should go. Upon this Mr. William
said (with a yet stronger expression) that he would be hanged if he
would go. Lady Maria thought the young gentleman whom they had remarked
at the bridge was a pretty fellow enough. Castlewood is dreadfully dull,
I am sure neither of my brothers do anything to make it amusing. He may
be vulgar--no doubt, he is vulgar--but let us see the American. Such was
Lady Maria's opinion. Lady Castlewood was neither for inviting nor for
refusing him, but for delaying. "Wait till your aunt comes, children;
perhaps the Baroness won't like to see the young man; at least, let us
consult her before we ask him." And so the hospitality to be offered by
his nearest kinsfolk to poor Harry Warrington remained yet in abeyance.

At length the equipage of the Baroness Bernstein made its appearance,
and whatever doubt there might be as to the reception of the Virginian
stranger, there was no lack of enthusiasm in this generous family
regarding their wealthy and powerful kinswoman. The state-chamber had
already been prepared for her. The cook had arrived the previous day
with instructions to get ready a supper for her such as her ladyship
liked. The table sparkled with old plate, and was set in the oak
dining-room with the pictures of the family round the walls. There was
the late Viscount, his father, his mother, his sister--these two lovely
pictures. There was his predecessor by Vandyck, and his Viscountess.
There was Colonel Esmond, their relative in Virginia, about whose
grandson the ladies and gentlemen of the Esmond family showed such a
very moderate degree of sympathy.

The feast set before their aunt, the Baroness, was a very good one,
and her ladyship enjoyed it. The supper occupied an hour or two, during
which the whole Castlewood family were most attentive to their guest.
The Countess pressed all the good dishes upon her, of which she freely
partook: the butler no sooner saw her glass empty than he filled it with
champagne: the young folks and their mother kept up the conversation,
not so much by talking, as by listening appropriately to their friend.
She was full of spirits and humour. She seemed to know everybody in
Europe, and about those everybodies the wickedest stories. The Countess
of Castlewood, ordinarily a very demure, severe woman, and a stickler
for the proprieties, smiled at the very worst of these anecdotes; the
girls looked at one another and laughed at the maternal signal; the boys
giggled and roared with especial delight at their sisters' confusion.
They also partook freely of the wine which the butler handed round, nor
did they, or their guest, disdain the bowl of smoking punch, which was
laid on the table after the supper. Many and many a night, the Baroness
said, she had drunk at that table by her father's side. "That was his
place," she pointed to the place where the Countess now sat. She saw
none of the old plate. That was all melted to pay his gambling debts.
She hoped, "Young gentlemen, that you don't play."

"Never, on my word," says Castlewood.

"Never, 'pon honour," says Will--winking at his brother.

The Baroness was very glad to hear they were such good boys. Her face
grew redder with the punch; and she became voluble, might have been
thought coarse, but that times were different, and those critics were
inclined to be especially favourable.

She talked to the boys about their father, their grandfather--other men
and women of the house. "The only man of the family was that," she said,
pointing (with an arm that was yet beautifully round and white) towards
the picture of the military gentleman in the red coat and cuirass, and
great black periwig.

"The Virginian? What is he good for? I always thought he was good for
nothing but to cultivate tobacco and my grandmother," says my lord,
laughing.

She struck her hand upon the table with an energy that made the glasses
dance. "I say he was the best of you all. There never was one of the
male Esmonds that had more brains than a goose, except him. He was not
fit for this wicked, selfish old world of ours, and he was right to go
and live out of it. Where would your father have been, young people, but
for him?"

"Was he particularly kind to our papa?" says Lady Maria.

"Old stories, my dear Maria!" cries the Countess. "I am sure my dear
Earl was very kind to him in giving him that great estate in Virginia."

"Since his brother's death, the lad who has been here to-day is heir to
that. Mr. Draper told me so! Peste! I don't know why my father gave up
such a property."

"Who has been here to-day?" asked the Baroness, highly excited.

"Harry Esmond Warrington, of Virginia," my lord answered: "a lad whom
Will nearly pitched into the river, and whom I pressed my lady the
Countess to invite to stay here."

"You mean that one of the Virginian boys has been to Castlewood, and has
not been asked to stay here?"

"There is but one of them, my dear creature," interposes the Earl. "The
other, you know, has just been----"

"For shame, for shame!"

"Oh! it ain't pleasant, I confess, to be se----"

"Do you mean that a grandson of Henry Esmond, the master of this house,
has been here, and none of you have offered him hospitality?"

"Since we didn't know it, and he is staying at the Castles?" interposes
Will.

"That he is staying at the Inn, and you are sitting there!" cries the
old lady. "This is too bad--call somebody to me. Get me my hood--I'll go
to the boy myself. Come with me this instant, my Lord Castlewood."

The young man rose up, evidently in wrath. "Madame the Baroness of
Bernstein," he said, "your ladyship is welcome to go; but as for me, I
don't choose to have such words as 'shameful' applied to my conduct. I
won't go and fetch the young gentleman from Virginia, and I propose to
sit here and finish this bowl of punch. Eugene! Don't Eugene me, madam.
I know her ladyship has a great deal of money, which you are desirous
should remain in our amiable family. You want it more than I do. Cringe
for it--I won't." And he sank back in his chair.

The Baroness looked at the family, who held their heads down, and then
at my lord, but this time without any dislike. She leaned over to him
and said rapidly in German, "I had unright when I said the Colonel was
the only man of the family. Thou canst, if thou willest, Eugene." To
which remark my lord only bowed.

"If you do not wish an old woman to go out at this hour of the night,
let William, at least, go and fetch his cousin," said the Baroness.

"The very thing I proposed to him."

"And so did we--and so did we!" cried the daughters in a breath.

"I am sure, I only wanted the dear Baroness's consent!" said their
mother, "and shall be charmed for my part to welcome our young
relative."

"Will! Put on thy pattens and get a lantern, and go fetch the
Virginian," said my lord.

"And we will have another bowl of punch when he comes," says William,
who by this time had already had too much. And he went forth--how we
have seen; and how he had more punch; and how ill he succeeded in his
embassy.

The worthy lady of Castlewood, as she caught sight of young Harry
Warrington by the river-side, must have seen a very handsome and
interesting youth, and very likely had reasons of her own for not
desiring his presence in her family. All mothers are not eager to
encourage the visits of interesting youths of nineteen in families where
there are virgins of twenty. If Harry's acres had been in Norfolk or
Devon, in place of Virginia, no doubt the good Countess would have been
rather more eager in her welcome. Had she wanted him she would have
given him her hand readily enough. If our people of ton are selfish, at
any rate they show they are selfish; and, being cold-hearted, at least
have no hypocrisy of affection.

Why should Lady Castlewood put herself out of the way to welcome the
young stranger? Because he was friendless? Only a simpleton could ever
imagine such a reason as that. People of fashion, like her ladyship, are
friendly to those who have plenty of friends. A poor lad, alone, from a
distant country, with only very moderate means, and those not as yet in
his own power, with uncouth manners very likely, and coarse provincial
habits; was a great lady called upon to put herself out of the way for
such a youth? Allons donc! He was quite as well at the alehouse as at
the castle.

This, no doubt, was her ladyship's opinion, which her kinswoman, the
Baroness Bernstein, who knew her perfectly well, entirely understood.
The Baroness, too, was a woman of the world, and, possibly, on occasion,
could be as selfish as any other person of fashion. She fully understood
the cause of the deference which all the Castlewood family showed to
her--mother, and daughter, and sons,--and being a woman of great humour,
played upon the dispositions of the various members of this family,
amused herself with their greedinesses, their humiliations, their
artless respect for her money-box, and clinging attachment to her purse.
They were not very rich; Lady Castlewood's own money was settled on
her children. The two elder had inherited nothing but flaxen heads from
their German mother, and a pedigree of prodigious distinction. But
those who had money, and those who had none, were alike eager for the
Baroness's; in this matter the rich are surely quite as greedy as the
poor.

So if Madam Bernstein struck her hand on the table, and caused the
glasses and the persons round it to tremble at her wrath, it was because
she was excited with plenty of punch and champagne, which her ladyship
was in the habit of taking freely, and because she may have had a
generous impulse when generous wine warmed her blood, and felt indignant
as she thought of the poor lad yonder, sitting friendless and lonely on
the outside of his ancestors' door; not because she was specially angry
with her relatives, who she knew would act precisely as they had done.

The exhibition of their selfishness and humiliation alike amused her,
as did Castlewood's act of revolt. He was as selfish as the rest of the
family, but not so mean; and, as he candidly stated, he could afford the
luxury of a little independence, having tolerable estate to fall back
upon.

Madam Bernstein was an early woman, restless, resolute, extraordinarily
active for her age. She was up long before the languid Castlewood
ladies (just home from their London routs and balls) had quitted their
feather-beds, or jolly Will had slept off his various potations of
punch. She was up, and pacing the green terraces that sparkled with the
sweet morning dew, which lay twinkling, also, on a flowery wilderness
of trim parterres, and on the crisp walls of the dark box hedges, under
which marble fauns and dryads were cooling themselves, whilst a thousand
birds sang, the fountains plashed and glittered in the rosy morning
sunshine, and the rooks cawed from the great wood.

Had the well-remembered scene (for she had visited it often in
childhood) a freshness and charm for her? Did it recall days of
innocence and happiness, and did its calm beauty soothe or please,
or awaken remorse in her heart? Her manner was more than ordinarily
affectionate and gentle, when, presently, after pacing the walks for a
half-hour, the person for whom she was waiting came to her. This was our
young Virginian, to whom she had despatched an early billet by one of
the Lockwoods. The note was signed B. Bernstein, and informed Mr. Esmond
Warrington that his relatives at Castlewood, and among them a dear
friend of his grandfather, were most anxious that he should come to
"Colonel Esmond's house in England." And now, accordingly, the lad made
his appearance, passing under the old Gothic doorway, tripping down the
steps from one garden terrace to another, hat in hand, his fair hair
blowing from his flushed cheeks, his slim figure clad in mourning. The
handsome and modest looks, the comely face and person, of the young lad
pleased the lady. He made her a low bow which would have done credit
to Versailles. She held out a little hand to him, and, as his own palm
closed over it, she laid the other hand softly on his ruffle. She looked
very kindly and affectionately in the honest blushing face.

"I knew your grandfather very well, Harry," she said. "So you came
yesterday to see his picture, and they turned you away, though you know
the house was his of right?"

Harry blushed very red. "The servants did not know me. A young gentleman
came to me last night," he said, "when I was peevish, and he, I fear,
was tipsy. I spoke rudely to my cousin, and would ask his pardon.
Your ladyship knows that in Virginia our manners towards strangers are
different. I own I had expected another kind of welcome. Was it you,
madam, who sent my cousin to me last night?"

"I sent him; but you will find your cousins most friendly to you to-day.
You must stay here. Lord Castlewood would have been with you this
morning, only I was so eager to see you. There will be breakfast in
an hour; and meantime you must talk to me. We will send to the Three
Castles for your servant and your baggage. Give me your arm. Stop, I
dropped my cane when you came. You shall be my cane."

"My grandfather used to call us his crutches," said Harry.

"You are like him, though you are fair."

"You should have seen--you should have seen George," said the boy, and
his honest eyes welled with tears. The recollection of his brother,
the bitter pain of yesterday's humiliation, the affectionateness of the
present greeting--all, perhaps, contributed to soften the lad's heart.
He felt very tenderly and gratefully towards the lady who had received
him so warmly. He was utterly alone and miserable a minute since, and
here was a home and a kind hand held out to him. No wonder he clung to
it. In the hour during which they talked together, the young fellow
had poured out a great deal of his honest heart to the kind new-found
friend; when the dial told breakfast-time, he wondered to think how much
he had told her. She took him to the breakfast-room; she presented
him to his aunt, the Countess, and bade him embrace his cousins. Lord
Castlewood was frank and gracious enough. Honest Will had a headache,
but was utterly unconscious of the proceedings of the past night. The
ladies were very pleasant and polite, as ladies of their fashion know
how to be. How should Harry Warrington, a simple truth-telling lad
from a distant colony, who had only yesterday put his foot upon English
shore, know that my ladies, so smiling and easy in demeanour, were
furious against him, and aghast at the favour with which Madam Bernstein
seemed to regard him?

She was folle of him, talked of no one else, scarce noticed the
Castlewood young people, trotted with him over the house, and told him
all its story, showed him the little room in the courtyard where his
grandfather used to sleep, and a cunning cupboard over the fireplace
which had been made in the time of the Catholic persecutions; drove out
with him in the neighbouring country, and pointed out to him the most
remarkable sites and houses, and had in return the whole of the young
man's story.

This brief biography the kind reader will please to accept, not in
the precise words in which Mr. Harry Warrington delivered it to Madam
Bernstein, but in the form in which it has been cast in the Chapters
next ensuing.




CHAPTER III. The Esmonds in Virginia


Henry Esmond, Esq., an office who had served with the rank of Colonel
during the wars of Queen Anne's reign, found himself, at its close,
compromised in certain attempts for the restoration of the Queen's
family to the throne of these realms. Happily for itself, the nation
preferred another dynasty; but some of the few opponents of the house
of Hanover took refuge out of the three kingdoms, and amongst others,
Colonel Esmond was counselled by his friends to go abroad. As Mr. Esmond
sincerely regretted the part which he had taken, and as the august
Prince who came to rule over England was the most pacable of sovereigns,
in a very little time the Colonel's friends found means to make his
peace.

Mr. Esmond, it has been said, belonged to the noble English family which
takes its title from Castlewood, in the county of Hants; and it was
pretty generally known that King James II. and his son had offered the
title of Marquis to Colonel Esmond and his father, and that the former
might have assumed the (Irish) peerage hereditary in his family, but
for an informality which he did not choose to set right. Tired of the
political struggles in which he had been engaged, and annoyed by family
circumstances in Europe, he preferred to establish himself in Virginia,
where he took possession of a large estate conferred by King Charles I.
upon his ancestor. Here Mr. Esmond's daughter and grandsons were born,
and his wife died. This lady, when she married him, was the widow of the
Colonel's kinsman, the unlucky Viscount Castlewood, killed in a duel by
Lord Mohun, at the close of King William's reign.

Mr. Esmond called his American house Castlewood, from the patrimonial
home in the old country. The whole usages of Virginia, indeed, were
fondly modelled after the English customs. It was a loyal colony. The
Virginians boasted that King Charles II. had been king in Virginia
before he had been king in England. English king and English church were
alike faithfully honoured there. The resident gentry were allied to good
English families. They held their heads above the Dutch traders of New
York, and the money-getting Roundheads of Pennsylvania and New England.
Never were people less republican than those of the great province which
was soon to be foremost in the memorable revolt against the British
Crown.

The gentry of Virginia dwelt on their great lands after a fashion almost
patriarchal. For its rough cultivation, each estate had a multitude
of hands--of purchased and assigned servants--who were subject to the
command of the master. The land yielded their food, live stock, and
game. The great rivers swarmed with fish for the taking. From their
banks the passage home was clear. Their ships took the tobacco off their
private wharves on the banks of the Potomac or the James river, and
carried it to London or Bristol,--bringing back English goods and
articles of home manufacture in return for the only produce which the
Virginian gentry chose to cultivate. Their hospitality was boundless.
No stranger was ever sent away from their gates. The gentry received one
another, and travelled to each other's houses, in a state almost feudal.
The question of Slavery was not born at the time of which we write. To
be the proprietor of black servants shocked the feelings of no Virginian
gentleman; nor, in truth, was the despotism exercised over the negro
race generally a savage one. The food was plenty; the poor black people
lazy and not unhappy. You might have preached negro emancipation to
Madam Esmond of Castlewood as you might have told her to let the horses
run loose out of her stables; she had no doubt but that the whip and the
corn-bag were good for both.

Her father may have thought otherwise, being of a sceptical turn on very
many points, but his doubts did not break forth in active denial, and
he was rather disaffected than rebellious. At one period, this gentleman
had taken a part in active life at home, and possibly might have been
eager to share its rewards; but in latter days he did not seem to care
for them. A something had occurred in his life, which had cast a tinge
of melancholy over all his existence. He was not unhappy--to those about
him most kind--most affectionate, obsequious even to the women of
his family, whom be scarce ever contradicted; but there had been some
bankruptcy of his heart, which his spirit never recovered. He submitted
to life, rather than enjoyed it, and never was in better spirits than in
his last hours when he was going to lay it down.

Having lost his wife, his daughter took the management of the Colonel
and his affairs; and he gave them up to her charge with an entire
acquiescence. So that he had his books and his quiet, he cared for no
more. When company came to Castlewood, he entertained them handsomely,
and was of a very pleasant, sarcastical turn. He was not in the least
sorry when they went away.

"My love, I shall not be sorry to go myself," he said to his daughter,
"and you, though the most affectionate of daughters, will console
yourself after a while. Why should I, who am so old, be romantic? You
may, who are still a young creature." This he said, not meaning all he
said, for the lady whom he addressed was a matter-of-fact little person,
with very little romance in her nature.

After fifteen years' residence upon his great Virginian estate, affairs
prospered so well with the worthy proprietor, that he acquiesced in his
daughter's plans for the building of a mansion much grander and more
durable than the plain wooden edifice in which he had been content to
live, so that his heirs might have a habitation worthy of their noble
name. Several of Madam Warrington's neighbours had built handsome houses
for themselves; perhaps it was her ambition to take rank in the country,
which inspired this desire for improved quarters. Colonel Esmond, of
Castlewood, neither cared for quarters nor for quarterings. But his
daughter had a very high opinion of the merit and antiquity of her
lineage; and her sire, growing exquisitely calm and good-natured in his
serene, declining years, humoured his child's peculiarities in an easy,
bantering way,--nay, helped her with his antiquarian learning, which was
not inconsiderable, and with his skill in the art of painting, of which
he was a proficient. A knowledge of heraldry, a hundred years ago,
formed part of the education of most noble ladies and gentlemen: during
her visit to Europe, Miss Esmond had eagerly studied the family history
and pedigrees, and returned thence to Virginia with a store of documents
relative to her family on which she relied with implicit gravity and
credence, and with the most edifying volumes then published in France
and England, respecting the noble science. These works proved, to her
perfect satisfaction, not only that the Esmonds were descended from
noble Norman warriors, who came into England along with their victorious
chief, but from native English of royal dignity: and two magnificent
heraldic trees, cunningly painted by the hand of the Colonel,
represented the family springing from the Emperor Charlemagne on the
one hand, who was drawn in plate-armour, with his imperial mantle and
diadem, and on the other from Queen Boadicea, whom the Colonel insisted
upon painting in the light costume of an ancient British queen, with
a prodigious gilded crown, a trifling mantle of furs, and a lovely
symmetrical person, tastefully tattooed with figures of a brilliant blue
tint. From these two illustrious stocks the family-tree rose until
it united in the thirteenth century somewhere in the person of the
fortunate Esmond who claimed to spring from both.

Of the Warrington family, into which she married, good Madam Rachel
thought but little. She wrote herself Esmond Warrington, but was
universally called Madam Esmond of Castlewood, when after her father's
decease she came to rule over that domain. It is even to be feared that
quarrels for precedence in the colonial society occasionally disturbed
her temper; for though her father had had a marquis's patent from King
James, which he had burned and disowned, she would frequently act as if
that document existed and was in full force. She considered the English
Esmonds of an inferior dignity to her own branch; and as for the
colonial aristocracy, she made no scruple of asserting her superiority
over the whole body of them. Hence quarrels and angry words, and even
a scuffle or two, as we gather from her notes, at the Governor's
assemblies at Jamestown. Wherefore recall the memory of these squabbles?
Are not the persons who engaged in them beyond the reach of quarrels
now, and has not the republic put an end to these social inequalities?
Ere the establishment of Independence, there was no more aristocratic
country in the world than Virginia; so the Virginians, whose history
we have to narrate, were bred to have the fullest respect for the
institutions of home, and the rightful king had not two more faithful
little subjects than the young twins of Castlewood.

When the boys' grandfather died, their mother, in great state,
proclaimed her eldest son George her successor and heir of the estate;
and Harry, George's younger brother by half an hour, was always enjoined
to respect his senior. All the household was equally instructed to pay
him honour; the negroes, of whom there was a large and happy family, and
the assigned servants from Europe, whose lot was made as bearable as it
might be under the government of the lady of Castlewood. In the whole
family there scarcely was a rebel save Mrs. Esmond's faithful friend and
companion, Madam Mountain, and Harry's foster-mother, a faithful negro
woman, who never could be made to understand why her child should not be
first, who was handsomer, and stronger, and cleverer than his brother,
as she vowed; though, in truth, there was scarcely any difference in the
beauty, strength, or stature of the twins. In disposition, they were in
many points exceedingly unlike; but in feature they resembled each other
so closely, that but for the colour of their hair it had been difficult
to distinguish them. In their beds, and when their heads were covered
with those vast ribboned nightcaps which our great and little ancestors
wore, it was scarcely possible for any but a nurse or mother to tell the
one from the other child.

Howbeit alike in form, we have said that they differed in temper. The
elder was peaceful, studious, and silent; the younger was warlike
and noisy. He was quick at learning when he began, but very slow at
beginning. No threats of the ferule would provoke Harry to learn in
an idle fit, or would prevent George from helping his brother in his
lesson. Harry was of a strong military turn, drilled the little
negroes on the estate and caned them like a corporal, having many
good boxing-matches with them, and never bearing malice if he was
worsted;--whereas George was sparing of blows and gentle with all about
him. As the custom in all families was, each of the boys had a special
little servant assigned him; and it was a known fact that George,
finding his little wretch of a blackamoor asleep on his master's bed,
