The Project Gutenberg EBook of Micah Clarke, by Arthur Conan Doyle

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Micah Clarke
       His Statement as made to his three Grandchildren Joseph,
       Gervas and Reuben During the Hard Winter of 1734

Author: Arthur Conan Doyle

Posting Date: March 11, 2009 [EBook #9504]
Release Date: December, 2005

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MICAH CLARKE ***




Produced by Lionel G. Sear





MICAH CLARKE

HIS STATEMENT AS MADE TO HIS THREE GRANDCHILDREN JOSEPH, GERVAS, AND
REUBEN DURING THE HARD WINTER OF 1734


By Arthur Conan Doyle



CONTENTS


CHAPTER.

I. OF CORNET JOSEPH CLARKE OF THE IRONSIDES.

II. OF MY GOING TO SCHOOL AND OF MY COMING THENCE.

III. OF TWO FRIENDS OF MY YOUTH.

IV. OF THE STRANGE FISH THAT WE CAUGHT AT SPITHEAD.

V. OF THE MAN WITH THE DROOPING LIDS.

VI. OF THE LETTER THAT CAME FROM THE LOWLANDS.

VII. OF THE HORSEMAN WHO RODE FROM THE WEST.

VIII. OF OUR START FOR THE WARS.

IX. OF A PASSAGE OF ARMS AT THE BLUE BOAR.

X. OF OUR PERILOUS ADVENTURE ON THE PLAIN.

XI. OF THE LONELY MAN AND THE GOLD CHEST.

XII. OF CERTAIN PASSAGES UPON THE MOOR.

XIII. OF SIR GERVAS JEROME, KNIGHT BANNERET OF THE COUNTY OF SURREY.

XIV. OF THE STIFF-LEGGED PARSON AND HIS FLOCK.

XV. OF OUR BRUSH WITH THE KING'S DRAGOONS.

XVI. OF OUR COMING TO TAUNTON.

XVII. OF THE GATHERING IN THE MARKET-SQUARE.

XVIII. OF MASTER STEPHEN TIMEWELL, MAYOR OF TAUNTON.

XIX. OF A BRAWL IN THE NIGHT.

XX. OF THE MUSTER OF THE MEN OF THE WEST.

XXI. OF MY HAND-GRIPS WITH THE BRANDENBURGER.

XXII. OF THE NEWS FROM HAVANT.

XXIII. OF THE SNARE ON THE WESTON ROAD.

XXIV. OF THE WELCOME THAT MET ME AT BADMINTON.

XXV. OF STRANGE DOINGS IN THE BOTELER DUNGEON.

XXVI. OF THE STRIFE IN THE COUNCIL.

XXVII OF THE AFFAIR NEAR KEYNSHAM BRIDGE.

XXVIII OF THE FIGHT IN WELLS CATHEDRAL.

XXIX. OF THE GREAT CRY FROM THE LONELY HOUSE.

XXX OF THE SWORDSMAN WITH THE BROWN JACKET.

XXXI. OF THE MAID OF THE MARSH AND THE BUBBLE WHICH ROSE FROM THE
          BOG.

XXXII. OF THE ONFALL AT SEDGEMOOR.

XXXIII. OF MY PERILOUS ADVENTURE AT THE MILL.

XXXIV. OF THE COMING OF SOLOMON SPRENT.

XXXV. OF THE DEVIL IN WIG AND GOWN.

XXXVI. OF THE END OF IT ALL.

          APPENDIX





Chapter I. Of Cornet Joseph Clarke of the Ironsides

It may be, my dear grandchildren, that at one time or another I
have told you nearly all the incidents which have occurred during my
adventurous life. To your father and to your mother, at least, I know
that none of them are unfamiliar. Yet when I consider that time wears
on, and that a grey head is apt to contain a failing memory, I am
prompted to use these long winter evenings in putting it all before
you from the beginning, that you may have it as one clear story in your
minds, and pass it on as such to those who come after you. For now that
the house of Brunswick is firmly established upon the throne and that
peace prevails in the land, it will become less easy for you every
year to understand how men felt when Englishmen were in arms against
Englishmen, and when he who should have been the shield and the
protector of his subjects had no thought but to force upon them what
they most abhorred and detested.

My story is one which you may well treasure up in your memories, and
tell again to others, for it is not likely that in this whole county of
Hampshire, or even perhaps in all England, there is another left alive
who is so well able to speak from his own knowledge of these events,
or who has played a more forward part in them. All that I know I shall
endeavour soberly and in due order to put before you. I shall try to
make these dead men quicken into life for your behoof, and to call back
out of the mists of the past those scenes which were brisk enough in
the acting, though they read so dully and so heavily in the pages of the
worthy men who have set themselves to record them. Perchance my words,
too, might, in the ears of strangers, seem to be but an old man's
gossip. To you, however, who know that these eyes which are looking at
you looked also at the things which I describe, and that this hand has
struck in for a good cause, it will, I know, be different. Bear in mind
as you listen that it was your quarrel as well as our own in which
we fought, and that if now you grow up to be free men in a free land,
privileged to think or to pray as your consciences shall direct, you may
thank God that you are reaping the harvest which your fathers sowed in
blood and suffering when the Stuarts were on the throne.

I was born then in the year 1664, at Havant, which is a flourishing
village a few miles from Portsmouth off the main London road, and there
it was that I spent the greater part of my youth. It is now as it was
then, a pleasant, healthy spot, with a hundred or more brick cottages
scattered along in a single irregular street, each with its little
garden in front, and maybe a fruit tree or two at the back. In the
middle of the village stood the old church with the square tower, and
the great sun-dial like a wrinkle upon its grey weather-blotched face.
On the outskirts the Presbyterians had their chapel; but when the Act of
Uniformity was passed, their good minister, Master Breckinridge, whose
discourses had often crowded his rude benches while the comfortable pews
of the church were empty, was cast into gaol, and his flock dispersed.
As to the Independents, of whom my father was one, they also were under
the ban of the law, but they attended conventicle at Emsworth, whither
we would trudge, rain or shine, on every Sabbath morning. These meetings
were broken up more than once, but the congregation was composed of such
harmless folk, so well beloved and respected by their neighbours, that
the peace officers came after a time to ignore them, and to let them
worship in their own fashion. There were Papists, too, amongst us, who
were compelled to go as far as Portsmouth for their Mass. Thus, you see,
small as was our village, we were a fair miniature of the whole country,
for we had our sects and our factions, which were all the more bitter
for being confined in so narrow a compass.

My father, Joseph Clarke, was better known over the countryside by the
name of Ironside Joe, for he had served in his youth in the Yaxley
troop of Oliver Cromwell's famous regiment of horse, and had preached
so lustily and fought so stoutly that old Noll himself called him out
of the ranks after the fight at Dunbar, and raised him to a cornetcy.
It chanced, however, that having some little time later fallen into an
argument with one of his troopers concerning the mystery of the Trinity,
the man, who was a half-crazy zealot, smote my father across the face, a
favour which he returned by a thrust from his broadsword, which sent his
adversary to test in person the truth of his beliefs. In most armies
it would have been conceded that my father was within his rights
in punishing promptly so rank an act of mutiny, but the soldiers of
Cromwell had so high a notion of their own importance and privileges,
that they resented this summary justice upon their companion. A
court-martial sat upon my father, and it is likely that he would have
been offered up as a sacrifice to appease the angry soldiery, had not
the Lord Protector interfered, and limited the punishment to dismissal
from the army. Cornet Clarke was accordingly stripped of his buff
coat and steel cap, and wandered down to Havant, where he settled into
business as a leather merchant and tanner, thereby depriving Parliament
of as trusty a soldier as ever drew blade in its service. Finding
that he prospered in trade, he took as wife Mary Shepstone, a young
Churchwoman, and I, Micah Clarke, was the first pledge of their union.

My father, as I remember him first, was tall and straight, with a great
spread of shoulder and a mighty chest. His face was craggy and stern,
with large harsh features, shaggy over-hanging brows, high-bridged
fleshy nose, and a full-lipped mouth which tightened and set when he
was angry. His grey eyes were piercing and soldier-like, yet I have seen
them lighten up into a kindly and merry twinkle. His voice was the most
tremendous and awe-inspiring that I have ever listened to. I can well
believe what I have heard, that when he chanted the Hundredth Psalm as
he rode down among the blue bonnets at Dunbar, the sound of him rose
above the blare of trumpets and the crash of guns, like the deep roll of
a breaking wave. Yet though he possessed every quality which was
needed to raise him to distinction as an officer, he had thrown off his
military habits when he returned to civil life. As he prospered and grew
rich he might well have worn a sword, but instead he would ever bear a
small copy of the Scriptures bound to his girdle, where other men hung
their weapons. He was sober and measured in his speech, and it was
seldom, even in the bosom of his own family, that he would speak of the
scenes which he had taken part in, or of the great men, Fleetwood and
Harrison, Blake and Ireton, Desborough and Lambert, some of whom had
been simple troopers like himself when the troubles broke out. He was
frugal in his eating, backward in drinking, and allowed himself no
pleasures save three pipes a day of Oronooko tobacco, which he kept ever
in a brown jar by the great wooden chair on the left-hand side of the
mantelshelf.

Yet for all his self-restraint the old leaven would at times begin to
work in him, and bring on fits of what his enemies would call fanaticism
and his friends piety, though it must be confessed that this piety
was prone to take a fierce and fiery shape. As I look back, one or two
instances of that stand out so hard and clear in my recollection that
they might be scenes which I had seen of late in the playhouse, instead
of memories of my childhood more than threescore years ago, when the
second Charles was on the throne.

The first of these occurred when I was so young that I can remember
neither what went before nor what immediately after it. It stuck in my
infant mind when other things slipped through it. We were all in the
house one sultry summer evening, when there came a rattle of kettledrums
and a clatter of hoofs, which brought my mother and my father to the
door, she with me in her arms that I might have the better view. It was
a regiment of horse on their way from Chichester to Portsmouth, with
colours flying and band playing, making the bravest show that ever my
youthful eyes had rested upon. With what wonder and admiration did I
gaze at the sleek prancing steeds, the steel morions, the plumed hats
of the officers, the scarfs and bandoliers. Never, I thought, had such
a gallant company assembled, and I clapped my hands and cried out in my
delight. My father smiled gravely, and took me from my mother's arms.
'Nay, lad,' he said, 'thou art a soldier's son, and should have more
judgment than to commend such a rabble as this. Canst thou not, child as
thou art, see that their arms are ill-found, their stirrup-irons rusted,
and their ranks without order or cohesion? Neither have they thrown out
a troop in advance, as should even in times of peace be done, and their
rear is straggling from here to Bedhampton. Yea,' he continued, suddenly
shaking his long arm at the troopers, and calling out to them, 'ye are
corn ripe for the sickle and waiting only for the reapers!' Several of
them reined up at this sudden out-flame. 'Hit the crop-eared rascal over
the pate, Jack!' cried one to another, wheeling his horse round; but
there was that in my father's face which caused him to fall back into
the ranks again with his purpose unfulfilled. The regiment jingled on
down the road, and my mother laid her thin hands upon my father's arm,
and lulled with her pretty coaxing ways the sleeping devil which had
stirred within him.

On another occasion which I can remember, about my seventh or eighth
year, his wrath burst out with more dangerous effect. I was playing
about him as he worked in the tanning-yard one spring afternoon, when
in through the open doorway strutted two stately gentlemen, with
gold facings to their coats and smart cockades at the side of their
three-cornered hats. They were, as I afterwards understood, officers of
the fleet who were passing through Havant, and seeing us at work in the
yard, designed to ask us some question as to their route. The younger of
the pair accosted my father and began his speech by a great clatter of
words which were all High Dutch to me, though I now see that they were a
string of such oaths as are common in the mouth of a sailor; though why
the very men who are in most danger of appearing before the Almighty
should go out of their way to insult Him, hath ever been a mystery to
me. My father in a rough stern voice bade him speak with more reverence
of sacred things, on which the pair of them gave tongue together,
swearing tenfold worse than before, and calling my father a canting
rogue and a smug-faced Presbytery Jack. What more they might have said I
know not, for my father picked up the great roller wherewith he smoothed
the leather, and dashing at them he brought it down on the side of one
of their heads with such a swashing blow, that had it not been for his
stiff hat the man would never have uttered oath again. As it was, he
dropped like a log upon the stones of the yard, while his companion
whipped out his rapier and made a vicious thrust; but my father, who was
as active as he was strong, sprung aside, and bringing his cudgel down
upon the outstretched arm of the officer, cracked it like the stem of
a tobacco-pipe. This affair made no little stir, for it occurred at
the time when those arch-liars, Oates, Bedloe, and Carstairs, were
disturbing the public mind by their rumours of plots, and a rising of
some sort was expected throughout the country. Within a few days all
Hampshire was ringing with an account of the malcontent tanner of
Havant, who had broken the head and the arm of two of his Majesty's
servants. An inquiry showed, however, that there was no treasonable
meaning in the matter, and the officers having confessed that the first
words came from them, the Justices contented themselves with imposing a
fine upon my father, and binding him over to keep the peace for a period
of six months.

I tell you these incidents that you may have an idea of the fierce and
earnest religion which filled not only your own ancestor, but most of
those men who were trained in the parliamentary armies. In many ways
they were more like those fanatic Saracens, who believe in conversion by
the sword, than the followers of a Christian creed. Yet they have this
great merit, that their own lives were for the most part clean and
commendable, for they rigidly adhered themselves to those laws which
they would gladly have forced at the sword's point upon others. It is
true that among so many there were some whose piety was a shell for
their ambition, and others who practised in secret what they denounced
in public, but no cause however good is free from such hypocritical
parasites. That the greater part of the saints, as they termed
themselves, were men of sober and God-fearing lives, may be shown by the
fact that, after the disbanding of the army of the Commonwealth, the old
soldiers flocked into trade throughout the country, and made their mark
wherever they went by their industry and worth. There is many a wealthy
business house now in England which can trace its rise to the thrift and
honesty of some simple pikeman of Ireton or Cromwell.

But that I may help you to understand the character of your
great-grandfather, I shall give an incident which shows how fervent and
real were the emotions which prompted the violent moods which I have
described. I was about twelve at the time, my brothers Hosea and Ephraim
were respectively nine and seven, while little Ruth could scarce have
been more than four. It chanced that a few days before a wandering
preacher of the Independents had put up at our house, and his religious
ministrations had left my father moody and excitable. One night I had
gone to bed as usual, and was sound asleep with my two brothers beside
me, when we were roused and ordered to come downstairs. Huddling on our
clothes we followed him into the kitchen, where my mother was sitting
pale and scared with Ruth upon her knee.

'Gather round me, my children,' he said, in a deep reverent voice, 'that
we may all appear before the throne together. The kingdom of the Lord is
at hand-oh, be ye ready to receive Him! This very night, my loved ones,
ye shall see Him in His splendour, with the angels and the archangels in
their might and their glory. At the third hour shall He come-that very
third hour which is now drawing upon us.'

'Dear Joe,' said my mother, in soothing tones, 'thou art scaring thyself
and the children to no avail. If the Son of Man be indeed coming, what
matters it whether we be abed or afoot?'

'Peace, woman,' he answered sternly; 'has He not said that He will come
like a thief in the night, and that it is for us to await Him? Join
with me, then, in prayerful outpourings that we may be found as those in
bridal array. Let us offer up thanks that He has graciously vouchsafed
to warn us through the words of His servant. Oh, great Lord, look down
upon this small flock and lead it to the sheep fold! Mix not the
little wheat with the great world of chaff. Oh, merciful Father! look
graciously upon my wife, and forgive her the sin of Erastianism, she
being but a woman and little fitted to cast off the bonds of antichrist
wherein she was born. And these too, my little ones, Micah and Hosea,
Ephraim and Ruth, all named after Thy faithful servants of old, oh let
them stand upon Thy right hand this night!' Thus he prayed on in a wild
rush of burning, pleading words, writhing prostrate upon the floor
in the vehemence of his supplication, while we, poor trembling mites,
huddled round our mother's skirts and gazed with terror at the contorted
figure seen by the dim light of the simple oil lamp. On a sudden the
clang of the new church clock told that the hour had come. My father
sprang from the floor, and rushing to the casement, stared up with wild
expectant eyes at the starry heavens. Whether he conjured up some vision
in his excited brain, or whether the rush of feeling on finding that his
expectations were in vain, was too much for him, it is certain that
he threw his long arms upwards, uttered a hoarse scream, and tumbled
backwards with foaming lips and twitching limbs upon the ground. For an
hour or more my poor mother and I did what we could to soothe him, while
the children whimpered in a corner, until at last he staggered slowly to
his feet, and in brief broken words ordered us to our rooms. From that
time I have never heard him allude to the matter, nor did he ever give
us any reason why he should so confidently have expected the second
coming upon that particular night. I have learned since, however,
that the preacher who visited us was what was called in those days a
fifth-monarchy man, and that this particular sect was very liable to
these premonitions. I have no doubt that something which he had said had
put the thought into my father's head, and that the fiery nature of the
man had done the rest.

So much for your great-grandfather, Ironside Joe. I have preferred to
put these passages before you, for on the principle that actions speak
louder than words, I find that in describing a man's character it is
better to give examples of his ways than to speak in broad and general
terms. Had I said that he was fierce in ins religion and subject to
strange fits of piety, the words might have made little impression
upon you; but when I tell you of his attack upon the officers in the
tanning-yard, and his summoning us down in the dead of the night to
await the second coming, you can judge for yourselves the lengths to
which his belief would carry him. For the rest, he was an excellent man
of business, fair and even generous in his dealings, respected by all
and loved by few, for his nature was too self-contained to admit of much
affection. To us he was a stern and rigid father, punishing us heavily
for whatever he regarded as amiss in our conduct. He bad a store of such
proverbs as 'Give a child its will and a whelp its fill, and neither
will strive,' or 'Children are certain cares and uncertain comforts,'
wherewith he would temper my mother's more kindly impulses. He could not
bear that we should play trick-track upon the green, or dance with the
other children upon the Saturday night.

As to my mother, dear soul, it was her calm, peaceful influence which
kept my father within bounds, and softened his austere rule. Seldom
indeed, even in his darkest moods, did the touch of her gentle hand and
the sound of her voice fail to soothe his fiery spirit. She came of a
Church stock, and held to her religion with a quiet grip which was proof
against every attempt to turn her from it. I imagine that at one time
her husband had argued much with her upon Arminianism and the sin of
simony, but finding his exhortations useless, he had abandoned the
subject save on very rare occasions. In spite of her Episcopacy,
however, she remained a staunch Whig, and never allowed her loyalty to
the throne to cloud her judgment as to the doings of the monarch who sat
upon it.

Women were good housekeepers fitly years ago, but she was conspicuous
among the best. To see her spotless cuffs and snowy kirtle one would
scarce credit how hard she laboured. It was only the well ordered house
and the dustless rooms which proclaimed her constant industry. She
made salves and eyewaters, powders and confects, cordials and persico,
orangeflower water and cherry brandy, each in its due season, and all of
the best. She was wise, too, in herbs and simples. The villagers and the
farm labourers would rather any day have her advice upon their ailments
than that of Dr. Jackson of Purbrook, who never mixed a draught under
a silver crown. Over the whole countryside there was no woman more
deservedly respected and more esteemed both by those above her and by
those beneath.

Such were my parents as I remember them in my childhood. As to myself, I
shall let my story explain the growth of my own nature. My brothers and
my sister were all brownfaced, sturdy little country children, with no
very marked traits save a love of mischief controlled by the fear of
their father. These, with Martha the serving-maid, formed our whole
household during those boyish years when the pliant soul of the child
is hardening into the settled character of the man. How these influences
affected me I shall leave for a future sitting, and if I weary you by
recording them, you must remember that I am telling these things rather
for your profit than for your amusement; that it may assist you in your
journey through life to know how another has picked out the path before
you.



Chapter II. Of my going to school and of my coming thence.


With the home influences which I have described, it may be readily
imagined that my young mind turned very much upon the subject of
religion, the more so as my father and mother took different views upon
it. The old Puritan soldier held that the bible alone contained all
things essential to salvation, and that though it might be advisable
that those who were gifted with wisdom or eloquence should expound the
Scriptures to their brethren, it was by no means necessary, but rather
hurtful and degrading, that any organised body of ministers or of
bishops should claim special prerogatives, or take the place of
mediators between the creature and the Creator. For the wealthy
dignitaries of the Church, rolling in their carriages to their
cathedrals, in order to preach the doctrines of their Master, who wore
His sandals out in tramping over the countryside, he professed the most
bitter contempt; nor was he more lenient to those poorer members of the
clergy who winked at the vices of their patrons that they might secure
a seat at their table, and who would sit through a long evening of
profanity rather than bid good-bye to the cheesecakes and the wine
flask. That such men represented religious truth was abhorrent to
his mind, nor would he even give his adhesion to that form of church
government dear to the Presbyterians, where a general council of the
ministers directed the affairs of their church. Every man was, in his
opinion, equal in the eyes of the Almighty, and none had a right to
claim any precedence over his neighbour in matters of religion. The book
was written for all, and all were equally able to read it, provided that
their minds were enlightened by the Holy Spirit.

My mother, on the other hand, held that the very essence of a church
was that it should have a hierarchy and a graduated government within
itself, with the king at the apex, the archbishops beneath him, the
bishops under their control, and so down through the ministry to the
common folk. Such was, in her opinion, the Church as established in the
beginning, and no religion without these characteristics could lay any
claim to being the true one. Ritual was to her of as great importance
as morality, and if every tradesman and farmer were allowed to invent
prayers, and change the service as the fancy seized him, it would be
impossible to preserve the purity of the Christian creed. She agreed
that religion was based upon the Bible, but the Bible was a book which
contained much that was obscure, and unless that obscurity were
cleared away by a duly elected and consecrated servant of God, a
lineal descendant of the Disciples, all human wisdom might not serve to
interpret it aright. That was my mother's position, and neither argument
nor entreaty could move her from it. The only question of belief on
which my two parents were equally ardent was their mutual dislike
and distrust of the Roman Catholic forms of worship, and in this the
Churchwoman was every whit as decided as the fanatical Independent.

It may seem strange to you in these days of tolerance, that the
adherents of this venerable creed should have met with such universal
ill-will from successive generations of Englishmen. We recognise now
that there are no more useful or loyal citizens in the state than our
Catholic brethren, and Mr. Alexander Pope or any other leading Papist is
no more looked down upon for his religion than was Mr. William Penn
for his Quakerism in the reign of King James. We can scarce credit how
noblemen like Lord Stafford, ecclesiastics like Archbishop Plunkett,
and commoners like Langhorne and Pickering, were dragged to death on
the testimony of the vilest of the vile, without a voice being raised in
their behalf; or how it could be considered a patriotic act on the part
of an English Protestant to carry a flail loaded with lead beneath his
cloak as a menace against his harmless neighbours who differed from
him on points of doctrine. It was a long madness which has now happily
passed off, or at least shows itself in a milder and rarer form.

Foolish as it appears to us, there were some solid reasons to account
for it. You have read doubtless how, a century before I was born, the
great kingdom of Spain waxed and prospered. Her ships covered every
sea. Her troops were victorious wherever they appeared. In letters, in
learning, in all the arts of war and peace they were the foremost nation
in Europe. You have heard also of the ill-blood which existed between
this great nation and ourselves; how our adventurers harried their
possessions across the Atlantic, while they retorted by burning such
of our seamen as they could catch by their devilish Inquisition, and by
threatening our coasts both from Cadiz and from their provinces in the
Netherlands. At last so hot became the quarrel that the other nations
stood off, as I have seen the folk clear a space for the sword-players
at Hockley-in-the-Hole, so that the Spanish giant and tough little
England were left face to face to fight the matter out. Throughout all
that business it was as the emissary of the Pope, and as the avenger of
the dishonoured Roman Church, that King Philip professed to come. It
is true that Lord Howard and many another gentleman of the old religion
fought stoutly against the Dons, but the people could never forget that
the reformed faith had been the flag under which they had conquered, and
that the blessing of the Pontiff had rested with their opponents. Then
came the cruel and foolish attempt of Mary to force upon them a creed
for which they had no sympathy, and at the heels of it another great
Roman Catholic power menaced our liberty from the Continent. The growing
strength of France promoted a corresponding distrust of Papistry in
England, which reached a head when, at about the time of which I write,
Louis XIV. threatened us with invasion at the very moment when, by
the revocation of the Edict of Nantes, he showed his intolerant spirit
towards the faith which we held dear. The narrow Protestantism of
England was less a religious sentiment than a patriotic reply to
the aggressive bigotry of her enemies. Our Catholic countrymen were
unpopular, not so much because they believed in Transubstantiation, as
because they were unjustly suspected of sympathising with the Emperor or
with the King of France. Now that our military successes have secured us
against all fear of attack, we have happily lost that bitter religious
hatred but for which Oates and Dangerfield would have lied in vain.

In the days when I was young, special causes had inflamed this dislike
and made it all the more bitter because there was a spice of fear
mingled with it. As long as the Catholics were only an obscure faction
they might be ignored, but when, towards the close of the reign of the
second Charles, it appeared to be absolutely certain that a Catholic
dynasty was about to fill the throne, and that Catholicism was to be the
court religion and the stepping-stone to preferment, it was felt that
a day of vengeance might be at hand for those who had trampled upon
it when it was defenceless. There was alarm and uneasiness amongst all
classes. The Church of England, which depends upon the monarch as an
arch depends upon the keystone; the nobility, whose estates and coffers
had been enriched by the plunder of the abbeys; the mob, whose ideas of
Papistry were mixed up with thumbscrews and Fox's Martyrology, were all
equally disturbed. Nor was the prospect a hopeful one for their cause.
Charles was a very lukewarm Protestant, and indeed showed upon his
deathbed that he was no Protestant at all. There was no longer any
chance of his having legitimate offspring. The Duke of York, his younger
brother, was therefore heir to the throne, and he was known to be an
austere and narrow Papist, while his spouse, Mary of Modena, was
as bigoted as himself. Should they have children, there could be
no question but that they would be brought up in the faith of their
parents, and that a line of Catholic monarchs would occupy the throne
of England. To the Church, as represented by my mother, and to
Nonconformity, in the person of my father, this was an equally
intolerable prospect.

I have been telling you all this old history because you will find, as
I go on, that this state of things caused in the end such a seething and
fermenting throughout the nation that even I, a simple village lad, was
dragged into the whirl and had my whole life influenced by it. If I did
not make the course of events clear to you, you would hardly understand
the influences which had such an effect upon my whole history. In the
meantime, I wish you to remember that when King James II. ascended the
throne he did so amid a sullen silence on the part of a large class of
his subjects, and that both my father and my mother were among those who
were zealous for a Protestant succession.

My childhood was, as I have already said, a gloomy one. Now and again
when there chanced to be a fair at Portsdown Hill, or when a passing
raree showman set up his booth in the village, my dear mother would
slip a penny or two from her housekeeping money into my hand, and with
a warning finger upon her lip would send me off to see the sights. These
treats were, however, rare events, and made such a mark upon my mind,
that when I was sixteen years of age I could have checked off upon my
