Project Gutenberg's Woodstock; or, The Cavalier, by Sir Walter Scott

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Woodstock; or, The Cavalier

Author: Sir Walter Scott

Posting Date: November 12, 2011 [EBook #9785]
Release Date: January, 2006
First Posted: October 16, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WOODSTOCK; OR, THE CAVALIER ***




Produced by Lee Dawei, David King and PG Distributed Proofreaders









WOODSTOCK; OR, THE CAVALIER

BY

SIR WALTER SCOTT


1855.




APPENDIX TO INTRODUCTION.



APPENDIX NO. I.

THE WOODSTOCK SCUFFLE; or, Most dreadfull apparitions that were lately
seene in the Mannor-house of Woodstock, neere Oxford, to the great
terror and the wonderful amazement of all there that did behold them.


It were a wonder if one unites,
And not of wonders and strange sights;
For ev'ry where such things affrights
Poore people,

That men are ev'n at their wits' end;
God judgments ev'ry where doth send,
And yet we don't our lives amend,
But tipple,

And sweare, and lie, and cheat, and--,
Because the world shall drown no more,
As if no judgments were in store
But water;

But by the stories which I tell,
You'll heare of terrors come from hell,
And fires, and shapes most terrible
For matter.

It is not long since that a child
Spake from the ground in a large field,
And made the people almost wild
That heard it,

Of which there is a printed book,
Wherein each man the truth may look,
If children speak, the matter's took
For verdict.

But this is stranger than that voice,
The wonder's greater, and the noyse;
And things appeare to men, not boyes,
At _Woodstock_;

Where _Rosamond_ had once a bower,
To keep her from Queen _Elinour_,
And had escap'd her poys'nous power
By good-luck,

But fate had otherwise decreed,
And _Woodstock_ Manner saw a deed,
Which is in _Hollinshed_ or _Speed_
Chro-nicled;

But neither _Hollinshed_ nor _Stow_,
Nor no historians such things show,
Though in them wonders we well know
Are pickled;

For nothing else is history
But pickle of antiquity,
Where things are kept in memory
From stinking;

Which otherwise would have lain dead,
As in oblivion buried,
Which now you may call into head
With thinking.

The dreadfull story, which is true,
And now committed unto view,
By better pen, had it its due,
Should see light.

But I, contented, do indite,
Not things of wit, but things of right;
You can't expect that things that fright
Should delight.

O hearken, therefore, hark and shake!
My very pen and hand doth quake!
While I the true relation make
O' th' wonder,

Which hath long time, and still appeares
Unto the State's Commissioners,
And puts them in their beds to feares
From under.

They come, good men, imploi'd by th' State
To sell the lands of Charles the late.
And there they lay, and long did waite
For chapmen.

You may have easy pen'worths, woods,
Lands, ven'son, householdstuf, and goods,
They little thought of dogs that wou'd
There snap-men.

But when they'd sup'd, and fully fed,
They set up remnants and to bed.
Where scarce they had laid down a head
To slumber,

But that their beds were heav'd on high;
They thought some dog under did lie,
And meant i' th' chamber (fie, fie, fie)
To scumber.

Some thought the cunning cur did mean
To eat their mutton (which was lean)
Reserv'd for breakfast, for the men
Were thrifty.

And up one rises in his shirt,
Intending the slie cur to hurt,
And forty thrusts made at him for't,
Or fifty.

But empty came his sword again.
He found he thrust but all in vain;
An the mutton safe, hee went amain
To's fellow.

And now (assured all was well)
The bed again began to swell,
The men were frighted, and did smell
O' th' yellow.

From heaving, now the cloaths it pluckt
The men, for feare, together stuck,
And in their sweat each other duck't.
They wished

A thousand times that it were day;
'Tis sure the divell! Let us pray.
They pray'd amain; and, as they say,
---- ----

Approach of day did cleere the doubt,
For all devotions were run out,
They now waxt strong and something stout,
One peaked

Under the bed, but nought was there;
He view'd the chamber ev'ry where,
Nothing apear'd but what, for feare.
They leaked.

Their stomachs then return'd apace,
They found the mutton in the place,
And fell unto it with a grace.
They laughed

Each at the other's pannick feare,
And each his bed-fellow did jeere,
And having sent for ale and beere,
They quaffed.

And then abroad the summons went,
Who'll buy king's-land o' th' Parliament?
A paper-book contein'd the rent,
Which lay there;

That did contein the severall farmes,
Quit-rents, knight services, and armes;
But that they came not in by swarmes
To pay there.

Night doth invite to bed again,
The grand Commissioners were lain,
But then the thing did heave amain,
It busled,

And with great clamor fil'd their eares,
The noyse was doubled, and their feares;
Nothing was standing but their haires,
They nuzled.

Oft were the blankets pul'd, the sheete
Was closely twin'd betwixt their feete,
It seems the spirit was discreete
And civill.

Which makes the poore Commissioners
Feare they shall get but small arreares,
And that there's yet for cavaliers
One divell.

They cast about what best to doe;
Next day they would to wisemen goe,
To neighb'ring towns some cours to know;
For schollars

Come not to Woodstock, as before,
And Allen's dead as a nayle-doore,
And so's old John (eclep'd the poore)
His follower;

Rake Oxford o're, there's not a man
That rayse or lay a spirit can,
Or use the circle, or the wand,
Or conjure;

Or can say (Boh!) unto a divell,
Or to a goose that is uncivill,
Nor where Keimbolton purg'd out evill,
'Tis sin sure.

There were two villages hard by,
With teachers of presbytery,
Who knew the house was hidiously
Be-pestred;

But 'lasse! their new divinity
Is not so deep, or not so high;
Their witts doe (as their meanes did) lie
Sequestred;

But Master Joffman was the wight
Which was to exorcise the spright;
Hee'll preach and pray you day and night
At pleasure.

And by that painfull gainfull trade,
He hath himselfe full wealthy made;
Great store of guilt he hath, 'tis said,
And treasure.

But no intreaty of his friends
Could get him to the house of fiends,
He came not over for such ends
From Dutch-land,

But worse divinity hee brought,
And hath us reformation taught,
And, with our money, he hath bought
Him much land.

Had the old parsons preached still,
The div'l should nev'r have had his wil;
But those that had or art or skill
Are outed;

And those to whom the pow'r was giv'n
Of driving spirits, are out-driv'n;
Their colledges dispos'd, and livings,
To grout-heads.

There was a justice who did boast,
Hee had as great a gift almost,
Who did desire him to accost
This evill.

But hee would not employ his gifts.
But found out many sleights and shifts;
Hee had no prayers, nor no snifts,
For th' divell.

Some other way they cast about,
These brought him in, they throw not out;
A woman, great with child, will do't;
They got one.

And she i' th' room that night must lie;
But when the thing about did flie,
And broke the windows furiously
And hot one

Of the contractors o're the head,
Who lay securely in his bed,
The woman, shee-affrighted, fled
---- ----

And now they lay the cause on her.
That e're that night the thing did stir,
Because her selfe and grandfather
Were Papists;

They must be barnes-regenerate,
(A _Hans en Kelder_ of the state,
Which was in reformation gatt,)
They said, which

Doth make the divell stand in awe,
Pull in his hornes, his hoof, his claw;
But having none, they did in draw
---- ---- ----

But in the night there was such worke,
The spirit swaggered like a Turke;
The bitch had spi'd where it did lurke,
And howled

In such a wofull manner that
Their very hearts went pit a pat;
       *       *       *       *       *
---- ---- ----

The stately rooms, where kings once lay
But the contractors show'd the way.
But mark what now I tell you, pray,
'Tis worth it.

That book I told you of before,
Wherein were tenants written store,
A register for many more
Not forth yet,

That very book, as it did lie,
Took of a flame, no mortall eye
Seeing one jot of fire thereby,
Or taper;

For all the candles about flew,
And those that burned, burned blew,
Never kept soldiers such a doe
Or vaper.

The book thus burnt and none knew how
The poore contractors made a vow
To work no more; this spoil'd their plow
In that place.

Some other part o' th' house they'll find,
To which the divell hath no mind,
But hee, it seems, is not inclin'd
With that grace;

But other pranks it plaid elsewhere.
An oake there was stood many a yeere,
Of goodly growth as any where,
Was hewn down,

Which into fewell-wood was cut,
And some into a wood-pile put,
But it was hurled all about
And thrown down.

In sundry formes it doth appeare;
Now like a grasping claw to teare;
Now like a dog; anon a beare
It tumbles;

And all the windows battered are,
No man the quarter enter dare;
All men (except the glasier)
Doe grumble.

Once in the likenesse of woman,
Of stature much above the common,
'Twas seene, but spak a word to no man,
And vanish'd.

'Tis thought the ghost of some good wife
Whose husband was depriv'd of life,
Her children cheated, land in strife
She banist.

No man can tell the cause of these
So wondrous dreadful outrages;
Yet if upon your sinne you please
To discant,

You'le find our actions out-doe hell's;
O wring your hands and cease the bells,
Repentance must, or nothing else
Appease can't.




No. II.

THE JUST DEVIL OF WOODSTOCK;

OR,

A TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE SEVERAL APPARITIONS, THE FRIGHTS AND
PUNISHMENTS, INFLICTED UPON THE RUMPISH COMMISSIONERS SENT THITHER
TO SURVEY THE MANNORS AND HOUSES BELONGING TO HIS MAJESTIE.

[London, printed in the year 1660. 4to.]


The names of the persons in the ensuing Narrative mentioned, with
others:--

CAPTAIN COCKAINE.
CAPTAIN HART.
CAPTAIN CROOK.
CAPTAIN CARELESSE.
CAPTAIN ROE.
Mr. CROOK, the Lawyer.
Mr. BROWNE, the Surveyor.
Their three Servants.
Their Ordinary-keeper, and others.
The Gatekeeper, with the Wife and Servants.

Besides many more, who each night heard the noise; as Sir Gerrard
Fleetwood and his lady, with his family, Mr. Hyans, with his family, and
several others, who lodged in the outer courts; and during the three
last nights, the inhabitants of Woodstock town, and other neighbor
villages.

And there were many more, both divines and others, who came out of the
country, and from Oxford, to see the glass and stones, and other stuffe,
the devil had brought, wherewith to beat out the Commissioners; the
marks upon some walls remain, and many, this to testifie.


THE PREFACE TO THE ENSUING NARRATIVE.

Since it hath pleased the Almighty God, out of his infinite mercy, so to
make us happy, by restoring of our native King to us, and us unto our
native liberty through him, that now the good may say, _magna temporum
felicitas ubi sentire quoe velis, et dicere licet quoe sentias_, we
cannot but esteem ourselves engaged in the highest of degrees, to render
unto him the highest thanks we can express. Although, surpris'd with
joy, we become as lost in the performance; when gladness and admiration
strikes us silent, as we look back upon the precipiece of our late
condition, and those miraculous deliverances beyond expression. Freed
from the slavery, and those desperate perils, we dayly lived in fear of,
during the tyrannical times of that detestable usurper, Oliver Cromwell;
he who had raked up such judges, as would wrest the most innocent
language into high treason, when he had the cruel conscience to take
away our lives, upon no other ground of justice or reason, (the stones
of London streets would rise to witness it, if all the citizens were
silent.) And with these judges had such councillors, as could advise him
unto worse, which will less want of witness. For should the many
auditors be silent, the press, (as God would have it,) hath given it us
in print, where one of them (and his conscience-keeper, too,) speaks
out. What shall we do with these men? saith he; _Aeger intemperans
crudelem facit medicum, et immedicabile vulmis ense recidendum_. Who
these men are that should be brought to such Scicilian vespers, the
former page sets forth--those which conceit _Utopias_, and have their
day-dreams of the return of I know not what golden age, with the old
line. What usage, when such a privy councillor had power, could he
expect, who then had published this narrative? This much so plainly
shows the devil himself dislikt their doings, (so much more bad were
they than he would have them be,) severer sure than was the devil to
their Commissioners at Woodstock; for he warned them, with dreadful
noises, to drive them from their work. This councillor, without more
ado, would have all who retained conceits of allegiance to their
soveraign, to be absolutely cut off by the usurper's sword. A sad
sentence for a loyal party, to a lawful King. But Heaven is always just;
the party is repriv'd, and do acknowledge the hand of God in it, as is
rightly apply'd, and as justly sensible of their deliverance in that the
foundation which the councillor saith was already so well laid, is now
turned up, and what he calls day-dreams are come to passe. That old line
which (as with him) there seemed, _aliquid divini_, to the contrary is
now restored. And that rock which, as he saith, the prelates and all
their adherents, nay, and their master and supporter, too, with all his
posterity, have split themselves upon, is nowhere to be heard. And that
posterity are safely arrived in their ports, and masters of that mighty
navy, their enemies so much encreased to keep them out with. The eldest
sits upon the throne, his place by birthright and descent,

  "Pacatumque regit Patriis virtutibus orbem;"

upon which throne long may he sit, and reign in peace. That by his just
government, the enemies of ours, the true Protestant Church, of that
glorious martyr, our late sovereign, and of his royal posterity, may be
either absolutely converted, or utterly confounded.

If any shall now ask thee why this narrative was not sooner published,
as neerer to the times wherein the things were acted, he hath the reason
for it in the former lines; which will the more clearly appear unto his
apprehension, if he shall perpend how much cruelty is requisite to the
maintenance of rebellion; and how great care is necessary in the
supporters, to obviate and divert the smallest things that tend to the
unblinding of the people; so that it needs will follow, that they must
have accounted this amongst the great obstructions to their sales of his
majestie's lands, the devil not joining with them in the security; and
greater to the pulling down the royal pallaces, when their chapmen
should conceit the devil would haunt them in their houses, for building
with so ill got materials; as no doubt but that he hath, so numerous and
confident are the relations made of the same, though scarce any so
totally remarkeable as this, (if it be not that others have been more
concealed,) in regard of the strange circumstances as long continuances,
but especially the number of persons together, to whom all things were
so visibly both seen and done, so that surely it exceeds any other; for
the devils thus manifesting themselves, it appears evidently that there
are such things as devils, to persecute the wicked in this world as in
the next.

Now, if to these were added the diverse reall phantasms seen at
Whitehall in Cromwell's times, which caused him to keep such mighty
guards in and about his bedchamber, and yet so oft to change his
lodgings; if those things done at St. James', where the devil so joal'd
the centinels against the sides of the queen's chappell doors, that some
of them fell sick upon it; and others, not, taking warning by it, kild
one outright, whom they buried in the place; and all other such dreadful
things, those that inhabited the royal houses have been affrighted with.

And if to these were likewise added, a relation of all those regicides
and their abettors the devil hath entered into, as he did the Gadarenes'
swine, with so many more of them who hath fallen mad, and dyed in
hideous forms of such distractions, that which hath been of this within
these 12 last years in England, (should all of this nature, our
chronicles do tell, with all the superstitious monks have writ, be put
together,) would make the greater volume, and of more strange
occurrents.

And now as to the penman of this narrative, know that he was a divine,
and at the time of those things acted, which are here related, the
minister and schoolmaster of Woodstock; a person learned and discreet,
not byassed with factious humours, his name Widows, who each day put in
writing what he heard from their mouthes, (and such things as they told
to have befallen them the night before,) therein keeping to their own
words; and, never thinking that what he had writ should happen to be
made publick, gave it no better dress to set it forth. And because to do
it now shall not be construed to change the story, the reader hath it
here accordingly exposed.

The 16th day of _October_, in the year of our Lord 1649, the
Commissioners for surveying and valuing his majestie's mannor-house,
parks, woods, deer, demesnes, and all things thereunto belonging, by
name Captain Crook, Captain Hart, Captain Cockaine, Captain Carelesse,
and Captain Roe, their messenger, with Mr. Browne, their secretary, and
two or three servants, went from Woodstock town, (where they had lain
some nights before,) and took up their lodgings in his majestie's house
after this manner: The bed-chamber and withdrawing-room they both lodged
in and made their kitchen; the presence-chamber their room for dispatch
of their business with all commers; of the council-hall their
brew-house, as of the dining-room, their wood-house, where they laid in
the clefts of that antient standard in the High-Park, for many ages
beyond memory known by the name of the King's Oak, which they had chosen
out, and caused to be dug up by the roots.

_October_ 17. About the middle of the night, these new guests were first
awaked by a knocking at the presence-chamber door, which they also
conceived did open, and something to enter, which came through the room,
and also walkt about that room with a heavy step during half an hour,
then crept under the bed where Captain Hart and Captain Carelesse lay,
where it did seem (as it were) to bite and gnaw the mat and bed-coards,
as if it would tear and rend the feather beds; which having done a
while, then would heave a while, and rest; then heave them up again in
the bed more high than it did before, sometime on the one side, sometime
on the other, as if it had tried which Captain was heaviest. Thus having
heaved some half an hour, from thence it walkt out and went under the
servants' bed, and did the like to them; hence it walkt into a
withdrawing room, and there did the same to all who lodged there. Thus
having welcomed them for more than two hours' space, it walkt out as it
came in, and shut the outer door again, but with the clap of some
mightie force. These guests were in a sweat all this while, but out of
it falling into a sleep again, it became morning first before they spake
their minds; then would they have it to be a dog, yet they described it
more to the likeness of a great bear; so fell to the examining under the
beds, where, finding only the mats scracht, but the bed-coards whole,
and the quarter of beef which lay on the floor untoucht, they
entertained other thoughts.

_October_ 18. They were all awaked as the night before, and now
conceived that they heard all the great clefts of the King's Oak brought
into the presence-chamber, and there thumpt down, and after roul about
the room; they could hear their chairs and stools tost from one side of
the room unto the other, and then (as it were) altogether josled. Thus
having done an hour together, it walkt into the withdrawing-room, where
lodged the two captains, the secretary, and two servants; here stopt the
thing a while, as if it did take breath, but raised a hideous one, then
walkt into the bed-chamber, where lay those as before, and under the bed
it went, where it did heave and heave again, that now they in bed were
put to catch hold upon bed-posts, and sometimes one of the other, to
prevent their being tumbled out upon the ground; then coming out as from
under the bed, and taking hold upon the bed-posts, it would shake the
whole bed, almost as if a cradle rocked. Thus having done here for half
an hour, it went into the withdrawing-room, where first it came and
stood at the bed's feet, and heaving up the bed's feet, flopt them down
again a while, until at last it heaved the feet so high that those in
bed thought to have been set upon their heads; and having thus for two
hours entertained them, went out as in the night before, but with a
great noise.

_October_ 19. This night they awaked not until the midst of the night;
they perceived the room, to shake with something that walkt about the
bedchamber, which having done so a while, it walkt into a
withdrawing-room, where it took up a brasse warming-pan, and returning
with it into the bed-chamber, therein made so loud a noise, in these
captains' own words, it was as loud and scurvy as a ring of five untuned
bells rung backward; but the captains, not to seem afraid, next day made
mirth of what had past, and jested at the devil in the pan.

_October_ 20. These captains and their company, still lodging as before,
were wakened in this night with some things flying about the rooms, and
out of one room into the other, as thrown with some great force. Captain
Hart, being in a slumber, was taken by the shoulder and shaked until he
did sit up in his bed, thinking that it had been one of his fellows,
when suddenly he was taken on the pate with a trencher, that it made him
shrink down into the bed-clothes, and all of them, in both rooms, kept
their heads at least within their sheets, so fiercely did three dozen of
trenchers fly about the rooms; yet Captain Hart ventured again to peep
out to see what was the matter, and what it was that threw, but then the
trenchers came so fast and neer about his ears, that he was fain quickly
to couch again. In the morning they found all their trenchers, pots, and
spits, upon and about their beds, and all such things as were of common
use scattered about the rooms. This night there were also, in several
parts of the room and outer rooms, such noises of beating at doors, and
on the walls, as if that several smiths had been at work; and yet our
captains shrunk not from their work, but went on in that, and lodged as
they had done before.

_October_ 21. About midnight they heard great knocking at every door;
after a while the doors flew open, and into the withdrawing-room entered
something as of a mighty proportion, the figure of it they knew not how
to describe. This walkt awhile about the room shaking the floor at every
step, then came it up close to the bed-side, where lay Captains Crook
and Carelesse; and after a little pause, as it were, the bed-curtains,
both at sides and feet, were drawn up and down slowly, then faster again
for a quarter of an hour, then from end to end as fast as imagination
can fancie the running of the rings, then shaked it the beds, as if the
joints thereof had crackt; then walkt the thing into the bed-chamber,
and so plaied with those beds there; then took up eight peuter dishes,
and bouled them about the room and over the servants in the
truckle-beds; then sometimes were the dishes taken up and thrown crosse
the high beds and against the walls, and so much battered; but there
were more dishes wherein was meat in the same room, that were not at all
removed. During this, in the presence-chamber there was stranger noise
of weightie things thrown down, and, as they supposed, the clefts of the
King's Oak did roul about the room, yet at the wonted hour went away,
and left them to take rest, such as they could.

_October_ 22. Hath mist of being set down, the officers imployed in
their work farther off, came not that day to Woodstock.

_October_ 23. Those that lodged in the withdrawing-room, in the midst of
the night were awakened with the cracking of fire, as if it had been
with thorns and sparks of fire burning, whereupon they supposed that the
bed-chamber had taken fire, and listning to it farther, they heard their
fellows in bed sadly groan, which gave them to suppose they might be
suffocated; wherefore they called upon their servants to make all
possible hast to help them. When the two servants were come in, they
found all asleep, and so brought back word, but that there were no
bedclothes upon them; wherefore they were sent back to cover them, and
to stir up and mend the fire. When the servants had covered them and
were come to the chimney, in the corners they found their wearing
apparrel, boots, and stockings, but they had no sooner toucht the
embers, when the firebrands flew about their ears so fast, that away ran
they into the other room for the shelter of their cover-lids; then after
them walkt something that stampt about the room as if it had been
exceeding angry, and likewise threw about the trenchers, platters, and
all such things in the room--after two hours went out, yet stampt again
over their heads.

_October_ 24. They lodged all abroad.

_October_ 25. This afternoon was come unto them Mr. Richard Crook the
lawyer, brother to Captain Crook, and now deputy-steward of the manner,
