Demetrius even now would not yield, and Vespasian bade it be told him:
"You are working every way to have me kill you, but I am not slaughtering
barking dogs."

[Sidenote:--13--] Before long many others who followed the so-called Stoic
system made themselves prominent, among whom was Demetrius the cynic.
These men, abusing the title of philosophy, kept teaching their disciples
publicly many pernicious doctrines, and in this way were gradually
corrupting [Footnote: Reading [Greek: hypodiephtheiron] (Dindorf).] some.
Under these circumstances Mucianus, influenced more by anger than by
fondness for speaking, uttered many charges against them and persuaded
Vespasian to expel all such persons from the city.

[Sidenote:--14--] This period saw also the demise of Vespasian's
concubine, Caenis. I have mentioned her because she was exceedingly
faithful and possessed naturally a most excellent memory. For instance,
her mistress Antonia, the mother of Claudius, had had her write secretly
to Tiberius about Sejanus and later had ordered the message erased, that
no trace of the same might be left. Thereupon she replied: "It is in vain,
mistress, that you have issued this command. All of this and whatever else
you dictate to me I always carry with me in my soul and it can never be
erased." This is one thing I have admired about her and a second is that
Vespasian should have been so much pleased with her. This fact gave her
the greatest influence, and she collected untold wealth, so that it was
even thought that she obtained money by her independent efforts. She
received vast sums from all sources and sold to some persons offices, to
others procuratorships, the command of campaigns, priesthoods, and to some
actually imperial decisions. For Vespasian killed no one to get his money
and took care to preserve large numbers of those who freely gave it. The
person who secured the funds was his concubine, but it was suspected that
Vespasian willingly allowed her to do as she did; and this belief was
strengthened by his other acts, a few of which, for the sake of
illustration, I shall relate. When certain persons voted to erect to him a
statue costing twenty-five myriads, he stretched out his hand and said:
"Give me the money; this [Footnote: i.e., the hollowed hand (compare
Suetonius Vespasian, chapter 23).] will serve as its pedestal."--And to
Titus, who was angry at the tax on urinating [Footnote: This refers to
conveniences in the public streets.], which was appointed along with the
rest, he replied, as he picked up some gold pieces that were the product
of it: "See, my child, if they smell at all."

[Sidenote: A.D. 75 (a.u. 828)] [Sidenote:--15--] In the sixth year of
Vespasian as magistrate and the fourth of Titus the precinct of Peace was
dedicated and the so-called Colossus was set up on the Sacred Way. It is
said to have been one hundred feet high, and to have had--according to one
account--the figure of Nero, according to others that of Titus. Vespasian
would often have beasts slain in the theatres. He did not particularly
enjoy gladiatorial combats of men, although Titus during the youthful
sports which were celebrated in his own land had once had a sham fight in
heavy armor with Alienus. The Parthians, who fell into a war with some
peoples, asked for an alliance with him, but he did not go to their aid,
saying that it was not proper for him to interfere in other persons'
business.

Berenice was at the height of her power and consequently came to Rome
along with her brother Agrippa. [Footnote: This Agrippa, known also as
Herodes II, was an intimate friend of the Jewish historian Josephus and a
companion of Titus at the siege of Jerusalem. It was before him, moreover,
that the apostle Paul made his defence in A.D. 60.] The latter was
accorded pretorial honors, while she dwelt in the Palace and cohabited
with Titus. She expected to be married to him and behaved in all respects
as if his wife. But when he perceived that the Romans were displeased at
the situation he sent her away; for various reports were in circulation.
At this time, too, certain sophists of the cynic school managed somehow to
slip into the city: first, Diogenes entered the theatre when it was full
of men and denounced them in a long, abusive speech, for which he was
flogged; after him Heras, who showed no greater disposition to be
obedient, gave vent to many senseless bawlings in the true cynic
(dog-like) manner,--and for this behavior was beheaded.

[Sidenote: A.D. 79 (a.u. 832)] [Sidenote:--16--] About the same period
that these events took place it happened that at a certain inn such a
quantity of overflowed the vessels that it ran out into the street.
Moreover, Sabinus the Gaul, already mentioned, the person who had once
named himself Caesar, had later taken up arms, had been defeated and had
hidden himself in the monument, was discovered [Footnote: The meaning is
clear. Cobet (Mnemosyne, N.S.X). thinks that ephorathae expresses the idea
more accurately than the commonly accepted ephanerothae (Boissevain also
ephorathae).] and brought to Rome. With him perished also his wife
Peponila, who had previously saved his life. She had presented her
children before Vespasian and had delivered a most pitiful speech in their
behalf: "These little ones, Caesar, I both brought forth and reared in the
monument, that we might be a greater number to supplicate you." She caused
both him and the rest to weep; no mercy, however, was shown to the family.
Meantime the emperor was also the object of a conspiracy on the part of
Alienus and Marcellus, although he considered them among his best friends
and bestowed honors upon them quite unstintedly. They did not succeed in
killing him, though. Upon their being detected, Alienus was slain at once,
in the imperial residence itself, as he rose from a meal with his intended
victim. Titus issued this order to prevent his carrying his rebellion any
further during the night; Alienus had already made arrangements with not a
few of the soldiers. Marcellus was brought to trial before the senate and
was condemned, whereupon he cut his own throat with a razor. Not even
benefits, it may be remarked, can subdue those who are naturally vicious,
as is shown by the plotting of these men against him who had done them so
many kindnesses.

[Sidenote:--17--] It was after the episode just narrated that Vespasian
fell sick, not, if the truth be known, of his ordinary gout but of fever
and passed away at Aquae Cutiliae, [Footnote: These are mineral springs,
chiefly sulphurous in nature, both hot and cold, situated near the town of
Cutiliae, famous for its pool with the "floating island." Celsus (On
Medicine, Book Four, chapter 5 (=12)) recommends bathing and standing in
such cold mineral springs as those at Cutiliae in cases where a patient
suffers from inability of the stomach to assimilate food.--The town itself
is between Reate and Interocrea among the Sabines. (And compare Suetonius,
Vespasian, chapter 24).] so-called, in Sabine territory. Some, who
endeavor falsely to incriminate Titus (among them the emperor Hadrian)
have spread a report that he was poisoned at a banquet. Portents had
occurred in his career indicating his approaching end, such as the comet
star which was seen for a considerable period and the opening of the
monument of Augustus of its own accord. When the sick man's physician
chided him for continuing his usual course of living and attending to all
the duties that belonged to his office, he answered: "The emperor ought to
die on his feet." To those who said anything to him about the comet he
responded: "This is an omen not for me but for the Parthian king. He has
flowing hair like the comet, whereas I am baldheaded." When he at length
came to the belief that he was to die, he said only: "Now I shall become a
god." He had lived to the age of sixty-nine years and eight months. His
reign lasted ten years lacking six days. Accordingly, it results that from
the death of Nero to Vespasian's becoming emperor a year and twenty-two
days elapsed. I have recorded this fact to prevent a misapprehension on
the part of any persons who might reckon the time with reference to the
men who were in power. They, however, did not legitimately succeed one
another, but each of them while his rival was alive and still ruling
believed himself to be emperor from the moment that the thought first
entered his head. One must not enumerate all the days of their reigns as
if those days had followed one after another in orderly succession, but
make a single sweeping calculation with the exact time, as I have stated
it, in mind.

[Sidenote:--18--] At his death Titus succeeded to the imperial power.
Titus as a ruler committed no act of murder or passion, but showed himself
upright, though the victim of plots, and self-controlled, though Berenice
came to Rome again. Perhaps this was because he had undergone a change.
(To share a reign with somebody else is a very different thing from being
one's self an independent ruler. In the former case persons are heedless
of the good name of the sovereignty and enjoy greedily the authority it
gives them, thus doing many things that make their position the object of
envy and slander. Actual monarchs, on the other hand, knowing that
everything depends on their decision, have some eye to good repute as well
as to other matters. So Titus said to somebody whose society he had
previously affected: "It is not the same thing to desire something from
another as to decide a case yourself, nor to ask something from another as
it is to give it to some one yourself.") Perhaps his satisfactory conduct
was also due to his surviving so short a time compared with most rulers,
for he was thus given little opportunity for wrongdoing. For he lived
after this only two years, two months and twenty days in addition to his
thirty-nine years, five months and twenty-five days. People compare this
feature of Titus's career with the fullness of years of Augustus, and say
that the latter would never have won affection if he had lived a shorter
time, nor the former, if he had lived longer. Augustus, though at the
outset he had shown himself rather harsh because of the wars and the
political factions, was able later in the course of time to become
distinguished for his kindnesses: Titus ruled with forbearance and died at
the summit of his glory, whereas if he had enjoyed a longer life, it might
have been proved that he owes his present fame more to good fortune than
to virtue.

[Sidenote:--19--] It is worth noting that Titus during his reign put no
senator to death, nor was any one else slain by him all the time that he
was emperor. Cases involving maiestas he would never entertain himself nor
allow others to entertain, for he said: "It is impossible for me to be
insulted or outraged in any way. I do naught that deserves censure and I
care not for what is falsely reported. As for the emperors that are dead
and gone, they will avenge themselves in case any one does them wrong, if
in very truth they be heroes and possess some power."--He also made
various arrangements to render men more secure and free from trouble. One
of these was the posting of a notice confirming all gifts bestowed upon
any person by the former emperors. This also enabled him to avoid the
nuisance of having people petition him individually about the
matter.--Informers he banished from the city.

In money matters he was frugal and sanctioned no unnecessary expenditure,
yet he did not punish any one for opposite tendencies.

In his reign also the False Nero appeared, who was an Asiatic and called
himself Terentius Maximus. He resembled Nero in form and voice: he even
sang to the zither's accompaniment. He gained a few followers in Asia and
in his onward progress to the Euphrates he secured a far greater number
and at length sought a retreat with Artabanus, the Parthian chief, who,
out of the anger that he felt toward Titus, both received the pretender
and set about preparations for restoring him to Rome. (Compare John of
Antioch, frag. 104 Mueller).

[Sidenote:--20--] Meantime war had again broken out in Britain, and Gnaeus
Julius Agricola overran the whole of the hostile region. He was the first
of the Romans whom we know to discover that Britain was surrounded by
water. Some soldiers had rebelled and after killing centurions and a
military tribune had taken refuge in boats. In these they put out to sea
and sailed around to the western portion of the country just as the
billows and the wind bore them. And without knowing it they came around
from the opposite side and stopped at the camps on this side again. At
that Agricola sent others to try the voyage around Britain and learned
from them, too, that it was an island.

As a result of these events in Britain Titus received the title of
imperator for the fifteenth time. Agricola for the rest of his life lived
in dishonor and even in want because he had accomplished greater things
than a mere general should. Finally he was murdered on this account by
Domitian, in spite of having received triumphal honors from Titus.

[Sidenote:--21--] In Campania remarkable and frightful occurrences took
place. A great fire was suddenly created just at the end of autumn. It was
this way. The mountain Vesuvius stands over against Naples near the sea
and has unquenchable springs of fire. Once it was equally high at all
points and the fire rose from the center of it. This is the only portion
of it that is in a blaze, for the outside parts of the mountain remain
even now unkindled. Consequently, as the latter are never burned, while
the interior is constantly growing brittle and being reduced to ashes, the
surrounding peaks retain their original height to this day, but the whole
section that is on fire, as it is consumed in the course of time, has
grown hollow from continual collapse. Thus the entire mountain, if we may
compare great things to small, resembles a hunting-theatre. The outlying
heights of it support both trees and vines,--many of them,--but the crater
is given over to fire and sends up smoke by day, flame by night. It looks
as if quantities of incense of all sorts were being burned in it. This
goes on all the time, sometimes more, sometimes less. Often it throws up
ashes, when there is a general settling in the interior, or again it sends
up stones when the air forces them out. It echoes and bellows, too,
because its vents are not all together but are narrow and hidden.

[Sidenote:--22--] Such is Vesuvius, and these phenomena regularly occur
there at least once a year. But all the other happenings that took place
in former time, though they may have seemed great and unusual to those who
on each occasion observed them, nevertheless would be reckoned as but
slight in comparison with what now occurred even though they should all be
rolled into one. This was what befell. Numbers of huge men quite
surpassing any human stature,--such creatures as giants are depicted to
be,--appeared now on the mountain, now in the country surrounding it, and
again in the cities, wandering over the earth day and night and also
traversing the air. After this fearful droughts and earthquakes sudden and
violent occurred, so that all the level ground in that region undulated
and the heights gave a great leap. Reverberations were frequent, some
subterranean resembling thunder and some on the surface like bellowings.
The sea joined the roar and the sky resounded with it. Then suddenly a
portentous crash was heard, as if the mountains were tumbling in ruins.
And first there were belched forth stones of huge size that rose to the
very summits before they fell; after them came a deal of fire and smoke in
inexhaustible quantities so that the whole atmosphere was obscured and the
whole sun was screened from view as if in an eclipse. [Sidenote:--23--]
Thus night succeeded day and darkness light. Some thought the giants were
rising in revolt (for even at this time many of their forms could be
discerned in the smoke and moreover a kind of sound of trumpets was
heard), while others believed that the whole world was disappearing in
chaos or fire. Therefore they fled, some from the houses into the streets,
others from without into the house; in their confusion, indeed, they
hastened from the sea to the land or from the land to the sea, deeming any
place at a distance from where they were safer than what was near by.
While this was going on an inconceivable amount of ashes was blown out and
covered the land and the sea everywhere and filled all the air. It did
harm of all sorts, as chance dictated, to men and places and cattle, and
the fish and the birds it utterly destroyed. Moreover, it buried two whole
cities, Herculaneum and Pompeii, while the populace was seated in the
theatre. The entire amount of dust was so great that some of it reached
Africa and Syria and Egypt, and it also entered Rome, where it occupied
all the air over the city and cast the sun into shadow. There, too, no
little fear was felt for several days, since the people did not know and
could not conjecture what had happened. They like the rest thought that
everything was being turned upside down, that the sun was disappearing in
the earth and the earth was bounding up to the sky. This ashes for the
time being did them no great harm: later it bred among them a terrible
pestilence.

[Sidenote: A.D. 80 (a.u. 833)] [Sidenote:--24--] Another fire, above
ground, in the following year spread over a very large portion of Rome
while Titus was absent on business connected with the catastrophe that had
befallen in Campania. It consumed the temple of Serapis, the temple of
Isis, the Saepta, the temple of Neptune, the Baths of Agrippa, the
Pantheon, the Diribitorium, the theatre of Balbus, the stage-building of
Pompey's theatre, the Octavian buildings together with their books, and
the temple of Capitoline Jupiter with its surrounding temples. Hence the
disaster seemed to be not of human but of divine contrivance. Any one can
estimate from the list of buildings that I have given, how many more must
have been destroyed. Titus, accordingly, sent two exconsuls to the
Campanians to supervise the founding of settlements and bestowed upon the
inhabitants money that came (besides various other sources) from those
citizens that had died without heirs. As for himself, he took nothing from
individual or city or king, although many kept offering and promising him
large sums. In spite of this, he restored everything from funds already at
hand. [Sidenote:--25--] Most of his deeds had no unusual quality to mark
them, but in dedicating the hunting-theatre and the baths that bear his
name he produced many remarkable spectacles. Cranes fought with one
another, and four elephants, as well as other grazing animals and wild
beasts, to the number of nine thousand, were slaughtered, and women (not
of any prominence, however,) took part in despatching them. Of men several
fought in single combat and several groups contended together in infantry
and naval battles. For Titus filled the above mentioned theatre suddenly
with water and introduced horses and bulls and some other tractable
creatures that had been taught to behave in the liquid element precisely
as upon land. He introduced also human beings on boats. These persons had
a sea-fight there, impersonating two parties, Corcyreans and Corinthians:
others gave the same performance outside in the grove of Gaius and Lucius,
a spot which Augustus had formerly excavated for this very purpose. There,
on the first day, a gladiatorial combat and slaughter of beasts took
place; this was done by building a structure of planks over the lake that
faced the images and placing benches round about it. On the second day
there was a horse-race, and on the third a naval battle involving three
thousand men. Afterwards there was also an infantry battle. The Athenians
conquered the Syracusans (these were the names that were used in the naval
battle), made a landing on the islet, and having assaulted a wall
constructed around the monument took it. These were the sights offered to
spectators, and they lasted for a hundred days.

Titus also contributed some things that were of practical use to the
people. He would throw down into the theatre from aloft little wooden
balls that had a mark, one signifying something to eat, another clothing,
another a silver vessel, or perhaps a gold one, or again horses,
pack-animals, cattle, slaves. Those who snatched them had to carry them
back to the dispensers of the bounty to secure the article of which the
name was inscribed.

[Sidenote: A.D. 81 (a.u. 834)] [Sidenote:--26--] When he had finished this
exhibition, he wept so bitterly on the last day that all the people saw
him, and after this time he performed no other great deed; but the
following year, in the consulship of Flavius [Footnote: L. Flavius Silva
Nonius Bassus.] and Pollio, [Footnote: Asinius Pollio Verrucosus.]
subsequent to the dedication of the buildings mentioned, he passed away at
the same Aquae that was the scene of his father's demise. The common
report had it that he was done to death by his brother, for he had
previously been the object of that person's plot: but some writers state
that a disease carried him off. The tradition is that, while he was still
breathing and had a possible chance of recovery, Domitian, to hasten his
end, put him in a box packed with a quantity of snow, pretending that the
