For I would have no man pass through a time of thoughts such as
mine were as they took me to Caistor--rage and grief and fear of
shame all at once, and one chasing the other through my mind till I
knew not where I was, and would start as from a troubled dream when
one spoke, and then go back to the same again as will a sick man.
But by the time we reached Caistor I had, as it seemed to me,
thought every thought that might be possible, and one thing only
was plain and clear. I would ask for judgment by Eadmund the King,
and if that might not be, then for trial by battle, which the earl
would surely grant. And yet I hoped that Beorn's plot was not so
crafty but that it would fail in some way.

So they put me in a strong cell in the old castle, leading Beorn to
another, and there left me. The darkness came, and they brought me
food, so I ate and drank, being very hungry and weary; and that
done, my thoughts passed from me, for I slept heavily, worn out
both in body and mind.



CHAPTER VI. THE JUSTICE OF EARL ULFKYTEL.


An armed jailor woke me with daylight, bringing me food again, and
at first I was dazed, not knowing where I was, so heavy was my
sleep. Yet I knew that I woke to somewhat ill.

"Where am I?" I asked.

"Under Caistor walls, surely," he said; and I remembered all.

The man looked friendly enough, so that I spoke again to him,
asking if the great earl was here, and he said that he was.

"What do men say?" I asked then.

"That the matter is like to puzzle the earl himself, so that it is
hard for a plain man to unriddle. But I think that half Reedham are
here to see justice done you; even if it is naught but Earl
Ulfkytel's justice!" And he grinned.

I knew why. For Ulfkytel was ever a just man, though severe, and
his justice was a word with us, though in a strange way enough. For
if a case was too hard for him to decide in his own mind, he would
study to find some way in which the truth might make itself known,
as it were. Nor did he hold much with trial by hot water, or heated
ploughshares, and the like; finding new ways of his own contriving,
which often brought the truth plainly to light, but which no other
man would have thought of. So that if a man, in doing or planning
some ill to another, was himself hurt, we would laugh and say:
"That is like the earl's justice".

So though Ulfkytel was no friend of my father's, having, indeed,
some old quarrel about rights of manor or the like, I thought
nothing of that, save that he would the sooner send me to the king
for trial.

The jailor told me that I should be tried at noonday, and went
away, and so I waited patiently as I might until then, keeping
thought quiet as best I could by looking forward and turning over
what I could say, which seemed to be nothing but the plain truth.

At last the weary waiting ended, and they took me into the great
hall of the castle, and there on the high seat sat the earl, a
thin, broad-shouldered man, with a long gray beard and gray eyes,
that glittered bright and restless under shaggy eyebrows. Beorn,
too, was brought in at the same time, and we were set opposite to
one another, to right and left of the earl, below the high place,
closely watched by the armed guards, bound also, though not
tightly, and only as to our hands.

And there on a trestle table before us lay the body of Jarl
Lodbrok, my friend, in whose side was my broken arrow. All the
lower end of the hall was filled with the people, and I saw my two
serfs there, and many Reedham folk.

Then the court was set, and with the earl were many men whom I knew
by sight, honest thanes and franklins enough, and of that I was
glad.

First of all one read, in the ears of all, that of which we two who
were there bound were accused, giving the names of those half-dozen
men who had found us fighting and had brought us for judgment.

Then said Earl Ulfkytel:

"Here is a matter that is not easy in itself, and I will not hide
this, that the father of this Wulfric and I are unfriendly, and
that Beorn has been a friend of mine, though no close one.
Therefore is more need that I must be very careful that justice is
not swayed by my knowledge and thoughts of the accused. So I put
that away from me; I know naught of these two men but what I hear
from witnesses."

Some people at the end of the hall sought to praise the even
handedness of that saying loudly, but the earl frowned and shouted:

"Silence!--shall a judge be praised for doing right?"

"Then," said he, growing quiet again, and speaking plainly and
slowly that all might hear, "this is how the matter stands. Here
are two men found fighting over the body of a third who is known,
as men say, to have been friendly with both. No man saw the
beginning of the business. Now we will hear what was seen, but
first let this Wulfric speak for himself;" and he turned his bright
eyes on me.

Now I told him all the truth from the time when I parted from
Lodbrok until the men came.

Then the earl asked me:

"Why thought you that Beorn slew the man?"

"Because there was no other man near, and because I know that he
bore ill will towards him for the favour shown him by the king."

"So," said Ulfkytel; "now let Beorn speak."

Then that evil man, being very crafty, did not deny my words, but
said that he had found the body lying with my arrow in its side.
And though he knew not why I had done the deed, for the sake of his
friendship with my father and myself he would have hidden it, and
even as he did so I came, falling on him. Whereon he grew wroth,
and fought.

"It seems to me," said the earl, "that a word from you should
rather have made Wulfric help you and thank you; not fall on you.
Now let the witnesses say their say."

So they stood forward, telling naught but the truth, as honest men.
And they seemed to think much of Beorn's having cried out for
revenge. Also they showed the arrow, which fitted exactly to the
headed end which was in Lodbrok's side, and was the same as two
that were in my quiver with others. Now if Beorn shot that arrow he
must have made away with both bow and quiver, for he had none when
we were taken.

Then one of the other thanes said that the dead man had another
wound, and that in the throat, and it was so, Whereon the jailer
was bidden to bring our swords, and it was found that both were
stained, for I had wounded Beorn a little, as I have said.

"Is Wulfric wounded then?" asked Ulfkytel.

And I was not.

"Whence then is Beorn's sword stained?" he asked.

Then came my two thralls, and spoke to the truth of my story, as
did one of the men who had stayed with them, for he too had seen
the deer hanging where I had left it, nearly a mile away from where
the fight was. And my men added that they had seen me riding to
that place, and had followed the call of my horn.

"Murderers do not call thus for help," said the earl. "What more?"

"Only that Lodbrok's dog flew at Beorn;" they said.

Then my steward and others told the story of my saving of Lodbrok,
and there were one or two who knew how closely Beorn seemed to have
sought his friendship. There was no more then to be said.

All the while Ulfkytel had watched my face and Beorn's, and now he
said:

"The arrow condemns Wulfric, but any man might pick up a good arrow
that he had lost. And the sword condemns Beorn, but there are many
ways in which it might be bloodstained in that affair. Now, were
these two robbers, I would hold that they were fighting over
division of booty, but they are honourable men. Wherefore I will
have one more witness who knows not how to lie. Fetch the dog."

So they brought Lodbrok's dog, which the serfs had with them, and
they loosed it. It ran to his body first and cried over it, pulling
his coat with its paws and licking his face, so that it was pitiful
to see it, and there were women present who wept thereat.

Then it left him and came to me, thrusting its nose into my hand,
but I would not notice it, for justice's sake; but when it saw
Beorn, it bristled up, flying at his throat so that he fell under
it, and the guards had much ado in getting it off, and one was
bitten.

"The dog condemns Beorn," said the earl, "but Wulfric bred it."

After that he would have no more witness; but now should each of us
lay hand on the body and swear that he was guiltless.

They brought a book of the Holy Gospels and put it on Lodbrok's
breast, and first I laid my hand thereon, looking into the quiet
face of the man whose life I had saved, and sware truly.

Then must Beorn confess or swear falsely, and I looked at him and
his cheek was pale. But he, too, laid hand on the dread book in its
awful place and sware that he was innocent--and naught happened.
For I looked, as I think many looked, to see the blood start from
the wound that he had given the jarl, but it was not so. There was
no sign. Then crossed my mind the first doubt that I had had that
Beorn was guilty. Yet I knew he lied in some things, and the doubt
passed away quickly.

Then Ulfkytel pushed away the table from before him so that it fell
over.

"Take these men away," he said. "I have heard and seen enough. I
will think!"

They led us away to the cells again, and I wondered how all this
would end. In an hour they brought us back, and set us in our
places again. The earl had more to say, as it seemed.

"Will you two pay the weregild {xi} between you?"

"No, Lord Earl," I said; "that were to confess guilt, which would
be a lie."

Then Beorn cried:

"I pray you, Wulfric, let us pay and have done!"

But I turned from him in loathing.

"Ho, Master Falconer," said Ulfkytel, "the man is an outlander! To
whom will you pay it? To Wulfric who saved his life?"

Now at that Beorn was dumb, seeing that the earl had trapped him
very nearly, and he grew ashy pale, and the great earl scowled at
him.

"Let me have trial by battle," I said quietly, thinking that it
would be surely granted.

There was as good reason to suspect me as Beorn, as I saw.

"Silence, Wulfric!" said the earl. "That is for me to say."

"Let the king judge, I pray you, Lord Earl," I went on, for he
spoke in no angry tone, nor looked at me.

However, that angered him, for, indeed, it was hard to say whether
king or earl was more powerful in East Anglia. Maybe Eadmund's
power came by love, and that of the earl by the strong hand. But
the earl was most loyal.

"What!" he said in a great voice, "am I not earl? And shall the
king be troubled with common manslayers while I sit in his seat of
justice? Go to! I am judge, and will answer to the king for what I
do."

So I was silent, waiting for what should come next.

But he forgot me in a minute, and seemed to be thinking.

At last he said:

"One of these men is guilty, but I know not which."

And so he summed up all that he had heard, and as he did so it
seemed, even to me, that proofs of guilt were evenly balanced, so
that once again I half thought that Beorn might be wronged in the
accusation, as I was.

"So," he ended, "friend has slain friend, and friends have fought,
and there is no question of a third man in the matter."

He looked round on the honest faces with him, and saw that they
were puzzled and had naught to say, and went on:

"Wherefore, seeing that these men have had trial by battle already,
which was stopped, and that the slain man was a foreigner from over
seas and has no friends to speak concerning him, I have a mind to
put the judgment into the hands of the greatest Judge of all. As
Lodbrok the Dane came by sea, these men shall be judged upon the
sea by Him who is over all. And surely the innocent shall escape,
and the guilty shall be punished in such sort that he shall wish
that I had been wise enough to see his guilt plainly and to hang
him for treachery to his friend and the king's, or else to put him
into ward until some good bishop asks for pardon for ill doing."

And with that half promise he looked sharply at us to see if any
sign would come from the murderer.

But I had naught to say, nor did I seem to care just now what
befell me, while Beorn was doubtless fearful lest the wrath of
Eadmund the King should prevail in the end were he to be imprisoned
only. So he answered not, and the earl frowned heavily.

Now one of the franklins there, who knew me well enough, said:

"Wulfric, be not ashamed to confess it, if for once you shot
ill--if your arrow went by chance to Lodbrok's heart, I pray you,
say so. It may well be forgiven."

Very grateful was I for that kind word, but I would not plead
falsely, nor, indeed, would it have told aught of the other wound
that had been made. So I shook my head, thanking the man, and
saying that it was not so.

Now I think that the earl had planned this in order to make one of
us speak at the last, and for a moment I thought that Beorn was
about to speak, but he forbore. Then Ulfkytel sighed heavily and
turned away, speaking in a low voice to the thanes with him, and
they seemed to agree with his words.

At length he turned to us and spoke gravely:

"It is, as I said, too hard for me. The Lord shall judge. Even as
Lodbrok came shall you two go, at the mercy of wind and wave and of
Him who rules them. You shall be put into Lodbrok's boat this
night, and set adrift to take what may come. Only this I lay upon
you, that the innocent man shall not harm the guilty. As for
himself, he need, as I think, have no fear, for the guilty man is a
coward and nidring {xii}. Nor, as it seems to me, if all may be
believed, can the guiltless say for certain that the other did it."

Then was a murmur of assent to this strange manner of justice of
Earl Ulfkytel's, and I, who feared not the sea, was glad; but Beorn
would have fallen on the ground, but for his guards, and almost had
he confessed, as I think.

"Eat and drink well," said Ulfkytel, "for maybe it is long before
you see food again."

"Where shall you set them afloat?" asked a thane.

"Am I a fool to let men know that?" asked the earl sharply. "There
would be a rescue for a certainty. You shall know by and by in
private."

The guards took us away, and unbinding our hands, set plenty of
good food and drink before us. And for my part I did well, for now
that I knew the worst my spirits rose, and I had some hopes of
escape, for there was every sign of fair weather for long enough.
And viking ways had taught me to go fasting for two days, if need
be, given a good meal to start upon.
