Incensed at what he deemed the coldness of his friends, in a cause
which interested him so nearly, Hobbie had shaken himself free of their
company, and was now on his solitary road homeward. "The fiend founder
thee!" said he, as he spurred impatiently his over-fatigued and
stumbling horse; "thou art like a' the rest o' them. Hae I not bred
thee, and fed thee, and dressed thee wi' mine ain hand, and wouldst thou
snapper now and break my neck at my utmost need? But thou'rt e'en like
the lave--the farthest off o' them a' is my cousin ten times removed,
and day or night I wad hae served them wi' my best blood; and now, I
think they show mair regard to the common thief of Westburnflat than to
their ain kinsman. But I should see the lights now in Heugh-foot--Wae's
me!" he continued, recollecting himself, "there will neither coal nor
candle-light shine in the Heugh-foot ony mair! An it werena for my
mother and sisters, and poor Grace, I could find in my heart to put
spurs to the beast, and loup ower the scaur into the water to make an
end o't a'."--In this disconsolate mood he turned his horse's bridle
towards the cottage in which his family had found refuge.

As he approached the door, he heard whispering and tittering amongst
his sisters. "The deevil's in the women," said poor Hobbie; "they
would nicker, and laugh, and giggle, if their best friend was lying a
corp--and yet I am glad they can keep up their hearts sae weel, poor
silly things; but the dirdum fa's on me, to be sure, and no on them."

While he thus meditated, he was engaged in fastening up his horse in
a shed. "Thou maun do without horse-sheet and surcingle now, lad," he
said, addressing the animal; "you and me hae had a downcome alike; we
had better hae fa'en i, the deepest pool o' Tarras."

He was interrupted by the youngest of his sisters, who came running
out, and, speaking in a constrained voice, as if to stifle some emotion,
called out to him, "What are ye doing there, Hobbie, fiddling about the
naig, and there's ane frae Cumberland been waiting here for ye this hour
and mair? Haste ye in, man; I'll take off the saddle."

"Ane frae Cumberland!" exclaimed Elliot; and putting the bridle of his
horse into the hand of his sister, he rushed into the cottage. "Where is
he? where is he!" he exclaimed, glancing eagerly around, and seeing only
females; "Did he bring news of Grace?"

"He doughtna bide an instant langer," said the elder sister, still with
a suppressed laugh.

"Hout fie, bairns!" said the old lady, with something of a good-humoured
reproof, "ye shouldna vex your billy Hobbie that way.--Look round, my
bairn, and see if there isna ane here mair than ye left this morning."

Hobbie looked eagerly round. "There's you, and the three titties."

"There's four of us now, Hobbie, lad," said the youngest, who at this
moment entered.

In an instant Hobbie had in his arms Grace Armstrong, who, with one
of his sister's plaids around her, had passed unnoticed at his first
entrance. "How dared you do this?" said Hobbie.

"It wasna my fault," said Grace, endeavouring to cover her face with her
hands to hide at once her blushes, and escape the storm of hearty kisses
with which her bridegroom punished her simple stratagem,--"It wasna my
fault, Hobbie; ye should kiss Jeanie and the rest o' them, for they hae
the wyte o't."

"And so I will," said Hobbie, and embraced and kissed his sisters
and grandmother a hundred times, while the whole party half-laughed,
half-cried, in the extremity of their joy. "I am the happiest man," said
Hobbie, throwing himself down on a seat, almost exhausted,--"I am the
happiest man in the world!"

"Then, O my dear bairn," said the good old dame, who lost no opportunity
of teaching her lesson of religion at those moments when the heart
was best open to receive it,--"Then, O my son, give praise to Him that
brings smiles out o' tears and joy out o' grief, as He brought light out
o' darkness and the world out o' naething. Was it not my word, that if
ye could say His will be done, ye might hae cause to say His name be
praised?"

"It was--it was your word, grannie; and I do praise Him for His mercy,
and for leaving me a good parent when my ain were gane," said honest
Hobbie, taking her hand, "that puts me in mind to think of Him, baith in
happiness and distress."

There was a solemn pause of one or two minutes employed in the exercise
of mental devotion, which expressed, in purity and sincerity, the
gratitude of the affectionate family to that Providence who had
unexpectedly restored to their embraces the friend whom they had lost.

Hobbie's first enquiries were concerning the adventures which Grace
had undergone. They were told at length, but amounted in substance
to this:--That she was awaked by the noise which the ruffians made in
breaking into the house, and by the resistance made by one or two of the
servants, which was soon overpowered; that, dressing herself hastily,
she ran downstairs, and having seen, in the scuffle, Westburnflat's
vizard drop off, imprudently named him by his name, and besought him for
mercy; that the ruffian instantly stopped her mouth, dragged her from
the house, and placed her on horseback, behind one of his associates.

"I'll break the accursed neck of him," said Hobbie, "if there werena
another Graeme in the land but himsell!"

She proceeded to say, that she was carried southward along with the
party, and the spoil which they drove before them, until they had
crossed the Border. Suddenly a person, known to her as a kinsman of
Westburnflat, came riding very fast after the marauders, and told their
leader, that his cousin had learnt from a sure hand that no luck would
come of it, unless the lass was restored to her friends. After some
discussion, the chief of the party seemed to acquiesce. Grace was placed
behind her new guardian, who pursued in silence, and with great speed,
the least-frequented path to the Heugh-foot, and ere evening closed, set
down the fatigued and terrified damsel within a quarter of a mile of the
dwelling of her friends. Many and sincere were the congratulations which
passed on all sides.

As these emotions subsided, less pleasing considerations began to
intrude themselves.

"This is a miserable place for ye a'," said Hobbie, looking around him;
"I can sleep weel eneugh mysell outby beside the naig, as I hae done
mony a lang night on the hills; but how ye are to put yoursells up, I
canna see! And what's waur, I canna mend it; and what's waur than a',
the morn may come, and the day after that, without your being a bit
better off."

"It was a cowardly cruel thing," said one of the sisters, looking round,
"to harry a puir family to the bare wa's this gate."

"And leave us neither stirk nor stot," said the youngest brother, who
now entered, "nor sheep nor lamb, nor aught that eats grass and corn."

"If they had ony quarrel wi' us," said Harry, the second brother, "were
we na ready to have fought it out? And that we should have been a' frae
hame, too,--ane and a' upon the hill--Odd, an we had been at hame, Will
Graeme's stamach shouldna hae wanted its morning; but it's biding him,
is it na, Hobbie?"

"Our neighbours hae taen a day at the Castleton to gree wi' him at the
sight o' men," said Hobbie, mournfully; "they behoved to have it a'
their ain gate, or there was nae help to be got at their hands."

"To gree wi' him!" exclaimed both his brothers at once, "after siccan an
act of stouthrife as hasna been heard o' in the country since the auld
riding days!"

"Very true, billies, and my blood was e'en boiling at it; but the sight
o' Grace Armstrong has settled it brawly."

"But the stocking, Hobbie'" said John Elliot; "we're utterly ruined.
Harry and I hae been to gather what was on the outby land, and there's
scarce a cloot left. I kenna how we're to carry on--We maun a' gang
to the wars, I think. Westburnflat hasna the means, e'en if he had the
will, to make up our loss; there's nae mends to be got out o' him, but
what ye take out o' his banes. He hasna a four-footed creature but the
vicious blood thing he rides on, and that's sair trash'd wi' his night
wark. We are ruined stoop and roop."

Hobbie cast a mournful glance on Grace Armstrong, who returned it with a
downcast look and a gentle sigh.

"Dinna be cast down, bairns," said the grandmother, "we hae gude friends
that winna forsake us in adversity. There's Sir Thomas Kittleloof is my
third cousin by the mother's side, and he has come by a hantle siller,
and been made a knight-baronet into the bargain, for being ane o' the
commissioners at the Union."

"He wadna gie a bodle to save us frae famishing," said Hobbie; "and, if
he did, the bread that I bought wi't would stick in my throat, when
I thought it was part of the price of puir auld Scotland's crown and
independence."

"There's the Laird o' Dunder, ane o' the auldest families in
Tiviotdale."

"He's in the tolbooth, mother--he's in the Heart of Mid-Louden for a
thousand merk he borrowed from Saunders Wyliecoat the writer."

"Poor man!" exclaimed Mrs. Elliot, "can we no send him something,
Hobbie?"

"Ye forget, grannie, ye forget we want help oursells," said Hobbie,
somewhat peevishly.

"Troth did I, hinny," replied the good-natured lady, "just at the
instant; it's sae natural to think on ane's blude relations before
themsells;--But there's young Earnscliff."

"He has ower little o' his ain; and siccan a name to keep up, it wad be
a shame," said Hobbie, "to burden him wi' our distress. And I'll tell
ye, grannie, it's needless to sit rhyming ower the style of a' your
kith, kin, and allies, as if there was a charm in their braw names to do
us good; the grandees hae forgotten us, and those of our ain degree hae
just little eneugh to gang on wi' themsells; ne'er a friend hae we that
can, or will, help us to stock the farm again."

"Then, Hobbie, me maun trust in Him that can raise up friends and
fortune out o' the bare moor, as they say."

Hobbie sprung upon his feet. "Ye are right, grannie!" he exclaimed; "ye
are right. I do ken a friend on the bare moor, that baith can and will
help us--The turns o' this day hae dung my head clean hirdie-girdie.
I left as muckle gowd lying on Mucklestane-Moor this morning as would
plenish the house and stock the Heugh-foot twice ower, and I am certain
sure Elshie wadna grudge us the use of it."

"Elshie!" said his grandmother in astonishment; "what Elshie do you
mean?"

"What Elshie should I mean, but Canny Elshie, the Wight o' Mucklestane,"
replied Hobbie.

"God forfend, my bairn, you should gang to fetch water out o' broken
cisterns, or seek for relief frae them that deal wi' the Evil One! There
was never luck in their gifts, nor grace in their paths. And the haill
country kens that body Elshie's an unco man. O, if there was the law,
and the douce quiet administration of justice, that makes a kingdom
flourish in righteousness, the like o' them suldna be suffered to live!
The wizard and the witch are the abomination and the evil thing in the
land."

"Troth, mother," answered Hobbie, "ye may say what ye like, but I am in
the mind that witches and warlocks havena half the power they had lang
syne; at least, sure am I, that ae ill-deviser, like auld Ellieslaw, or
ae ill-doer, like that d--d villain Westburnflat, is a greater plague
and abomination in a country-side than a haill curnie o' the warst
witches that ever capered on a broomstick, or played cantrips on
Fastern's E'en. It wad hae been lang or Elshie had burnt down my house
and barns, and I am determined to try if he will do aught to build them
up again. He's weel kend a skilfu' man ower a' the country, as far as
Brough under Stanmore."

"Bide a wee, my bairn; mind his benefits havena thriven wi' a'body. Jock
Howden died o' the very same disorder Elshie pretended to cure him of,
about the fa' o' the leaf; and though he helped Lambside's cow weel out
o' the moor-ill, yet the louping-ill's been sairer amane; his sheep than
ony season before. And then I have heard he uses sic words abusing human
nature, that's like a fleeing in the face of Providence; and ye mind ye
said yoursell, the first time ye ever saw him, that he was mair like a
bogle than a living thing."

"Hout, mother," said Hobbie, "Elshie's no that bad a chield; he's a
grewsome spectacle for a crooked disciple, to be sure, and a rough
talker, but his bark is waur than his bite; sae, if I had anes something
to eat, for I havena had a morsel ower my throat this day, I wad streek
mysell down for twa or three hours aside the beast, and be on and awa'
to Mucklestane wi' the first skreigh o' morning."

"And what for no the night, Hobbie," said Harry, "and I will ride wi'
ye?"

"My naig is tired," said Hobbie.

"Ye may take mine, then," said John.

"But I am a wee thing wearied mysell."

"You wearied?" said Harry; "shame on ye! I have kend ye keep the saddle
four-and-twenty hours thegither, and ne'er sic a word as weariness in
your wame."

"The night's very dark," said Hobbie, rising and looking through the
casement of the cottage; "and, to speak truth, and shame the deil,
though Elshie's a real honest fallow, yet somegate I would rather take
daylight wi' me when I gang to visit him."

This frank avowal put a stop to further argument; and Hobbie, having
thus compromised matters between the rashness of his brother's counsel,
and the timid cautions which he received from his grandmother, refreshed
himself with such food as the cottage afforded; and, after a cordial
salutation all round, retired to the shed, and stretched himself beside
his trusty palfrey. His brothers shared between them some trusses of
clean straw, disposed in the stall usually occupied by old Annaple's
cow; and the females arranged themselves for repose as well as the
accommodations of the cottage would permit.

With the first dawn of morning, Hobbie arose; and, having rubbed down
and saddled his horse, he set forth to Mucklestane-Moor. He avoided the
company of either of his brothers, from an idea that the Dwarf was most
propitious to those who visited him alone.

"The creature," said he to himself, as he went along, "is no
neighbourly; ae body at a time is fully mair than he weel can abide.
I wonder if he's looked out o' the crib o' him to gather up the bag
o' siller. If he hasna done that, it will hae been a braw windfa' for
somebody, and I'll be finely flung.--Come, Tarras," said he to his
horse, striking him at the same time with his spur, "make mair fit, man;
we maun be first on the field if we can."

He was now on the heath, which began to be illuminated by the beams of
the rising sun; the gentle declivity which he was descending presented
him a distinct, though distant view, of the Dwarf's dwelling. The door
opened, and Hobbie witnessed with his own eyes that phenomenon which he
had frequently heard mentioned. Two human figures (if that of the Dwarf
could be termed such) issued from the solitary abode of the Recluse, and
stood as if in converse together in the open air. The taller form then
stooped, as if taking something up which lay beside the door of the
hut, then both moved forward a little way, and again halted, as in deep
conference. All Hobbie's superstitious terrors revived on witnessing
this'spectacle. That the Dwarf would open his dwelling to a mortal
guest, was as improbable as that any one would choose voluntarily to
be his nocturnal visitor; and, under full conviction that he beheld a
wizard holding intercourse with his familiar spirit, Hobbie pulled in at
once his breath and his bridle, resolved not to incur the indignation
of either by a hasty intrusion on their conference. They were probably
aware of his approach, for he had not halted for a moment before the
Dwarf returned to his cottage; and the taller figure who had accompanied
him, glided round the enclosure of the garden, and seemed to disappear
from the eyes of the admiring Hobbie.

"Saw ever mortal the like o' that!" said Elliot; "but my case is
desperate, sae, if he were Beelzebub himsell, I'se venture down the brae
on him."

Yet, notwithstanding his assumed courage, he slackened his pace, when,
nearly upon the very spot where he had last seen the tall figure,
he discerned, as if lurking among the long heather, a small black
rough-looking object, like a terrier dog.

"He has nae dog that ever I heard of," said Hobbie, "but mony a deil
about his hand--lord forgie me for saying sic a word!--It keeps its
grund, be what it like--I'm judging it's a badger; but whae kens what
shapes thae bogies will take to fright a body? it will maybe start up
like a lion or a crocodile when I come nearer. I'se e'en drive a stage
at it, for if it change its shape when I'm ower near, Tarras will never
stand it; and it will be ower muckle to hae him and the deil to fight
wi' baith at ance."

He therefore cautiously threw a stone at the object, which continued
motionless. "It's nae living thing, after a'," said Hobbie, approaching,
"but the very bag o' siller he flung out o' the window yesterday! and
