length the passenger being fatigued, begins to sleep; and the lazy
waterman ties the halter of the mule, turned out a-grazing, to a stone,
and snores, lying flat on his back. And now the day approached, when we
saw the boat made no way; until a choleric fellow, one of the
passengers, leaps out of the boat, and drubs the head and sides of both
mule and waterman with a willow cudgel. At last we were scarcely set
ashore at the fourth hour. We wash our faces and hands in thy water, O
Feronia. Then, having dined we crawled on three miles; and arrive under
Anxur, which is built up on rocks that look white to a great distance.
Maecenas was to come here, as was the excellent Cocceius. Both sent
ambassadors on matters of great importance, having been accustomed to
reconcile friends at variance. Here, having got sore eyes, I was obliged
to use the black ointment. In the meantime came Maecenas, and Cocceius,
and Fonteius Capito along with them, a man of perfect polish, and
intimate with Mark Antony, no man more so.

Without regret we passed Fundi, where Aufidius Luscus was praetor,
laughing at the honors of that crazy scribe, his praetexta, laticlave,
and pan of incense. At our next stage, being weary, we tarry in the city
of the Mamurrae, Murena complimenting us with his house, and Capito with
his kitchen.

The next day arises, by much the most agreeable to all: for Plotius, and
Varius, and Virgil met us at Sinuessa; souls more candid ones than
which the world never produced, nor is there a person in the world more
bound to them than myself. Oh what embraces, and what transports were
there! While I am in my senses, nothing can I prefer to a pleasant
friend. The village, which is next adjoining to the bridge of Campania,
accommodated us with lodging [at night]; and the public officers with
such a quantity of fuel and salt as they are obliged to [by law]. From
this place the mules deposited their pack-saddles at Capua betimes [in
the morning]. Maecenas goes to play [at tennis]; but I and Virgil to our
repose: for to play at tennis is hurtful to weak eyes and feeble
constitutions.

From this place the villa of Cocceius, situated above the Caudian inns,
which abounds with plenty, receives us. Now, my muse, I beg of you
briefly to relate the engagement between the buffoon Sarmentus and
Messius Cicirrus; and from what ancestry descended each began the
contest. The illustrious race of Messius-Oscan: Sarmentus's mistress is
still alive. Sprung from such families as these, they came to the
combat. First, Sarmentus: "I pronounce thee to have the look of a mad
horse." We laugh; and Messius himself [says], "I accept your challenge:"
and wags his head. "O!" cries he, "if the horn were not cut off your
forehead, what would you not do; since, maimed as you are, you bully at
such a rate?" For a foul scar has disgraced the left part of Messius's
bristly forehead. Cutting many jokes upon his Campanian disease, and
upon his face, he desired him to exhibit Polyphemus's dance: that he had
no occasion for a mask, or the tragic buskins. Cicirrus [retorted]
largely to these: he asked, whether he had consecrated his chain to the
household gods according to his vow; though he was a scribe, [he told
him] his mistress's property in him was not the less. Lastly, he asked,
how he ever came to run away; such a lank meager fellow, for whom a
pound of corn [a-day] would be ample. We were so diverted, that we
continued that supper to an unusual length.

Hence we proceed straight on for Beneventum; where the bustling landlord
almost burned himself, in roasting some lean thrushes: for, the fire
falling through the old kitchen [floor], the spreading flame made a
great progress toward the highest part of the roof. Then you might have
seen the hungry guests and frightened slaves snatching their supper out
[of the flames], and everybody endeavoring to extinguish the fire.

After this Apulia began to discover to me her well-known mountains,
which the Atabulus scorches [with his blasts]: and through which we
should never have crept, unless the neighboring village of Trivicus had
received us, not without a smoke that brought tears into our eyes;
occasioned by a hearth's burning some green boughs with the leaves upon
them. Here, like a great fool as I was, I wait till midnight for a
deceitful mistress; sleep, however, overcomes me while meditating love;
and disagreeable dreams make me ashamed of myself and every thing about
me.

Hence we were bowled away in chaises twenty-four miles, intending to
stop at a little town, which one cannot name in a verse, but it is
easily enough known by description. For water is sold here, though the
worst in the world; but their bread is exceeding fine, inasmuch that the
weary traveler is used to carry it willingly on his shoulders; for [the
bread] at Canusium is gritty; a pitcher of water is worth no more [than
it is here]: which place was formerly built by the valiant Diomedes.
Here Varius departs dejected from his weeping friends.

Hence we came to Rubi, fatigued: because we made a long journey, and it
was rendered still more troublesome by the rains. Next day the weather
was better, the road worse, even to the very walls of Barium that
abounds in fish. In the next place Egnatia, which [seems to have] been
built on troubled waters, gave us occasion for jests and laughter; for
they wanted to persuade us, that at this sacred portal the incense
melted without fire. The Jew Apella may believe this, not I. For I have
learned [from Epicurus], that the gods dwell in a state of tranquillity;
nor, if nature effect any wonder, that the anxious gods send it from the
high canopy of the heavens.

Brundusium ends both my long journey, and my paper.

       *       *       *       *       *



SATIRE VI.

_Of true nobility_.


Not Maecenas, though of all the Lydians that ever inhabited the Tuscan
territories, no one is of a nobler family than yourself; and though you
have ancestors both on father's and mother's side, that in times past
have had the command of mighty legions; do you, as the generality are
wont, toss up your nose at obscure people, such as me, who has [only] a
freed-man for my father: since you affirm that it is of no consequence
of what parents any man is born, so that he be a man of merit. You
persuade yourself, with truth, that before the dominions of Tullius, and
the reign of one born a slave, frequently numbers of men descended from
ancestors of no rank, have both lived as men of merit, and have been
distinguished by the greatest honors: [while] on the other hand
Laevinus, the descendant of that famous Valerius, by whose means
Tarquinius Superbus was expelled from his kingdom, was not a farthing
more esteemed [on account of his family, even] in the judgment of the
people, with whose disposition you are well acquainted; who often
foolishly bestow honors on the unworthy, and are from their stupidity
slaves to a name: who are struck with admiration by inscriptions and
statues. What is it fitting for us to do, who are far, very far removed
from the vulgar [in our sentiments]? For grant it, that the people had
rather confer a dignity on Laevinus than on Decius, who is a new man;
and the censor Appius would expel me [the senate-house], because I was
not sprung from a sire of distinction: and that too deservedly, inasmuch
as I rested not content in my own condition. But glory drags in her
dazzling car the obscure as closely fettered as those of nobler birth.
What did it profit you, O Tullius, to resume the robe that you [were
forced] to lay aside, and become a tribune [again]? Envy increased upon
you, which had been less, it you had remained in a private station. For
when any crazy fellow has laced the middle of his leg with the sable
buskins, and has let flow the purple robe from his breast, he
immediately hears: "Who is this man? Whose son is he?" Just as if there
be any one, who labors under the same distemper as Barrus does, so that
he is ambitious of being reckoned handsome; let him go where he will, he
excites curiosity among the girls of inquiring into particulars; as what
sort of face, leg, foot, teeth, hair, he has. Thus he who engages to his
citizens to take care of the city, the empire, and Italy, and the
sanctuaries of the gods, forces every mortal to be solicitous, and to
ask from what sire he is descended, or whether he is base by the
obscurity of his mother. What? do you, the son of a Syrus, a Dana, or a
Dionysius, dare to cast down the citizens of Rome from the [Tarpeian]
rock, or deliver them up to Cadmus [the executioner]? But, [you may
say,] my colleague Novius sits below me by one degree: for he is only
what my father was. And therefore do you esteem yourself a Paulus or a
Messala? But he (Novius), if two hundred carriages and three funerals
were to meet in the forum, could make noise enough to drown all their
horns and trumpets: this [kind of merit] at least has its weight with
us.

Now I return to myself, who am descended from a freed-man; whom every
body nibbles at, as being descended from a freed-man. Now, because,
Maecenas, I am a constant guest of yours; but formerly, because a Roman
legion was under my command, as being a military tribune. This latter
case is different from the former: for, though any person perhaps might
justly envy me that post of honor, yet could he not do so with regard to
your being my friend! especially as you are cautious to admit such as
are worthy; and are far from having any sinister ambitious views. I can
not reckon myself a lucky fellow on this account, as if it were by
accident that I got you for my friend; for no kind of accident threw you
in my way. That best of men, Virgil, long ago, and after him, Varius,
told you what I was. When first I came into your presence, I spoke a few
words in a broken manner (for childish bashfulness hindered me from
speaking more); I did not tell you that I was the issue of an
illustrious father: I did not [pretend] that I rode about the country on
a Satureian horse, but plainly what I really was; you answer (as your
custom is) a few words: I depart: and you re-invite me after the ninth
month, and command me to be in the number of your friends. I esteem it a
great thing that I pleased you, who distinguish probity from baseness,
not by the illustriousness of a father, but by the purity of heart and
feelings.

And yet if my disposition be culpable for a few faults, and those small
ones, otherwise perfect (as if you should condemn moles scattered over a
beautiful skin), if no one can justly lay to my charge avarice, nor
sordidness, nor impure haunts; if, in fine (to speak in my own praise),
I live undefiled, and innocent, and dear to my friends; my father was
the cause of all this: who though a poor man on a lean farm, was
unwilling to send me to a school under [the pedant] Flavius, where great
boys, sprung from great centurions, having their satchels and tablets
swung over their left arm, used to go with money in their hands the very
day it was due; but had the spirit to bring me a child to Rome, to be
taught those arts which any Roman knight and senator can teach his own
children. So that, if any person had considered my dress, and the slaves
who attended me in so populous a city, he would have concluded that
those expenses were supplied to me out of some hereditary estate. He
himself, of all others the most faithful guardian, was constantly about
every one of my preceptors. Why should I multiply words? He preserved me
chaste (which is the first honor or virtue) not only from every actual
guilt, but likewise from [every] foul imputation, nor was he afraid lest
any should turn it to his reproach, if I should come to follow a
business attended with small profits, in capacity of an auctioneer, or
(what he was himself) a tax-gatherer. Nor [had that been the case]
should I have complained. On this account the more praise is due to him,
and from me a greater degree of gratitude. As long as I am in my senses,
I can never be ashamed of such a father as this, and therefore shall not
apologize [for my birth], in the manner that numbers do, by affirming it
to be no fault of theirs. My language and way of thinking is far
different from such persons. For if nature were to make us from a
certain term of years to go over our past time again, and [suffer us] to
choose other parents, such as every man for ostentation's sake would
wish for himself; I, content with my own, would not assume those that
are honored with the ensigns and seats of state; [for which I should
seem] a madman in the opinion of the mob, but in yours, I hope a man of
sense; because I should be unwilling to sustain a troublesome burden,
being by no means used to it. For I must [then] immediately set about
acquiring a larger fortune, and more people must be complimented; and
this and that companion must be taken along, so that I could neither
take a jaunt into the country, or a journey by myself; more attendants
and more horses must be fed; coaches must be drawn. Now, if I please, I
can go as far as Tarentum on my bob-tail mule, whose loins the
portmanteau galls with his weight, as does the horseman his shoulders.
No one will lay to my charge such sordidness as he may, Tullius, to you,
when five slaves follow you, a praetor, along the Tiburtian way,
carrying a traveling kitchen, and a vessel of wine. Thus I live more
comfortably, O illustrious senator, than you, and than thousands of
others. Wherever I have a fancy, I walk by myself: I inquire the price
of herbs and bread; I traverse the tricking circus, and the forum often
in the evening: I stand listening among the fortune-tellers: thence I
take myself home to a plate of onions, pulse, and pancakes. My supper is
served up by three slaves; and a white stone slab supports two cups and
a brimmer: near the salt-cellar stands a homely cruet with a little
bowl, earthen-ware from Campania. Then I go to rest; by no means
concerned that I must rise in the morning, and pay a visit to the statue
of Marsyas, who denies that he is able to bear the look of the younger
Novius. I lie a-bed to the fourth hour; after that I take a ramble, or
having read or written what may amuse me in my privacy, I am anointed
with oil, but not with such as the nasty Nacca, when he robs the lamps.
But when the sun, become more violent, has reminded me to go to bathe, I
avoid the Campus Martius and the game of hand-ball. Having dined in a
temperate manner, just enough to hinder me from having an empty stomach,
during the rest of the day I trifle in my own house. This is the life of
those who are free from wretched and burthensome ambition: with such
things as these I comfort myself, in a way to live more delightfully
than if my grandfather had been a quaestor, and father and uncle too.

       *       *       *       *       *



SATIRE VII.

_He humorously describes a squabble betwixt Rupilius and Persius._


In what manner the mongrel Persius revenged the filth and venom of
Rupilius, surnamed King, is I think known to all the blind men and
barbers. This Persius, being a man of fortune, had very great business
at Clazomenae, and, into the bargain, certain troublesome litigations
with King; a hardened fellow, and one who was able to exceed even King
in virulence; confident, blustering, of such a bitterness of speech,
that he would outstrip the Sisennae and Barri, if ever so well equipped.

I return to King. After nothing could be settled betwixt them (for
people among whom adverse war breaks out, are proportionably vexatious
on the same account as they are brave. Thus between Hector, the son of
Priam, and the high-spirited Achilles, the rage was of so capital a
nature, that only the final destruction [one of them] could determine
it; on no other account, than that valor in each of them was
consummate. If discord sets two cowards to work; or if an engagement
happens between two that are not of a match, as that of Diomed and the
Lycian Glaucus; the worst man will walk off, [buying his peace] by
voluntarily sending presents), when Brutus held as praetor the fertile
Asia, this pair, Rupilius and Persius, encountered; in such a manner,
that [the gladiators] Bacchius and Bithus were not better matched.
Impetuous they hurry to the cause, each of them a fine sight.

Persius opens his case; and is laughed at by all the assembly; he extols
Brutus, and extols the guard; he styles Brutus the sun of Asia, and his
attendants he styles salutary stars, all except King; that he [he says,]
came like that dog, the constellation hateful to husbandman: he poured
along like a wintery flood, where the ax seldom comes.

Then, upon his running on in so smart and fluent a manner, the
Praenestine [king] directs some witticisms squeezed from the vineyard,
himself a hardy vine-dresser, never defeated, to whom the passenger had
often been obliged to yield, bawling cuckoo with roaring voice.

But the Grecian Persius, as soon as he had been well sprinkled with
Italian vinegar, bellows out: O Brutus, by the great gods I conjure you,
who are accustomed to take off kings, why do you not dispatch this King?
Believe me, this is a piece of work which of right belongs to you.

       *       *       *       *       *



SATIRE VIII.

_Priapus complains that the Esquilian mount is infested with the
incantations of sorceresses_.


Formerly I was the trunk of a wild fig-tree, an useless log: when the
artificer, in doubt whether he should make a stool or a Priapus of me,
determined that I should be a god. Henceforward I became a god, the
greatest terror of thieves and birds: for my right hand restrains
thieves, and a bloody-looking pole stretched out from my frightful
middle: but a reed fixed upon the crown of my head terrifies the
mischievous birds, and hinders them from settling in these new gardens.
Before this the fellow-slave bore dead corpses thrown out of their
narrow cells to this place, in order to be deposited in paltry coffins.
This place stood a common sepulcher for the miserable mob, for the
buffoon Pantelabus, and Nomentanus the rake. Here a column assigned a
thousand feet [of ground] in front, and three hundred toward the fields:
that the burial-place should not descend to the heirs of the estate. Now
one may live in the Esquiliae, [since it is made] a healthy place; and
walk upon an open terrace, where lately the melancholy passengers beheld
the ground frightful with white bones; though both the thieves and wild
beasts accustomed to infest this place, do not occasion me so much care
and trouble, as do [these hags], that turn people's minds by their
incantations and drugs. These I can not by any means destroy nor hinder,
but that they will gather bones and noxious herbs, as soon as the
fleeting moon has shown her beauteous face.

I myself saw Canidia, with her sable garment tucked up, walk with bare
feet and disheveled hair, yelling together with the elder Sagana.
Paleness had rendered both of them horrible to behold. They began to
claw up the earth with their nails, and to tear a black ewe-lamb to
pieces with their teeth. The blood was poured into a ditch, that thence
they might charm out the shades of the dead, ghosts that were to give
them answers. There was a woolen effigy too, another of wax: the woolen
one larger, which was to inflict punishment on the little one. The waxen
stood in a suppliant posture, as ready to perish in a servile manner.
One of the hags invokes Hecate, and the other fell Tisiphone. Then might
you see serpents and infernal bitches wander about, and the moon with
blushes hiding behind the lofty monuments, that she might not be a
witness to these doings. But if I lie, even a tittle, may my head be
contaminated with the white filth of ravens; and may Julius, and the
effeminate Miss Pediatous, and the knave Voranus, come to water upon me,
and befoul me. Why should I mention every particular? viz. in what
manner, speaking alternately with Sagana, the ghosts uttered dismal and
piercing shrieks; and how by stealth they laid in the earth a wolf's
beard, with the teeth of a spotted snake; and how a great blaze flamed
forth from the waxen image? And how I was shocked at the voices and
actions of these two furies, a spectator however by no means incapable
of revenge? For from my cleft body of fig-tree wood I uttered a loud
noise with as great an explosion as a burst bladder. But they ran into
the city: and with exceeding laughter and diversion might you have seen
Canidia's artificial teeth, and Sagana's towering tete of false hair
falling off, and the herbs, and the enchanted bracelets from her arm.

       *       *       *       *       *



SATIRE IX.

_He describes his sufferings from the loquacity of an impertinent
fellow._


I was accidentally going along the Via Sacra, meditating on some trifle
or other, as is my custom, and totally intent upon it. A certain person,
known to me by name only, runs up; and, having seized my hand, "How do
you do, my dearest fellow?" "Tolerably well," say I, "as times go; and I
wish you every thing you can desire." When he still followed me; "Would
you any thing?" said I to him. But, "You know me," says he: "I am a man
of learning." "Upon that account," says I: "you will have more of my
esteem." Wanting sadly to get away from him, sometimes I walked on
apace, now and then I stopped, and I whispered something to my boy. When
the sweat ran down to the bottom of my ankles. O, said I to myself,
Bolanus, how happy were you in a head-piece! Meanwhile he kept prating
on any thing that came uppermost, praised the streets, the city; and,
when I made him no answer; "You want terribly," said he, "to get away; I
perceived it long ago; but you effect nothing. I shall still stick close
to you; I shall follow you hence: Where are you at present bound for?"
"There is no need for your being carried so much about: I want to see a
person, who is unknown to you: he lives a great way off across the
Tiber, just by Caesar's gardens." "I have nothing to do, and I am not
lazy; I will attend you thither." I hang down my ears like an ass of
surly disposition, when a heavier load than ordinary is put upon his
back. He begins again: "If I am tolerably acquainted with myself, you
will not esteem Viscus or Varius as a friend, more than me; for who can
write more verses, or in a shorter time than I? Who can move his limbs
with softer grace [in the dance]? And then I sing, so that even
Hermogenes may envy."

Here there was an opportunity of interrupting him. "Have you a mother,
[or any] relations that are interested in your welfare?" "Not one have
I; I have buried them all." "Happy they! now I remain. Dispatch me: for
the fatal moment is at hand, which an old Sabine sorceress, having
shaken her divining urn, foretold when I was a boy; 'This child, neither
shall cruel poison, nor the hostile sword, nor pleurisy, nor cough, nor
the crippling gout destroy: a babbler shall one day demolish him; if he
be wise, let him avoid talkative people, as soon as he comes to man's
estate.'"

One fourth of the day being now passed, we came to Vesta's temple; and,
as good luck would have it, he was obliged to appear to his
recognizance; which unless he did, he must have lost his cause. "If you
love me," said he, "step in here a little." "May I die! if I be either
able to stand it out, or have any knowledge of the civil laws: and
besides, I am in a hurry, you know whither." "I am in doubt what I shall
do," said he; "whether desert you or my cause." "Me, I beg of you." "I
will not do it," said he; and began to take the lead of me. I (as it is
difficult to contend with one's master) follow him. "How stands it with
Maecenas and you?" Thus he begins his prate again. "He is one of few
intimates, and of a very wise way of thinking. No man ever made use of
opportunity with more cleverness. You should have a powerful assistant,
who could play an underpart, if you were disposed to recommend this man;
may I perish, if you should not supplant all the rest!" "We do not live
there in the manner you imagine; there is not a house that is freer or
more remote from evils of this nature. It is never of any disservice to
me, that any particular person is wealthier or a better scholar than I
am: every individual has his proper place." "You tell me a marvelous
thing, scarcely credible." "But it is even so." "You the more inflame my
desires to be near his person." "You need only be inclined to it: such
is your merit, you will accomplish it: and he is capable of being won;
and on that account the first access to him he makes difficult." "I will
not be wanting to myself: I will corrupt his servants with presents; if
I am excluded to-day, I will not desist; I will seek opportunities; I
will meet him in the public streets; I will wait upon him home. Life
allows nothing to mortals without great labor." While he was running on
at this rate, lo! Fuscus Aristius comes up, a dear friend of mine, and
one who knows the fellow well. We make a stop. "Whence come you? whither
are you going?" he asks and answers. I began to twitch him [by the
elbow], and to take hold of his arms [that were affectedly] passive,
nodding and distorting my eyes, that he might rescue me. Cruelly arch
he laughs, and pretends not to take the hint: anger galled my liver.
"Certainly," [said I, "Fuscus,] you said that you wanted to communicate
something to me in private." "I remember it very well; but will tell it
you at a better opportunity: to-day is the thirtieth sabbath. Would you
affront the circumcised Jews?" I reply, "I have no scruple [on that
account]." "But I have: I am something weaker, one of the multitude. You
must forgive me: I will speak with you on another occasion." And has
this sun arisen so disastrous upon me! The wicked rogue runs away, and
leaves me under the knife. But by luck his adversary met him: and,
"Whither are you going, you infamous fellow?" roars he with a loud
voice: and, "Do you witness the arrest?" I assent. He hurries him into
court: there is a great clamor on both sides, a mob from all parts. Thus
Apollo preserved me.

       *       *       *       *       *



SATIRE X.

_He supports the judgment which he had before given of Lucilius, and
