
"Is it a ghost, Lorry?" said Sukey, drawing nearer to the stalwart
keeper.

"By th' maskins, lass, ey conna tell," replied Blackrod; "boh whotever
it be, ey'll protect ye."

"Tak care o' me, Phil," ejaculated Nancy Holt, pressing close to her
lover's side.

"Eigh, that I win," rejoined the forester.

"Ey dunna care for ghosts so long as yo are near me, Phil," said Nancy,
tenderly.

"Then ey'n never leave ye, Nance," replied Phil.

"Ghost or not," said Jennet, who had been occupied in regarding the
new-comer attentively, "ey'n go an speak to it. Ey'm nah afeerd, if yo
are."

"Eigh do, Jennet, that's a brave little lass," said Blackrod, glad to be
rid of her in any way.

"Stay!" cried Adam Whitworth, coming up at the moment, and overhearing
what was said--"you must not go near the gentleman. I will not have him
molested, or even spoken with, till Sir Ralph appears."

Meanwhile, the stranger, without returning the glances fixed upon him,
or deigning to notice any of the company, pursued his way, and sat down
in a chair at the upper table.

But his entrance had been witnessed by others besides the rustic guests
and servitors. Nicholas and Richard Assheton chanced to be in the
gallery at the time, and, greatly struck by the singularity of his
appearance, immediately descended to make inquiries respecting him. As
they appeared below, the old steward advanced to meet them.

"Who the devil have you got there, Adam?" asked the squire.

"It passeth me almost to tell you, Master Nicholas," replied the
steward; "and, not knowing whether the gentleman be invited or not, I am
fain to wait Sir Ralph's pleasure in regard to him."

"Have you no notion who he is?" inquired Richard.

"All I know about him may be soon told, Master Richard," replied Adam.
"He is a stranger in these parts, and hath very recently taken up his
abode in Wiswall Hall, which has been abandoned of late years, as you
know, and suffered to go to decay. Some few months ago an aged couple
from Colne, named Hewit, took possession of part of the hall, and were
suffered to remain there, though old Katty Hewit, or Mould-heels, as she
is familiarly termed by the common folk, is in no very good repute
hereabouts, and was driven, it is said from Colne, owing to her
practices as a witch. Be that as it may, soon after these Hewits were
settled at Wiswall, comes this stranger, and fixes himself in another
part of the hall. How he lives no one can tell, but it is said he
rambles all night long, like a troubled spirit, about the deserted
rooms, attended by Mother Mould-heels; while in the daytime he is never
seen."

"Can he be of sound mind?" asked Richard.

"Hardly so, I should think, Master Richard," replied the steward. "As to
who he may be there are many opinions; and some aver he is Francis
Paslew, grandson of Francis, brother to the abbot, and being a Jesuit
priest, for you know the Paslews have all strictly adhered to the old
faith--and that is why they have fled the country and abandoned their
residence--he is obliged to keep himself concealed."

"If such be the case, he must be crazed indeed to venture here,"
observed Nicholas; "and yet I am half inclined to credit the report.
Look at him, Dick. He is the very image of the old abbot."

"Yon portrait might have been painted for him," said Richard, gazing at
the picture on the wall, and from it to the monk as he spoke; "the very
same garb, too."

"There is an old monastic robe up-stairs, in the closet adjoining the
room occupied by Mistress Nutter," observed the steward, "said to be the
garment in which Abbot Paslew suffered death. Some stains are upon it,
supposed to be the blood of the wizard Demdike, who perished in an
extraordinary manner on the same day."

"I have seen it," cried Nicholas, "and the monk's habit looks precisely
like it, and, if my eyes deceive me not, is stained in the same manner."

"I see the spots plainly on the breast," cried Richard. "How can he have
procured the robe?"

"Heaven only knows," replied the old steward. "It is a very strange
occurrence."

"I will go question him," said Richard.

So saying, he proceeded to the upper table, accompanied by Nicholas. As
they drew near, the stranger arose, and fixed a grim look upon Richard,
who was a little in advance.

"It is the abbot's ghost!" cried Nicholas, stopping, and detaining his
cousin. "You shall not address it."

During the contention that ensued, the monk glided towards a side-door
at the upper end of the hall, and passed through it. So general was the
consternation, that no one attempted to stay him, nor would any one
follow to see whither he went. Released, at length, from the strong
grasp of the squire, Richard rushed forth, and not returning, Nicholas,
after the lapse of a few minutes, went in search of him, but came back
presently, and told the old steward he could neither find him nor the
monk.

"Master Richard will be back anon, I dare say, Adam," he remarked; "if
not, I will make further search for him; but you had better not mention
this mysterious occurrence to Sir Ralph, at all events not until the
festivities are over, and the ladies have retired. It might disturb
them. I fear the appearance of this monk bodes no good to our family;
and what makes it worse is, it is not the first ill omen that has
befallen us to-day, Master Richard was unlucky enough to stand on Abbot
Paslew's grave!"

"Mercy on us! that was unlucky indeed!" cried Adam, in great
trepidation. "Poor dear young gentleman! Bid him take especial care of
himself, good Master Nicholas. I noticed just now, that yon fearsome
monk regarded him more attentively than you. Bid him be careful, I
conjure you, sir. But here comes my honoured master and his guests.
Here, Gregory, Dickon, bestir yourselves, knaves; and serve supper at
the upper table in a trice."

Any apprehensions Nicholas might entertain for Richard were at this
moment relieved, for as Sir Ralph and his guests came in at one door,
the young man entered by another. He looked deathly pale. Nicholas put
his finger to his lips in token of silence--a gesture which the other
signified that he understood.

Sir Ralph and his guests having taken their places at the table, an
excellent and plentiful repast was speedily set before them, and if they
did not do quite such ample justice to it as the hungry rustics at the
lower board had done to the good things provided for them, the cook
could not reasonably complain. No allusion whatever being made to the
recent strange occurrence, the cheerfulness of the company was
uninterrupted; but the noise in the lower part of the hall had in a
great measure subsided, partly out of respect to the host, and partly in
consequence of the alarm occasioned by the supposed supernatural
visitation. Richard continued silent and preoccupied, and neither ate
nor drank; but Nicholas appearing to think his courage would be best
sustained by an extra allowance of clary and sack, applied himself
frequently to the goblet with that view, and erelong his spirits
improved so wonderfully, and his natural boldness was so much increased,
that he was ready to confront Abbot Paslew, or any other abbot of them
all, wherever they might chance to cross him. In this enterprising frame
of mind he drew Richard aside, and questioned him as to what had taken
place in his pursuit of the mysterious monk.

"You overtook him, Dick, of course?" he said, "and put it to him roundly
why he came hither, where neither ghosts nor Jesuit priests, whichever
he may be, are wanted. What answered he, eh? Would I had been there to
interrogate him! He should have declared how he became possessed of that
old moth-eaten, blood-stained, monkish gown, or I would have unfrocked
him, even if he had proved to be a skeleton. But I interrupt you. You
have not told me what occurred at the interview?"

"There was no interview," replied Richard, gravely.

"No interview!" echoed Nicholas. "S'blood, man!--but I must be careful,
for Doctor Ormerod and Parson Dewhurst are within hearing, and may
lecture me on the wantonness and profanity of swearing. By Saint Gregory
de Northbury!--no, that's an oath too, and, what is worse, a Popish
oath. By--I have several tremendous imprecations at my tongue's end, but
they shall not out. It is a sinful propensity, and must be controlled.
In a word, then, you let him escape, Dick?"

"If you were so anxious to stay him, I wonder you came not with me,"
replied Richard; "but you now hold very different language from what you
used when I quitted the hall."

"Ah, true--right--Dick," replied Nicholas; "my sentiments have undergone
a wonderful change since then. I now regret having stopped you. By my
troth! if I meet that confounded monk again, he shall give a good
account of himself, I promise him. But what said he to you, Dick? Make
an end of your story."

"I have not begun it yet," replied Richard. "But pay attention, and you
shall hear what occurred. When I rushed forth, the monk had already
gained the entrance-hall. No one was within it at the time, all the
serving-men being busied here with the feasting. I summoned him to stay,
but he answered not, and, still grimly regarding me, glided towards the
outer door, which (I know not by what chance) stood open, and passing
through it, closed it upon me. This delayed me a moment; and when I got
out, he had already descended the steps, and was moving towards the
garden. It was bright moonlight, so I could see him distinctly. And mark
this, Nicholas--the two great blood-hounds were running about at large
in the court-yard, but they slunk off, as if alarmed at his appearance.
The monk had now gained the garden, and was shaping his course swiftly
towards the ruined Conventual Church. Determined to overtake him, I
quickened my pace; but he gained the old fane before me, and threaded
the broken aisles with noiseless celerity. In the choir he paused and
confronted me. When within a few yards of him, I paused, arrested by his
fixed and terrible gaze. Nicholas, his look froze my blood. I would have
spoken, but I could not. My tongue clove to the roof of my mouth for
very fear. Before I could shake off this apprehension the figure raised
its hand menacingly thrice, and passed into the Lacy Chapel. As soon as
he was gone my courage returned, and I followed. The little chapel was
brilliantly illuminated by the moon; but it was empty. I could only see
the white monument of Sir Henry de Lacy glistening in the pale
radiance."

"I must take a cup of wine after this horrific relation," said Nicholas,
replenishing his goblet. "It has chilled my blood, as the monk's icy
gaze froze yours. Body o' me! but this is strange indeed. Another oath.
Lord help me!--I shall never get rid of the infernal--I mean, the evil
habit. Will you not pledge me, Dick?"

The young man shook his head.

"You are wrong," pursued Nicholas,--"decidedly wrong. Wine gladdeneth
the heart of man, and restoreth courage. A short while ago I was
downcast as you, melancholy as an owl, and timorous as a kid, but now I
am resolute as an eagle, stout of heart, and cheerful of spirit; and all
owing to a cup of wine. Try the remedy, Dick, and get rid of your gloom.
You look like a death's-head at a festival. What if you have stumbled on
an ill-omened grave! What if you have been banned by a witch! What if
you have stood face to face with the devil--or a ghost! Heed them not!
Drink, and set care at defiance. And, not to gainsay my own counsel, I
shall fill my cup again. For, in good sooth, this is rare clary, Dick;
and, talking of wine, you should taste some of the wonderful Rhenish
found in the abbot's cellar by our ancestor, Richard Assheton--a century
old if it be a day, and yet cordial and corroborative as ever. Those
monks were lusty tipplers, Dick. I sometimes wish I had been an abbot
myself. I should have made a rare father confessor--especially to a
pretty penitent. Here, Gregory, hie thee to the master cellarer, and bid
him fill me a goblet of the old Rhenish--the wine from the abbot's
cellar. Thou understandest--or, stay, better bring the flask. I have a
profound respect for the venerable bottle, and would pay my devoirs to
it. Hie away, good fellow!"

"You will drink too much if you go on thus," remarked Richard.

"Not a drop," rejoined Nicholas. "I am blithe as a lark, and would keep
so. That is why I drink. But to return to our ghosts. Since this place
must be haunted, I would it were visited by spirits of a livelier kind
than old Paslew. There is Isole de Heton, for instance. The fair
votaress would be the sort of ghost for me. I would not turn my back on
her, but face her manfully. Look at her picture, Dick. Was ever
countenance sweeter than hers--lips more tempting, or eyes more melting!
Is she not adorable? Zounds!" he exclaimed, suddenly pausing, and
staring at the portrait--"Would you believe it, Dick? The fair Isole
winked at me--I'll swear she did. I mean--I will venture to affirm upon
oath, if required, that she winked."

"Pshaw!" exclaimed Richard. "The fumes of the wine have mounted to your
brain, and disordered it."

"No such thing," cried Nicholas, regarding the picture as steadily as he
could--"she's leering at me now. By the Queen of Paphos! another wink.
Nay, if you doubt me, watch her well yourself. A pleasant adventure
this--ha!--ha!"

"A truce to this drunken foolery," cried Richard, moving away.

"Drunken! s'death! recall that epithet, Dick," cried Nicholas, angrily.
"I am no more drunk than yourself, you dog. I can walk as steadily, and
see as plainly, as you; and I will maintain it at the point of the
sword, that the eyes of that picture have lovingly regarded me; nay,
that they follow me now."

"A common delusion with a portrait," said Richard; "they appear to
follow _me_."

"But they do not wink at you as they do at me," said Nicholas, "neither
do the lips break into smiles, and display the pearly teeth beneath
them, as occurs in my case. Grim old abbots frown on you, but fair,
though frail, votaresses smile on me. I am the favoured mortal, Dick."

"Were it as you represent, Nicholas," replied Richard, gravely, "I
should say, indeed, that some evil principle was at work to lure you
through your passions to perdition. But I know they are all fancies
engendered by your heated brain, which in your calmer moments you will
discard, as I discard them now. If I have any weight with you, I counsel
you to drink no more, or you will commit some mad foolery, of which you
will be ashamed hereafter. The discreeter course would be to retire
altogether; and for this you have ample excuse, as you will have to
arise betimes to-morrow, to set out for Pendle Forest with Master
Potts."

"Retire!" exclaimed Nicholas, bursting into a loud, contemptuous laugh.
"I like thy counsel, lad. Yes, I will retire when I have finished the
old monastic Rhenish which Gregory is bringing me. I will retire when I
have danced the Morisco with the May Queen--the Cushion Dance with Dame
Tetlow--and the Brawl with the lovely Isole de Heton. Another wink,
Dick. By our Lady! she assents to my proposition. When I have done all
this, and somewhat more, it will be time to think of retiring. But I
have the night before me, Dick--not to be spent in drowsy
unconsciousness, as thou recommendest, but in active, pleasurable
enjoyment. No man requires less sleep than I do. Ordinarily, I 'retire,'
as thou termest it, at ten, and rise with the sun. In summer I am abroad
soon after three, and mend that if thou canst, Dick. To-night I shall
seek my couch about midnight, and yet I'll warrant me I shall be the
first stirring in the Abbey; and, in any case, I shall be in the saddle
before thee."

"It may be," replied Richard; "but it was to preserve you from
extravagance to-night that I volunteered advice, which, from my
knowledge of your character, I might as well have withheld. But let me
caution you on another point. Dance with Dame Tetlow, or any other dame
you please--dance with the fair Isole de Heton, if you can prevail upon
her to descend from her frame and give you her hand; but I object--most
decidedly object--to your dancing with Alizon Device."

"Why so?" cried Nicholas; "why should I not dance with whom I please?
And what right hast thou to forbid me Alizon? Troth, lad, art thou so
ignorant of human nature as not to know that forbidden fruit is the
sweetest. It hath ever been so since the fall. I am now only the more
bent upon dancing with the prohibited damsel. But I would fain know the
principle on which thou erectest thyself into her guardian. Is it
because she fainted when thy sword was crossed with that hot-headed
fool, Sir Thomas Metcalfe, that thou flatterest thyself she is in love
with thee? Be not too sure of it, Dick. Many a timid wench has swooned
at the sight of a naked weapon, without being enamoured of the
swordsman. The fainting proves nothing. But grant she loves thee--what
then! An end must speedily come of it; so better finish at once, before
she be entangled in a mesh from which she cannot be extricated without
danger. For hark thee, Dick, whatever thou mayst think, I am not so far
gone that I know not what I say, neither is my vision so much obscured
that I see not some matters plainly enough, and I understand thee and
Alizon well, and see through you both. This matter must go no further.
It has gone too far already. After to-night you must see her no more. I
am serious in this--serious _inter pocula_, if such a thing can be. It
is necessary to observe caution, for reasons that will at once occur to
thee. Thou canst not wed this girl--then why trifle with her till her
heart be broken."

"Broken it shall never be by me!" cried Richard.

"But I tell you it will be broken, if you do not desist at once,"
rejoined Nicholas. "I was but jesting when I said I would rob you of her
in the Morisco, though it would be charity to both, and spare you many a
pang hereafter, were I to put my threat into execution. However, I have
a soft heart where aught of love is concerned, and, having pointed out
the risk you will incur, I shall leave you to follow your own devices.
But, for Alizon's sake, stop in time."

"You now speak soberly and sensibly enough, Nicholas," replied Richard,
"and I thank you heartily for your counsel; and if I do not follow it by
withdrawing at once from a pursuit which may appear to you hopeless, if
not dangerous, you will, I hope, give me credit for being actuated by
worthy motives. I will at once, and frankly admit, that I love Alizon;
and loving her, you may rest assured I would sacrifice my life a
thousand times rather than endanger her happiness. But there is a point
in her history, with which if you were acquainted, it might alter your
view of the case; but this is not the season for its disclosure,
neither, I am bound to say, does the circumstance so materially alter
the apparent posture of affairs as to remove all difficulty. On the
contrary, it leaves an insurmountable obstacle behind it."

"Are you wise, then, in going on?" asked Nicholas.

"I know not," answered Richard, "but I feel as if I were the sport of
fate. Uncertain whither to turn for the best, I leave the disposition of
my course to chance. But, alas!" he added, sadly, "all seems to point
out that this meeting with Alizon will be my last."

"Well, cheer up, lad," said Nicholas. "These afflictions are hard to
bear, it is true; but somehow they are got over. Just as if your horse
should fling you in the midst of a hedge when you are making a flying
leap, you get scratched and bruised, but you scramble out, and in a day
or two are on your legs again. Love breaks no bones, that's one comfort.
When at your age, I was desperately in love, not with Mistress Nicholas
Assheton--Heaven help the fond soul! but with--never mind with whom; but
it was not a very prudent match, and so, in my worldly wisdom, I was
obliged to cry off. A sad business it was. I thought I should have died
of it, and I made quite sure that the devoted girl would die first, in
which case we were to occupy the same grave. But I was not driven to
such a dire extremity, for before I had kept house a week, Jack Walker,
the keeper of Downham, made his appearance in my room, and after telling
me of the mischief done by a pair of otters in the Ribble, finding me in
a very desponding state, ventured to inquire if I had heard the news.
Expecting to hear of the death of the girl, I prepared myself for an
outburst of grief, and resolved to give immediate directions for a
double funeral, when he informed me--what do you think, Dick?--that she
was going to be married to himself. I recovered at once, and immediately
went out to hunt the otters, and rare sport we had. But here comes
Gregory with the famous old Rhenish. Better take a cup, Dick; this is
the best cure for the heartache, and for all other aches and grievances.
Ah! glorious stuff--miraculous wine!" he added, smacking his lips with
extraordinary satisfaction after a deep draught; "those worthy fathers
were excellent judges. I have a great reverence for them. But where can
Alizon be all this while? Supper is wellnigh over, and the dancing and
pastimes will commence anon, and yet she comes not."

"She is here," cried Richard.

And as he spoke Mistress Nutter and Alizon entered the hall.

Richard endeavoured to read in the young girl's countenance some
intimation of what had passed between her and Mistress Nutter, but he
only remarked that she was paler than before, and had traces of anxiety
about her. Mistress Nutter also looked gloomy and thoughtful, and there
was nothing in the manner or deportment of either to lead to the
conclusion, that a discovery of relationship between them had taken
place. As Alizon moved on, her eyes met those of Richard--but the look
was intercepted by Mistress Nutter, who instantly called off her
daughter's attention to herself; and, while the young man hesitated to
join them, his sister came quickly up to him, and drew him away in
another direction. Left to himself, Nicholas tossed off another cup of
the miraculous Rhenish, which improved in flavour as he discussed it,
and then, placing a chair opposite the portrait of Isole de Heton,
filled a bumper, and, uttering the name of the fair votaress, drained it
to her. This time he was quite certain he received a significant glance
in return, and no one being near to contradict him, he went on indulging
the idea of an amorous understanding between himself and the picture,
till he had finished the bottle, and obtained as many ogles as he
swallowed draughts of wine, upon which he arose and staggered off in
search of Dame Tetlow.

Meanwhile, Mistress Nutter having made her excuses to Lady Assheton for
not attending the supper, walked down the hall with her daughter, until
such time as the dancing and pastimes should commence. As will be
readily supposed under the circumstances, this part of the entertainment
was distasteful to both of them; but it could not be avoided without
entering into explanations, which Mistress Nutter was unwilling to make,
and she, therefore, counselled her daughter to act in all respects as if
she were still Alizon Device, and in no way connected with her.

"I shall take an early opportunity of announcing my intention to adopt
you," she said, "and then you can act differently. Meantime, keep near
me as much as you can. Say little to Dorothy or Richard Assheton, and
prepare to retire early; for this noisy and riotous assemblage is not
much to my taste, and I care not how soon I quit it."

Alizon assented to what was said, and stole a timid glance towards
Richard and Dorothy; but the latter, who alone perceived it, instantly
averted her head, in such way as to make it evident she wished to shun
her regards. Slight as it was, this circumstance occasioned Alizon much
pain, for she could not conceive how she had offended her new-made
friend, and it was some relief to encounter a party of acquaintances who
had risen from the lower table at her approach, though they did not
presume to address her while she was with Mistress Nutter, but waited
respectfully at a little distance. Alizon, however, flew towards them.

"Ah, Susan!--ah, Nancy!" she cried taking the hand of each--"how glad I
am to see you here; and you too, Lawrence Blackrod--and you, Phil
Rawson--and you, also, good Master Harrop. How happy you all look!"

"An wi' good reason, sweet Alizon," replied Blackrod. "Boh we began to
be afeerd we'd lost ye, an that wad ha' bin a sore mishap--to lose our
May Queen--an th' prettiest May Queen os ever dawnced i' this ha', or i'
onny other ha' i' Lonkyshiar."

"We ha drunk your health, sweet Alizon," added Phil--"an wishin' ye may
be os happy os ye desarve, wi' the mon o' your heart, if onny sich lucky
chap there be."

"Thank you--thank you both," replied Alizon, blushing; "and in return I
cannot wish you better fortune, Philip, than to be united to the good
girl near you, for I know her kindly disposition so well, that I am sure
she will make you happy."

"Ey'm satisfied on't myself," replied Rawson; "an ey hope ere long
she'll be missus o' a little cot i' Bowland Forest, an that yo'll pay us
a visit, Alizon, an see an judge fo' yourself how happy we be. Nance win
make a rare forester's wife."

"Not a bit better than my Sukey," cried Lawrence Blackrod. "Ye shanna
get th' start o' me, Phil, fo' by th' mess! the very same day os sees yo
wedded to Nancy Holt shan find me united to Sukey Worseley. An so Alizon
win ha' two cottages i' Bowland Forest to visit i'stead o' one."

"And well pleased I shall be to visit them both," she rejoined. At this
moment Mistress Nutter came up.

"My good friends," she said, "as you appear to take so much interest in
Alizon, you may be glad to learn that it is my intention to adopt her as
a daughter, having no child of my own; and, though her position
henceforth will be very different from what it has been, I am sure she
will never forget her old friends."

"Never, indeed, never!" cried Alizon, earnestly.

"This is good news, indeed," cried Sampson Harrop, joyfully, while the
others joined in his exclamation. "We all rejoice in Alizon's good
fortune, and think she richly deserves it. For my own part, I was always
sure she would have rare luck, but I did not expect such luck as this."

"What's to become o' me?" cried Jennet, coming from behind a chair,
where she had hitherto concealed herself.

"I will always take care of you," replied Alizon, stooping, and kissing
her.

"Do not promise more than you may be able to perform, Alizon," observed
Mistress Nutter, coldly, and regarding the little girl with a look of
disgust; "an ill-favour'd little creature, with the Demdike eyes."

"And as ill-tempered as she is ill-favoured," rejoined Sampson Harrop;
"and, though she cannot help being ugly, she might help being
malicious."

Jennet gave him a bitter look.

"You do her injustice, Master Harrop," said Alizon. "Poor little Jennet
is quick-tempered, but not malevolent."

"Ey con hate weel if ey conna love," replied Jennet, "an con recollect
injuries if ey forget kindnesses.--Boh dunna trouble yourself about me,
sister. Ey dunna envy ye your luck. Ey dunna want to be adopted by a
grand-dame. Ey'm content os ey am. Boh are na ye gettin' on rayther too
fast, lass? Mother's consent has to be axed, ey suppose, efore ye leave
her."

"There is little fear of her refusal," observed Mistress Nutter.

"Ey dunna knoa that," rejoined Jennet. "If she were to refuse, it wadna
surprise me."

"Nothing spiteful she could do would surprise me," remarked Harrop. "But
how are you likely to know what your mother will think and do, you
forward little hussy?"

"Ey judge fro circumstances," replied the little girl. "Mother has often
said she conna weel spare Alizon. An mayhap Mistress Nutter may knoa,
that she con be very obstinate when she tays a whim into her head."

"I _do_ know it," replied Mistress Nutter; "and, from my experience of
her temper in former days, I should be loath to have you near me, who
seem to inherit her obstinacy."

"Wi' sich misgivings ey wonder ye wish to tak Alizon, madam," said
Jennet; "fo she's os much o' her mother about her os me, onny she dunna
choose to show it."

"Peace, thou mischievous urchin," cried Mistress Nutter, losing all
patience.

"Shall I take her away?" said Harrop--seizing her hand.

"Ay, do," said Mistress Nutter.

"No, no, let her stay!" cried Alizon, quickly; "I shall be miserable if
she goes."

"Oh, ey'm quite ready to go," said Jennet, "fo ey care little fo sich
seets os this--boh efore ey leave ey wad fain say a few words to Mester
Potts, whom ey see yonder."

"What can you want with him, Jennet," cried Alizon, in surprise.

"Onny to tell him what brother Jem is gone to Pendle fo to-neet,"
replied the little girl, with a significant and malicious look at
Mistress Nutter.

"Ha!" muttered the lady. "There is more malice in this little wasp than
I thought. But I must rob it of its sting."

And while thus communing with herself, she fixed a searching look on
Jennet, and then raising her hand quickly, waved it in her face.

"Oh!" cried the little girl, falling suddenly backwards.

"What's the matter?" demanded Alizon, flying to her.

"Ey dunna reetly knoa," replied Jennet.

"She's seized with a sudden faintness," said Harrop. "Better she should
go home then at once. I'll find somebody to take her."

"Neaw, neaw, ey'n sit down here," said Jennet; "ey shan be better soon."

"Come along, Alizon," said Mistress Nutter, apparently unconcerned at
the circumstance.

Having confided the little girl, who was now recovered from the shock,
to the care of Nancy Holt, Alizon followed her mother.

At this moment Sir Ralph, who had quitted the supper-table, clapped his
hands loudly, thus giving the signal to the minstrels, who, having
repaired to the gallery, now struck up a merry tune, and instantly the
whole hall was in motion. Snatching up his wand Sampson Harrop hurried
after Alizon, beseeching her to return with him, and join a procession
about to be formed by the revellers, and of course, as May Queen, and
the most important personage in it, she could not refuse. Very short
space sufficed the morris-dancers to find their partners; Robin Hood and
the foresters got into their places; the hobby-horse curveted and
capered; Friar Tuck resumed his drolleries; and even Jack Roby was so
far recovered as to be able to get on his legs, though he could not walk
very steadily. Marshalled by the gentleman-usher, and headed by Robin
Hood and the May Queen, the procession marched round the hall, the
minstrels playing merrily the while, and then drew up before the upper
table, where a brief oration was pronounced by Sir Ralph. A shout that
made the rafters ring again followed the address, after which a couranto
was called for by the host, who, taking Mistress Nicholas Assheton by
the hand, led her into the body of the hall, whither he was speedily
followed by the other guests, who had found partners in like manner.

Before relating how the ball was opened a word must be bestowed upon
Mistress Nicholas Assheton, whom I have neglected nearly as much as she
was neglected by her unworthy spouse, and I therefore hasten to repair
the injustice by declaring that she was a very amiable and very charming
woman, and danced delightfully. And recollect, ladies, these were
dancing days--I mean days when knowledge of figures as well as skill was
required, more than twenty forgotten dances being in vogue, the very
names of which may surprise you as I recapitulate them. There was the
Passamezzo, a great favourite with Queen Elizabeth, who used to foot it
merrily, when, as you are told by Gray--

          "The great Lord-keeper led the brawls,
          And seals and maces danced before him!"

the grave Pavane, likewise a favourite with the Virgin Queen, and which
I should like to see supersede the eternal polka at Almack's and
elsewhere, and in which--

          "Five was the number of the music's feet
          Which still the dance did with live paces meet;"

the Couranto, with its "current traverses," "sliding passages," and
solemn tune, wherein, according to Sir John Davies--

          --"that dancer greatest praise hath won
          Who with best order can all order shun;"

the Lavolta, also delineated by the same knowing hand--

          "Where arm in arm two dancers are entwined,
          And whirl themselves with strict embracements bound,
          their feet an anapest do sound."

Is not this very much like a waltz? Yes, ladies, you have been dancing
the lavolta of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries without being
aware of it. But there was another waltz still older, called the
Sauteuse, which I suspect answered to your favourite polka. Then there
were brawls, galliards, paspys, sarabands, country-dances of various
figures, cushion dances (another dance I long to see revived), kissing
dances, and rounds, any of which are better than the objectionable
polka. Thus you will see that there was infinite variety at least at the
period under consideration, and that you have rather retrograded than
advanced in the saltatory art. But to return to the ball.

Mistress Nicholas Assheton, I have said, excelled in the graceful
accomplishment of dancing, and that was probably the reason why she had
been selected for the couranto by Sir Ralph, who knew the value of a
good partner. By many persons she was accounted the handsomest woman in
the room, and in dignity of carriage she was certainly unrivalled. This
was precisely what Sir Ralph required, and having executed a few
"current traverses and sliding passages" with her, with a gravity and
stateliness worthy of Sir Christopher Hatton himself, when graced by the
hand of his sovereign mistress, he conducted her, amid the hushed
admiration of the beholders, to a seat. Still the dance continued with
unabated spirit; all those engaged in it running up and down, or
"turning and winding with unlooked-for change." Alizon's hand had been
claimed by Richard Assheton, and next to the stately host and his
dignified partner, they came in for the largest share of admiration and
attention; and if the untutored girl fell short of the accomplished dame
in precision and skill, she made up for the want of them in natural
grace and freedom of movement, for the display of which the couranto,
with its frequent and impromptu changes, afforded ample opportunity.
Even Sir Ralph was struck with her extreme gracefulness, and pointed her
out to Mistress Nicholas, who, unenvying and amiable, joined heartily in
his praises. Overhearing what was said, Mrs. Nutter thought it a fitting
opportunity to announce her intention of adopting the young girl; and
though Sir Ralph seemed a good deal surprised at the suddenness of the
declaration, he raised no objection to the plan; but, on the contrary,
applauded it. But another person, by no means disposed to regard it in
an equally favourable light became acquainted with the intelligence at
the same time. This was Master Potts, who instantly set his wits at work
to discover its import. Ever on the alert, his little eyes, sharp as
needles, had detected Jennet amongst the rustic company, and he now made
his way towards her, resolved, by dint of cross-questioning and
otherwise, to extract all the information he possibly could from her.

The dance over, Richard and his partner wandered towards a more retired
part of the hall.

"Why does your sister shun me?" inquired Alizon, with a look of great
distress. "What can I have done to offend her? Whenever I regard her she
averts her head, and as I approached her just now, she moved away,
making it evident she designed to avoid me. If I could think myself in
any way different from what I was this morning, when she treated me with
such unbounded confidence and kindness, or accuse myself of any offence
towards her, even in thought, I could understand it; but as it is, her
present coldness appears inexplicable and unreasonable, and gives me
great pain. I would not forfeit her regard for worlds, and therefore
beseech you to tell me what I have done amiss, that I may endeavour to
repair it."

"You have done nothing--nothing whatever, sweet girl," replied Richard.
"It is only caprice on Dorothy's part, and except that it distresses
you, her conduct, which you justly call 'unreasonable,' does not deserve
a moment's serious consideration."

"Oh no! you cannot deceive me thus," cried Alizon. "She is too kind--too
well-judging, to be capricious. Something must have occurred to make her
change her opinion of me, though what it is I cannot conjecture. I have
gained much to-day--more than I had any right to expect; but if I have
forfeited the good opinion of your sister, the loss of her friendship
will counterbalance all the rest."

"But you have not lost it, Alizon," replied Richard, earnestly. "Dorothy
has got some strange notions into her head, which only require to be
combated. She does not like Mistress Nutter, and is piqued and
displeased by the extraordinary interest which that lady displays
towards you. That is all."

"But why should she not like Mistress Nutter?" inquired Alizon.

"Nay, there is no accounting for fancies," returned Richard, with a
faint smile. "I do not attempt to defend her, but simply offer the only
excuse in my power for her conduct."

"I am concerned to hear it," said Alizon, sadly, "because henceforth I
shall be so intimately connected with Mistress Nutter, that this
estrangement, which I hoped arose only from some trivial cause, and
merely required a little explanation to be set aside, may become widened
and lasting. Owing every thing to Mistress Nutter, I must espouse her
cause; and if your sister likes her not, she likes me not in
consequence, and therefore we must continue divided. But surely her
dislike is of very recent date, and cannot have any strong hold upon
her; for when she and Mistress Nutter met this morning, a very different
feeling seemed to animate her."

"So, indeed, it did," replied Richard, visibly embarrassed and
distressed. "And since you have made me acquainted with the new tie and
interests you have formed, I can only regret alluding to the
circumstance."

"That you may not misunderstand me," said Alizon, "I will explain the
extent of my obligations to Mistress Nutter, and then you will perceive
how much I am bounden to her. Childless herself, greatly interested in
me, and feeling for my unfortunate situation, with infinite goodness of
heart she has declared her intention of removing me from all chance of
baneful influence, from the family with whom I have been heretofore
connected, by adopting me as her daughter."

"I should indeed rejoice at this," said Richard, "were it not that--"

And he stopped, gazing anxiously at her.

"Were not what?" cried Alizon, alarmed by his looks. "What do you mean?"

"Do not press me further," he rejoined; "I cannot answer you. Indeed I
have said too much already."

"You have said too much or too little," cried Alizon. "Speak, I implore
you. What mean these dark hints which you throw out, and which like
shadows elude all attempts to grasp them! Do not keep me in this state
of suspense and agitation. Your looks speak more than your words. Oh,
give your thoughts utterance!"

"I cannot," replied Richard. "I do not believe what I have heard, and
therefore will not repeat it. It would only increase the mischief. But
oh! tell me this! Was it, indeed, to remove you from the baneful
influence of Elizabeth Device that Mistress Nutter adopted you?"

"Other motives may have swayed her, and I have said they did so,"
replied Alizon; "but that wish, no doubt, had great weight with her.
Nay, notwithstanding her abhorrence of the family, she has kindly
consented to use her best endeavours to preserve little Jennet from
further ill, as well as to reclaim poor misguided Elizabeth herself."

"Oh! what a weight you have taken from my heart," cried Richard,
joyfully. "I will tell Dorothy what you say, and it will at once remove
all her doubts and suspicions. She will now be the same to you as ever,
and to Mistress Nutter."

"I will not ask you what those doubts and suspicions were, since you so
confidently promise me this, which is all I desire," replied Alizon,
smiling; "but any unfavourable opinions entertained of Mistress Nutter
are wholly undeserved. Poor lady! she has endured many severe trials and
sufferings, and whenever you learn the whole of her history, she will, I
am sure, have your sincere sympathy."

"You have certainly produced a complete revolution in my feelings
towards her," said Richard, "and I shall not be easy till I have made a
like convert of Dorothy."

At this moment a loud clapping of hands was heard, and Nicholas was seen
marching towards the centre of the hall, preceded by the minstrels, who
had descended for the purpose from the gallery, and bearing in his arms
a large red velvet cushion. As soon as the dancers had formed a wide
circle round him, a very lively tune called "Joan Sanderson," from which
the dance about to be executed sometimes received its name, was struck
up, and the squire, after a few preliminary flourishes, set down the
cushion, and gave chase to Dame Tetlow, who, threading her way rapidly
through the ring, contrived to elude him. This chase, accompanied by
music, excited shouts of laughter on all hands, and no one knew which
most to admire, the eagerness of the squire, or the dexterity of the
lissom dame in avoiding him.

Exhausted at length, and baffled in his quest, Nicholas came to a halt
before Tom the Piper, and, taking up the cushion, thus preferred his
complaint:--"This dance it can no further go--no further go."

Whereupon the piper chanted in reply,--"I pray you, good sir, why say
you so--why say you so?"

Amidst general laughter, the squire tenderly and touchingly
responded--"Because Dame Tetlow will not come to--will not come to."

Whereupon Tom the Piper, waxing furious, blew a shrill whistle,
accompanied by an encouraging rattle of the tambarine, and enforcing the
mandate by two or three energetic stamps on the floor, delivered himself
in this fashion:--"She _must_ come to, and she SHALL come to. And she
must come, whether she will or no."

Upon this two of the prettiest female morris-dancers, taking each a hand
of the blushing and overheated Dame Tetlow, for she had found the chase
rather warm work, led her forward; while the squire advancing very
gallantly placed the cushion upon the ground before her, and as she
knelt down upon it, bestowed a smacking kiss upon her lips. This
ceremony being performed amidst much tittering and flustering,
accompanied by many knowing looks and some expressed wishes among the
swains, who hoped that their turn might come next, Dame Tetlow arose,
and the squire seizing her hand, they began to whisk round in a sort of
jig, singing merrily as they danced--

          "Prinkum prankum is a fine dance,
          And we shall go dance it once again!
                                   Once again,
          And we shall go dance it once again!"

And they made good the words too; for on coming to a stop, Dame Tetlow
snatched up the cushion, and ran in search of the squire, who retreating
among the surrounding damsels, made sad havoc among them, scarcely
leaving a pretty pair of lips unvisited. Oh Nicholas! Nicholas! I am
thoroughly ashamed of you, and regret becoming your historian. You get
me into an infinitude of scrapes. But there is a rod in pickle for you,
sir, which shall be used with good effect presently. Tired of such an
unprofitable quest, Dame Tetlow came to a sudden halt, addressed the
piper as Nicholas had addressed him, and receiving a like answer,
summoned the delinquent to come forward; but as he knelt down on the
cushion, instead of receiving the anticipated salute, he got a sound box
on the ears, the dame, actuated probably by some feeling of jealousy,
taking advantage of the favourable opportunity afforded her of avenging
herself. No one could refrain from laughing at this unexpected turn in
affairs, and Nicholas, to do him justice, took it in excellent part, and
laughed louder than the rest. Springing to his feet, he snatched the
kiss denied him by the spirited dame, and led her to obtain some
refreshment at the lower table, of which they both stood in need, while
the cushion being appropriated by other couples, other boxes on the ear
and kisses were interchanged, leading to an infinitude of merriment.

Long before this Master Potts had found his way to Jennet, and as he
drew near, affecting to notice her for the first time, he made some
remarks upon her not looking very well.

"'Deed, an ey'm nah varry weel," replied the little girl, "boh ey knoa
who ey han to thonk fo' my ailment."

"Your sister, most probably," suggested the attorney. "It must be very
vexatious to see her so much noticed, and be yourself so much
neglected--very vexatious, indeed--I quite feel for you."

"By dunna want your feelin'," replied Jennet, nettled by the remark;
"boh it wasna my sister os made me ill."

"Who was it then, my little dear," said Potts.

"Dunna 'dear' me," retorted Jennet; "yo're too ceevil by half, os the
lamb said to the wolf. Boh sin ye mun knoa, it wur Mistress Nutter."

"Aha! very good--I mean--very bad," cried Potts. "What did Mistress
Nutter do to you, my little dear? Don't be afraid of telling me. If I
can do any thing for you I shall be very happy. Speak out--and don't be
afraid."

"Nay fo' shure, ey'm nah afeerd," returned Jennet. "Boh whot mays ye so
inqueesitive? Ye want to get summat out'n me, ey con see that plain
enough, an os ye stand there glenting at me wi' your sly little een, ye
look loike an owd fox ready to snap up a chicken o' th' furst
opportunity."

"Your comparison is not very flattering, Jennet," replied Potts; "but I
pass it by for the sake of its cleverness. You are a sharp child,
Jennet--a very sharp child. I remarked that from the first moment I saw
you. But in regard to Mistress Nutter, she seems a very nice lady--and
must be a very kind lady, since she has made up her mind to adopt your
sister. Not that I am surprised at her determination, for really Alizon
is so superior--so unlike--"

"Me, ye wad say," interrupted Jennet. "Dunna be efeerd to speak out,
sir."

"No, no," replied Potts, "on the contrary, there's a very great likeness
between you. I saw you were sisters at once. I don't know which is the
cleverest or prettiest--but perhaps you are the sharpest. Yes, you are
