of housework as it is to-day a part of a druggest's activities.

In a sense, however, the very nature of such work provided some phases
of that social life which authorities consider so lacking in colonial
existence. For those arduous tasks frequently required neighborly
co-operation, and social functions thus became mingled with industrial
activities. Quilting bees, spinning bees, knitting bees, sewing bees,
paring bees, and a dozen other types of "bees" served to lighten the
drudgery of such work and developed a spirit of neighborliness that is
perhaps a little lacking under modern social conditions. Ignoring the
crude methods of labor, and the other forms of hardship, we may look
back from the vantage point of two hundred years of progress and perhaps
admire and envy something of the quietness, orderliness, and simplicity
of those colonial homes. After all, however, doubtless many a colonial
mother now and then grew sick at heart over the conditions and problems
facing her. Confronted with the unsettled condition of a new country,
with society on a most insecure foundation, with privations, hardships,
and genuine toil always in view, and with the prospect of the terrible
strain of bearing and rearing an inexcusable number of children, the
wife of that era may not have been able to see all the romance which
modern novelists have perceived in the days that are no more.


_VI. The Size of the Family_

And this brings us once more to what was doubtless the most terrific
burden placed upon the colonial woman--the incessant bearing of
offspring. In those days large families were not a liability, but a
positive asset. With a vast wilderness teeming with potential wealth,
waiting only for a supply of workers, the only economic pressure on the
birth rate was the pressure to make it larger to meet the demand for
laborers. Every child born in the colonies was assured, through moderate
industry, of the comforts of life, and, through patience and shrewd
investments, of some degree of wealth. Boys and girls meant
workers--producers of wealth--the boys on farm or sea or in the shop,
the girls in the home. Since their wants were simple, since the
educational demands were not large, since much of the food or clothing
was produced directly by those who used it, children were not
unwelcome--at least to the fathers.

Yet, who can say what rebellion unconsciously arose sometimes in the
hearts of the women? Doubtless they strove to make themselves believe
that all the little ones were a blessing and welcome--the religion of
the day taught that any other thought was sinful--but still there must
have been many a woman, distant from medical aid, living amidst new, raw
environments, mothers already of many a child, who longed for liberty
from the inevitable return of the trial. Women bore many children--and
buried many. And mothers followed their children to the grave too
often--to rest with them. Cotton Mather, married twice, was father of
fifteen children; the two wives of Benjamin Franklin's father bore
seventeen; Roger Clap of Dorchester, Massachusetts, "begat" fourteen
children by one wife; William Phipps, a governor of Massachusetts, had
twenty-five brothers and sisters all by one mother. Catherine Schuyler,
a woman of superior intellect, gave birth to fourteen children. Judge
Sewall piously tells us in his _Diary_: "Jan. 6, 1701. This is the
Thirteenth child that I have offered up to God in Baptisme; my wife
having borne me Seven Sons and Seven Daughters." One of the children had
been born dead, and therefore had not received baptism. Ben Franklin
often boasted of the strong constitution of his mother and of the fact
that she nursed all of her own ten babes; but he does not tell us of the
constitution of the children or of the ages to which they lived. Five of
Sewall's children died in infancy, and only four lived beyond the age of
thirty. It seems never to have occurred to the pious colonial fathers
that it would be better to rear five to maturity and bury none, than to
rear five and bury five. The strain on the womanhood of the period
cannot be doubted; innumerable men were married twice or three times and
no small number four times.

Industry was the law of the day, and every child soon became a producer.
The burdens placed upon children naturally lightened as the colonies
progressed; but as late as 1775, if we may judge by the following
record, not many moments of childhood were wasted. This is an account of
her day's work jotted down by a young girl in that year: "Fix'd gown for
Prude,--Mend Mother's Riding-hood, Spun short thread,--Fix'd two gowns
for Welsh's girls,--Carded tow,--Spun linen,--Worked on
Cheese-basket,--Hatchel'd flax with Hannah, we did 51 lbs.
apiece,--Pleated and ironed,--Read a Sermon of Dodridge's,--Spooled a
piece--Milked the Cows,--Spun linen, did 50 knots,--Made a Broom of
Guinea wheat straw,--Spun thread to whiten,--Set a Red dye,--Had two
Scholars from Mrs. Taylor's,--I carded two pounds of whole wool and felt
Nationaly,--Spun harness twine,--Scoured the pewter,--Ague in my
face,--Ellen was spark'd last night,--spun thread to whiten--Went to Mr.
Otis's and made them a swinging visit--Israel said I might ride his jade
[horse]--Prude stayed at home and learned Eve's Dream by heart."[89]


_VII. Indian Attacks_

The children whose comment has just been quoted were probably safe from
all dangers except ague and sparking; but in the previous century women
and children daily faced possibilities that apparently should have kept
them in a continuous state of fright. Time after time mothers and babes
were stolen by the Indians, and the tales of their sufferings fill many
an interesting page in the diaries, records, and letters of the
seventeenth century and the early eighteenth. Hear these words from an
early pamphlet, _A Memorial of the Present Deplorable State of New
England_, inserted in Sewall's _Diary_:

"The Indians came upon the House of one Adams at Wells, and captived the
Man and his Wife, and assassinated the children.... The woman had Lain
in about Eight Days. They drag'd her out, and tied her to a Post, until
the House was rifled. They then loosed her, and bid her walk. She could
not stir. By the help of a Stick she got half a step forward. She look'd
up to God. On the sudden a new strength entered into her. She was up to
the Neck in Water five times that very Day in passing Rivers. At night
she fell over head and ears, into a Slough in a Swamp, and hardly got
out alive.... She is come home alive unto us."

The following story of Mrs. Bradley of Haverly, Massachusetts, was sworn
to as authentic:

     "She was now entered into a Second Captivity; but she had the
     great Encumbrance of being Big with Child, and within Six Weeks
     of her Time! After about an Hours Rest, wherein they made her put
     on Snow Shoes, which to manage, requires more than ordinary
     agility, she travelled with her Tawny Guardians all that night,
     and the next day until Ten a Clock, associated with one Woman
     more who had been brought to Bed but just one Week before: Here
     they Refreshed themselves a little, and then travelled on till
     Night; when they had no Refreshment given them, nor had they any,
     till after their having Travelled all the Forenoon of the Day
     Ensuing.... She underwent incredible Hardships and Famine: A
     Mooses Hide, as tough as you may Suppose it, was the best and
     most of her Diet. In one and twenty days they came to their
     Head-quarters.... But then her Snow-Shoes were taken from her;
     and yet she must go every step above the knee in Snow, with such
     weariness that her Soul often Pray'd _That the Lord would put an
     end unto her weary life_!"

     "...Here in the Night, she found herself ill." [Her child was
     born here].... There she lay till the next Night, with none but
     the Snow under her, and the Heaven over her, in a misty and rainy
     season. She sent then unto a French Priest, that he would speak
     unto her _Squaw Mistress_, who then, without condescending to
     look upon her, allow'd her a little Birch-Rind, to cover her Head
     from the Injuries of the Weather, and a little bit of dried
     Moose, which being boiled, she drunk the Broth, and gave it unto
     the Child."

     "In a Fortnight she was called upon to Travel again, with her
     child in her Arms: every now and then, a whole day together
     without the least Morsel of any Food, and when she had any, she
     fed only on Ground-nuts and Wild-onions, and Lilly-roots. By the
     last of May, they arrived at _Cowefick_, where they planted their
     Corn; wherein she was put into a hard Task, so that the Child
     extreamly Suffered. The Salvages would sometimes also please
     themselves, with casting _hot Embers_ into the Mouth of the
     Child, which would render the Mouth so sore that it could not
     Suck for a long while together, so that it starv'd and Dy'd...."

     "Her mistress, the squaw, kept her a Twelve-month with her, in a
     Squalid Wigwam: Where, in the following Winter, she fell sick of
     a Feavour; but in the very height and heat of her Paroxysms, her
     Mistress would compel her sometimes to Spend a Winters-night,
     which is there a very bitter one, abroad in all the bitter Frost
     and Snow of the Climate. She recovered; but Four Indians died of
     the Feavour, and at length her Mistress also.... She was made to
     pass the River on the Ice, when every step she took, she might
     have struck through it if she pleased."

     "...At last, there came to the fight of her a Priest from Quebeck
     who had known her in her former Captivity at Naridgowock.... He
     made the Indians sell her to a French Family.... where tho' she
     wrought hard, she Lived more comfortably and contented.... She
     was finally allowed to return to her husband."[90]

The account of Mary Rowlandson's captivity, long known to every New
England family, and perhaps secretly read by many a boy in lieu of the
present Wild West series, may serve as another vivid example of the
dangers and sufferings faced by every woman who took unto herself a
husband and went forth from the coast settlements to found a new home in
the wilderness. The narrative, as written by Mrs. Rowlandson herself,
tells of the attack by the Indians, the massacre of her relations, and
the capture of herself and her babe:

     "There remained nothing to me but one poor, wounded babe, and it
     seemed at present worse than death, that it was in such a pitiful
     condition, bespeaking compassion, and I had no refreshing for it,
     nor suitable things to revive it.... But now (the next morning) I
     must turn my back upon the town, and travel with them into the
     vast and desolate wilderness, I knew not whither. It is not my
     tongue or pen can express the sorrows of my heart, and bitterness
     of my spirit, that I had at this departure; but God was with me
     in a wonderful manner, carrying me along and bearing up my spirit
     that it did not quite fail."

     "One of the Indians carried my poor wounded babe upon a horse, it
     went moaning all along: 'I shall die, I shall die.' I went on
     foot after it, with sorrow that cannot be expressed. At length I
     took it off the horse and carried it in my arms, till my strength
     failed and I fell down with it. Then they set me upon a horse
     with my wounded child in my lap, and there being no furniture on
     the horse's back, as we were going down a steep hill we both fell
     over the horse's head, at which they, like inhuman creatures,
     laughed and rejoiced to see it, though I thought we should there
     have ended our days, overcome with so many difficulties."

They went farther and farther into the wilderness, and a few days after
leaving her home, her son Joseph joined her, having been captured by
another band of Indians. She tells how, having her Bible with her, she
and her son found it a continual help, reading it and praying.

     "After this it quickly began to snow, and when night came on they
     stopped: and now down I must sit in the snow by a little fire,
     and a few boughs behind me, with my sick child in my lap and
     calling much for water, (being now) through the wound fallen into
     a violent fever. My own wound also growing so stiff that I could
     scarce sit down or rise up, yet so it must be, that I must sit
     all this cold winter night, upon the cold snowy ground, with my
     sick child in my arms, looking that every hour would be the last
     of its life; and having no Christian friend near me, either to
     comfort or help me."

     "...Fearing the worst, I durst not send to my husband, though
     there were some thoughts of his coming to redeem and fetch me,
     not knowing what might follow...."

     "The Lord preserved us in safety that night, and raised us up
     again in the morning, and carried us along, that before noon we
     came to Concord. Now was I full of joy and yet not without
     sorrow: joy, to see such a lovely sight, so many Christians
     together; and some of them my neighbors. There I met with my
     brother, and brother-in-law, who asked me if I knew where his
     wife was. Poor heart! he had helped to bury her and knew it not;
     she, being shot down by the house, was partly burned, so that
     those who were at Boston ... who came back afterward and buried
     the dead, did not know her.... Being recruited with food and
     rainment, we went to Boston that day, where I met with my dear
     husband; but the thoughts of our dear children, one being dead,
     and the other we could not tell where, abated our comfort in each
     other...."

And here is the brief story of the return of her daughter: "She was
travelling one day with the Indians, with her basket on her back; the
company of Indians were got before her and gone out of sight, all except
one squaw. She followed the squaw till night, and then both of them lay
down, having nothing over them but the heavens, nor under them but the
earth. Thus she traveled three days together, having nothing to eat or
drink but water and green whortle-berries. At last they came into
Providence, where she was kindly entertained by several of that town....
The Lord make us a blessing indeed to each other. Thus hath the Lord
brought me and mine out of the horrible pit, and hath set us in the
midst of tender-hearted and compassionate Christians. 'Tis the desire of
my soul that we may walk worthy of the mercies received, and which we
are receiving."

This carrying away of white children occurred with surprising frequency,
and we of a later generation can but wonder that their parents did not
wreak more terrific vengeance upon the red man than is recorded even in
the bloodiest pages of our early history. In 1755, after the close of
the war with Pontiac, a meeting took place in the orchard of the
Schuyler homestead at Albany, where many of such kidnapped children were
returned to their parents and relatives. Perhaps we can comprehend some
of the tragedy of this form of warfare when we read of this gathering as
described by an eye-witness:

     "Poor women who had traveled one hundred miles from the back
     settlements of Pennsylvania, and New England appeared here with
     anxious looks and aching hearts, not knowing whether their
     children were alive or dead, or how to identify their children if
     they should meet them...."

     "On a gentle slope near the Fort stood a row of temporary huts
     built by retainers to the troops; the green before these
     buildings was the scene of these pathetic recognitions which I
     did not fail to attend. The joy of the happy mothers was
     overpowering and found vent in tears; but not the tears of those
     who after long travel found not what they sought. It was
     affecting to see the deep silent sorrow of the Indian women and
     of the children, who knew no other mother, and clung fondly to
     their bosems from whence they were not torn without bitter
     shrieks. I shall never forget the grotesque figures and wild
     looks of these young savages; nor the trembling haste with which
     their mothers arrayed them in the new clothes they had brought
     for them, as hoping with the Indian dress they would throw off
     their habits and attachments...."[91]

Such distress caused by Indian raids did not, of course, cease with the
seventeenth century. During the entire period of the next century the
settlers on the western frontier lived under constant dread of such
calamities. It has been one of the chief elements in American
history--this ceaseless expectation of warfare with primitive savages.
In the settlement of the Ohio and Mississippi valleys, in the
establishment of the great states of the Plains, in the founding of
civilization on the Pacific slope, even down to the twentieth century,
the price of progress has been paid in this form of savage torture of
women and children. Even in the long settled communities of the
eighteenth century such dangers did not entirely disappear. As late as
1782, when an attempt was made by Burgoyne to capture General Schuyler,
the ancient contest between mother and Indian warrior once more
occurred. "Their guns were stacked in the hall, the guards being
outside and the relief asleep. Lest the small Philip (grandson of
General Schuyler) be tempted to play with the guns, his mother had them
removed. The guards rushed for their guns, but they were gone. The
family fled up stairs, but Margaret, remembering the baby in the cradle
below, ran back, seized the baby, and when she was half way up the
flight, an Indian flung his tomahawk at her head, which, missing her,
buried itself in the wood, and left its historic mark to the present
time."[92]


_VIII. Parental Training_

We sometimes hear the complaint that the training of the modern child is
left almost entirely to the mother or to the woman school teacher, and
that as a result the boy is becoming effeminate. The indications are
that this could not have been said of the colonial child; for, according
to the records of that day, there was admirable co-operation between man
and wife in the training of their little ones. Kindly Judge Sewall, who
so indiscriminately mingled his accounts of courtships, weddings,
funerals, visits to neighbors, notices of hangings, duties as a
magistrate, what not, often spared time from his activities among the
grown-ups to record such incidents as: "Sabbath-day, Febr. 14, 1685.
Little Hull speaks Apple plainly in the hearing of his grandmother and
Eliza Jane; this the first word."[93]

And hear what Samuel Mather in his _Life of Cotton Mather_ tells of the
famous divine's interest in the children of the household: "He began
betimes to entertain them with delightful stories, especially
scriptural ones; and he would ever conclude with some lesson of piety,
giving them to learn that lesson from the story.... And thus every day
at the table he used himself to tell some entertaining tale before he
rose; and endeavored to make it useful to the olive plants about the
table. When his children accidentally, at any time, came in his way, it
was his custom to let fall some sentence or other that might be monitory
or profitable to them.... As soon as possible he would make the children
learn to write; and, when they had the use of the pen, he would employ
then in writing out the most instructive, and profitable things he could
invent for them.... The first chastisement which he would inflict for
any ordinary fault was to let the child see and hear him in an
astonishment, and hardly able to believe that the child could do so base
a thing; but believing they would never do it again. He would never come
to give a child a blow excepting in case of obstinacy or something very
criminal. To be chased for a while out of his presence he would make to
be looked upon as the sorest punishment in his family. He would not say
much to them of the evil angels; because he would not have them
entertain any frightful fancies about the apparitions of devils. But yet
he would briefly let them know that there are devils to tempt to
wickedness."

Beside this tender picture we may place one of juvenile warfare in the
godly home of Judge Sewall, and of the effect such a rise of the Old
Adam had upon the soul of the conscientious magistrate: "Nov. 6, 1692.
Joseph threw a knob of Brass and hit his sister Betty on the forhead so
as to make it bleed and swell, upon which, and for his playing at
Prayer-time, and eating when Return Thanks, I whipd him pretty smartly.
When I first went in (call'd by his Grandmother) he sought to shadow and
hide himself from me behind the head of the Cradle: which gave me the
sorrowfull remembrance of Adam's carriage."[94]

Such turmoil was, of course, unusual in the Sewall or any other Puritan
home; but the spiritual paroxysms of his daughter Betty, as noted in
previous pages, were more characteristic, and probably not half so
alarming to the deeply religious father. There seems to be little
"sorrowfull remembrance" in the following note by the Judge; what would
have caused genuine alarm to a modern parent seemed to be almost a
source of secret satisfaction to him: "Sabbath, May 3, 1696. Betty can
hardly read her chapter for weeping; tells me she is afraid she is gone
