
She did not turn or answer, and there followed a low laugh.

"You think a man will lie beneath your feet and be trodden upon without
speaking.  You are too high and bold."

She waved her painted fan, and gazed steadily before her at the crowd,
now and then bending her head in gracious greeting and smiling at some
passer-by.

"If I could tell the story of the rose garden, and of what the sun-dial
saw, and what the moon shone on--" he said.

He heard her draw her breath sharply through her teeth, he saw her white
bosom lift as if a wild beast leapt within it, and he laughed again.

"His Grace of Osmonde returns," he said; and then marking, as he never
failed to do, bitterly against his will, the grace and majesty of this
rival, who was one of the greatest and bravest of England's gentlemen,
and knowing that she marked it too, his rage so mounted that it overcame
him.

"Sometimes," he said, "methinks that I shall _kill_ you!"

"Would you gain your end thereby?" she answered, in a voice as low and
deadly.

"I would frustrate his--and yours."

"Do it, then," she hissed back, "some day when you think I fear you."

"'Twould be too easy," he answered.  "You fear it too little.  There are
bitterer things."

She rose and met his Grace, who had approached her.  Always to his
greatness and his noble heart she turned with that new feeling of
dependence which her whole life had never brought to her before.  His
deep eyes, falling on her tenderly as she rose, were filled with
protecting concern.  Involuntarily he hastened his steps.

"Will your Grace take me to my coach?" she said.  "I am not well.  May
I--go?" as gently as a tender, appealing girl.

And moved by this, as by her pallor, more than his man's words could have
told, he gave her his arm and drew her quickly and supportingly away.

Mistress Anne did not sleep well that night, having much to distract her
mind and keep her awake, as was often in these days the case.  When at
length she closed her eyes her slumber was fitful and broken by dreams,
and in the mid hour of the darkness she wakened with a start as if some
sound had aroused her.  Perhaps there had been some sound, though all was
still when she opened her eyes; but in the chair by her bedside sat
Clorinda in her night-rail, her hands wrung hard together on her knee,
her black eyes staring under a brow knit into straight deep lines.

"Sister!" cried Anne, starting up in bed.  "Sister!"

Clorinda slowly turned her head towards her, whereupon Anne saw that in
her face there was a look as if of horror which struggled with a grief, a
woe, too monstrous to be borne.

"Lie down, Anne," she said.  "Be not afraid--'tis only I," bitterly--"who
need fear?"

Anne cowered among the pillows and hid her face in her thin hands.  She
knew so well that this was true.

"I never thought the time would come," her sister said, "when I should
seek you for protection.  A thing has come upon me--perhaps I shall go
mad--to-night, alone in my room, I wanted to sit near a woman--'twas not
like me, was it?"

Mistress Anne crept near the bed's edge, and stretching forth a hand,
touched hers, which were as cold as marble.

"Stay with me, sister," she prayed.  "Sister, do not go!  What--what can
I say?"

"Naught," was the steady answer.  "There is naught to be said.  You were
always a woman--I was never one--till now."

She rose up from her chair and threw up her arms, pacing to and fro.

"I am a desperate creature," she cried.  "Why was I born?"

She walked the room almost like a thing mad and caged.

"Why was I thrown into the world?" striking her breast.  "Why was I made
so--and not one to watch or care through those mad years?  To be given a
body like this--and tossed to the wolves."

She turned to Anne, her arms outstretched, and so stood white and strange
and beauteous as a statue, with drops like great pearls running down her
lovely cheeks, and she caught her breath sobbingly, like a child.

"I was thrown to them," she wailed piteously, "and they harried me--and
left the marks of their great teeth--and of the scars I cannot rid
myself--and since it was my fate--pronounced from my first hour--why was
not this," clutching her breast, "left hard as 'twas at first?  Not a
woman's--not a woman's, but a she-cub's.  Ah! 'twas not just--not just
that it should be so!"

Anne slipped from her bed and ran to her, falling upon her knees and
clinging to her, weeping bitterly.

"Poor heart!" she cried.  "Poor, dearest heart!"

Her touch and words seemed to recall Clorinda to herself.  She started as
if wakened from a dream, and drew her form up rigid.

"I have gone mad," she said.  "What is it I do?"  She passed her hand
across her brow and laughed a little wild laugh.  "Yes," she said; "this
it is to be a woman--to turn weak and run to other women--and weep and
talk.  Yes, by these signs I _am_ a woman!"  She stood with her clenched
hands pressed against her breast.  "In any fair fight," she said, "I
could have struck back blow for blow--and mine would have been the
heaviest; but being changed into a woman, my arms are taken from me.  He
who strikes, aims at my bared breast--and that he knows and triumphs in."

She set her teeth together, and ground them, and the look, which was like
that of a chained and harried tigress, lit itself in her eyes.

"But there is _none_ shall beat me," she said through these fierce shut
teeth.  "Nay I there is _none_!  Get up, Anne," bending to raise her.
"Get up, or I shall be kneeling too--and I must stand upon my feet."

She made a motion as if she would have turned and gone from the room
without further explanation, but Anne still clung to her.  She was afraid
of her again, but her piteous love was stronger than her fear.

"Let me go with you," she cried.  "Let me but go and lie in your closet
that I may be near, if you should call."

Clorinda put her hands upon her shoulders, and stooping, kissed her,
which in all their lives she had done but once or twice.

"God bless thee, poor Anne," she said.  "I think thou wouldst lie on my
threshold and watch the whole night through, if I should need it; but I
have given way to womanish vapours too much--I must go and be alone.  I
was driven by my thoughts to come and sit and look at thy good face--I
did not mean to wake thee.  Go back to bed."

She would be obeyed, and led Anne to her couch herself, making her lie
down, and drawing the coverlet about her; after which she stood upright
with a strange smile, laying her hands lightly about her own white
throat.

"When I was a new-born thing and had a little throat and a weak breath,"
she cried, "'twould have been an easy thing to end me.  I have been told
I lay beneath my mother when they found her dead.  If, when she felt her
breath leaving her, she had laid her hand upon my mouth and stopped mine,
I should not," with the little laugh again--"I should not lie awake to-
night."

And then she went away.




CHAPTER XIV--Containing the history of the breaking of the horse Devil,
and relates the returning of his Grace of Osmonde from France


There were in this strange nature, depths so awful and profound that it
was not to be sounded or to be judged as others were.  But one thing
could have melted or caused the unconquerable spirit to bend, and this
was the overwhelming passion of love--not a slight, tender feeling, but a
great and powerful one, such as could be awakened but by a being of as
strong and deep a nature as itself, one who was in all things its peer.

"I have been lonely--lonely all my life," my Lady Dunstanwolde had once
said to her sister, and she had indeed spoken a truth.

Even in her childhood she had felt in some strange way she stood apart
from the world about her.  Before she had been old enough to reason she
had been conscious that she was stronger and had greater power and
endurance than any human being about her.  Her strength she used in these
days in wilful tyranny, and indeed it was so used for many a day when she
was older.  The time had never been when an eye lighted on her with
indifference, or when she could not rule and punish as she willed.  As an
infant she had browbeaten the women-servants and the stable-boys and
grooms; but because of her quick wit and clever tongue, and also because
no humour ever made her aught but a creature well worth looking at, they
had taken her bullying in good-humour and loved her in their coarse way.
She had tyrannised over her father and his companions, and they had
adored and boasted of her; but there had not been one among them whom she
could have turned to if a softer moment had come upon her and she had
felt the need of a friend, nor indeed one whom she did not regard
privately with contempt.

A god or goddess forced upon earth and surrounded by mere human beings
would surely feel a desolateness beyond the power of common words to
express, and a human being endowed with powers and physical gifts so rare
as to be out of all keeping with those of its fellows of ordinary build
and mental stature must needs be lonely too.

She had had no companion, because she had found none like herself, and
none with whom she could have aught in common.  Anne she had pitied,
being struck by some sense of the unfairness of her lot as compared with
her own.  John Oxon had moved her, bringing to her her first knowledge of
buoyant, ardent youth, and blooming strength and beauty; for Dunstanwolde
she had felt gratitude and affection; but than these there had been no
others who even distantly had touched her heart.

The night she had given her promise to Dunstanwolde, and had made her
obeisance before his kinsman as she had met his deep and leonine eye, she
had known that 'twas the only man's eye before which her own would fall
and which held the power to rule her very soul.

She did not think this as a romantic girl would have thought it; it was
revealed to her by a sudden tempestuous leap of her heart, and by a shock
like terror.  Here was the man who was of her own build, whose thews and
sinews of mind and body was as powerful as her own--here was he who, had
she met him one short year before, would have revolutionised her world.

In the days of her wifehood when she had read in his noble face something
of that which he endeavoured to command and which to no other was
apparent, the dignity of his self-restraint had but filled her with
tenderness more passionate and grateful.

"Had he been a villain and a coward," was her thought, "he would have
made my life a bitter battle; but 'tis me he loves, not himself only, and
as I honour him so does he honour me."

Now she beheld the same passion in his eyes, but no more held in leash:
his look met hers, hiding from her nothing of what his high soul burned
with; and she was free--free to answer when he spoke, and only feeling
one bitterness in her heart--if he had but come in time--God! why had he
not been sent in time?

But, late or early, he had come; and what they had to give each other
should not be mocked at and lost.  The night she had ended by going to
Anne's chamber, she had paced her room saying this again and again, all
the strength of her being rising in revolt.  She had been then a caged
tigress of a verity; she had wrung her hands; she had held her palm hard
against her leaping heart; she had walked madly to and fro, battling in
thought with what seemed awful fate; she had flung herself upon her knees
and wept bitter scalding tears.

"He is so noble," she had cried--"he is so noble--and I so worship his
nobleness--and I have been so base!"

And in her suffering her woman's nerves had for a moment betrayed her.
Heretofore she had known no weakness of her sex, but the woman soul in
her so being moved, she had been broken and conquered for a space, and
had gone to Anne's chamber, scarcely knowing what refuge she so sought.
It had been a feminine act, and she had realised all it signified when
Anne sank weeping by her.  Women who wept and prated together at midnight
in their chambers ended by telling their secrets.  So it was that it fell
out that Anne saw not again the changed face to the sight of which she
had that night awakened.  It seemed as if my lady from that time made
plans which should never for a moment leave her alone.  The next day she
was busied arranging a brilliant rout, the next a rich banquet, the next
a great assembly; she drove in the Mall in her stateliest equipages; she
walked upon its promenade, surrounded by her crowd of courtiers, smiling
upon them, and answering them with shafts of graceful wit--the charm of
her gaiety had never been so remarked upon, her air never so enchanting.
At every notable gathering in the World of Fashion she was to be seen.
Being bidden to the Court, which was at Hampton, her brilliant beauty and
spirit so enlivened the royal dulness that 'twas said the Queen herself
was scarce resigned to part with her, and that the ladies and gentlemen
in waiting all suffered from the spleen when she withdrew.  She bought at
this time the fiercest but most beautiful beast of a horse she had ever
mounted.  The creature was superbly handsome, but apparently so
unconquerable and so savage that her grooms were afraid to approach it,
and indeed it could not be saddled and bitted unless she herself stood
near.  Even the horse-dealer, rogue though he was, had sold it to her
with some approach to a qualm of conscience, having confessed to her that
it had killed two grooms, and been sentenced to be shot by its first
owner, and was still living only because its great beauty had led him to
hesitate for a few days.  It was by chance that during these few days
Lady Dunstanwolde heard of it, and going to see it, desired and bought it
at once.

"It is the very beast I want," she said, with a gleam in her eye.  "It
will please me to teach it that there is one stronger than itself."

She had much use for her loaded riding-whip; and indeed, not finding it
heavy enough, ordered one made which was heavier.  When she rode the
beast in Hyde Park, her first battles with him were the town talk; and
there were those who bribed her footmen to inform them beforehand, when
my lady was to take out Devil, that they might know in time to be in the
Park to see her.  Fops and hunting-men laid wagers as to whether her
ladyship would kill the horse or be killed by him, and followed her
training of the creature with an excitement and delight quite wild.

"Well may the beast's name be Devil," said more than one looker-on; "for
he is not so much horse as demon.  And when he plunges and rears and
shows his teeth, there is a look in his eye which flames like her own,
and 'tis as if a male and female demon fought together, for surely such a
woman never lived before.  She will not let him conquer her, God knows;
and it would seem that he was swearing in horse fashion that she should
not conquer him."

When he was first bought and brought home, Mistress Anne turned ashy at
the sight of him, and in her heart of hearts grieved bitterly that it had
so fallen out that his Grace of Osmonde had been called away from town by
high and important matters; for she knew full well, that if he had been
in the neighbourhood, he would have said some discreet and tender word of
warning to which her ladyship would have listened, though she would have
treated with disdain the caution of any other man or woman.  When she
herself ventured to speak, Clorinda looked only stern.

"I have ridden only ill-tempered beasts all my life, and that for the
mere pleasure of subduing them," she said.  "I have no liking for a horse
like a bell-wether; and if this one should break my neck, I need battle
with neither men nor horses again, and I shall die at the high tide of
life and power; and those who think of me afterwards will only remember
that they loved me--that they loved me."

But the horse did not kill her, nor she it.  Day after day she stood by
while it was taken from its stall, many a time dealing with it herself,
because no groom dare approach; and then she would ride it forth, and in
Hyde Park force it to obey her; the wondrous strength of her will, her
wrist of steel, and the fierce, pitiless punishment she inflicted,
actually daunting the devilish creature's courage.  She would ride from
the encounter, through two lines of people who had been watching her--and
some of them found themselves following after her, even to the Park
gate--almost awed as they looked at her, sitting erect and splendid on
the fretted, anguished beast, whose shining skin was covered with lather,
whose mouth tossed blood-flecked foam, and whose great eye was so
strangely like her own, but that hers glowed with the light of triumph,
and his burned with the agonised protest of the vanquished.  At such
times there was somewhat of fear in the glances that followed her beauty,
which almost seemed to blaze--her colour was so rich, the curve of her
red mouth so imperial, the poise of her head, with its loosening coils of
velvet black hair, so high.

"It is good for me that I do this," she said to Anne, with a short laugh,
one day.  "I was growing too soft--and I have need now for all my power.
To fight with the demon in this beast, rouses all in me that I have held
in check since I became my poor lord's wife.  That the creature should
have set his will against all others, and should resist me with such
strength and devilishness, rouses in me the passion of the days when I
cursed and raved and struck at those who angered me.  'Tis fury that
possesses me, and I could curse and shriek at him as I flog him, if
'twould be seemly.  As it would not be so, I shut my teeth hard, and
shriek and curse within them, and none can hear."

Among those who made it their custom to miss no day when she went forth
on Devil that they might stand near and behold her, there was one man
ever present, and 'twas Sir John Oxon.  He would stand as near as might
be and watch the battle, a stealthy fire in his eye, and a look as if the
outcome of the fray had deadly meaning to him.  He would gnaw his lip
until at times the blood started; his face would by turns flush scarlet
and turn deadly pale; he would move suddenly and restlessly, and break
forth under breath into oaths of exclamation.  One day a man close by him
saw him suddenly lay his hand upon his sword, and having so done, still
keep it there, though 'twas plain he quickly remembered where he was.

As for the horse's rider, my Lady Dunstanwolde, whose way it had been to
avoid this man and to thrust him from her path by whatsoever adroit means
she could use, on these occasions made no effort to evade him and his
glances; in sooth, he knew, though none other did so, that when she
fought with her horse she did it with a fierce joy in that he beheld her.
'Twas as though the battle was between themselves; and knowing this in
the depths of such soul as he possessed, there were times when the man
would have exulted to see the brute rise and fall upon her, crushing her
out of life, or dash her to the earth and set his hoof upon her dazzling
upturned face.  Her scorn and deadly defiance of him, her beauty and
maddening charm, which seemed but to increase with every hour that flew
by, had roused his love to fury.  Despite his youth, he was a villain, as
he had ever been; even in his first freshness there had been older
men--and hardened ones--who had wondered at the selfish mercilessness and
blackness of the heart that was but that of a boy.  They had said among
themselves that at his years they had never known a creature who could be
so gaily a dastard, one who could plan with such light remorselessness,
and using all the gifts given him by Nature solely for his own ends,
would take so much and give so little.  In truth, as time had gone on,
men who had been his companions, and had indeed small consciences to
boast of, had begun to draw off a little from him, and frequent his
company less.  He chose to tell himself that this was because he had
squandered his fortune and was less good company, being pursued by
creditors and haunted by debts; but though there was somewhat in this,
perchance 'twas not the entire truth.

"By Gad!" said one over his cups, "there are things even a rake-hell
fellow like me cannot do; but he does them, and seems not to know that
they are to his discredit."

There had been a time when without this woman's beauty he might have
lived--indeed, he had left it of his own free vicious will; but in these
days, when his fortunes had changed and she represented all that he stood
most desperately in need of, her beauty drove him mad.  In his haunting
of her, as he followed her from place to place, his passion grew day by
day, and all the more gained strength and fierceness because it was so
mixed with hate.  He tossed upon his bed at night and cursed her; he
remembered the wild past, and the memory all but drove him to delirium.
He knew of what stern stuff she was made, and that even if her love had
died, she would have held to her compact like grim death, even while
loathing him.  And he had cast all this aside in one mad moment of boyish
cupidity and folly; and now that she was so radiant and entrancing a
thing, and wealth, and splendour, and rank, and luxury lay in the hollow
of her hand, she fixed her beauteous devil's eyes upon him with a scorn
in their black depths which seemed to burn like fires of hell.

The great brute who dashed, and plunged, and pranced beneath her seemed
to have sworn to conquer her as he had sworn himself; but let him plunge
and kick as he would, there was no quailing in her eye, she sat like a
creature who was superhuman, and her hand was iron, her wrist was steel.
She held him so that he could not do his worst without such pain as would
drive him mad; she lashed him, and rained on him such blows as almost
made him blind.  Once at the very worst, Devil dancing near him, she
looked down from his back into John Oxon's face, and he cursed aloud, her
eye so told him his own story and hers.  In those days their souls met in
such combat as it seemed must end in murder itself.

"You will not conquer him," he said to her one morning, forcing himself
near enough to speak.

"I will, unless he kills me," she answered, "and that methinks he will
find it hard to do."

"He will kill you," he said.  "I would, were I in his four shoes."

"You would if you could," were her words; "but you could not with his bit
in your mouth and my hand on the snaffle.  And if he killed me, still
'twould be he, not I, was beaten; since he could only kill what any
bloody villain could with any knife.  He is a brute beast, and I am that
which was given dominion over such.  Look on till I have done with him."

And thus, with other beholders, though in a different mood from theirs,
he did, until a day when even the most sceptical saw that the brute came
to the fray with less of courage, as if there had at last come into his
brain the dawning of a fear of that which rid him, and all his madness
could not displace from its throne upon his back.

"By God!" cried more than one of the bystanders, seeing this, despite the
animal's fury, "the beast gives way!  He gives way!  She has him!"  And
John Oxon, shutting his teeth, cut short an oath and turned pale as
death.

From that moment her victory was a thing assured.  The duel of strength
became less desperate, and having once begun to learn his lesson, the
brute was made to learn it well.  His bearing was a thing superb to
behold; once taught obedience, there would scarce be a horse like him in
the whole of England.  And day by day this he learned from her, and being
mastered, was put through his paces, and led to answer to the rein, so
that he trotted, cantered, galloped, and leaped as a bird flies.  Then as
the town had come to see him fight for freedom, it came to see him adorn
the victory of the being who had conquered him, and over their dishes of
tea in the afternoon beaux and beauties of fashion gossiped of the
interesting and exciting event; and there were vapourish ladies who vowed
they could not have beaten a brute so, and that surely my Lady
Dunstanwolde must have looked hot and blowzy while she did it, and have
had the air of a great rough man; and there were some pretty tiffs and
even quarrels when the men swore that never had she looked so magnificent
