the state legislature. He nursed his political prospects carefully, and
eight years later, was sent to Congress. He was afterwards twice
governor of Tennessee.

It has been said that secession was, in the beginning, a policy of the
ruling class in the South and not of the people. It is not surprising,
then, that Johnson should have arrayed himself against it, and fought it
with all his might. This position made him so prominent, that on March
4, 1862, Lincoln appointed him military-governor of Tennessee--a
position which was exactly to Johnson's taste and which he filled well.
In this position, he seemed the embodiment of the Union element of the
South, and at their national convention in 1864, the Republicans decided
that the President's policy of reconstruction for the South would be
greatly aided by the presence of a southern man on the ticket, and
Johnson was thereupon chosen for the office of Vice-President. On the
same day that Lincoln was inaugurated for the second time, Johnson took
the oath of office in the Senate chamber, and delivered a speech which
created a sensation. He declared, in effect, that Tennessee had never
been out of the Union, that she was electing representatives who would
soon mingle with their brothers from the North at Washington, and that
she was entitled to every privilege which the northern states enjoyed.

Three hours after the death of the President, Andrew Johnson took the
oath of office as his successor, but he was regarded with suspicion at
both North and South--at the North, because he was believed to be at
heart pro-slavery; at the South because of his well-known animosity
toward the aristocratic and ruling class. He was also known to be
stubborn, high-tempered and intemperate, and he and Congress were soon
at sword's point. Johnson was of the opinion that the question of
suffrage for the negroes should be left to the several states; a
majority of Congress were determined to exact this for their own
protection. This was embodied in the so-called Civil Rights Bill,
conferring citizenship upon colored men. It was promptly vetoed by the
President, and was passed over his veto; soon afterwards the fourteenth
amendment was passed, conferring the suffrage upon all citizens of the
United States without regard to color or previous condition of
servitude. It also was vetoed, and passed over the veto. Johnson was
hailed as a traitor by Republicans, and the campaign against him
culminated in his impeachment by Congress early in 1868. The trial
which followed was the most bitter in the history of the Senate, but
Andrew Johnson was acquitted by the failure of the prosecution to secure
the two-thirds vote necessary for conviction by a single vote,
thirty-five senators voting for conviction and nineteen for acquittal.

Johnson's friends were jubilant, but his power had vanished. The seceded
states one by one came back into the Union in accordance with the
Reconstruction act which Johnson had vetoed. He failed of the nomination
on the Democratic ticket, and after the inauguration of his successor,
at once returned to his old home in Tennessee. There he attempted to
secure the nomination for United States senator, but his influence was
gone and he was defeated. So ended his public life.

It has been rather the fashion to picture Johnson, as an intemperate and
bull-headed ignoramus, but such a characterization is far from fair. But
for Lincoln's assassination, some such policy of reconstruction as
Johnson advocated would probably have been carried out, instead of the
policy of fanatics like Thaddeus Stevens, which left the South a prey to
the carpet-bagger and the ignorant negro for over a decade. Johnson
himself might have accomplished more if he had been of a less violent
disposition; but he was ignorant of diplomacy, incapable of compromise,
and so was worsted in the fight. However we may disagree with his policy
and dislike his character, let us at least not forget that picture of
the "poor white" boy teaching himself to read; and that other of the
girl-wife patiently instructing him in the rudiments of writing.

       *       *       *       *       *

A successful war inevitably gives to its commanders a tremendous popular
prestige. We have seen how the battle of New Orleans made Andrew Jackson
a national hero, how William Henry Harrison loomed large after the
battle of Tippecanoe, and how Zachary Taylor was chosen President as a
result of his victories in Mexico. The country was now to undergo
another period of military domination, longer lived than those others,
as the Civil War was greater than them--a period from which it has even
yet not fully recovered.

In 1868, the Republican party nominated unanimously for President the
general who had pushed the war to a successful finish, and who had
received Lee's surrender, Ulysses Simpson Grant, and he was elected by
an overwhelming majority. For the first time in the history of the
country, a man had been elected President without regard to his
qualifications for the office, for even Jackson had had many years'
experience in public affairs. Of such qualifications, Grant had very
few. He was egotistical, a poor judge of men, without experience in
statesmanship, and unwilling to submit to guidance. As a result, his
administration was marked by inefficiency and extravagance, and ended in
a swirl of scandal.

Born in Ohio in 1822, and graduated at West Point, he had served through
the war with Mexico, resigned from the army, remained in obscurity for
six years, during which he made an unsuccessful attempt to support
himself in civil life, and entered the army again at the outbreak of the
Civil War. From the first he was successful more than any other of the
Union generals, not so much because of military genius as from a certain
tenacity of purpose with which he fairly wore out the enemy. But a
people discouraged by reverses were not disposed to inquire too closely
into the reason of his victories, and early in 1864, after a brilliant
campaign along the Mississippi, he had been appointed commander-in-chief
of the Union army, and began that series of operations against Richmond
which cost the North so dear, but which resulted in the fall of the
capital of the Confederacy and in Lee's surrender.

A bearded, square-jawed, silent man, he caught the public fancy by two
messages, the one of "Unconditional surrender," with which he had
answered the demand for terms on the part of the Confederates whom he
had entrapped in Fort Donelson; the other, the famous: "I propose to
fight it out on this line, if it takes all summer," with which he
started his campaign in the Wilderness. Both were characteristic, and if
Grant had retired from public life at the close of the Civil War, or had
been content to remain commander-in-chief of the army of the United
States, his fame would probably have been brighter than it is to-day.

His training, such as it was, had been wholly military and his inaugural
address showed his profound ignorance of the work which lay before
him--an ignorance all the more profound and unreachable because of his
serene unconsciousness of it. He fell at once an easy prey to political
demagogues, and before the close of his first administration,
demoralization was widespread throughout the government. A large portion
of the Republican party, realizing his unfitness for the office, opposed
his renomination, and when they saw his nomination was inevitable, broke
away and named a ticket of their own, but Grant's victory was a sweeping
one.

With this stamp of public approval, the boodlers became bolder and great
scandals followed, involving many members of Congress and even some
members of the cabinet, but not the President himself, of whose personal
honesty there was never any doubt, and in 1873, came the worst panic the
country had ever experienced. A political reaction followed, and in 1874
the Democrats carried the country, gaining the House of Representatives
by a majority of nearly a hundred.

Following his retirement from office in 1877, Grant made a tour of the
world, returning in 1879, to be again a candidate for the presidency,
and coming very near to getting the nomination. It was characteristic of
the man's egotism that, even yet, he did not realize his unfitness for
the office, but thought himself great enough to disregard the precedent
which Washington had established. He lived five years longer, the last
years of his life rendered miserable by cancer of the throat, which
finally killed him.

In the summer of 1876, the Republicans nominated Rutherford B. Hayes,
at that time Governor of Ohio, as their candidate for President--a
nomination which was a surprise to the country, which had confidently
expected that of James G. Blaine. Hayes was by no means a national
figure, although he had served in the Union army, had been in Congress,
and, as has been said, was governor of Ohio at the time of his
nomination. Nor was he a man of more than very ordinary ability,
upright, honest, and mediocre. The Democratic candidate was Samuel J.
Tilden, a political star of the first magnitude, and the contest which
followed was unprecedented in American history.

Tilden received a popular majority of half a million votes, and 184
electoral votes, out of the 185 necessary to elect, without counting the
votes from Florida, South Carolina and Louisiana, all of which he had
carried on the face of the returns. The Republicans disputed the vote in
these states, however, and by the inexorable use of party machinery and
carpet-bag government, declared Hayes elected. For a time, so manifest
was the partisan bias of this decision, the country seemed on the verge
of another Civil War, but Tilden led in wiser council, and Hayes was
permitted to take his seat. It is the only instance in a national
election where the will of the people at the polls has been defied and
overridden.

Hayes was a sincere and honest man, and he felt keenly the cloud which
the manner of his election cast over his administration. He was never
popular with his party, and no doubt he felt that the debt he owed it
for getting him his seat was a doubtful one. His administration was
noteworthy principally because he destroyed the last vestiges of
carpet-bag government in the South, and left the southern states to work
out their own destiny unhampered. He was not even considered for a
renomination, and spent the remainder of his life quietly in his Ohio
home.

Hayes's successor was another so-called "dark horse," that is, a man of
minor importance, whose nomination, was due to the fact that the party
leaders could not agree upon any of the more prominent candidates. They
were Grant, Blaine and John Sherman, and after thirty-five ballots, it
was evident that a "dark horse" must be found. The choice fell upon
James Abram Garfield, who was not prominent enough to have made any
enemies, and who was as astonished as was the country at large when it
heard the news.

Garfield was born in Ohio in 1831, in a little log cabin and to a
position in the world not greatly different to Lincoln's. While laboring
at various rough trades, he succeeded in preparing himself for college,
worked his way through, got into politics, served through the Civil War,
and later for eighteen years in Congress, where he made a creditable but
by no means brilliant record. He was elected President by a small
majority, and enraged the many enemies of James G. Blaine by selecting
that astute politician as his secretary of state. One of these, a
rattle-brained New Yorker named Charles J. Guiteau, approached the
President on July 2, 1881, as he was waiting at a railroad station in
Washington, about to start on a journey, and shot him through the body.
Death followed, after a painful struggle, two months later.

Obscure, in a sense, as Garfield had been, the man who succeeded him was
immeasurably more so. Chester Alan Arthur was a successful New York
lawyer, who had dabbled in politics and held some minor appointive
offices, his selection as Vice-President being due to the desire of the
Republican managers to throw a sop to the Empire State. His
administration, however, while marked by no great or stirring event, was
for the most part wise and conservative, but James G. Blaine had by this
time secured complete control of the party, and Arthur had no chance for
the nomination for President. He died of apoplexy within two years of
his retirement.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Republican party had been supreme in the national government for a
quarter of a century, and there seemed no reason to doubt that Blaine,
its candidate in the campaign of 1884, would at last realize his
consuming ambition to be elected President. He had an immense personal
prestige, he had outlived the taint of corruption attached to him during
the administration of Grant, and he had for years been preparing and
strengthening himself for this contest. So he entered it confidently.

But a new issue had arisen--that of the protective tariff, which,
originally a war revenue measure, had been formally adopted as a
principle of Republicanism, which was hailed by its adherents as a new
and brilliant economic device for enriching everybody at nobody's
expense, and which had really enriched a few at the expense of the many.
The Democrats, with considerable hesitation and ambiguity, pronounced
against it, arraigned the Republican party for corruption, and named as
their nominee Grover Cleveland, of New York.

Cleveland was born in New Jersey in 1837, the son of a clergyman whose
early death threw him upon his own resources. He started west in search
of employment, stopped at Buffalo, and afterwards made it his home. He
studied law while working as a clerk and copyist, was admitted to the
bar in 1859, and in the late seventies was elected mayor of Buffalo on a
reform ticket. Almost at once, the country's eyes were fastened upon
him. Elected as a reform mayor, he continued to be one after his
induction into office. He actually seemed to think that the promises and
pledges made by him during his campaign were still binding upon him, and
astounded the politicians by proceeding to carry those promises out. So
scathing were the veto messages he sent in, one after another, to a
corrupt council, that they awakened admiration and respect even among
his opponents. The messages, written in the plainest of plain English,
aroused the people of the city to the way in which they had been robbed
by dishonest officials, they rallied behind him, and his reputation was
made. In 1882, his party wanted a reform candidate for governor, and
they naturally turned to Cleveland, and he was elected by a plurality of
two hundred thousand.

He found the same condition of things on a larger scale at Albany as at
Buffalo--a corrupt machine paying political debts with public money--and
here, again, he showed the same astonishing regard for pre-election
pledges, the same belief in his famous declaration that "a public office
is a public trust," and bill after bill was vetoed, while the people
applauded. And with every veto came a message stating its reasons in
language which did not mince words and which all could understand. He
showed himself not only to be entirely beyond the control of the
political machine of his own party, but also to possess remarkable moral
courage, and he became naturally and inevitably the Democratic candidate
for President, since the Democratic platform was in the main an
arraignment of Republican corruption and moral decay. The campaign which
followed was a bitter one; but Blaine had estranged a large portion of
his party, he made a number of bad blunders, and Cleveland was elected.
The old party founded by Jefferson, which, beginning with Jefferson's
administration, had ruled the country uninterruptedly for forty years,
was returned to power, and on an issue which would have delighted
Jefferson's heart.

Much to the dismay and disappointment of the politicians, the new
President made no clean sweep of Republican officeholders. He took the
unheard-of ground that, in the public service, as in any other, good
work merited advancement, no matter what the politics of the individual
might be. He made some changes, as a matter of course, but he was from
the first sturdily in favor of civil service reform. It is worth
remarking that a Democratic President was the first to take a decided
stand against the principle of "to the victors belong the spoils," first
put into practice by another Democratic President, Andrew Jackson, over
fifty years before.

His stand, too, on the pension question was startling in its audacity.
The shadow of the Civil War still hung over the country; the soldiers
who had served in that war had formed themselves into a great,
semi-political organization, known as the Grand Army of the Republic,
and worked unceasingly for increased pensions, which Congress had found
itself unable to refuse. More than that, the members of Congress were in
the habit of passing hundreds of special bills, giving pensions to men
whose claims had been rejected by the pension department, as not coming
within the law. Cleveland took the stand that, unless the soldier had
been disabled by the war, he had no just claim to government support,
and he vetoed scores of private pension bills, many of which were shown
to be fraudulent.

In other ways, his remarkable strength of personality soon became
apparent, and his determination to do what he thought his duty,
regardless of consequences. His message of December, 1887, fairly
startled the country. It was devoted entirely to a denunciation of the
high tariff laws, a subject on which the Democratic leaders had deemed
it prudent to maintain a discreet silence since the preceding election,
and which many of them hoped would be forgotten by the public. But
Cleveland's message brought the question squarely to the front, and made
it the one issue of the campaign which followed. Cleveland would have
been elected but for the traitorous conduct of the leaders in New York,
who had never forgiven him for the way in which, as governor, he had
scourged them. New York State was lost to him, and his opponent,
Benjamin Harrison, was elected, although his popular vote fell below
that of Cleveland by over a hundred thousand.

But Cleveland had his revenge four years later, when, in spite of the
protests of the leaders from his own state of New York, he was again
nominated on a platform denouncing the tariff, and defeated Harrison by
an overwhelming majority. And now came one of those strange instances of
party perfidy and party suicide, of which the country has just witnessed
a second example. In accordance with the platform pledges, a bill to
lower the tariff was at once framed in the House and adopted; but the
Senate, although Democratic in complexion, so altered it that it fell
far short of carrying out the party pledges. The leader in the Senate
was Arthur P. Gorman, of Maryland, and to him chiefly was due this act
of treachery. The President refused to sign the bill, and it became a
law without his signature. There can be little question that it was the
failure of the Democratic party to fulfil its pledges at that critical
time which led to its subsequent disruption and defeat.

Twice more did Cleveland startle the country with his extraordinary
decision of character. In the summer of 1894, a great railroad strike,
centering at Chicago, occasioned an outbreak of violence, which the
governor of Illinois did nothing to quell. The President, therefore,
declaring that the rioters had no right to interfere with the United
States mails, ordered national troops to the scene to maintain order. A
year later, when the British Government, involved in a boundary dispute
with Venezuela, declared that it did not accept the Monroe Doctrine and
would not submit the dispute to arbitration, the President sent a
message to Congress, declaring that the Monroe Doctrine must be upheld
at whatever cost. The country was thrilled from end to end, the
President's course approved, and Great Britain at last consented to
arbitration.

[Illustration: CLEVELAND]

And yet, when Cleveland left the presidential chair for the second time,
he had entirely lost control of and sympathy with his own party. He had
shown little tact in his dealings with the party leaders. He seemed to
forget that, after all, these leaders had certain rights and privileges
which should be respected; he sometimes blundered through very anxiety
to be right. You have heard some men called so upright that they leaned
over backward--well, that, occasionally, was Cleveland's fault. He
was subjected to such a storm of abuse as no other ex-President ever had
to endure. That he felt it keenly there can be no question; but in the
years which followed, his sturdy and unassailable character came to be
recognized and appreciated, and his death, in the summer of 1908, was
the occasion of deep and widespread sorrow.

       *       *       *       *       *

We have told how, in 1888, Cleveland was defeated for the presidency by
Benjamin Harrison. Harrison was a grandson of the old warrior of
Tippecanoe, William Henry Harrison, the successful candidate of the Whig
