  Of fifty measured acres, vineyard half,
  And half of land commodious for the plow.
  Him Oeneus also, warrior grey with age,
  Ascending to his chamber, and his doors                        725
  Smiting importunate, with earnest prayers
  Assay'd to soften, kneeling to his son.
  Nor less his sisters woo'd him to relent,
  Nor less his mother; but in vain; he grew
  Still more obdurate. His companions last,                      730
  The most esteem'd and dearest of his friends,
  The same suit urged, yet he persisted still
  Relentless, nor could even they prevail.
  But when the battle shook his chamber-doors
  And the Curetes climbing the high towers                       735
  Had fired the spacious city, then with tears
  The beauteous Cleopatra, and with prayers
  Assail'd him; in his view she set the woes
  Numberless of a city storm'd--the men
  Slaughter'd, the city burnt to dust, the chaste                740
  Matrons with all their children dragg'd away.
  That dread recital roused him, and at length
  Issuing, he put his radiant armor on.
  Thus Meleager, gratifying first
  His own resentment from a fatal day                            745
  Saved the AEtolians, who the promised gift
  Refused him, and his toils found no reward.
  But thou, my son, be wiser; follow thou
  No demon who would tempt thee to a course
  Like his; occasion more propitious far                         750
  Smiles on thee now, than if the fleet were fired.
  Come, while by gifts invited, and receive
  From all the host, the honors of a God;
  For shouldst thou, by no gifts induced, at last
  Enter the bloody field, although thou chase                    755
  The Trojans hence, yet less shall be thy praise.
    Then thus Achilles, matchless in the race.
  Phoenix, my guide, wise, noble and revered!
  I covet no such glory! the renown
  Ordain'd by Jove for me, is to resist                          760
  All importunity to quit my ships
  While I have power to move, or breath to draw.
  Hear now, and mark me well. Cease thou from tears.
  Confound me not, pleading with sighs and sobs
  In Agamemnon's cause; O love not him,                          765
  Lest I renounce thee, who am now thy friend.
  Assist me rather, as thy duty bids,
  Him to afflict, who hath afflicted me,
  So shalt thou share my glory and my power.
  These shall report as they have heard, but here                770
  Rest thou this night, and with the rising morn
  We will decide, to stay or to depart.
    He ceased, and silent, by a nod enjoin'd
  Patroclus to prepare an easy couch
  For Phoenix, anxious to dismiss the rest                       775
  Incontinent; when Ajax, godlike son
  Of Telamon, arising, thus began.
    Laertes' noble son, for wiles renown'd:
  Depart we now; for I perceive that end
  Or fruit of all our reasonings shall be none.                  780
  It is expedient also that we bear
  Our answer back (unwelcome as it is)
  With all dispatch, for the assembled Greeks
  Expect us. Brave Achilles shuts a fire
  Within his breast; the kindness of his friends,                785
  And the respect peculiar by ourselves
  Shown to him, on his heart work no effect.
  Inexorable man! others accept
  Even for a brother slain, or for a son
  Due compensation;[18] the delinquent dwells                    790
  Secure at home, and the receiver, soothed
  And pacified, represses his revenge.
  But thou, resentful of the loss of one,
  One virgin (such obduracy of heart
  The Gods have given thee) can'st not be appeased               795
  Yet we assign thee seven in her stead,
  The most distinguish'd of their sex, and add
  Large gifts beside. Ah then, at last relent!
  Respect thy roof; we are thy guests; we come
  Chosen from the multitude of all the Greeks,                   800
  Beyond them all ambitious of thy love.
    To whom Achilles, swiftest of the swift.
  My noble friend, offspring of Telamon!
  Thou seem'st sincere, and I believe thee such.
  But at the very mention of the name                            805
  Of Atreus' son, who shamed me in the sight
  Of all Achaia's host, bearing me down
  As I had been some vagrant at his door,
  My bosom boils. Return ye and report
  Your answer. I no thought will entertain                       810
  Of crimson war, till the illustrious son
  Of warlike Priam, Hector, blood-embrued,
  Shall in their tents the Myrmidons assail
  Themselves, and fire my fleet. At my own ship,
  And at my own pavilion it may chance                           815
  That even Hector's violence shall pause.[19]
    He ended; they from massy goblets each
  Libation pour'd, and to the fleet their course
  Resumed direct, Ulysses at their head.
  Patroclus then his fellow-warriors bade,                       820
  And the attendant women spread a couch
  For Phoenix; they the couch, obedient, spread
  With fleeces, with rich arras, and with flax
  Of subtlest woof. There hoary Phoenix lay
  In expectation of the sacred dawn.                             825
  Meantime Achilles in the interior tent,
  With beauteous Diomeda by himself
  From Lesbos brought, daughter of Phorbas, lay.
  Patroclus opposite reposed, with whom
  Slept charming Iphis; her, when he had won                     830
  The lofty towers of Scyros, the divine
  Achilles took, and on his friend bestow'd.
    But when those Chiefs at Agamemnon's tent
  Arrived, the Greeks on every side arose
  With golden cups welcoming their return.                       835
  All question'd them, but Agamemnon first.
    Oh worthy of Achaia's highest praise,
  And her chief ornament, Ulysses, speak!
  Will he defend the fleet? or his big heart
  Indulging wrathful, doth he still refuse?                      840
    To whom renown'd Ulysses thus replied.
  Atrides, Agamemnon, King of men!
  He his resentment quenches not, nor will,
  But burns with wrath the more, thee and thy gifts
  Rejecting both. He bids thee with the Greeks                   845
  Consult by what expedient thou may'st save
  The fleet and people, threatening that himself
  Will at the peep of day launch all his barks,
  And counselling, beside, the general host
  To voyage homeward, for that end as yet                        850
  Of Ilium wall'd to heaven, ye shall not find,
  Since Jove the Thunderer with uplifted arm
  Protects her, and her courage hath revived.
  Thus speaks the Chief, and Ajax is prepared,
  With the attendant heralds to report                           855
  As I have said. But Phoenix in the tent
  Sleeps of Achilles, who his stay desired,
  That on the morrow, if he so incline,
  The hoary warrior may attend him hence
  Home to his country, but he leaves him free.                   860
    He ended. They astonish'd at his tone
  (For vehement he spake) sat silent all.
  Long silent sat the afflicted sons of Greece,
  When thus the mighty Diomede began.
    Atrides, Agamemnon, King of men!                             865
  Thy supplications to the valiant son
  Of Peleus, and the offer of thy gifts
  Innumerous, had been better far withheld.
  He is at all times haughty, and thy suit
  Hath but increased his haughtiness of heart                    870
  Past bounds: but let him stay or let him go
  As he shall choose. He will resume the fight
  When his own mind shall prompt him, and the Gods
  Shall urge him forth. Now follow my advice.
  Ye have refresh'd your hearts with food and wine               875
  Which are the strength of man; take now repose.
  And when the rosy-finger'd morning fair
  Shall shine again, set forth without delay
  The battle, horse and foot, before the fleet,
  And where the foremost fight, fight also thou.                 880
    He ended; all the Kings applauded warm
  His counsel, and the dauntless tone admired
  Of Diomede. Then, due libation made,
  Each sought his tent, and took the gift of sleep.

                *        *        *        *        *

There is much in this book which is worthy of close attention. The
consummate genius, the varied and versatile power, the eloquence,
truth, and nature displayed in it, will always be admired. Perhaps
there is no portion of the poem more remarkable for these
attributes.--FELTON.




                              THE ILIAD.

                               BOOK X.




                     ARGUMENT OF THE TENTH BOOK.


 Diomede and Ulysses enter the Trojan host by night, and slay Rhesus.




                               BOOK X.


  All night the leaders of the host of Greece
  Lay sunk in soft repose, all, save the Chief,[1]
  The son of Atreus; him from thought to thought
  Roving solicitous, no sleep relieved.
  As when the spouse of beauteous Juno, darts                      5
  His frequent fires, designing heavy rain
  Immense, or hail-storm, or field-whitening snow,
  Or else wide-throated war calamitous,
  So frequent were the groans by Atreus' son
  Heaved from his inmost heart, trembling with dread.             10
  For cast he but his eye toward the plain
  Of Ilium, there, astonish'd he beheld
  The city fronted with bright fires, and heard
  Pipes, and recorders, and the hum of war;
  But when again the Grecian fleet he view'd,                     15
  And thought on his own people, then his hair
  Uprooted elevating to the Gods,
  He from his generous bosom groan'd again.
  At length he thus resolved; of all the Greeks
  To seek Neleian Nestor first, with whom                         20
  He might, perchance, some plan for the defence
  Of the afflicted Danai devise.
  Rising, he wrapp'd his tunic to his breast,
  And to his royal feet unsullied bound
  His sandals; o'er his shoulders, next, he threw                 25
  Of amplest size a lion's tawny skin
  That swept his footsteps, dappled o'er with blood,
  Then took his spear. Meantime, not less appall'd
  Was Menelaus, on whose eyelids sleep
  Sat not, lest the Achaians for his sake                         30
  O'er many waters borne, and now intent
  On glorious deeds, should perish all at Troy.
  With a pard's spotted hide his shoulders broad
  He mantled over; to his head he raised
  His brazen helmet, and with vigorous hand                       35
  Grasping his spear, forth issued to arouse
  His brother, mighty sovereign of the host,
  And by the Grecians like a God revered.
  He found him at his galley's stern, his arms
  Assuming radiant; welcome he arrived                            40
  To Agamemnon, whom he thus address'd.
    Why arm'st thou, brother? Wouldst thou urge abroad
  Some trusty spy into the Trojan camp?[2]
  I fear lest none so hardy shall be found
  As to adventure, in the dead still night,                       45
  So far, alone; valiant indeed were he!
    To whom great Agamemnon thus replied.
  Heaven-favor'd Menelaus! We have need,
  Thou and myself, of some device well-framed,
  Which both the Grecians and the fleet of Greece                 50
  May rescue, for the mind of Jove hath changed,
  And Hector's prayers alone now reach his ear.
  I never saw, nor by report have learn'd
  From any man, that ever single chief
  Such awful wonders in one day perform'd                         55
  As he with ease against the Greeks, although
  Nor from a Goddess sprung nor from a God.
  Deeds he hath done, which, as I think, the Greeks
  Shall deep and long lament, such numerous ills
  Achaia's host hath at his hands sustain'd.                      60
  But haste, begone, and at their several ships
  Call Ajax and Idomeneus; I go
  To exhort the noble Nestor to arise,
  That he may visit, if he so incline,
  The chosen band who watch, and his advice                       65
  Give them; for him most prompt they will obey,
  Whose son, together with Meriones,
  Friend of Idomeneus, controls them all,
  Entrusted by ourselves with that command.
    Him answer'd Menelaus bold in arms.                           70
  Explain thy purpose. Wouldst thou that I wait
  Thy coming, there, or thy commands to both
  Given, that I incontinent return?
    To whom the Sovereign of the host replied.
  There stay; lest striking into different paths                  75
  (For many passes intersect the camp)
  We miss each other; summon them aloud
  Where thou shalt come; enjoin them to arise;
  Call each by his hereditary name,
  Honoring all. Beware of manners proud,                          80
  For we ourselves must labor, at our birth
  By Jove ordain'd to suffering and to toil.
    So saying, he his brother thence dismiss'd
  Instructed duly, and himself, his steps
  Turned to the tent of Nestor. Him he found                      85
  Amid his sable galleys in his tent
  Reposing soft, his armor at his side,
  Shield, spears, bright helmet, and the broider'd belt
  Which, when the Senior arm'd led forth his host
  To fight, he wore; for he complied not yet                      90
  With the encroachments of enfeebling age.
  He raised his head, and on his elbow propp'd,
  Questioning Agamemnon, thus began.
    But who art thou, who thus alone, the camp
  Roamest, amid the darkness of the night,                        95
  While other mortals sleep? Comest thou abroad
  Seeking some friend or soldier of the guard?
  Speak--come not nearer mute. What is thy wish?
    To whom the son of Atreus, King of men.
  Oh Nestor, glory of the Grecian name,                          100
  Offspring of Neleus! thou in me shalt know
  The son of Atreus, Agamemnon, doom'd
  By Jove to toil, while life shall yet inform
  These limbs, or I shall draw the vital air.
  I wander thus, because that on my lids                         105
  Sweet sleep sits not, but war and the concerns
  Of the Achaians occupy my soul.
  Terrible are the fears which I endure
  For these my people; such as supersede
  All thought; my bosom can no longer hold                       110
  My throbbing heart, and tremors shake my limbs.
  But if thy mind, more capable, project
  Aught that may profit us (for thee it seems
  Sleep also shuns) arise, and let us both
  Visit the watch, lest, haply, overtoil'd                       115
  They yield to sleep, forgetful of their charge.
  The foe is posted near, and may intend
  (None knows his purpose) an assault by night.
    To him Gerenian Nestor thus replied.
  Illustrious Agamemnon, King of men!                            120
  Deep-planning Jove the imaginations proud
  Of Hector will not ratify, nor all
  His sanguine hopes effectuate; in his turn
  He also (fierce Achilles once appeased)
  Shall trouble feel, and haply, more than we.                   125
  But with all readiness I will arise
  And follow thee, that we may also rouse
  Yet others; Diomede the spear-renown'd,
  Ulysses, the swift Ajax, and the son
  Of Phyleus, valiant Meges. It were well                        130
  Were others also visited and call'd,
  The godlike Ajax, and Idomeneus,
  Whose ships are at the camp's extremest bounds.
  But though I love thy brother and revere,
  And though I grieve e'en thee, yet speak I must,               135
  And plainly censure him, that thus he sleeps
  And leaves to thee the labor, who himself
  Should range the host, soliciting the Chiefs
  Of every band, as utmost need requires.
    Him answer'd Agamemnon, King of men.                         140
  Old warrior, times there are, when I could wish
  Myself thy censure of him, for in act
  He is not seldom tardy and remiss.
  Yet is not sluggish indolence the cause,
  No, nor stupidity, but he observes                             145
  Me much, expecting till I lead the way.
  But he was foremost now, far more alert
  This night than I, and I have sent him forth
  Already, those to call whom thou hast named.
  But let us hence, for at the guard I trust                     150
  To find them, since I gave them so in charge.[3]
    To whom the brave Gerenian Chief replied.
  Him none will censure, or his will dispute,
  Whom he shall waken and exhort to rise.
    So saying, he bound his corselet to his breast,              155
  His sandals fair to his unsullied feet,
  And fastening by its clasps his purple cloak
  Around him, double and of shaggy pile,
  Seized, next, his sturdy spear headed with brass,
  And issued first into the Grecian fleet.                       160
  There, Nestor, brave Gerenian, with a voice
  Sonorous roused the godlike counsellor
  From sleep, Ulysses; the alarm came o'er
  His startled ear, forth from his tent he sprang
  Sudden, and of their coming, quick, inquired.                  165
    Why roam ye thus the camp and fleet alone
  In darkness? by what urgent need constrain'd?
    To whom the hoary Pylian thus replied.
  Laertes' noble son, for wiles renown'd!
  Resent it not, for dread is our distress.                      170
  Come, therefore, and assist us to convene
  Yet others, qualified to judge if war
  Be most expedient, or immediate flight.
    He ended, and regaining, quick, his tent,
  Ulysses slung his shield, then coming forth                    175
  Join'd them. The son of Tydeus first they sought.
  Him sleeping arm'd before his tent they found,
  Encompass'd by his friends also asleep;
  His head each rested on his shield, and each
  Had planted on its nether point[4] erect                       180
  His spear beside him; bright their polish'd heads,
  As Jove's own lightning glittered from afar.
  Himself, the Hero, slept. A wild bull's hide
  Was spread beneath him, and on arras tinged
  With splendid purple lay his head reclined.                    185
  Nestor, beside him standing, with his heel
  Shook him, and, urgent, thus the Chief reproved.
    Awake, Tydides! wherefore givest the night
  Entire to balmy slumber? Hast not heard
  How on the rising ground beside the fleet                      190
  The Trojans sit, small interval between?
    He ceased; then up sprang Diomede alarm'd
  Instant, and in wing'd accents thus replied.
    Old wakeful Chief! thy toils are never done.
  Are there not younger of the sons of Greece,                   195
  Who ranging in all parts the camp, might call
  The Kings to council? But no curb controls
  Or can abate activity like thine.
    To whom Gerenian Nestor in return.
  My friend! thou hast well spoken. I have sons,                 200
  And they are well deserving; I have here
  A numerous people also, one of whom
  Might have sufficed to call the Kings of Greece.
  But such occasion presses now the host
  As hath not oft occurr'd; the overthrow                        205
  Complete, or full deliverance of us all,
  In balance hangs, poised on a razor's edge.
  But haste, and if thy pity of my toils
  Be such, since thou art younger, call, thyself,
  Ajax the swift, and Meges to the guard.                        210
    Then Diomede a lion's tawny skin
  Around him wrapp'd, dependent to his heels,
  And, spear in hand, set forth. The Hero call'd
  Those two, and led them whither Nestor bade.
    They, at the guard arrived, not sleeping found               215
  The captains of the guard, but sitting all
  In vigilant posture with their arms prepared.
  As dogs that, careful, watch the fold by night,
  Hearing some wild beast in the woods,[5] which hounds
  And hunters with tumultuous clamor drive                       220
  Down from the mountain-top, all sleep forego;
  So, sat not on their eyelids gentle sleep
  That dreadful night, but constant to the plain
  At every sound of Trojan feet they turn'd.
  The old Chief joyful at the sight, in terms                    225
  Of kind encouragement them thus address'd.
    So watch, my children! and beware that sleep
  Invade none here, lest all become a prey.
    So saying, he traversed with quick pace the trench
  By every Chief whom they had thither call'd                    230
  Attended, with whom Nestor's noble son
  Went, and Meriones, invited both
  To join their consultation. From the foss
  Emerging, in a vacant space they sat,
  Unstrew'd with bodies of the slain, the spot,                  235
  Whence furious Hector, after slaughter made
  Of numerous Greeks, night falling, had return'd.
  There seated, mutual converse close they held,
  And Nestor, brave Gerenian, thus began.
    Oh friends! hath no Achaian here such trust                  240
  In his own prowess, as to venture forth
  Among yon haughty Trojans? He, perchance,
  Might on the borders of their host surprise
  Some wandering adversary, or might learn
  Their consultations, whether they propose                      245
  Here to abide in prospect of the fleet,
  Or, satiate with success against the Greeks
  So signal, meditate retreat to Troy.
  These tidings gain'd, should he at last return
  Secure, his recompense will be renown                          250
  Extensive as the heavens, and fair reward.
  From every leader of the fleet, his gift
  Shall be a sable[6] ewe, and sucking lamb,
  Rare acquisition! and at every board
  And sumptuous banquet, he shall be a guest.                    255
    He ceased, and all sat silent, when at length
  The mighty son of Tydeus thus replied.
    Me, Nestor, my courageous heart incites
  To penetrate into the neighbor host
  Of enemies; but went some other Chief                          260
  With me, far greater would my comfort prove,
  And I should dare the more. Two going forth,
  One quicker sees than other, and suggests
  Prudent advice; but he who single goes,
  Mark whatsoe'er he may, the occasion less                      265
  Improves, and his expedients soon exhausts.
    He ended, and no few willing arose
  To go with Diomede. Servants of Mars
  Each Ajax willing stood; willing as they
  Meriones; most willing Nestor's son;                           270
  Willing the brother of the Chief of all,
  Nor willing less Ulysses to explore
  The host of Troy, for he possess'd a heart
  Delighted ever with some bold exploit.
    Then Agamemnon, King of men, began.                          275
  Now Diomede, in whom my soul delights!
  Choose whom thou wilt for thy companion; choose
  The fittest here; for numerous wish to go.
  Leave not through deference to another's rank,
  The more deserving, nor prefer a worse,                        280
  Respecting either pedigree or power.
    Such speech he interposed, fearing his choice
  Of Menelaus; then, renown'd in arms
  The son of Tydeus, rising, spake again.
    Since, then, ye bid me my own partner choose                 285
  Free from constraint, how can I overlook
  Divine Ulysses, whose courageous heart
  With such peculiar cheerfulness endures
  Whatever toils, and whom Minerva loves?
  Let _him_ attend me, and through fire itself                   290
  We shall return; for none is wise as he.[7]
    To him Ulysses, hardy Chief, replied.
  Tydides! neither praise me much, nor blame,
  For these are Grecians in whose ears thou speak'st,
  And know me well. But let us hence! the night                  295
  Draws to a close; day comes apace; the stars
  Are far advanced; two portions have elapsed
  Of darkness, but the third is yet entire.
    So they; then each his dreadful arms put on.
  To Diomede, who at the fleet had left                          300
  His own, the dauntless Thrasymedes gave
  His shield and sword two-edged, and on his head
  Placed, crestless, unadorn'd, his bull-skin casque.
  It was a stripling's helmet, such as youths
  Scarce yet confirm'd in lusty manhood, wear.                   305
  Meriones with quiver, bow and sword
  Furnish'd Ulysses, and his brows enclosed
  In his own casque of hide with many a thong
  Well braced within;[8] guarded it was without
  With boar's teeth ivory-white inherent firm                    310
  On all sides, and with woolen head-piece lined.
  That helmet erst Autolycus[9] had brought
  From Eleon, city of Amyntor son
  Of Hormenus, where he the solid walls
  Bored through, clandestine, of Amyntor's house.                315
  He on Amphidamas the prize bestow'd
  In Scandia;[10] from Amphidamas it pass'd
  To Molus as a hospitable pledge;
  He gave it to Meriones his son,
  And now it guarded shrewd Ulysses' brows.                      320
  Both clad in arms terrific, forth they sped,
  Leaving their fellow Chiefs, and as they went
  A heron, by command of Pallas, flew
  Close on the right beside them; darkling they
  Discern'd him not, but heard his clanging plumes.[11]          325
  Ulysses in the favorable sign
  Exulted, and Minerva thus invoked.[12]
    Oh hear me, daughter of Jove AEgis-arm'd!
  My present helper in all straits, whose eye
  Marks all my ways, oh with peculiar care                       330
  Now guard me, Pallas! grant that after toil
  Successful, glorious, such as long shall fill
  With grief the Trojans, we may safe return
  And with immortal honors to the fleet.
    Valiant Tydides, next, his prayer preferr'd.                 335
  Hear also me, Jove's offspring by the toils
  Of war invincible! me follow now
  As my heroic father erst to Thebes
  Thou followedst, Tydeus; by the Greeks dispatch'd
  Ambassador, he left the mail-clad host                         340
  Beside Asopus, and with terms of peace
  Entrusted, enter'd Thebes; but by thine aid
  Benevolent, and in thy strength, perform'd
  Returning, deeds of terrible renown.
  Thus, now, protect me also! In return                          345
  I vow an offering at thy shrine, a young
  Broad-fronted heifer, to the yoke as yet
  Untamed, whose horns I will incase with gold.
    Such prayer they made, and Pallas heard well pleased.
  Their orisons ended to the daughter dread                      350
  Of mighty Jove, lion-like they advanced
  Through shades of night, through carnage, arms and blood.
    Nor Hector to his gallant host indulged
  Sleep, but convened the leaders; leader none
  Or senator of all his host he left                             355
  Unsummon'd, and his purpose thus promulged.
    Where is the warrior who for rich reward,
  Such as shall well suffice him, will the task
  Adventurous, which I propose, perform?
  A chariot with two steeds of proudest height,                  360
  Surpassing all in the whole fleet of Greece
  Shall be his portion, with immortal praise,
  Who shall the well-appointed ships approach
  Courageous, there to learn if yet a guard
  As heretofore, keep them, or if subdued                        365
  Beneath us, the Achaians flight intend,
  And worn with labor have no will to watch.
    So Hector spake, but answer none return'd.
  There was a certain Trojan, Dolon named,[13]
  Son of Eumedes herald of the Gods,                             370
  Rich both in gold and brass, but in his form
  Unsightly; yet the man was swift of foot,
  Sole brother of five sisters; he his speech
  To Hector and the Trojans thus address'd.
    My spirit, Hector, prompts me, and my mind                   375
  Endued with manly vigor, to approach
  Yon gallant ships, that I may tidings hear.
  But come. For my assurance, lifting high
  Thy sceptre, swear to me, for my reward,
  The horses and the brazen chariot bright                       380
  Which bear renown'd Achilles o'er the field.
  I will not prove a useless spy, nor fall
  Below thy best opinion; pass I will
  Their army through, 'till I shall reach the ship
  Of Agamemnon, where the Chiefs, perchance,                     385
  Now sit consulting, or to fight, or fly.[14]
    Then raising high his sceptre, Hector sware
  Know, Jove himself, Juno's high-thundering spouse!
  That Trojan none shall in that chariot ride
  By those steeds drawn, save Dolon; on my oath                  390
  I make them thine; enjoy them evermore.
    He said, and falsely sware, yet him assured.
  Then Dolon, instant, o'er his shoulder slung
  His bow elastic, wrapp'd himself around
  With a grey wolf-skin, to his head a casque                    395
  Adjusted, coated o'er with ferret's felt,
  And seizing his sharp javelin, from the host
  Turn'd right toward the fleet, but was ordain'd
  To disappoint his sender, and to bring
  No tidings thence. The throng of Trojan steeds                 400
  And warriors left, with brisker pace he moved,
  When brave Ulysses his approach perceived,
  And thus to Diomede his speech address'd.
    Tydides! yonder man is from the host;
  Either a spy he comes, or with intent                          405
  To spoil the dead. First, freely let him pass
  Few paces, then pursuing him with speed,
  Seize on him suddenly; but should he prove
  The nimbler of the three, with threatening spear
  Enforce him from his camp toward the fleet,                    410
  Lest he elude us, and escape to Troy.
    So they; then, turning from the road oblique,
  Among the carcases each laid him down.
  Dolon, suspecting nought, ran swiftly by.
  [15]But when such space was interposed as mules                415
  Plow in a day (for mules the ox surpass
  Through fallows deep drawing the ponderous plow)
  Both ran toward him. Dolon at the sound
  Stood; for he hoped some Trojan friends at hand
  From Hector sent to bid him back again.                        420
  But when within spear's cast, or less they came,
  Knowing them enemies he turn'd to flight
  Incontinent, whom they as swift pursued.
  As two fleet hounds sharp fang'd, train'd to the chase,
  Hang on the rear of flying hind or hare,                       425
  And drive her, never swerving from the track,
  Through copses close; she screaming scuds before;
  So Diomede and dread Ulysses him
  Chased constant, intercepting his return.
  And now, fast-fleeting to the ships, he soon                   430
  Had reach'd the guard, but Pallas with new force
  Inspired Tydides, lest a meaner Greek
  Should boast that he had smitten Dolon first,
  And Diomede win only second praise.
  He poised his lifted spear, and thus exclaim'd.                435
    Stand! or my spear shall stop thee. Death impends
  At every step; thou canst not 'scape me long.
    He said, and threw his spear, but by design,
  Err'd from the man. The polish'd weapon swift
  O'er-glancing his right shoulder, in the soil                  440
  Stood fixt, beyond him. Terrified he stood,
  Stammering, and sounding through his lips the clash
  Of chattering teeth, with visage deadly wan.
  They panting rush'd on him, and both his hands
  Seized fast; he wept, and suppliant them bespake.              445
    Take me alive, and I will pay the price
  Of my redemption. I have gold at home,
  Brass also, and bright steel, and when report
  Of my captivity within your fleet
  Shall reach my father, treasures he will give                  450
  Not to be told, for ransom of his son.
    To whom Ulysses politic replied.
  Take courage; entertain no thought of death.[16]
  But haste! this tell me, and disclose the truth.
  Why thus toward the ships comest thou alone                    455
  From yonder host, by night, while others sleep?
  To spoil some carcase? or from Hector sent
  A spy of all that passes in the fleet?
  Or by thy curiosity impell'd?
    Then Dolon, his limbs trembling, thus replied.               460
  To my great detriment, and far beyond
  My own design, Hector trepann'd me forth,
  Who promised me the steeds of Peleus' son
  Illustrious, and his brazen chariot bright.
  He bade me, under night's fast-flitting shades                 465
  Approach our enemies, a spy, to learn
  If still as heretofore, ye station guards
  For safety of your fleet, or if subdued
  Completely, ye intend immediate flight,
  And worn with labor, have no will to watch.                    470
    To whom Ulysses, smiling, thus replied.
  Thou hadst, in truth, an appetite to gifts
  Of no mean value, coveting the steeds
  Of brave AEacides; but steeds are they
  Of fiery sort, difficult to be ruled                           475
  By force of mortal man, Achilles' self
  Except, whom an immortal mother bore.
  But tell me yet again; use no disguise;
  Where left'st thou, at thy coming forth, your Chief,
  The valiant Hector? where hath he disposed                     480
  His armor battle-worn, and where his steeds?
  What other quarters of your host are watch'd?
  Where lodge the guard, and what intend ye next?
  Still to abide in prospect of the fleet?
  Or well-content that ye have thus reduced                      485
  Achaia's host, will ye retire to Troy?
    To whom this answer Dolon straight returned
  Son of Eumedes. With unfeigning truth
  Simply and plainly will I utter all.
  Hector, with all the Senatorial Chiefs,                        490
  Beside the tomb of sacred Ilius sits
  Consulting, from the noisy camp remote.
  But for the guards, Hero! concerning whom
  Thou hast inquired, there is no certain watch
  And regular appointed o'er the camp;                           495
  The native[17] Trojans (for _they_ can no less)
  Sit sleepless all, and each his next exhorts
  To vigilance; but all our foreign aids,
  Who neither wives nor children hazard here,
  Trusting the Trojans for that service, sleep.                  500
    To whom Ulysses, ever wise, replied.
  How sleep the strangers and allies?--apart?
  Or with the Trojans mingled?--I would learn.
    So spake Ulysses; to whom Dolon thus,
  Son of Eumedes. I will all unfold,                             505
  And all most truly. By the sea are lodged
  The Carians, the Paeonians arm'd with bows,
  The Leleges, with the Pelasgian band,
  And the Caucones. On the skirts encamp
  Of Thymbra, the Maeonians crested high,                         510
  The Phrygian horsemen, with the Lycian host,
  And the bold troop of Mysia's haughty sons.
  But wherefore these inquiries thus minute?
  For if ye wish to penetrate the host,
  These who possess the borders of the camp                      515
  Farthest removed of all, are Thracian powers
  Newly arrived; among them Rhesus sleeps,
  Son of Eioneus, their Chief and King.
  His steeds I saw, the fairest by these eyes
  Ever beheld, and loftiest; snow itself                         520
  They pass in whiteness, and in speed the winds,
  With gold and silver all his chariot burns,
  And he arrived in golden armor clad
  Stupendous! little suited to the state
  Of mortal man--fit for a God to wear!                          525
  Now, either lead me to your gallant fleet,
  Or where ye find me leave me straitly bound
  Till ye return, and after trial made,
  Shall know if I have spoken false or true.
    But him brave Diomede with aspect stern                      530
  Answer'd. Since, Dolon! thou art caught, although
  Thy tidings have been good, hope not to live;
  For should we now release thee and dismiss,
  Thou wilt revisit yet again the fleet
  A spy or open foe; but smitten once                            535
  By this death-dealing arm, thou shall return
  To render mischief to the Greeks no more.
    He ceased, and Dolon would have stretch'd his hand
  Toward his beard, and pleaded hard for life,
  But with his falchion, rising to the blow,                     540
  On the mid-neck he smote him, cutting sheer
  Both tendons with a stroke so swift, that ere
  His tongue had ceased, his head was in the dust.[18]
  They took his helmet clothed with ferret's felt,
  Stripp'd off his wolf-skin, seized his bow and spear,          545
  And brave Ulysses lifting in his hand
  The trophy to Minerva, pray'd and said:
    Hail Goddess; these are thine! for thee of all
  Who in Olympus dwell, we will invoke
  First to our aid. Now also guide our steps,                    550
  Propitious, to the Thracian tents and steeds.
    He ceased, and at arm's-length the lifted spoils
  Hung on a tamarisk; but mark'd the spot,
  Plucking away with handful grasp the reeds
  And spreading boughs, lest they should seek the prize          555
  Themselves in vain, returning ere the night,
  Swift traveller, should have fled before the dawn.
  Thence, o'er the bloody champain strew'd with arms
  Proceeding, to the Thracian lines they came.
  They, wearied, slept profound; beside them lay,                560
  In triple order regular arranged,
  Their radiant armor, and their steeds in pairs.
  Amid them Rhesus slept, and at his side
  His coursers, to the outer chariot-ring
  Fasten'd secure. Ulysses saw him first,                        565
  And, seeing, mark'd him out to Diomede.
    Behold the man, Tydides! Lo! the steeds
  By Dolon specified whom we have slain.
  Be quick. Exert thy force. Arm'd as thou art,
  Sleep not. Loose thou the steeds, or slaughter thou            570
  The Thracians, and the steeds shall be my care.
    He ceased; then blue-eyed Pallas with fresh force
  Invigor'd Diomede. From side to side
  He slew; dread groans arose of dying men
  Hewn with the sword, and the earth swam with blood.            575
  As if he find a flock unguarded, sheep
  Or goats, the lion rushes on his prey,
  With such unsparing force Tydides smote
  The men of Thrace, till he had slaughter'd twelve;
  And whom Tydides with his falchion struck                      580
  Laertes' son dragg'd by his feet abroad,
  Forecasting that the steeds might pass with ease,
  Nor start, as yet uncustom'd to the dead.
  But when the son of Tydeus found the King,
  Him also panting forth his last, last, breath,                 585
  He added to the twelve; for at his head
  An evil dream that night had stood, the form
  Of Diomede, by Pallas' art devised.
  Meantime, the bold Ulysses loosed the steeds,
  Which, to each other rein'd, he drove abroad,                  590
  Smiting them with his bow (for of the scourge
  He thought not in the chariot-seat secured)
