He stopped suddenly, for the woman held up her hand as if to stop
him, and her voice took a strange hissing tone.

"Silence! Enough--thou hast spoken enough. Let me now tell thee the
rest. I will tell thee what thou hast come to seek for. Silence! I
will consult the spirits; they will tell me all."

Drawing nearer to her the crystal bowl, the old woman bent her head
over it, and whispered incantations, as it seemed, over its
contents. For a while there was deep silence in the room, and
Cherry felt chill with excitement and wonder. This was very
different from the reception she and her cousin Rachel had met.
They had but been bidden to show their hands, and had then seen
some cabalistic characters formed by the wise woman, from which she
had told them all they wished to know. But there had been nothing
half so mysterious as this, and the girl felt certain that the wise
woman regarded Cuthbert and his questions with far greater interest
than any she had bestowed upon the fortunes or the ailments of
Rachel.

Presently there arose, as if in the far, far distance, a sound of
voices faint and confused. Cherry clung to Cuthbert's arm, and
looked about her with a pale, scared face, half expecting to see
the room filled with disembodied spirits; but his glance never
shifted from the down-bent face of the wise woman, and he half
suspected that the sounds proceeded in some way from her, albeit
they seemed to float about in the air round them, and to approach
and die away at will.

Suddenly the old woman raised her head and spoke.

"Thy mission to me this day is to ask news of the lost treasure of
Trevlyn."

Cherry started, and so did Cuthbert. There could be no doubting the
old woman's power now. If she could see so much in her bowl, could
she not likewise see where that lost treasure lay buried?

"Thou speakest sooth, mother," he said boldly. "It is of the lost
treasure I would speak. Canst tell me if it still remains as it was
when it was lost? Canst tell me the spot where it lies hid, that I
may draw it thence? If thou canst lead me to it, thou shalt not
lose thy reward; thou shalt be rich for life."

The youth spoke eagerly; but a curious smile crept over the old
woman's face at his words.

"Foolish boy!" she said. "Seest thou not that if gold were my
desire I have but to discover the place where the treasure lies to
some stalwart knave sworn to do my bidding, and all would be mine?
Could I not sell this golden secret to the highest bidder, an
wealth was all I craved? Foolish, foolish boy--impetuous like all
thy race! What hast thou to offer me that I may not obtain by one
wave of this wand?"

Cuthbert was silent, wondering alike at the old woman and her
words. If she was not disposed to sell her golden secret (and what
she said was but too true--that the treasure would be more to her
than any reward), what hope was there of her revealing it to him?
He stood silent and perplexed, waiting for the old woman to speak
again.

"Cuthbert Trevlyn," she said, after a long pause, "methought that
the hope of finding the treasure had long since been abandoned by
thy race."

"That may well be, but it has not been so abandoned by me. Whilst I
have youth and health and strength, I will not give up that hope.
I, the grandson of Isabel Wyvern, will not cease to strive till I
have won back the lost luck that was to return to that house
through the daughters' sons."

It was almost at random that Cuthbert had spoken these words, but
some recollection had come over him of the story he had heard of
the devotion of certain gipsy people to the family of the Wyverns,
and their prognostications concerning them. This woman, with the
brown and crumpled skin and the beady black eyes, was very like
some of those wild gipsy folk he had seen from time to time in the
forest. Was it not just possible that she might be one of their
tribe, who for some reason or some physical infirmity had abandoned
the wandering life, and had set up for a wise woman in the heart of
the great city? Was there not some strange community of knowledge
and interest amongst all these wandering people? and might she not
in any case know something about the families of foe and friend,
and the loss of the vast treasure one day to be restored?

As his grandmother's name passed his lips, Cuthbert was certain
that he saw a flicker pass across the wise woman's face; but she
bent her head again over her bowl, and for some minutes remained in
deep silence. Then she looked up and scanned his face again.

"Let me see thy hand," she said.

He held it out fearlessly, and she bent over it for some time.

"It is a good hand," she said at length, "and its owner may look
for prosperity in life, But he must heed one thing, and that is his
own over-bold rashness. He must beware of trusting all men. He must
beware of fatal fascination. He must beware of a darkly-flowing
river, and the dark cellar beyond. He must have the courage to say
'nay'--the courage to fly as well as to fight. Young man, thou hast
over-much curiosity. In these times of peril men must walk warily.
Choose the safe path, and keep therein. Think not to play with edge
tools and yet keep thy fingers unscarred."

Cuthbert felt the colour rising in his face. He felt the home
thrust embodied in these words. He knew that they were a warning
addressed to that side of his character which urged him to make
friends on all sides, and strive to see good in all men, and to
avoid joining himself to any one party in Church or State whilst in
measure belonging to all. For a man of quality he knew such a
course would be impossible and foolishly perilous, but he had felt
secure in his own insignificance. He, however, well understood the
warning, and so he marked the words about the flowing river and
dark cellar, and though by no means understanding them now, he
resolved that he would not forget.

But Cherry was shivering with excitement, and at last she could
keep silence no longer. The wise woman had been kind to her before;
surely she would not resent it if she spoke now.

"But the treasure, mother, the treasure," she urged. "Canst not
thou help us there?"

The old woman shifted her bright eyes to the flushed face of the
girl, and a flicker passed over her face as she repeated:

"Us--us? And what part or lot has Martin Holt's daughter in the
lost treasure of Trevlyn? What, my pretty child, has thy handsome
lover come so soon? and art thou looking already to be made a lady
of by him?"

The girl hid her blushing face on Cuthbert's shoulder, whilst he
answered with boyish straightforwardness:

"I will wed my cousin Cherry or none else. We have plighted our
troth secretly, and she shall one day be my bride. If thou canst
help me in this matter, it will make our lot easier; but, poor or
rich, she shall be mine!"

The old woman nodded her head several times, and Cuthbert fancied
that a greater benignity of expression crossed her wrinkled face.

"Brave words! brave words!" she muttered, "and a brave heart
behind. Grandson to Isabel Wyvern! Ay, so it is; and there is
Wyvern in that face as well as Trevlyn. For her sake--for her sake!
Ay, I would do much for that.

"Boy," she said suddenly, raising her voice and speaking in her
witch-like accents again, "thou hast spoken a name which is as a
talisman, and though thou hast asked a hard thing, I will help thee
an I can. Yet I myself know naught. It is the familiar spirits that
know, and they will not always come even at my call; they will not
always speak sooth at my bidding. I can but use my arts; the rest
lies with them; and this is a secret that has been long-time hid."

"Ay, and the time has now come when it should be revealed,"
answered Cuthbert boldly. "Use what arts thou wilt! I ask the
answer to my question. I would know where the lost treasure lies."

As he spoke these words the room became suddenly darkened. Around
them again as they stood there seemed to float voices and whispers,
though not one articulate word could either hear. In the gloom they
saw nothing save the fiery eyes of the great cat, which appeared to
be crouched upon the table beside its mistress. The whisperings and
voices, sometimes accompanied by soft or mocking laughter,
continued for the space of several moments, and appeared to be
interrupted at last by the tap of the wise woman's wand upon the
table, which three times repeated enforced a sudden silence.

The silence was for a moment more awe inspiring than what had gone
first; but before Cherry had more time than sufficed to nip
Cuthbert hard by the hand, they heard the old woman's voice, in an
accent of stern command, uttering one single word:

"Speak!"

There was a brief pause, and then a sweet low voice rose in the
room and seemed to float round them, whilst the words with their
rhythmic cadence fell distinctly on the ears of the listening pair:

"Three times three--on a moonlight night,
The oak behind, the beech to right;
Three times three--over ling and moss,
Robin's gain is Trevlyn's loss.

"Three times three--the war is long,
Yet vengeance hums, and the back is strong;
Three times three--the dell is deep,
It knows its secret well to keep.

"Three times three--the bones gleam white,
None dare pass by day or night;
Three times three--the riddle tell!
The answer lies in the pixies' well."

The voice ceased as suddenly as it had begun.

"Is that all?" asked the harsh accents of the wise woman.

"That is all the spirits choose to tell," answered the soft voice,
already, as it seemed, far away; and in another moment the lamp
shone forth again.

The cat leaped down from the table with a hissing sound, and the
old woman was revealed in her former position, resting her two
elbows on the table, her withered face supported in the palm of her
hand.

"Thou hast heard?"

"Ay, but I have not understood. Canst thou read the riddle to me?"

But the old woman shook her head.

"That may not be; that thou must do for thyself. I will write down
the words for thee, that thou mayest not forget; but thou, and thou
alone, must find the clue."

With swift fingers she transcribed some characters on a fragment of
parchment, and Cuthbert marvelled at the skill in penmanship the
old woman displayed when she gave the paper into his hands. It was
with a beating heart that he scanned the mysterious characters; but
the old woman had risen to her feet, and motioned them away.

"Begone!" she cried, "begone! I have no more to say. Heed my
warning. Beware of menaced perils. The perils of the forest are
less than the perils of the city; and an open foe is better than a
false friend--a friend who lures those that trust him to a common
destruction, even though he himself be ready to share it. Harden
thine heart--beware of thine own merciful spirit. Turn a deaf ear
to the cry of the pursued. Swim with the current, and strive not to
stem it. And now go! I have said my say. Thou hast fortune within
thy grasp an thou hast wits to find it and hold it."

There was no disobeying the imperious gesture of the old woman.
Cuthbert would fain have lingered to ask more questions, but he
dared not do so. With a few brief words of thanks and farewell, he
took Cherry's hand and turned away. The bolt of the door flew back;
the door opened of itself again. The cat stalked on before down the
dark staircase, and a faint gleam from above showed them the way
down. The outer door sprang open before and closed behind them, and
the next minute Cuthbert was hurrying his companion along the dark
street, pulling her into the shadow of a doorway if any sounds
announced the approach of any of the tavern roisterers, and so
protecting her from any danger or peril till they stood at last in
safety beneath Martin Holt's roof, and looked wonderingly into each
other's eyes, as if questioning whether it had not all been part
and parcel of a dream.

They had not been long gone; a bare hour had elapsed since they had
stolen out into the darkness together. There was no fear that any
other member of Martin Holt's household would be back for a
considerable time. The two conspirators bent over the scrap of
parchment they placed between them on the table, and pored
earnestly over it together.

"What does it mean, Cuthbert? what can it mean? Canst read the
words aright?"

"Ay, it is well writ. I can read it, but I know not what it means."

"Read it again to me."

He obeyed, and she forthwith began to ask a hundred questions.

"'Three times three'--that comes so many times. What can that mean,
Cuthbert? it must mean something."

"Yes, doubtless, but I know not what."

"And again, 'Robin's gain is Trevlyn's loss.' Cuthbert, who may
Robin be?"

"I know not: Yet stop--hold! Yes, I have it now. Not that it may be
aught of import. Robin is a name a score of men may bear even in
one village. But when the robbers of the road found themselves at
the ruined mill where the gipsies were, I heard the leader ask,
'Where is Long Robin?'"

"And was he there?" asked Cherry eagerly.

"I know not: none answered the question, and I heeded it no more.
Most like he was but some serving man they wanted to take the
horses."

"Cuthbert, it seems plain that some Robin has stolen this treasure,
and carried it off and hidden it. The verses must mean that!"

"Ay, I doubt it not, Cherry," answered Cuthbert, smiling; "but see
you not, fair cousin, that almost any person knowing of this lost
treasure and the legend of the gipsies' hate could have strung
together words like these? All men hold that it may still be hidden
in the forest around the Chase; but there be deep dells by the
dozen, and the pixies, men say, have all fled away. And there be
wells that run dry, and men find fresh ones bursting out where
never water was before. These lines scarce show me more than I have
known or thought before."

"But they do, they do!" cried Cherry excitedly. "They tell that it
was Robin who has stolen it. Cuthbert, when thou goest to the
forest next thou must find this Long Robin and see if it can be
he."

The young man smiled at her credulity and enthusiasm. He was not so
entirely sceptical as to some possible clue being given by these
verses as he would have her believe, but he could not see any
daylight yet, and wished to save her from disappointment.

"That is scarce like to be. The treasure was stolen nigh on fifty
years agone, and he must have been a lusty robber who stole it
then--scarce like to be living now. But we will think of this more.
The wise woman must have dealings with a familiar, else how could
she have known our errand? We must heed her words well; they may be
words of wisdom. She knew strange things from my hand. I marvel how
she could read it all there."

Cuthbert looked upon his palm and shook his head. It was all a
mystery to him. But he had greater faith in the wise woman than he
altogether felt prepared to admit, and as he sought his couch that
night he kept saying over and over to himself the magic words he
had heard.

"'Three times three--three times three!' What can that signify? In
the forest perchance I shall read the riddle aright. Or perchance
the gipsy queen, the dark-eyed Joanna, will aid me in the search.
If I could but trust her, she might see things that I cannot in
these lines. Would that the winter were past; would that the summer
were about to come! The perils of the forest are to be less to me
than the perils of the city. I wonder what perils menace me here.
Beneath my father's roof I oft went in peril of my life; but
here--why, here I feel safer than ever in my life before!"



Chapter 10: The Hunted Priest.


The two friends that Cuthbert had made of his own sex during the
first weeks spent beneath his uncle's roof were the same two guests
he had seen at the supper table on the evening of his arrival--Walter
Cole and Jacob Dyson.

Both these men were several years older than himself, but in a
short time he became exceedingly intimate with the pair, and thus
obtained insight into the home life of persons belonging to the
three leading parties in the realm. The Puritan element was
strongly represented in Martin Holt's house, the Romanist in that
of the Coles, whilst the Dysons, although springing from a Puritan
stock, had been amongst those willing to conform to the laws as
laid down in the late Queen's time. Both Rachel and Jacob preferred
the Episcopal form of worship to any other, and openly marvelled at
the taste of those who still frequented the private conventicles,
where unlicensed preachers, at the risk of liberty and even life,
held forth by the hour together upon their favourite doctrines and
arguments.

But honest Jacob was no theologian. He did not hesitate to assert
openly his ignorance of all controversy, and his opinion that it
mattered uncommonly little what a man believed, so long as he led
an upright life and did his duty in the world. He was "fair sick"
of long-drawn arguments, the splitting of hairs, and those
questions which the theologians of all parties took such keen joy
in discussing--though, as nobody ever moved his opponent one whit,
the disputes could only be held for the love the disputants felt
for hearing themselves talk. Jacob had long since claimed for
himself the right to leave the room when politics and religion came
under discussion. As an only son, he had some privileges accorded
him, and this was one he used without stint.

Honest Jacob had taken an immediate and great liking for Cuthbert
Trevlyn from the first appearance of that youth at his uncle's
house. Though himself rough and uncouth of aspect, clumsy of gait
and slow of speech, he was quick to see and admire beauty and wit
in others. He had picked out Cherry from amongst her sisters for
those qualities of brightness and vivacity in which he felt himself
so deficient, and it seemed as though he took to Cuthbert for very
much the same reason.

Cuthbert was ready enough to accept the advances of this
good-natured youth. He was a stranger in this great city, whilst
Jacob knew it well. He was eager to hear and see and learn all he
could; and though Jacob's ideas were few and his powers of
observation limited, he was still able to answer a great many of
the eager questions that came crowding to the lips of the stranger
as they walked the streets together. And when Cuthbert accompanied
Jacob to his home, Abraham Dyson could fill up all the blank in his
son's story, and was secretly not a little pleased with Cuthbert's
keen intelligence and ready interest.

The Dysons were merchants in a small way of business, but were
thriving and thrifty folks. They and the Holts had been in close
relations one with the other for more than one generation, and any
relative of Martin Holt's would have been welcome at their house.
Cuthbert was liked on his own account; and soon he became greatly
fascinated by the river-side traffic, took the greatest interest in
the vessels that came to the wharves to be unladed, and delighted
in going aboard and making friends with the sailors. He quickly
came to learn the name of every part of the ship, and to pick up a
few ideas on the subject of navigation. Whenever a vessel came in
from the New World but recently discovered, he would try to get on
board and question the sailors about the wonders they had seen.
Afterwards he would discourse to Jacob or to Cherry of the things
he had learned, and would win more and more admiration from both by
his brilliant powers of imagination and description.

So the river became, as it were, a second home to him. Abraham
Dyson had more than one wherry of his own in which Cuthbert was
welcome to skim about upon the broad bosom of the great river. He
soon became so skillful with the rude oars or the sail, that he was
a match for the hardiest waterman on the river, and more than once
Cherry had been permitted to accompany Cuthbert and Jacob upon some
excursion up or down stream.

And now, after many weeks of pleasant comradeship, Cuthbert found
himself in the unenviable position of standing rival to his friend
in the affections of Cherry, and the more he thought about it the
less he liked the situation. He could not give Cherry up--that was
out of the question; besides, had he renounced her twenty times
over, that would not improve Jacob's case one whit. Cherry was her
father's own daughter, and, with all her kittenish softness, had a
very decided will of her own. She was not the sort of daughter to
be bought and sold, or calmly made over like a bale of wool. She
would certainly insist on having a voice in the matter, and her
choice was not likely at any time to fall upon the worthy but
unprepossessing Jacob.

All this Cuthbert understood with the quick apprehension of a
lover; but it was very doubtful if Jacob would so see things, and
Cuthbert felt as though there was something of treachery in
accepting and returning his many advances of friendship whilst all
the time he was secretly affianced to the girl for whose hand Jacob
had made formal application, and had been formally accepted, though
for the present, on account of the maiden's tender years, the
matter was allowed to stand over.

With Walter Cole there was no such hindrance to friendship, and
just at this juncture Cuthbert prosecuted and confirmed his
intimacy at that house by constant visits there. He was greedy of
information and book learning, and in this narrow dim dwelling,
literally stacked with books, papers, and pamphlets of all kinds,
and partially given over to the mysteries of the printing press,
seldom worked save at dead of night, Cuthbert's expanding mind
could revel to its full content.

He devoured every book upon which he could lay hands--history,
theology, philosophy; nothing came amiss to him. He would sit by
the hour watching Anthony Cole at work setting type, asking him
innumerable questions about what he had been last reading, and
finding the white-headed bookseller a perfect mine of information.

Controversy and the vexed topics of the day were generally avoided
by common consent. The Coles had learned through bitter experience
the necessity for silence and reticence. Everybody knew them for
ardent and devoted sons of Rome, and they were under suspicion of
issuing many of the pamphlets against the policy of the King that
raised ire in the hearts of the great ones of the land. But none of
these "seditious" writings had so far been traced to them, and they
still lived in comparative peace, although the tranquillity
somewhat resembled that of the peaceful dwellers upon the sides of
a volcanic mountain, within whose crater grumblings and mutterings
are heard from time to time.

Cuthbert's frequent visits, and the manifest pleasure he took in
their society, were a source of pleasure to both father and son;
and though they never showed this pleasure too openly, or asked him
to continue his visits or help them in their night work, they did
not refuse his help when offered, and sometimes would look at each
other and say:

"He is drawing nearer; he is drawing nearer. Old traditions, race
instincts, are telling upon him. He is too true a Trevlyn not to
become a member of the true fold. His vagrant fancy is straying
here and there. He is tasting the bitter-sweet fruit of knowledge
and restless search after the wisdom of this world. But already he
begins to turn with loathing from the cold, lifeless Puritan code.
Anon he will find that the Established Church has naught to give
him save the husk, from which the precious grain has been carefully
extracted."

"Father Urban thinks well of him," Walter once remarked, as they
discussed the youth after his departure one evening. "He has met
him, I know not where, and believes that there may be work for him
to do yet. We want those with us who have the single mind and
honest heart, the devotion that counts not the cost. All that is
written on the lad's face. If he breaks not away from us, he may
become a tool in a practised hand to do a mighty work."

Cuthbert, however, went on his way all unconscious of the notice he
was arousing in certain quarters. His mind was filled just now with
other matters than those of religious controversy. He had become
rather weary of the strife of tongues, and was glad to busy himself
with the practical concerns of life that did not always land him in
a dilemma or a difficulty.

Abraham Dyson was having a new sloop built for trading purposes,
and both Jacob and Cuthbert took the keenest interest in the
progress of the work. The sloop was to be called the Cherry Blossom
when complete, and it was Abraham Dyson's plan that the christening
of the vessel by Cherry herself should be the occasion of her
formal betrothal to his son.

This ceremony, however, would not take place for some while yet, as
at present the little vessel was only in the earlier stages of
construction. Neither Jacob nor Cuthbert had heard anything about
this secondary plan, but both took the greater interest in the
sloop from the fact that she was to be named after Cherry.

Cuthbert visited her daily, and Jacob as often as his duties at his
father's warehouse allowed him. On this particular bright February
afternoon the pair had been a great part of their time on the
river, skimming about in the wherry, and examining every part of
the little vessel under the auspices of the master builder. Dusk
had fallen upon the river before they landed, and a heavy fog
beginning to rise from the water made them glad to leave it behind.
They secured the wherry to the landing stage, leaving the oars in
her, as they not unfrequently did when returning late, and were
pursuing their way up the dark and unsavoury streets, when the
sound of a distant tumult smote upon their ears, and they arrested
their steps that they might listen the better.

Cuthbert's quick ears were the first to gather any sort of meaning
from the discordant shouts and cries which arose.

"They are chasing some wretched fugitive!" he said in a low voice.
"That is the sound of pursuit. Hark! they are coming this way. Who
and what are they thus hounding on?"

Nearer and nearer came the surging sound of many voices and the
hurried trampling of feet.

"Stop him--catch him--hold him!" shouted a score of hoarse voices,
rolling along through the fog-laden air long before anything could
be seen. "Stop him, good folks, stop him! stop the runaway
priest--stop the treacherous Jesuit! He is an enemy to peace--a
stirrer up of sedition and conspiracy! Down with him--to prison
