Protector of the realm, and shortly afterward the Duke of Somerset,
the King's particular favorite and chief adviser, was cast into prison
on the double charge of having culpably lost Normandy and embezzled
public moneys.

When Henry recovered (1455), he released Somerset and restored him to
office.  Richard protested, and raising an army in the north, marched
toward London.  He met the royalist forces at St. Albans; a battle
ensued, and Somerset was slain.

During the next thirty years the war raged with more or less fury
between the parties of the Red Rose (Lancaster) and the White Rose
(York).  The first maintained that Parliament had the right to choose
whatever king it saw fit, as in Henry IV's case (S279); the second
insisted that the succession should be determined by strict hereditary
descent, as represented in the claim of Richard.[2]

[2] See Genealogical Table, p. 161.

But beneath the surface the contest was not for principle, but for
place and spoils.  The great nobles, who during the French wars (S288)
had pillaged abroad, now pillaged each other; and as England was
neither big enough nor rich enough to satisfy the greed of all of
them, the struggle gradually became a war of mutual extermination.

It was, to a certain extent, a sectional war.  Eastern England, then
the wealthiest and most progressive part of the country, had strongly
supported Wycliffe in his reforms (S254).  It now espoused the side of
Richard, Duke of York, who was believed to be friendly to religious
liberty, while the western counties fought for the cause of Lancaster
and the Church.

302. The First Battles (1455-1460).

We have already seen (S301) that the first blood was shed at
St. Albans (1455), where the Yorkists, after half an hour's fighting,
gained a complete victory.  A similar result followed at Bloreheath,
Staffordshire (1459).  In a third battle, at Northampton, the Yorkists
were again successful (1460).  Henry was taken prisoner, and Queen
Margaret fled with the young Prince Edward to Scotland.  Richard now
demanded the crown.  (See map facing p. 172.)

Henry answered with unexpected spirit: "My father was King, his father
also was King.  I have worn the crown forty years from my cradle; you
have all sworn fealty to me as your sovereign, and your fathers did
the like to my fathers.  How, then, can my claim be disputed?"  After
a long controversy, a compromise was effected.  Henry agreed that if
he were left in peaceable possession of the throne during his life,
Richard or his heirs should succeed him.

303. Battles of Wakefield and Towton (1460-1461).

But Queen Margaret refused to see her son, Prince Edward, thus tamely
set aside.  She raised an army and attacked the Yorkists.  Richard,
Duke of York, whose forces were inferior to hers, had entrenched
himself in Sandal Castle near Wakefield, Yorkshire.  Day after day
Margaret went up under the walls and dared him to come out.

At length, stung by her taunts, the Duke sallied from his strongold,
and the battle of Wakefield was fought (1460).  Margaret was
victorious.  Richard was slain, and the Queen, in mockery of his
claims to sovereignty, cut off his head, decked it with a paper crown,
and set it up over the chief gate of the city of York.  Fortune now
changed.  The next year (1461) the Lacastrians were defeated with
great slaughter at Towton, Yorkshire.  The light spring snow was
crimsoned with the blood of thirty thousand slain, and the way strewn
with corpses for ten miles up to the walls of York.

The Earl of Warwick (S296), henceforth popularly known as "King
Maker," now place Edward, eldest son of the late Duke of York, on the
throne, with the title of Edward IV (S300, table).  Henry and Margaret
fled to Scotland.  The new government summoned them to appear, and as
they failed to answer, proclaimed them traitors.

Four years later Henry was taken prisoner and sent to the Tower of
London (S305).  He may have been happier there than battling for his
throne.  He was not born to reign, but rather, as Shakespeare makes
him say, to lead a shepherd's life, watching his flocks, until the
peacefully flowing years should--

        "Bring white hairs unto a quiet grave."[1]

[1] See Henry's soliloquy on the field of Towton, beginning,
                "O God! methinks it were a happy life
                   To be no better than a homely swain."
                        Shakespeare's "Henry VI," Part III,
                                Act II, scene v

304. Summary.

The history of the peiod is one of loss to England.  The brilliant
French conquests of Henry V (SS289, 290) slipped from the nerveless
hands of his son, leaving France practically independent.  The
people's power to vote had been restricted (S297).  The House of
Commons had ceased to be democratic even in a moderate degree.  Its
members were all property holders elected by property holders (S297).
Cade's rebellion was the sign of political discontent and the
forerunner of civil war (S298).

The contests of the parties of the Red and White Roses drenched
England's fair fields with the best blood of her own sons.  The reign
ends with King Henry in prison, Queen Margaret and Prince Edward
fugitives, and the Yorkist, Edward IV, placed on the throne by the
help of the powerful Earl of Warwick (S296).

Edward IV (House of York, White Rose)--1461-1483

305. Continuation of the War; Barnet; Death of Henry; Tewkesbury
(1471).

During the whole of Edward IV's reign (S303) the war went on with
varying success, but unvarying ferocity, until at last neither side
would ask or give quarter.  Some years after the accession of the new
sovereign, the Earl of Warwick (S296) quarreled with him, thrust him
from the throne, and restored Henry VI (S303).

But a few months later, at the battle of Barnet, near London (1471),
Warwick, who was "the last of the great barons," was killed, and
Henry, who had been led back to the Tower of London again (S303), died
one of those "conveniently sudden deaths" which were then so common.

The heroic Queen Margaret (SS295, 303), however, would not give up the
contest in behalf of her son's claim to the crown.  But fate was
against her.  A few weeks after the battle of Barnet her army was
utterly defeated at Tewkesbury (1471), her son Edward slain, and the
Queen herself taken prisoner.  (See map facing p. 172.)

She was eventually released on the payment of a large ransom, and
returned to France, where she died broken-hearted in her native Anjou,
prophesying that the contest would go on until the Red Rose,
representing her party, should get a still deeper dye from the blood
of her enemies.

306. The Introduction of Printing, 1477.

But an event was at hand of greater importance than any question of
crowns or parties, though then none was wise enough to see its real
significance.  William Caxton, a London merchant, had learned the new
art of printing with movable type[1] at Bruges in Flanders (now
Belgium).  When he returned to his native country, he set up a small
press within the grounds of Westminster Abbey.

[1] The first printing in Europe was done in the early part of the
fifteenth century from wooden blocks on which the words were cut.
Movable types were invented about 1450.

There, at the sign of a shield bearing a red "pale," or band, he
advertised his wares as "good chepe."  He was not only printer, but
translator and editor.  King Edward gave him some royal patronage.
His Majesty was willing to pay liberally for work which was not long
before the clergy in France had condemned as a black art emanating
from the devil.  Many, too, of the English clergy regarded it with no
very friendly eye, since it threatened to destroy the copying trade,
of which the monks had well-nigh a monopoly (S154).

The first printed book which Caxton is known to have published in
England was a small volume entitled "The Sayings of the Philosophers,"
1477.[1]  This venture was followed in due time by Chaucer's
"Canterbury Tales" (S253), and whatever other poetry, history, or
classics seemed worthy of preservation; making in all nearly a hundred
distinct works comprising more than eighteen thousand volumes.

[1] "The dictes or sayengis of the philosophres, enprynted by me
william Caxton at westmestre, the year of our lord MCCCCLxxvii."

Up to this time a book of any kind was a luxury, laboriously "written
by the few for the few"; but from this date literature of all sorts
was destined to multiply and fill the earth with many leaves and some
good fruit.

Caxton's patrons, though few, were choice, and when one of them, the
Earl of Worcester, was beheaded in the wars, Caxton said, "The ax did
then cut off more learning than was left in all the heads of the
surviving lords."  Towards the close of the nineteenth century a
memorial window was placed in St. Margaret's Church within the abbey
grounds, as a tribute to the man who, while England was red with
slaughter, introduced "the art preservative of all arts," and
preservative of liberty no less[1] (S322).

[1] "Lord! taught by thee, when Caxton bade
        His silent words forever speak;
     A grave for tyrants then was made,
        Then crack'd the chain which yet shall break."
                        Ebenezer Elliott, "Hymn for the Printers'
                                Gathering at Sheffield," 1833

307. King Edward's Character.

The King, however, cared more for his pleasures than for literature or
the welfare of the nation.  His chief aim was to beg, borrow, or
extort money to waste in dissipation.  The loans which he forced his
subjects to grant, and which were seldom, if ever, repaid, went under
the name of "benevolences."  But it is safe to say that those who
furnished them were in no very benevolent frame of mind at the time.

Exception may perhaps be made of the rich and elderly widow, who was
so pleased with the King's handsome face that she willingly handed him
a 20 pounds (a large sum in those days); and when the jovial monarch
gallantly kissed her out of gratitude for her generosity, she at once,
like a true and loyal subject, doubled the donation.  Edward's course
of life was not conducive to length of days, even if the times had
favored a long reign.  He died early, leaving a son, Prince Edward, to
succeed him.

308. Summary.

The reign was marked by the continuation of the Wars of the Roses, the
death of King Henry VI and of his son, with the return of Queen
Margaret to France.  The most important event outside of the war was
the introduction of the printing press into England by William Caxton.

Edward V (House of York, White Rose)--1483

309. Gloucester appointed Protector.

Prince Edward, heir to the throne, was a lad of twelve (S307).  His
position was naturally full of peril.  It became much more so, from
the fact that his ambitious and unscrupulous uncle, Richard, Duke of
Gloucester, had been appointed Lord Protector of the realm until the
boy should become of age.  Richard protected his young nephew as a
wolf would protect a lamb.

He met the Prince coming up to London from Ludlow Castle, Shropshire,
attended by his half brother, Sir Richard Grey, and his uncle, Lord
Rivers.  Under the pretext that Edward would be safer in the Tower of
London than at Westminster Palace, Richard sent the Prince there, and
soon found means for having his kinsmen, Grey and Rivers, executed.

310. Murder of Lord Hastings and the Two Princes.

Richard shortly after showed his object.  Lord Hastings was one of the
council who had voted to make him Lord Protector, but he was unwilling
to help him in his plot to seize the crown.  While at the council
table in the Tower of London Richard suddenly started up and accused
Hastings of treason, saying, "By St. Paul, I will not to dinner till I
see thy head off!"  Hastings was dragged out of the room, and without
either trial or examination was beheaded on a stick of timber on the
Tower green.

The way was now clear for the accomplishment of the Duke's purpose.
The Queen Mother (Elizabeth Woodville, widow of Edward IV) (S305) took
her younger son and his sisters, one of whom was the Princess
Elizabeth of York, and fled for protection to the sanctuary (S95) of
Westminster Abbey, where, refusing all comfort, "she sat alone, on the
rush-covered stone floor."  Finally, Richard half persuaded and half
forced the unhappy woman to give up her second son to his tender care.

With bitter weeping and dread presentiments of evil she parted from
him, saying: "Farewell, mine own sweet son! God send you good keeping!
Let me kiss you once ere you go, for God knoweth when we shall kiss
together again."  That was the last time she saw the lad.  He and
Edward, his elder brother, were soon after murdered in the Tower, and
Richard rose by that double crime to the height he coveted.

311. Summary.

Edward V's nominal reign of less than three months must be regarded
simply as the time during which his uncle, the Duke of Gloucester,
perfected his plot for seizing the crown by the successive murders of
Rivers, Grey, Hastings, and the two young Princes.

Richard III (House of York, White Rose)--1483-1485

312. Richard's Accession; he promises Financial Reform.

Richard used the preparations which had been made for the murdered
Prince Edward's coronation for his own (S310).  He probably gained
over an influential party by promises of financial reform.  In their
address to him at his accession, Parliament said, "Certainly we be
determined rather to adventure and commit us to the peril of our
lives...than to live in such thraldom and bondage as we have lived
long time heretofore, oppressed and injured by extortions and new
impositions, against the laws of God and man, and the liberty, old
policy and laws of this realm, wherein every Englishman is
inherited."[1]

[1] Taswell-Langmead's "Constitutional History of England."

313. Richard III's Character.

Several attempts have been made of late years to defend the King
against the odium heaped upon him by the older historians.  But these
well-meant efforts to prove him less black than tradition painted him
are answered by the fact that his memory was thoroughly hated by those
who knew him best.  No one of the age when he lived thought of
vindicating his character.  He was called a "hypocrite" and a
"hunchback."

We must believe then, until it is clearly proved to the contrary, that
the last of the Yorkist kings was what common report and Shakespeare
have together represented him,[2]--distorted in figure, and with
ambition so unrestrained that the words the great English poet has
seen fit to put into his mouth may have really expressed Richard's own
thought:

        "Then, since the heavens have shap'd my body so,
         Let hell make crookt my mind to answer it."[1]

[2] In this connection it may be well to say a word in regard to the
historical value of Shakespeare's utterances, which have been freely
quoted in this book.  He generally followed the Chronicles of Hall and
Holinshed, which constitute two important sources of information on
the periods of which they treat; and he sometimes followed them so
closely that he simply turned their prose into verse.  Mr. James
Gairdner, who is a high authority on the Wars of the Roses, calls
Shakespeare "an unrivaled interpreter" of that long and terrible
conflict.  (See the preface to his "Houses of Lancaster and York.")
In the preface to his "Richard III" Mr. Gairdner is still more
explicit.  He says: "A minute study of the facts of Richard's life has
tended more and more to convince me of the general fidelity of the
portrait with which we have been made familiar by Shakespeare and Sir
Thomas More."  On Shakespeare's faithful presentation of history see
also A.G.S. Canning's "Thoughts on Shakespeare," p. 295; the
Dictionary of National (British) Biography under "Holinshed"; Garnett
and Gosse's "English Literature," Vol. II, p. 68; and H.N. Hudson's
"Shakespeare's Life and Characters," Vol. II, pp. 5-8.  See, too,
S298, note 1.
[1] Shakespeare's "Henry VI," Part III, Act V, scene vi.

Personally he was as brave as he was cruel and unscrupulous.  He
promoted some reforms; he encouraged Caxton in his great work (S306),
and he abolished the forced loans ironically called "benevolences"
(S307), at least for a time.

314. Revolts; Buckingham; Henry Tudor.

During his short reign of two years, several revolts broke out, but
came to nothing.  The Duke of Buckingham, who had helped Richard III
to the throne, turned against him because he did not get the rewards
he expected.  He headed a revolt; but as his men deserted him, he fell
into the King's hands, and the executioner speedily did the rest.

Finally, a more formidable enemy arose.  Before he gained the crown
Richard had cajoled or compelled the unfortunate Anne Neville, widow
of that Prince Edward, son of Henry VI, who was slain at Tewkesbury
(S305), into becoming his wife.  She might have said with truth,
"Small joy have I in being England's Queen."  The King intended that
his son should marry Elizabeth of York, sister to the two Princes he
had murdered in the Tower (S310).  By so doing he would strengthen his
position and secure the succession to the throne to his own family.
But Richard's son shortly after died, and the King, having
mysteriously got rid of his wife, now made up his mind to marry
Elizabeth himself.

The Princess, however, was already betrothed to Henry Tudor, Earl of
Richmond, the engagement having been effected during that sad winter
which she and her mother spent in sactuary (S95) at Westminster
Abbey, watched by Richard's soldiers to prevent their escape (S310).
The Earl of Richmond, who was an illegitimate descendant of the House
of Lancaster (see the Genealogical Table, p. 172), had long been
waiting on the Continent for an opportunity to invade England and
claim the crown.

Owing to the enmity of Edward IV and Richard toward him, the Earl had
been, as he himself said, "either a fugitive or a captive since he was
five years old."  He now determined to remain so no longer.  He landed
(1485) with a force at Milford Haven, in Wales, where he felt sure of
a welcome, since his paternal ancestors were Welsh.[1]

Advancing through Shrewsbury, he met Richard on Bosworth Field, in
Leicestershire.

[1] Descent of Henry Tudor, Earl of Richmond:

Henry V (House of Lancaster) married Catharine of France, who after
   |       his death married Owen Tudor, a Welshman of Anglesey
Henry VI                          |
             Edmund Tudor (Earl of Richmond) married Margaret
                Beaufort, a descendent of John of Gaunt, Duke
                of Lancaster [she was granddaughter of John,
                 Earl of Somerset; see p. 161]
                                  |
                Henry Tudor, Earl of Richmond (also called
                        Henry of Lancaster)

315. Battle of Bosworth Field, 1485.

There the decisive battle was fought between the great rival houses of
York and Lancaster (S300).  Richard represented the first, and Henry
Tudor, Earl of Richmond, the second.  The King went out the evening
before to look over the ground.  He found one of his sentinels
slumbering at his post.  Drawing his sword, he stabbed him in the
heart, saying, "I found him asleep and I leave him asleep." Going back
to his tent, he passed a restless night.  The ghosts of all his
murdered victims seemed to pass in procession before him.  Such a
sight may well, as Shakespeare says, have "struck terror to the soul
of Richard."[2]

[2] Shakespeare's "Richard III," Act V, scene iii.

At sunrise the battle began.  Before the attack, Richard, it is said,
confessed to his troops the murder of his two nephews (S310), but
pleaded that he had atoned for the crime with "many salt tears and
long penance."  It is probably that had it not been for the treachery
of some of his adherents the King would have won the day.

When he saw that he was deserted by those on whose help he had
counted, he uttered the cry of "Treason! treason!" and dashed forward
into the thick of the fight.  With the fury of despair he hewed his
way into the very presence of Henry Tudor, and killing the standard
bearer, flung the Lancastrian banner to the ground.  But he could go
no further.  Numbers overpowered him, and he fell.

During the battle Richard had worn his crown.  After all was over, it
was found hanging on a hawthorn bush[1] and handed to the victor, who
placed it on his own head.  The army then gathered round Henry Tudor
thus crowned, and moved by one impulse joined in the exultant hymn of
the Te Deum.[2]  Thus ended the last of the Plantagenet line (S159).
"Whatever their faults or crimes, there was not a coward among
them."[3]

[1] An ancient stained-glass window in the east end of Henry VII's
Chapel (Westminster Abbey) commemorates this incident.
[2] "Te Deum laudamus" (We praise thee, O God): a Roman Catholic hymn
of thanksgiving, now sung in English in the Episcopal and other
churches.
[3] W. Stubb's "Constitutional History of England."

316. End of the Wars of the Roses (1485); their Effects.

With Bosworth Field the Wars of the Roses ceased (SS299, 300).  During
the thirty years they had continued, fourteen pitched battles had been
fought, in a single one of which (Towton) (S303) more Englishmen lost
their lives than in the whole course of the wars with France during
the preceding forty years.  In all, eighty princes of the blood royal
and more than half of the nobility of the realm perished.

Of those who escaped death by the sword, many died on the scaffold.
The remnant who were saved had hardly a better fate.  They left their
homes only to suffer in foreign lands.  A writer of the day[4] says,
"I, myself, saw the Duke of Exeter, the King of England's
brother-in-law, walking barefoot in the Duke of Burgundy's train, and
begging his bread from door to door."

[4] See the "Paston Letters."

Every individual of two families of the great houses of Somerset and
Warwick (SS296, 300) fell either on the field or under the
executioner's ax.  In tracing family pedigrees it is startling to see
how often the record reads, "killed at St. Albans," "slain at Towton,"
"beheaded after the battle of Wakefield," and the like.[5]

[5] Guest's "Lectures on English History."

When the contest closed, the feudal baronage was broken up (SS113,
114, 150).  In a majority of cases the estates of the nobles either
fell to the Crown for lack of heirs, or they were fraudulently seized
by the King's officers.  Thus the greater part of the wealthiest and
most powerful aristocracy in the world disappeared so completely that
they ceased to have either a local habitation or a name.

But the elements of civil discord at last exhausted themselves.
Bosworth Field was a turning point in English history.  When the sun
went down, it saw the termination of the desperate struggle between
the White Rose of York and the Red Rose of Lancaster; when it ushed in
a new day, it shone also on a new King, Henry VII, who introduced a
new social and political period.

317. Summary.

The importance of Richard's reign is that it marks the close of the
Wars of the Roses.  Those thirty years of civil strife destroyed the
predominating influence of the feudal barons.  Henry Tudor (S314) now
becomes the central figure, and will ascend the throne as Henry VII.

General Reference Summary of the Lancastrian and Yorkist Period
(1399-1485)

I. Government.  II. Religion.  III. Military Affairs.
IV. Literature, Learning, and Art.  V. General Industry and Commerce.
VI. Mode of Life, Manners, and Customs

I. Government

318. Parliament and the Royal Succession.

The period began with the parliamentary recognition of the claim to
the crown of Henry, Duke of Lancaster, son of John of Gaunt, Duke of
Lancaster, fourth son of Edward III.  By this act the claim of Edmund
Mortimer, a descendant of Edward III by his third son, Lionel, Duke of
Clarence, was deliberately set aside, and this change in the order of
succession eventually furnished an excuse for civil war.[1]

[1] Before the accession of Henry III, Parliament made choice of any
one of the King's sons whom it considered best fitted to rule.  After
hat time it was understood that the King's eldest son should be chosen
to succeed him; or incase of his death during the lifetime of his
father, the eldest son of the eldest son; and so forward in that
line.  The action taken by Parliament in favor of Henry IV was a
departure from that principle, and a reassurtion of its ancient right
to choose and descendant of the royal family it deemed best.  (See
Genealogical Table, p. 140.)

319. Disfranchisement of Electors; Benevolences.

Under Henry VI a property qualification was established by act of
Parliament which cut off all persons from voting for countyy members
of the House of Commons who did not have an income of forty shillings
(say 40 pounds, or $200, in modern money) from freehold land.  County
elections, the statute said, had "of late been made by a very great,
outrageous, and excessive number of people...of which the most part
were people of small substance and of no value."

Later, candidates for the House of Commons from the counties were
required to be gentlemen by birth, and to have an income of not less
than 20 pounds (or say 400 pounds, or $2000, in modern money).  Though
the tendency of such laws was to make the House of Commons represent
property holders more than the freemen as a body, yet no apparent
change seems to have taken place in the class of county members
chosen.

Eventually, however, these and other interferences with free elections
caused the rebellion of Jack Cade, in which the insurgents demanded
the right to choose such representatives as they saw fit.  But the
movement appears to have had no practical result.  During the civil
war which ensued, King Edward IV compelled wealthy subjects to lend
him large sums (seldom, if ever, repaid) called "benevolences."
Richard III abolished this obnoxious system, but afterward revived it,
and it became conspicuously hateful under his successor in the next
period.

Another great grievance was Purveyance.  By it the King's purveyors
had the right to seize provisions and means of transportation for the
King and his hundreds of attendants whenever they journeyed through
the country on a "royal progress."  The price offered by the purveyors
was always much below the real value of what was taken, and frequently
even that was not paid.  Purveyance, which had existed from the
earliest times, was not finally abolished until 1660.

II. Religion

320. Suppression of Heresy.

Under Henry IV the first act was passed by Lords and clergy,
apparently with the assent of the House of Commons, for punishing
heretics by burning at the stake, and the first martyr suffered in
that reign.  Later, the Lollards, or followers of Wycliffe, who appear
in many cases to have been socialists as well as religious reformers,
were punished by imprisonment, and occasionally with death.  The whole
number of martyrs, however, was small.

III. Military Affairs

321. Armor and Arms.

The armor of the period was made of steel plate, fitting and
completely covering the body.  It was often inlaid with gold and
elegantly ornamented.  Firearms had not yet superseded the old
weapons.  Cannon were in use, to some degree, and also clumsy handguns
fired with a match.

The long bow continued to be the chief arm of the foot soldiers, and
was used with great dexterity and fatal effect.  Targets were set up
by law in every parish, and the yeomen were required to practice
frequently at contests in archery.  The principle wars were the civil
wars and those with France.

IV. Literature, Learning, and Art

322. Introduction of Printing; Books.

The art of printing was introduced into England about 1477 by Caxton,
a London merchant.  Up to that time all books had been written on
either parchment or paper, at an average rate of about fifty cents per
page in modern money.  The age was not favorable to literature, and
produced no great writers; but Caxton edited and published a large
number of works, many of which he translated from the French and
Latin.

The two books which throw most light on the history of the times are
the "Sir John Paston Letters" (1424-1506), and a work by Chief Justice
Fortescue on government, intended for the use of Prince Edward (slain
at Tewkesbury).  The latter work is remarkable for its bold
declaration that the King "has the delegation of power from the
people, and he has no just claims to any other power than this."  The
chief justice also praises the courage of his countrymen, and declares
with honest pride that "more Englishmen are hanged in England in one
year for robbery and manslaughter than are hanged in France in seven
years."

323. Education.

Henry VI took a deep interest in education, and founded the great
public school of Eton, which ranks next in age to that of Winchester.
The money for its endowment was obtained by the appropriation of the
revenues of alien or foreign monasteries which had been erected in
England, and which were confiscated by Henry V.  The King watched the
progress of the building from the windows of Windsor Castle, and to
supplement the course of education to be given there, he furthermore
erected and endowed the magnificent King's College, Cambridge.

324. Architecture.

There was a new development of Gothic architecture in this period, the
Decorated giving place to the Perpendicular.  The latter derives its
name from the perpendicular divisions of the lights in the arches of
the windows.  It marks the final period of the Gothic or Pointed
style, and is noted for the exquisite carved work of its ceilings.
King's College Chapel, Cambridge, St. George's Chapel, Windsor, and
Henry VII's Chapel (built in the next reign), connected with
Westminster Abbey, are among the most celebrated examples of this
style of architecture, whic his peculiar to England.

The mansions of the nobility at this period exhibited great elegance.
Crosby Hall, London, at one time the residence of Richard III, was one
of the best examples of the "Inns" of the great families and wealthy
knights.  The Hall was pulled down in 1903, but it has been reerected
on the Chelsea Embankment, on the Thames.

V. General Industry and Commerce

325. Agriculture and Trade.

Notwithstanding the Civil Wars of the Roses, agriculture was
prosperous and foreign trade largely increased.  The latter was well
represented by Sir Richard Whittington, thrice mayor of London, who,
according to tradition, lent Henry V large sums of money, and then at
an entertainment which he gave to the King and Queen in his city
mansion, generously canceled the debt by throwing the bonds into the
open sandalwood fire.  There is a fine fresco, representing this
scene, in the Royal Exchange, London.

Goldsmiths from Lombardy had now settled in London in such numbers as
to give the name of Lobard Street to the quarter they occupied.  They
succeeded the Jews in the business of money lending and banking, and
Lombard Street still remains famous for its bankers and brokers.

VI. Mode of Life, Manners, and Customs

326. Dress.

Great sums were spent on dress by both sexes, and the courtiers'
doublets, or jackets, were of the most costly silks and velvets,
elaborately puffed and slashed.  During the latter part of the period
the pointed shoes, which had formerly been of prodigious length,
suddenly began to grow broad, with such rapidity that Parliament
passed a law limiting the width of the toes to six inches.

At the same time the court ladies adopted the fashion of wearing horns
as huge in proportion as the noblemen's shoes.  The government tried
legislating them down, and the clergy fulminated a solemn curse
against them; but fashion was more powerful than Church and Parliament
combined, and horns and hoofs came out triumphant.


                     EIGHTH PERIOD[1]

        "One half her soil has walked the rest
         In poets, heroes, martyrs, sages!"
                                        O. W. Holmes

                Political Reaction--Absolutism of the
        Crown--The English Reformation and the New Learning

Crown or Pope?

House of Tudor (1485-1603)

Henry VII, 1485-1509
Henry VIII, 1509-1547
Edward VI, 1547-1553
Mary, 1553-1558
Elizabeth, 1558-1603

[1] Reference Books on this period will be found in the Classified
List of Books in the Appendix.  The pronunciation of names will be
found in the Index.  The Leading Dates stand unenclosed; all others
are in parentheses.

327. Union of the Houses of Lancaster and York.

Before leaving the Continent Henry Tudor (S314) had promised the
Yorkist party that he would marry Elizabeth, eldest daughter of Edward
IV (see Genealogical Table, p. 179), and sister to the young Princes
murdered by Richard III (S310).  Such a marriage would unite the rival
houses of Lancaster and York, and put an end to the civil war.

A few months after the new King's accession the wedding was duly
celebrated, and in the beautiful east window of stained glass in Henry
VII's Chapel, Westminster Abbey, the Roses are seen joined; so that,
as the quaint verse of that day says:

                "Both roses flourish--red and white--
                 In love and sisterly delight;
                 The two that were at strife are blended,
                 And all old troubles now are ended."

Peace came from the union, but it was peace interrupted by
insurrections which lasted for several years.

                Origin of the House of Tudor

                        Edward III
     1       2         3     |          4             5
     --------------------------------------------------
     |       |         |                |             |
  Edward  William, Lionel, Duke  John of Gaunt,  Edmund, Duke of York
 (the Black  no    of Clarence,    Duke of            |
  Prince)   issue  from whom      Lancaster      /-----------------\
     |            descended in       |      Edward, Duke of   Richard,
 Richard II       the fourth      Henry IV  York, no issue    Earl of
                  generation         |                      Cambridge,
                  *Richard,       Henry V (Catharine,       m. Anne  
                  Duke of York     |       his widow,  Mortimer, great-
                      |         Henry VI   married     granddaughter of
       ---------------------              Owen Tudor,   Lionel, Duke of
       |                   |         a Welsh gentleman) Clarence; their
    Edward IV        Richard III             |              son was
       |                            Edmund Tudor, Earl of   Richard,
  ---------------------------      Richmond, m. Margaret   Duke of York
  |            |            |      Beaufort, a descendant
+Edward V  +Richard,    Elizabeth  of John of Gaunt, Duke
          Duke of York  of York,   of Lancaster, see 
                       m. Henry VII    pages 161, 172
                      (of Lancaster)        |
                                       Henry (Tudor) VII (formerly
                                Earl of Richmond), m. Elizabeth of
                                York, thus uniting the House of
                                Lancaster (Red Rose) and York
                                (White Rose) in the new royal
                                        House of Tudor

*Inherited the title Duke of York from his uncle Edward. See No. 5.
+The Princes murdered by Richard III.
