they cut across the lakes of Minnesota, dragging their sleighs on the
ice.  Groseillers' sleigh was loaded with pelts obtained from the
Sioux, and the elder man began to fag.  Radisson took the heavy sleigh,
giving Groseillers the lighter one.  About twelve miles out from the
shore, on one of these lakes, the ice suddenly gave, and Radisson
plunged through to his waist.  It was as dangerous to turn back as to
go on.  If they deserted their merchandise, they would have nothing to
trade with the Indians; but when Radisson succeeded in extricating
himself, he was so badly strained that he could not go forward another
step.  There was no sense in risking both their lives on the rotten
ice.  He urged Groseillers to go on.  Groseillers dared not hesitate.
Laying two sleds as a wind-break on each side of Radisson, he covered
the injured man with robes, consigned him to the keeping of God, and
hurried over the ice to obtain help from the Crees.

The Crees got Radisson ashore, and there he lay in agony for eight
days.  The Indians were preparing to set out for the North.  They
invited Radisson to go with them.  His sprain had not healed; but he
could not miss the opportunity of approaching the Bay of the North.
For two days he marched with the hunters, enduring torture at every
step.  The third day he could go no farther and they deserted him.
Groseillers had gone hunting with another band of Crees.  Radisson had
neither gun nor hatchet, and the Indians left him only ten pounds of
pemmican.  After a short rest he journeyed painfully on, following the
trail of the marching Crees.  On the fifth day he found the frame of a
deserted wigwam.  Covering it with branches of trees and kindling a
fire to drive off beasts of prey, he crept in and lay down to sleep.
He was awakened by a crackling of flame.  The fire had caught the pine
boughs and the tepee was in a blaze.  Radisson flung his snow-shoes and
clothing as far as he could, and broke from the fire-trap.
Half-dressed and lame, shuddering with cold and hunger, he felt through
the dark over the snow for his clothing.  A far cry rang through the
forest like the bay of the wolf pack.  Radisson kept solitary watch
till morning, when he found that the cry came from Indians sent out to
find him by Groseillers.  He was taken to an encampment, where the
Crees were building canoes to go to the Bay of the North.

The entire band, with the two explorers, then launched on the rivers
flowing north.  "We were in danger to perish a thousand times from the
ice jam," writes Radisson.  ". . .  At last we came full sail from a
deep bay . . . we came to the seaside, where we found an old house all
demolished and battered with bullets. . . .  They (the Crees) told us
about Europeans. . . .  We went from isle to isle all that
summer. . . .  This region had a great store of cows (caribou). . . .
We went farther to see the place that the Indians were to pass the
summer. . . .  The river (where they went) came from the lake that
empties itself in . . . the Saguenay . . . a hundred leagues from the
great river of Canada (the St. Lawrence) . . . to where we were in the
Bay of the North. . . .  We passed the summer quietly coasting the
seaside. . . .  The people here burn not their prisoners, but knock
them on the head. . . .  They have a store of turquoise. . . .  They
find green stones, very fine, at the same Bay of the Sea
(labradorite). . . .  We went up another river to the Upper Lake
(Winnipeg)." [10]

For years the dispute has been waged with zeal worthy of a better cause
whether Radisson referred to Hudson Bay in this passage.  The French
claim that he did; the English that he did not.  "The house demolished
with bullets" was probably an old trading post, contend the English;
but there was no trading post except Radisson's west of Lake Superior
at that time, retort the French.  By "cows" Radisson meant buffalo, and
no buffalo were found as far east as Hudson Bay, say the English; by
"cows" Radisson meant caribou and deer, and herds of these frequented
the shores of Hudson Bay, answer the French.  No river comes from the
Saguenay to Hudson Bay, declare the English; yes, but a river comes
from the direction of the Saguenay, and was followed by subsequent
explorers, assert the French.[11]  The stones of turquoise and green
were agates from Lake Superior, explain the English; the stones were
labradorites from the east coast of the Bay, maintain the French.  So
the childish quarrel has gone on for two centuries.  England and France
alike conspired to crush the man while he lived; and when he died they
quarrelled over the glory of his discoveries.  The point is not whether
Radisson actually wet his oars in the different indentations of Hudson
and James bays.  The point is that he found where it lay from the Great
Lakes, and discovered the watershed sloping north from the Great Lakes
to Hudson Bay.  This was new ground, and entitled Radisson to the fame
of a discoverer.

From the Indians of the bay, Radisson heard of another lake leagues to
the north, whose upper end was always frozen.  This was probably some
vague story of the lakes in the region that was to become known two
centuries later as Mackenzie River.  The spring of 1663 found the
explorers back in the Lake of the Woods region accompanied by seven
hundred Indians of the Upper Country.  The company filled three hundred
and sixty canoes.  Indian girls dived into the lake to push the canoes
off, and stood chanting a song of good-speed till the boats had glided
out of sight through the long, narrow, rocky gaps of the Lake of the
Woods.  At Lake Superior the company paused to lay up a supply of
smoked sturgeon.  At the Sault four hundred Crees turned back.  The
rest of the Indians hoisted blankets on fishing-poles, and, with a west
wind, scudded across Lake Huron to Lake Nipissing.  From Lake Nipissing
they rode safely down the Ottawa to Montreal.  Cannon were fired to
welcome the discoverers, for New France was again on the verge of
bankruptcy from a beaver famine.

A different welcome awaited them at Quebec.  D'Argenson, the governor,
was about to leave for France, and nothing had come of the Jesuit
expedition up the Saguenay.  He had already sent Couture, for a second
time, overland to find a way to Hudson Bay; but no word had come from
Couture, and the governor's time was up.  The explorers had disobeyed
him in leaving without his permission.  Their return with a fortune of
pelts was the salvation of the impecunious governor.  From 1627 to 1663
five distinct fur companies, organized under the patronage of royalty,
had gone bankrupt in New France.[12]  Therefore, it became a loyal
governor to protect his Majesty's interests.  Besides, the revenue
collectors could claim one-fourth of all returns in beaver except from
posts farmed expressly for the king.  No sooner had Radisson and
Groseillers come home than D'Argenson ordered Groseillers imprisoned.
He then fined the explorers $20,000, to build a fort at Three Rivers,
giving them leave to put their coats-of-arms on the gate; a $30,000
fine was to go to the public treasury of New France; $70,000 worth of
beaver was seized as the tax due the revenue.  Of a cargo worth
$300,000 in modern money, Radisson and Groseillers had less than
$20,000 left.[13]

Had D'Argenson and his successors encouraged instead of persecuted the
discoverers, France could have claimed all North America but the narrow
strip of New England on the east and the Spanish settlements on the
south.  Having repudiated Radisson and Groseillers, France could not
claim the fruits of deeds which she punished.[14]


[1] The childish dispute whether Bourdon sailed into the bay and up to
its head, or only to 50 degrees N. latitude, does not concern
Radisson's life, and, therefore, is ignored.  One thing I can state
with absolute certainty from having been up the coast of Labrador in a
most inclement season, that Bourdon could not possibly have gone to and
back from the inner waters of Hudson Bay between May 2 and August 11.
J. Edmond Roy and Mr. Sulte both pronounce Bourdon a myth, and his trip
a fabrication.

[2] "Shame put upon them," says Radisson.  Menard did _not_ go out with
Radisson and Groseillers, as is erroneously recorded.

[3] I have purposely avoided stating whether Radisson went by way of
Lake Ontario or the Ottawa.  Dr. Dionne thinks that he went by Ontario
and Niagara because Radisson refers to vast waterfalls under which a
man could walk.  Radisson gives the height of these falls as forty
feet.  Niagara are nearer three hundred; and the Chaudiere of the
Ottawa would answer Radisson's description better, were it not that he
says a man could go under the falls for a quarter of a mile.  "The Lake
of the Castors" plainly points to Lake Nipissing.

[4] The two main reasons why I think that Radisson and Groseillers were
now moving up that chain of lakes and rivers between Minnesota and
Canada, connecting Lake of the Woods with Lake Winnipeg, are: (1)
Oldmixon says it was the report of the Assiniboine Indians from Lake
Assiniboine (Lake Winnipeg) that led Radisson to seek for the Bay of
the North overland.  These Assiniboines did not go to the bay by way of
Lake Superior, but by way of Lake Winnipeg.  (2) A memoire written by
De la Chesnaye in 1696--see _Documents Nouvelle France_,
1492-1712--distinctly refers to a _coureur's_ trail from Lake Superior
to Lake Assiniboine or Lake Winnipeg.  There is no record of any
Frenchmen but Radisson and Groseillers having followed such a trail to
the land of the Assiniboines--the Manitoba of to-day--before 1676.

[5] One can guess that a man who wrote in that spirit two centuries
before the French Revolution would not be a sycophant in
courts,--which, perhaps, helps to explain the conspiracy of silence
that obscured Radisson's fame.

[6] My reason for thinking that this region was farther north than
Minnesota is the size of the Cree winter camp; but I have refrained
from trying to localize this part of the trip, except to say it was
west and north of Duluth.  Some writers recognize in the description
parts of Minnesota, others the hinterland between Lake Superior and
James Bay.  In the light of the _memoire_ of 1696 sent to the French
government, I am unable to regard this itinerary as any other than the
famous fur traders' trail between Lake Superior and Lake Winnipeg by
way of Sturgeon River and the Lake of the Woods.

[7] _Radisson Relations_, p. 207.

[8] We are now on safe ground.  There was a well-known trail from what
is now known as the Rat Portage region to the great Sioux camps west of
the Mississippi and Red River valleys.  But again I refuse to lay
myself open to controversy by trying definitely to give either the
dates or exact places of this trip.

[9] If any proof is wanted that Radisson's journeyings took him far
west of the Mississippi, these details afford it.

[10] _Radisson's Journal_, pp. 224, 225, 226.

[11] Mr. A. P. Low, who has made the most thorough exploration of
Labrador and Hudson Bay of any man living, says, "Rupert River forms
the discharge of the Mistassini lakes . . . and empties into Rupert Bay
close to the mouth of the Nottoway River, and rises in a number of
lakes close to the height of land dividing it from the St. Maurice
River, which joins the St. Lawrence at Three Rivers."

[12] _Les Compagnies de Colonisation sous l'ancien regime_, by
Chailly-Bert.

[13] Oldmixon says: "Radisson and Groseillers met with some savages on
the Lake of Assiniboin, and from them they learned that they might go
by land to the bottom of Hudson's Bay, where the English had not been
yet, at James Bay; upon which they desired them to conduct them
thither, and the savages accordingly did it.  They returned to the
Upper Lake the same way they came, and thence to Quebec, where they
offered the principal merchants to carry ships to Hudson's Bay; but
their project was rejected."  Vol. I, p. 548.  Radisson's figures are
given as "pounds "; but by "_L_" did he mean English "pound" or French
livre, that is 17 cents?  A franc in 1660 equalled the modern dollar.

[14] The exact tribes mentioned in the _Memoire of 1696_, with whom the
French were in trade in the West are: On the "Missoury" and south of
it, the Mascoutins and Sioux; two hundred miles beyond the "Missisipy"
the Issaguy, the Octbatons, the Omtous, of whom were Sioux capable of
mustering four thousand warriors, south of Lake Superior, the Sauteurs,
on "Sipisagny, the river which is the discharge of Lake Asemipigon"
(Winnipeg), the "Nation of the Grand Rat," Algonquins numbering two
thousand, who traded with the English of Hudson Bay, De la Chesnaye
adds in his memoire details of the trip from Lake Superior to the lake
of the Assiniboines.  Knowing what close co-workers he and Radisson
were, we can guess where he got his information.




CHAPTER V

1664-1676

RADISSON RENOUNCES ALLEGIANCE TO TWO CROWNS

Rival Traders thwart the Plans of the Discoverers--Entangled in
Lawsuits, the two French Explorers go to England--The Organization of
the Hudson's Bay Fur Company--Radisson the Storm-centre of
International Intrigue--Boston Merchants in the Struggle to capture the
Fur Trade


Henceforth Radisson and Groseillers were men without a country.  Twice
their return from the North with cargoes of beaver had saved New France
from ruin.  They had discovered more of America than all the other
explorers combined.  Their reward was jealous rivalry that reduced them
to beggary; injustice that compelled them to renounce allegiance to two
crowns; obloquy during a lifetime; and oblivion for two centuries after
their death.  The very force of unchecked impulse that carries the hero
over all obstacles may also carry him over the bounds of caution and
compromise that regulate the conduct of other men.  This was the case
with Radisson and Groseillers.  They were powerless to resist the
extortion of the French governor.  The Company of One Hundred
Associates had given place to the Company of the West Indies.  This
trading venture had been organized under the direct patronage of the
king.[1]  It had been proclaimed from the pulpits of France.
Privileges were promised to all who subscribed for the stock.  The
Company was granted a blank list of titles to bestow on its patrons and
servants.  No one else in New France might engage in the beaver trade;
no one else might buy skins from the Indians and sell the pelts in
Europe; and one-fourth of the trade went for public revenue.  In spite
of all the privileges, fur company after fur company failed in New
France; but to them Radisson had to sell his furs, and when the revenue
officers went over the cargo, the minions of the governor also seized a
share under pretence of a fine for trading without a license.

Groseillers was furious, and sailed for France to demand restitution;
but the intriguing courtiers proved too strong for him.  Though he
spent 10,000 pounds, nothing was done.  D'Avaugour had come back to
France, and stockholders of the jealous fur company were all-powerful
at court.  Groseillers then relinquished all idea of restitution, and
tried to interest merchants in another expedition to Hudson Bay by way
of the sea.[2]  He might have spared himself the trouble.  His
enthusiasm only aroused the quiet smile of supercilious indifference.
His plans were regarded as chimerical.  Finally a merchant of Rochelle
half promised to send a boat to Isle Percee at the mouth of the St.
Lawrence in 1664.  Groseillers had already wasted six months.  Eager
for action, he hurried back to Three Rivers, where Radisson awaited
him.  The two secretly took passage in a fishing schooner to Anticosti,
and from Anticosti went south to Isle Percee.  Here a Jesuit just out
from France bore the message to them that no ship would come.  The
promise had been a put-off to rid France of the enthusiast.  New France
had treated them with injustice.  Old France with mockery.  Which way
should they turn?  They could not go back to Three Rivers.  This
attempt to go to Hudson Bay without a license laid them open to a
second fine.  Baffled, but not beaten, the explorers did what
ninety-nine men out of a hundred would have done in similar
circumstances--they left the country.  Some rumor of their intention to
abandon New France must have gone abroad; for when they reached Cape
Breton, their servants grumbled so loudly that a mob of Frenchmen
threatened to burn the explorers.  Dismissing their servants, Radisson
and Groseillers escaped to Port Royal, Nova Scotia.

[Illustration: Martello Tower of Refuge in Time of Indian Wars--Three
Rivers.]

In Port Royal they met a sea-captain from Boston, Zechariah Gillam, who
offered his ship for a voyage to Hudson Bay, but the season was far
spent when they set out.  Captain Gillam was afraid to enter the
ice-locked bay so late in summer.  The boat turned back, and the trip
was a loss.  This run of ill-luck had now lasted for a year.  They
still had some money from the Northern trips, and they signed a
contract with ship-owners of Boston to take two vessels to Hudson Bay
the following spring.  Provisions must be laid up for the long voyage.
One of the ships was sent to the Grand Banks for fish.  Rounding
eastward past the crescent reefs of Sable Island, the ship was caught
by the beach-combers and totally wrecked on the drifts of sand.
Instead of sailing for Hudson Bay in the spring of 1665, Radisson and
Groseillers were summoned to Boston to defend themselves in a lawsuit
for the value of the lost vessel.  They were acquitted; but lawsuits on
the heels of misfortune exhausted the resources of the adventurers.
The exploits of the two Frenchmen had become the sensation of Boston.
Sir Robert Carr, one of the British commissioners then in the New
England colonies, urged Radisson and Groseillers to renounce allegiance
to a country that had shown only ingratitude, and to come to
England.[3]  When Sir George Cartwright sailed from Nantucket on August
1, 1665, he was accompanied by Radisson and Groseillers.[4]  Misfortune
continued to dog them.  Within a few days' sail of England, their ship
encountered the Dutch cruiser _Caper_.  For two hours the ships poured
broadsides of shot into each other's hulls.  The masts were torn from
the English vessel.  She was boarded and stripped, and the Frenchmen
were thoroughly questioned.  Then the captives were all landed in
Spain.  Accompanied by the two Frenchmen, Sir George Cartwright
hastened to England early in 1666.  The plague had driven the court
from London to Oxford.  Cartwright laid the plans of the explorers
before Charles II.  The king ordered 40s. a week paid to Radisson and
Groseillers for the winter.  They took chambers in London.  Later they
followed the court to Windsor, where they were received by King Charles.

The English court favored the project of trade in Hudson Bay, but
during the Dutch war nothing could be done.  The captain of the Dutch
ship _Caper_ had sent word of the French explorers to De Witt, the
great statesman.  De Witt despatched a spy from Picardy, France, one
Eli Godefroy Touret, who chanced to know Groseillers, to meet the
explorers in London.  Masking as Groseillers' nephew, Touret tried to
bribe both men to join the Dutch.  Failing this, he attempted to
undermine their credit with the English by accusing Radisson and
Groseillers of counterfeiting money; but the English court refused to
be deceived, and Touret was imprisoned.  Owing to the plague and the
war, two years passed without the vague promises of the English court
taking shape.  Montague, the English ambassador to France, heard of the
explorers' feats, and wrote to Prince Rupert.  Prince Rupert was a
soldier of fortune, who could enter into the spirit of the explorers.
He had fought on the losing side against Cromwell, and then taken to
the high seas to replenish broken fortunes by piracy.  The wealth of
the beaver trade appealed to him.  He gave all the influence of his
_prestige_ to the explorers' plans.  By the spring of 1668 money enough
had been advanced to fit out two boats for Hudson Bay.  In the _Eagle_,
with Captain Stannard, went Radisson; in the _Nonsuch_, with Captain
Zechariah Gillam of Boston, went Groseillers.  North of Ireland furious
gales drove the ships apart.  Radisson's vessel was damaged and driven
back to London; but his year was not wasted.  It is likely that the
account of his first voyages was written while Groseillers was away.[5]
Sometime during his stay in London he married Mary Kirke, a daughter of
the Huguenot John Kirke, whose family had long ago gone from Boston and
captured Quebec.
