N.N.E., and arrived at the island of Tortuga. He sighted a point which he
named Punta Pierna, E.N.E. of the end of the island 12 miles; and from
thence another point was seen and named Punta Lanzada, in the same N.E.
direction 16 miles. Thus from the end of Tortuga to Punta Aguda the
distance is 44 miles, which is 11 leagues E.N.E. Along this route there
are several long stretches of beach. The island of Tortuga is very high,
but not mountainous, and is very beautiful and populous, like Espanola,
and the land is cultivated, so that it looked like the plain of Cordova.
Seeing that the wind was foul, and that he could not steer for the island
of Baneque,[179-1] he determined to return to the Puerto de la Concepcion
whence he had come; but he could not fetch a river which is two leagues
to the east of that port.


_Saturday, 15th of December_

Once more the Admiral left the Puerto de la Concepcion, but, on leaving
the port, he was again met by a contrary east wind. He stood over to
Tortuga, and then steered with the object of exploring the river he had
been unable to reach yesterday; nor was he able to fetch the river this
time, but he anchored half a league to leeward of it, where there was
clean and good anchoring ground. As soon as the vessels were secured, he
went with the boats to the river, entering an arm of the sea, which
proved not to be the river. Returning, he found the mouth, there being
only one, and the current very strong. He went in with the boats to find
the villagers that had been seen the day before. He ordered a tow-rope to
be got out and manned by the sailors, who hauled the boats up for a
distance of two lombard-shots. They could not get further owing to the
strength of the current. He saw some houses, and the large valley where
the villages were, and he said that a more beautiful valley he had never
seen, this river flowing through the centre of it. He also saw people at
the entrance, but they all took to flight. He further says that these
people must be much hunted, for they live in such a state of fear. When
the ships arrived at any port, they presently made signals by fires on
heights throughout the country; and this is done more in this island of
Espanola and in Tortuga, which is also a large island, than in the others
that were visited before. He called this valley Valle del Paraiso,[180-1]
and the river Guadalquivir; because he says that it is the size of the
Guadalquivir at Cordova. The banks consist of shingle, suitable for
walking.[180-2]


_Sunday, 16th of December_

At midnight the Admiral made sail with the land-breeze to get clear of
that gulf. Passing along the coast of Espanola on a bowline, for the wind
had veered to the east, he met a canoe in the middle of the gulf, with a
single Indian in it. The Admiral was surprised how he could have kept
afloat with such a gale blowing. Both the Indian and his canoe were taken
on board, and he was given glass beads, bells, and brass trinkets, and
taken in the ship, until she was off a village 17 miles from the former
anchorage, where the Admiral came to again. The village appeared to have
been lately built, for all the houses were new. The Indian then went on
shore in his canoe, bringing the news that the Admiral and his companions
were good people; although the intelligence had already been conveyed to
the village from the place where the natives had their interview with the
six Spaniards. Presently more than five hundred natives with their king
came to the shore opposite the ships, which were anchored very close to
the land. Presently one by one, then many by many, came to the ship
without bringing anything with them, except that some had a few grains of
very fine gold in their ears and noses, which they readily gave away. The
Admiral ordered them all to be well treated; and he says: "for they are
the best people in the world, and the gentlest; and above all I entertain
the hope in our Lord that your Highnesses will make them all Christians,
and that they will be all your subjects, for as yours I hold them." He
also saw that they all treated the king with respect, who was on the
sea-shore. The Admiral sent him a present, which he received in great
state. He was a youth of about 21 years of age, and he had with him an
aged tutor, and other councillors who advised and answered him, but he
uttered very few words. One of the Indians who had come in the Admiral's
ship spoke to him, telling him how the Christians had come from Heaven,
and how they came in search of gold, and wished to find the island of
Baneque. He said that it was well and that there was much gold in the
said island. He explained to the alguazil of the Admiral[181-1] that the
way they were going was the right way, and that in two days they would be
there; adding, that if they wanted anything from the shore he would give
it them with great pleasure. This king, and all the others, go naked as
their mothers bore them, as do the women without any covering, and these
were the most beautiful men and women that had yet been met with. They
are fairly white, and if they were clothed and protected from the sun and
air, they would be almost as fair as people in Spain. This land is cool,
and the best that words can describe. It is very high, yet the top of the
highest mountain could be ploughed with bullocks; and all is diversified
with plains and valleys. In all Castile there is no land that can be
compared with this for beauty and fertility. All this island, as well as
the island of Tortuga, is cultivated like the plain of Cordova. They
raise on these lands crops of yams,[181-2] which are small branches, at
the foot of which grow roots like carrots, which serve as bread. They
powder and knead them, and make them into bread; then they plant the same
branch in another part, which again sends out four or five of the same
roots, which are very nutritious, with the taste of chestnuts. Here they
have the largest the Admiral had seen in any part of the world, for he
says that they have the same plant in Guinea. At this place they were as
thick as a man's leg. All the people were stout and lusty, not thin, like
the natives that had been seen before, and of a very pleasant manner,
without religious belief. The trees were so luxuriant that the leaves
left off being green, and were dark colored with verdure. It was a
wonderful thing to see those valleys, and rivers of sweet water, and the
cultivated fields, and land fit for cattle, though they have none, for
orchards, and for anything in the world that a man could seek for.

In the afternoon the king came on board the ship, where the Admiral
received him in due form, and caused him to be told that the ships
belonged to the Sovereigns of Castile, who were the greatest princes in
the world. But neither the Indians who were on board, who acted as
interpreters, nor the king, believed a word of it. They maintained that
the Spaniards came from Heaven, and that the Sovereigns of Castile must
be in Heaven, and not in this world. They placed Spanish food before the
king to eat, and he ate a mouthful, and gave the rest to his councillors
and tutor, and to the rest who came with him.

"Your Highnesses may believe that these lands are so good and fertile,
especially these of the island of Espanola, that there is no one who
would know how to describe them, and no one who could believe if he had
not seen them. And your Highnesses may believe that this island, and all
the others, are as much yours as Castile. Here there is only wanting a
settlement and the order to the people to do what is required. For I,
with the force I have under me, which is not large, could march over all
these islands without opposition. I have seen only three sailors land,
without wishing to do harm, and a multitude of Indians fled before them.
They have no arms, and are without warlike instincts; they all go naked,
and are so timid that a thousand would not stand before three of our men.
So that they are good to be ordered about, to work and sow, and do all
that may be necessary, and to build towns, and they should be taught to
go about clothed and to adopt our customs."


_Monday, 17th of December_

It blew very hard during the night from E.N.E., but there was not much
sea, as this part of the coast is enclosed and sheltered by the island
of Tortuga. The sailors were sent away to fish with nets. They had
much intercourse with the natives, who brought them certain arrows of
the Caniba or Canibales. They are made of reeds, pointed with sharp
bits of wood hardened by fire, and are very long. They pointed out two
men who wanted certain pieces of flesh on their bodies, giving to
understand that the Canibales had eaten them by mouthfuls. The Admiral
did not believe it. Some Christians were again sent to the village,
and, in exchange for glass beads, obtained some pieces of gold beaten
out into fine leaf. They saw one man, whom the Admiral supposed to be
Governor of that province, called by them Cacique,[183-1] with a piece
of gold leaf as large as a hand, and it appears that he wanted to
barter with it. He went into his house, and the other remained in the
open space outside. He cut the leaf into small pieces, and each time
he came out he brought a piece and exchanged it. When he had no more
left, he said by signs that he had sent for more, and that he would
bring it another day. The Admiral says that all these things, and the
manner of doing them, with their gentleness and the information they
gave, showed these people to be more lively and intelligent than any
that had hitherto been met with. In the afternoon a canoe arrived from
the island of Tortuga with a crew of forty men; and when they arrived
on the beach, all the people of the village sat down in sign of peace,
and nearly all the crew came on shore. The cacique rose by himself,
and, with words that appeared to be of a menacing character, made them
go back to the canoe and shove off. He took up stones from the beach
and threw them into the water, all having obediently gone back into
the canoe. He also took a stone and put it in the hands of my
Alguazil,[183-2] that he might throw it. He had been sent on shore
with the Secretary[184-1] to see if the canoe had brought anything of
value. The alguazil did not wish to throw the stone. That cacique
showed that he was well disposed to the Admiral. Presently the canoe
departed, and afterwards they said to the Admiral that there was more
gold in Tortuga than in Espanola, because it is nearer to Baneque. The
Admiral did not think that there were gold mines either in Espanola or
Tortuga, but that the gold was brought from Baneque in small
quantities, there being nothing to give in return. That land is so
rich that there is no necessity to work much to sustain life, nor to
clothe themselves, as they go naked. He believed that they were very
near the source, and that our Lord would point out where the gold has
its origin. He had information that from here to Baneque was four
days' journey, about 34 leagues, which might be traversed with a fair
wind in a single day.


_Tuesday, 18th of December_

The Admiral remained at the same anchorage, because there was no wind,
and also because the cacique had said that he had sent for gold. The
Admiral did not expect much from what might be brought, but he wanted to
understand better whence it came. Presently he ordered the ship and
caravel to be adorned with arms and dressed with flags, in honor of the
feast of Santa Maria de la O,[184-2] or commemoration of the
Annunciation, which was on that day, and many rounds were fired from the
lombards. The king of that island of Espanola had got up very early and
left his house, which is about five leagues away, reaching the village at
three in the morning. There were several men from the ship in the
village, who had been sent by the Admiral to see if any gold had arrived.
They said that the king came with two hundred men; that he was carried in
a litter by four men; and that he was a youth, as has already been said.
To-day, when the Admiral was dining under the poop, the king came on
board with all his people.

The Admiral says to the Sovereigns: "Without doubt, his state, and the
reverence with which he is treated by all his people, would appear good
to your Highnesses, though they all go naked. When he came on board, he
found that I was dining at a table under the poop, and, at a quick walk,
he came to sit down by me, and did not wish that I should give place by
coming to receive him or rising from the table, but that I should go on
with my dinner. I thought that he would like to eat of our viands, and
ordered them to be brought for him to eat. When he came under the poop,
he made signs with his hand that all the rest should remain outside, and
so they did, with the greatest possible promptitude and reverence. They
all sat on the deck, except the men of mature age, whom I believe to be
his councillors and tutor, who came and sat at his feet. Of the viands
which I put before him, he took of each as much as would serve to taste
it, sending the rest to his people, who all partook of the dishes. The
same thing in drinking: he just touched with his lips, giving the rest to
his followers. They were all of fine presence and very few words. What
they did say, so far as I could make out, was very clear and intelligent.
The two at his feet watched his mouth, speaking to him and for him, and
with much reverence. After dinner, an attendant brought a girdle, made
like those of Castile, but of different material, which he took and gave
to me, with pieces of worked gold, very thin. I believe they get very
little here, but they say that they are very near the place where it is
found, and where there is plenty. I saw that he was pleased with some
drapery I had over my bed, so I gave it him, with some very good amber
beads I wore on my neck, some colored shoes, and a bottle of
orange-flower water. He was marvellously well content, and both he and
his tutor and councillors were very sorry that they could not understand
me, nor I them. However, I knew that they said that, if I wanted
anything, the whole island was at my disposal. I sent for some beads of
mine, with which, as a charm, I had a gold excelente,[186-1] on which
your Highnesses were stamped. I showed it to him, and said as I had done
yesterday, that your Highnesses ruled the best part of the world, and
that there were no princes so great. I also showed him the royal
standards, and the others with a cross, of which he thought much. He said
to his councillors what great lords your Highnesses must be to have sent
me from so far, even from Heaven to this country, without fear. Many
other things passed between them which I did not understand, except that
it was easy to see that they held everything to be very wonderful."

When it got late, and the king wanted to go, the Admiral sent him on
shore in his boat very honorably, and saluted him with many guns. Having
landed, he got into his litter, and departed with his 200 men, his son
being carried behind on the shoulders of an Indian, a man highly
respected. All the sailors and people from the ships were given to eat,
and treated with much honor wherever they liked to stop. One sailor said
that he had stopped in the road and seen all the things given by the
Admiral. A man carried each one before the king, and these men appeared
to be among those who were most respected. His son came a good distance
behind the king, with a similar number of attendants, and the same with a
brother of the king, except that the brother went on foot, supported
under the arms by two honored attendants. This brother came to the ship
after the king, and the Admiral presented him with some of the things
used for barter. It was then that the Admiral learnt that a king was
called Cacique in their language. This day little gold was got by barter,
but the Admiral heard from an old man that there were many neighboring
islands, at a distance of a hundred leagues or more, as he understood, in
which much gold is found; and there is even one island that was all gold.
In the others there was so much that it was said they gather it with
sieves, and they fuse it and make bars, and work it in a thousand ways.
They explained the work by signs. This old man pointed out to the Admiral
the direction and position, and he determined to go there, saying that if
the old man had not been a principal councillor of the king he would
detain him, and make him go, too; or if he knew the language he would ask
him, and he believed, as the old man was friendly with him and the other
Christians, that he would go of his own accord. But as these people were
now subjects of the King of Castile, and it would not be right to injure
them, he decided upon leaving him. The Admiral set up a very large cross
in the centre of the square of that village, the Indians giving much
help; they made prayers and worshipped it, and, from the feeling they
show, the Admiral trusted in our Lord that all the people of those
islands would become Christians.


_Wednesday, 19th of December_

This night the Admiral got under way to leave the gulf formed between the
islands of Tortuga and Espanola, but at dawn of day a breeze sprang up
from the east, against which he was unable to get clear of the strait
between the two islands during the whole day. At night he was unable to
reach a port which was in sight.[187-1] He made out four points of land,
and a great bay with a river, and beyond he saw a large bay,[187-2] where
there was a village, with a valley behind it among high mountains covered
with trees, which appeared to be pines. Over the Two Brothers there is a
very high mountain-range running N.E. and S.W., and E.S.E. from the Cabo
de Torres is a small island to which the Admiral gave the name of Santo
Tomas, because to-morrow was his vigil. The whole circuit of this island
alternates with capes and excellent harbors, so far as could be judged
from the sea. Before coming to the island on the west side, there is a
cape which runs far into the sea, in part high, the rest low; and for
this reason the Admiral named it Cabo Alto y Bajo.[188-1] From the
road[188-2] of Torres East by South 60 miles, there is a mountain higher
than any that reaches the sea,[188-3] and from a distance it looks like
an island, owing to a depression on the land side. It was named Monte
Caribata, because that province was called Caribata. It is very
beautiful, and covered with green trees, without snow or clouds. The
weather was then, as regards the air and temperature, like March in
Castile, and as regards vegetation, like May. The nights lasted 14
hours.[188-4]


_Thursday, 20th of December_

At sunrise they entered a port between the island of Santo Tomas and the
Cabo de Carabata,[188-5] and anchored. This port is very beautiful, and
would hold all the ships in Christendom. The entrance appears impossible
from the sea to those who have never entered, owing to some reefs of
rocks which run from the mountainous cape almost to the island. They are
not placed in a row, but one here, another there, some towards the sea,
others near the land. It is therefore necessary to keep a good look-out
for the entrances, which are wide and with a depth of 7 fathoms, so that
they can be used without fear. Inside the reefs there is a depth of 12
fathoms. A ship can lie with a cable made fast, against any wind that
blows. At the entrance of this port there is a channel on the west side
of a sandy islet with 7 fathoms, and many trees on its shore. But there
are many sunken rocks in that direction, and a look-out should be kept up
until the port is reached. Afterwards there is no need to fear the
greatest storm in the world. From this port a very beautiful cultivated
valley is in sight, descending from the S.E., surrounded by such lofty
mountains that they appear to reach the sky, and covered with green
trees. Without doubt there are mountains here which are higher than the
island of Tenerife, in the Canaries, which is held to be the highest yet
known.[189-1] On this side of the island of Santo Tomas, at a distance of
a league, there is another islet, and beyond it another, forming
wonderful harbors; though a good look-out must be kept for sunken rocks.
The Admiral also saw villages, and smoke made by them.


_Friday, 21st of December_

To-day the Admiral went with the ship's boats to examine this port, which
he found to be such that it could not be equalled by any he had yet seen;
but, having praised the others so much, he knew not how to express
himself, fearing that he will be looked upon as one who goes beyond the
truth. He therefore contents himself with saying that he had old sailors
with him who say the same. All the praises he has bestowed on the other
ports are true, and that this is better than any of them is equally true.
He further says: "I have traversed the sea for 23 years,[189-2] without
leaving it for any time worth counting, and I saw all the east and the
west, going on the route of the north, which is England, and I have been
to Guinea, but in all those parts there will not be found the perfection
of harbors ...[189-3] always found ...[189-4] better than another, that
I, with good care, saw written; and I again affirm it was well written,
that this one is better than all others, and will hold all the ships of
the world, secured with the oldest cables."[190-1] From the entrance to
the end is a distance of five leagues.[190-2] The Admiral saw some very
well cultivated lands, although they are all so, and he sent two of the
boat's crew to the top of a hill to see if any village was near, for none
could be seen from the sea. At about ten o'clock that night, certain
Indians came in a canoe to see the Admiral and the Christians, and they
were given presents, with which they were much pleased. The two men
returned, and reported that they had seen a very large village at a short
distance from the sea.[190-3] The Admiral ordered the boat to row towards
the place where the village was until they came near the land, when he
saw two Indians, who came to the shore apparently in a state of fear. So
he ordered the boats to stop, and the Indians that were with the Admiral
were told to assure the two natives that no harm whatever was intended to
them. Then they came nearer the sea, and the Admiral nearer the land. As
soon as the natives had got rid of their fear, so many came that they
covered the ground, with women and children, giving a thousand thanks.
They ran hither and thither to bring us bread made of _niames_, which
they call _ajes_, which is very white and good, and water in calabashes,
and in earthen jars made like those of Spain, and everything else they
had and that they thought the Admiral could want, and all so willingly
and cheerfully that it was wonderful. "It cannot be said that, because
what they gave was worth little, therefore they gave liberally, because
those who had pieces of gold gave as freely as those who had a calabash
of water; and it is easy to know when a thing is given with a hearty
desire to give." These are the Admiral's words. "These people have no
spears nor any other arms, nor have any of the inhabitants of the whole
island, which I believe to be very large. They go naked as when their
mothers bore them, both men and women. In Juana and the other islands the
women wear a small clout of cotton in front, with which to cover their
private parts, as large as the flap of a man's breeches, especially after
they have passed the age of twelve years, but here neither old nor young
do so. Also, the men in the other islands jealously hide their women from
the Christians, but here they do not." The women have very beautiful
bodies, and they were the first to come and give thanks to Heaven, and to
bring what they had, especially things to eat, such as bread of _ajes_,
nuts,[191-1] and four or five kinds of fruits, some of which the Admiral
ordered to be preserved, to be taken to the Sovereigns. He says that the
women did not do less in other ports before they were hidden; and he
always gave orders that none of his people should annoy them; that
nothing should be taken against their wills, and that everything that was
taken should be paid for. Finally, he says that no one could believe that
there could be such good-hearted people, so free to give, anxious to let
the Christians have all they wanted, and, when visitors arrived, running
to bring everything to them.

Afterwards the Admiral sent six Christians to the village to see what it
was like, and the natives showed them all the honor they could devise,
and gave them all they had; for no doubt was any longer entertained that
the Admiral and all his people had come from Heaven; and the same was
believed by the Indians who were brought from the other islands, although
they had now been told what they ought to think. When the six Christians
had gone, some _canoas_ came with people to ask the Admiral to come to
their village when he left the place where he was. _Canoa_ is a boat in
which they navigate, some large and others small. Seeing that this
village of the chief was on the road, and that many people were waiting
there for him, the Admiral went there; but, before he could depart, an
enormous crowd came to the shore, men, women, and children, crying out
to him not to go, but to stay with them. The messengers from the other
chief, who had come to invite him, were waiting with their canoes, that
he might not go away, but come to see their chief, and so he did. On
arriving where the chief was waiting for him with many things to eat, he
ordered that all the people should sit down, and that the food should be
taken to the boats, where the Admiral was, on the sea-shore. When he saw
that the Admiral had received what he sent, all or most of the Indians
ran to the village, which was near, to bring more food, parrots, and
other things they had, with such frankness of heart that it was
marvellous. The Admiral gave them glass beads, brass trinkets, and bells:
not because they asked for anything in return, but because it seemed
right, and, above all, because he now looked upon them as future
Christians, and subjects of the Sovereigns, as much as the people of
Castile. He further says that they want nothing except to know the
language and be under governance; for all they may be told to do will be
done without any contradiction. The Admiral left this place to go to the
ships, and the people, men, women, and children, cried out to him not to
go, but remain with them. After the boats departed, several canoes full
of people followed after them to the ship, who were received with much
honor, and given to eat. There had also come before another chief from
the west, and many people even came swimming, the ship being over a good
half-league from the shore. I sent certain persons to the chief, who had
gone back, to ask him about these islands. He received them very well,
and took them to his village, to give them some large pieces of gold.
They arrived at a large river, which the Indians crossed by swimming. The
Christians were unable, so they turned back. In all this district there
are very high mountains which seem to reach the sky, so that the mountain
in the island of Tenerife appears as nothing in height and beauty, and
they are all green with trees. Between them there are very delicious
valleys, and at the end of this port, to the south, there is a valley so
large that the end of it is not visible, though no mountains intervene, so
that it seems to be 15 or 20 leagues long. A river flows through it, and
it is all inhabited and cultivated, and as green as Castile in May or
June; but the night contains 14 hours, the land being so far north. This
port is very good for all the winds that can blow, being enclosed and
deep, and the shores peopled by a good and gentle race without arms or
evil designs. Any ship may lie within it without fear that other ships
will enter at night to attack her, because, although the entrance is over
two leagues wide, it is protected by reefs of rocks which are barely
awash; and there is only a very narrow channel through the reef, which
looks as if it had been artificially made, leaving an open door by which
ships may enter. In the entrance there are 7 fathoms of depth up to the
shore of a small flat island, which has a beach fringed with trees. The
entrance is on the west side, and a ship can come without fear until she
is close to the rock. On the N.W. side there are three islands, and a
great river a league from the cape on one side of the port. It is the
best harbor in the world, and the Admiral gave it the name of Puerto de
la Mar de Santo Tomas, because to-day it was that Saint's day. The
Admiral called it a sea, owing to its size.


_Saturday, 22nd of December_

At dawn the Admiral made sail to shape a course in search of the
islands which the Indians had told him contained much gold, some of
them having more gold than earth. But the weather was not favorable,
so he anchored again, and sent away the boat to fish with a net. The
lord of that land,[193-1] who had a place near there, sent a large
canoe full of people, including one of his principal attendants, to
invite the Admiral to come with the ships to his land, where he would
give him all he wanted. The chief sent, by this servant, a girdle
which, instead of a purse,[194-1] had attached to it a mask with two
large ears made of beaten gold, the tongue, and the nose. These people
are very open-hearted, and whatever they are asked for they give most
willingly; while, when they themselves ask for anything, they do so as
if receiving a great favor. So says the Admiral. They brought the
canoe alongside the boat, and gave the girdle to a boy; then they came
on board with their mission. It took a good part of the day before
they could be understood. Not even the Indians who were on board
understood them well, because they have some differences of words for
the names of things. At last their invitation was understood by signs.
The Admiral determined to start to-morrow, although he did not usually
sail on a Sunday, owing to a devout feeling, and not on account of any
superstition whatever. But in the hope that these people would become
Christians through the willingness they show, and that they will be
subjects of the Sovereigns of Castile, and because he now holds them
to be so, and that they may serve with love, he wished and endeavored
to please them. Before leaving, to-day, the Admiral sent six men to a
large village three leagues to the westward, because the chief had
come the day before and said that he had some pieces of gold. When the
Christians arrived, the secretary of the Admiral, who was one of them,
took the chief by the hand. The Admiral had sent him, to prevent the
others from imposing upon the Indians. As the Indians are so simple,
and the Spaniards so avaricious and grasping, it does not suffice that
the Indians should give them all they want in exchange for a bead or a
bit of glass, but the Spaniards would take everything without any
return at all. The Admiral always prohibits this, although, with the
exception of gold, the things given by the Indians are of little
value. But the Admiral, seeing the simplicity of the Indians, and
that they will give a piece of gold in exchange for six beads, gave
the order that nothing should be received from them unless something
had been given in exchange. Thus the chief took the secretary by the
hand and led him to his house, followed by the whole village, which
was very large. He made his guests eat, and the Indians brought them
many cotton fabrics, and spun-cotton in skeins. In the afternoon the
chief gave them three very fat geese and some small pieces of gold. A
great number of people went back with them, carrying all the things
they had got by barter, and they also carried the Spaniards themselves
across streams and muddy places. The Admiral ordered some things to be
given to the chief, and both he and his people were very well
satisfied, truly believing that the Christians had come from Heaven,
so that they considered themselves fortunate in beholding them. On
this day more than 120 canoes came to the ships, all full of people,
and all bringing something, especially their bread and fish, and fresh
water in earthen jars. They also brought seeds of good kinds, and
there was a grain which they put into a porringer of water and drank
it. The Indians who were on board said that this was very wholesome.


_Sunday, 23rd of December_

The Admiral could not go with the ships to that land whither he had been
invited by the chief, because there was no wind. But he sent, with the
three messengers who were waiting for the boats, some people, including
the secretary. While they were gone, he sent two of the Indians he had on
board with him to the villages which were near the anchorage. They
returned to the ship with a chief, who brought the news that there was a
great quantity of gold in that island of Espanola, and that people from
other parts came to buy it. They said that here the Admiral would find as
much as he wanted. Others came, who confirmed the statement that there
was much gold in the island, and explained the way it was collected. The
Admiral understood all this with much difficulty; nevertheless, he
concluded that there was a very great quantity in those parts, and that,
if he could find the place whence it was got, there would be abundance;
and, if not, there would be nothing. He believed there must be a great
deal, because during the three days that he had been in that port, he had
got several pieces of gold, and he could not believe that it was brought
from another land. "Our Lord, who holds all things in his hands, look
upon me, and grant what shall be for his service." These are the
Admiral's words. He says that, according to his reckoning, a thousand
people had visited the ship, all of them bringing something. Before they
come alongside, at a distance of a crossbow-shot, they stand up in the
canoe with what they bring in their hands, crying out, "Take it! take
it!" He also reckoned that 500 came to the ship swimming, because they
had no canoes, the ship being near a league from the shore. Among the
visitors, five chiefs had come, sons of chiefs, with all their families
of wives and children, to see the Christians. The Admiral ordered
something to be given to all, because such gifts were all well employed.
"May our Lord favor me by his clemency, that I may find this gold, I mean
the mine of gold, which I hold to be here, many saying that they know
it." These are his words. The boats arrived at night, and said that there
was a grand road as far as they went, and they found many canoes, with
people who went to see the Admiral and the Christians, at the mountain of
Caribatan. They held it for certain that, if the Christmas festival was
kept in that port,[196-1] all the people of the island would come, which
they calculated to be larger than England.[196-2] All the people went
with them to the village,[196-3] which they said was the largest, and the
best laid out with streets, of any they had seen. The Admiral says it is
part of the Punta Santa,[196-4] almost three leagues S.E. The canoes go
very fast with paddles; so they went ahead to apprise the _Cacique_, as
they call the chief. Up to that time the Admiral had not been able to
understand whether Cacique meant king or governor. They also have another
name for a great man--_Nitayno_;[197-1] but it was not clear whether they
used it for lord, or governor, or judge. At last the cacique came to
them, and joined them in the square, which was clean-swept, as was all
the village. The population numbered over 2,000 men. This king did great
honor to the people from the ship, and every inhabitant brought them
something to eat and drink. Afterwards the king gave each of them cotton
cloths such as women wear, with parrots for the Admiral, and some pieces
of gold. The people also gave cloths and other things from their houses
to the sailors; and as for the trifles they got in return, they seemed to
look upon them as relics. When they wanted to return in the afternoon, he
asked them to stay until the next day, and all the people did the same.
When they saw that the Spaniards were determined to go, they accompanied
them most of the way, carrying the gifts of the cacique on their backs as
far as the boats, which had been left at the mouth of the river.


_Monday, 24th of December_

Before sunrise the Admiral got under way with the land-breeze. Among the
numerous Indians who had come to the ship yesterday, and had made signs
that there was gold in the island, naming the places whence it was
collected, the Admiral noticed one who seemed more fully informed, or who
spoke with more willingness, so he asked him to come with the Christians
and show them the position of the gold mines. This Indian has a companion
or relation with him, and among other places they mentioned where gold
was found, they named Cipango, which they called Civao.[197-2] Here they
said that there was a great quantity of gold, and that the cacique
carried banners of beaten gold. But they added that it was very far off
to the eastward.

Here the Admiral addresses the following words to the Sovereigns: "Your
Highnesses may believe that there is no better nor gentler people in the
world. Your Highnesses ought to rejoice that they will soon become
Christians, and that they will be taught the good customs of your
kingdom. A better race there cannot be, and both the people and the lands
are in such quantity that I know not how to write it. I have spoken in
the superlative degree of the country and people of Juana which they call
Cuba, but there is as much difference between them and this island and
people as between day and night. I believe that no one who should see
them could say less than I have said, and I repeat that the things and
the great villages of this island of Espanola, which they call Bohio, are
wonderful. All here have a loving manner and gentle speech, unlike the
others, who seem to be menacing when they speak. Both men and women are
of good stature, and not black. It is true that they all paint, some with
black, others with other colors, but most with red. I know that they are
tanned by the sun, but this does not affect them much. Their houses and
villages are pretty, each with a chief, who acts as their judge, and who
is obeyed by them. All these lords use few words, and have excellent
manners. Most of their orders are given by a sign with the hand, which is
understood with surprising quickness." All these are the words of the
Admiral.

