
"Unless I remit the sentence.  The young man, you understand, was
placed under my care."

"My lord, you will pardon him?"

"With pleasure.  Nay, I will restore him to you this very night--"

Captain Barker leapt up from his seat in a transport of gratitude,
and would have caught the Earl's hand had not his friend dragged him
back by the coat-tails.

"--On conditions," his lordship concluded.

"Name them."

"In a moment.  We are agreed, I believe, that to blacken a Dutchman's
eyes is no great sin.  There are too many Dutchmen around his
Majesty--as you, sirs, had the courage to inform his Majesty this
afternoon."

"Did we say that?"

"I understood you to hint it, at any rate.  I assure you that I am
never so much disposed to regret my change of allegiance on that
November night at Salisbury as when I look around and see how little
my own countrymen have profited by that action."

"A while ago," interposed Captain Runacles sharply, "it was the crime
itself that pursued you with remorse."

"The results, sir, have helped me to see the crime in its proper
light."

"My lord, I have the deepest respect for your genius; but at the same
time it appears to me that you lack something."

"Indeed? It would be a kindness to point out in what respect--"

"Let me call it--a gift.  But I interrupt you."

"To proceed, then.  We are at one on the question of these Dutchmen;
at one also on the question of William's high-handed action this
afternoon.  Let me propose a plan by which you can effectively mark
your disgust of both, while at the same time you recover the young
man on whom you set so much store.  Gentlemen, you are not past
serving your country on the seas."

"King William hinted as much to-day,"  replied Captain Barker, "and I
gave him my answer."

"I appeal to you not in the name of William, but in the name of your
true sovereign, King James."

"That is another matter, I'll admit.  Would you mind putting the
question definitely?"

"I must have your word to regard what I am about to say as a secret."

"If it does not bind us in any way."

"It does not.  You are free to accept or reject my offer."

"We promise, then."

"Listen: I am in a position to offer each of you the command of one
of his Majesty's ships."

"As a condition of getting back Tristram tonight?"

The Earl nodded.

"But excuse me--"

"Ah, I know what you will say.  It is a sacrifice of your leisure.
I admit it; but from certain expressions of yours this afternoon I
gathered that your love for this lad might overcome your natural
disinclination."

"You mistake.  I was about to say that this offer of yours strikes us
as rather barren.  At least it might have been kept until King James
is restored to his country.  In that event he may very well prefer to
give his commands to younger men; but in any event he will find us
obedient to his royal wish."

"That is a very loyal attitude.  But, as it happens, you would be
required to enter into your commands before his Majesty's
restoration."

"Explain yourself, my lord."

"I am not in a position to speak with authority or exactness
of the events which will shortly take place in the British fleet.
I am a mere soldier, you understand.  But let us suppose a case.
King William sails early to-morrow, with Rear-Admiral Rooke's
squadron, for the Maese.  Let us suppose that no sooner is his
Majesty landed at The Hague and safe in his own beloved realm than
our gallant English sailors display a just distaste for their Dutch
commanders by setting those commanders ashore, and running--let us
say--for Calais, where their true Sovereign waits to be conveyed
across to the country which his rival has quitted.  Obviously, for
this purpose, the fleet would need, on the spot, capable officers to
step into the shoes of the deposed Dutchmen."

"You propose that Jack and I shall be two of these officers?" asked
Captain Runacles slowly, with a glance at his comrade.

"I think it advisable that you should be at The Hague.  You
understand that I merely sketch out a possible course of events."

"Of course.  Do you think it likely that the British squadron--
supposing it to behave as you say--would receive support at Calais?"

"I fancy it might find a large squadron of his French Majesty's fleet
waiting there to co-operate."

"And the army?"

"It is possible that events might happen, about that time, among our
regiments in Flanders."

"That, in other words, they would desert to King Lewis?"

"You put it crudely, Captain Runacles.  I believe that our gallant
soldiers will act with a single eye to their country's welfare; and I
am sure they will do nothing that can be constructed as a blot upon
their country's flag."

"I also am tolerably certain of that, my lord," answered Captain
Jemmy drily.  "Come, Jack--your answer?"

The little hunchback had been leaning back, during the last minute or
two, with his face in the shadow; but at these words he bent forward.
His cheeks were white and drawn.

"Why must I give the answer, Jemmy?"

"Because the lad is your son.  It rests with you to save him or not."

Captain Barker stood up.

"You'll abide by my decision?"

"Certainly." Captain Runacles crossed his legs and eyed the visitor
deliberately.

"Then," said the little man, dragging out the words syllable by
syllable, "there, my lord, are your hat and cloak.  Oblige me by
quitting this house of mine at once."

"God bless you, Jack!" muttered his friend.  The Earl's brow did not
even flush at the rebuff.  Throughout his career this extraordinary
man was able to overlook the contempt of others as easily as he
disregarded their sufferings.  Probably, as Captain Runacles had
said, he lacked a gift.

On this occasion he picked up his hat and cloak without a trace of
discomposure.

"I understand you to refuse my offer?" he said.

"Yes."

"You prefer that the young man should receive six dozen lashes
to-morrow morning."

Captain Barker winced and his mouth contracted painfully.

"My lord, I took that boy from his dead mother when he was a few
hours old.  Never in his life has a hand been laid upon him in anger.
He will hardly understand what it means.  But he has been taught to
know honour and to cherish it.  I choose as he would choose, were he
here."

"Are you going, my lord?" added Captain Jemmy.  "You have your
answer."

"Not quite yet, I fancy.  Captain Barker, you told me you took this
lad from his dead mother.  She was a Mistress Salt, I believe."

"Excuse me if I fail to see--"

"You will see in a moment.  I am not wrong, perhaps, in supposing
that lady to have been the wife of Roderick Salt, sometime my comrade
in the Foot Guards.  He married in Harwich, I remember; and in many
respects the resemblance which this lad bears to him is remarkable."

"There is no likeness in their characters, my lord."

"I daresay not; indeed, I hope not.  But suppose now I inform you
that Roderick Salt is still alive--"

The Earl broke off and looked at the two captains narrowly.

"Did you know that?" he asked.

There was no answer.

"I seem to remember an expression which you, Captain Runacles, let
fall this afternoon.  You told his Majesty that Tristram Salt owned
large estates.  Is the boy's father aware of this?"

Again he paused for an answer, but none came.

"These estates are administered under trust, I presume.  Who are the
legal trustees?"

"I am,"  Captain Jemmy replied, with a sudden effort.

"You alone?"

Captain Jemmy, after struggling for a moment with the wrath in his
throat, answered:

"I refuse to say."

"Well, well, the affair seems to need some explanation, but doubtless
admits of a very good one.  It is none of my business, and I do not
ask you to satisfy me.  But I cannot help thinking that Roderick Salt
will be hardly more astonished to find that his son is a man of large
estates than disposed to make inquiries."

"What do you mean, my lord?"

"I mean that, as father and son happen at this moment to lie aboard
the same vessel, the _Good Intent_--"

The chair which Captain Barker had been grasping and tilting
impatiently fell to the floor with a crash.

"--I foresee a scene of happy recognition and mutual explanations.
We will suppose the father to learn the truth before to-morrow's
punishment is inflicted.  We will picture his feelings"--the Earl
paused, and fired a shot more or less at a venture--"when he becomes
aware that, though by law enabled to buy his son off from military
service, he has by chicanery been rendered powerless.  We will
imagine him an enforced spectator, wincing as each stroke draws
blood."

"You will do this thing! You will tell him!"

"My dear sirs, I shall hate to do it.  In proof that I speak
sincerely, let me say that my offer still remains open.  May I now
count on your accepting it?"

"No!" thundered the little man, springing forward in a fury.
Captain Jemmy caught him by the arm, however, and forced him back to
the arm-chair.  The Earl shrugged his shoulders.

"Truly you are a Roman parent," said he, bowing ironically; "but you
will excuse me if I find it time to seek the lad's natural father.
Remember, if you please, gentlemen, your promise of silence."

He opened the door and passed quietly through the hall and out of the
house.  In the road at the foot of the garden a sergeant stepped out
of the shadow and saluted him.

The Earl gave a muttered order.

"Where is my horse?" he asked.

"A little up the road, my lord.  The orderly is walking him up and
down to keep him warm."

The Earl nodded and walked on.  A hundred yards farther he came up
with them, and, climbing into the saddle, trotted off towards
Harwich, the orderly at his heels.

At the Cock and Pye Stairs a boat was waiting.  He dismounted and,
giving his horse over to the orderly, stepped on board and was rowed
swiftly out towards the harbour, where the lights of the squadron
flickered and its great hulls brooded over the jet-black water.
As the boat crossed under the tilted stern and high, flaming lanterns
of Rear-Admiral Rooke's ship, the _Foresight_, the sentry on deck
sang out his challenge.

It was answered.  The boat dropped alongside and the Earl climbed
upon deck.  Turning at the top of the ladder, he gave his boatman the
order to wait for half an hour, and acknowledging the sentry's
salute, made his way aft, and down the companion-stairs to the cabin
set apart for him.

In the passage below was a second sentry, pacing up and down; and by
the Earl's door an orderly standing ready.

"Send Captain Salt to me.  After that, you may retire."

The man saluted and went off on his errand, and the Earl stepped into
his cabin.  The furniture of this narrow apartment consisted of a
hanging-lamp, a chair or two, a chest heaped with dispatch-boxes and
a swing-table upon which a map of the Low Countries was spread amid
regimental lists and reports, writing materials, works on
fortification, official seals and piles of papers not yet reduced to
order.  Pushing aside the map and a treatise by the Marechal de
Vauban that lay face downwards upon it, the Earl drew a blank sheet
of paper towards him, dipped pen in ink, and after a moment's
consideration scribbled a sentence.  Then, sprinkling it quickly with
sand, he folded the paper, and was about to seal it, when a light tap
sounded on the cabin-door.

"Come in," said the Earl quietly, holding the sealing-wax to the
flame, and without troubling to turn.

