which fire can be applied. A black powder, composed of various
substances, is placed in the tube and pressed up to the end, a wad
of cotton or other material being forced down upon it. A large ball
made of this metal, which is called iron, and almost the same
diameter as the tube, is pushed down upon the wad; and the weapon
is pointed at the enemy, or at the wall to be knocked down. Then
fire is applied to the small hole, the powder at once explodes with
a noise like thunder, and the ball is sent through the air with so
great a speed that the eye cannot follow its flight, and all that
it strikes goes down before it."

"Even one of these captains on his horse?" the king asked.

"Fifty of them, Sire, were they ranged up in line, one behind the
other."

"Will you be able to teach us to make such weapons?"

"Your Majesty, I have had a share in the using of these weapons,
but not in the making of them; and they require great skill in
their manufacture. I know not whether iron stone exists in this
country, and were it found it would require a long experiment and
great knowledge to manufacture a cannon from it. As to the powder,
it is composed of three ingredients--one is charcoal, which can be
obtained wherever trees grow; another is called by us saltpeter;
and the third, sulphur; but I cannot say whether either is found in
this land. Nor, your Majesty, do I think that such knowledge, could
I impart it, would be a blessing to the land; on the contrary, the
battles would be far more terrible and bloody than they now are.
Vast numbers would be slain, and valor and bravery would avail but
little, against these terrible missiles."

"No," the king said, thoughtfully: "you would take few prisoners,
if you fought with such weapons as these. You take some prisoners,
I suppose?"

"Yes, your Majesty; we always take as prisoners those who ask for
mercy."

"And what do you do with them?"

"We treat them honorably and well, as is befitting men who have
fought bravely. We exchange them for men of our own side who have
been taken prisoners by the enemy, or if they are knights or nobles
they pay a ransom according to their rank to their captor, and so
return home."

"That is good," the young king said, with animation; "though it
differs altogether from our usages; but then, how are their altars
of the gods to be served?"

"I believe," Roger said, "that your Majesty's grandfather erected a
temple here to the Unknown God. It is the Unknown God--unknown to
you, but known to us--that the white peoples across the sea
worship. He is a good and gentle and loving God, and would abhor
sacrifices of blood."

The king did not reply for a minute. The introduction of human
sacrifices was a comparatively recent innovation in Tezcuco, and
although the Aztecs had, lately, almost forced their own hideous
rites upon their neighbors, there were many who were still, at
heart, opposed to them. He turned the subject by saying:

"There will be much for you to tell me, when we have leisure. At
present the banquet waits."

The eighteen months that had elapsed, since the wreck of the Swan,
had prepared Roger for taking part in such scenes as those in which
he was, at present, placed. From living so long among natives, and
in native costume, he had acquired something of their manner;
which, unless under strong excitement, was quiet and dignified. He
had done this the more because, whenever he went out, all eyes had
been upon him, and he had felt that it was necessary, so far as he
could, to support the mysterious reputation he possessed. He had
lost, alike, the sailor walk and carriage, the careless gaiety of a
boy, and the roughness of one brought up to life at sea. He himself
was only half conscious of this transformation, but to one who had
seen him last when he sailed from Plymouth, it would have appeared
absolutely marvelous. Undoubtedly it impressed both the king and
his nobles most favorably; and as the party followed the king and
Roger to the banqueting hall, there was a chorus of approval of the
manners, bearing, and appearance of the white stranger.

The banquet was similar, but on a vastly greater scale, to that of
which Roger had partaken at Tepeaca. Mexico contained, within
comparatively narrow limits, extreme diversities of climate; and by
means of the swift couriers, the kings and nobles could place upon
their tables the tropical fruits and vegetables from the zone of
the sea, the temperate fruits from the lofty plateau land, and the
products of the rich and highly cultivated valley of the capital.

The twenty counselors sat down at table with the king. Other tables
were spread at which the principal nobles feasted, while the king's
wife and sister and other ladies dined in the same hall, but had
tables apart. The king abstained from asking questions of Roger
about his country, during the meal, but conversed with him
concerning his journey, and his impressions of the country; and
inquired particularly whether he was perfectly satisfied with the
treatment he had received from the merchants. Roger assured him
that nobody could have been kinder or more courteous than they had
been, and that he hoped his Majesty would express his satisfaction
at their conduct.

"That has already been done," the king said. "The reports of my
envoys were sufficient for that. They have been raised in rank,
have received permission to carry specially decorated banners, with
other privileges and immunities."

After dinner was over, the king, without waiting as usual for the
smoking and entertainments of musicians, dancers, and acrobats,
rose, saying to Roger:

"I am too anxious to talk with you to take pleasure in these
amusements. Come with me now."

He led the way to the entrance to the private apartments. These
were enclosed by magnificent hangings, which were drawn aside by
two attendants as he approached them. The walls were here entirely
hidden by hangings, and the floor covered with a thick carpeting of
richly-dyed cotton stuff. The air was heavy with odors of perfumes.

The king led the way to an apartment of considerable size, although
small in comparison to the two great halls they had left. Couches
of quilted mats, covered with silken embroidery, extended round the
room; and a general air of comfort, as well as luxury, pervaded it.

From the open windows, a view extended over a lovely garden below,
and then across the lake to the walls and temples of Mexico,
shining in the moonlight and dotted with innumerable spots of fire
on the summits of the teocallis. The room itself was lighted with
open lamps, in which burned cotton wicks embedded in wax.

Cacama clapped his hands, and a young noble in attendance entered.
The king bade him summon six of his counselors, and tell the queen
and the princess that he awaited them.

In a short time these entered. The pomp and ceremony of royalty
were, to a considerable extent, laid aside in Tezcuco in the
interior of the palace--the custom there differing much from that
which prevailed at the court of Montezuma, where the emperor never
relaxed, in the slightest, in exacting the lowliest and most
profound homage from all who approached him.



Chapter 9: Life In A Palace.


"Now," the young king exclaimed joyously, as soon as the party he
had invited had assembled, and the silk hangings at the entrance of
the door had been closed: "Now we can talk at our ease. In the
first place, what can I call you?"

"My name is Roger Hawkshaw, your Majesty."

The king repeated the name.

"It is two words," Roger said. "With us, people have two names--the
one which is common to all the family, the other which is given
particularly to each person. The name of my family is Hawkshaw, my
own name is Roger. Your Majesty can call me by either one, or by
both."

Long names were common in Mexico, and Roger Hawkshaw seemed by no
means long to the king.

"Roger Hawkshaw shall be your name in public," he said. "It has a
strange grand sound, and will impress the people; but I will call you
Roger. This is my queen and first wife, Maclutha. This is my sister,
Amenche. These are two of my oldest and ablest counselors--both are
great nobles, and have led the armies of my father to victory. These
four young men are, as you see, my friends--they are the sons of four
of my chief nobles, and have been brought up with me since we were
children. Now, tell us more about yourself and your people."

The whole party took their seats upon the couches, half sitting,
half reclining. Attendants brought in cocoa of many different
flavors, confections, and tobacco. Roger took the cocoa, but
refused the tobacco.

"We do not know this herb in our country," he said.

"That is a grave misfortune for you," the king remarked. "It is
known and used by all peoples that we know of, here. It was used by
the people we found here, when we came from the far north, and all
the tribes there used it also.

"First, tell me what induced you to make this long journey across
the sea."

Roger had been expecting this question, and as he had already
determined that he would, in all matters, adhere to the truth, he
did not hesitate in his reply.

"Your Majesty will understand that all the white peoples who dwell
on the borders of the sea journey much in ships, which is the name
we give to the floating castles. We do trade with many peoples. For
example there is, far to the south of us, a great land wholly
inhabited by people who are quite black."

A general exclamation of astonishment broke from the party.

"They must be frightful!" the young queen exclaimed.

"They are very ugly," Roger said, "with very wide mouths and very
thick lips, and flat noses; and instead of having long soft hair,
they have only a short, curly sort of black wool on the top of
their heads."

"Have you seen them yourself?" asked Cacama, rather gravely.

"I have seen some of them, Sire," Roger replied. "I was in a ship
that was attacked by others, manned by a people who live on the
northern coast of this land, and who are themselves not black but
yellow; and they had with them several of these people of whom I
speak, who were frightful in their ugliness; but who, to do them
justice, fought bravely, though we managed at last to beat them
off.

"I pray your Majesty not to doubt any facts that I may tell you,
for in my country it is considered disgraceful to lie; and however
extraordinary some of the things I may say may appear to you, I can
assure you that they will all be absolutely true. They may seem to
you hard to believe, but you must remember that things which are
strange to us always seem wonderful. My own countrymen, for
example, would find it hard to believe that there could be a people
who took delight in drawing in the smoke of a burning vegetable,
and puffing it out again."

"I will not doubt what you say, in future," Cacama said. "Now,
continue what you were telling us."

"The white people are divided into nations, as are your people on
this side of the water. Some, however, are much more powerful than
others. While in times of peace all the ports of different
countries are open to the ships of the others, there are two
countries that claim the right over great seas, although as yet
untraveled and unknown."

"But how can they claim such a right as that?" one of the two chief
counselors asked.

"Partly by the right that they have been the first to try to make
discoveries in those seas; secondly because one of these countries
is the strongest, at the present time; and thirdly, because they
have been confirmed in their claim by the pope, who is the chief
priest of the religion that is held in common among all white
people. To the Spaniards was assigned that vast space of water
lying towards the setting sun."

"You do not belong to that nation?"

"No. My country is called England. It is a great island divided
into two kingdoms, of which ours is the larger."

"Are your people great fighters?"

"Yes. We have fought many obstinate wars with the nation lying on
the mainland opposite to us, and our men have beaten theirs when
they have outnumbered us many-fold; but at present we are at peace.
We found that, while we could beat them in battle, we could not
continue to hold a country that lay separated from us by the sea."

"And you are friends with the Spaniards also?"

"Yes. We have never warred with Spain, and our king has as his wife
a princess of that country. Trading at Spanish ports, we learned
that there was a rumor among the Spaniards that, far to the west,
lay a great people possessing vast stores of gold, and riches of
all kinds; and so my father, who was the captain of one of these
floating castles, determined to sail across the sea and, in despite
of the Spaniards and their rules, endeavor to perform the adventure
of discovering, if possible, this great nation."

"What would have happened if the Spaniards had met you, as you
passed through their waters?"

"Had they succeeded in taking our ship, they would have killed us
without mercy; but we had a strong crew, and would have matched
ourselves, willingly enough, against any Spanish ship, however big,
that interfered with us."

"And what became of your ship?"

"She struck during a gale on the coast of Tabasco, and was dashed
to pieces. My father and all on board were drowned. But God
protected me, and I was thrown ashore unhurt; it being doubtless
His intention that I should live to be the first white man to see
your great country, and to bring to you the news of the white
peoples beyond the sea."

"You know the story about our god, Quetzalcoatl," the king said,
after a long pause. "We had news that you knew all about him. We
believe that his descendants will return hither, to teach us many
things."

"I am aware of it, Sire."

"But do you know, also, that we of Tezcuco have reason to view the
arrival of the Whites with fear? My father, who was full of
learning and wisdom, predicted when on his deathbed that a white
people would shortly arrive, from the sea, and would overthrow the
Anahuac kingdoms. It is strange, indeed, that within three years of
his death you should appear."

"It is strange," Roger agreed. "Assuredly, your Majesty, your
father's prophecy did not allude to my people. We are a
comparatively small nation, and are not even masters of the whole
of our island. We have not one ship to fifty that the Spaniards
possess, and have no desire for foreign conquests. We are strong if
attacked, and even Spain would find it a hard matter, did she
endeavor to conquer us; but we should not dream of challenging the
rights she exercises over the seas to the west of her. Moreover,
our climate is a cold one, and we should not be able to support,
with comfort, the heat of a country like this. It is not from our
nation that danger can ever approach you."

"But from the Spaniards?" the king asked, gravely.

"I cannot think, Sire, that so great and powerful a nation as yours
has reason to dread conquest by the Spaniards. But they are a
mighty people. They have extended their rule over many peoples, on
the other side of the water; and they have captured many islands
which lie not so very far from your shores."

"How far away?" one of the old counselors asked.

"A vessel with a favoring wind would sail to your coast, thence, in
twelve or fourteen days," Roger replied.

There was a general exclamation of surprise and uneasiness from
Roger's hearers. Many questions were asked him, as to the number of
men the Spaniards could put in the field. His answer somewhat
reassured them.

"Perhaps two thousand would be the utmost they could send from
these islands," he said; "though I know not the strength of their
various garrisons. But from Spain they could, if they chose, send
across the seas in their ships ten times as many."

"We could put over two hundred thousand in the field," the king
said proudly.

Roger was silent.

"You do not think," the king went on after a pause, "that twenty
thousand of these men are to be feared by a host like ours?"

"With equal arms and armor, no, your Majesty; but with the
advantage of their weapons, the fact that they are clad in armor
which your spears and arrows and knives would be powerless to
pierce, and that many of them would be mounted soldiers, whose rush
and impetus in battle it is nigh impossible--even for white
infantry, who have no fear of the horses, and are themselves clad
in armor--to withstand; and that they have, in addition these,
terrible cannon of which I spoke to you, I think that should twenty
thousand of the Spaniards land here, they would be irresistible.

"However, I do not think that there is any chance of such an army
being brought against you. Rich and powerful as Spain is, the
expense of preparing such an expedition, and the ships required to
carry it, would be so vast that I do not think she would undertake
it. Moreover, she is always so occupied with wars at home that she
could not spare such a force for a distant expedition; and I do
not, therefore, think you have any ground for alarm, in the
present.

"I believe that in a very short time Spanish ships may arrive at
your ports, and will open trade with your people. I wonder that
they have not, long since, found their way here. Trade would be
beneficent to both. They have many commodities that would be most
useful to you. You have others that they would prize greatly."

"What are our products they would most value?" the king asked.

"First, and most of all, gold," Roger said. "It is with us the
scarcest and most valuable of metals, and all things are valued by
it. As with you bags of cocoa are your standard of value, so with
them are pieces of gold. A wide estate is worth so much gold; a
ship, or a horse, or a suit of armor, so many pieces of gold; and
so through everything. All your delicate embroidery work would be
valuable in their eyes, as being strange and different to anything
we possess; while on their side they could provide you with silks,
and satins, and velvets, and cloths, and other fabrics new to you;
to say nothing of arms and iron work vastly superior to any you
possess."

One of the old counselors whispered something in the king's ear,
and the latter said to the queen:

"Maclutha, I would talk these matters over with my counselors. I am
sure that you and my sister are longing to hear, from Roger
Hawkshaw, all about the ladies of his race, and their dresses and
fashions. Take him, therefore, into your room, while we discuss
this matter here."

The two ladies and Roger thereupon went into another apartment,
similar in style to that which they had left. The conversation here
took a light turn, unrestrained by the presence of the king and his
counselors. They plied him with questions, which Roger answered to
the best of his power. He was soon furnished with paper, pens,
brushes, and paint; and he drew them several sketches, showing
ladies in European fashions, which filled his companions with
surprise. It seemed to them impossible that a woman could move with
ease and comfort in so much clothing. Then he drew for them a noble
in the court dress of the period, and also the figure of a knight
in full armor.

The last astonished them most of all. How could a man move and
breathe, thus enclosed in metal? Roger admitted that, in a hot
climate like that of Mexico, the heat would be terrible. But he
pointed out that men so clad were carried on horses, and had no
occasion for movement; save of their arms, which, as there were
joints in the armor at the shoulder, could be moved in any way with
freedom.

"There cannot be much bravery required to fight, when protected in
this way by metal," the queen said.

"Numbers are killed, nevertheless," Roger replied. "The armor,
strong as it is, will not resist the missiles fired from cannon;
and the helmets--that is, the part that protects the head--can be
beaten in by blows with heavy maces. Moreover, when two parties
similarly armed charge, the shock is so terrible that horses and
riders are alike thrown to the ground, and when thrown down they
may be trampled to death by the horses, or killed by footmen before
they can recover their feet. Still, there are many who think that
some day armor will be given up altogether; for the guns are being
improved constantly, and when the balls sent by those carried by
footmen are able to pierce any armor, it will no longer be any
protection, whatever."

"And these ladies of yours," the Princess Amenche asked; "are they
very pretty? Because these matters are more to our taste than these
ugly arms."

"They differ much from each other, just as they do here," Roger
said. "Some are homely, and others are pretty."

"Are their eyes always blue, and their hair of a bright color, like
yours?"

"Oh no! There is a great difference. Some have hair almost as light
as flax; some almost as dark as yours, but not quite so dark. Some
have hair almost exactly the color of gold; some a red, like the
fringe of your garments; then there are many shades of brown,
between red and black. The eyes vary in the same way. People with
light hair, and golden, and red, have either gray or blue eyes.
Those with brown hair of different shades have brown eyes,
sometimes light and sometimes dark brown."

"How strange it must be," the girl laughed, "to see people with
hair of so many colors! And which do you like best, Roger
Hawkshaw?"

"At the present moment, Princess, I cannot imagine any color more
beautiful than a deep, glossy black."

The girl colored through her hazel skin.

"Ah, you know how to flatter in your country, also!"

Roger was about to reply, when a message was brought from the king,
desiring them to return to the next room.

"We have been taking all these things that you have told us into
grave consideration," the king said, when they were seated; "and
have concluded that it will be for the best that this matter of
these Spaniards should remain an absolute secret, and that no word
shall be spoken to a single person, however dear, by any of those
who have heard it. The country has long been in a disturbed state,
and constant expeditions are necessary, for ourselves and for
Mexico, to suppress risings, and put down outbreaks of discontent.
Were the news to be whispered about that there is a strange,
terrible white people within but a short distance of our shores,
the result would be disastrous.

"Men's minds would become unsettled, their ordinary employment
would be neglected, all sorts of dismal forebodings would seize
them, the very worship of the gods might be affected; and instead
of being able, should the time of danger ever come, to meet our
invaders boldly and fearlessly, they would find us disorganized and
disheartened, and our power of resistance greatly diminished.

"You, Roger Hawkshaw, have told us everything with frankness. We
feel that every word you have spoken is true, and that you have a
real feeling of friendliness towards us, and that your sympathies
are with us, rather than with the people of this other white
nation. But others would not see it so. Even as it is, there is
sure to be a party against you. Were it known that a nation,
possibly hostile, of your color were but a short distance away,
nothing could save you. You would be sacrificed at once to the
gods. Therefore as, for the sake of the nation, we have decided
that what you have told us shall remain a profound secret to
ourselves; so, for your own sake, we pray you henceforth to say
nothing to any of what you have told us. Let men think what they
like as to how you have reached our shores. Preserve a sort of
mystery as to yourself. There is no reason why you should not
speak, but even then guardedly, of the wonders of the land
inhabited by white men many months' sail across the seas; but it
were best that as little should be said as possible.

"Montezuma is sure to wish to see you, but before you visit him, we
will again take counsel together."

"I will, to the best of my power, carry out your Majesty's orders,"
Roger said. "I fully recognize their wisdom. Indeed, neither at
Tabasco nor upon the journey, either to the merchants or to your
envoys, have I said a word respecting the Spaniards; but I thought
that it was but right that you should know the truth of the matter,
especially when you told me of the prediction of your royal father.
In future, when I am asked questions, I can always fall back upon
silence and reply, truly, 'I am forbidden to tell this.'"

"That will do excellently," the king said. "There is but one point
connected with you now that puzzles us--a point which, before you
came, confirmed us in the belief that there was something
supernatural in your character: How is it that you have come to
understand and speak our tongue?"

Roger smiled.

"To anyone else, your Majesty, I should have replied, 'I am
forbidden to answer that question;' but I wish not to have any
mystery with you. During the time I was at Tabasco I was waited
upon by a Mexican slave girl, who taught me her tongue."

The king burst into a hearty laugh, in which even the grave
counselors joined, at this simple solution at what had appeared to
them so strange a mystery.

"Cuitcatl," the king said to one of the young nobles, "I hand over
Roger Hawkshaw to your charge. You see you need not be afraid of
