I fling myself back into the miseries of life. Farewell, monsieur, may
you be happy; farewell."

She made a sign to Captain Merle, who was just then reaching the brow
of the hill behind her. The marquis was taken unawares by her sudden
action.

"Stop!" he cried, in a tone of despair that was well acted.

This singular caprice of a girl for whom he would at that instant have
thrown away his life so surprised him that he invented, on the spur of
the moment, a fatal fiction by which to hide his name and satisfy the
curiosity of his companion.

"You have almost guessed the truth," he said. "I am an _emigre_,
condemned to death, and my name is Vicomte de Bauvan. Love of my country
has brought me back to France to join my brother. I hope to be taken off
the list of _emigres_ through the influence of Madame de Beauharnais,
now the wife of the First Consul; but if I fail in this, I mean to die
on the soil of my native land, fighting beside my friend Montauran. I am
now on my way secretly, by means of a passport he has sent me, to learn
if any of my property in Brittany is still unconfiscated."

While the young man spoke Mademoiselle de Verneuil examined him with
a penetrating eye. She tried at first to doubt his words, but being
by nature confiding and trustful, she slowly regained an expression
of serenity, and said eagerly, "Monsieur, are you telling me the exact
truth?"

"Yes, the exact truth," replied the young man, who seemed to have no
conscience in his dealings with women.

Mademoiselle de Verneuil gave a deep sigh, like a person who returns to
life.

"Ah!" she exclaimed, "I am very happy."

"Then you hate that poor Montauran?"

"No," she said; "but I could not make you understand my meaning. I was
not willing that _you_ should meet the dangers from which I will try to
protect him,--since he is your friend."

"Who told you that Montauran was in danger?"

"Ah, monsieur, even if I had not come from Paris, where his enterprise
is the one thing talked of, the commandant at Alencon said enough to
show his danger."

"Then let me ask you how you expect to save him from it."

"Suppose I do not choose to answer," she replied, with the haughty air
that women often assume to hide an emotion. "What right have you to know
my secrets?"

"The right of a man who loves you."

"Already?" she said. "No, you do not love me. I am only an object of
passing gallantry to you,--that is all. I am clear-sighted; did I not
penetrate your disguise at once? A woman who knows anything of
good society could not be misled, in these days, by a pupil of the
Polytechnique who uses choice language, and conceals as little as you do
the manners of a _grand seigneur_ under the mask of a Republican. There
is a trifle of powder left in your hair, and a fragrance of nobility
clings to you which a woman of the world cannot fail to detect.
Therefore, fearing that the man whom you saw accompanying me, who has
all the shrewdness of a woman, might make the same discovery, I sent him
away. Monsieur, let me tell you that a true Republican officer just from
the Polytechnique would not have made love to me as you have done, and
would not have taken me for a pretty adventuress. Allow me, Monsieur de
Bauvan, to preach you a little sermon from a woman's point of view. Are
you too juvenile to know that of all the creatures of my sex the most
difficult to subdue is that same adventuress,--she whose price is
ticketed and who is weary of pleasure. That sort of woman requires, they
tell me, constant seduction; she yields only to her own caprices; any
attempt to please her argues, I should suppose, great conceit on the
part of a man. But let us put aside that class of women, among whom you
have been good enough to rank me; you ought to understand that a young
woman, handsome, brilliant, and of noble birth (for, I suppose, you will
grant me those advantages), does not sell herself, and can only be won
by the man who loves her in one way. You understand me? If she loves
him and is willing to commit a folly, she must be justified by great and
heroic reasons. Forgive me this logic, rare in my sex; but for the sake
of your happiness,--and my own," she added, dropping her head,--"I will
not allow either of us to deceive the other, nor will I permit you to
think that Mademoiselle de Verneuil, angel or devil, maid or wife, is
capable of being seduced by commonplace gallantry."

"Mademoiselle," said the marquis, whose surprise, though he concealed
it, was extreme, and who at once became a man of the great world, "I
entreat you to believe that I take you to be a very noble person, full
of the highest sentiments, or--a charming girl, as you please."

"I don't ask all that," she said, laughing. "Allow me to keep my
incognito. My mask is better than yours, and it pleases me to wear
it,--if only to discover whether those who talk to me of love are
sincere. Therefore, beware of me! Monsieur," she cried, catching his arm
vehemently, "listen to me; if you were able to prove that your love is
true, nothing, no human power, could part us. Yes, I would fain
unite myself to the noble destiny of some great man, and marry a
vast ambition, glorious hopes! Noble hearts are never faithless,
for constancy is in their fibre; I should be forever loved, forever
happy,--I would make my body a stepping-stone by which to raise the man
who loved me; I would sacrifice all things to him, bear all things from
him, and love him forever,--even if he ceased to love me. I have never
before dared to confess to another heart the secrets of mine, nor the
passionate enthusiasms which exhaust me; but I tell you something of
them now because, as soon as I have seen you in safety, we shall part
forever."

"Part? never!" he cried, electrified by the tones of that vigorous soul
which seemed to be fighting against some overwhelming thought.

"Are you free?" she said, with a haughty glance which subdued him.

"Free! yes, except for the sentence of death which hangs over me."

She added presently, in a voice full of bitter feeling: "If all this
were not a dream, a glorious life might indeed be ours. But I have been
talking folly; let us beware of committing any. When I think of all you
would have to be before you could rate me at my proper value I doubt
everything--"

"I doubt nothing if you will only grant me--"

"Hush!" she cried, hearing a note of true passion in his voice, "the
open air is decidedly disagreeing with us; let us return to the coach."

That vehicle soon came up; they took their places and drove on several
miles in total silence. Both had matter for reflection, but henceforth
their eyes no longer feared to meet. Each now seemed to have an equal
interest in observing the other, and in mutually hiding important
secrets; but for all that they were drawn together by one and the
same impulse, which now, as a result of this interview, assumed the
dimensions of a passion. They recognized in each other qualities which
promised to heighten all the pleasures to be derived from either
their contest or their union. Perhaps both of them, living a life of
adventure, had reached the singular moral condition in which, either
from weariness or in defiance of fate, the mind rejects serious
reflection and flings itself on chance in pursuing an enterprise
precisely because the issues of chance are unknown, and the interest of
expecting them vivid. The moral nature, like the physical nature, has
its abysses into which strong souls love to plunge, risking their future
as gamblers risk their fortune. Mademoiselle de Verneuil and the young
marquis had obtained a revelation of each other's minds as a consequence
of this interview, and their intercourse thus took rapid strides, for
the sympathy of their souls succeeded to that of their senses. Besides,
the more they felt fatally drawn to each other, the more eager they
were to study the secret action of their minds. The so-called Vicomte de
Bauvan, surprised at the seriousness of the strange girl's ideas, asked
himself how she could possibly combine such acquired knowledge of life
with so much youth and freshness. He thought he discovered an extreme
desire to appear chaste in the modesty and reserve of her attitudes.
He suspected her of playing a part; he questioned the nature of his own
pleasure; and ended by choosing to consider her a clever actress. He was
right; Mademoiselle de Verneuil, like other women of the world, grew the
more reserved the more she felt the warmth of her own feelings, assuming
with perfect naturalness the appearance of prudery, beneath which such
women veil their desires. They all wish to offer themselves as virgins
on love's altar; and if they are not so, the deception they seek to
practise is at least a homage which they pay to their lovers. These
thoughts passed rapidly through the mind of the young man and gratified
him. In fact, for both, this mutual examination was an advance in their
intercourse, and the lover soon came to that phase of passion in which
a man finds in the defects of his mistress a reason for loving her the
more.

Mademoiselle de Verneuil was thoughtful. Perhaps her imagination led her
over a greater extent of the future than that of the young _emigre_,
who was merely following one of the many impulses of his life as a man;
whereas Marie was considering a lifetime, thinking to make it beautiful,
and to fill it with happiness and with grand and noble sentiments.
Happy in such thoughts, more in love with her ideal than with the actual
reality, with the future rather than with the present, she desired now
to return upon her steps so as to better establish her power. In this
she acted instinctively, as all women act. Having agreed with her soul
that she would give herself wholly up, she wished--if we may so express
it--to dispute every fragment of the gift; she longed to take back from
the past all her words and looks and acts and make them more in harmony
with the dignity of a woman beloved. Her eyes at times expressed a sort
of terror as she thought of the interview just over, in which she
had shown herself aggressive. But as she watched the face before her,
instinct with power, and felt that a being so strong must also be
generous, she glowed at the thought that her part in life would be
nobler than that of most women, inasmuch as her lover was a man of
character, a man condemned to death, who had come to risk his life in
making war against the Republic. The thought of occupying such a soul to
the exclusion of all rivals gave a new aspect to many matters. Between
the moment, only five hours earlier, when she composed her face and
toned her voice to allure the young man, and the present moment, when
she was able to convulse him with a look, there was all the difference
to her between a dead world and a living one.

In the condition of soul in which Mademoiselle de Verneuil now existed
external life seemed to her a species of phantasmagoria. The carriage
passed through villages and valleys and mounted hills which left no
impressions on her mind. They reached Mayenne; the soldiers of the
escort were changed; Merle spoke to her; she replied; they crossed the
whole town and were again in the open country; but the faces, houses,
streets, landscape, men, swept past her like the figments of a dream.
Night came, and Marie was travelling beneath a diamond sky, wrapped in
soft light, and yet she was not aware that darkness had succeeded day;
that Mayenne was passed; that Fougeres was near; she knew not even where
she was going. That she should part in a few hours from the man she
had chosen, and who, she believed, had chosen her, was not for her a
possibility. Love is the only passion which looks to neither past nor
future. Occasionally her thoughts escaped in broken words, in phrases
devoid of meaning, though to her lover's ears they sounded like promises
of love. To the two witnesses of this birth of passion she seemed to
be rushing onward with fearful rapidity. Francine knew Marie as well as
Madame du Gua knew the marquis, and their experience of the past made
them await in silence some terrible finale. It was, indeed, not long
before the end came to the drama which Mademoiselle de Verneuil had
called, without perhaps imagining the truth of her words, a tragedy.

When the travellers were about three miles beyond Mayenne they heard
a horseman riding after them with great rapidity. When he reached the
carriage he leaned towards it to look at Mademoiselle de Verneuil,
who recognized Corentin. That offensive personage made her a sign of
intelligence, the familiarity of which was deeply mortifying; then he
turned away, after chilling her to the bone with a look full of some
base meaning. The young _emigre_ seemed painfully affected by this
circumstance, which did not escape the notice of his pretended mother;
but Marie softly touched him, seeming by her eyes to take refuge in his
heart as thought it were her only haven. His brow cleared at this proof
of the full extent of his mistress's attachment, coming to him as it
were by accident. An inexplicable fear seemed to have overcome
her coyness, and her love was visible for a moment without a veil.
Unfortunately for both of them, Madame du Gua saw it all; like a miser
who gives a feast, she seemed to count the morsels and begrudge the
wine.

Absorbed in their happiness the lovers arrived, without any
consciousness of the distance they had traversed, at that part of the
road which passed through the valley of Ernee. There Francine noticed
and showed to her companions a number of strange forms which seemed to
move like shadows among the trees and gorse that surrounded the fields.
When the carriage came within range of these shadows a volley of
musketry, the balls of which whistled above their heads, warned the
travellers that the shadows were realities. The escort had fallen into a
trap.

Captain Merle now keenly regretted having adopted Mademoiselle de
Verneuil's idea that a rapid journey by night would be a safe one,--an
error which had led him to reduce his escort from Mayenne to sixty men.
He at once, under Gerard's orders, divided his little troop into two
columns, one on each side of the road, which the two officers marched
at a quick step among the gorse hedges, eager to meet the assailants,
though ignorant of their number. The Blues beat the thick bushes right
and left with rash intrepidity, and replied to the Chouans with a steady
fire.

Mademoiselle de Verneuil's first impulse was to jump from the carriage
and run back along the road until she was out of sight of the battle;
but ashamed of her fears, and moved by the feeling which impels us all
to act nobly under the eyes of those we love, she presently stood still,
endeavoring to watch the combat coolly.

The marquis followed her, took her hand, and placed it on his breast.

"I was afraid," she said, smiling, "but now--"

Just then her terrified maid cried out: "Marie, take care!"

But as she said the words, Francine, who was springing from the
carriage, felt herself grasped by a strong hand. The sudden weight
of that enormous hand made her shriek violently; she turned, and was
instantly silenced on recognizing Marche-a-Terre.

"Twice I owe to chance," said the marquis to Mademoiselle de Verneuil,
"the revelation of the sweetest secrets of the heart. Thanks to Francine
I now know you bear the gracious name of Marie,--Marie, the name I have
invoked in my distresses,--Marie, a name I shall henceforth speak in
joy, and never without sacrifice, mingling religion and love. There can
be no wrong where prayer and love go together."

They clasped hands, looked silently into each other's eyes, and the
excess of their emotion took away from them the power to express it.

"There's no danger for _the rest of you_," Marche-a-Terre was saying
roughly to Francine, giving to his hoarse and guttural voice a
reproachful tone, and emphasizing his last words in a way to stupefy the
innocent peasant-girl. For the first time in her life she saw ferocity
in that face. The moonlight seemed to heighten the effect of it. The
savage Breton, holding his cap in one hand and his heavy carbine in the
other, dumpy and thickset as a gnome, and bathed in that white light the
shadows of which give such fantastic aspects to forms, seemed to belong
more to a world of goblins than to reality. This apparition and its
tone of reproach came upon Francine with the suddenness of a phantom.
He turned rapidly to Madame du Gua, with whom he exchanged a few eager
words, which Francine, who had somewhat forgotten the dialect of Lower
Brittany, did not understand. The lady seemed to be giving him a series
of orders. The short conference ended by an imperious gesture of the
lady's hand pointing out to the Chouan the lovers standing a little
distance apart. Before obeying, Marche-a-Terre glanced at Francine whom
he seemed to pity; he wished to speak to her, and the girl was aware
that his silence was compulsory. The rough and sunburnt skin of his
forehead wrinkled, and his eyebrows were drawn violently together. Did
he think of disobeying a renewed order to kill Mademoiselle de Verneuil?
The contortion of his face made him all the more hideous to Madame du
Gua, but to Francine the flash of his eye seemed almost gentle, for it
taught her to feel intuitively that the violence of his savage nature
would yield to her will as a woman, and that she reigned, next to God,
in that rough heart.

The lovers were interrupted in their tender interview by Madame du
Gua, who ran up to Marie with a cry, and pulled her away as though some
danger threatened her. Her real object however, was to enable a member
of the royalist committee of Alencon, whom she saw approaching them, to
speak privately to the Gars.

"Beware of the girl you met at the hotel in Alencon; she will betray
you," said the Chevalier de Valois, in the young man's ear; and
immediately he and his little Breton horse disappeared among the bushes
from which he had issued.

The firing was heavy at that moment, but the combatants did not come to
close quarters.

"Adjutant," said Clef-des-Coeurs, "isn't it a sham attack, to capture
our travellers and get a ransom."

"The devil is in it, but I believe you are right," replied Gerard,
darting back towards the highroad.

Just then the Chouan fire slackened, for, in truth, the whole object
of the skirmish was to give the chevalier an opportunity to utter his
warning to the Gars. Merle, who saw the enemy disappearing across the
hedges, thought best not to follow them nor to enter upon a fight that
was uselessly dangerous. Gerard ordered the escort to take its former
position on the road, and the convoy was again in motion without the
loss of a single man. The captain offered his hand to Mademoiselle
de Verneuil to replace her in the coach, for the young nobleman stood
motionless, as if thunderstruck. Marie, amazed at his attitude, got into
the carriage alone without accepting the politeness of the Republican;
she turned her head towards her lover, saw him still motionless, and was
stupefied at the sudden change which had evidently come over him. The
young man slowly returned, his whole manner betraying deep disgust.

"Was I not right?" said Madame du Gua in his ear, as she led him to the
coach. "We have fallen into the hands of a creature who is trafficking
for your head; but since she is such a fool as to have fallen in love
with you, for heaven's sake don't behave like a boy; pretend to love her
at least till we reach La Vivetiere; once there--But," she thought to
herself, seeing the young man take his place with a dazed air, as if
bewildered, "can it be that he already loves her?"

The coach rolled on over the sandy road. To Mademoiselle de Verneuil's
eyes all seemed changed. Death was gliding beside her love. Perhaps it
was only fancy, but, to a woman who loves, fancy is as vivid as reality.
Francine, who had clearly understood from Marche-a-Terre's glance that
Mademoiselle de Verneuil's fate, over which she had commanded him to
watch, was in other hands than his, looked pale and haggard, and could
scarcely restrain her tears when her mistress spoke to her. To her
eyes Madame du Gua's female malignancy was scarcely concealed by
her treacherous smiles, and the sudden changes which her obsequious
attentions to Mademoiselle de Verneuil made in her manners, voice, and
expression was of a nature to frighten a watchful observer. Mademoiselle
de Verneuil herself shuddered instinctively, asking herself, "Why should
I fear? She is his mother." Then she trembled in every limb as the
thought crossed her mind, "Is she really his mother?" An abyss suddenly
opened before her, and she cast a look upon the mother and son, which
finally enlightened her. "That woman loves him!" she thought. "But why
has she begun these attentions after showing me such coolness? Am I
lost? or--is she afraid of me?"

As for the young man, he was flushed and pale by turns; but he kept
a quiet attitude and lowered his eyes to conceal the emotions which
agitated him. The graceful curve of his lips was lost in their close
compression, and his skin turned yellow under the struggle of his stormy
thoughts. Mademoiselle de Verneuil was unable to decide whether any love
for her remained in his evident anger. The road, flanked by woods at
this particular point, became darker and more gloomy, and the obscurity
prevented the eyes of the silent travellers from questioning each other.
The sighing of the wind, the rustling of the trees, the measured step
of the escort, gave that almost solemn character to the scene which
quickens the pulses. Mademoiselle de Verneuil could not long try in vain
to discover the reason of this change. The recollection of Corentin came
to her like a flash, and reminded her suddenly of her real destiny.
For the first time since the morning she reflected seriously on her
position. Until then she had yielded herself up to the delight of
loving, without a thought of the past or of the future. Unable to bear
the agony of her mind, she sought, with the patience of love, to obtain
a look from the young man's eyes, and when she did so her paleness and
the quiver in her face had so penetrating an influence over him that he
wavered; but the softening was momentary.

"Are you ill, mademoiselle?" he said, but his voice had no gentleness;
the very question, the look, the gesture, all served to convince her
that the events of this day belonged to a mirage of the soul which was
fast disappearing like mists before the wind.

"Am I ill?" she replied, with a forced laugh. "I was going to ask you
the same question."

"I supposed you understood each other," remarked Madame du Gua with
specious kindliness.

Neither the young man nor Mademoiselle de Verneuil replied. The girl,
doubly insulted, was angered at feeling her powerful beauty powerless.
She knew she could discover the cause of the present situation the
moment she chose to do so; but, for the first time, perhaps, a woman
recoiled before a secret. Human life is sadly fertile in situations
where, as a result of either too much meditation or of some catastrophe,
our thoughts seem to hold to nothing; they have no substance, no point
of departure, and the present has no hooks by which to hold to the past
or fasten on the future. This was Mademoiselle de Verneuil's condition
at the present moment. Leaning back in the carriage, she sat there like
an uprooted shrub. Silent and suffering, she looked at no one, wrapped
herself in her grief, and buried herself so completely in the unseen
world, the refuge of the miserable, that she saw nothing around her.
Crows crossed the road in the air above them cawing, but although,
