independent traffic, that they should be communities for the consumption
of British manufactures and the feeding of British trade. New England was
especially the object of English jealousy and restriction, and for
reasons, as given by Sir Josiah Child, in his "New Discourse on Trade,"
written about the year 1677, that are creditable to the founders of those
States, for after speaking of the people of Virginia and the Barbadoes as
a loose vagrant sort, "vicious and destitute of means to live at home,
gathered up about the streets of London or other places, and who, had
there been no English foreign plantation in the world, must have come to
be hanged or starved or died untimely of those miserable diseases that
proceed from want and vice, or have sold themselves as soldiers to be
knocked on the head, or at best, by begging or stealing two shillings and
sixpence, have made their way to Holland to become servants to the Dutch,
who refuse none," he goes on to describe "a people whose frugality,
industry and temperance and the happiness of whose laws and institutions,
do promise to themselves long life, with a wonderful increase of people,
riches and power." But, after paying this probably reluctant tribute to
New England virtue and industry, he frankly avows his full sympathy with
the restrictive system, and adds that "there is nothing more prejudicial
and in prospect more dangerous to any mother kingdom than the increase of
shipping in her colonies, plantations and provinces." It is no wonder
that John Adams said that he never read these authors without being set
on fire, and that at last the same fire spread to every patriotic breast.

The Acts of Navigation and of Trade were not the dead letters that some
superficial writers and readers have seen fit to term them. It is true
that obedience was reluctant and slow, and that evasion was extensive,
and it is also true, that colonial commerce flourished in spite of the
restrictions; but it should be remembered that the prolonged wars in
which England was engaged gave lucrative opportunities for privateering,
and that even the customs duties, though intended to be virtually
prohibitory, were not heavy enough to overcome the advantages which the
colonists enjoyed. In Rhode Island the General Assembly asserted and
maintained the right to regulate the fees of the customs officers, and,
as far as was possible, the collection of the dues. The shipping of the
colony rapidly increased, and in 1731 included two vessels from England,
as many from Holland and the Mediterranean, and ten or twelve from the
West Indies, and ten years later numbered one hundred and twenty vessels
engaged in the West Indian, African, European and coasting trade. The
period preceding the Revolution witnessed New England's greatest
commercial prosperity, and it was in that age that Moses Brown and other
enterprising merchants and shipowners laid the foundation of fortunes, a
liberal share of which has been expended with illustrious munificence in
monuments of learning, of art and of charity. As for the restrictions
upon domestic industry, they were not severely felt among a people
devoted, in the country to agriculture, and in the towns to local traffic
and shipping, and the American farmer who wore homespun attire, did not
realize the harshness or appreciate the purpose of the statute which
prohibited the export of wool, or woolen manufactures. As for the
Southern planter, the question of fostering domestic manufactures never
entered his thoughts. He raised his tobacco and his cotton, exported them
to England, and got what goods he needed there just as his descendants,
in a later age, procured the manufactured necessities and luxuries of
life from the depots of New England trade.[1]

      [1] "English Free Trade; Its Foundation, Growth and Decline." By
      Henry Mann.

But even if the British Parliament had never attempted to raise a revenue
by taxation in the American colonies, it is probable that in time the
restrictions on commerce would have led to revolution, unless rescinded.
This was the opinion of the shrewd observer Du Chatelet, who, after
France had surrendered her American possessions to Great Britain, said
that "they (the chambers of commerce) regard everything in colonial
commerce which does not turn exclusively to the benefit of the kingdom as
contrary to the end for which colonies were established, and as a theft
from the state. To practice on these maxims is impossible. The wants of
trade are stronger than the laws of trade. The north of America can alone
furnish supplies to its south. This is the only point of view under which
the cession of Canada can be regarded as a loss for France; but that
cession will one day be amply compensated, if it shall cause in the
English colonies the rebellion and the independence which become every
day more probable and more near."

                        *          *          *

America, if not contented, was quiet under restrictive laws not
stringently enforced, and but for the measures initiated by Grenville and
Townshend, and approved by the king, the Parliament and the people of
England, there would, if the leading American minds of that day were
sincere, have been no insurrection in that era against British authority.
George the Third is called a tyrant on every recurring Fourth of July,
but the nation he ruled was as tyrannical as he, and impartial history
cannot condemn the monarch without awarding a greater share of odium to
his people, who sustained by their pronounced opinion and through their
chosen representatives, every measure for the destruction of the
liberties of these colonies, and who began to listen to the dictates of
reason and of humanity only when America had become the prison of
thousands of England's soldiers, and thousands of others, hired Hessian
and kidnapped Briton alike, had been welcomed by American freemen to
graves in American soil. The measures which led to war, and the war
itself, were inspired and incited by the trading classes, as well as the
aristocracy of England, who expected, in the destruction of a powerful
commercial and menacing industrial rival, an ample return for the blood
and treasure expended in the strife. The American people recognized that
the struggle was for commercial and industrial as well as for political
independence, and the stand in behalf of American industry was taken long
before the scattered colonies met an empire in the field of arms.




CHAPTER XVI.

Writs of Assistance Issued--Excitement in Boston--The Stamp Act--Protests
Against Taxation Without Representation--Massachusetts Appoints a
Committee of Correspondence--Samuel Adams and Patrick Henry--Henry's
Celebrated Resolutions--His Warning to King George--Growing Agitation in
the Colonies--The Stamp Act Repealed--Parliament Levies Duties on Tea and
Other Imports to America--Lord North's Choice of Infamy--Measures Of
Resistance in America--The Massachusetts Circular Letter--British Troops
in Boston--The Boston Massacre--Burning of the "Gaspee"--North Carolina
"Regulators"--The Boston Tea Party--The Boston Port Bill--The First
Continental Congress--A Declaration of Rights--"Give Me Liberty or Give
Me Death!"


Even before peace had been made with France the king's officers in
America began to enforce the revenue laws with a rigor to which the
colonists had been unaccustomed. Charles Paxton, commissioner of customs
in Boston, applied to the Superior Court for authority to use writs of
assistance in searching for smuggled goods. These writs were warrants for
the officers to search when and where they pleased and to call upon
others to assist them, instead of procuring a special search-warrant for
some designated place. Thomas Hutchinson, chief justice, and afterward
royalist governor and refugee, favored the application, which was
earnestly opposed by the merchants and the people generally.[1] "To my
dying day," exclaimed James Otis, in pleading against the measure, "I
will oppose with all the power and faculties God has given me, all such
instruments of slavery on one hand and of villainy on the other."
Parliament had authorized the issue of the writs, however, and the custom
house officers therefore had the law on their side. Writs were granted,
but their enforcement was attended with so many difficulties that the
customs authorities virtually gave up this attempt to encroach upon the
rights of the people. The next step in provoking the colonists to
revolution was the Stamp Act. The object of this enactment was to raise
money for the support of British troops and the payment of salaries to
certain public officers in the colonies who had depended upon the
colonial treasuries for their compensation. In this there was a threefold
invasion of colonial rights. Taxation without representation was contrary
to a principle recognized for centuries in England, vindicated in the
revolution which cost Charles I his head, and upheld in America from the
very beginning of the settlements here. Again, while British troops had
been welcome as allies in battling against the French and the Indians,
they were not desired as garrisons to overawe the free people of the
colonies, and finally the colonial officers whom it was proposed to pay
from the royal treasury would become the masters instead of servants of
the people--or they would be servants only of the king. The purpose of
the Stamp Act obviously was to make America the vassal of Great Britain.
The act required that legal documents and commercial instruments should
be written, and that newspapers should be printed on stamped paper.

      [1] John Adams, in his letter to the President of Congress, July 17,
      1780, attributes the outbreak of the Revolution to Hutchinson's
      course in this and other matters. "He was perhaps the only man in
      the world," wrote Adams, "who could have brought on the controversy
      between Great Britain and America in the manner and at the time it
      was done, and involved the two countries in an enmity which must end
      in their everlasting separation."

                        *          *          *

The people everywhere protested against the tyrannical action of
Parliament. Samuel Adams drew up the instructions to the newly elected
representatives of Boston to use all efforts against the plan of
parliamentary taxation. It was resolved "that the imposition of duties
and taxes by the Parliament of Great Britain upon a people not
represented in the House of Commons is irreconcilable with their rights."
A committee of correspondence was appointed in Massachusetts to
communicate with other colonial assemblies, and the idea of union for the
common defence began to take firm hold on the public mind. Benjamin
Franklin, in the Congress held at Albany in 1754 to insure the aid of the
Six Nations in the war then breaking out with France, had proposed a plan
of union for the colonies, with a grand council having extensive powers
and a president to be appointed by the crown. The plan was not adopted.
Adams had written about the same time that "the only way to keep us from
setting up for ourselves is to disunite us." Everybody now began to
perceive the need of union, which the great intellects of Franklin and
Adams had discerned long before.

No influence was so powerful in leading the South to stand side by side
with the Northern colonies as that of Patrick Henry, the great orator of
Virginia. In the House of Burgesses, in 1765, Mr. Henry introduced his
celebrated resolutions against the Stamp Act, as follows:

    "Resolved, That the first adventurers and settlers of this his
    majesty's colony and dominion, brought with them, and transmitted to
    their posterity, and all other his majesty's subjects, since
    inhabiting in this, his majesty's said colony, all the privileges,
    franchises and immunities, that have at any time been held, enjoyed
    and possessed by the people of Great Britain.

    "Resolved, That by two royal charters, granted by King James the
    First, the colonists, aforesaid, are declared entitled to all the
    privileges, liberties and immunities of denizens and natural born
    subjects, to all intents and purposes, as if they had been abiding
    and born within the realm of England.

    "Resolved, That the taxation of the people by themselves, or by
    persons chosen by themselves to represent them, who can only know
    what taxes the people are able to bear, and the easiest mode of
    raising them, and are equally affected by such taxes themselves, is
    the distinguishing characteristic of British freedom, and without
    which the ancient constitution cannot subsist.

    "Resolved, That his majesty's liege people of this most ancient
    colony have uninterruptedly enjoyed the right of being thus governed
    by their own assembly in the article of their taxes and internal
    police, and that the same hath never been forfeited, or any other way
    given up, but hath been constantly recognized by the king and people
    of Great Britain.

    "Resolved, therefore, That the General Assembly of this colony have
    the sole right and power to lay taxes and impositions upon the
    inhabitants of this colony; and that every attempt to vest such power
    in any person or persons whatsoever, other than the General Assembly
    aforesaid, has a manifest tendency to destroy British as well as
    American freedom."

On the back of the paper containing those resolutions, and found among
Henry's papers after his death, was the following endorsement in the
handwriting of Mr. Henry himself: "The within resolutions passed the
House of Burgesses in May, 1765. They formed the first opposition to the
Stamp Act, and the scheme of taxing America by the British Parliament.
All the colonies, either through fear or want of opportunity to form an
opposition, or from influence of some kind or other, had remained silent.
I had been for the first time elected a burgess, a few days before; was
young, inexperienced, unacquainted with the forms of the House, and the
members that composed it. Finding the men of weight averse to opposition,
and the commencement of the tax at hand, and that no person was likely to
step forth, I determined to venture, and alone, unadvised and unassisted,
on a blank leaf of an old law book wrote the within. Upon offering them
to the House, violent debates ensued. Many threats were uttered, and much
abuse cast upon me by the party for submission. After a long and warm
contest, the resolutions passed by a very small majority, perhaps of one
or two only. The alarm spread throughout America with astonishing
quickness, and the ministerial party were overwhelmed. The great point of
resistance to British taxation was universally established in the
colonies. This brought on the war, which finally separated the two
countries, and gave independence to ours. Whether this will prove a
blessing or a curse will depend upon the use our people make of the
blessings which a gracious God hath bestowed on us. If they are wise,
they will be great and happy. If they are of a contrary character, they
will be miserable--Righteousness alone can exalt them as a nation.

"Reader, whoever thou art, remember this; and in thy sphere practice
virtue thyself, and encourage it in others.--P. HENRY."

Every American realized the truth expressed in Mr. Henry's resolutions;
but no man beside himself dared to utter it. All wished for independence;
and all hitherto trembled at the thought of asserting it. Randolph,
Bland, Pendleton and Wythe, with "all the old members whose influence in
the House had, till then, been unbroken," opposed the resolutions, and
had not Henry's unrivalled eloquence supported them, they would have been
strangled in their birth. "The last and strongest resolution was carried
by a single vote;" and Peyton Randolph said, immediately after, "I would
have given 500 guineas for a single vote!" From this we may easily imagine
how spirited was the opposition, and how energetic the eloquence exerted
against Henry. It was in the midst of this magnificent debate, while he
was descanting on the tyranny of the obnoxious act, that he exclaimed
in a voice of thunder, and with the look of a god, "Caesar had his
Brutus--Charles the First his Cromwell--and George the Third--('Treason,'
cried the Speaker--'treason, treason,' echoed from every part of the
House--it was one of those trying moments which is decisive of
character--Henry faltered not for an instant; but rising to a loftier
attitude, and fixing on the Speaker an eye of the most determined fire,
he finished his sentence with the firmest emphasis) _may profit by
their example. If this be treason, make the most of it_."[2]

      [2] Wirts' "Life of Patrick Henry," pages 64, 65.

On the following day, when Henry was absent, the more timid asserted
themselves and the most important of the resolutions was reconsidered and
expunged.

A congress held at New York declared against, the Stamp Act, and sent a
protest to Parliament. Americans would not buy or use the stamps, and
those who undertook agencies for their sale were treated as public
enemies. Boxes of stamped paper were burned on arrival in port; the
newspapers ignored the act, and legal documents were, by general consent,
treated as valid without the stamp. In the following year Parliament,
after a prolonged debate, in which William Pitt earnestly supported the
American cause, repealed the act. The news of the repeal was received
with great rejoicing in America, and the colonists hoped that there would
be no more attempts to invade their rights as English subjects.

                        *          *          *

King George III., however, was bent upon reducing the colonists to abject
submission to his will, and the fact that William Pitt, whom the king
detested, had championed the Americans, made the monarch all the more
obstinate in his purpose to humiliate them. In 1767 Charles Townshend,
chancellor of the exchequer, carried through Parliament a bill putting a
duty upon tea, glass, paper and other articles entering American ports.
In connection with this measure the scheme of the British crown to reduce
the colonies to a vassal condition was fully disclosed. Not only were
troops to be supported out of the revenue thus raised, but the salaries
of governors, judges and crown attorneys were to be paid from it, and any
surplus remaining could be used by the king to pension Americans who had
gained the royal grace by their subserviency. Townshend suddenly died
after these measures had been adopted, and was succeeded by Lord North,
who soon afterward became prime minister. North was not personally in
favor of dealing harshly with the colonies, but he yielded to the royal
will as the price of remaining in office, and shares in history the
infamy of his master's course.

The Americans began to concert measures of resistance. They refused to
use the dutiable articles, and made it unprofitable to import them. The
Massachusetts legislature was dissolved by order of the king, because it
had sent a circular-letter to other colonies inviting common action
against the aggressions of Parliament. Other colonial assemblies were
dissolved by the king's governors because they answered the letter
favorably. The people's representatives continued to attend to the
people's interests in informal conventions, and had the more time to give
to the overshadowing issue of colonial rights, because royal displeasure
had relieved them from the ordinary business of law making. Boston and
Richmond worked in harmony in the one great cause, and North and South
forgot social and religious differences in common effort for the common
weal.

                        *          *          *

King George regarded Massachusetts as the hotbed and centre of colonial
discontent, and in the autumn of 1768 he sent two regiments of British
regulars to that city to assist in enforcing the Townshend acts. The
troops and the citizens had frequent disputes, for the colonists were
unused to military arrogance, and refused to be ordered about by
martinets in uniform. The Boston Massacre, so-called, in March, 1770,
when seven soldiers fired into a crowd of townspeople, killing five and
wounding several others, helped to inflame the antagonism between the
provincials and the military, and Governor Hutchinson, at the demand of
Samuel Adams, speaking in behalf of three thousand resolute citizens,
removed the troops to an island in the harbor. In April, 1770, Parliament
again yielded to the Americans in so far as to take off all the Townshend
duties except the duty on tea, which the king insisted upon retaining as
a vindication of England's right to impose the duty.

The colonists continued as determined as ever not to submit to British
