as you were the day before yesterday, but always." Then taking some of
the ribbons, he crowned Socrates, and again reclined. When he had lain
down again, he said: "You seem, my friends, to be sober, which is a
thing not to be endured; you must drink for that was the agreement
which I made with you--and I elect myself master of the feast until
you are quite drunk. Let me have a large goblet, Agathon, or rather,"
he said, addressing the attendant, "bring me that wine-cooler." The
wine-cooler which caught his eye was a vessel holding more than two
quarts; this he filled and emptied, and bade the attendant fill it
again for Socrates. "Observe, my friends," said Alcibiades, "that my
ingenious device will have no effect on Socrates, for he can drink any
quantity of wine and not be at all nearer being drunk." Socrates drank
the cup which the attendant filled for him....

"I shall praise Socrates in a figure which will appear to him to be a
caricature, and yet I do not mean to laugh at him, but only to speak
the truth. I say, then, that he is exactly like the masks of Silenus,
which may be seen sitting in the statuaries' shops, having pipes and
flutes in their mouths; and they are made to open in the middle, and
there are images of gods inside them. I say also that he is like
Marsyas the satyr. You will not deny this, Socrates, that your face is
like that of a satyr. Aye, and there is a resemblance in other points
too. For example, you are a bully--that I am in a position to prove by
the evidence of witnesses if you will not confess. And are you not a
flute-player? That you are, and a far more wonderful performer than
Marsyas. For he indeed with instruments charmed the souls of men by
the power of his breath, as the performers of his music do still; for
the melodies of Olympus are derived from the teaching of Marsyas, and
these, whether they are played by a great master or by a miserable
flute-girl, have a power which no others have; they alone possess the
soul and reveal the wants of those who have need of gods and
mysteries, because they are inspired.

"But you produce the same effect with the voice only, and do not
require the flute; that is the difference between you and him. When we
hear any other speaker, even a very good one, his words produce
absolutely no effect upon us in comparison, whereas the very fragments
of you and your words, even at second-hand, and however imperfectly
repeated, amaze and possess the souls of every man, woman, and child
who comes within hearing of them. And if I were not afraid that you
think me drunk, I would have sworn to as well as spoken of the
influence which they have always and still have over me. For my heart
leaps within me more than that of any Corybantian[68] reveler, and my
eyes rain tears when I hear him. And I observe that many others are
affected in the same way. I have heard Pericles and other great
orators, but tho I thought that they spoke well, I never had any
similar feeling; my soul was not stirred by them, nor was I angry at
the thought of my own slavish state. But this Marsyas has often
brought me to such a pass that I have felt as if I could hardly endure
the life which I am leading (this, Socrates, you admit); and I am
conscious that if I did not shut my ears against him, and fly from the
voice of the siren, he would detain me until I grew old sitting at his
feet. For he makes me confess that I ought not to live as I do,
neglecting the wants of my own soul, and busying myself with the
concerns of the Athenians; therefore I hold my ears and tear myself
away from him. And he is the only person who ever made me ashamed,
which you might think not to be in my nature, and there is no one else
who does the same. For I know that I can not answer him or say that I
ought not to do as he bids, but when I leave his presence the love of
popularity gets the better of me. And therefore I run away and fly
from him, and when I see him I am ashamed of what I have confest to
him. And many a time I wish that he were dead, and yet I know that I
should be much more sorry than glad if he were to die; so that I am at
my wit's end.

"And this is what I and many others have suffered from the
flute-playing of this satyr. Yet hear me once more while I show you
how exact the image is, and how marvelous his power. For I am sure
that none of you know him; but I know him and will describe him, as I
have begun. See you how fond he is of the fair? He is always with them
and is always being smitten by them, and then again he knows nothing
and is ignorant of all things--that is the appearance which he puts
on. Is he not like a Silenus in this? Yes, surely; that is, his outer
mask, which is the carved head of the Silenus; but when he is opened,
what temperance there is, as I may say to you, O my companions in
drink, residing within. Know you that beauty and wealth and honor, at
which the many wonder, are of no account with him, and are utterly
despised by him; he regards not at all the persons who are gifted with
them; mankind are nothing to him; all his life is spent in mocking
and flouting at them. But when I opened him, and looked within at his
serious purpose, I saw in him divine and golden images of such
fascinating beauty that I was ready to do in a moment whatever
Socrates commanded (they may have escaped the observation of others,
but I saw them). Now I thought that he was seriously enamored of my
beauty, and this appeared to be a grand opportunity of hearing him
tell what he knew, for I had a wonderful opinion of the attractions of
my youth.

"In the prosecution of this design, when I next went to him, I sent
away the attendant who usually accompanied me (I will confess the
whole truth, and beg you to listen; and if I speak falsely, do you,
Socrates, expose the falsehood). Well, he and I were alone together,
and I thought that when there was nobody with us, I should hear him
speak the language of love as lovers do, and I was delighted. Not a
word; he conversed as usual, and spent the day with me and then went
away. Afterward I challenged him to the palestra; and he wrestled and
closed with me several times alone; I fancied that I might succeed in
this way. Not a bit; there was no use in that. Lastly, as I had failed
hitherto, I thought that I must use stronger measures and attack him
boldly, as I had begun, and not give him up until I saw how the matter
stood. So I invited him to supper, just as if he were a fair youth,
and I a designing lover. He was not easily persuaded to come; he did,
however, after a while, accept the invitation, and when he came the
first time, he wanted to go away at once as soon as supper was over,
and I had not the face to detain him....

"And yet I could not help wondering at his natural temperance and
self-restraint and courage. I never could have thought that I should
have met with a man like him in wisdom and endurance. Neither could I
be angry with him or renounce his company any more than I could hope
to win him. For I well knew that if Ajax could not be wounded by
steel, much less he by money; and I had failed in my only chance of
captivating him. So I wandered about and was at my wit's end; no one
was ever more hopelessly enslaved by another. All this, as I should
explain, happened before he and I went on the expedition to Potidaea;
there we messed together, and I had the opportunity of observing his
extraordinary power of sustaining fatigue and going without food when
our supplies were intercepted at any place, as will happen with an
army. In the faculty of endurance he was superior not only to me but
to everybody else; there was no one to be compared to him. Yet at a
festival he was the only person who had any real powers of enjoyment,
and tho not willing to drink, he could if compelled beat us all at
that, and the most wonderful thing of all was that no human being had
ever seen Socrates drunk; and that, if I am not mistaken, will soon be
tested. His endurance of cold was also surprizing. There was a severe
frost, for the winter in that region is really tremendous, and
everybody else either remained indoors, or if they went out had on no
end of clothing, and were well shod, and had their feet swathed in
felt and fleeces; in the midst of this, Socrates, with his bare feet
on the ice, and in his ordinary dress, marched better than any of the
other soldiers who had their shoes on, and they looked daggers at him
because he seemed to despise them.

"I have told you one tale, and now I must tell you another, which is
worth hearing, of the doings and sufferings of this enduring man while
he was on the expedition. One morning he was thinking about something
which he could not resolve; and he would not give up, but continued
thinking from early dawn until noon--there he stood fixt in thought;
and at noon attention was drawn to him, and the rumor ran through the
wondering crowd that Socrates had been standing and thinking about
something ever since the break of day. At last, in the evening after
supper, some Ionians out of curiosity (I should explain that this was
not in the winter but in summer) brought out their mats and slept in
the open air that they might watch him and see whether he would stand
all night. There he stood all night as well as all day and the
following morning; and with the return of light he offered up a prayer
to the sun, and went his way. I will also tell, if you please--and
indeed I am bound to tell--of his courage in battle; for who but he
saved my life? Now this was the engagement in which I received the
prize for valor; for I was wounded and he would not leave me, but he
rescued me and my arms; and he ought to have received the prize of
valor which the generals wanted to confer on me partly on account of
my rank, and I told them so (this Socrates will not impeach or deny),
but he was more eager than the generals that I and not he should have
the prize. There was another occasion on which he was very noticeable;
this was in the flight of the army after the battle of Delium, and I
had a better opportunity of seeing him than at Potidaea, as I was
myself on horseback, and therefore comparatively out of danger. He and
Laches were retreating as the troops were in flight, and I met them
and told them not to be discouraged, and promised to remain with them;
and there you might see him, Aristophanes, as you describe, just as he
is in the streets of Athens, stalking like a pelican, and rolling his
eyes, calmly contemplating enemies as well as friends, and making very
intelligible to anybody, even from a distance, that whoever attacks
him will be likely to meet with a stout resistance; and in this way he
and his companion escaped--for these are the sort of persons who are
never touched in war; they pursue only those who are running away
headlong. I particularly observed how superior he was to Laches in
presence of mind.

"Many are the wonders of Socrates which I might narrate in his praise;
most of his ways might perhaps be paralleled in others, but the most
astonishing thing of all is his absolute unlikeness to any other human
being that is or ever has been. You may imagine Brasidas and others to
have been like Achilles; or you may imagine Nestor and Antenor to have
been like Pericles; and the same may be said of other famous men, but
of this strange being you will never be able to find any likeness,
however remote, either among men who now are or who ever have been,
except that which I have already suggested of Silenus and the satyrs;
and this is an allegory not only of himself, but also of his words.
For, altho I forgot to mention this before, his words are ridiculous
when you first hear them; he clothes himself in language that is as
the skin of the wanton satyr--for his talk is of pack-asses and smiths
and cobblers and curriers, and he is always repeating the same things
in the same words, so that an ignorant man who did not know him might
feel disposed to laugh at him; but he, who pierces the mask and sees
what is within will find that they are the only words which have a
meaning in them, and also the most divine, abounding in fair examples
of virtue, and of the largest discourse, or rather extending to the
whole duty of a good and honorable man.

"This, friends, is my praise of Socrates. I have added my blame of him
for his ill treatment of me; and he has ill treated not only me, but
Charmides,[69] the son of Glaucon, and Euthydemus,[70] the son of
Diocles, and many others in the same way--beginning as their lover, he
has ended by making them pay their addresses to him. Wherefore I say
to you, Agathon, 'Be not deceived by him; learn from me and take
warning, and don't be a fool and learn by experience,' as the proverb
says."

When Alcibiades had done speaking, there was a laugh at his plainness
of speech, as he seemed to be still in love with Socrates. "You are
sober, Alcibiades," said Socrates, "or you would never have gone about
to hide the purpose of your satyr's praises, for all this long story
is only an ingenious circumlocution, the point of which comes in by
the way at the end; you want to get up a quarrel between me and
Agathon, and your notion is that I ought to love you and nobody else,
and that you and you only ought to love Agathon. But the plot of this
satyric or Selinic drama has been detected, and you must not allow
him, Agathon, to set us at variance."

"I believe you are right," said Agathon, "and I am disposed to think
that his intention in placing himself between you and me was only to
divide us; but he shall gain nothing by that move, as I will go and
lie in the couch next to you."

"Yes, yes," replied Socrates, "by all means come here and lie on the
couch below me."

"Alas," said Alcibiades, "how am I fooled by this man! He is
determined to get the better of me at every turn. I do beseech you,
allow Agathon to lie between us."

"Impossible," said Socrates, "as you praised me, and I ought to praise
my neighbor on the right, he will be out of order in praising me again
when he ought rather to be praised by me, and I must entreat you to
consent to this, and not be jealous, for I have a great desire to
praise the youth."

"Ha! ha!" cried Agathon; "I will rise instantly, that I may be praised
by Socrates."

"The usual way," said Alcibiades; "where Socrates is, no one else has
any chance with the fair, and now how readily has he invented a
specious reason for attracting Agathon to himself!"

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 66: From "The Symposium." Translated by Benjamin Jowett.
This picture of Socrates is declared by Mahaffy to be the most
wonderful of all pictures of him, inasmuch as it shows him "in all his
ugliness, his fascination, his deep sympathy, his iron courage, his
unassailable chastity." Mahaffy's enthusiasm has been shared by many
writers and readers in all generations.]

[Footnote 67: The famous comic poet and dramatist, author of the
"Frogs," "Clouds," "Birds," and many other works, of which only eleven
are now extant; born about 451 B.C., died not later than 380.]

[Footnote 68: The Corybantes were priests of the Phrygian goddess
Rhea, worship of whom was exprest in dances, which often took the
character of orgies.]

[Footnote 69: Charmides was an uncle of Plato, noted for moderation.]

[Footnote 70: Euthydemus was a name given by Plato to one of his
dialogs, in which virtue and the teaching of virtue are the themes.]




V

THE REFUSAL OF SOCRATES TO ESCAPE FROM PRISON[71]


_Crito_: There are persons who at no great cost are willing to save
you and bring you out of prison; and as for the informers, you may
observe that they are far from being exorbitant in their demands; a
little money will satisfy them. My means, which, as I am sure, are
ample, are at your service, and if you have a scruple about spending
all mine, here are strangers who will give you the use of others; and
one of them, Simmias the Theban, has brought a sum of money for this
very purpose; and Cebes and many others are willing to spend their
money too. I say, therefore, do not on that account hesitate about
making your escape, and do not say, as you did in court, that you will
have difficulty in knowing what to do with yourself if you escape. For
men will love you in other places to which you may go, and not in
Athens only; there are friends of mine in Thessaly, if you like to go
to them, who will value and protect you, and no Thessalians will give
you any trouble.

Nor can I think that you are justified, Socrates, in betraying your
own life when you might be saved; this is playing into the hands of
your enemies and destroyers; and moreover I should say that you were
betraying your children; for you might bring them up and educate them;
instead of which you go away and leave them, and they will have to
take their chance; and if they do not meet with the usual fate of
orphans, there will be small thanks to you. No man should bring
children into the world who is unwilling to persevere to the end in
their nurture and education. But you are choosing the easier part, as
I think, not the better and manlier, which would rather have become
one who professes virtue in all his actions, like yourself. And indeed
I am ashamed not only of you, but of us who are your friends, when I
reflect that this entire business of yours will be attributed to our
want of courage. The trial need never have come on, or might have been
brought to another issue; and the end of all, which is the crowning
absurdity, will seem to have been permitted by us, through cowardice
and baseness, who might have saved you, as you might have saved
yourself, if we had been good for anything (for there was no
difficulty in escaping); and we did not see how disgraceful, Socrates,
and also miserable all this will be to us as well as you. Make your
mind up then, or rather have your mind already made up, for the time
of deliberation is over, and there is only one thing to be done, which
must be done, if at all, this very night, and which any delay will
render all but impossible; I beseech you therefore, Socrates, to be
persuaded by me, and to do as I say....

_Socrates_: From these premises I proceed to argue the question
whether I ought or ought not to try and escape without the consent of
the Athenians; and if I am clearly right in escaping, then I will
make the attempt; but if not, I will abstain. The other considerations
which you mention, of money and loss of character and the duty of
educating children, are, as I fear, only the doctrines of the
multitude, who would be as ready to call people to life if they were
able as they are to put them to death--and with as little reason. But
now, since the argument has thus far prevailed, the only question
which remains to be considered is whether we shall do rightly either
in escaping or in suffering others to aid in our escape and paying
them in money and thanks, or whether we shall not do rightly; and if
the latter, then death or any other calamity which may ensue on my
remaining here must not be allowed to enter into the calculation.

_Crito_: I think that you are right, Socrates; how then shall we
proceed?

_Socrates_: Let us consider the matter together, and do you either
refute me if you can, and I will be convinced, or else cease, my dear
friend, from repeating to me that I ought to escape against the wishes
of the Athenians; for I am extremely desirous to be persuaded by you,
but not against my own better judgment. And now please to consider my
first position, and do your best to answer me.

_Crito_: I will do my best....

_Socrates_: Again, Crito, may we do evil?

_Crito_: Surely not, Socrates.

_Socrates_: And what of doing evil in return for evil, which is the
morality of the many; is that just or not?

_Crito_: Not just.

_Socrates_: For doing evil to another is the same as injuring him?

_Crito_: Very true.

_Socrates_: Then we ought not to retaliate or render evil for evil to
any one, whatever evil we may have suffered from him. But I would have
you consider, Crito, whether you really mean what you are saying. For
this opinion has never been held, and never will be held, by any
considerable number of persons; and those who are agreed and those who
are not agreed upon this point have no common ground, and can only
despise one another when they see how widely they differ. Tell me,
then, whether you agree with and assent to my first principle, that
neither injury nor retaliation nor warding off evil by evil is ever
right. And shall that be the premise of our argument? Or do you
decline and dissent from this? For this has been of old and is still
my opinion; but, if you are of another opinion, let me hear what you
have to say. If, however, you remain of the same mind, I will proceed.

_Crito_: You may proceed, for I have not changed my mind.

_Socrates_: Then I will proceed to the next step, which may be put in
the form of a question: Ought a man to do what he admits to be right
or ought he to betray the right?

_Crito_: He ought to do what he thinks right.

_Socrates_: But if this is true, what is the application? In leaving
the prison against the will of the Athenians, do I wrong any? or
rather do I not wrong those whom I ought least to wrong? Do I not
desert the principles which were acknowledged by us to be just? What
do you say?

_Crito_: I can not tell, Socrates; for I do not know.

_Socrates_: Then consider the matter in this way: Imagine that I am
about to play truant (you may call the proceeding by any name which
you like), and the laws and the government come and interrogate me:
"Tell us, Socrates," they say; "what are you about? Are you going by
an act of yours to overturn us--the laws and the whole state, as far
as in you lies? Do you imagine that a state can subsist and not be
overthrown in which the decisions of law have no power, but are set
aside and overthrown by individuals?" What will be our answer, Crito,
to these and the like words? Any one, and especially a clever
rhetorician, will have a good deal to urge about the evil of setting
aside the law which requires a sentence to be carried out; and we
might reply, "Yes; but the state has injured us and given an unjust
sentence." Suppose I say that?

_Crito_: Very good, Socrates.

_Socrates_: "And was that our agreement with you?" the law would say;
"or were you to abide by the sentence of the state?" And if I were to
express astonishment at their saying this, the law would probably add:
"Answer, Socrates, instead of opening your eyes; you are in the habit
of asking and answering questions. Tell us what complaint you have to
make against us which justifies you in attempting to destroy us and
the state? In the first place, did we not bring you into existence?
Your father married your mother by our aid and begot you. Say whether
you have any objection to urge against those of us who regulate
marriage?" None, I should reply. "Or against those of us who regulate
the system of nurture and education of children in which you were
trained? Were not the laws, which have the charge of this, right in
commanding your father to train you in music and gymnastic?" Right, I
should say. "Well then, since you were brought into the world and
nurtured and educated by us, can you deny, in the first place, that
you are our child and slave, as your fathers were before you? And if
this is true, you are not on equal terms with us; nor can you think
that you have a right to do to us what we are doing to you. Would you
have any right to strike or revile or do any other evil to a father or
