men stealing on our land, and you ought to have begged.  The Darleys
always were beggars and thieves; but you will not.  I gave you the
opportunity."

He thrust the sword back in its sheath, and let his right hand fall to
his side, where a strong knife-like dagger hung by a short chain from
his belt, and whipped it out of its case.

"Does for a hunting-knife," he said, with a curious laugh.  "My father
has killed many a stag with it.  Now, are you going to beg for your
life?"

There was no reply, and the men took a step or two forward.

"Go back!" cried Mark fiercely; and the men obeyed.

Mark bent over the prisoner, with the mocking laugh intensifying.

"Too much of a coward to beg for your life," he said: "well, I'm too
much of a coward to make you see it taken.  There!"

With a quick movement, he turned Ralph over upon his face, thrust the
point of the dagger beneath the line where the cut would tell best, and
the prisoner's wrists were free; another quick cut divided the rope
which drew his elbows together, and then the knees and ankles followed,
the strained hemp easily parting at the touch of the keen blade, and
Ralph Darley was free.

"Why, Master Mark," cried the chief man of the party in astonishment,
"what you doing of?"

"Can't you see, idiot?" cried Mark, with a fierce snap.

"But what's the good of our ketching and tying on him?" cried the man
addressed as Tom, in an ill-used tone.

"Say another word, you brute, and I'll have you tied as you tied him,"
cried Mark fiercely.

"Well, I dunno what Sir Eddard'll say when he knows."

"What he says he'll say to me," cried Mark.  "You fellows ought to be in
the mine by now.  Go back to your work."

The youth stood pointing down the steep slope, and an angry murmur of
opposition arose; but the men began to move off, only to be called back
just as Ralph rose painfully to his feet.

"Come here," cried Mark.  "Pick up those pieces of rope."

"Who's going to take them back to the mine?" said the leader, in an
ill-used tone.  "What's Dan Rugg going to say?  Noo rope too."

"Tell him I cut it," said Mark imperiously.  "You take it back."

The man picked up the pieces, and Tom quietly took up the creel from
where it lay, half hidden by a tuft of fern fronds, to begin moving off
with the trout.  But Mark let him get a few steps away before following
with a rush and a kick which sent the man on his face.  Then, as he
struggled up, angry and threatening, the lad snatched the creel from his
hands.

"The Edens are not thieves," he said fiercely--"only when they want a
few young ravens," he added, turning with a mocking laugh to Ralph; and
once more the two lads stood gazing in each other's eyes for a few
moments, the rustling made by the departing men and the murmur of their
voices rising from below.

Then, imitating Ralph's action of the last time they met, he pointed
down to the river, and said, with a mocking laugh:

"It's my turn now.  The Darleys are not the only ones who know how to
treat a fallen enemy.  Your creel, sir; and you are welcome to our
trout."

Ralph took the basket without a word, and without taking his eyes from
Mark's, while it seemed as if each lad was fighting hard not to be the
first to let his glance sink before the other's.

Then Ralph raised the lid of the creel, and began to take out the fish,
but hesitated, and laid them back.  To have thrown them on the ground
seemed to him contemptible and mean.

"Now go," said Mark.  "You and I are straight, sir.  Next time we meet I
hope you will wear your sword."

Ralph hesitated, and remained standing in the same place; his eyes
looking as if he wanted to speak, but no words would come; and at last
he turned and took a step to go, but his numbed feet and ankles gave way
beneath him, and he tottered, and would have fallen, had not Mark
involuntarily sprung forward and caught him in his arms.

Ralph laughed painfully.

"Let me sit down on the enemy's ground for a few minutes," he said.
"Your men have left me no use in my limbs."

Mark gently let him down; and, faint with pain, the cold sweat breaking
out in great drops all over his brow, Ralph said feebly, smiling the
while:

"Not straight yet, Master Eden.  I am in your debt now."

Then a deathly feeling of sickness came over him; trees, rocks, and
sunny sky were dim, and glided before his eyes till all was darkness,
for how long he could not tell.

When he opened his eyes again the sickly feeling still troubled him, but
he could not understand why.  It was like awakening from some troubled
dream, and full consciousness came back slowly.  Then, by degrees, he
grasped the fact that his head was resting on a tuft of heath, and
bracken fronds shaded him from the sun.  His wrists throbbed with
sharp-shooting pains, which ran right up beyond his elbows.  There were
pains, too, about his knees and ankles, and there was something else
which he could not make out, till he looked towards his feet, to see
that some one was seated a little below him on the sharp slope, with
back half-turned to him, and his bare legs across his lap, chafing the
ankles gently, first one and then the other, over and over again.

Ralph was quite conscious now, but he did not speak.  He lay back there,
making no movement, no sign; but a curiously dark look came into his
eyes, and his lips quivered a little, grew firm again, and were softened
by a smile, while a strange glowing sensation set in about his heart.

Five minutes must have elapsed before Mark Eden turned his head, started
as he saw that Ralph's eyes were watching him, and his quiet intent gaze
gave place to a frown; his face became scarlet, and he hastily placed
his patient's legs upon the ground.

"How long have you been watching me?" he said hotly.

"Only a minute or so.  Did I faint?"

"I suppose so," said Mark roughly.  "Just like a great girl."

"Yes: very weak of me," said Ralph quietly.

"Yes, very," said Mark.  "The brutes tied you too tightly.  Try if you
can walk now.  Get down by the river, and bathe them a bit."

He stood up and thrust his hands behind him, looking at his young enemy
scornfully; but the scarlet flush was in his face still, and would make
him look as if he were ashamed of what he had been caught doing.

Ralph sat up, and struggled painfully to his feet, turning hot and faint
again; but he made a brave effort to be firm, and took a step or two and
then stopped, Mark making no effort to assist him.  Then stifling a cry
of pain, he took another step or two and tottered, when Mark caught his
arm.

"You're shamming," he cried angrily.

Ralph's brow wrinkled, and he looked down at his bare legs and feet,
raising one a little, painfully, to draw attention to the terribly
swollen state of his ankles and knees.

"Shamming!" he said quietly.  "Am I?  Well, they are not."

Ralph held out first one leg, and then the other, before seating himself
again, drawing his hose from his belt, and trying to draw them on; but
at the end of a minute the pain from his swollen wrists forced him to
give up the task, and he slowly replaced the hose in his belt.

Twice over, unseen by Ralph, his companion made a gesture as if to
advance and help him, but he mastered the inclination; and after a
while, Ralph sat perfectly still, waiting for the giddy feeling from
which he suffered to go off.  And at last, feeling a little better, he
rose to his feet, bowed distantly, and began to descend the steep slope;
but in a few minutes he was clinging to a tree, helpless once more, and
he started, as Mark suddenly said, roughly:

"Here; you don't know our cliff: let me show you--"

Ralph was under the impression that he had left Mark Eden quite behind,
and his surprise was the greater when he found that his enemy was
offering him his arm, and ended by helping him down the remainder of the
way to the river, where the injured lad gladly seated himself at the
edge upon a stone, which enabled him to lave both feet at once in the
clear cool current, to the great comfort and relief of his swollen
ankles.

After a time he was able to use his feet, resume his hose and shoes, and
rise to start back; but it was awkward to part without some word of
thanks, and these were very difficult to say to one who stood by all the
time, watching every action, with a mocking smile upon his lips.

But the words had to be said, and making an effort Ralph turned to
speak.  But before a sound had left his lips, Mark burst out with:

"Going now?  Very well.  Wait till we meet again.  That way, sir.  I
dare say you know that you can cross the river there?"

Ralph bowed coldly, and took a few steps toward the shallows, before
stopping short.

"I must go and thank him for what he has done," he said to himself; and
he turned to walk back, but Mark was not visible.

"Master Mark Eden," he cried; but there was no reply, and he cried
again, shouting as loud as he could, but there was still no response.
And, sick at heart with pain and vexation, Ralph once more stumbled
awkwardly along by the river, amongst stone, bramble, and fern, trying
to make out where the deep chasm was down into which he had looked, but
it was completely hidden by the trees; and, reaching the shallows, he
slowly crossed to go homeward on the more open side, which was a far
less difficult task, though it necessitated crossing the river again.

But as the lad disappeared among the trees, Mark Eden rose from where he
had been hidden behind a pile of fallen blocks, to make his way into the
chasm, and then upward to the castle on the Black Tor, frowning very
fiercely, and feeling a good deal dissatisfied with himself, though
brightening up a little as he began thinking of what was to happen the
next time he and Ralph Darley met.

"One couldn't do anything," he said roughly, "till that old business had
been put straight."



CHAPTER TWELVE.

BARING THE WHITE BLADE.

Ralph Darley's disposition led him to determine to say nothing about
what had passed, but his lame legs forced him to confess how it was his
ankles were so bad, and Sir Morton was furious.  He was ready to declare
war on a small scale against his neighbour, and carry fire and sword
into his camp.  But Ralph's legs were better the next day; and when the
whole history of the two encounters had been gone over, he thought
better of the affair, to the extent of determining to wait till his son
was quite well again; and when he was quite well, there were other
things to dwell upon.

For one, Nick Garth, who had been across to one of the villages beyond
the moor, came back with his head bleeding, and stripped to breeches and
shirt.

His account of his trouble was that he was coming home in the dark,
keeping one eye upon a flickering light some distance away up the
mountain-side.  Sometimes it was visible, at others all was black; and
he was wondering whether it had anything to do with the witches' fire of
which he had heard tell, when all at once he found himself surrounded by
seven or eight wild-looking figures, either in long gowns or cloaks, who
seized him; and upon his resisting wildly, they knocked him down, took
the best of his clothes away, emptied his pockets, and departed,
carrying off a large basket he was taking home, a basket containing two
chickens, two ducklings, and a big pat of butter, the present of a
married sister beyond the moors.

The next day news reached the Black Tor that the witches had been seen
again by two different miners, and in each case the tale was the same.

The witches were crowding together in a huddled way, in their long
cloaks, over a fire.  A caldron was hung from three sticks, joined
together at the top, and one of the men declared that they must have
been busy over some unhallowed work.

"Why do you say that, man?" asked Mark.

"Because they were chanting some horrible thing together."

"You heard that?"

"Ay, Master Mark, I heered it."

"A song?"

"Song, Master Mark?  Save us, no!  A song makes your eyes water if it's
about solemn things, or it makes you laugh if it's comic; but this made
the marrow in my bones turn hard as taller, for it went through me; and
as I watched them, they all got up and joined hands, and began to walk
slowly round the great pot over the fire, and the light shone on their
horrible faces and long ragged gowns.  I wanted to run away, but my legs
was all of a tremble.  I'd ha' give anything to run, but they legs
wouldn't go, and there I stood, watching 'em as they danced round the
fire a little faster, and a little faster, till they were racing about,
singing and screeching.  And then all at once they stopped and shouted
`Wow?' all together, and burst into the most horrid shrecking laughter
you ever heered, and the light went out.  That seemed to set my legs
going, master, and I turned to get away as fast as ever I could go, when
I heered some kind o' wild bird whistle over the mountain-side, and
another answered it close to me: and before I knew where I was, the
great bird fluttered its wings over me, and I caught my foot in a tuft
of heather, and fell."

"Well, and what then?" asked Mark.

"Nothing, sir, only that I ran all the way home to my cottage yonder,
and you ask my wife, and she'll tell you I hadn't a dry thread on me
when I got in.  Now, sir, what do you say?"

"All nonsense!" replied Mark bluntly, and he walked away.

Another few days passed.  Mark had been very quiet and thoughtful at
home, reading, or making believe to read, and spending a good deal of
time in the mine with Dummy Rugg, who twice over proposed that they
should go on exploring the grotto-like place he had discovered; but to
his surprise, his young master put it off, and the quiet, silent fellow
waited.  He, though, had more tales to tell of the way in which things
disappeared from cottages.  Pigs, sheep, poultry went in the most
unaccountable way, and the witches who met sometimes on the mountain
slope had the credit of spiriting them away.

"Then why don't the people who lose things follow the witches up, and
see if they have taken them?"

"Follow 'em up, sir?" said Dummy, opening his eyes very widely.  "They
wouldn't dare."

Then came a day when, feeling dull and bitter and as if he were not
enjoying himself at home, as he did the last time he was there, Mark
mounted one of the stout cob ponies kept for his and his sister's use,
and went for a good long round, one which was prolonged so that it was
getting toward evening, and the sun was peering over the shoulder of one
of the western hills, when, throwing the rein on his cob's neck, and
leaving it to pick its own way among the stones of the moorland, he
entered a narrow, waste-looking dale, about four miles from the Tor.

He felt more dull and low-spirited than when he started in the morning,
probably from want of a good meal, for he had had nothing since
breakfast, save a hunch of very cake-like bread and a bowl of milk at a
cottage farm right up in the Peak, where he had rested his pony while it
had a good feed of oats.

The dale looked desolation itself, in spite of the gilding of the
setting sun.  Stone lay everywhere: not the limestone of his own hills
and cliffs, but grim, black-looking millstone-grit, which here and there
formed craggy, forbidding outlines; and this did not increase his
satisfaction with his ride, when he took up the rein and began to urge
the cob on, to get through the gloomy place.

But the cob knew better than his master what was best, and refused to
risk breaking its legs among the stones with which the moor was strewn.

"Ugh! you lazy fat brute," cried Mark; "one might just as well walk,
and--Who's that?"

He shaded his eyes from the sun, and looked long and carefully at a
figure a few hundred yards ahead till his heart began to beat fast, for
he felt sure that it was Ralph Darley.  Ten minutes after, he began to
be convinced, and coming to a clearer place where there was a pretence
of a bit of green sward, the cob broke into a canter of its own will,
which brought its rider a good deal nearer to the figure trudging in the
same direction.  Then the cob dropped into a walk again, picking its way
among great blocks of stone; and Mark was certain now that it was Ralph
Darley, with creel on back, and rod over his shoulder, evidently
returning from one of the higher streams after a day's fishing.

Mark's heart beat a little faster, and he nipped his cob's sides; but
the patient animal would not alter its steady walk, which was at about
the same rate as the fisher's, and consequently Mark had to sit and
watch his enemy's back, as, unconscious of his presence, Ralph trudged
on homeward, with one arm across his back to ease up the creel, which
was fairly heavy with the delicate burden of grayling it contained, the
result of a very successful day.

"He has his sword on this time," said Mark to himself, "and I've got
mine."

The lad touched the hilt, to make sure it had not been jerked out of the
scabbard during his ride.

"Just a bit farther on yonder," he muttered, gazing at the steep slope
of a limestone hill to his right, and a mile distant, "there are some
nice level bits of turf.  I can overtake him then, and we can have a bit
of a talk together."

The cob walked steadily on, avoiding awkward places better than his
master could have guided him, and suddenly stopped short at a rocky
pool, where a little spring of water gushed from the foot of a steep
slope, and lowered its head to drink.

"You don't want water now," said Mark angrily; and he tightened the
rein, but his cob had a mouth like leather; and caring nothing for the
bit, bore upon it heavily, stretched out his neck, and had a long deep
drink.

"I wish I had spurs on," muttered Mark; "I'd give you a couple of such
digs, my fine fellow."

Then he sat thinking.

"Good job I haven't got any on.  I should trip, for certain, when we
were at it."

Then the cob raised its dripping mouth, which it had kept with lips very
close together, to act as a strainer to keep out tadpoles,
water-beetles, leeches, or any other unpleasant creatures that might be
in the water, took two or three steps back and aside, and then, noticing
that there was a goodly patch of rich juicy herbage close by the spring,
it lowered its head once more, uttered a snort as it blew the grass
heavily, to drive off any flies that might be nestling among the
strands, and began to crop, crop at the rich feed.

