moreover, the gods grant that we destroy the great city of Priam, let
him fill his ships abundantly with gold and brass, entering in when we
the Greeks divide the spoil. Let him also choose twenty Trojan women,
who may be fairest next to Argive Helen. But if we reach Achaean Argos,
the udder of the land,[296] he may become my son-in-law; and I will
honour him equally with Orestes, who is nurtured as my darling son, in
great affluence. Now, I have three daughters in my well-built
palace,--Chrysothemis, Laodice, and Iphianassa. Of these let him lead
the beloved one, whichsoever he may choose, without marriage-dower, to
the house of Peleus; but I will give very many dowries, so many as no
man ever yet gave to his daughter. I will, moreover, give him seven
well-inhabited cities,--Cardamyle, Enope, and grassy Ira, glorious
Pherae, with deep-pastured Anthea, fair AEpeia, and vine-bearing Pedasus;
which are all near the sea, the last towards sandy Pylus. But in them
dwell men rich in flocks and herds, who will honour him like a god with
gifts, and beneath his sceptre will pay rich tributes. These will I
bestow upon him, ceasing from his anger. Let him be prevailed upon.
Pluto indeed is implacable and inexorable, wherefore he is the most
hateful of all the gods to men. Let him likewise yield to me, inasmuch
as I am more kingly, and because I boast to be older [than he]."

But him the Gerenian knight Nestor then answered: "Most glorious son of
Atreus, king of men, Agamemnon, thou indeed offerest gifts by no means
despicable to king Achilles. But come, let us urge chosen men, who may
go with all speed to the tent of Achilles, the son of Peleus. Come then,
these will I select, but let them obey. First of all indeed let Phoenix,
dear to Jove, be the leader; next then mighty Ajax and divine Ulysses:
and of the heralds, let Hodius and Eurybates follow with them. But bring
water for the hands, and command to observe well-omened words,[297] that
we may supplicate Saturnian Jove, if perchance he will take pity."

   [Footnote 295: _I. e_. not yet brought into common use.]

   [Footnote 296: A beautiful expression, denoting the fertility of
   the land. Cf. Albert. on Hesych. t. ii. p. 806. So [Greek: nesoio
   mastos] in Callim. II. in Del. 48.]

   [Footnote 297: The translation, "favour us with their voices," is
   nonsense, while "keep silence" is by no means the meaning of
   [Greek: euphemesai]. Kennedy rightly explains it, "abstain from
   expressions unsuitable to the solemnity of the occasion, which,
   by offending the god, might defeat the object of their
   supplications." See Servius on Virg. AEn. v. 71; Lamb, on Hor. Od.
   iii. 1, 2; Broukhus. on Tibull. ii. 1, 1.]

Thus he spoke, and delivered an opinion agreeable to them all.
Immediately indeed the heralds poured water upon their hands, and the
youths crowned the goblets with wine; then they distributed them to all,
having poured the first of the wine into the cups. But when they had
made libations, and drunk as much as their mind desired, they hastened
from the tent of Agamemnon, the son of Atreus. To them the Gerenian
knight Nestor gave many charges, looking wistfully upon each,
particularly upon Ulysses, that they should endeavour to persuade the
blameless son of Peleus.

They twain then went along the shore of the loud-sounding sea, praying
earnestly to earth-shaking [Neptune], who encompasses the earth, that
they might easily persuade the great mind of the grandson of AEacus. But
they came to the tents and ships of the Myrmidons, and they found him
delighting his soul with his clear-toned harp, beautiful, curiously
wrought, and upon it was a silver comb. This he had taken from amongst
the spoils, having destroyed the city of Eetion, and with it he was
delighting his soul, and singing the glorious deeds[298] of heroes.
Patroclus alone sat opposite to him in silence, waiting upon the
descendant of AEacus when he should cease to sing. Then they advanced
farther, and divine Ulysses preceded; and they stood before him; whilst
Achilles, astonished, leaped up, with his lyre, quitting the seat where
he had been sitting. In like manner Patroclus, when he beheld the
heroes, arose, and swift-footed Achilles taking them by the hand,
addressed them:

"Hail, warriors, ye indeed have come as friends. Surely [there is] some
great necessity [when ye come], who are to me, although enraged, dearest
of the Greeks."

   [Footnote 298: Or the renown of heroes. So Apollon. i. 1:
   [Greek: Palaigeneon klea photon Mnesomai].]

Thus having spoken, divine Achilles led them forward, and seated them
upon couches and purple coverlets; then straightway he addressed
Patroclus, who was near:

"Place a larger goblet, O son of Menoetius, mix purer wine,[299] and
prepare a cup for each, for men most dear [to me] are beneath my roof."

   [Footnote 299: _I. e_. less diluted than usual. On this quaint
   picture of ancient manners, compared with the customs of the
   Hebrew fathers, compare Coleridge, p. 151.]

Thus he spoke; and Patroclus obeyed his dear companion. But he
[Achilles] placed in the flame of the fire a large dressing-block, and
upon it he laid the chine of a sheep and of a fat goat, with the back of
a fatted sow, abounding in fat. Automedon then held them for him, and
noble Achilles cut them up; and divided them skilfully into small
pieces, and transfixed them with spits; whilst the son of Menoetius, a
godlike hero, kindled a large fire. But when the fire had burned away,
and the flame grew languid, strewing the embers, he extended the spits
over them, and sprinkled them with sacred salt, raising them up from the
racks. But when he had dressed them, and had thrown them upon kitchen
tables, Patroclus, taking bread, served it out upon the board in
beautiful baskets: but Achilles distributed the flesh. But he himself
sat opposite to noble Ulysses, against the other wall, and ordered
Patroclus, his companion, to sacrifice to the gods; and he accordingly
cast the first morsels[300] into the fire. And they stretched forth
their hands to the prepared viands which lay before them. But when they
had dismissed the desire of eating and drinking, Ajax nodded to Phoenix,
but noble Ulysses observed it, and having filled his goblet with wine,
he pledged Achilles:

   [Footnote 300: Hesych. and Phrynicus (for their glosses should
   probably be joined), [Greek: Thnelas' aparchas ton tethymenon].]

"Health, Achilles. We are not wanting of a complete feast, either in the
tent of Agamemnon, son of Atreus, or even here also, for many
strength-recruiting dainties are here; but the business of an agreeable
feast is not our care. We, O thou Jove-nurtured one, contemplating it,
rather dread a very great disaster, as it is matter of doubt whether the
well-benched ships be saved or destroyed, unless thou puttest on thy
might. For near the ships and the wall the high-minded Trojans and their
far-summoned allies have pitched their camp, kindling many fires
throughout the host; and they say that they will no longer restrain
themselves, but that they will fall upon our black vessels.[301] And
Saturnian Jove exhibiting to them propitious signs, darts his lightning;
and Hector, looking fiercely round in valour, rages terribly, trusting
in Jove, nor reverences at all either men or gods, but great madness
hath come upon him. He prays that divine morn may speedily come. For he
declares that he will cut off the poop-ends[302] of the ships, and burn
[the ships] themselves with ravaging fire, and slaughter the Greeks
beside them, discomforted by the smoke. Wherefore do I greatly fear in
my mind lest the gods may fulfil his threats, and it be destined for us
to perish in Troy, far from steed-nourishing Argos. Rise then, if thou
hast the intention, although late, to defend the harassed sons of the
Greeks from the violent onslaught of the Trojans. To thyself it will
hereafter be a cause of sorrow, nor is it possible in any manner to
discover a remedy for a disaster when received; wherefore reflect much
beforehand, how thou mayest avert the evil day from the Greeks. O my
friend, surely thy father Peleus charged thee, on that day when he sent
thee from Phthia to Agamemnon, 'My son, Minerva and Juno will bestow
valour, if they choose; but restrain thy great-hearted soul within thy
breast, because humanity is better; and abstain from injurious
contention, that both the youth and elders of the Greeks may honour thee
the more.' Thus did the old man give charge, but thou art forgetful. Yet
even now desist, and lay aside thy mind-corroding wrath. To thee
Agamemnon gives worthy gifts, ceasing from indignation. But if [thou
wilt] hear from me, and I will repeat to thee how many presents
Agamemnon in his tents hath promised thee: seven tripods, untouched by
the fire, and ten talents of gold, twenty shining caldrons, and twelve
stout steeds, victorious in the race, which have borne off prizes by
their feet. No pauper, nor in want of precious gold, would that man be
to whom so many prizes belonged as the steeds of Agamemnon have borne
off by their fleetness. He will likewise give seven beautiful women,
skilful in faultless works, Lesbians, whom he selected when thou thyself
didst take well-inhabited Lesbos, who then excelled the race of women in
beauty. These will he give thee, and amongst them will be her whom once
he took away, the daughter of Briseis; and he will moreover swear a
mighty oath, that he never ascended her bed, nor embraced her, as is the
custom. O king, both of men and women. All these shall immediately be in
waiting; and if, moreover, the gods grant that we pillage the vast city
of Priam, entering, thou mayest fill thy ships abundantly with gold and
brass, when we, the Greeks, divide the spoil. Thou shalt also choose
twenty Trojan women, who may be fairest next to Argive Helen. But if we
reach Achaean Argos, the udder of the land, thou mayest become his
son-in-law, and he will honour thee equally with Orestes, who is
nurtured as his darling son, in great affluence. But he has three
daughters in his well-built palace,--Chrysothemis, Laodice, and
Iphianassa. Of these thou shalt conduct the most beloved whomsoever thou
mayest choose, without marriage-gifts, to the house of Peleus; but he
will give very many dowries, such as no man yet gave his daughter. He
will moreover give thee seven well-inhabited cities,--Cardamyle, Enope,
and grassy Ira, glorious Pherae, with deep-pastured Anthea, fair AEpeia,
and vine-bearing Pedasus; which are all near the sea, the last towards
sandy Pylus. But in them dwell men abounding in flocks and herds, who
will honour thee with gifts like a god, and under thy sceptre pay rich
tributes. These will he fulfil to thee ceasing from thy wrath. But if
indeed the son of Atreus himself and his gifts be more hateful to thee
from thine heart, at least have pity upon all the other Greeks, harassed
throughout the army, who will honour thee as a god; for surely thou wilt
obtain very great honour among them. For now mayest thou slay Hector,
since he hath already come very near thee, possessing destructive fury;
since he declares that no one of the Greeks whom the ships have conveyed
hither is his equal."

   [Footnote 301: But Heyne, "non locum tuituros [nos], sed in naves
   fugituros et discessuros."]

   [Footnote 302: This interpretation is substantiated by Heyne,
   from Il. O, 717. The [Greek: akrostolia], or _figure-heads_, are
   not meant here.]

But him swift-footed Achilles answering, addressed: "Most noble son of
Laertes, much-scheming Ulysses, it behoves me indeed to speak my opinion
without reserve, even as I think, and as will be accomplished, that ye
may not, sitting beside me, keep whining[303] one after another. Hateful
to me as the gates of Hades is he who conceals one thing in his mind and
utters another. But I will speak as appears to me to be best; and I
think that neither Agamemnon, the son of Atreus, nor the other Greeks
will persuade me; since there is no gratitude to him who fights ever
ceaselessly with hostile men. An equal portion [falls] to him who
loiters, as if one continually fight; and the coward is in equal honour
with the brave. The man of no deeds, and the man of many, are wont
equally to die; nor does anything lie by me as a store,[304] because I
have suffered sorrows in my soul, ever risking my life to fight. And as
the bird brings food to her unfledged young when she hath found it,
although she fares badly herself; so have I too spent many sleepless
nights, and gone through bloody days in combat, fighting with heroes for
their wives' sakes. Twelve cities indeed of men have I wasted with my
ships, and on foot I say eleven throughout the fertile Troad.[305] From
all these have I carried off many and precious spoils, and bearing them,
have given all to Agamemnon, the son of Atreus; whilst he, remaining
behind at the swift ships, receiving them, hath distributed but few, but
retained many. To the chiefs and kings hath he given other prizes; to
whom indeed they remain entire: but from me alone of the Greeks hath he
taken it away, and he possesses my spouse, dear to my soul, with whom
reclining, let him delight himself. But why is it necessary that the
Greeks wage war with the Trojans? Or from what necessity did the son of
Atreus, assembling an army, lead it hither? Was it not on account of
fair-haired Helen? Do the sons of Atreus alone, of articulate-speaking
men, love their wives? [Surely not], since whatever man is good and
prudent loves and cherishes his spouse; thus I too loved her from my
soul, though the captive of my spear. And now since he hath snatched my
reward from my hands, and deceived me, let him not make trial of me,
already well informed, for he will not persuade me; but let him consider
with thee, O Ulysses, and the other kings, how he may repel the hostile
fire from the ships. Assuredly he has already accomplished many labours
without me. He has already built a rampart, and drawn a trench broad
[and] large beside it; and planted in it palisades; but not even thus
can he restrain the might of man-slaughtering Hector. Whilst I indeed
fought amongst the Greeks, Hector chose not to arouse the battle at a
distance from the wall, but he came [only] as far as the Scaean gates,
and the beech-tree. There once he awaited me alone, and with difficulty
escaped my attack. But since I choose not to war with noble Hector,
to-morrow,[306] having performed sacrifices to Jove and all the gods,
[and] having well laden my ships, when I shall have drawn them down to
the sea, thou shalt behold, if thou wilt, and if such things be a care
to thee, my ships early in the morn sailing upon the fishy Hellespont,
and men within them, eager for rowing; and if glorious Neptune grant but
a prosperous voyage, on the third day I shall surely reach fertile
Phthia.[307] Now there I have very many possessions, which I left,
coming hither, to my loss.[308] And I will carry hence other gold and
ruddy brass, well-girdled women, and hoary iron, which I have obtained
by lot. But the reward which he gave, king Agamemnon, the son of Atreus,
hath himself insultingly taken from me: to whom do thou tell all things
as I charge thee, openly, that the other Greeks also may be indignant,
if he, ever clad in impudence, still hope to deceive any of the Greeks;
nor let him dare, dog-like as he is, to look in my face. I will neither
join in counsels nor in any action with him; for he hath already
deceived and offended me, nor shall he again overreach me with words. It
is enough for him [to do so once]: but in quiet[309] let him perish, for
provident Jove hath deprived him of reason. Hateful to me are his gifts,
and himself I value not a hair.[310] Not if he were to give me ten and
twenty times as many gifts as he now has, and if others were to be added
from any other quarter; nor as many as arrive at Orchomenos, or
Egyptian Thebes,[311] where numerous possessions are laid up in the
mansions, and where are one hundred gates,[312] from each of which rush
out two hundred men with horses and chariots. Nor if he were to give me
as many as are the sands and dust, not even thus shall Agamemnon ow
persuade my mind, until he indemnify me for all his mind-grieving
insult. But I will not wed the daughter of Agamemnon, the son of Atreus,
not if she were fit to contend in beauty with golden Venus, or were
equal in accomplishments to azure-eyed Minerva; not even thus will I wed
her. Let him then select another of the Greeks who may suit him, and who
is more the king; for if the gods preserve me, and I reach home, then
will Peleus himself hereafter bestow upon me a lady in marriage. There
are many Grecian women throughout Hellas and Phthia, daughters of
chieftains who defend the cities. Whomsoever of these I may choose, I
will make my beloved wife; and there my generous soul very much desires
that I, wedding a betrothed spouse, a fit partner of my bed, should
enjoy the possessions which aged Peleus hath acquired. For not worth my
life are all the [treasures] which they say the well-inhabited city
Ilium possessed, whilst formerly at peace, before the sons of the Greeks
arrived; nor all which the stony threshold of the archer Phoebus Apollo
contains within it, in rocky Pytho.[313] By plunder, oxen and fat sheep
are to be procured, tripods are to be procured, and the yellow heads of
steeds; but the life of man cannot be obtained nor seized, so as to
return again, when once it has passed the enclosure of the teeth. For my
goddess mother, silver-footed Thetis, declares that double destinies
lead me on to the end of death. If, on the one hand, remaining here, I
wage war around the city of the Trojans, return is lost to me, but my
glory will be immortal; but if, on the other hand, I return home to my
dear fatherland, my excellent glory is lost, but my life will be
lasting, nor will the end of death speedily seize upon me. And to others
also would I give advice to sail home, for ye will not find an end of
lofty Ilium; for far-sounding Jove hath stretched over it his hand, and
the people have taken courage. But do ye, departing, bear back this
message to the chiefs of the Greeks, for such is the office of
ambassadors, that they devise within their minds some other better plan,
which for them may preserve their ships, and the army of the Greeks in
the hollow barks; since this, which they have now devised, is not
expedient for them, while I cherish my wrath. But let Phoenix, remaining
here, recline beside us, that to-morrow, if he will, he may follow me
in the ships to my dear fatherland, although I will by no means lead him
away by compulsion."

   [Footnote 303: This word is etymologically connected with [Greek:
   trngon]. It properly signifies the moaning of the dove.]

   [Footnote 304: Schol. [Greek: perisson ti esti]. Kennedy explains
   it: "nor have all the toils which I have undergone been
   productive of any superior advantage to me."]

   [Footnote 305: See a list of these cities in Heyne's note.]

   [Footnote 306: Observe the broken construction, well suited to
   the irritability of the speaker.]

   [Footnote 307: Cf. Cicero de Div. i. 25.]

   [Footnote 308: [Greek: "Erron, epi phthora."] (ita etym. magn.)
   [Greek: paragenomenos]. Cf. Alberti on Hesych. t. i. p. 1445.]

   [Footnote 309: "[Greek: Ekelos] forcibly expresses the condition
   of one who is advancing imperceptibly, though surely, to final
   ruin."--Kennedy].

   [Footnote 310: See Kennedy, and Duport, Gnom. p. 52, who compare
   the phrases "pilo minus amare", "pili facere." There is, however,
   much uncertainty respecting the origin and meaning of the
   proverb. Cf. Alberti on Hesych. t. i. p. 1246.]

   [Footnote 311: "Thebes was the centre of Egyptian power and
   commerce, probably long before Memphis grew into importance, or
   before the Delta was made suitable to the purposes of husbandry
   by the cutting of canals and the raising of
   embankments."--Egyptian Antiquities, vol. i. p. 66.]

   [Footnote 312: Although Denon (see Egypt. Antt. p. 62) regards
   this as an unmeaning expression, Heyne well observes: "numerus
   centenarius ponitur pro magno: et portis semel memoratis,
   multitudo hominum declaratur per numerum exeuntium."]

   [Footnote 313: Cf. Mueller, Dorians, vol. i. pp. 26, 268.]

Thus he spoke; but they all became mute in silence, marvelling at his
speech, for he answered with much vehemence. At length, however, the
aged knight, Phoenix, addressed him, shedding tears, for he greatly
feared for the ships of the Greeks:

"If indeed, O illustrious Achilles, thou dost now meditate a return
within thy mind, nor art at all willing to repel the destructive fire
from the swift ships, because indignation hath fallen upon thy soul; how
then can I, my dear child, be left here alone by thee? for aged Peleus,
the breaker of steeds, sent me forth with thee on that day, when he
despatched thee from Phthia to Agamemnon, a boy, not yet skilled either
in equally-destroying war, nor in counsels where men also become
illustrious. On which account he sent me forth to teach thee all these
things, that thou mightest become both an orator in words and a
performer in deeds. Thus then, my dear child, I wish not at length to be
left by thee, not even if a god himself, having divested me of old age,
should promise that he would render me a blooming youth, such as I was
when first I quitted fair-damed Hellas, flying the contentions of my
father Amyntor, son of Ormenus; who was enraged with me on account of a
fair-haired concubine whom he himself loved, but dishonoured his wife,
my mother. But she continually would embrace my knees in supplication,
that I should first have connection with the concubine, that she might
loathe the old man. Her I obeyed, and did so; but my father immediately
perceiving it, uttered many execrations, and invoked the hateful
Erinnys, that no dear son, sprung from me, should ever be placed upon
his knees; and the gods ratified his execrations, both infernal Jove and
dread Proserpine. Then my soul within my mind could no longer endure
that I should sojourn in the palace whilst my father was enraged. My
friends, indeed, and relations, being much about me, detained me there
within the halls, entreating [me to stay]. Many fat sheep and
stamping-footed, crooked-horned oxen they slaughtered; many swine
abounding in fat were stretched out to be roasted in the flame of
Vulcan, and much of the old man's wine was drunk out of earthen vessels.
Nine nights did they sleep around me: whilst, taking it in turns, they
kept watch; nor was the fire ever extinguished, one in the portico of
the well-fenced hall, and another in the vestibule, before the
chamber-doors. But when at length the tenth shady night had come upon
me, then indeed I rushed forth, having burst the skilfully-joined doors
of the apartment, and I easily overleaped the fence of the hall,
escaping the notice of the watchmen and the female domestics. Afterwards
I fled thence through spacious Hellas, and came to fertile Phthia, the
mother of sheep, to king Peleus; who kindly received me, and loved me
even as a father loves his only son, born in his old age[314] to ample
possessions. He made me opulent, and bestowed upon me much people, and I
inhabited the extreme shores of Phthia, ruling over the Dolopians. Thee
too, O godlike Achilles, have I rendered what thou art,[315] loving thee
from my soul; since thou wouldst not go with another to the feast, nor
take food in the mansion, until I, placing thee upon my knees, satisfied
thee with viands, previously carving them, and supplied thee with wine.
Often hast thou wetted the tunic upon my breast, ejecting the wine in
infant peevishness.[316] Thus have I borne very many things from thee,
and much have I laboured, thinking this, that since the gods have not
granted an offspring to me from myself, I should at least make thee my
son, O Achilles, like unto the gods, that thou mightst yet repel from me
unworthy destiny. But O Achilles, subdue thy mighty rage; it is by no
means necessary for thee to have a merciless heart. Flexible are even
the gods themselves, whose virtue, honour, and might are greater [than
thine]. Even these, when any one transgresses and errs, do men divert
[from their wrath] by sacrifices and appeasing vows, and frankincense
and savour. For Prayers also are the daughters of supreme Jove,[317]
both halt, and wrinkled, and squint-eyed; which following on Ate from
behind, are full of care. But Ate is robust and sound in limb, wherefore
she far outstrips all, and arrives first at every land, doing injury to
men; whilst these afterwards cure them.[318] Whosoever will reverence
the daughters of Jove approaching, him they are wont greatly to aid, and
hear when praying. But whosoever will deny and obstinately refuse them,
then indeed, drawing near, they entreat Saturnian Jove, that Ate may
follow along with him, that being injured [in turn], he may pay the
penalty. But O Achilles, do thou too yield honour to accompany the
daughters of Jove, which bends the minds of other brave men; for if
Atrides brought not gifts, and did not mention others in futurity, but
would ever rage vehemently, I for my part would not advise that, casting
away wrath, thou shouldst defend the Greeks, although greatly in need.
But now he at once gives both many immediately, and promises others
hereafter; moreover, he hath despatched the best men to supplicate thee,
having selected throughout the Grecian army those who are dearest to
thyself; whose entreaty do not thou despise, nor their mission, although
formerly fault was not to be found with thee, because thou wert enraged.
Thus also have we heard the renown of heroes of former days, when
vehement wrath came upon any, [that] they were both appeasable by gifts,
and to be reconciled by words. I remember this ancient and by no means
modern deed, of what sort it was; and I will repeat it among you all,
being friends. The Curetes and AEtolians, obstinate in battle, fought
around the city of Calydon, and slaughtered each other; the AEtolians, in
defence of lofty Calydon, the Curetes, eager to lay it waste in war; for
between them had golden-throned Diana excited mischief, indignant
because oeneus had not offered the first-fruits in sacrifice in the
fertile spot of ground:[319] whilst the other gods feasted on hecatombs,
but to the daughter of mighty Jove alone he sacrificed not. Either he
forgot,[320] or did not think of it, but he did greatly err in mind. But
she, the daughter of Jove, delighting in arrows, enraged, sent against
[him] a sylvan wild boar, with white tusks, which did much detriment, as
is the wont [of boars], to the land of oeneus. And many tall trees, one
after another, did he prostrate on the ground, with their very roots and
the blossom of their fruit. But him Meleager, son of oeneus, slew,
assembling huntsmen and dogs from many cities; for he would not have
been subdued by a few mortals: so mighty was he, and he caused many to
ascend the sad funeral-pile. Still she (Diana) excited around him[321] a
great tumult and war between the Curetes and magnanimous AEtolians, for
the head and bristly skin of the boar.[322] Whilst warlike Meleager
fought, so long were the Curetes unsuccessful; nor were they able,
although numerous, to remain without the wall. But when wrath, which
swells the minds of others, though very prudent, within their breasts,
came upon Meleager, for, enraged at heart with his dear mother Althaea,
he remained inactive beside his wedded wife, fair Cleopatra, daughter of
Marpessa, the handsome-footed child of Evenus and Idas, who was then the
bravest of earthly men, and even lifted a bow against king Phoebus
Apollo, for the sake of his fair-ankled spouse. Her [Cleopatra] then her
father and venerable mother in the palace were accustomed to call by the
surname of Alcyone, because her mother, having the plaintive note of sad
Alcyone,[323] lamented when far-darting Phoebus Apollo stole her away.
Beside her he [Meleager] remained inactive, brooding[324] over his sad
anger, enraged because of the curses of his mother, who, much grieving,
prayed to the gods on account of the murder of her brethren.[325] Often
with her hands did she strike the fruitful earth, calling upon Pluto and
dread Proserpine, reclining upon her knees, whilst her bosom was bedewed
with tears, to give death to her son: but her the Erinnys, wandering in
gloom, possessing an implacable heart, heard from Erebus. Then
immediately was there noise and tumult of these[326] excited round the
gates, the towers being battered. Then did the elders of the AEtolians
entreat him, and sent chosen priests to the gods, that he would come
forth and defend them, promising a great gift. Where the soil of fertile
Calydon was richest, there they ordered him to choose a beautiful
enclosure of fifty acres; the one half, of land fit for vines, to cut
off the other half of plain land, free from wood, for tillage. Much did
aged oeneus, breaker of steeds, beseech him, having ascended to the
threshold of his lofty-roofed chamber, shaking the well-glued door-post,
supplicating his son. And much also his sisters and venerable mother
entreated him, but he the more refused; and much [prayed] the companions
who were dearest and most friendly of all; but not even thus did they
persuade the soul within his breast, until his chamber was violently
assailed, and the Curetes were in the act of scaling the ramparts, and
firing the great city. Then indeed at length his fair-girdled spouse,
weeping, supplicated Meleager, and recounted all the disasters, as many
as happen to men whose city may be taken. In the first place, they slay
the men,[327] whilst fire reduces the city to ashes; and others carry
off the children and deep-zoned women. Then was his soul disturbed when
he heard of evil deeds, and he hasted to go and gird the all-glittering
armour around his body. Thus he repelled the evil day from the AEtolians,
yielding to his own inclination; but they did not make good to him the
many and pleasing gifts; but he nevertheless warded off evil. But
revolve not such things within thy mind, O my friend, nor let the
deity[328] thus turn thee, since it would be more dishonourable to
assist the ships [when already] set on fire. Rather come for the gifts,
for the Greeks will honour thee equally with a god. If again without
gifts thou enter the man-destroying battle, thou wilt not receive equal
honour, although warding off the war."

But him swift-footed Achilles, answering, addressed: "Phoenix, respected
father, old man, Jove-nurtured, to me there is no need of this honour,
for I conceive that I have been honoured by the behest of Jove, which
will detain me at the crooked ships whilst breath remains in my bosom,
and my knees have the power of motion. But I will tell thee something
else, and do thou revolve it in thy mind. Disturb not my soul, weeping
and lamenting, gratifying the hero Atrides; it is not at all necessary
that thou love him, that thou mayest not be hated by me, who love thee.
It is proper for thee with me to give annoyance to him who hath annoyed
me. Rule equally with me, and receive my honour in half.[329] These will
bear back my message; but do thou, remaining here, recline upon a soft
bed, and with morn appearing let us consult whether we shall return to
our native land or remain."

   [Footnote 314: See, however, Buttm. Lexil. p. 510, sqq., who
   considers that [Greek: telygetos] simply means "_tenderly
   beloved_; only that it is a more forcible expression for this
   idea, as is evident from the bad sense in which the word is used
   at II. v. 470, where the meaning of a child _spoiled_ by the love
   of its parents is evident."]

   [Footnote 315: _I.e._ I reared thee to thy present age. Lit. "I
   made thee so great."]

   [Footnote 316: If any one should despise these natural details as
   trifling and beneath the dignity of poetry, I can only recommend
   a comparison with AEsch. Choeph. 750, sqq., and Shakspeare's nurse
   in "Romeo and Juliet." In such passages, the age of the supposed
   speaker is the best apology for the poet.]

   [Footnote 317: See Duport, Gnom. Hom. p. 57.]

   [Footnote 318: Perhaps it was from this passage that Sterne took
   his sublime idea of the Recording Angel blotting out the oath
   which the Accusing Spirit had carried up to heaven.]

   [Footnote 319: Cf. Hesiod, Theog. 54. [Greek: Mnemosyne,
   gounoisin eleutheros medeousa]. Like [Greek: outhar aroures], in
   ver. 141, it is an expression denoting excessive fertility.]

   [Footnote 320: So Xenoph. de Venat. Sec. 1. [Greek: Oineos d' en
   gera epilathomenou tes ueou]. See an excellent sketch of the
   story in Grote, vol. i. p. 195, sqq. Cf. Hygin. Fab. clxxii.;
   Lactant. Arg. fab. Ovid. viii. 4; Antonin. Lib. Met. Sec. 2.]

   [Footnote 321: _I. e._ the boar.]

   [Footnote 322: On the legend of this war, see Apollodor. i. 8, 2;
   Callimach. Ib. Dian. 216; Ovid, Met. viii. 260. A catalogue of
   the heroes who accompanied Meleager is given by Hyginus, Fab.
   clxxiii.]

   [Footnote 323: See Antonin. Liberal. Met. Sec. 2. who follows Homer
   rather closely.]

   [Footnote 324: Literally, "digesting."]

   [Footnote 325: See n. 2, p. 41, and on the death of Meleager, by
   his mother burning a fatal brand, Apollodor. i. c.; Zenobius
   Cent. Adag. v. 33; Anton. Lib. Met. Sec. 2.]

   [Footnote 326: _I. e._ the Calydonians.]

   [Footnote 327: This catalogue of the horrors of war seems to have
   been in the minds of Sallust, Cat. Sec. 51, and Cicero, Or. iv. in
   Catil.]

   [Footnote 328: Rudolf on Ocellus Lucan. p. 266, well observes,
   "Antiquissimis temporibus, quorum repetere memoriam possumus,
   [Greek: daimon] nihil aliud erat, quam deus. Horn. Od. g, 165,
   160; Il. g, 420; II. l, 791. Neque in eo vocabuli discrimen est,
   si aut prosunt hominibus, aut iis nocent; utroque enim modo
   [Greek: daimones] dicuntur." Kennedy and some of the translators
   have erred on this point.]

   [Footnote 329: _I. e._ [Greek: kath' emisu]. See Heyne.]

He said, and in silence nodded to Patroclus from beneath his brows, that
he should strew a thick bed for Phoenix, whilst they were meditating to
withdraw as quickly as possible from the tent. But them godlike
Telamonian Ajax addressed:

"O Jove-born son of Laertes, crafty Ulysses, let us go, for the object
of our address appears not to me to be attainable, in this way at least,
and we must report the message to the Greeks with all haste, although it
be not good. They now sit expecting us; but Achilles stores up within
his breast a fierce and haughty soul, unyielding; nor does he regard the
friendship of his companions, with which we have honoured him at the
ships beyond others. Merciless one! and truly some one hath accepted
compensation even for a brother's death, or his own son slain, whilst
[the murderer] remains at home among his people, having paid many
expiations: and the mind and noble soul of the other is appeased upon
his having received compensation. But in thy breast the gods have put an
unyielding and evil mind, for the sake of a maid only; whereas we now
offer thee seven far excelling, and many other gifts beside them. Do
thou then assume a propitious disposition; and have respect to thy
house, for we are guests beneath thy roof from the multitude of the
Greeks, and desire to be most dear and friendly to thee beyond all the
Achaeans, as many as they are."

But him swift-footed Achilles, answering, addressed: "Most noble Ajax,
son of Telamon, chief of the people, thou appearest to me to have said
all this from thy soul, yet does my heart swell with indignation as
often as I recollect those things, how the son of Atreus hath rendered
me dishonoured among the Greeks, as if it were some contemptible
stranger. But go ye, and carry back my message, for I shall not think of
bloody war, before the son of warlike Priam, noble Hector, slaughtering
the Greeks, shall reach the ships of the Myrmidons, and burn the ships
with fire. But about my tent and black ship, however, I think that
Hector, although eager, will desist from combat."

Thus he spake; but they, each having seized a double goblet, having made
libations, went back by the side of the fleet, and Ulysses led the way.
But Patroclus gave orders to his companions and female domestics to
strew, with all haste, a thick couch for Phoenix; and they, obedient,
spread a bed as he desired,--sheep-skins, coverlets, and the fine fabric
of flax: there lay the old man, and awaited heavenly Morn. But Achilles
slept in the recess of his well-made tent; and beside him lay a lady,
fair-cheeked Diomede, daughter of Phorbas, whom he had brought from
Lesbos. And Patroclus on the other side reclined: and by him also lay
fair-waisted Iphis, whom noble Achilles gave him, having taken lofty
Scyros, a city of Enyeus.

But when they were within the tents of Atrides, the sons of the Greeks,
rising one after another, received them with golden cups, and
interrogated thus. And first the king of men, Agamemnon, inquired:

"Come, tell me, O Ulysses, much praised, great glory of the Greeks,
whether does he wish to ward off the hostile fire from the ships, or has
he refused, and does wrath still posses his haughty soul?"

But him much-enduring, noble Ulysses then addressed: "Most glorious son
of Atreus, Agamemnon, king of men, he wills not to extinguish his wrath,
but is the more filled with anger, and despises thee as well as thy
gifts. He bids thee thyself consult with the Greeks, in what manner thou
mayest preserve both the ships and the army of the Greeks, but has
himself threatened, that with the rising dawn he will launch into the
main his well-benched, equally-plied vessels. And he has declared that
he would advise others also to sail home, since ye will not now effect
the destruction of lofty Ilium; for far-resounding Jove hath greatly
stretched forth his hand [over it], and the people have taken courage.
Thus he spoke; and here are these who followed me, Ajax, and the two
heralds, both prudent men, to tell these things. But aged Phoenix hath
lain down there, for thus he ordered, that in the morning, if he chose,
he might follow him in the ships to his dear father-land; but he will by
no means carry him off against his will."

Thus he spake; and they all became mute in silence, marvelling at his
speech, for he harangued with great vehemence. Long were the sorrowing
sons of the Greeks mute, till at length Diomede, valiant in the din of
battle, addressed them:

"Most glorious son of Atreus, king of men, Agamemnon, would that thou
hadst not supplicated the illustrious son of Peleus, offering countless
gifts, for he is haughty even otherwise:[330] now again hast thou
excited him much more to insolence. Let us, however, leave him alone,
whether he go or remain, for he will fight again at that time when his
mind within his breast urges, and the Deity incites him. But come, let
us all obey as I shall advise: go now to rest, having satisfied your
hearts with food and wine, for this is force and vigour. But when fair
