
'Ah yes, Elleen,' cried Jean. 'This is something to have come for.'

'And Margaret, sweet Madge,' repeated Eleanor to herself, in her native
Scotch, while King Rene's trumpets, harps, and hautbois burst forth with
an answering peal, so exciting her that her yellow-brown eyes sparkled
and the colour rose in her cheeks, giving her a strange beauty full of
eager spirit. Duke Sigismund turned and gazed at her in surprise, and an
old herald who was waiting near observed, 'Is that the daughter of the
captive King of Scotland? She has his very countenance and bearing.'

The trumpeters and other attendants, bearing the blue-lilied banner of
France, appeared among the trees, and dividing, formed a lane for the
advance of the royal personages. King Rene went forward to meet them,
foremost, so as to be ready to hold the stirrup for his sister the Queen
of France. Duke Sigismund seemed about to give his hand to the Infanta
Violante, as the Provencaux called Yolande, but she was beforehand with
him, linking her arm into Jean's, while Margaret took Eleanor's, and
said in her ear, 'The great awkward German! He is come here to pay his
court to Yolande, but she will none of him. She has better hopes.'

Eleanor hardly attended, for her whole soul was bent on the party
arriving. King Charles, riding on a handsome bay horse, closely followed
by a conveyance such as was called in England a whirlicote, from which
the Queen was handed out by her brother, and then, on a sorrel palfrey,
in a blue gold-embroidered riding-suit--could that be Margaret of
Scotland? The long reddish-yellow hair and the tall figure had a
familiar look. King Rene was telling her something as he helped her to
alight, and with one spring, regardless of all, and of all ceremony,
she sprang forward. 'My wee Jeanie! My Elleen! My titties! Mine ain wee
things,' she cried in her native tongue, as she embraced them by turns,
as if she would have devoured them, with a gush of tears.

Though these were times of great state and ceremony, yet they were also
very demonstrative times, when tears and embracings were expected of
near kindred; and, indeed, the King and Queen were equally occupied
with their brother and nieces; but presently Eleanor heard a low voice
observe, with a sort of sarcastic twang, 'If Madame has sufficiently
satiated her tenderness, perhaps she will remember the due of others.'
Margaret started as if stung, and Eleanor, looking up, beheld a face,
young but sharp, and with a keen, hard, set look in the narrow eyes,
contracted brow, and thin lips, that made her feel as though the serpent
had found his way into her paradise. Hastily turning, Margaret presented
her sisters to her husband, who bowed, and kissed each with those
strange thin lips, that again made Eleanor shudder, perhaps because of
his compliment, 'We are graced by these ladies, in whom we have another
Madame la Dauphine, as well as an errant beauty.'

Jean appropriated the last words, but Elleen felt sure that the earlier
ones were ironical, both to her and to the Dauphiness, on whose cheeks
they brought a flush. The two kings, however, turned to receive the
sisters, and nothing could be kinder than the tone of King Charles and
Queen Marie towards the sisters of their good daughter, as they termed
the Dauphiness, who on her side was welcomed by Rene as the sweet niece,
sharer of his tastes, who brought minstrelsy and poetry in her train.

'Trust her for that, my fair uncle,' said her husband in a cold, dry
tone.

All the royal personages sat down on the cushions spread on the grass
to the 'rural fare,' as King Rene called it, which he had elaborately
prepared for them, while the music sounded from the trees in welcome.

All was, as the kind prince announced, without ceremony, and he placed
Lord Suffolk, as the representative of Henry VI., next to the young
Infanta Margaret, and contrived that the Dauphiness should sit between
her two sisters, whose hands she clasped from time to time within her
own in an ecstasy of delight, while inquiries came from time to time,
low breathed in her native tongue, for wee Mary and Jamie and baby
Annaple. 'The very sound of your tongues is music to my lugs,' she said.
'And how much mair when ye speak mine ain bonnie Scotch, sic as I never
hear save by times when one archer calls to another. Jeanie, you favour
our mother. 'Tis gude for ye! I am blithe one of ye is na like puir
Marget!'

'Dinna say that,' cried Jean, in an access of feeling. ''Tis hame, and
it's hame to see sic a sonsie Scots face--and it minds me of my blessed
father.'

It was true that Margaret and Eleanor both were thorough Scotswomen, and
with the expressive features, the auburn colouring, and tall figures of
their father; but there was for the rest a melancholy contrast between
them, for while Elleen had the eager, hopeful, lively healthfulness of
early youth, giving a glow to her countenance and animation to the lithe
but scarcely-formed figure, Margaret, with the same original mould,
had the pallor and puffiness of ill-health in her complexion, and a
largeness of growth more unsatisfactory than leanness, and though her
face was lighted up and her eyes sparkled with the joy of meeting her
sisters, there were lines about the brow and round the mouth ill suited
to her age, which was little over twenty years.




CHAPTER 7. THE MINSTREL KING'S COURT


     'Where throngs of knights and barons bold,
      In weeds of peace, high triumphs hold,
      With store of ladies, whose bright eyes
      Rain influence, and judge the prize
      Of wit or arms, while both contend
      To win her grace whom all commend.'--L'Allegro.


The whole of the two Courts had to be received in the capital of
Lorraine in full state under the beautiful old gateway, but as mediaeval
pageants are wearisome matters this may be passed over, though it was
exceptionally beautiful and poetic, owing to the influence of
King Rene's taste, and it perfectly dazzled the two Scottish
princesses--though, to tell the truth, they were somewhat disappointed
in the personal appearance of their entertainers, who did not come up to
their notion of royalty. Their father had been a stately and magnificent
man; their mother a beautiful woman. Henry VI. was a tall, well-made,
handsome man, with Plantagenet fairness and regularity of feature and a
sweetness all his own; but both these kings were, like all the house of
Valois, small men with insignificant features and sallow complexions.
Rene, indeed, had a distinction about him that compensated for want of
beauty, and Charles had a good-natured, easy, indolent look and gracious
smile that gave him an undefinable air of royalty. Rene's daughters
were both very lovely, but their beauty came from the other side of the
house, with the blood of Charles the Great, through their mother, the
heiress of Lorraine.

There was a curious contrast between the brothers-in-law, Charles, when
dismounting at the castle gate, not disguising his weariness and relief
that it was over, and Rene, eager and anxious, desirous of making all
his bewildering multitude of guests as happy as possible, while the
Dauphin Louis stood by, half interested and amused, half mocking. He
was really fond of his uncle, though in a contemptuous superior sort
of manner, despising his religious and honourable scruples as mere
simplicity of mind.

Rene of Anjou has been hardly dealt with, as is often the case with
princes upright, religious, and chivalrous beyond the average of their
time, yet without the strength or the genius to enforce their rights and
opinions, and therefore thrust aside. After his early unsuccessful wars
his lands of Provence and Lorraine were islands of peace, prosperity,
and progress, and withal he was an extremely able artist, musician,
and poet, striving to revive the old troubadour spirit of Provence, and
everywhere casting about him an atmosphere of refinement and kindliness.

The hall of his hotel at Nanci was a beautiful place, with all the
gorgeous grace of the fifteenth century, and here his guests assembled
for supper soon after their arrival, all being placed as much as
possible according to rank. Eleanor found herself between a deaf old
Church dignitary and Duke Sigismund, on whose other side was Yolande,
the Infanta, as the Provencals called the daughter of Rene; while Jean
found the Dauphin on one side of her and a great French Duke on
the other. Louis amused himself with compliments and questions that
sometimes nettled her, sometimes pleased her, giving her a sense that he
might admire her beauty, but was playing on her simplicity, and trying
to make her betray the destitution of her home and her purpose in
coming.

Eleanor, on the other hand, found her cavalier more simple than herself.
In fact, he properly belonged to the Infanta, but she paid no attention
to him, nor did the Bishop try to speak to the Scottish princess.
Sigismund's French was very lame, and Eleanor's not perfect, but she had
a natural turn for languages, and had, in the convent, picked up some
German, which in those days had many likenesses to her own broad Scotch.
They made one another out, between the two languages, with signs,
smiles, and laughter, and whereas the subtilties along the table
represented the entire story of Sir Gawain and his Loathly Lady, she
contrived to explain the story to him, greatly to his edification; and
they went on to King Arthur, and he did his best to narrate the German
reading of Sir Parzival. The difficulties engrossed them till the
rose-water was brought in silver bowls to wash their fingers, on which
Sigismund, after observing and imitating the two ladies, remarked that
they had no such Schwarmerci in Deutschland, and Yolande looked as if
she could well believe it, while Elleen, though ignorant of the meaning
of his word, laughed and said they had as little in Scotland.

There was still an hour of daylight to come, and moon-rise would not
be far off, so that the hosts proposed to adjourn to the garden, where
fresh music awaited them.

King Rene was an ardent gardener. His love of flowers was viewed as one
of his weaknesses, only worthy of an old Abbot, but he went his own way,
and the space within the walls of his castle at Nanci was lovely with
bright spring flowers, blossoming trees, and green walks, where, as Lady
Suffolk said, her grandfather could have mused all day and all night
long, to the sound of the nightingales.

But what the sisters valued it for was that they could ramble away
together to a stone bench under the wall, and there sit at perfect ease
together and pour out their hearts to one another. Margaret, indeed,
touched them as they leant against her as if to convince herself of
their reality, and yet she said that they knew not what they did when
they put the sea between themselves and Scotland, nor how sick the heart
could be for its bonnie hills.

'O gin I could see a mountain top again, I feel as though I could lay
me down and die content. What garred ye come daundering to these weary
flats of France?'

'Ah, sister, Scotland is not what you mind it when our blessed father
lived!'

And they told her how their lives had been spent in being hurried from
one prison-castle to another.

'Prison-castles be not wanting here,' replied Margaret with a
sigh. Then, as Elleen held up a hand in delight at the thrill of a
neighbouring nightingale, she cried, 'What is yon sing-song, seesaw,
gurgling bird to our own bonnie laverock, soaring away to the sky,
without making such a wark of tuning his pipes, and never thinking
himself too dainty and tender for a wholesome frost or two! So Jamie
sent you off to seek for husbands here, did he? Couldna ye put up with a
leal Scot, like Glenuskie there?'

'There were too many of them,' said Jean.

'And not ower leal either,' said Eleanor.

'Lealty is a rare plant ony gate,' sighed Margaret, 'and where sae
little is recked of our Scots royalty, mayhap ye'll find that tocherless
lasses be less sought for than at hame. Didna I see thee, Elleen,
clavering with that muckle Archduke that nane can talk with?'

'Ay,' said Eleanor.

'He is come here a-courting Madame Yolande, with his father's goodwill,
for Alsace and Tyrol be his, mountains that might be in our ain
Hielands, they tell me.'

'Methougnt,' said Eleanor, 'she scunnered from him, as Jeanie does
at--shall I say whom?'

'And reason gude,' said Margaret. 'She has a joe of her ain, Count Ferry
de Vaudemont, that is the heir male of the line, and a gallant laddie.
At the great joust the morn methinks ye'll see what may well be sung by
minstrels, and can scarce fail to touch the heart of a true troubadour,
as is my good uncle Rene.'

Margaret became quite animated, and her sisters pressed her to tell them
if she knew of any secret; but she playfully shook her head, and said
that if she did know she would not mar the romaunt that was to be played
out before them.

'Nay,' said Eleanor, 'we have a romaunt of our own. May I tell, Jeanie?'

'Who recks?' replied Jean, with a little toss of her head.

Thus Eleanor proceeded to tell her sister what--since the adventure of
the goose--had gone far beyond a guess as to the tall, red-haired young
man-at-arms who had ridden close behind David Drummond.

'Douglas, Douglas, tender and true,' exclaimed Margaret. 'He loves you
so as to follow for weeks, nay, months, in this guise without word or
look. Oh, Jeanie, Jeanie, happy lassie, did ye but ken it! Nay, put not
on that scornful mou'. It sorts you not weel, my bairn. He is of degree
befitting a Stewart, and even were he not, oh, sisters, sisters, better
to wed with a leal loving soul in ane high peel-tower than to bear a
broken heart to a throne!' and she fell into a convulsive fit of choked
and bitter weeping, which terrified her sisters.

At the sound of a lute, apparently being brought nearer, accompanied
with footsteps, she hastily recovered herself, and rose to her feet,
while a smile broke out over her face, as the musician, a slender,
graceful figure, appeared on the path in the moonlight.

'Answering the nightingales, Maitre Alain?' she said.

'This is the court of nightingales, Madame,' he replied. 'It is
presumption to endeavour to rival them even though the heart be torn
like that of Philomel.' Wherewith he touched his lute, and began to sing
from his famous idyll--


              'Ainsi mon coeur se guermentait
               De la grande douleur qu'il portait,
                 En ce plaisant lieu solitaire
               Ou un doux ventelet venait,
               Si seri qu'on le sentait
                 Lorsque la violette mieux flaire.'


Again, as Eleanor heard the sweet strains, and saw the long shadows of
the trees and the light of the rising moon, it was like the attainment
of her dreamland; and Margaret proceeded to make known to her sisters
Maitre Alain Chartier, the prince of song, adding, 'Thou, too, wast a
songster, sister Elleen, even while almost a babe. Dost sing as of old?'

'I have brought my father's harp,' said Eleanor.

'Ah! I must hear it,' she cried with effusion. 'The harp. It will be his
voice again.'

'Madame! Madame! Madame la Dauphine. Out here! Ever reckless of dew--ay,
and of waur than dew.'

These last words were added in Scotch, as a tall, dark-cloaked figure
appeared on the scene from between the trees. Margaret laughed, with a
little annoyance in her tone, as she said, 'Ever my shadow, good Madame,
ever wearying yourself with care.  Here, sisters, here is my trusty and
well-beloved Dame de Ste. Petronelle, who takes such care of me that she
dogs my footsteps like a messan.'

'And reason gude,' replied the lady. 'Here is the muckle hall all
alight, and this King Rene, as they call him, twanging on his lute, and
but that the Seigneur Dauphin is talking to the English Lord on some
question of Gascon boundaries, we should have him speiring for you. I
saw the eye of him roaming after you, as it was.'

'His eye seeking me!' cried Margaret, springing up from her languid
attitude with a tone like exultation in her voice, such as evoked a low
sigh from the old dame, as all began to move towards the castle. She
was the widow of a Scotch adventurer who had won lands and honours in
France; and she was now attached to the service of the Dauphiness, not
as her chief lady--that post was held by an old French countess--but
still close enough to her to act as her guardian and monitor whenever it
was possible to deal with her.

The old lady, in great delight at meeting a compatriot, poured out her
confidences to Dame Lilias of Glenuskie. Infinitely grieved and annoyed
was she when, early as were the ordinary hours of the Court of Nanci, it
proved that the Dauphiness had called up her sisters an hour before, and
taken them across the chace which surrounded the castle to hear mass at
a convent of Benedictine nuns.

It was perfectly safe, though only a tirewoman and a page followed the
Dauphiness, and only Annis attended her two sisters, for the grounds
were enclosed, and King Rene's domains were far better ruled and more
peaceful than those of the princes who despised him. It was an exquisite
spring morning, with grass silvery with dew and enamelled with flowers,
birds singing ecstatically on every branch, squirrels here and there
racing up a trunk. Margaret was in joyous spirits, and almost danced
between her sisters. Eleanor was amazed at the luxuriant beauty of the
scene, and could not admire enough. Jean, though at first a little cross
at the early summons, could not but be infected with their delight, and
the three laughed and frolicked together with almost childish glee in
the delight of their content.

The great, gentle-eyed, long-horned kine were being driven in at the
convent-yard to be milked by the lay-sisters; at another entrance,
peasants, beggars, and sick were congregating; the bell from the
lace-works spire rang out, and the Dauphiness led the way to the
gateway, where, at her knock on the iron-studded door, a lay-sister
looked through the wicket.

'Good sister, here are some early pilgrims to the shrine of St.
Scolastique,' she began.

'To the other gate,' said the portress hastily. Margaret's face twinkled
with fun. 'I wad fain take a turn with the beggar crew,' she said to
her sisters in Scotch; 'but it might cause too great an outcry if I were
kenned. Commend me to the Mere St. Antoine,' she added in French, 'and
tell her that the Dauphiness would fain hear mass with her.'

The portress cast an anxious doubtful glance, but being apparently
convinced, cried out for pardon, while hastily unlocking her door, and
sending a message to the Abbess.

As they entered the cloistered quadrangle the nuns in black procession
were on their way to mass, but turned aside to receive their visitors.
Margaret knelt for a moment for the blessing and kiss of the Abbess,
then greeted the nun whom she had mentioned, but begged for no further
ceremony, and then was led into church.

It was a brief festival mass, and was not really over before she, with
a restlessness of which her sisters began to be conscious, began to rise
and make her way out. A nun followed and entreated her to stay and break
her fast, but she would accept nothing save a draught of milk, swallowed
hastily, and with signs of impatience as her sisters took their turn.

She walked quickly, rather as one guilty of an escapade, again
surprising her sisters, who fancied the liberty of a married princess
illimitable.

Jean even ventured to ask her why she went so fast, 'Would the King of
France be displeased?'

'He! Poor gude sire Charles! He heeds not what one does, good or bad;
no, not the murdering of his minion before his eyes,' said Margaret,
half laughing.

'Thy husband, would he be angered?' pressed on Jean.

'My husband? Oh no, it is not in the depth and greatness of is thoughts
to find fault with his poor worm,' said Margaret, a strange look, half
of exultation, half of pain, on her face. 'Ah! Jeanie, woman, none kens
in sooth how great and wise my Dauphin is, nor how far he sees beyond
all around him, so that he cannot choose but scorn them and make them
his tools. When he has the power, he will do more for this poor realm of
France than any king before him.'

'As our father would have done for Scotland,' said Eleanor.

'Then he tells thee of his plans?'

'Me!' said Margaret, with the suffering look returning. 'How should he
talk to me, the muckle uncouthie wife that I am, kenning nought but a
