sod never to stir with the green push of the corn. And so the white men
who went into Kentucky to build and to plant went as warriors go, and
for every cabin they erected they battled as warriors to hold a fort. In
the first years they planted little corn and reaped less, for it may be
said that their rifles were never out of their hands. We have seen
how stations were built and abandoned until but two stood. Untiring
vigilance and ceaseless warfare were the price paid by the first
Kentuckians ere they turned the Indian's place of desolation and death
into a land productive and a living habitation.

158 Herein lies the difference, slight apparently, yet significant,
between the first Kentucky and the first Tennessee¹ colonies. Within the
memory of the Indians only one tribe had ever attempted to make their
home in Kentucky--a tribe of the fighting Shawanoes--and they had been
terribly chastised for their temerity. But Tennessee was the home of the
Cherokees, and at Chickasaw Bluffs (Memphis) began the southward trail
to the principal towns of the Chickasaws. By the red man's fiat, then,
human life might abide in Tennessee, though not in Kentucky, and it
followed that in seasons of peace the frontiersmen might settle in
Tennessee. So it was that as early as 1757, before the great Cherokee
war, a company of Virginians under Andrew Lewis had, on an invitation
from the Indians, erected Fort Loudon near Great Telliko, the Cherokees'
principal town, and that, after the treaty of peace in 1761, Waddell and
his rangers of North Carolina had erected a fort on the Holston.

¹ Tennessee. The name, Ten-as-se, appears on Adair's map as one of the
old Cherokee towns. Apparently neither the meaning nor the reason why
the colonists called both state and river by this name has been handed
down to us. Though Fort Loudon had fallen tragically during the war,
and though Waddell's fort had been 159 abandoned, neither was without
influence in the colonization of Tennessee, for some of the men who
built these forts drifted back a year or two later and set up the first
cabins on the Holston. These earliest settlements, thin and scattered,
did not survive; but in 1768 the same settlers or others of their
kind--discharged militiamen from Back Country regiments--once more made
homes on the Holston. They were joined by a few families from near the
present Raleigh, North Carolina, who had despaired of seeing justice
done to the tenants on the mismanaged estates of Lord Granville. About
the same time there was erected the first cabin on the Watauga River, as
is generally believed, by a man of the name of William Bean (or Been),
hunter and frontier soldier from Pittsylvania County, Virginia. This
man, who had hunted on the Watauga with Daniel Boone in 1760, chose
as the site of his dwelling the place of the old hunting camp near the
mouth of Boone's Creek. He soon began to have neighbors.

Meanwhile the Regulation Movement stirred the Back Country of both the
Carolinas. In 1768, the year in which William Bean built his cabin on
the bank of the Watauga, 160 five hundred armed Regulators in North
Carolina, aroused by irregularities in the conduct of public office,
gathered to assert their displeasure, but dispersed peaceably on receipt
of word from Governor Tryon that he had ordered the prosecution of any
officer found guilty of extortion. Edmund Fanning, the most hated of
Lord Granville's agents, though convicted, escaped punishment. Enraged
at this miscarriage of justice, the Regulators began a system of
terrorization by taking possession of the court, presided over by
Richard Henderson. The judge himself was obliged to slip out by a
back way to avoid personal injury. The Regulators burned his house and
stable. They meted out mob treatment likewise to William Hooper, later
one of the signers of the Declaration of Independence.

Two elements, with antithetical aims, had been at work in the
Regulation; and the unfortunate failure of justice in the case of
Fanning had given the corrupt element its opportunity to seize control.
In the petitions addressed to Governor Tryon by the leaders of the
movement in its earlier stages the aims of liberty-loving thinkers are
traceable. It is worthy of note that they included in their demands
articles which are now constitutional. They desired that "suffrage be
given by ticket and 161 ballot"; that the mode of taxation be altered,
and each person be taxed in proportion to the profits arising from his
estate; that judges and clerks be given salaries instead of perquisites
and fees. They likewise petitioned for repeal of the act prohibiting
dissenting ministers from celebrating the rites of matrimony. The
establishment of these reforms, the petitioners of the Regulation
concluded, would conciliate their minds to every just measure of
government, and would make the laws what the Constitution ever designed
they should be, their protection and not their bane. Herein clearly
enough we can discern the thought and the phraseology of the Ulster
Presbyterians.

But a change took place in both leaders and methods. During the
Regulators' career of violence they were under the sway of an agitator
named Hermon Husband. This demagogue was reported to have been expelled
from the Quaker Society for cause; it is on record that he was expelled
from the North Carolina Assembly because a vicious anonymous letter was
traced to him. He deserted his dupes just before the shots cracked at
Alamance Creek and fled from the colony. He was afterwards apprehended
in Pennsylvania for complicity in the Whisky Insurrection.

162 Four of the leading Presbyterian ministers of the Back Country
issued a letter in condemnation of the Regulators. One of these
ministers was the famous David Caldwell, son-in-law of the Reverend
Alexander Craighead, and a man who knew the difference between liberty
and license and who proved himself the bravest of patriots in the War
of Independence. The records of the time contain sworn testimony
against the Regulators by Waightstill Avery, a signer of the Mecklenburg
Resolves, who later presided honorably over courts in the western
circuit of Tennessee; and there is evidence indicating Jacobite and
French intrigue. That Governor Tryon recognized a hidden hand at work
seems clearly revealed in his proclamation addressed to those whose
understandings have been run away with and whose passions have been led
in captivity by some evil designing men who, actuated by cowardice and
a sense of that Publick Justice which is due to their Crimes, have
obscured themselves from Publick view. What the Assembly thought of the
Regulators was expressed in 1770 in a drastic bill which so shocked
the authorities in England that instructions were sent forbidding any
Governor to approve such a bill in future, declaring it a disgrace to
the British Statute Books.

163 On May 16, 1771, some two thousand Regulators were precipitated
by Husband into the Battle of Alamance, which took place in a district
settled largely by a rough and ignorant type of Germans, many of whom
Husband had lured to swell his mob. Opposed to him were eleven hundred
of Governor Tryon's troops, officered by such patriots as Griffith
Rutherford, Hugh Waddell, and Francis Nash. During an hour's engagement
about twenty Regulators were killed, while the Governor's troops had
nine killed and sixty-one wounded. Six of the leaders were hanged. The
rest took the oath of allegiance which Tryon administered.

It has been said about the Regulators that they were not cast down by
their defeat at Alamance but like the mammoth, they shook the bolt from
their brow and crossed the mountains, but such flowery phrases do
not seem to have been inspired by facts. Nor do the records show that
fifteen hundred Regulators arrived at Watauga in 1771, as has also been
stated. Nor are the names of the leaders of the Regulation to be found
in the list of signatures affixed to the one state paper of Watauga
which was preserved and written into historic annals. Nor yet do those
names appear on the roster of the Watauga and Holston men who, 164
in 1774, fought with Shelby under Andrew Lewis in the Battle of Point
Pleasant. The Boones and the Bryans, the Robertsons, the Seviers, the
Shelbys, the men who opened up the West and shaped the destiny of its
inhabitants, were genuine freemen, with a sense of law and order as
inseparable from liberty. They would follow a Washington but not a
Hermon Husband.

James Hunter, whose signature leads on all Regulation manifestoes just
prior to the Battle of Alamance, was a sycophant of Husband, to whom he
addressed fulsome letters; and in the real battle for democracy--the
War of Independence--he was a Tory. The Colonial Records show that those
who, like the mammoth, shook from them the ethical restraints which
make man superior to the giant beast, and who later bolted into the
mountains, contributed chiefly the lawlessness that harassed the new
settlements. They were the banditti and, in 1776, the Tories of the
western hills; they pillaged the homes of the men who were fighting for
the democratic ideal.

It was not the Regulation Movement which turned westward the makers of
the Old Southwest, but the free and enterprising spirit of the age.
165 It was emphatically an age of doers; and if men who felt the
constructive urge in them might not lay hold on conditions where
they were and reshape them, then they must go forward seeking that
environment which would give their genius its opportunity.

Of such adventurous spirits was James Robertson, a Virginian born of
Ulster Scot parentage, and a resident of (the present) Wake County,
North Carolina, since his boyhood. Robertson was twenty-eight years old
when, in 1770, he rode over the hills to Watauga. We can imagine him as
he was then, for the portrait taken much later in life shows the type
of face that does not change. It is a high type combining the best
qualities of his race. Intelligence, strength of purpose, fortitude,
and moral power are there; they impress us at the first glance. At
twenty-eight he must have been a serious young man, little given to
laughter; indeed, spontaneity is perhaps the only good trait we miss in
studying his face. He was a thinker who had not yet found his purpose--a
thinker in leash, for at this time James Robertson could neither read
nor write.

At Watauga, Robertson lived for a while in the cabin of a man named
Honeycut. He chose land 166 for himself and, in accordance with the
custom of the time, sealed his right to it by planting corn. He remained
to harvest his first crop and then set off to gather his family and some
of his friends together and escort them to the new country. But on the
way he missed the trail and wandered for a fortnight in the mountains.
The heavy rains ruined his powder so that he could not hunt; for food he
had only berries and nuts. At one place, where steep bluffs opposed him,
he was obliged to abandon his horse and scale the mountain side on foot.
He was in extremity when he chanced upon two huntsmen who gave him food
and set him on the trail. If this experience proves his lack of the
hunter's instinct and the woodsman's resourcefulness which Boone
possessed, it proves also his special qualities of perseverance and
endurance which were to reach their zenith in his successful struggle
to colonize and hold western Tennessee. He returned to Watauga in the
following spring (1771) with his family and a small group of colonists.
Robertson's wife was an educated woman and under her instruction he now
began to study.

Next year a young Virginian from the Shenandoah Valley rode on down
Holston Valley on a hunting and exploring trip and loitered at
Watauga. 167 Here he found not only a new settlement but an independent
government in the making; and forthwith he determined to have a part
in both. This young Virginian had already shown the inclination of a
political colonist, for in the Shenandoah Valley he had, at the age of
nineteen, laid out the town of New Market (which exists to this day) and
had directed its municipal affairs and invited and fostered its clergy.
This young Virginian--born on September 23, 1745, and so in 1772
twenty-seven years of age--was John Sevier, that John Sevier whose
monument now towers from its site in Knoxville to testify of both
the wild and the great deeds of old Tennessee's beloved knight. Like
Robertson, Sevier hastened home and removed his whole family, including
his wife and children, his parents and his brothers and sisters, to this
new haven of freedom at Watauga.

The friendship formed between Robertson and Sevier in these first years
of their work together was never broken, yet two more opposite types
could hardly have been brought together. Robertson was a man of humble
origin, unlettered, not a dour Scot but a solemn one. Sevier was
cavalier as well as frontiersman. On his father's side he was of the
patrician family of Xavier in France. His 168 progenitors, having
become Huguenots, had taken refuge in England, where the name Xavier
was finally changed to Sevier. John Sevier's mother was an Englishwoman.
Some years before his birth his parents had emigrated to the Shenandoah
Valley. Thus it happened that John Sevier, who mingled good English
blood with the blue blood of old France, was born an American and grew
up a frontier hunter and soldier. He stood about five feet nine from his
moccasins to his crown of light brown hair. He was well-proportioned and
as graceful of body as he was hard-muscled and swift. His chin was firm,
his nose of a Roman cast, his mouth well-shaped, its slightly full lips
slanting in a smile that would not be repressed. Under the high, finely
modeled brow, small keen dark blue eyes sparkled with health, with
intelligence, and with the man's joy in life.

John Sevier indeed cannot be listed as a type; he was individual. There
is no other character like him in border annals. He was cavalier and
prince in his leadership of men; he had their homage. Yet he knew how to
be comrade and brother to the lowliest. He won and held the confidence
and friendship of the serious-minded Robertson no less than the idolatry
of the wildest spirits on the 169 frontier throughout the forty-three
years of the spectacular career which began for him on the day he
brought his tribe to Watauga. In his time he wore the governor's purple;
and a portrait painted of him shows how well this descendant of the
noble Xaviers could fit himself to the dignity and formal habiliments of
state; Yet in the fringed deerskin of frontier garb, he was fleeter on
the warpath than the Indians who fled before him; and he could outride
and outshoot--and, it is said, outswear--the best and the worst of the
men who followed him. Perhaps the lurking smile on John Sevier's face
was a flicker of mirth that there should be found any man, red or
white, with temerity enough to try conclusions with him. None ever did,
successfully.

The historians of Tennessee state that the Wataugans formed their
government in 1772 and that Sevier was one of its five commissioners.
Yet, as Sevier did not settle in Tennessee before 1773, it is possible
that the Watauga Association was not formed until then. Unhappily the
written constitution of the little commonwealth was not preserved; but
it is known that, following the Ulsterman's ideal, manhood suffrage and
religious independence were two of its provisions. The commissioners
enlisted a militia and they recorded 170 deeds for land, issued marriage
licenses, and tried offenders against the law. They believed themselves
to be within the boundaries of Virginia and therefore adopted the laws
of that State for their guidance. They had numerous offenders to deal
with, for men fleeing from debt or from the consequence of crime sought
the new settlements just across the mountains as a safe and adjacent
harbor. The attempt of these men to pursue their lawlessness in Watauga
was one reason why the Wataugans organized a government.

When the line was run between Virginia and North Carolina beyond the
mountains, Watauga was discovered to be south of Virginia's limits
and hence on Indian lands. This was in conflict with the King's
Proclamation, and Alexander Cameron, British agent to the Cherokees,
accordingly ordered the encroaching settlers to depart. The Indians,
however, desired them to remain. But since it was illegal to purchase
Indian lands, Robertson negotiated a lease for ten years. In 1775, when
Henderson made his purchase from the Cherokees, at Sycamore Shoals on
the Watauga, Robertson and Sevier, who were present at the sale with
other Watauga commissioners, followed Henderson's example and bought
outright the lands they desired 171 to include in Watauga's domain. In
1776 they petitioned North Carolina for annexation. As they were
already within North Carolina's bounds, it was recognition rather than
annexation which they sought. This petition, which is the only Wataugan
document to survive, is undated but marked as received in August,
1776. It is in Sevier's handwriting and its style suggests that it was
composed by him, for in its manner of expression it has much in common
with many later papers from his pen. That Wataugans were a law-loving
community and had formed their government for the purpose of making law
respected is reiterated throughout the document. As showing the quality
of these first western statemakers, two paragraphs are quoted:

Finding ourselves on the frontiers, and being apprehensive that for want
of proper legislature we might become a shelter for such as endeavored
to defraud their creditors; considering also the necessity of recording
deeds, wills, and doing other public business; we, by consent of the
people, formed a court for the purposes above mentioned, taking, by
desire of our constituents, the Virginia laws for our guide, so near as
the situation of affairs would permit. This was intended for ourselves,
and was done by consent of every individual.

The petition goes on to state that, among their measures for upholding
law, the Wataugans had 172 enlisted a company of fine riflemen and put
them under command of Captain James Robertson.

We… thought proper to station them on our frontiers in defense of the
common cause, at the expense and risque of our own private fortunes,
till farther public orders, which we flatter ourselves will give no
offense.… We pray your mature and deliberate consideration in our
behalf, that you may annex us to your Province (whether as county,
district, or other division) in such manner as may enable us to share in
the glorious cause of Liberty: enforce our laws under authority and in
every respect become the best members of society; and for ourselves
and our constituents we hope we may venture to assure you that we shall
adhere strictly to your determinations, and that nothing will be lacking
or anything neglected that may add weight (in the civil or military
establishments) to the glorious cause in which we are now struggling, or
contribute to the welfare of our own or ages yet to come.

One hundred and thirteen names are signed to the document. In the
following year (1777) North Carolina erected her overhill territory
into Washington County. The Governor appointed justices of the peace and
militia officers who in the following year organized the new county and
its courts. And so Watauga's independent government, begun in the spirit
of true liberty, came as lawfully to its end.

173 But for nearly three years before their political status was thus
determined, the Wataugans were sharing in the glorious cause of Liberty
by defending their settlements against Indian attacks. While the
majority of the young Cherokee warriors were among their enemies, their
chief battles were fought with those from the Chickamaugan towns on
the Tennessee River, under the leadership of Dragging Canoe. The
