deal thee thy fate."

So said he, and Tydeides was of divided mind, whether to wheel his
horses and fight him face to face. Thrice doubted he in heart and soul,
and thrice from Ida's mountains thundered Zeus the lord of counsel, and
gave to the Trojans a sign, the turning of the course of battle. And
Hector with loud shout called to the Trojans: "Trojans and Lykians and
Dardanians that love close fight, be men, my friends, and bethink you of
impetuous valour. I perceive that of good will Kronion vouchsafest me
victory and great glory, and to the Danaans destruction. Fools, that
devised these walls weak and of none account; they shall not withhold
our fury, and lightly shall our steeds overleap the delved foss. But
when I be once come amid the hollow ships, then be thought taken of
consuming fire, that with fire I may burn the ships and slay the men."

So spake he and shouted to his steeds, and said: "Xanthos, and thou
Podargos, and Aithon and goodly Lampos, now pay me back your tending,
even the abundance that Andromache, great-hearted Eetion's daughter, set
before you of honey-hearted wheat, and mingled wine to drink at the
heart's bidding. Pursue ye now and haste, that we may seize Nestor's
shield, the fame whereof now reacheth unto heaven, how that it is of
gold throughout, armrods and all; and may seize moreover from
horse-taming Diomedes' shoulders his richly dight breastplate that
Hephaistos wrought cunningly. Could we but take these, then might I hope
this very night to make the Achaians to embark on their fleet ships."

And now had he burned the trim ships with blazing fire, but that queen
Hera put it in Agamemnon's heart himself to bestir him and swiftly
arouse the Achaians. So he went his way along the huts and ships of the
Achaians, holding a great cloak of purple in his stalwart hand, and
stood by Odysseus' black ship of mighty burden, that was in the midst,
so that a voice could be heard to either end. Then shouted he in a
piercing voice, and called to the Danaans aloud: "Fie upon you, Argives,
ye sorry things of shame, so brave in semblance! Whither are gone our
boastings when we said that we were bravest, the boasts ye uttered
vaingloriously when in Lemnos, as ye ate your fill of flesh of
tall-horned oxen and drank goblets crowned with wine, and said that
every man should stand in war to face fivescore yea tenscore Trojans?
yet now can we not match one, even this Hector that anon will burn our
ships with flame of fire. O Father Zeus, didst ever thou blind with such
a blindness any mighty king, and rob him of great glory? Nay, Zeus, this
hope fulfil thou me; suffer that we ourselves at least flee and escape,
neither suffer that the Achaians be thus vanquished of the Trojans."

So spake he, and the Father had pity on him as he wept, and vouchsafed
him that his folk should be saved and perish not. Forthwith sent he an
eagle--surest sign among winged fowl--holding in his claws a fawn, the
young of a fleet hind; beside the beautiful altar of Zeus he let fall
the fawn, where the Achaians did sacrifice unto Zeus lord of all
oracles. So when they saw that the bird was come from Zeus, they sprang
the more upon the Trojans and bethought them of the joy of battle.

Now could no man of the Danaans, for all they were very many, boast that
he before Tydeus' son had guided his fleet horses forth, and driven them
across the trench and fought man to man; first by far was Tydeides to
slay a warrior of the Trojans in full array, even Agelaos son of
Phradmon. Now he had turned his steeds to flee; but as he wheeled the
other plunged the spear into his back between his shoulders, and drave
it through his breast. So fell he from his chariot, and his armour
clanged upon him.

And after him came Atreus' sons, even Agamemnon and Menelaos, and after
them the Aiantes clothed upon with impetuous valour, and after them
Idomeneus and Idomeneus' brother in arms Meriones, peer of Enyalios
slayer of men, and after them Eurypylos, Euaimon's glorious son. And
ninth came Teukros, stretching his back-bent bow, and took his stand
beneath the shield of Aias son of Telamon. And so Aias would stealthily
withdraw the shield, and Teukros would spy his chance; and when he had
shot and smitten one in the throng, then fell such an one and gave up
the ghost, and Teukros would return, and as a child beneath his mother,
so gat he him to Aias; who hid him with the shining shield.

And Agamemnon king of men rejoiced to behold him making havoc with his
stalwart bow of the battalions of the Trojans, and he came and stood by
his side and spake to him, saying: "Teukros, dear heart, thou son of
Telamon, prince of the host, shoot on in this wise, if perchance thou
mayest be found the salvation of the Danaans and glory of thy father
Telamon."

And noble Teukros made answer and said to him: "Most noble son of
Atreus, why urgest thou me that myself am eager? Verily with such
strength as is in me forbear I not, but ever since we drave them towards
Ilios I watch with my bow to slay the foemen. Eight long-barbed arrows
have I now sped, and all are buried in the flesh of young men swift in
battle; only this mad dog can I not smite."

He said, and shot another arrow from the string right against Hector;
and his heart was fain to smite him. Yet missed he once again, for
Apollo turned the dart away; but Archeptolemos, Hector's bold
charioteer, he smote on the breast beside the nipple as he hasted into
battle: so he fell from his car and his fleet-footed horses swerved
aside; and there his soul and spirit were unstrung. Then sore grief
encompassed Hector's soul for his charioteer's sake; yet left he him,
though he sorrowed for his comrade, and bade Kebriones his own brother,
being hard by, take the chariot reins; and he heard and disregarded not.
And himself he leapt to earth from the resplendent car, with a terrible
shout; and in his hand he caught a stone, and made right at Teukros, and
his heart bade him smite him. Now Teukros had plucked forth from his
quiver a keen arrow, and laid it on the string; but even as he drew it
back, Hector of the glancing helm smote him with the jagged stone, as he
aimed eagerly against him, even beside his shoulder, where the
collar-bone fenceth off neck and breast, and where is the most deadly
spot; and he brake the bowstring, and his hand from the wrist grew numb,
and he stayed fallen upon his knee, and his bow dropped from his hand.
But Aias disregarded not his brother's fall, but ran and strode across
him and hid him with his shield. Then two trusty comrades bent down to
him, even Mekisteus son of Echios and goodly Alastor, and bare him,
groaning sorely, to the hollow ships. And once again the Olympian
aroused the spirit of the Trojans. So they drove the Achaians straight
toward the deep foss, and amid the foremost went Hector exulting in his
strength. And even as when a hound behind wild boar or lion, with swift
feet pursuing snatcheth at him, at flank or buttock, and watcheth for
him as he wheeleth, so Hector pressed hard on the flowing-haired
Achaians, slaying ever the hindmost, and they fled on. But when they
were passed in flight through palisade and foss, and many were fallen
beneath the Trojans' hands, then halted they and tarried beside the
ships, calling one upon another, and lifting up their hands to all the
gods prayed each one instantly. But Hector wheeled round his
beauteous-maned steeds this way and that, and his eyes were as the eyes
of Gorgon or Ares bane of mortals.

Now at the sight of them the white-armed goddess Hera had compassion,
and anon spake winged words to Athene: "Out on it, thou child of
aegis-bearing Zeus, shall not we twain any more take thought for the
Danaans that perish, if only for this last time? Now will they fill up
the measure of evil destiny and perish by one man's onslaught; seeing
that he is furious now beyond endurance, this Hector son of Priam, and
verily hath wrought many a deed of ill."

And the bright-eyed goddess Athene made answer to her, "Yea in good
sooth, may this fellow yield up strength and life, and perish at the
Argives' hands in his native land; only mine own sire is furious, with
no good intent, headstrong, ever sinful, the foiler of my purposes. But
now make thou ready our whole-hooved horses, while I enter into the
palace of aegis-bearing Zeus and gird me in my armour for battle, that I
may see if Priam's son, Hector of the glancing helm, shall be glad at
the appearing of us twain amid the highways of the battle. Surely shall
many a Trojan likewise glut dogs and birds with fat and flesh, fallen
dead at the ships of the Achaians."

So said she, and the white-armed goddess Hera disregarded not. But when
father Zeus beheld from Ida, he was sore wroth, and sped Iris
golden-winged to bear a message: "Go thy way, fleet Iris, turn them
back, neither suffer them to face me; for in no happy wise shall we join
in combat. For thus will I declare, and even so shall the fulfilment be;
I will maim their fleet horses in the chariot, and them will I hurl out
from the car, and will break in pieces the chariot; neither within the
courses of ten years shall they heal them of the wounds the thunderbolt
shall tear; that the bright-eyed one may know the end when she striveth
against her father. But with Hera have I not so great indignation nor
wrath: seeing it ever is her wont to thwart me, whate'er I have
decreed."

So said he, and whirlwind-footed Iris arose to bear the message, and
departed from the mountains of Ida unto high Olympus. And even at the
entrance of the gates of Olympus many-folded she met them and stayed
them, and told them the saying of Zeus.

And father Zeus drave from Ida his fair-wheeled chariot and horses unto
Olympus, and came unto the session of the gods. For him also the noble
Shaker of Earth unyoked the steeds, and set the car upon the stand, and
spread a cloth thereover; and far-seeing Zeus himself sate upon his
golden throne, and beneath his feet great Olympus quaked. Only Athene
and Hera sate apart from Zeus, and spake no word to him neither
questioned him. But he was ware thereof in his heart, and said, "Why are
ye thus vexed, Athene and Hera? Surely ye are not wearied of making
havoc in glorious battle of the Trojans, for whom ye cherish bitter
hate! Howsoever, seeing that my might is so great and my hands
invincible, all the gods that are in Olympus could not turn me: and for
you twain, trembling erst gat hold upon your bright limbs ere that ye
beheld war and war's fell deeds. For thus will I declare, and even so
had the fulfilment been--never had ye, once smitten with the
thunderbolt, fared on your chariots back unto Olympus where is the
habitation of the immortals."

So spake he, and Athene and Hera murmured, that were sitting by him and
devising ills for the Trojans. Now Athene held her peace, and said not
anything, for wrath at father Zeus, and fierce anger gat hold upon her;
but Hera's heart contained not her anger, and she spake: "Most dread son
of Kronos, what word is this thou hast said? Well know we, even we, that
thy might is no wise puny; yet still have we pity for the Danaan
spearmen, that now shall perish and fill up the measure of grievous
fate."

And Zeus the cloud-gatherer answered and said: "At morn shalt thou
behold most mighty Kronion, if thou wilt have it so, O Hera, ox-eyed
queen, making yet more havoc of the vast army of Argive spearmen; for
headlong Hector shall not refrain from battle till that Peleus' son
fleet of foot have arisen beside the ships, that day when these shall
fight amid the sterns in most grievous stress, around Patroklos fallen.
Such is the doom of heaven. And for thine anger reck I not, not even
though thou go to the nethermost bounds of earth and sea, where sit
Iapetos and Kronos and have no joy in the beams of Hyperion the Sun-god,
neither in any breeze, but deep Tartaros is round about them. Though
thou shouldest wander till thou come even thither, yet reck I not of thy
vexation, seeing there is no thing more unabashed than thou."

So said he, but white-armed Hera spake him no word. And the sun's bright
light dropped into Ocean, drawing black night across Earth the
grain-giver. Against the Trojans' will daylight departed, but welcome,
thrice prayed for, to the Achaians came down the murky night.

Now glorious Hector made an assembly of the Trojans, taking them apart
from the ships, beside the eddying river, in an open space where was
found a spot clear of dead. And they came down from their chariots to
the ground to hear the word that Hector, dear unto Zeus, proclaimed. He
in his hand held his spear eleven cubits long; before his face gleamed
the spearhead of bronze, and a ring of gold ran round about it. Thereon
he leaned and spake to the Trojans, saying: "Hearken to me, Trojans and
Dardanians and allies. I thought but now to make havoc of the ships and
all the Achaians and depart back again to windy Ilios; but dusk came too
soon, and that in chief hath now saved the Argives and the ships beside
the beach of the sea. So let us now yield to black night, and make our
supper ready; unyoke ye from the chariots your fair-maned horses, and
set fodder beside them. And from the city bring kine and goodly sheep
with speed; and provide you with honey-hearted wine, and corn from your
houses, and gather much wood withal, that all night long until
early-springing dawn we may burn many fires, and the gleam may reach to
heaven; lest perchance even by night the flowing-haired Achaians strive
to take flight over the broad back of the sea. Verily must they not
embark upon their ships unvexed, at ease: but see ye that many a one of
them have a wound to nurse even at home, being stricken with arrow or
keen-pointed spear as he leapeth upon his ship; that so many another man
may dread to wage dolorous war on the horse-taming men of Troy. And let
the heralds dear to Zeus proclaim throughout the city that young maidens
and old men of hoary heads camp round the city on the battlements
builded of the gods; and let the women folk burn a great fire each in
her hall; and let there be a sure watch set, lest an ambush enter the
city when the host is absent. Howbeit for the night will we guard our
own selves, and at morn by daybreak, arrayed in our armour, let us awake
keen battle at the hollow ships. I will know whether Tydeus' son
stalwart Diomedes shall thrust me from the ships back to the wall, or I
shall lay him low with my spear and bear away his gory spoils. To-morrow
shall he prove his valour, whether he can abide the onslaught of my
spear. Would that I were immortal and ageless all my days and honoured
like as Athene is honoured and Apollo, so surely as this day bringeth
the Argives ill."

So Hector made harangue, and the Trojans clamoured applause. And they
loosed their sweating steeds from the yoke, and tethered them with
thongs, each man beside his chariot; and from the city they brought kine
and goodly sheep with speed, and provided them with honey-hearted wine
and corn from their houses, and gathered much wood withal. And from the
plain the winds bare into heaven the sweet savour. But these with high
hopes sate them all night along the highways of the battle, and their
watchfires burned in multitude. Even as when in heaven the stars about
the bright moon shine clear to see, when the air is windless, and all
the peaks appear and the tall headlands and glades, and from heaven
breaketh open the infinite air, and all stars are seen, and the
shepherd's heart is glad; even in like multitude between the ships and
the streams of Xanthos appeared the watchfires that the Trojans kindled
in front of Ilios. A thousand fires burned in the plain and by the side
of each sate fifty in the gleam of blazing fire. And the horses champed
white barley and spelt, and standing by their chariots waited for the
throned Dawn.



BOOK IX.

    How Agamemnon sent an embassage to Achilles, beseeching him
    to be appeased; and how Achilles denied him.

Thus kept the Trojans watch; but the Achaians were holden of heaven-sent
panic, handmaid of palsying fear, and all their best were stricken to
the heart with grief intolerable. Like as two winds stir up the main,
the home of fishes, even the north wind and the west wind that blow from
Thrace, coming suddenly; and the dark billow straightway lifteth up its
crest and casteth much tangle out along the sea; even so was the
Achaians' spirit troubled in their breast.

But Atreides was stricken to the heart with sore grief, and went about
bidding the clear-voiced heralds summon every man by name to the
assembly, but not to shout aloud; and himself he toiled amid the
foremost. So they sat sorrowful in assembly, and Agamemnon stood up
weeping like unto a fountain of dark water that from a beetling cliff
poureth down its black stream; even so with deep groaning he spake amid
the Argives and said: "My friends, leaders and captains of the Argives,
Zeus son of Kronos hath bound me with might in grievous blindness of
soul; hard of heart is he, for that erewhile he promised and gave his
pledge that not till I had laid waste well-walled Ilios should I depart,
but now hath planned a cruel wile, and biddeth me return in dishonour to
Argos with the loss of many of my folk. Such meseemeth is the good
pleasure of most mighty Zeus, that hath laid low the heads of many
cities, yea and shall lay low; for his is highest power. So come, even
as I shall bid let us all obey; let us flee with our ships to our dear
native land, for now shall we never take wide-wayed Troy."

So said he, and they all held their peace and kept silence. Long time
were the sons of the Achaians voiceless for grief, but at the last
Diomedes of the loud war-cry spake amid them and said: "Atreides: with
thee first in thy folly will I contend, where it is just, O king, even
in the assembly; be not thou wroth therefor. My valour didst thou blame
in chief amid the Danaans, and saidst that I was no man of war but a
coward; and all this know the Argives both young and old. But the son of
crooked-counselling Kronos hath endowed thee but by halves; he granted
thee to have the honour of the sceptre above all men, but valour he gave
thee not, wherein is highest power. Sir, deemest thou that the sons of
the Achaians are thus indeed cowards and weaklings as thou sayest? If
thine own heart be set on departing, go thy way; the way is before thee,
and thy ships stand beside the sea, even the great multitude that
followed thee from Mykene. But all the other flowing-haired Achaians
will tarry here until we lay waste Troy. Nay, let them too flee on their
ships to their dear native land; yet will we twain, even I and
Sthenelos, fight till we attain the goal of Ilios; for in God's name are
we come."

So said he, and all the sons of the Achaians shouted aloud, applauding
the saying of horse-taming Diomedes. Then knightly Nestor arose and said
amid them: "Tydeides, in battle art thou passing mighty, and in council
art thou best among thine equals in years; none of all the Achaians will
make light of thy word nor gainsay it. Now let us yield to black night
and make ready our meal; and let the sentinels bestow them severally
along the deep-delved foss without the wall. This charge give I to the
young men; and thou, Atreides, lead then the way, for thou art the most
royal. Spread thou a feast for the councillors; that is thy place and
seemly for thee. Thy huts are full of wine that the ships of the
Achaians bring thee by day from Thrace across the wide sea; all
entertainment is for thee, being king over many. In the gathering of
many shalt thou listen to him that deviseth the most excellent counsel;
sore need have all the Achaians of such as is good and prudent, because
hard by the ships our foemen are burning their watch-fires in multitude;
what man can rejoice thereat? This night shall either destroy or save
the host."

So said he, and they gladly hearkened to him and obeyed. Forth sallied
the sentinels in their harness. Seven were the captains of the
sentinels, and with each went fivescore young men bearing their long
spears in their hands; and they took post midway betwixt foss and wall,
and kindled a fire and made ready each man his meal.

Then Atreides gathered the councillors of the Achaians, and led them to
his hut, and spread before them an abundant feast. So they put forth
their hands to the good cheer that lay before them. And when they had
put away from them the desire of meat and drink, then the old man first
began to weave his counsel, even Nestor, whose rede of old time was
approved the best. He spake to them and said: "Most noble son of Atreus,
Agamemnon king of men, in thy name will I end and with thy name begin,
because thou art king over many hosts, and to thy hand Zeus hath
entrusted sceptre and law, that thou mayest take counsel for thy folk.
Thee therefore more than any it behoveth both to speak and hearken, and
to accomplish what another than thou may say. No other man shall have a
more excellent thought than this that I bear in mind from old time even
until now, since the day when thou, O heaven-sprung king, didst go and
take the damsel Briseis from angry Achilles' hut by no consent of ours.
Nay, I right heartily dissuaded thee; but thou yieldedst to thy proud
spirit, and dishonouredst a man of valour whom even the immortals
honoured; for thou didst take and keepest from him his meed of valour.
Still let us even now take thought how we may appease him and persuade
him with gifts of friendship and kindly words."

And Agamemnon king of men answered and said to him: "Old sir, in no
false wise hast thou accused my folly. Fool was I, I myself deny it not.
Worth many hosts is he whom Zeus loveth in his heart, even as now he
honoureth this man and destroyeth the host of the Achaians. But seeing I
was a fool in that I yielded to my sorry passion, I will make amends and
give a recompense beyond telling. In the midst of you all I will name
the excellent gifts; seven tripods untouched of fire, and ten talents of
gold and twenty gleaming caldrons, and twelve stalwart horses, winners
in the race, that have taken prizes by their speed. No lackwealth were
that man whose substance were as great as the prizes my whole-hooved
steeds have borne me off. And seven women will I give, skilled in
excellent handiwork, Lesbians whom I chose me from the spoils the day
that he himself took stablished Lesbos, surpassing womankind in beauty.
These will I give him, and with them shall be she whom erst I took from
him, even the daughter of Briseus. All these things shall be set
straightway before him; and if hereafter the gods grant us to lay waste
the great city of Priam, then let him enter in when we Achaians be
dividing the spoil, and lade his ship full of gold and bronze, and
himself choose twenty Trojan women, the fairest that there be after
Helen of Argos. And if we win to the richest of lands, even Achaian
Argos, he shall be my son and I will hold him in like honour with
Orestes, my stripling boy that is nurtured in all abundance. Three
daughters are mine in my well-builded hall, Chrysothemis and Laodike and
Iphianassa; let him take of them which he will, without gifts of wooing,
to Peleus' house; and I will add a great dower such as no man ever yet
gave with his daughter. And seven well-peopled cities will I give him,
Kardamyle and Enope and grassy Hire and holy Pherai and Antheia deep in
meads, and fair Aipeia and Pedasos land of vines. And all are nigh to
the salt sea, on the uttermost border of sandy Pylos; therein dwell men
abounding in flocks and kine, men that shall worship him like a god with
gifts, and beneath his sway fulfil his prosperous ordinances. All this
will I accomplish so he but cease from wrath. Let him yield; Hades I
ween is not to be softened neither overcome, and therefore is he
hatefullest of all gods to mortals. Yea, let him be ruled by me,
inasmuch as I am more royal and avow me to be the elder in years."

Then knightly Nestor of Gerenia answered and said: "Most noble son of
Atreus, Agamemnon king of men, now are these gifts not lightly to be
esteemed that thou offerest king Achilles. Come therefore, let us speed
forth picked men to go with all haste to the hut of Peleus' son
Achilles. Lo now, whomsoever I appoint let them consent. First let
Phoinix dear to Zeus lead the way, and after him great Aias and noble
Odysseus; and for heralds let Odios and Eurybates be their companions.
And now bring water for our hands, and bid keep holy silence, that we
may pray unto Zeus the son of Kronos, if perchance he will have mercy
upon us."

So said he, and spake words that were well-pleasing unto all. Forthwith
the heralds poured water on their hands, and the young men crowned the
bowls with drink and gave each man his portion after they had poured the
libation in the cups. And when they had made libation and drunk as their
heart desired, they issued forth from the hut of Agamemnon son of
Atreus. And knightly Nestor of Gerenia gave them full charge, with many
a glance to each, and chiefest to Odysseus, how they should essay to
prevail on Peleus' noble son.

So the twain went along the shore of the loud-sounding sea, making
instant prayer to the earth-embracer, the Shaker of the Earth, that they
might with ease prevail on Aiakides' great heart. So they came to the
huts and ships of the Myrmidons, and found their king taking his
pleasure of a loud lyre, fair, of curious work, with a silver cross-bar
upon it. Therein he was delighting his soul, and singing the glories of
heroes. And over against him sate Patroklos alone in silence, watching
till Aiakides should cease from singing. So the twain came forward, and
noble Odysseus led the way, and they stood before his face; and Achilles
