his expectations of borrowing money to gratify the rapacious s--t--ry at
the Navy Office, he found himself utterly unable to subsist any longer
in town, and had actually offered his service, in quality of mate, to
the surgeon of a merchant ship, bound to Guinea on the slaving trade;
when, one morning, a young fellow, of whom he had some acquaintance,
came to his lodgings, and informed him that he had seen a warrant made
out in his name at the Navy Office, for surgeon's second mate of a
third-rate. This unexpected piece of good news he could scarcely believe
to be true, more especially as he had been found qualified at Surgeons'
Hall for third mate only; but that he might not be wanting to himself,
he went thither to be assured, and actually found it so: whereupon,
demanding his warrant, it was delivered to him, and the oaths
administered immediately. That very afternoon he went to Gravesend
in the tilt-boat, from whence he took place in the tide-coach for
Rochester; next morning got on board the "Thunder," for which he was
appointed, then lying in the harbour at Chatham; and the same day was
mustered by the clerk of the checque. And well it was for him that such
expedition was used; for, in less than twelve hours after his arrival,
another William Thompson came on board, affirming that he was the person
for whom the warrant was expedited, and that the other was an impostor.

My friend was grievously alarmed at this accident, the more so, as his
namesake had very much the advantage over him both in assurance and
dress. However, to acquit himself of the suspicion of imposture, he
produced several letters written from Scotland to him in that name, and,
recollecting that his indentures were in a box on board, he brought them
up, and convinced all present that he had not assumed a name which did
not belong to him. His competitor, enraged that they should hesitate
in doing him justice (for to be sure the warrant had been designed for
him), behaved with so much indecent heat, that the commanding officer
(who was the same gentleman I had seen) and the surgeon were offended at
his presumption, and making a point of it with their friends in town, in
less than a week got the first confirmed in his station. "I have been
on board," said he, "ever since; and, as this way of life is becoming
familiar to me, have no cause to complain of my situation. The surgeon
is a good-natured, indolent man; the first mate (who is now on shore on
duty) is indeed a little proud and choleric, as all Welshmen are, but
in the main a friendly honest fellow. The lieutenants I have no concern
with; and, as for the captain, he is too much of a gentleman to know a
surgeon's mate, even by sight."






CHAPTER XXV

The behaviour of Mr. Morgan--his pride, displeasure, and generosity--the
economy of our mess described--Thomson's further friendship--the nature
of my duty explained--the situation of the sick

While he was thus discoursing to me, we heard a voice on the cockpit
ladder pronounce with great vehemence, in a strange dialect, "The devil
and his dam blow me from the top of Monchdenny, if I go to him before
there is something in my pelly. Let his nose be as yellow as saffron, or
as plue as a pell (look you), or as green as a leek, 'tis all one." To
this declaration somebody answered, "So it seems my poor messmate must
part his cable for want of a little assistance. His foretopsail is loose
already; and besides the doctor ordered you to overhaul him; but I see
you don't mind what your master says." Here he was interrupted with,
"Splutter and cons! you lousy tog, who do you call my master? Get
you gone to the doctor, and tell him my birth, and education, and
my abilities; and moreover, my behaviour is as good as his, or any
shentleman's (no disparagement to him,) in the whole world. Cot pless my
soul I does he think, or conceive, or imagine, that I am a horse, or
an ass, or a goat, to trudge backwards and forwards, and upwards and
downwards, and by sea and by land; at his will and pleasure? Go your
ways, you rapscallion, and tell Doctor Atkins that I desire and request
that he will give a look upon the tying man, and order something for
him, if he be dead or alive, and I will see him take it by and by, when
my craving stomach is satisfied, look you." At this, the other went
away, saying, "that if they should serve him so when he was dying, by
God he would be foul of them in the other world." Here Mr. Thompson let
me know, that the person we heard was Mr. Morgan, the first mate, who
was just come on board from the hospital, whither he had attended some
of the sick in the morning; at the same time I saw him come into the
berth. He was a short thick man, with a face garnished with pimples,
a snub nose turned up at the end, an excessive wide mouth, and little
fiery eyes, surrounded with skin puckered up in innumerable wrinkles. My
friend immediately made him acquainted with my case; when he regarded me
with a very lofty look, but without speaking, set down a bundle he had
in his hand, and approached the cupboard, which, when he had opened, he
exclaimed in a great passion, "Cot is my life, all the pork is gone, as
I am a Christian!" Thompson then gave him to understand, that, as I
had been brought on board half famished, he could do no less than to
entertain me with what was in the locker, and the rather as he had bid
the steward enter me in the mess. Whether this disappointment made Mr.
Morgan more peevish than usual, or he really thought himself too little
regarded by his fellow mate, I know not, but after some pause, he went
on in this manner: "Mr. Thompson, perhaps you do not use me with all
the good manners, and complaisance, and respect (look you,) that becomes
you, because you have not vouchsafed to advise with me in this affair.
I have in my time (look you,) been a man of some weight, and substance,
and consideration, and have kept house and home, and paid scot and lot,
and the king's taxes; ay, and maintained a family to boot. And moreover,
also, I am your senior, and your older, and your petter, Mr. Thompson."
"My elder, I'll allow you to be, but not my better!" cried Thompson,
with some heat. "Cot is my Saviour, and witness too," said Morgan, with
great vehemence, "that I am more elder, and therefore more petter by
many years than you." Fearing this dispute might be attended with some
bad consequence, I interposed, and told Mr. Morgan I was very sorry for
having been the occasion of any difference between him and the second
mate; and that, rather than cause the least breach in their good
understanding, I would eat my allowance to myself, or seek admission
into some other company. But Thompson, with more spirit than discretion
(as I thought), insisted upon my remaining where he had appointed me;
and observed that no man, possessed of generosity and compassion, would
have any objection to it, considering my birth and talents, and the
misfortunes I had of late so unjustly undergone.

This was touching Mr. Morgan on the right key, who protested with great
earnestness, that he had no objection to my being received in the mess;
but only complained that the ceremony of asking his consent was not
observed. "As for a sheltenman in distress," said he, shaking me by the
hand, "I lofe him as I lofe my own powels: for, Cot help me! I have had
vexations enough upon my own pack." And as I afterwards learned, in
so saying, he spoke no more than what was true; for he had been once
settled in a very good situation in Glamorganshire, and was ruined by
being security for an acquaintance. All differences being composed, he
untied his bundle, which consisted of three bunches of onions, and a
great lump of Cheshire cheese, wrapped up in a handkerchief: and, taking
some biscuit from the cupboard, fell to with a keen appetite, inviting
us to share of the repast. When he had fed heartily on his homely fare,
he filled a large cup, made of a cocoa-nut shell, with brandy, and,
drinking it off, told us, "Prandy was the best menstruum for onions and
sheese." His hunger being appeased, he began to be in better humour;
and, being inquisitive about my birth, no sooner understood that I was
descended of a good family, than he discovered a particular good-will to
me on that account, deducing his own pedigree in a direct line from the
famous Caractacus, king of the Britons, who was first the prisoner,
and afterwards the friend of Claudius Caesar. Perceiving how much I
was reduced in point of linen, he made me a present of two good
ruffled shirts, which, with two more of check which I received from Mr.
Thompson, enabled me to appear with decency.

Meanwhile the sailor, whom Mr. Morgan had sent to the doctor, brought a
prescription for his messmate, which when the Welshman had read, he got
up to prepare it, and asked, "if the man was dead or alive." "Dead!"
replied Jack; "if he was dead, he would have no occasion for doctor's
stuff. No, thank God, death han't as yet boarded him. But they have
been yard-arm and yard-arm these three glasses." "Are his eyes open,"
continued the mate. "His starboard eye," said the sailor, "is open, but
fast jammed in his head: and the haulyards of his under jaw have given
way." "Passion of my heart!" cried Morgan, "the man is as pad as one
would desire to be! Did you feel his pulses!" To this the other replied
with "Anan!" Upon which this Cambro Briton, with great earnestness and
humanity, ordered the tar to run to his messmate, and keep him alive
till he should come with the medicine, "and then," said he, "you shall
peradventure pehold what you shall see."

The poor fellow, with great simplicity, ran to the place where the sick
man lay, but in less than a minute returned with a woful countenance,
and told us his comrade had struck. Morgan, hearing this, exclaimed,
"Mercy upon my salvation! why did you not stop him till I came?" "Stop
him!" said the other; "I hailed him several times, but he was too far on
his way, and the enemy had got possession of his close quarters; so that
he did not mind me." "Well, well," said he, "we all owe heaven a teath.
Go your ways, you ragamuffin, and take an example and a warning, look
you, and repent of your misteets." So saying, he pushed the seaman out
of the berth.

While we entertained us with reflections suitable to this event, we
heard the boatswain pipe to dinner; and immediately the boy belonging
to our mess ran to the locker, from whence he carried off a large wooden
platter, and, in a few minutes, returned with it full of boiled peas,
crying "Scaldings" all the way as he came. The cloth, consisting of a
piece of an old sail, was instantly laid, covered with three plates,
which by the colour I could with difficulty discern to be metal, and as
many spoons of the same composition, two of which were curtailed in the
handles, and the other abridged in the lip. Mr. Morgan himself enriched
this mess with a lump of salt butter scooped from an old gallipot, and
a handful of onions shorn, with some pounded pepper. I was not very much
tempted with the appearance of this dish, of which, nevertheless, my
messmates ate heartily, advising me to follow their example, as it was
banyan day and we could have no meat till next noon. But I had already
laid in sufficient for the occasion, and therefore desired to be
excused: expressing a curiosity to know the meaning of banyan day. They
told me, that, on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays, the ship's company
had no allowance of meat, and that these meagre days were called banyan
days, the reason of which they did not know; but I have since learned
they take their denomination from a sect of devotees in some parts of
the East Indies, who never taste flesh.

After dinner Thompson led me round the ship, showed me the different
parts, described their uses, and, as far as he could, made me acquainted
with the particulars of the discipline and economy practised on board.
He then demanded of the boatswain a hammock for me, which was slung in
a very neat manner by my friend Jack Rattlin; and, as I had no
bed-clothes, procured credit for me with the purser, for a mattress and
two blankets. At seven o'clock in the evening Morgan visited the sick,
and, having ordered what was proper for each, I assisted Thompson in
making up his prescriptions: but when I followed him with the medicines
into the sick berth, or hospital, and observed the situation of the
patients, I was much less surprised that people should die on board,
than that a sick person should recover. Here I saw about fifty miserable
distempered wretches, suspended in rows, so huddled one upon another,
that not more than fourteen inches space was allotted for each with his
bed and bedding; and deprived of the light of the day, as well as of
fresh air; breathing nothing but a noisome atmosphere of the morbid
steams exhaling from their own excrements and diseased bodies, devoured
with vermin hatched in the filth that surrounded them, and destitute of
every convenience necessary for people in that helpless condition.






CHAPTER XXVI

A disagreeable accident happens to me in the discharge of my
office--Morgan's nose is offended--a dialogue between him and the Ship's
steward--upon examination, I find more causes of complaint than one--my
hair is cut off--Morgan's cookery--the manner of sleeping on board--I am
waked in the night by a dreadful noise

Could not comprehend how it was possible for the attendants to come near
those who hung on the inside towards the sides of the ship, in order to
assist them, as they seemed barricadoed by those who lay on the outside,
and entirely out of the reach of all visitation; much less could I
conceive how my friend Thompson would be able to administer clysters,
that were ordered for some, in that situation; when I saw him thrust his
wig in his pocket, and strip himself to his waistcoat in a moment, then
creep on all fours under the hammocks of the sick, and, forcing up his
bare pate between two, keep them asunder with one shoulder, until he had
done his duty. Eager to learn the service, I desired he would give me
leave to perform the next operation of that kind; and he consenting,
I undressed myself after his example, and crawling along, the ship
happened to roll: this motion alarming me, I laid hold of the first
thing that came within my grasp with such violence, that I overturned
it, and soon found, by the smell that issued upon me, that I had
unlocked a box of the most delicious perfume. It was well for me that
my nose was none of the most delicate, else I know not how I might have
been affected by this vapour, which diffused itself all over the ship,
to the utter discomposure of everybody who tarried on the same dock!
neither was the consequence of this disgrace confined to my sense of
smelling only; for I felt my misfortune more ways than one. That I might
not, however, appear altogether disconcerted in this my first essay,
I got up, and, pushing my head with great force between two hammocks,
towards the middle, where the greatest resistance was, I made an opening
indeed, but, not understanding the knack of dexterously turning my
shoulder to maintain my advantage, had the mortification to find myself
stuck up, as it were, in a pillory, and the weight of three or four
people bearing on each side of my neck, so that I was in danger of
strangulation. While I remained in this defenceless posture, one of the
sick men, rendered peevish by his distemper, was so enraged at the
smell I had occasioned and the rude shock he had received from me in my
elevation, that, with many bitter reproaches, he seized me by the nose,
which he tweaked so unmercifully, that I roared with anguish. Thompson,
perceiving my condition, ordered one of the waiters to my assistance,
who, with much difficulty, disengaged me from this situation, and
hindered me from taking vengeance on the sick man, whose indisposition
would not have screened him from the effects of my indignation.

After having made an end of our ministry for that time, we descended to
the cockpit, my friend comforting me for what had happened with a homely
proverb, which I do not choose to repeat. When we had descended half-way
down the ladder, Mr. Morgan, before he saw us, having intelligence by
his nose of the approach of something extraordinary, cried, "Cot have
mercy upon my senses! I pelieve the enemy has poarded us in a stinkpot!"
Then, directing his discourse to the steward, from whence he imagined
the odour proceeded, he reprimanded him severely for the freedoms he
took among gentlemen of birth, and threatened to smoke him like a padger
with sulphur, if ever he should presume to offend his neighbours with
such smells for the future. The steward, conscious of his own innocence,
replied with some warmth, "I know of no smells but those of your
own making." This repartee introduced a smart dialogue, in which the
Welshman undertook to prove, that, though the stench he complained of
did not flow from the steward's own body, he was nevertheless the author
of it, by serving out damaged provisions to the ship's company; and, in
particular, putrified cheese, from the use of which only, he affirmed,
such unsavoury steams could arise. Then he launched out into the praise
of good cheese, of which he gave the analysis; explained the different
kinds of that commodity, with the methods practised to make and preserve
it, concluded in observing, that, in yielding good cheese, the county of
Glamorgan might vie with Cheshire itself, and was much superior to it in
the produce of goats and putter.

I gathered from this conversation, that, if I entered in my present
pickle, I should be no welcome guest, and therefore desired Mr. Thompson
to go before, and represent my calamity; at which the first mate,
expressing some concern, went upon deck immediately, taking his way
through the cable-tier and the main hatchway, to avoid encountering
me; desiring me to clean myself as soon as possible: for he intended to
regale himself with a dish of salmagundy and a pipe. Accordingly, I set
about this disagreeable business, and soon found I had more causes of
complaint than I at first imagined; for I perceived some guests had
honoured me with their company, whose visit I did not think seasonable:
neither did they seem inclined to leave me in a hurry, for they were in
possession of my chief quarters, where they fed without reserve at the
expense of my blood. But, considering it would be easier to extirpate
the ferocious colony in the infancy of their settlement, than after they
should be multiplied and naturalised to the soil, I took the advice of
my friend, who, to prevent such misfortunes, went always close shaved,
and made the boy of our mess cut off my hair, which had been growing
since I left the service of Lavement; and the second mate lent me an old
bobwig to supply the loss of that covering. This affair being ended, and
everything adjusted in the best manner my circumstances would permit,
the descendant of Caractacus returned, and, ordering the boy to bring a
piece of salt beef from the brine, cut off a slice, and mixed it with an
equal quantity of onions, which seasoning with a moderate proportion of
pepper and salt, he brought it to a consistence with oil and vinegar;
then, tasting the dish, assured us it was the best salmagundy that ever
he made, and recommended it to our palate with such heartiness that
I could not help doing honour to his preparation. But I had no sooner
swallowed a mouthful, than I thought my entrails were scorched, and
endeavoured with a deluge of small-beer to allay the heat it occasioned.
Supper being over, Mr. Morgan having smoked a couple of pipes, and
supplied the moisture he had expended with as many cans of flip, of
which we all partook, a certain yawning began to admonish me that it was
high time to repair by sleep the injury I had suffered from want of rest
the preceding night; which being perceived by my companions, whose time
of repose was now arrived, they proposed we should turn in, or in other
words, go to bed. Our hammocks, which hung parallel to one another, on
the outside of the berth, were immediately unlashed, and I beheld my
messmates spring with great agility into their respective nests, where
they seemed to lie concealed, very much at their ease. But it was some
time before I could prevail upon myself to trust my carcase at such a
distance from the ground, in a narrow bag, out of which, I imagined, I
should be apt, on the least motion in my sleep, to tumble down at
the hazard of breaking my bones. I suffered myself, however, to be
persuaded, and taking a leap to get in, threw myself quite over, with
such violence, that had I not luckily got hold of Thompson's hammock,
I should have pitched upon my head on the other side, and in all
likelihood fractured my skull.

After some fruitless efforts, I succeeded at last; but the apprehension
of the jeopardy in which I believed myself withstood all the attacks of
sleep till towards the morning watch, when, in spite of my fears, I was
overpowered with slumber, though I did not long enjoy this comfortable
situation, being aroused with a noise so loud and shrill, that I thought
the drums of my ears were burst by it; this was followed by a dreadful
summons pronounced by a hoarse voice, which I could not understand.
While I was debating with myself, whether or not I should wake my
companion and inquire into the occasion of this disturbance, I was
informed by one of the quartermasters who passed by me with a lantern
in his hand, that the noise which alarmed me was occasioned by the
boatswain's mates who called up the larboard watch, and that I must lay
my account with such an interruption every morning at the same hour.
Being now more assured of my safety, I undressed myself again to rest,
and slept till eight o'clock, when rising, and breakfasting with my
comrades on biscuit and brandy, the sick were visited and assisted as
before; after which visitation my good friend Thompson explained and
performed another piece of duty, to which I was a stranger. At a certain
hour in the morning, the boy of the mess went round all the decks,
ringing a small hand-bell, and, in rhymes composed for the occasion,
invited all those who had sores to repair before the mast, where one of
the doctor's mates attended, with applications to dress them.






CHAPTER XXVII

I acquire the friendship of the Surgeon, who procures a warrant for me,
and makes me a present of clothes--a battle between a Midshipman and
me--the Surgeon leaves the ship--the Captain comes on board with another
Surgeon--a dialogue between the Captain and Morgan--the sick are ordered
to be brought upon the Quarter-deck and examined--the consequences of
that order--a Madman accuses Morgan, and is set at liberty by command of
the Captain, whom he instantly attacks, and pummels without mercy

While I was busied with my friend in the practice. The doctor chanced
to pass by the place where we were, and stopping to observe me appeared
very well satisfied with my application; and afterwards sent for me to
his cabin, where, having examined me touching my skill in surgery,
and the particulars of my fortune, he interested himself so far in my
behalf, as to promise his assistance in procuring a warrant for me,
seeing I had already been found qualified at Surgeons' Hall for the
station I filled on board; and in this good office he the more cordially
engaged when he understood I was nephew to lieutenant Bowling, for whom
he expressed a particular regard. In the meantime, I could learn from
his discourse that he did not intend to go to sea again with Captain
Oakum, having, as he thought, been indifferently used by him during the
last voyage.

While I lived tolerably easy, in expectation of preferment, I was not
altogether without mortifications, which I not only suffered from the
rude insults of the sailors and petty officers, among whom I was known
by the name of Loblolly Boy, but also from the disposition of Morgan,
who, though friendly in the main, was often very troublesome with his
pride, which expected a good deal of submission from me, and delighted
in recapitulating the favours I had received at his hands.

About six weeks after my arrival on board, the surgeon, bidding me to
follow him into his cabin, presented a warrant to me, by which I
was appointed surgeon's third mate on board the Thunder. This he
had procured by his interest at the Navy Office; as also another
for himself, by virtue of which he was removed into a second-rate. I
acknowledged his kindness in the strongest terms my gratitude could
suggest, and professed my sorrow at the prospect of losing so valuable a
friend, to whom I hoped to have recommended myself still further, by my
respectful and diligent behaviour. But his generosity rested not here;
for before he left the ship he made me a present of a chest and some
clothes that enabled me to support the rank to which he had raised me.

I found my spirit revive with my good fortune; and, now I was an
officer, resolved to maintain the dignity of my station, against all
opposition or affronts; nor was it long before I had occasion to exert
my resolution. My old enemy, the midshipman (whose name was Crampley),
entertaining an implacable animosity against me for the disgrace he had
suffered on my account, had since that time taken all opportunities of
reviling and ridiculing me, when I was not entitled to retort this bad
usage; and, even after I had been rated on the books, and mustered
as surgeon's mate, did not think fit to restrain his insolence. In
particular, being one day present while I dressed a wound in a sailor's
leg, he began to sing a song, which I thought highly injurious to
the honour of my country, and therefore signified my resentment, by
observing that the Scots always laid their account with finding enemies
among the ignorant, insignificant, and malicious. This unexpected piece
of assurance enraged him to such a degree, that he lent me a blow on
the face, which I verily thought had demolished my cheek-bone. I was
not slow in returning the obligation, and the affair began to be very
serious, when by accident Mr. Morgan, and one of the master's mates,
coming that way, interposed, and, inquiring into the cause, endeavoured
to promote a reconciliation; but, finding us both exasperated to the
uttermost, and bent against accommodation, they advised us either to
leave our difference undecided, till we should have an opportunity of
terminating it on shore, like gentlemen, or else choose a proper place
on board, and bring it to an issue by boxing. The last expedient was
greedily embraced by us both; and, being forthwith conducted to the
ground proposed, we stripped in a moment, and began a furious contest,
in which I soon found myself inferior to my antagonist, not so much in
strength and agility, as in skill, which he had acquired in the school
of Hockley-in-the-Hole at Tottenham-court. Many cross buttocks did I
sustain, and pegs on the stomach without number, till at last my breath
being quite gone, as well as my vigour wasted, I grew desperate, and
collecting all my strength in one effort, threw in at once, head, hands,
and feet, with such violence, that I drove my antagonist three paces
backward into the main hatchway, down which he fell, and pitching upon
his head and right shoulder, remained without sense and motion. Morgan,
looking down, and seeing him lie in that condition, cried, "Upon my
conscience, as I am a Christian sinner, (look you,) I believe his
pattles are all ofer; but I take you all to witness that there was no
treachery in the case, and that he has suffered by the chance of war."
So saying he descended to the deck below, to examine into the situation
of my adversary, and left me very little pleased with my victory, as I
found myself not only terribly bruised, but likewise in danger of being
called to account for the death of Crampley; but this fear vanished when
my fellow-mate having, by bleeding him in the jugular, brought him to
himself, and inquired into the state of his body, called up to me to be
under no concern, for the midshipman had received no other damage than
as pretty a luxation of the os humeri as one would desire to see on a
summer's day. Upon this information I crawled down to the cock-pit,
and acquainted Thompson with the affair, who, providing himself with
bandages, etc, necessary for the occasion, went up to assist Mr.
Morgan in the reduction of the dislocation. When this was successfully
performed, they wished me joy of the event of the combat; and the
Welshman, after observing, that, in all likelihood, the ancient Scots
and Britons were the same people, bade me "praise Cot for putting mettle
in my pelly, and strength in my limbs to support it." I acquired
such reputation by this rencontre, which lasted twenty minutes, that
everybody became more cautious in behaviour towards me; though Crampley,
with his arm in a sling, talked very high, and threatened to seize the
first opportunity of retrieving on shore the honour he had lost by an
accident, from which I could justly claim no merit.

About this time, Captain Oakum, having received sailing orders, came on
board, and brought along with him a surgeon of his own country, who
soon made us sensible of the loss we suffered in the departure of Doctor
Atkins; for he was grossly ignorant, and intolerably assuming, false,
vindictive, and unforgiving; a merciless tyrant to his inferiors, an
abject sycophant to those above him. In the morning after the captain
came on board, our first mate, according to custom, went to wait on him
with a sick list, which, when this grim commander had perused, he cried
with a stern countenance, "Blood and cons! sixty-one sick people on
board of my ship! Harkee, you sir, I'll have no sick in my ship, by
G--d." The Welshman replied, "he should be very glad to find no sick
people on board: but, while it was otherwise, he did no more than his
duty in presenting him with a list." "You and your list may be d--n'd,"
said the captain, throwing it at him; "I say, there shall be no sick in
this ship while I have the command of her." Mr. Morgan, being nettled
at this treatment, told him his indignation ought to be directed to Cot
Almighty, who visited his people with distempers, and not to him, who
contributed all in his power towards their cure. The bashaw, not being
used to such behaviour in any of his officers, was enraged to fury at
this satirical insinuation, and, stamping with his foot, called him
insolent scoundrel, threatening to have him pinioned to the deck, if he
should presume to utter another syllable. But the blood of Caractacus
being thoroughly heated, disdained to be restricted by such a command,
and began to manifest itself in, "Captain Oakum, I am a shentleman of
birth and parentage (look you), and peradventure I am moreover."
Here his harangue was broken off by the captain's steward, who, being
Morgan's countryman, hurried him out of the cabin before he had time to
exasperate his master to a greater degree, and this would certainly have
been the case; for the indignant Welshman could hardly be hindered
by his friend's arguments and entreaties from re-entering the
presence-chamber, and defying Captain Oakum to his teeth. He was,
however appeased at length, and came down to the berth, where, finding
Thompson and me at work preparing medicines, he bade us leave off our
lapour to go to play, for the captain, by his sole word, and power, and
command, had driven sickness a pegging to the tevil, and there was no
more malady on board. So saying, he drank off a gill of brandy sighed
grievously three times, poured fort an ejaculation of "Cot pless my
heart, liver, and lungs!" and then began to sing a Welsh song with great
earnestness of visage, voice, and gesture. I could not conceive the
meaning of this singular phenomenon, and saw by the looks of
Thompson, who at the same time shook his head, that he suspected poor
Cadwallader's brains were unsettled. He, perceiving our amazement,
told us he would explain the mystery; but at the same time bade us take
notice, that he had lived poy, patchelor, married man, and widower,
almost forty years, and in all that time there was no man, nor mother's
son in the whole world who durst use him so ill as Captain Oakum had
done. Then he acquainted us with the dialogue that passed between them,
as I have already related it: and had no sooner finished this narration
than he received a message from the surgeon, to bring the sick-list to
the quarter-deck, for the captain had ordered all the patients thither
to be reviewed.

This inhuman order shocked us extremely, as we knew it would be
impossible to carry some of them on the deck, without imminent danger of
their lives: but, as we likewise knew it would be to no purpose for us
to remonstrate against it, we repaired to the quarter-deck in a body,
to see this extraordinary muster; Morgan observing by the way, that the
captain was going to send to the other world a great many evidences to
testify against himself. When we appeared upon deck, the captain bade
the doctor, who stood bowing at his right hand, look at these lazy
lubberly sons of bitches, who were good for nothing on board but to
eat the king's provision, and encourage idleness in the skulkers. The
surgeon grinned approbation, and, taking the list, began to examine the
complaints of each as they could crawl to the place appointed. The first
who came under his cognizance was a poor fellow just freed of a fever,
which had weakened him so much that he could hardly stand. Mr. Mackshane
(for that was the doctor's name), having felt his pulse, protested he
was as well as any man in the world; and the captain delivered him over
to the boatswain's mate, with orders that he should receive a round
dozen at the gangway immediately, for counterfeiting himself sick; but,
before the discipline could be executed, the man dropped down on the
deck, and had well nigh perished under the hands of the executioner. The
next patient to be considered, laboured under a quartan ague, and,
being then in his interval of health, discovered no other symptoms of
distemper than a pale meagre countenance and emaciated body; upon which
he was declared fit for duty, and turned over to the boatswain; but,
being resolved to disgrace the doctor, died upon the forecastle next
day, during his cold fit. The third complained of a pleuritic stitch,
and spitting of blood, for which Doctor Mackshane prescribed exercise at
the pump to promote expectoration! but whether this was improper for one
in his situation, or that it was used to excess, I know not, but in less
than half-an-hour he was suffocated with a deluge of blood that
issued from his lungs. A fourth, with much difficulty, climbed to the
quarter-deck, being loaded with a monstrous ascites, or dropsy, that
invaded his chest so much, he could scarce fetch his breath; but his
disease being interpreted into fat, occasioned by idleness and excess of
eating, he was ordered, with a view to promote perspiration and enlarge
his chest, to go aloft immediately. It was in vain for this unwieldy
wretch to allege his utter incapacity; the boatswain's driver was
commanded to whip him up with the cat-and-nine-tails; the smart of this
application made him exert himself so much, that he actually arrived
at the puttock shrouds; but when the enormous weight of his body had
nothing else to support than his weakened arms, either out of spite or
necessity, he quitted his hold, and plunged into the sea, where he must
have been drowned, had not a sailor, who was in a boat alongside,
saved his life, by keeping him afloat till he was hoisted on board by a
tackle.

It would be tedious and disagreeable to describe the fate of every
miserable object that suffered by the inhumanity and ignorance of the
captain and surgeon, who so wantonly sacrificed the lives of their
fellow-creatures. Many were brought up in the height of fevers, and
rendered delirious by the injuries they received in the way. Some gave
up the ghost in the presence of their inspectors; and others, who were
ordered to their duties, languished a few days at work among their
fellows, and then departed without any ceremony. On the whole, the
number of the sick was reduced to less than a dozen; and the authors of
this reduction were applauding themselves for the services they had
done to their king and country, when the boatswain's mate informed his
honour, that there was a man below lashed to his hammock, by direction
of the doctor's mate, and that he begged hard to be released; affirming,
he had been so maltreated only for a grudge Mr. Morgan bore him, and
that he was as much in his senses as any man aboard. The captain hearing
this, darted a severe look at the Welshman, and ordered the man to
be brought up immediately; upon which, Morgan protested with great
fervency, that the person in question was as mad as a March hare; and
begged for the love of Cot, they would at least keep his arms pinioned
during his examination, to prevent him from doing mischief. This request
the commander granted for his own sake, and the patient was produced,
who insisted upon his being in his right wits with such calmness and
