Edward at length discovered, with a painful feeling of surprise
and shame, that Balmawhapple's submission and apology had been the
consequence of a rencontre with the Baron before his guest had
quitted his pillow, in which the younger combatant had been
disarmed and wounded in the sword arm.

Greatly mortified at this information, Edward sought out his
friendly host, and anxiously expostulated with him upon the
injustice he had done him in anticipating his meeting with Mr.
Falconer, a circumstance which, considering his youth and the
profession of arms which he had just adopted, was capable of being
represented much to his prejudice. The Baron justified himself at
greater length than I choose to repeat. He urged that the quarrel
was common to them, and that Balmawhapple could not, by the code
of honour, evite giving satisfaction to both, which he had done in
his case by an honourable meeting, and in that of Edward by such a
palinode as rendered the use of the sword unnecessary, and which,
being made and accepted, must necessarily sopite the whole affair.

With this excuse, or explanation, Waverley was silenced, if not
satisfied; but he could not help testifying some displeasure
against the Blessed Bear, which had given rise to the quarrel, nor
refrain from hinting that the sanctified epithet was hardly
appropriate. The Baron observed, he could not deny that 'the Bear,
though allowed by heralds as a most honourable ordinary, had,
nevertheless, somewhat fierce, churlish, and morose in his
disposition (as might be read in Archibald Simson, pastor of
Dalkeith's 'Hieroglyphica Animalium') and had thus been the type
of many quarrels and dissensions which had occurred in the house
of Bradwardine; of which,' he continued, 'I might commemorate mine
own unfortunate dissension with my third cousin by the mother's
side, Sir Hew Halbert, who was so unthinking as to deride my
family name, as if it had been QUASI BEAR-WARDEN; a most uncivil
jest, since it not only insinuated that the founder of our house
occupied such a mean situation as to be a custodier of wild
beasts, a charge which, ye must have observed, is only entrusted
to the very basest plebeians; but, moreover, seemed to infer that
our coat-armour had not been achieved by honourable actions in
war, but bestowed by way of paranomasia, or pun, upon our family
appellation,--a sort of bearing which the French call armoires
parlantes, the Latins arma cantantia, and your English authorities
canting heraldry, [Footnote: See Note 12] being indeed a species of
emblazoning more befitting canters, gaberlunzies, and such like
mendicants, whose gibberish is formed upon playing upon the word,
than the noble, honourable, and useful science of heraldry, which
assigns armorial bearings as the reward of noble and generous
actions, and not to tickle the ear with vain quodlibets, such as
are found in jestbooks.' Of his quarrel with Sir Hew he said
nothing more than that it was settled in a fitting manner.

Having been so minute with respect to the diversions of Tully-
Veolan on the first days of Edward's arrival, for the purpose of
introducing its inmates to the reader's acquaintance, it becomes
less necessary to trace the progress of his intercourse with the
same accuracy. It is probable that a young man, accustomed to more
cheerful society, would have tired of the conversation of so
violent an assertor of the 'boast of heraldry' as the Baron; but
Edward found an agreeable variety in that of Miss Bradwardine, who
listened with eagerness to his remarks upon literature, and showed
great justness of taste in her answers. The sweetness of her
disposition had made her submit with complacency, and even
pleasure, to the course of reading prescribed by her father,
although it not only comprehended several heavy folios of history,
but certain gigantic tomes in high-church polemics. In heraldry he
was fortunately contented to give her only such a slight tincture
as might be acquired by perusal of the two folio volumes of
Nisbet. Rose was indeed the very apple of her father's eye. Her
constant liveliness, her attention to all those little observances
most gratifying to those who would never think of exacting them,
her beauty, in which he recalled the features of his beloved wife,
her unfeigned piety, and the noble generosity of her disposition,
would have justified the affection of the most doting father.

His anxiety on her behalf did not, however, seem to extend itself
in that quarter where, according to the general opinion, it is
most efficiently displayed, in labouring, namely, to establish her
in life, either by a large dowry or a wealthy marriage. By an old
settlement, almost all the landed estates of the Baron went, after
his death, to a distant relation; and it was supposed that Miss
Bradwardine would remain but slenderly provided for, as the good
gentleman's cash matters had been too long under the exclusive
charge of Bailie Macwheeble to admit of any great expectations
from his personal succession. It is true, the said Bailie loved
his patron and his patron's daughter next (though at an
incomparable distance) to himself. He thought it was possible to
set aside the settlement on the male line, and had actually
procured an opinion to that effect (and, as he boasted, without a
fee) from an eminent Scottish counsel, under whose notice he
contrived to bring the point while consulting him regularly on
some other business. But the Baron would not listen to such a
proposal for an instant. On the contrary, he used to have a
perverse pleasure in boasting that the barony of Bradwardine was a
male fief, the first charter having been given at that early
period when women were not deemed capable to hold a feudal grant;
because, according to Les coustusmes de Normandie, c'est l'homme
ki se bast et ki conseille; or, as is yet more ungallantly
expressed by other authorities, all of whose barbarous names he
delighted to quote at full length, because a woman could not serve
the superior, or feudal lord, in war, on account of the decorum of
her sex, nor assist him with advice, because of her limited
intellect, nor keep his counsel, owing to the infirmity of her
disposition. He would triumphantly ask, how it would become a
female, and that female a Bradwardine, to be seen employed in
servitio exuendi, seu detrahendi, caligas regis post battaliam?
that is, in pulling off the king's boots after an engagement,
which was the feudal service by which he held the barony of
Bradwardine. 'No,' he said, 'beyond hesitation, procul dubio, many
females, as worthy as Rose, had been excluded, in order to make
way for my own succession, and Heaven forbid that I should do
aught that might contravene the destination of my forefathers, or
impinge upon the right of my kinsman, Malcolm Bradwardine of
Inchgrabbit, an honourable, though decayed branch of my own
family.'

The Bailie, as prime minister, having received this decisive
communication from his sovereign, durst not press his own opinion
any farther, but contented himself with deploring, on all suitable
occasions, to Saunderson, the minister of the interior, the
laird's self-willedness, and with laying plans for uniting Rose
with the young Laird of Balmawhapple, who had a fine estate, only
moderately burdened, and was a faultless young gentleman, being as
sober as a saint--if you keep brandy from him and him from brandy
--and who, in brief, had no imperfection but that of keeping light
company at a time; such as Jinker, the horse-couper, and Gibby
Gaethroughwi't, the piper o' Cupar; 'o' whilk follies, Mr.
Saunderson, he'll mend, he'll mend,' pronounced the Bailie.

'Like sour ale in simmer,' added Davie Gellatley, who happened to
be nearer the conclave than they were aware of.

Miss Bradwardine, such as we have described her, with all the
simplicity and curiosity of a recluse, attached herself to the
opportunities of increasing her store of literature which Edward's
visit afforded her. He sent for some of his books from his
quarters, and they opened to her sources of delight of which she
had hitherto had no idea. The best English poets, of every
description, and other works on belles-lettres, made a part of
this precious cargo. Her music, even her flowers, were neglected,
and Saunders not only mourned over, but began to mutiny against,
the labour for which he now scarce received thanks. These new
pleasures became gradually enhanced by sharing them with one of a
kindred taste. Edward's readiness to comment, to recite, to
explain difficult passages, rendered his assistance invaluable;
and the wild romance of his spirit delighted a character too young
and inexperienced to observe its deficiencies. Upon subjects which
interested him, and when quite at ease, he possessed that flow of
natural, and somewhat florid eloquence, which has been supposed as
powerful even as figure, fashion, fame, or fortune, in winning the
female heart. There was, therefore, an increasing danger in this
constant intercourse to poor Rose's peace of mind, which was the
more imminent as her father was greatly too much abstracted in his
studies, and wrapped up in his own dignity, to dream of his
daughter's incurring it. The daughters of the house of Bradwardine
were, in his opinion, like those of the house of Bourbon or
Austria, placed high above the clouds of passion which might
obfuscate the intellects of meaner females; they moved in another
sphere, were governed by other feelings, and amenable to other
rules than those of idle and fantastic affection. In short, he
shut his eyes so resolutely to the natural consequences of
Edward's intimacy with Miss Bradwardine, that the whole
neighbourhood concluded that he had opened them to the advantages
of a match between his daughter and the wealthy young Englishman,
and pronounced him much less a fool than he had generally shown
himself in cases where his own interest was concerned.

If the Baron, however, had really meditated such an alliance, the
indifference of Waverley would have been an insuperable bar to his
project. Our hero, since mixing more freely with the world, had
learned to think with great shame and confusion upon his mental
legend of Saint Cecilia, and the vexation of these reflections was
likely, for some time at least, to counterbalance the natural
susceptibility of his disposition. Besides, Rose Bradwardine,
beautiful and amiable as we have described her, had not precisely
the sort of beauty or merit which captivates a romantic
imagination in early youth. She was too frank, too confiding, too
kind; amiable qualities, undoubtedly, but destructive of the
marvellous, with which a youth of imagination delights to dress
the empress of his affections. Was it possible to bow, to tremble,
and to adore, before the timid, yet playful little girl, who now
asked Edward to mend her pen, now to construe a stanza in Tasso,
and now how to spell a very--very long word in her version of it?
All these incidents have their fascination on the mind at a
certain period of life, but not when a youth is entering it, and
rather looking out for some object whose affection may dignify him
in his own eyes than stooping to one who looks up to him for such
distinction. Hence, though there can be no rule in so capricious a
passion, early love is frequently ambitious in choosing its
object; or, which comes to the same, selects her (as in the case
of Saint Cecilia aforesaid) from a situation that gives fair scope
for le beau ideal, which the reality of intimate and familiar life
rather tends to limit and impair. I knew a very accomplished and
sensible young man cured of a violent passion for a pretty woman,
whose talents were not equal to her face and figure, by being
permitted to bear her company for a whole afternoon. Thus, it is
certain, that had Edward enjoyed such an opportunity of conversing
with Miss Stubbs, Aunt Rachel's precaution would have been
unnecessary, for he would as soon have fallen in love with the
dairy-maid. And although Miss Bradwardine was a very different
character, it seems probable that the very intimacy of their
intercourse prevented his feeling for her other sentiments than
those of a brother for an amiable and accomplished sister; while
the sentiments of poor Rose were gradually, and without her being
conscious, assuming a shade of warmer affection.

I ought to have said that Edward, when he sent to Dundee for the
books before mentioned, had applied for, and received permission,
extending his leave of absence. But the letter of his commanding
officer contained a friendly recommendation to him not to spend
his time exclusively with persons who, estimable as they might be
in a general sense, could not be supposed well affected to a
government which they declined to acknowledge by taking the oath
of allegiance. The letter further insinuated, though with great
delicacy, that although some family connections might be supposed
to render it necessary for Captain Waverley to communicate with
gentlemen who were in this unpleasant state of suspicion, yet his
father's situation and wishes ought to prevent his prolonging
those attentions into exclusive intimacy. And it was intimated,
that, while his political principles were endangered by
communicating with laymen of this description, he might also
receive erroneous impressions in religion from the prelatic
clergy, who so perversely laboured to set up the royal prerogative
in things sacred.

This last insinuation probably induced Waverley to set both down
to the prejudices of his commanding officer. He was sensible that
Mr. Bradwardine had acted with the most scrupulous delicacy, in
never entering upon any discussion that had the most remote
tendency to bias his mind in political opinions, although he was
himself not only a decided partisan of the exiled family, but had
been trusted at different times with important commissions for
their service. Sensible, therefore, that there was no risk of his
being perverted from his allegiance, Edward felt as if he should
do his uncle's old friend injustice in removing from a house where
he gave and received pleasure and amusement, merely to gratify a
prejudiced and ill-judged suspicion. He therefore wrote a very
general answer, assuring his commanding officer that his loyalty
was not in the most distant danger of contamination, and continued
an honoured guest and inmate of the house of Tully-Veolan.





CHAPTER XV

A CREAGH, AND ITS CONSEQUENCES


When Edward had been a guest at Tully-Veolan nearly six weeks, he
descried, one morning, as he took his usual walk before the
breakfast hour, signs of uncommon perturbation in the family. Four
bare-legged dairy-maids, with each an empty milk-pail in her hand,
ran about with frantic gestures, and uttering loud exclamations of
surprise, grief, and resentment. From their appearance, a pagan
might have conceived them a detachment of the celebrated Belides,
just come from their baling penance. As nothing was to be got from
this distracted chorus, excepting 'Lord guide us!' and 'Eh sirs!'
ejaculations which threw no light upon the cause of their dismay,
Waverley repaired to the fore-court, as it was called, where he
beheld Bailie Macwheeble cantering his white pony down the avenue
with all the speed it could muster. He had arrived, it would seem,
upon a hasty summons, and was followed by half a score of peasants
from the village who had no great difficulty in keeping pace with
him.

The Bailie, greatly too busy and too important to enter into
explanations with Edward, summoned forth Mr. Saunderson, who
appeared with a countenance in which dismay was mingled with
solemnity, and they immediately entered into close conference.
Davie Gellatley was also seen in the group, idle as Diogenes at
Sinope while his countrymen were preparing for a siege. His
spirits always rose with anything, good or bad, which occasioned
tumult, and he continued frisking, hopping, dancing, and singing
the burden of an old ballad--

    'Our gear's a' gane,'

until, happening to pass too near the Bailie, he received an
admonitory hint from his horse-whip, which converted his songs
into lamentation.

Passing from thence towards the garden, Waverley beheld the Baron
in person, measuring and re-measuring, with swift and tremendous
strides, the length of the terrace; his countenance clouded with
offended pride and indignation, and the whole of his demeanour
such as seemed to indicate, that any inquiry concerning the cause
of his discomposure would give pain at least, if not offence.
Waverley therefore glided into the house, without addressing him,
and took his way to the breakfast-parlour, where he found his
young friend Rose, who, though she neither exhibited the
resentment of her father, the turbid importance of Bailie
Macwheeble, nor the despair of the handmaidens, seemed vexed and
thoughtful. A single word explained the mystery. 'Your breakfast
will be a disturbed one, Captain Waverley. A party of Caterans
have come down upon us last night, and have driven off all our
milch cows.'

'A party of Caterans?'

'Yes; robbers from the neighbouring Highlands. We used to be quite
free from them while we paid blackmail to Fergus Mac-Ivor Vich Ian
Vohr; but my father thought it unworthy of his rank and birth to
pay it any longer, and so this disaster has happened. It is not
the value of the cattle, Captain Waverley, that vexes me; but my
father is so much hurt at the affront, and is so bold and hot,
that I fear he will try to recover them by the strong hand; and if
he is not hurt himself, he will hurt some of these wild people,
and then there will be no peace between them and us perhaps for
our life-time; and we cannot defend ourselves as in old times, for
the government have taken all our arms; and my dear father is so
rash--O what will become of us!'--Here poor Rose lost heart
altogether, and burst into a flood of tears.

The Baron entered at this moment, and rebuked her with more
asperity than Waverley had ever heard him use to any one. 'Was it
not a shame,' he said, 'that she should exhibit herself before any
gentleman in such a light, as if she shed tears for a drove of
horned nolt and milch kine, like the daughter of a Cheshire
yeoman!--Captain Waverley, I must request your favourable
construction of her grief, which may, or ought to proceed, solely
from seeing her father's estate exposed to spulzie and depredation
from common thieves and sorners, while we are not allowed to keep
half a score of muskets, whether for defence or rescue.'

Bailie Macwheeble entered immediately afterwards, and by his
report of arms and ammunition confirmed this statement, informing
the Baron, in a melancholy voice, that though the people would
certainly obey his honour's orders, yet there was no chance of
their following the gear to ony guid purpose, in respect there
were only his honour's body servants who had swords and pistols,
and the depredators were twelve Highlanders, completely armed
after the manner of their country. Having delivered this doleful
annunciation, he assumed a posture of silent dejection, shaking
his head slowly with the motion of a pendulum when it is ceasing
to vibrate, and then remained stationary, his body stooping at a
more acute angle than usual, and the latter part of his person
projecting in proportion.

The Baron, meanwhile, paced the room in silent indignation, and at
length fixing his eye upon an old portrait, whose person was clad
in armour, and whose features glared grimly out of a huge bush of
hair, part of which descended from his head to his shoulders, and
part from his chin and upper-lip to his breast-plate,--'That
gentleman, Captain Waverley, my grandsire,' he said, 'with two
hundred horse,--whom he levied within his own bounds, discomfited
and put to the rout more than five hundred of these Highland
reivers, who have been ever lapis offensionis et petra scandali, a
stumbling-block and a rock of offence, to the Lowland vicinage--he
discomfited them, I say, when they had the temerity to descend to
harry this country, in the time of the civil dissensions, in the
year of grace sixteen hundred forty and two. And now, sir, I, his
grandson, am thus used at such unworthy hands.'

Here there was an awful pause; after which all the company, as is
usual in cases of difficulty, began to give separate and
inconsistent counsel. Alexander ab Alexandro proposed they should
send some one to compound with the Caterans, who would readily, he
said, give up their prey for a dollar a head. The Bailie opined
that this transaction would amount to theft-boot, or composition
of felony; and he recommended that some canny hand should be sent
up to the glens to make the best bargain he could, as it were for
himself, so that the Laird might not be seen in such a
transaction. Edward proposed to send off to the nearest garrison
for a party of soldiers and a magistrate's warrant; and Rose, as
far as she dared, endeavoured to insinuate the course of paying
the arrears of tribute money to Fergus Mac-Ivor Vich Ian Vohr,
who, they all knew, could easily procure restoration of the
cattle, if he were properly propitiated.

None of these proposals met the Baron's approbation. The idea of
composition, direct or implied, was absolutely ignominious; that
of Waverley only showed that he did not understand the state of
the country, and of the political parties which divided it; and,
standing matters as they did with Fergus Mac-Ivor Vich Ian Vohr,
the Baron would make no concession to him, were it, he said, 'to
procure restitution in integrum of every stirk and stot that the
chief, his forefathers, and his clan, had stolen since the days of
Malcolm Canmore.'

In fact his voice was still for war, and he proposed to send
expresses to Balmawhapple, Killancureit, Tulliellum, and other
lairds, who were exposed to similar depredations, inviting them to
join in the pursuit; 'and then, sir, shall these nebulones
nequissimi, as Leslaeus calls them, be brought to the fate of
their predecessor Cacus,

    "Elisos oculos, et siccum sanguine guttur."'

The Bailie, who by no means relished these warlike counsels, here
pulled forth an immense watch, of the colour, and nearly of the
size, of a pewter warming-pan, and observed it was now past noon,
and that the Caterans had been seen in the pass of Ballybrough
soon after sunrise; so that, before the allied forces could
assemble, they and their prey would be far beyond the reach of the
most active pursuit, and sheltered in those pathless deserts,
where it was neither advisable to follow, nor indeed possible to
trace them.

This proposition was undeniable. The council therefore broke up
without coming to any conclusion, as has occurred to councils of
more importance; only it was determined that the Bailie should
send his own three milkcows down to the mains for the use of the
Baron's family, and brew small ale, as a substitute for milk, in
his own. To this arrangement, which was suggested by Saunderson,
the Bailie readily assented, both from habitual deference to the
family, and an internal consciousness that his courtesy would, in
some mode or other, be repaid tenfold.

The Baron having also retired to give some necessary directions,
Waverley seized the opportunity to ask, whether this Fergus, with
the unpronounceable name, was the chief thief-taker of the
district?

'Thief-taker!' answered Rose, laughing; 'he is a gentleman of
great honour and consequence, the chieftain of an independent
branch of a powerful Highland clan, and is much respected, both
for his own power and that of his kith, kin, and allies.'

'And what has he to do with the thieves, then? Is he a magistrate,
or in the commission of the peace?' asked Waverley.

'The commission of war rather, if there be such a thing,' said
Rose; 'for he is a very unquiet neighbour to his unfriends, and
keeps a greater following on foot than many that have thrice his
estate. As to his connection with the thieves, that I cannot well
explain; but the boldest of them will never steal a hoof from any
one that pays black-mail to Vich lan Vohr.'

'And what is black-mail?'

'A sort of protection-money that Low-Country gentlemen and
heritors, lying near the Highlands, pay to some Highland chief,
that he may neither do them harm himself, nor suffer it to be done
to them by others; and then if your cattle are stolen, you have
only to send him word, and he will recover them; or it may be, he
will drive away cows from some distant place, where he has a
quarrel, and give them to you to make up your loss.' [Footnote:
See note 13.]

'And is this sort of Highland Jonathan Wild admitted into society,
and called a gentleman?'

'So much so,' said Rose, 'that the quarrel between my father and
Fergus Mac-Ivor began at a county meeting, where he wanted to take
precedence of all the Lowland gentlemen then present, only my
