inclined to believe that this avenging force was led by the ghosts of
those who had been slain at New Brandenburg. Whenever we can't account
for a thing, we Scots are inclined to believe it's supernatural.

"Now tell me more about the affair, Malcolm. By the way do you know that
you are a lieutenant now? Poor Foulis died of the fever a few days after
you left us, and as the king had himself ordered that you were to have
the next vacancy, I of course appointed you at once. We must drink
tonight to your promotion."

Malcolm now related fully the incidents of the siege.

"By my faith, Malcolm Graheme," Munro said when he had finished, "you
are as lucky as you are brave. Mansfeld is a powerful nobleman, and has
large possessions in various parts of Germany and much influence, and
the king will be grateful that you have thus rendered him such effective
assistance and so bound him to our cause. I believe he has no children."

"He has a daughter," Malcolm said, "a pretty little maid some fourteen
years old."

"In faith, Malcolm, 'tis a pity that you and she are not some four
or five years older. What a match it would be for you, the heiress of
Mansfeld; she would be a catch indeed! Well, there's time enough yet, my
lad, for there is no saying how long this war will last."

There was a general laugh, and the colonel continued:

"Malcolm has the grace to colour, which I am afraid the rest of us have
lost long ago. Never mind, Malcolm, there are plenty of Scotch cadets
have mended their fortune by means of a rich heiress before now, and I
hope there will be many more. I am on the lookout for a wealthy young
countess myself, and I don't think there is one here who would not lay
aside his armour and sword on such inducement. And now, gentlemen, as we
have all finished, I will leave you to your wine while I go across with
our young lieutenant to the king. I must tell him tonight, or he will
not sleep with wondering over the mystery. We will be back anon and will
broach a cask of that famous wine we picked up the other day, in honour
of Malcolm Graheme's promotion."

Sir John Hepburn was dining with Gustavus, and the meal was just
concluded when Colonel Munro was announced.

"Well, my brave Munro, what is it?" the king said heartily, "and whom
have you here? The young officer who escaped from New Brandenburg and
Tilly, unless I am mistaken."

"It is, sir, but I have to introduce him in a new character tonight, as
the leader of your majesty's army who have defeated the Imperialists at
Mansfeld."

"Say you so?" exclaimed the king. "Then, though I understand you not,
we shall hear a solution of the mystery which has been puzzling us. Sit
down, young sir; fill yourself a flagon of wine, and expound this riddle
to us."

Malcolm repeated the narrative as he had told it to his colonel, and the
king expressed his warm satisfaction.

"You will make a great leader some day if you do not get killed in one
of these adventures, young sir. Bravery seems to be a common gift of the
men of your nation; but you seem to unite with it a surprising prudence
and sagacity, and, moreover, this march of yours to Mansfeld shows that
you do not fear taking responsibility, which is a high and rare quality.
You have done good service to the cause, and I thank you, and shall keep
my eye upon you in the future."

The next day Malcolm went round the camp, and was surprised at the
extensive works which had been erected. Strong ramparts and redoubts had
been thrown up round it, faced with stone, and mounted with 150 pieces
of cannon. In the centre stood an inner entrenchment with earthworks
and a deep fosse. In this stood the tents of the king and those of his
principal officers. The Marquis of Hamilton had, Malcolm heard, arrived
and gone. He had lost on the march many of the soldiers he had enlisted
in England, who had died from eating German bread, which was heavier,
darker coloured, and more sour than that of their own country. This,
however, did not disagree with the Scotch, who were accustomed to black
bread.

"I wonder," Malcolm said to Nigel Graheme, "that when the king has in
face of him a force so superior to his own he should have sent away on
detached service the four splendid regiments which they say the marquis
brought."

"Well, the fact was," Nigel said laughing, "Hamilton was altogether too
grand for us here. We all felt small and mean so long as he remained.
Gustavus himself, who is as simple in his tastes as any officer in the
army, and who keeps up no ostentatious show, was thrown into the shade
by his visitor. Why, had he been the Emperor of Germany or the King of
France he could not have made a braver show. His table was equipped
and furnished with magnificence; his carriages would have created a
sensation in Paris; the liveries of his attendants were more splendid
than the uniforms of generals; he had forty gentlemen as esquires and
pages, and 200 yeomen, splendidly mounted and armed, rode with him as
his bodyguard.

"Altogether he was oppressive; but the Hamiltons have ever been fond of
show and finery. So Gustavus has sent him and his troops away to guard
the passages of the Oder and to cover our retreat should we be forced to
fall back."

Tilly, finding that the position of Gustavus was too strong to be
forced, retired to Wolmirstadt, whence he summoned the Elector of Saxony
to admit his army into his country, and either to disband the Saxon
army or to unite it to his own. Hitherto the elector had held aloof from
Gustavus, whom he regarded with jealousy and dislike, and had stood by
inactive although the slightest movement of his army would have
saved Magdeburg. To disband his troops, however, and to hand over his
fortresses to Tilly, would be equivalent to giving up his dominions
to the enemy; rather than do this he determined to join Gustavus, and
having despatched Arnheim to treat with the King of Sweden for alliance,
he sent a point blank refusal to Tilly.

The Imperialist general at once marched towards Leipzig, devastating the
country as he advanced. Terms were soon arranged between the elector and
Gustavus, and on the 3d of September, 1631, the Swedish army crossed
the Elbe, and the next day joined the Saxon army at Torgau. By this time
Tilly was in front of Leipzig, and immediately on his arrival burned to
the ground Halle, a suburb lying beyond the wall, and then summoned the
city to surrender.

Alarmed at the sight of the conflagration of Halle, and with the fate of
Magdeburg in their minds, the citizens of Leipzig opened their gates at
once on promise of fair treatment. The news of this speedy surrender
was a heavy blow to the allies, who, however, after a council of war,
determined at once to march forward against the city, and to give battle
to the Imperialists on the plain around it.

Leipzig stands on a wide plain which is called the plain of Breitenfeld,
and the battle which was about to commence there has been called by
the Germans the battle of Breitenfeld, to distinguish it from the
even greater struggles which have since taken place under the walls of
Leipzig.

The baggage had all been left behind, and the Swedish army lay down as
they stood. The king occupied his travelling coach, and passed the night
chatting with Sir John Hepburn, Marshal Horn, Sir John Banner, Baron
Teuffel, who commanded the guards, and other leaders. The lines of red
fires which marked Tilly's position on the slope of a gentle eminence to
the southwest were plainly to be seen. The day broke dull and misty on
the 7th of September, and as the light fog gradually rose the troops
formed up for battle. Prayers were said in front of every regiment, and
the army then moved forward. Two Scottish brigades had the places of
honour in the van, where the regiments of Sir James Ramsay, the Laird of
Foulis, and Sir John Hamilton were posted, while Hepburn's Green Brigade
formed part of the reserve--a force composed of the best troops of the
army, as on them the fate of the battle frequently depends. The Swedish
cavalry were commanded by Field Marshal Horn, General Banner, and
Lieutenant General Bauditzen.

The king and Baron Teuffel led the main body of infantry; the King of
Saxony commanded the Saxons, who were on the Swedish left. The armies
were not very unequal in numbers, the allies numbering 35,000, of whom
the Swedes and Scots counted 20,000, the Saxons 15,000. The Imperialists
numbered about 40,000. Tilly was fighting unwillingly, for he had
wished to await the arrival from Italy of 12,000 veterans under General
Altringer, and who were within a few days' march; but he had been
induced, against his own better judgment, by the urgency of Pappenheim,
Furstenberg, and the younger generals, to quit the unassailable post
he had taken up in front of Leipzig, and to move out on to the plain of
Breitenfeld to accept the battle which the Swedes offered.

A short distance in his front was the village of Podelwitz. Behind his
position were two elevations, on which he placed his guns, forty
in number. In rear of these elevations was a very thick wood. The
Imperialist right was commanded by Furstenberg, the left by Pappenheim,
the centre by Tilly himself. Although he had yielded to his generals
so far as to take up a position on the plain, Tilly was resolved, if
possible, not to fight until the arrival of the reinforcements; but the
rashness of Pappenheim brought on a battle. To approach the Austrian
position the Swedes had to cross the little river Loder, and Pappenheim
asked permission of Tilly to charge them as they did so. Tilly consented
on condition that he only charged with two thousand horse and did not
bring on a general engagement. Accordingly, as the Scottish brigade
under Sir James Ramsay crossed the Loder, Pappenheim swept down upon
them.

The Scots stood firm, and with pike and musket repelled the attack; and
after hard fighting Pappenheim was obliged to fall back, setting fire as
he retired to the village of Podelwitz. The smoke of the burning village
drifted across the plain, and was useful to the Swedes, as under its
cover the entire army passed the Loder, and formed up ready for battle
facing the Imperialists position, the movement being executed under a
heavy fire from the Austrian batteries on the hills.

The Swedish order of battle was different from that of the Imperialists.
The latter had their cavalry massed together in one heavy, compact body,
while the Swedish regiments of horse were placed alternately with
the various regiments or brigades of infantry. The Swedish centre was
composed of four brigades of pikemen. Guns were behind the first line,
as were the cavalry supporting the pikemen. The regiments of musketeers
were placed at intervals among the brigades of pikemen.

Pappenheim on his return to the camp ordered up the whole of his
cavalry, and charged down with fury upon the Swedes, while at the same
moment Furstenberg dashed with seven regiments of cavalry on the Saxons.
Between these and the Swedes there was a slight interval, for Gustavus
had doubts of the steadiness of his allies, and was anxious that in case
of their defeat his own troops should not be thrown into confusion. The
result justified his anticipations.

Attacked with fury on their flank by Furstenberg's horse, while his
infantry and artillery poured a direct fire into their front, the Saxons
at once gave way. Their elector was the first to set the example of
flight, and, turning his horse, galloped without drawing rein to Torgau,
and in twenty minutes after the commencement of the fight the whole of
the Saxons were in utter rout, hotly pursued by Furstenberg's cavalry.

Tilly now deemed the victory certain, for nearly half of his opponents
were disposed of, and he outnumbered the remainder by two to one; but
while Furstenberg had gained so complete a victory over the Saxons,
Pappenheim, who had charged the Swedish centre, had met with a very
different reception.

In vain he tried to break through the Swedish spears. The wind was
blowing full in the faces of the pikemen, and the clouds of smoke and
dust which rolled down upon them rendered it impossible for them to see
the heavy columns of horse until they fell upon them like an avalanche,
yet with perfect steadiness they withstood the attacks.

Seven times Pappenheim renewed his charge; seven times he fell back
broken and disordered.

As he drew off for the last time Gustavus, seeing the rout of the
Saxons, and knowing that he would have the whole of Tilly's force
upon him in a few minutes, determined to rid himself altogether of
Pappenheim, and launched the whole of his cavalry upon the retreating
squadrons with overwhelming effect. Thus at the end of half an hour's
fighting Tilly had disposed of the Saxons, and Gustavus had driven
Pappenheim's horse from the field.

Three of the Scottish regiments were sent from the centre to strengthen
Horn on the left flank, which was now exposed by the flight of the
Saxons. Scarcely had the Scottish musketeers taken their position
when Furstenberg's horse returned triumphant from their pursuit of the
Saxons, and at once fell upon Horn's pikemen. These, however, stood
as firmly as their comrades in the centre had done; and the Scottish
musketeers, six deep, the three front ranks kneeling, the three in rear
standing, poured such heavy volleys into the horsemen that these fell
back in disorder; the more confused perhaps, since volley firing was at
that time peculiar to the Swedish army, and the crashes of musketry were
new to the Imperialists.

As the cavalry fell back in disorder, Gustavus led his horse, who had
just returned from the pursuit of Pappenheim, against them. The shock
was irresistible, and Furstenberg's horse were driven headlong from
the field. But the Imperialist infantry, led by Tilly himself, were
now close at hand, and the roar of musketry along the whole line was
tremendous, while the artillery on both sides played unceasingly.

Just as the battle was at the hottest the Swedish reserve came up to the
assistance of the first line, and Sir John Hepburn led the Green Brigade
through the intervals of the Swedish regiments into action. Lord Reay's
regiment was in front, and Munro, leading it on, advanced against the
solid Imperialist columns, pouring heavy volleys into them. When close
at hand the pikemen passed through the intervals of the musketeers and
charged furiously with levelled pikes, the musketeers following them
with clubbed weapons.

The gaps formed by the losses of the regiment at New Brandenburg and the
other engagements had been filled up, and two thousand strong they
fell upon the Imperialists. For a few minutes there was a tremendous
hand-to-hand conflict, but the valour and strength of the Scotch
prevailed, and the regiment was the first to burst its way through the
ranks of the Imperialists, and then pressed on to attack the trenches
behind, held by the Walloon infantry. While the battle was raging in the
plain the Swedish cavalry, after driving away Furstenberg's horse, swept
round and charged the eminence in the rear of the Imperialists, cutting
down the artillerymen and capturing the cannon there.

These were at once turned upon the masses of Imperialist infantry, who
thus, taken between two fires--pressed hotly by the pikemen in
front, mown down by the cannon in their rear--lost heart and fled
precipitately, four regiments alone, the veterans of Furstenberg's
infantry, holding together and cutting their way through to the woods in
the rear of their position.

The slaughter would have been even greater than it was, had not the
cloud of dust and smoke been so thick that the Swedes were unable to see
ten yards in front of them. The pursuit was taken up by their cavalry,
who pressed the flying Imperialists until nightfall. So complete was the
defeat that Tilly, who was badly wounded, could only muster 600 men to
accompany him in his retreat, and Pappenheim could get together but 1400
of his horsemen. Seven thousand of the Imperialists were killed, 5000
were wounded or taken prisoners. The Swedes lost but 700 men, the Saxons
about 2000.

The Swedes that night occupied the Imperial tents, making great bonfires
of the broken wagons, pikes, and stockades. A hundred standards were
taken. Tilly had fought throughout the battle with desperate valour.
He was ever in the van of his infantry, and three times was wounded
by bullets and once taken prisoner, and only rescued after a desperate
conflict.

At the conclusion of the day Cronenberg with 600 Walloon cavalry threw
themselves around him and bore him from the field. The fierce old
soldier is said to have burst into a passion of tears on beholding the
slaughter and defeat of his infantry. Hitherto he had been invincible,
this being the first defeat he had suffered in the course of his long
military career. Great stores of provision and wine had been captured,
and the night was spent in feasting in the Swedish camp.

The next morning the Elector of Saxony rode on to the field to
congratulate Gustavus on his victory. The latter was politic enough to
receive him with great courtesy and to thank him for the services the
Saxons had rendered. He intrusted to the elector the task of recapturing
Leipzig, while he marched against Merseburg, which he captured with its
garrison of five hundred men.

After two or three assaults had been made on Leipzig the garrison
capitulated to the Saxons, and on the 11th of September the army was
drawn up and reviewed by Gustavus. When the king arrived opposite the
Green Brigade he dismounted and made the soldiers an address, thanking
them for their great share in winning the battle of Leipzig.

Many of the Scottish officers were promoted, Munro being made a full
colonel, and many others advanced a step in rank. The Scottish brigade
responded to the address of the gallant king with hearty cheers.
Gustavus was indeed beloved as well as admired by his soldiers. Fearless
himself of danger, he ever recognized bravery in others, and was ready
to take his full share of every hardship as well as every peril.

He had ever a word of commendation and encouragement for his troops, and
was regarded by them as a comrade as well as a leader. In person he was
tall and rather stout, his face was handsome, his complexion fair, his
forehead lofty, his hair auburn, his eyes large and penetrating, his
cheeks ruddy and healthy. He had an air of majesty which enabled him
to address his soldiers in terms of cheerful familiarity without in
the slightest degree diminishing their respect and reverence for him as
their monarch.



CHAPTER X THE PASSAGE OF THE RHINE


"I suppose," Nigel Graheme said, as the officers of the regiment
assembled in one of the Imperialist tents on the night after the battle
of Leipzig, "we shall at once press forward to Vienna;" and such was
the general opinion throughout the Swedish army; but such was not the
intention of Gustavus. Undoubtedly the temptation to press forward
and dictate peace in Vienna was strong, but the difficulties and
disadvantages of such a step were many. He had but 20,000 men, for the
Saxons could not be reckoned upon; and indeed it was probable that their
elector, whose jealousy and dislike of Gustavus would undoubtedly be
heightened by the events of the battle of Breitenfeld, would prove
himself to be a more than a doubtful ally were the Swedish army to
remove to a distance.

Tilly would soon rally his fugitives, and, reinforced by the numerous
Imperialist garrisons from the towns, would be able to overrun North
Germany in his absence, and to force the Saxons to join him even if the
elector were unwilling to do so. Thus the little Swedish force would be
isolated in the heart of Germany; and should Ferdinand abandon Vienna
at his approach and altogether refuse to treat with him--which his
obstinacy upon a former occasion when in the very hands of his enemy
rendered probable--the Swedes would find themselves in a desperate
position, isolated and alone in the midst of enemies.

There was another consideration. An Imperialist diet was at that moment
sitting at Frankfort, and Ferdinand was using all his influence to
compel the various princes and representatives of the free cities to
submit to him. It was of the utmost importance that Gustavus should
strengthen his friends and overawe the waverers by the approach of his
army. Hitherto Franconia and the Rhine provinces had been entirely
in the hands of the Imperialists, and it was needful that a
counterbalancing influence should be exerted. These considerations
induced Gustavus to abandon the tempting idea of a march upon Vienna.
The Elector of Saxony was charged with carrying the war into Silesia and
Bohemia, the Electors of Hesse and Hesse-Cassel were to maintain Lower
