the senator, and, after a short explanation, led up to Melissa,
whom Coeranus desired to appeal for help to Philostratus, the famous
philosopher, who enjoyed Caesar's closest confidence.

Coeranus then obeyed a sign from Berenike, who wished to know whether
he would be answerable for introducing this rarely pretty girl, who had
placed herself under their protection--and whom she, for her part, meant
to protect--to a courtier of whom she knew nothing but that he was a
writer of taste.

The question seemed to amuse Coeranus, but, seeing that his
sister-in-law was very much in earnest, he dropped his flippant tone
and admitted that Philostratus, as a young man, had been one of the
last with whom he would trust a girl. His far-famed letters sufficiently
proved that the witty philosopher had been a devoted and successful
courtier of women. But that was all a thing of the past. He still, no
doubt, did homage to female beauty, but he led a regular life, and had
become one of the most ardent and earnest upholders of religion and
virtue. He was one of the learned circle which gathered round Julia
Domna, and it was by her desire that he had accompanied Caracalla, to
keep his mad passions in check when it might be possible.

The conversation between Melissa and the philosopher had meanwhile taken
an unexpected turn. At his very first address the reply had died on her
lips, for in Caesar's representative she had recognized the Roman whom
she had seen in the Temple of Asklepios, and who had perhaps overheard
her there. Philostratus, too, seemed to remember the meeting; for his
shrewd face--a pleasing mixture of grave and gay--lighted up at once
with a subtle smile as he said:

"If I am not mistaken, I owe the same pleasure this evening to divine
Caesar as to great Asklepios this morning?"

At this, Melissa cast a meaning glance at Coeranus and the lady, and,
although surprise and alarm sealed her lips, her uplifted hands and
whole gesture sufficiently expressed her entreaty that he would not
betray her. He understood and obeyed. It pleased him to share a secret
with this fair child. He had, in fact, overheard her, and understood
with amazement that she was praying fervently for Caesar.

This stirred his curiosity to the highest pitch. So he said, in an
undertone:

"All that I saw and heard in the temple is our secret, sweet maid. But
what on earth can have prompted you to pray so urgently for Caesar? Has
he done you or yours any great benefit?"

Melissa shook her head, and Philostratus went on with increased
curiosity:

"Then are you one of those whose heart Eros can fire at the sight of an
image, or the mere aspect of a man?"

To this she answered hastily:

"What an idea! No, no. Certainly not."

"No?" said her new friend, with greater surprise. "Then perhaps your
hopeful young soul expects that, being still but a youth, he may, by the
help of the gods, become, like Titus, a benefactor to the whole world?"

Melissa looked timidly at the matron, who was still talking with her
brother-in-law, and hastily replied:

"They all call him a murderer! But I know for certain that he suffers
fearful torments of mind and body; and one who knows many things told
me that there was not one among all the millions whom Caesar governs who
ever prays for him; and I was so sorry--I can not tell you--"

"And so," interrupted the philosopher, "you thought it praiseworthy and
pleasing to the gods that you should be the first and only one to offer
sacrifice for him, in secret, and of your own free will? That was how it
came about? Well, child, you need not be ashamed of it."

But then suddenly his face clouded, and he asked, in a grave and altered
voice:

"Are you a Christian?"

"No," she replied, firmly. "We are Greeks. How could I have offered a
sacrifice of blood to Asklepios if I had believed in the crucified god?"

"Then," said Philostratus, and his eyes flashed brightly, "I may
promise you, in the name of the gods, that your prayer and offering were
pleasing in their eyes. I myself, noble girl, owe you a rare pleasure.
But, tell me--how did you feel as you left the sanctuary?"

"Light-hearted, my lord, and content," she answered, with a frank,
glad look in her fine eyes. "I could have sung as I went down the road,
though there were people about."

"I should have liked to hear you," he said, kindly, and he still
held her hand, which he had grasped with the amiable geniality that
characterized him, when they were joined by the senator and his
sister-in-law.

"Has she won your good offices?" asked Coeranus; and Philostratus
replied, quickly, "Anything that it lies in my power to do for her shall
certainly be done."

Berenike bade them both to join her in her own rooms, for everything
that had to do with the banquet was odious to her; and as they went,
Melissa told her new friend her brother's story. She ended it in the
quiet sitting-room of the mistress of the house, an artistic but not
splendid apartment, adorned only with the choicest works of early
Alexandrian art. Philostratus listened attentively, but, before she
could put her petition for help into words, he exclaimed:

"Then what we have to do is, to move Caesar to mercy, and that--Child,
you know not what you ask!"

They were interrupted by a message from Seleukus, desiring Coeranus to
join the other guests, and as soon as he had left them Berenike withdrew
to take off the splendor she hated. She promised to return immediately
and join their discussion, and Philostratus sat for a while lost in
thought. Then he turned to Melissa and asked her:

"Would you for their sakes be able to make up your mind to face bitter
humiliation, nay, perhaps imminent danger?"

"Anything! I would give my life for them!" replied the girl, with
spirit, and her eyes gleamed with such enthusiastic self-sacrifice that
his heart, though no longer young, warmed under their glow, and the
principle to which he had sternly adhered since he had been near the
imperial person, never to address a word to the sovereign but in reply,
was blown to the winds.

Holding her hand in his, with a keen look into her eyes, he went on:

"And if you were required to do a thing from which many a man even would
recoil--you would venture?"

And again the answer was a ready "Yes." Philostratus released her hand,
and said:

"Then we will dare the worst. I will smooth the way for you, and
to-morrow--do not start--tomorrow you yourself, under my protection,
shall appeal to Caesar."

The color faded from the girl's cheeks, which had been flushed with
fresh hopes, and her counselor had just expressed his wish to talk the
matter over with the lady Berenike, when she came into the room. She was
now dressed in mourning, and her pale, beautiful face showed the traces
of the tears she had just shed. The dark shadows which, when they
surround a woman's eyes, betray past storms of grief, as the halo round
the moon--the eye of night--gives warning of storms to come, were deeper
than ever; and when her sorrowful gaze fell on Melissa, the girl felt an
almost irresistible longing to throw herself into her arms and weep on
her motherly bosom.

Philostratus, too, was deeply touched by the appearance of this mother,
who possessed so much, but for whom everything dearest to a woman's
heart had been destroyed by a cruel stroke of Fate. He was glad to be
able to tell her that he hoped to soften Caesar. Still, his plan was a
bold one; Caracalla had been deeply offended by the scornful tone of the
attacks on him, and Melissa's brother was perhaps the only one of the
scoffers who had been taken. The crime of the Alexandrian wits could not
be left unpunished. For such a desperate case only desperate remedies
could avail; he therefore ventured to propose to conduct Melissa into
Caesar's presence, that she might appeal to his clemency.

The matron started as though a scorpion had stung her. In great
agitation, she threw her arm round the girl as if to shelter her from
imminent danger, and Melissa, seeking help, laid her head on that kind
breast. Berenike was reminded, by the scent that rose up from the girl's
hair, of the hours when her own child had thus fondly clung to her.
Her motherly heart had found a new object to love, and exclaiming,
"Impossible!" she clasped Melissa more closely.

But Philostratus begged to be heard. Any plea urged by a third person he
declared would only be the ruin of the rash mediator.

"Caracalla," he went on, looking at Melissa, "is terrible in his
passions, no one can deny that; but of late severe suffering has made
him irritably sensitive, and he insists on the strictest virtue in all
who are about his person. He pays no heed to female beauty, and this
sweet child, at any rate, will find many protectors. He shall know that
the high-priest's wife, one of the best of women, keeps an anxious eye
on Melissa's fate; and I myself, his mother's friend, shall be at hand.
His passion for revenge, on the other hand, is boundless--no one living
can control it; and not even the noble Julia can shield those who
provoke it from a cruel end. If you do not know it, child, I can tell
you that he had his brother Geta killed, though he took refuge in the
arms of the mother who bore them both. You must understand the worst;
and again I ask you, are you ready to risk all for those you love? Have
you the courage to venture into the lion's den?"

Melissa clung more closely to the motherly woman, and her pale lips
answered faintly but firmly, "I am ready, and he will grant my prayer."

"Child, child," cried Berenike in horror, "you know not what lies before
you! You are dazzled by the happy confidence of inexperienced youth. I
know what life is. I can see you, in your heart's blood, as red and pure
as the blood of a lamb! I see--Ah, child! you do not know death and its
terrible reality."

"I know it!" Melissa broke in with feverish excitement. "My dearest--my
mother--I saw her die with these eyes. What did I not bury in her grave!
And yet hope still lived in my heart; and though Caracalla may be a
reckless murderer, he will do nothing to me, precisely because I am so
feeble. And, lady, what am I? Of what account is my life if I lose my
father, and my brothers, who are both on the high-road to greatness?"

"But you are betrothed," Berenike eagerly put in. "And your lover, you
told me, is dear to you. What of him? He no doubt loves you, and, if you
come to harm, sorrow will mar his young life."

At this Melissa clasped her hands over her face and sobbed aloud. "Show
me, then, any other way--any! I will face the worst. But there is
none; and if Diodoros were here he would not stop me; for what my heart
prompts me to do is right, is my duty. But he is lying sick and with a
clouded mind, and I can not ask him. O noble lady, kindness looks out of
your eyes; cease to rub salt into my wounds! The task before me is
hard enough already. But I would do it, and try to get speech with that
terrible man, even if I had no one to protect me."

The lady had listened with varying feelings to this outpouring of the
young girl's heart. Every instinct rebelled against the thought of
sacrificing this pure, sweet creature to the fury of the tyrant whose
wickedness was as unlimited as his power, and yet she saw no other
chance of saving the artist, whom she held in affectionate regard. Her
own noble heart understood the girl's resolve to purchase the life of
those she loved, even with her blood; she, in the same place, would have
done the same thing; and she thought to herself that it would have made
her happy to see such a spirit in her own child. Her resistance melted
away, and almost involuntarily she exclaimed, "Well, do what you feel to
be right."

Melissa flew into her arms again with a grateful sense of release from
a load, and Berenike did all she could to smooth the thorny way for her.
She discussed every point with Philostratus as thoroughly as though for
a child of her own; and, while the tumult came up from the banquet in
the men's rooms, they settled that Berenike herself should conduct the
girl to the wife of the high-priest of Serapis, the brother of Seleukus,
and there await Melissa's return. Philostratus named the hour and other
details, and then made further inquiries concerning the young artist
whose mocking spirit had brought so much trouble on his family.

On this the lady led him into an adjoining room, where the portrait of
her adored daughter was hanging. It was surrounded by a thick wreath
of violets, the dead girl's favorite flower. The beautiful picture was
lighted up by two three-branched lamps on high stands; and Philostratus,
a connoisseur who had described many paintings with great taste and
vividness, gazed in absorbed silence at the lovely features, which
were represented with rare mastery and the inspired devotion of loving
admiration. At last he turned to the mother, exclaiming:

"Happy artist, to have such a subject! It is a work worthy of the early,
best period, and of a master of the time of Apelies. The daughter who
has been snatched from you, noble lady, was indeed matchless, and no
sorrow is too deep to do her justice. But the divinity who has taken her
knows also how to give; and this portrait has preserved for you a part
of what you loved. This picture, too, may influence Melissa's fate; for
Caesar has a fine taste in art, and one of the wants of our time which
has helped to embitter him is the paralyzed state of the imitative arts.
It will be easier to win his favor for the painter who did this portrait
than for a man of noble birth. He needs such painters as this Alexander
for the Pinakothek in the splendid baths he has built at Rome. If you
would but lend me this treasure to-morrow--"

But she interrupted him with a decisive "Never!" and laid her hand on
the frame as if to protect it. Philostratus, however, was not to be put
off; he went on in a tone of the deepest disappointment: "This portrait
is yours, and no one can wonder at your refusal. We must, therefore,
consider how to attain our end without this important ally." Berenike's
gaze had lingered calmly on the sweet face while he spoke, looking more
and more deeply into the beautiful, expressive features. All was silent.

At last she slowly turned to Melissa, who stood gazing sadly at the
ground, and said in a low voice: "She resembled you in many ways. The
gods had formed her to shed joy and light around her. Where she could
wipe away a tear she always did so. Her portrait is speechless, and yet
it tells me to act as she herself would have acted. If this work can
indeed move Caracalla to clemency, then--You, Philostratus, really think
so?"

"Yes," he replied, decisively. "There can be no better mediator for
Alexander than this work." Berenike drew herself up, and said:

"Well, then, to-morrow morning early, I will send it to you at the
Serapeum. The portrait of the dead may perish if it may but save the
life of him who wrought it so lovingly." She turned away her face as she
gave the philosopher her hand, and then hastily left the room.

Melissa flew after her and, with overflowing gratitude, besought the
sobbing lady not to weep.

"I know something that will bring you greater comfort than my brother's
picture: I mean the living image of your Korinna--a young girl; she is
here in Alexandria."

"Zeno's daughter Agatha?" said Berenike; and when Melissa said yes,
it was she, the lady went on with a deep sigh: "Thanks for your kind
thought, my child; but she, too, is lost to me."

And as she spoke she sank on a couch, saying, in a low voice, "I would
rather be alone."

Melissa modestly withdrew into the adjoining room, and Philostratus, who
had been lost in the contemplation of the picture, took his leave.

He did not make use of the imperial chariot in waiting for him, but
returned to his lodgings on foot, in such good spirits, and so well
satisfied with himself, as he had not been before since leaving Rome.

When Berenike had rested in solitude for some little time she recalled
Melissa, and took as much care of her young guest as though she were her
lost darling, restored to her after a brief absence. First she allowed
the girl to send for Argutis; and when she had assured the faithful
slave that all promised well, she dismissed him with instructions to
await at home his young mistress's orders, for that Melissa would for
the present find shelter under her roof.

When the Gaul had departed, she desired her waiting-woman, Johanna, to
fetch her brother. During her absence the lady explained to Melissa
that they both were Christians. They were freeborn, the children of a
freedman of Berenike's house. Johannes had at an early age shown so
much intelligence that they had acceded to his wish to be educated as a
lawyer. He was now one of the most successful pleaders in the city;
but he always used his eloquence, which he had perfected not only at
Alexandria but also at Carthage, by preference in the service of accused
Christians. In his leisure hours he would visit the condemned in prison,
speak comfort to them, and give them presents out of the fine profits he
derived from his business among the wealthy. He was the very man to
go and see her father and brothers; he would revive their spirits, and
carry them her greeting.

When, presently, the Christian arrived he expressed himself as very
ready to undertake this commission. His sister was already busied in
packing wine and other comforts for the captives-more, no doubt, as
Johannes told Berenike, than the three men could possibly consume,
even if their imprisonment should be a long one. His smile showed how
confidently he counted on the lady's liberality, and Melissa quickly
put her faith in the young Christian, who would have reminded her of
her brother Philip, but that his slight figure was more upright, and
his long hair quite smooth, without a wave or curl. His eyes, above all,
were unlike Philip's; for they looked out on the world with a gaze as
mild as Philip's were keen and inquiring.

Melissa gave him many messages for her father and brothers, and when the
lady Berenike begged him to take care that the portrait of her daughter
was safely carried to the Serapeum, where it was to contribute to
mollify Caesar in the painter's favor, he praised her determination,
and modestly added: "For how long may we call our own any of these
perishable joys? A day, perhaps a year, at most a lustrum. But eternity
is long, and those who, for its sake, forget time and set all their
hopes on eternity--which is indeed time to the soul--soon cease to
bewail the loss of any transitory treasure, were it the noblest
and dearest. Oh, would that I could lead you to place your hopes on
eternity, best of women and most true-hearted mother! Eternity, which
not the wisest brain can conceive of!--I tell you, lady, for you are
a philosopher--that is the hardest and therefore the grandest idea for
human thought to compass. Fix your eye on that, and in its infinite
realm, which must be your future home, you will meet her again whom you
have lost--not her image returned to you, but herself."

"Cease," interrupted the matron, with impatient sharpness. "I know what
you are aiming at. But to conceive of eternity is the prerogative of the
immortals; our intellect is wrecked in the attempt. Our wings melt like
those of Ikarus, and we fall into the ocean--the ocean of madness, to
which I have often been near enough. You Christians fancy you know all
about eternity, and if you are right in that--But I will not reopen that
old discussion. Give me back my child for a year, a month, a day even,
as she was before murderous disease laid hands on her, and I will
make you a free gift of your cuckoo-cloud-land of eternity, and of the
remainder of my own life on earth into the bargain."

The vehement woman trembled with renewed sorrow, as if shivering with
ague; but as soon as she had recovered her self-command enough to speak
calmly, she exclaimed to the lawyer:

"I do not really wish to vex you, Johannes. I esteem you, and you are
dear to me. But if you wish our friendship to continue, give up these
foolish attempts to teach tortoises to fly. Do all you can for the poor
prisoners; and if you--"

"By daybreak to-morrow I will be with them," Johannes said, and he
hastily took leave.

As soon as they were alone Berenike observed "There he goes, quite
offended, as if I had done him a wrong. That is the way with all these
Christians. They think it their duty to force on others what they
themselves think right, and any one who turns a deaf ear to their
questionable truths they at once set down as narrow-minded, or as
hostile to what is good. Agatha, of whom you were just now speaking, and
Zeno her father, my husband's brother, are Christians. I had hoped that
Korinna's death would have brought the child back to us; I have longed
to see her, and have heard much that is sweet about her: but a common
sorrow, which so often brings divided hearts together, has only widened
the gulf between my husband and his brother. The fault is not on our
side. Nay, I was rejoiced when, a few hours after the worst was over, a
letter from Zeno informed me that he and his daughter would come to
see us the same evening. But the letter itself"--and her voice began
to quiver with indignation--"compelled us to beg him not to come. It is
scarcely credible--and I should do better not to pour fresh oil on my
wrath--but he bade us 'rejoice'; three, four, five times he repeated the
cruel words. And he wrote in a pompous strain of the bliss and rapture
which awaited our lost child--and this to a mother whose heart had been
utterly broken but a few hours before by a fearful stroke of Fate! He
would meet the bereaved, grieving, lonely mourner with a smile on
his lips! Rejoice! This climax of cruelty or aberration has parted us
forever. Why, our black gardener, whose god is a tree-stump that bears
only the faintest likeness to humanity, melted into tears at the news;
and Zeno, our brother, the uncle of that broken dower, could be glad and
bid us rejoice! My husband thinks that hatred and the long-standing
feud prompted his pen. For my part, I believe it was only this Christian
frenzy which made him suggest that I should sink lower than the brutes,
who defend their young with their lives. Seleukus has long since
forgiven him for his conduct in withdrawing his share of the capital
from the business when he became a Christian, to squander it on the
baser sort; but this 'Rejoice' neither he nor I can forgive, though
things which pierce me to the heart often slide off him like water off
grease."

Her black hair had come down as she delivered this vehement speech, and,
when she ceased, her flushed cheeks and the fiery glow of her eyes gave
the majestic woman in her dark robes an aspect which terrified Melissa.

She, too, thought this "Rejoice," under such circumstances, unseemly and
insulting; but she kept her opinion to herself, partly out of modesty
and partly because she did not wish to encourage the estrangement
between this unhappy lady and the niece whose mere presence would have
been so great a comfort to her.

When Johanna returned to lead her to a bedroom, she gave a sigh of
relief; but the lady expressed a wish to keep Melissa near her, and in
a low voice desired the waiting-woman to prepare a bed for her in
the adjoining room, by the side of Korinna's, which was never to be
disturbed. Then, still greatly excited, she invited Melissa into her
daughter's pretty room.

There she showed her everything that Korinna had especially cared for.
Her bird hung in the same place; her lap-dog was sleeping in a basket,
on the cushion which Berenike had embroidered for her child. Melissa had
to admire the dead girl's lute, and her first piece of weaving, and the
elegant loom of ebony and ivory in which she had woven it. And Berenike
repeated to the girl the verses which Korinna had composed, in imitation
of Catullus, on the death of a favorite bird. And although Melissa's
eyes were almost closing with fatigue, she forced herself to attend to
it all, for she saw now how much her sympathy pleased her kind friend.

Meanwhile the voices of the men, who had done eating and were now
drinking, came louder and louder into the women's apartments. When the
merriment of her guests rose to a higher pitch than usual, or something
amusing gave rise to a shout of laughter, Berenike shrank, and either
muttered some unintelligible threat or besought the forgiveness of her
daughter's manes.

It seemed to be a relief to her to rush from one mood to the other; but
neither in her grief, nor when her motherly feeling led her to talk, nor
yet in her wrath, did she lose her perfect dignity. All Melissa saw and
heard moved her to pity or to horror. And meanwhile she was worn out
with anxiety for her family, and with increasing fatigue.

At last, however, she was released. A gay chorus of women's voices and
flutes came up from the banqueting-hall. With a haughty mien and dilated
nostrils Berenike listened to the first few bars. That such a song
should be heard in her house of woe was too much; with her own hand she
closed the shutters over the window next her; then she bade her young
guest go to bed.

Oh, how glad was the overtired girl to stretch herself on the soft
couch! As usual, before going to sleep, she told her mother in the
spirit all the history of the day. Then she prayed to the manes of the
departed to lend her aid in the heavy task before her; but in the midst
of her prayer sleep overcame her, and her young bosom was already rising
and falling in regular breathing when she was roused by a visit from the
lady Berenike.

Melissa suddenly beheld her at the head of the bed, in a flowing white
night-dress, with her hair unpinned, and holding a silver lamp in
her hand; and the girl involuntarily put up her arms as if to protect
herself, for she fancied that the daemon of madness stared out of those
large black eyes. But the unhappy woman's expression changed, and she
looked down kindly on Melissa. She quietly set the lamp on the table,
and then, as the cool nightbreeze blew in through the open window,
to which there was no shutter, she tenderly wrapped the white woolen
blanket round Melissa, and muttered to herself, "She liked it so."

Then she knelt down by the side of the bed, pressed her lips on the brow
of the girl, now fully awake, and said:

"And you, too, are fair to look upon. He will grant your prayer!"

Then she asked Melissa about her lover, her father, her mother, and at
last she, unexpectedly, asked her in a whisper:

"Your brother Alexander, the painter--My daughter, though in death,
inspired his soul with love. Yes, Korinna was dear to him. Her image is
living in his soul. Am I right? Tell me the truth!"

On this Melissa confessed how deeply the painter had been impressed by
the dead girl's beauty, and that he had given her his heart and soul
with a fervor of devotion of which she had never imagined him capable.
And the poor mother smiled as she heard it, and murmured, "I was sure of
it."

But then she shook her head, sadly, and said "Fool that I am!"

At last she bade Melissa good-night, and went back to her own bedroom.
There Johanna was awaiting her, and while she was plaiting her
mistress's hair the matron said, threateningly:

"If the wretch should not spare even her"--She was interrupted by loud
shouts of mirth from the banqueting-hall, and among the laughing voices
she fancied that she recognized her husband's. She started up with a
vehement movement, and exclaimed, in angry excitement:

"Seleukus might have prevented such an outrage! Oh, I know that
sorrowing father's heart! Fear, vanity, ambition, love of pleasure--"

"But consider," Johanna broke in, "to cross Caesar's wish is to forfeit
life!"

"Then he should have died!" replied the matron, with stern decision.




CHAPTER XVI.

Before sunrise the wind changed. Heavy clouds bore down from the north,
darkening the clear sky of Alexandria. By the time the market was
filling it was raining in torrents, and a cold breeze blew over the town
from the lake. Philostratus had only allowed himself a short time for
sleep, sitting till long after midnight over his history of Apolonius
of Tyana. His aim was to prove, by the example of this man, that a
character not less worthy of imitation than that of the lord of the
Christians might be formed in the faith of the ancients, and nourished
by doctrines produced by the many-branched tree of Greek religion
and philosophy. Julia Domna, Caracalla's mother, had encouraged the
philosopher in this task, which was to show her passionate and criminal
son the dignity of moderation and virtue. The book was also to bring
home to Caesar the religion of his forefathers and his country in all
its beauty and elevating power; for hitherto he had vacillated from
one form to another, had not even rejected Christianity, with which his
nurse had tried to inoculate him as a child, and had devoted himself to
every superstition of his time in a way which had disgusted those about
him. It had been particularly interesting to the writer, with a view
to the purpose of this work, to meet with a girl who practiced all the
virtues the Christians most highly prized, without belonging to that
sect, who were always boasting of the constraining power of their
religion in conducing to pure morality.

In his work the day before he had taken occasion to regret the small
recognition his hero had met with among those nearest to him. In this,
as in other respects, he seemed to have shared the fate of Jesus Christ,
whose name, however, Philostratus purposely avoided mentioning. Now,
to-night, he reflected on the sacrifice offered by Melissa for Caesar
whom she knew not, and he wrote the following words as though proceeding
from the pen of Apollonius himself: "I know well how good a thing it is
to regard all the world as my home, and all mankind as my brethren
and friends; for we are all of the same divine race, and have all one
Father."

Then, looking up from the papyrus, he murmured to himself: "From such
a point of view as this Melissa might see in Caracalla a friend and a
brother. If only now it were possible to rouse the conscience of that
imperial criminal!"

He took up the written sheet on which he had begun a dissertation as to
what conscience is, as exerting a choice between good and evil. He had
written: "Understanding governs what we purpose; consciousness governs
what our understanding resolves upon. Hence, if our understanding choose
the good, consciousness is satisfied."

How flat it sounded! It could have no effect in that form.

Melissa had confessed with far greater warmth what her feelings had been
after she had sacrificed for the suffering sinner. Every one, no doubt,
would feel the same who, when called on to choose between good and evil,
should prefer the good; so he altered and expanded the last words: "Thus
consciousness sends a man with song and gladness into the sanctuaries
and groves, into the roads, and wherever mortals live. Even in sleep the
song makes itself heard, and a happy choir from the land of dreams lift
up their voices about his bed."

That was better! This pleasing picture might perhaps leave some
impression on the soul of the young criminal, in whom a preference for
good could still, though rarely, be fanned to a flame. Caesar read what
Philostratus wrote, because he took pleasure in the form of his work;
and this sentence would not have been written in vain if only it should
prompt Caracalla in some cases, however few, to choose the good.

The philosopher was fully determined to do his utmost for Melissa and
her brothers. He had often brought pictures under Caesar's notice, for
he was the first living authority as a connoisseur of painting, and as
having written many descriptions of pictures. He built some hopes, too,
on Melissa's innocence; and so the worthy man, when he retired to rest,
looked forward with confidence to the work of mediation, which was by no
means devoid of danger.

But next morning it presented itself in a less promising light. The
clouded sky, the storm, and rain might have a fatal effect on Caesar's
temper; and when he heard that old Galen, after examining his patient
and prescribing certain remedies, had yesterday evening taken ship,
leaving Caracalla in a frenzy of rage which had culminated in slight
convulsions, he almost repented of his promise. However, he felt himself
pledged; so as early as possible he went to Caesar's rooms, prepared for
the worst.

His gloomy anticipations were aggravated by the scene which met his
eyes.

In the anteroom he found the chief men of the city and some
representative members of the Alexandrian Senate, who were anxious for
an audience of their imperial visitor. They had been commanded to
attend at an unusually early hour, and had already been kept a long time
waiting.

When Philostratus--who was always free to enter Caesar's presence--made
his appearance, Caracalla was seating himself on the throne which had
been placed for him in the splendidly fitted audience-chamber. He had
come from his bath, and was wrapped in the comfortable white woolen
robe which he wore on leaving it. His "friends" as they were called,
senators, and other men of mark, stood round in considerable numbers,
among them the high-priest of Serapis. Pandion, Caesar's charioteer, was
occupied, under the sovereign's instructions, in fastening the lion's
chain to the ring fixed for the purpose in the floor by the side of the
throne; and as the beast, whose collar had been drawn too tight, uttered
a low, complaining growl, Caracalla scolded the favorite. As soon as he
caught sight of Philostratus, he signed to him to approach:

"Do you see nothing strange in me?" he whispered. "Your Phoebus Apollo
appeared to me in a dream. He laid his hand on my shoulder toward
morning; indeed, I saw only horrible faces." Then he pointed out of the
window, exclaiming:

"The god hides his face to-day. Gloomy days have often brought me good
fortune; but this is a strange experience of the eternal sunshine of
Egypt! Men and sky have given me the same kind welcome; gray, gray, and
always gray-without and within--and my poor soldiers out on the square!
Macrinus tells me they are complaining. But my father's advice was
sound: 'Keep them content, and never mind anything else.' The heads of
the town are waiting outside; they must give up their palaces to the
bodyguard; if they murmur, let them try for themselves how they like
sleeping on the soaking ground under dripping tents. It may cool their
hot blood, and perhaps dilute the salt of their wit.--Show them in,
Theocritus."

He signed to the actor, and when he humbly asked whether Caesar had
forgotten to exchange his morning wrapper for another dress, Caracalla
laughed contemptuously, and replied:

"Why, an empty corn-sack over my shoulders would be dress enough for
this rabble of traders!" He stretched his small but muscular frame out
at full length, resting his head on his hand, and his comely face, which
had lost the suffering look it had worn the day before, suddenly changed
in expression. As was his habit when he wished to inspire awe or fear,
he knit his brows in deep furrows, set his teeth tightly, and assumed a
suspicious and sinister scowl.

The deputation entered, bowing low, headed by the exegetes, the head of
the city, and Timotheus, the chief-priest of Serapis. After these
came the civic authorities, the members of the senate, and then, as
representing the large Jewish colony in the city, their alabarch
or head-man. It was easy to see in each one as he came in, that the
presence of the lion, who had raised his head at their approach, was far
from encouraging; and a faint, scornful smile parted Caracalla's lips as
he noted the cowering knees of these gorgeously habited courtiers. The
high-priest alone, who, as Caesar's host, had gone up to the side of the
throne, and two or three others, among them the governor of the town, a
tall, elderly man of Macedonian descent, paid no heed to the brute. The
Macedonian bowed to his sovereign with calm dignity, and in the name of
the municipally hoped he had rested well. He then informed Caesar what
shows and performances were prepared in his honor, and finally named
the considerable sum which had been voted by the town of Alexandria to
express to him their joy at his visit. Caracalla waved his hand, and
said, carelessly:

"The priest of Alexander, as idiologos, will receive the gold with the
temple tribute. We can find use for it. We knew that you were rich. But
what do you want for your money? What have you to ask?"

"Nothing, noble Caesar," replied the governor. "Thy gracious presence--"

Caracalla interrupted him with a long-drawn "Indeed!" Then, leaning
forward, he gave him a keen, oblique look. "No one but the gods has
nothing to wish for; so it must be that you are afraid to ask. What can
that avail, unless to teach me that you look for nothing but evil from
me; that you are suspicious of me? And if that is so, you fear me; and
if you fear, you hate me. The insults I have received in this house
sufficiently prove the fact. And if you hate me," and he sprang up and
shook his fist, "I must protect myself!"

"Great Caesar," the exegetes began, in humble deprecation, but Caracalla
went on, wrathfully:

"I know when I have to protect myself, and from whom. It is not well to
trifle with me! An insolent tongue is easily hidden behind the lips; but
heads are less easy to hide, and I shall be content with them. Tell that
to your Alexandrian wits! Macrinus will inform you of all else. You may
go."

During this speech the lion, excited by his master's furious gestures,
had risen on his feet and showed his terrible teeth to the delegates. At
this their courage sank. Some laid their hands on their bent knees, as
if to shield them; others had gradually sidled to the door before Caesar
had uttered the last word. Then, in spite of the efforts of the governor
and the alabarch to detain them, in the hope of pacifying the potentate,
as soon as they heard the word "go," they hurried out; and, for better
or for worse, the few bolder spirits had to follow.

As soon as the door was closed upon them, Caesar's features lost their
cruel look. He patted the lion with soothing words of praise, and
exclaimed, contemptuously:

"These are the descendants of the Macedonians, with whom the greatest of
heroes conquered the world! Who was that fat old fellow who shrank into
himself so miserably, and made for the door while I was yet speaking?"

"Kimon, the chief of the night-watch and guardian of the peace of the
city," replied the high-priest of Alexander, who as a Roman had kept his
place by the throne; and Theocritus put in:

"The people must sleep badly under the ward of such a coward. Let him
follow the prefect, noble Caesar."

"Send him his dismissal at once," said Caracalla; "but see that his
successor is a man."

He then turned to the high-priest, and politely requested him to assist
Theocritus in choosing a new head for the town-guard, and Timotheus and
the favorite quitted the room together.

Philostratus took ingenious advantage of the incident, by at once
informing the emperor that it had come to his knowledge that this
coward, so worthily dismissed from office, had, on the merest suspicion,
cast into prison a painter who was undoubtedly one of the first of
living artists, and with him his guiltless relations.

