started and whispered: "Be silent, fool." Then he added aloud, "Guest!
What guest?"

"It is I, cousin Dirk, I, Elsa, Hendrik Brant's daughter," she said,
sliding from her mule.

"Elsa Brant!" ejaculated Dirk. "Why, how came you here?"

"I will tell you presently," she answered; "I cannot talk in the
street," and she touched her lips with her finger. "These are my
friends, the van Broekhovens, under whose escort I have travelled from
The Hague. They wish to go on to the house of their relations, the other
Broekhovens, if some one will show them the way."

Then followed greetings and brief explanations. After these the
Broekhovens departed to the house of their relatives, under the care of
Martin, while, its saddle having been removed and carried into the house
at Elsa's express request, Adrian led the mule round to the stable.



When Dirk had kissed and welcomed his young cousin he ushered her, still
accompanied by the saddle, into the room where his wife and Foy were at
supper, and with them the Pastor Arentz, that clergyman who had preached
to them on the previous night. Here he found Lysbeth, who had risen from
the table anxiously awaiting his return. So dreadful were the times that
a knocking on the door at an unaccustomed hour was enough to throw those
within into a paroxysm of fear, especially if at the moment they chanced
to be harbouring a pastor of the New Faith, a crime punishable with
death. That sound might mean nothing more than a visit from a neighbour,
or it might be the trump of doom to every soul within the house,
signifying the approach of the familiars of the Inquisition and of a
martyr's crown. Therefore Lysbeth uttered a sigh of joy when her husband
appeared, followed only by a girl.

"Wife," he said, "here is our cousin, Elsa Brant, come to visit us from
The Hague, though why I know not as yet. You remember Elsa, the little
Elsa, with whom we used to play so many years ago."

"Yes, indeed," answered Lysbeth, as she put her arms about her and
embraced her, saying, "welcome, child, though," she added, glancing at
her, "you should no longer be called child who have grown into so fair
a maid. But look, here is the Pastor Arentz, of whom you may have heard,
for he is the friend of your father and of us all."

"In truth, yes," answered Elsa curtseying, a salute which Arentz
acknowledged by saying gravely,

"Daughter, I greet you in the name of the Lord, who has brought you to
this house safely, for which give thanks."

"Truly, Pastor, I have need to do so since--" and suddenly she stopped,
for her eyes met those of Foy, who was gazing at her with such wonder
and admiration stamped upon his open face that Elsa coloured at the
sight. Then, recovering herself, she held out her hand, saying, "Surely
you are my cousin Foy; I should have known you again anywhere by your
hair and eyes."

"I am glad," he answered simply, for it flattered him to think that this
beautiful young lady remembered her old playmate, whom she had not seen
for at least eleven years, adding, "but I do not think I should have
known you."

"Why?" she asked, "have I changed so much?"

"Yes," Foy answered bluntly, "you used to be a thin little girl with red
arms, and now you are the most lovely maiden I ever saw."

At this speech everybody laughed, including the Pastor, while Elsa,
reddening still more, replied, "Cousin, I remember that _you_ used to be
rude, but now you have learned to flatter, which is worse. Nay, I beg of
you, spare me," for Foy showed signs of wishing to argue the point. Then
turning from him she slipped off her cloak and sat down on the chair
which Dirk had placed for her at the table, reflecting in her heart that
she wished it had been Foy who rescued her from the wood thieves, and
not the more polished Adrian.

Afterwards as the meal went on she told the tale of their adventure.
Scarcely was it done when Adrian entered the room. The first thing
he noticed was that Elsa and Foy were seated side by side, engaged in
animated talk, and the second, that there was no cover for him at the
table.

"Have I your permission to sit down, mother?" he asked in a loud voice,
for no one had seen him come in.

"Certainly, son, why not?" answered Lysbeth, kindly. Adrian's voice
warned her that his temper was ruffled.

"Because there is no place for me, mother, that is all, though doubtless
it is more worthily filled by the Rev. Pastor Arentz. Still, after a man
has been fighting for his life with armed thieves, well--a bit of food
and a place to eat it in would have been welcome."

"Fighting for your life, son!" said Lysbeth astonished. "Why, from what
Elsa has just been telling us, I gathered that the rascals ran away at
the first blow which you struck with your staff."

"Indeed, mother; well, doubtless if the lady says that, it was so. I
took no great note; at the least they ran and she was saved, with the
others; a small service not worth mentioning, still useful in its way."

"Oh! take my chair, Adrian," said Foy rising, "and don't make such a
stir about a couple of cowardly footpads and an old hag. You don't want
us to think you a hero because you didn't turn tail and leave Elsa and
her companions in their hands, do you?"

"What you think, or do not think, is a matter of indifference to me,"
replied Adrian, seating himself with an injured air.

"Whatever my cousin Foy may think, Heer Adrian," broke in Elsa
anxiously, "I am sure I thank God who sent so brave a gentleman to help
us. Yes, yes, I mean it, for it makes me sick to remember what might
have happened if you had not rushed at those wicked men like--like----"

"Like David on the Philistines," suggested Foy.

"You should study your Bible, lad," put in Arentz with a grave smile.
"It was Samson who slew the Philistines; David conquered the giant
Goliath, though it is true that he also was a Philistine."

"Like Samson--I mean David--on Goliath," continued Elsa confusedly. "Oh!
please, cousin Foy, do not laugh; I believe that you would have left me
at the mercy of that dreadful man with a flat face and the bald head,
who was trying to steal my father's letter. By the way, cousin Dirk,
I have not given it to you yet, but it is quite safe, sewn up in the
lining of the saddle, and I was to tell you that you must read it by the
old cypher."

"Man with a flat face," said Dirk anxiously, as he slit away at the
stitches of the saddle to find the letter; "tell me about him. What was
he like, and what makes you think he wished to take the paper from you?"

So Elsa described the appearance of the man and of the black-eyed hag,
his companion, and repeated also the words that the Heer van Broekhoven
had heard the woman utter before the attack took place.

"That sounds like the spy, Hague Simon, him whom they call the Butcher,
and his wife, Black Meg," said Dirk. "Adrian, you must have seen these
people, was it they?"

For a moment Adrian considered whether he should tell the truth; then,
for certain reasons of his own, decided that he would not. Black Meg, it
may be explained, in the intervals of graver business was not averse to
serving as an emissary of Venus. In short, she arranged assignations,
and Adrian was fond of assignations. Hence his reticence.

"How should I know?" he answered, after a pause; "the place was gloomy,
and I have only set eyes upon Hague Simon and his wife about twice in my
life."

"Softly, brother," said Foy, "and stick to the truth, however gloomy the
wood may have been. You know Black Meg pretty well at any rate, for I
have often seen you--" and he stopped suddenly, as though sorry that the
words had slipped from his tongue.

"Adrian, is this so?" asked Dirk in the silence which followed.

"No, stepfather," answered Adrian.

"You hear," said Dirk addressing Foy. "In future, son, I trust that you
will be more careful with your words. It is no charge to bring lightly
against a man that he has been seen in the fellowship of one of the most
infamous wretches in Leyden, a creature whose hands are stained red with
the blood of innocent men and women, and who, as your mother knows, once
brought me near to the scaffold."

Suddenly the laughing boyish look passed out of the face of Foy, and it
grew stern.

"I am sorry for my words," he said, "since Black Meg does other things
besides spying, and Adrian may have had business of his own with her
which is no affair of mine. But, as they are spoke, I can't eat them, so
you must decide which of us is--not truthful."

"Nay, Foy, nay," interposed Arentz, "do not put it thus. Doubtless there
is some mistake, and have I not told you before that you are over rash
of tongue?"

"Yes, and a great many other things," answered Foy, "every one of them
true, for I am a miserable sinner. Well, all right, there is a mistake,
and it is," he added, with an air of radiant innocency that somehow was
scarcely calculated to deceive, "that I was merely poking a stick into
Adrian's temper. I never saw him talking to Black Meg. Now, are you
satisfied?"

Then the storm broke, as Elsa, who had been watching the face of Adrian
while he listened to Foy's artless but somewhat fatuous explanation, saw
that it must break.

"There is a conspiracy against me," said Adrian, who had grown white
with rage; "yes, everything has conspired against me to-day. First the
ragamuffins in the street make a mock of me, and then my hawk is killed.
Next it chances that I rescue this lady and her companions from robbers
in the wood. But, do I get any thanks for this? No, I come home to find
that I am so much forgotten that no place is even laid for me at table;
more, to be jeered at for the humble services that I have done. Lastly,
I have the lie given to me, and without reproach, by my brother, who,
were he not my brother, should answer for it at the sword's point."

"Oh! Adrian, Adrian," broke in Foy, "don't be a fool; stop before you
say something you will be sorry for."

"That isn't all," went on Adrian, taking no heed. "Whom do I find at
this table? The worthy Heer Arentz, a minister of the New Religion.
Well, I protest. I belong to the New Religion myself, having been
brought up in that faith, but it must be well known that the presence of
a pastor here in our house exposes everybody to the risk of death. If
my stepfather and Foy choose to take that risk, well and good, but I
maintain that they have no right to lay its consequences upon my mother,
whose eldest son I am, nor even upon myself."

Now Dirk rose and tapped Adrian on the shoulder. "Young man," he said
coldly and with glittering eyes, "listen to me. The risks which I and
my son, Foy, and my wife, your mother, take, we run for conscience sake.
You have nothing to do with them, it is our affair. But since you have
raised the question, if your faith is not strong enough to support you
I acknowledge that I have no right to bring you into danger. Look you,
Adrian, you are no son of mine; in you I have neither part nor lot, yet
I have cared for you and supported you since you were born under very
strange and unhappy circumstances. Yes, you have shared whatever I had
to give with my own son, without preference or favour, and should have
shared it even after my death. And now, if these are your opinions, I am
tempted to say to you that the world is wide and that, instead of idling
here upon my bounty, you would do well to win your own way through it as
far from Leyden as may please you."

"You throw your benefits in my teeth, and reproach me with my birth,"
broke in Adrian, who by now was almost raving with passion, "as though
it were a crime in me to have other blood running in my veins than that
of Netherlander tradesfolk. Well, if so, it would seem that the crime
was my mother's, and not mine, who----"

"Adrian, Adrian!" cried Foy, in warning, but the madman heeded not.

"Who," he went on furiously, "was content to be the companion, for
I understand that she was never really married to him, of some noble
Spaniard before she became the wife of a Leyden artisan."

He ceased, and at this moment there broke from Lysbeth's lips a low wail
of such bitter anguish that it chilled even his mad rage to silence.

"Shame on thee, my son," said the wail, "who art not ashamed to speak
thus of the mother that bore thee."

"Ay," echoed Dirk, in the stillness that followed, "shame on thee! Once
thou wast warned, but now I warn no more."

Then he stepped to the door, opened it, and called, "Martin, come
hither."

Presently, still in that heavy silence, which was broken only by the
quick breath of Adrian panting like some wild beast in a net, was heard
the sound of heavy feet shuffling down the passage. Then Martin entered
the room, and stood there gazing about him with his large blue eyes,
that were like the eyes of a wondering child.

"Your pleasure, master," he said at length.

"Martin Roos," replied Dirk, waving back Arentz who rose to speak,
"take that young man, my stepson, the Heer Adrian, and lead him from my
house--without violence if possible. My order is that henceforth you are
not to suffer him to set foot within its threshold; see that it is not
disobeyed. Go, Adrian, to-morrow your possessions shall be sent to you,
and with them such money as shall suffice to start you in the world."

Without comment or any expression of surprise, the huge Martin shuffled
forward towards Adrian, his hand outstretched as though to take him by
the arm.

"What!" exclaimed Adrian, as Martin advanced down the room, "you set
your mastiff on me, do you? Then I will show you how a gentleman treats
dogs," and suddenly, a naked dagger shining in his hand, he leaped
straight at the Frisian's throat. So quick and fierce was the onslaught
that only one issue to it seemed possible. Elsa gasped and closed her
eyes, thinking when she opened them to see that knife plunged to the
hilt in Martin's breast, and Foy sprang forward. Yet in this twinkling
of an eye the danger was done with, for by some movement too quick to
follow, Martin had dealt his assailant such a blow upon the arm that the
poniard, jarred from his grasp, flew flashing across the room to fall in
Lysbeth's lap. Another second and the iron grip had closed upon Adrian's
shoulder, and although he was strong and struggled furiously, yet he
could not loose the hold of that single hand.

"Please cease fighting, Mynheer Adrian, for it is quite useless," said
Martin to his captive in a voice as calm as though nothing unusual had
happened. Then he turned and walked with him towards the door.

On the threshold Martin stopped, and looking over his shoulder said,
"Master, I think that the Heer is dead, do you still wish me to put him
into the street?"

They crowded round and stared. It was true, Adrian seemed to be dead; at
least his face was like that of a corpse, while from the corner of his
mouth blood trickled in a thin stream.



CHAPTER XII

THE SUMMONS

"Wretched man!" said Lysbeth wringing her hands, and with a shudder
shaking the dagger from her lap as though it had been a serpent, "you
have killed my son."

"Your pardon, mistress," replied Martin placidly; "but that is not so.
The master ordered me to remove the Heer Adrian, whereon the Heer Adrian
very naturally tried to stab me. But I, having been accustomed to such
things in my youth," and he looked deprecatingly towards the Pastor
Arentz, "struck the Heer Adrian upon the bone of his elbow, causing the
knife to jump from his hand, for had I not done so I should have been
dead and unable to execute the commands of my master. Then I took the
Heer Adrian by the shoulder, gently as I might, and walked away with
him, whereupon he died of rage, for which I am very sorry but not to
blame."

"You are right, man," said Lysbeth, "it is you who are to blame, Dirk;
yes, you have murdered my son. Oh! never mind what he said, his temper
was always fierce, and who pays any heed to the talk of a man in a mad
passion?"

"Why did you let your brother be thus treated, cousin Foy?" broke in
Elsa quivering with indignation. "It was cowardly of you to stand still
and see that great red creature crush the life out of him when you know
well that it was because of your taunts that he lost his temper and said
things that he did not mean, as I do myself sometimes. No, I will
never speak to you again--and only this afternoon he saved me from the
robbers!" and she burst into weeping.

"Peace, peace! this is no time for angry words," said the Pastor Arentz,
pushing his way through the group of bewildered men and overwrought
women. "He can scarcely be dead; let me look at him, I am something of
a doctor," and he knelt by the senseless and bleeding Adrian to examine
him.

"Take comfort, Vrouw van Goorl," he said presently, "your son is not
dead, for his heart beats, nor has his friend Martin injured him in any
way by the exercise of his strength, but I think that in his fury he has
burst a blood-vessel, for he bleeds fast. My counsel is that he should
be put to bed and his head cooled with cold water till the surgeon can
be fetched to treat him. Lift him in your arms, Martin."

So Martin carried Adrian, not to the street, but to his bed, while Foy,
glad of an excuse to escape the undeserved reproaches of Elsa and the
painful sight of his mother's grief, went to seek the physician. In due
course he returned with him, and, to the great relief of all of them,
the learned man announced that, notwithstanding the blood which he had
lost, he did not think that Adrian would die, though, at the best, he
must keep his bed for some weeks, have skilful nursing and be humoured
in all things.

While his wife Lysbeth and Elsa were attending to Adrian, Dirk and his
son, Foy, for the Pastor Arentz had gone, sat upstairs talking in the
sitting-room, that same balconied chamber in which once Dirk had been
refused while Montalvo hid behind the curtain. Dirk was much disturbed,
for when his wrath had passed he was a tender-hearted man, and his
stepson's plight distressed him greatly. Now he was justifying himself
to Foy, or, rather, to his own conscience.

"A man who could speak so of his own mother, was not fit to stop in the
same house with her," he said; "moreover, you heard his words about the
pastor. I tell you, son, I am afraid of this Adrian."

"Unless that bleeding from his mouth stops soon you will not have cause
to fear him much longer," replied Foy sadly, "but if you want my opinion
about the business, father, why here it is--I think that you have made
too much of a small matter. Adrian is--Adrian; he is not one of us, and
he should not be judged as though he were. You cannot imagine me flying
into a fury because the women forgot to set my place at table, or trying
to stab Martin and bursting a blood vessel because you told him to lead
me out of the room. No, I should know better, for what is the use of any
ordinary man attempting to struggle against Martin? He might as well try
to argue with the Inquisition. But then I am I, and Adrian is Adrian."

"But the words he used, son. Remember the words."

"Yes, and if I had spoken them they would have meant a great deal, but
in Adrian's mouth I think no more of them than if they came from some
angry woman. Why, he is always sulking, or taking offence, or flying
into rages over something or other, and when he is like that it all
means--just nothing except that he wants to use fine talk and show off
and play the Don over us. He did not really mean to lie to me when he
said that I had not seen him talking to Black Meg, he only meant to
contradict, or perhaps to hide something up. As a matter of fact, if you
want to know the truth, I believe that the old witch took notes for him
to some young lady, and that Hague Simon supplied him with rats for his
hawks."

"Yes, Foy, that may be so, but how about his talk of the pastor? It
makes me suspicious, son. You know the times we live in, and if he
should go that way--remember it is in his blood--the lives of every one
of us are in his hand. The father tried to burn me once, and I do not
wish the child to finish the work."

"Then when they come out of his hand, you are at liberty to cut off
mine," answered Foy hotly. "I have been brought up with Adrian, and I
know what he is; he is vain and pompous, and every time he looks at
you and me he thanks God that he was not made like that. Also he has
failings and vices, and he is lazy, being too fine a gentleman to work
like a common Flemish burgher, and all the rest of it. But, father, he
has a good heart, and if any man outside this house were to tell me that
Adrian is capable of playing the traitor and bringing his own family to
the scaffold, well, I would make him swallow his words, or try to, that
is all. As regards what he said about my mother's first marriage"--and
Foy hung his head--"of course it is a subject on which I have no right
to talk, but, father, speaking as one man to another--he _is_ sadly
placed and innocent, whatever others may have been, and I don't wonder
that he feels sore about the story."

As he spoke the door opened and Lysbeth entered.

"How goes it with Adrian, wife?" Dirk asked hastily.

"Better, husband, thank God, though the doctor stays with him for this
night. He has lost much blood, and at the best must lie long abed; above
all none must cross his mood or use him roughly," and she looked at her
husband with meaning.

"Peace, wife," Dirk answered with irritation. "Foy here has just read
me one lecture upon my dealings with your son, and I am in no mood to
listen to another. I served the man as he deserved, neither less nor
more, and if he chose to go mad and vomit blood, why it is no fault of
mine. You should have brought him up to a soberer habit."

"Adrian is not as other men are, and ought not to be measured by the
same rule," said Lysbeth, almost repeating Foy's words.

"So I have been told before, wife, though I, who have but one standard
of right and wrong, find the saying hard. But so be it. Doubtless the
rule for Adrian is that which should be used to measure angels--or
Spaniards, and not one suited to us poor Hollanders who do our work, pay
our debts, and don't draw knives on unarmed men!"

"Have you read the letter from your cousin Brant?" asked Lysbeth,
changing the subject.

"No," answered Dirk, "what with daggers, swoonings, and scoldings it
slipped my mind," and drawing the paper from his tunic he cut the silk
and broke the seals. "I had forgotten," he went on, looking at the
sheets of words interspersed with meaningless figures; "it is in our
private cypher, as Elsa said, or at least most of it is. Get the key
from my desk, son, and let us set to work, for our task is likely to be
long."

Foy obeyed, returning presently with an old Testament of a very scarce
edition. With the help of this book and an added vocabulary by slow
degrees they deciphered the long epistle, Foy writing it down sentence
by sentence as they learned their significance. When at length the task
was finished, which was not till well after midnight, Dirk read the
translation aloud to Lysbeth and his son. It ran thus:


"Well-beloved cousin and old friend, you will be astonished to see my
dear child Elsa, who brings you this paper sewn in her saddle, where
I trust none will seek it, and wonder why she comes to you without
warning. I will tell you.

"You know that here the axe and the stake are very busy, for at The
Hague the devil walks loose; yes, he is the master in this land. Well,
although the blow has not yet fallen on me, since for a while I have
bought off the informers, hour by hour the sword hangs over my head, nor
can I escape it in the end. That I am suspected of the New Faith is not
my real crime. You can guess it. Cousin, they desire my wealth. Now I
have sworn that no Spaniard shall have this, no, not if I must sink it
in the sea to save it from them, since it has been heaped up to another
end. Yet they desire it sorely, and spies are about my path and about my
bed. Worst among them all, and at the head of them, is a certain Ramiro,
a one-eyed man, but lately come from Spain, it is said as an agent of
the Inquisition, whose manners are those of a person who was once a
gentleman, and who seems to know this country well. This fellow has
approached me, offering if I will give him three-parts of my wealth to
secure my escape with the rest, and I have told him that I will consider
the offer. For this reason only I have a little respite, since he
desires that my money should go into his pocket and not into that of the
Government. But, by the help of God, neither of them shall touch it.

"See you, Dirk, the treasure is not here in the house as they think. It
is hidden, but in a spot where it cannot stay.

"Therefore, if you love me, and hold that I have been a good friend
to you, send your son Foy with one other strong and trusted man--your
Frisian servant, Martin, if possible--on the morrow after you receive
this. When night falls he should have been in The Hague some hours, and
have refreshed himself, but let him not come near me or my house. Half
an hour after sunset let him, followed by his serving man, walk up and
down the right side of the Broad Street in The Hague, as though seeking
adventures, till a girl, also followed by a servant, pushes up against
him as if on purpose, and whispers in his ear, 'Are you from Leyden,
sweetheart?' Then he must say 'Yes,' and accompany her till he comes to
a place where he will learn what must be done and how to do it. Above
all, he must follow no woman who may accost him and does not repeat
these words. The girl who addresses him will be short, dark, pretty, and
gaily dressed, with a red bow upon her left shoulder. But let him not be
misled by look or dress unless she speaks the words.

"If he reaches England or Leyden safely with the stuff let him hide it
for the present, friend, till your heart tells you it is needed. I care
not where, nor do I wish to know, for if I knew, flesh and blood are
weak, and I might give up the secret when they stretch me on the rack.

"Already you have my will sent to you three months ago, and enclosed
in it a list of goods. Open it now and you will find that under it my
possessions pass to you and your heirs absolutely as my executors, for
such especial trusts and purposes as are set out therein. Elsa has
been ailing, and it is known that the leech has ordered her a change.
Therefore her journey to Leyden will excite no wonder, neither, or so I
hope, will even Ramiro guess that I should enclose a letter such as this
in so frail a casket. Still, there is danger, for spies are many, but
having no choice, and my need being urgent, I must take the risks. If
the paper is seized they cannot read it, for they will never make out
the cypher, since, even did they know of them, no copies of our books
can be found in Holland. Moreover, were this writing all plain Dutch
or Spanish, it tells nothing of the whereabouts of the treasure, of its
destination, or of the purpose to which it is dedicate. Lastly, should
any Spaniard chance to find that wealth, it will vanish, and, mayhap, he
with it."


"What can he mean by that?" interrupted Foy.

"I know not," answered Dirk. "My cousin Brant is not a person who speaks
at random, so perhaps we have misinterpreted the passage." Then he went
on reading:


"Now I have done with the pelf, which must take its chance. Only, I pray
you--I trust it to your honour and to your love of an old friend to bury
it, burn it, cast it to the four winds of heaven before you suffer a
Spaniard to touch a gem or a piece of gold.

"I send to you to-day Elsa, my only child. You will know my reason. She
will be safer with you in Leyden than here at The Hague, since if they
take me they might take her also. The priests and their tools do not
spare the young, especially if their rights stand between them and
money. Also she knows little of my desperate strait; she is ignorant
even of the contents of this letter, and I do not wish that she should
share these troubles. I am a doomed man, and she loves me, poor child.
One day she will hear that it is over, and that will be sad for her,
but it would be worse if she knew all from the beginning. When I bid her
good-bye to-morrow, it will be for the last time--God give me strength
to bear the blow.

"You are her guardian, as you deal with her--nay, I must be crazy with
my troubles, for none other would think it needful to remind Dirk van
Goorl or his son of their duty to the dead. Farewell, friend and cousin.
God guard you and yours in these dreadful times with which it has
pleased Him to visit us for a season, that through us perhaps this
country and the whole world may be redeemed from priestcraft and
tyranny. Greet your honoured wife, Lysbeth, from me; also your son Foy,
who used to be a merry lad, and whom I hope to see again within a night
or two, although it may be fated that we shall not meet. My blessing
on him, especially if he prove faithful in all these things. May the
Almighty who guards us give us a happy meeting in the hereafter which is
at hand. Pray for me. Farewell, farewell.--Hendrik Brant.

"P.S. I beg the dame Lysbeth to see that Elsa wears woollen when the
weather turns damp or cold, since her chest is somewhat delicate. This
was my wife's last charge, and I pass it on to you. As regards her
marriage, should she live, I leave that to your judgment with this
command only, that her inclination shall not be forced, beyond what is
right and proper. When I am dead, kiss her for me, and tell her that I
loved her beyond any creature now living on the earth, and that wherever
I am from day to day I wait to welcome her, as I shall wait to welcome
you and yours, Dirk van Goorl. In case these presents miscarry, I will
send duplicates of them, also in mixed cypher, whenever chance may
offer."



Having finished reading the translation of this cypher document, Dirk
bent his head while he folded it, not wishing that his face should be
seen. Foy also turned aside to hide the tears which gathered in his
eyes, while Lysbeth wept openly.

"A sad letter and sad times!" said Dirk at length.
