  For Juno, headstrong and imperious still,
  She claims some title to transgress our will."

  Swift as the wind, the various-colour'd maid
  From Ida's top her golden wings display'd;
  To great Olympus' shining gate she flies,
  There meets the chariot rushing down the skies,
  Restrains their progress from the bright abodes,
  And speaks the mandate of the sire of gods.

  "What frenzy goddesses! what rage can move
  Celestial minds to tempt the wrath of Jove?
  Desist, obedient to his high command:
  This is his word; and know his word shall stand:
  His lightning your rebellion shall confound,
  And hurl ye headlong, flaming, to the ground;
  Your horses crush'd beneath the wheels shall lie,
  Your car in fragments scatter'd o'er the sky;
  Yourselves condemn'd ten rolling years to weep
  The wounds impress'd by burning thunder deep.
  So shall Minerva learn to fear his ire,
  Nor dare to combat hers and nature's sire.
  For Juno, headstrong and imperious still,
  She claims some title to transgress his will:
  But thee, what desperate insolence has driven
  To lift thy lance against the king of heaven?"

  Then, mounting on the pinions of the wind,
  She flew; and Juno thus her rage resign'd:

  "O daughter of that god, whose arm can wield
  The avenging bolt, and shake the dreadful shield
  No more let beings of superior birth
  Contend with Jove for this low race of earth;
  Triumphant now, now miserably slain,
  They breathe or perish as the fates ordain:
  But Jove's high counsels full effect shall find;
  And, ever constant, ever rule mankind."

  She spoke, and backward turn'd her steeds of light,
  Adorn'd with manes of gold, and heavenly bright.
  The Hours unloosed them, panting as they stood,
  And heap'd their mangers with ambrosial food.
  There tied, they rest in high celestial stalls;
  The chariot propp'd against the crystal walls,
  The pensive goddesses, abash'd, controll'd,
  Mix with the gods, and fill their seats of gold.

       [Illustration: THE HOURS TAKING THE HORSES FROM JUNO'S CAR.]

               THE HOURS TAKING THE HORSES FROM JUNO'S CAR.


  And now the Thunderer meditates his flight
  From Ida's summits to the Olympian height.
  Swifter than thought, the wheels instinctive fly,
  Flame through the vast of air, and reach the sky.
  'Twas Neptune's charge his coursers to unbrace,
  And fix the car on its immortal base;
  There stood the chariot, beaming forth its rays,
  Till with a snowy veil he screen'd the blaze.
  He, whose all-conscious eyes the world behold,
  The eternal Thunderer sat, enthroned in gold.
  High heaven the footstool of his feet he makes,
  And wide beneath him all Olympus shakes.
  Trembling afar the offending powers appear'd,
  Confused and silent, for his frown they fear'd.
  He saw their soul, and thus his word imparts:
  "Pallas and Juno! say, why heave your hearts?
  Soon was your battle o'er: proud Troy retired
  Before your face, and in your wrath expired.
  But know, whoe'er almighty power withstand!
  Unmatch'd our force, unconquer'd is our hand:
  Who shall the sovereign of the skies control?
  Not all the gods that crown the starry pole.
  Your hearts shall tremble, if our arms we take,
  And each immortal nerve with horror shake.
  For thus I speak, and what I speak shall stand;
  What power soe'er provokes our lifted hand,
  On this our hill no more shall hold his place;
  Cut off, and exiled from the ethereal race."

  Juno and Pallas grieving hear the doom,
  But feast their souls on Ilion's woes to come.
  Though secret anger swell'd Minerva's breast,
  The prudent goddess yet her wrath repress'd;
  But Juno, impotent of rage, replies:
  "What hast thou said, O tyrant of the skies!
  Strength and omnipotence invest thy throne;
  'Tis thine to punish; ours to grieve alone.
  For Greece we grieve, abandon'd by her fate
  To drink the dregs of thy unmeasured hate.
  From fields forbidden we submiss refrain,
  With arms unaiding see our Argives slain;
  Yet grant our counsels still their breasts may move,
  Lest all should perish in the rage of Jove."

  The goddess thus; and thus the god replies,
  Who swells the clouds, and blackens all the skies:

  "The morning sun, awaked by loud alarms,
  Shall see the almighty Thunderer in arms.
  What heaps of Argives then shall load the plain,
  Those radiant eyes shall view, and view in vain.
  Nor shall great Hector cease the rage of fight,
  The navy flaming, and thy Greeks in flight,
  Even till the day when certain fates ordain
  That stern Achilles (his Patroclus slain)
  Shall rise in vengeance, and lay waste the plain.
  For such is fate, nor canst thou turn its course
  With all thy rage, with all thy rebel force.
  Fly, if thy wilt, to earth's remotest bound,
  Where on her utmost verge the seas resound;
  Where cursed Iapetus and Saturn dwell,
  Fast by the brink, within the streams of hell;
  No sun e'er gilds the gloomy horrors there;
  No cheerful gales refresh the lazy air:
  There arm once more the bold Titanian band;
  And arm in vain; for what I will, shall stand."

  Now deep in ocean sunk the lamp of light,
  And drew behind the cloudy veil of night:
  The conquering Trojans mourn his beams decay'd;
  The Greeks rejoicing bless the friendly shade.

  The victors keep the field; and Hector calls
  A martial council near the navy walls;
  These to Scamander's bank apart he led,
  Where thinly scatter'd lay the heaps of dead.
  The assembled chiefs, descending on the ground,
  Attend his order, and their prince surround.
  A massy spear he bore of mighty strength,
  Of full ten cubits was the lance's length;
  The point was brass, refulgent to behold,
  Fix'd to the wood with circling rings of gold:
  The noble Hector on his lance reclined,
  And, bending forward, thus reveal'd his mind:

  "Ye valiant Trojans, with attention hear!
  Ye Dardan bands, and generous aids, give ear!
  This day, we hoped, would wrap in conquering flame
  Greece with her ships, and crown our toils with fame.
  But darkness now, to save the cowards, falls,
  And guards them trembling in their wooden walls.
  Obey the night, and use her peaceful hours
  Our steeds to forage, and refresh our powers.
  Straight from the town be sheep and oxen sought,
  And strengthening bread and generous wine be brought
  Wide o'er the field, high blazing to the sky,
  Let numerous fires the absent sun supply,
  The flaming piles with plenteous fuel raise,
  Till the bright morn her purple beam displays;
  Lest, in the silence and the shades of night,
  Greece on her sable ships attempt her flight.
  Not unmolested let the wretches gain
  Their lofty decks, or safely cleave the main;
  Some hostile wound let every dart bestow,
  Some lasting token of the Phrygian foe,
  Wounds, that long hence may ask their spouses' care.
  And warn their children from a Trojan war.
  Now through the circuit of our Ilion wall,
  Let sacred heralds sound the solemn call;
  To bid the sires with hoary honours crown'd,
  And beardless youths, our battlements surround.
  Firm be the guard, while distant lie our powers,
  And let the matrons hang with lights the towers;
  Lest, under covert of the midnight shade,
  The insidious foe the naked town invade.
  Suffice, to-night, these orders to obey;
  A nobler charge shall rouse the dawning day.
  The gods, I trust, shall give to Hector's hand
  From these detested foes to free the land,
  Who plough'd, with fates averse, the watery way:
  For Trojan vultures a predestined prey.
  Our common safety must be now the care;
  But soon as morning paints the fields of air,
  Sheathed in bright arms let every troop engage,
  And the fired fleet behold the battle rage.
  Then, then shall Hector and Tydides prove
  Whose fates are heaviest in the scales of Jove.
  To-morrow's light (O haste the glorious morn!)
  Shall see his bloody spoils in triumph borne,
  With this keen javelin shall his breast be gored,
  And prostrate heroes bleed around their lord.
  Certain as this, oh! might my days endure,
  From age inglorious, and black death secure;
  So might my life and glory know no bound,
  Like Pallas worshipp'd, like the sun renown'd!
  As the next dawn, the last they shall enjoy,
  Shall crush the Greeks, and end the woes of Troy."

  The leader spoke. From all his host around
  Shouts of applause along the shores resound.
  Each from the yoke the smoking steeds untied,
  And fix'd their headstalls to his chariot-side.
  Fat sheep and oxen from the town are led,
  With generous wine, and all-sustaining bread,
  Full hecatombs lay burning on the shore:
  The winds to heaven the curling vapours bore.
  Ungrateful offering to the immortal powers!(197)
  Whose wrath hung heavy o'er the Trojan towers:
  Nor Priam nor his sons obtain'd their grace;
  Proud Troy they hated, and her guilty race.

  The troops exulting sat in order round,
  And beaming fires illumined all the ground.
  As when the moon, refulgent lamp of night,(198)
  O'er heaven's pure azure spreads her sacred light,
  When not a breath disturbs the deep serene,
  And not a cloud o'ercasts the solemn scene,
  Around her throne the vivid planets roll,
  And stars unnumber'd gild the glowing pole,
  O'er the dark trees a yellower verdure shed,
  And tip with silver every mountain's head:
  Then shine the vales, the rocks in prospect rise,
  A flood of glory bursts from all the skies:
  The conscious swains, rejoicing in the sight,
  Eye the blue vault, and bless the useful light.
  So many flames before proud Ilion blaze,
  And lighten glimmering Xanthus with their rays.
  The long reflections of the distant fires
  Gleam on the walls, and tremble on the spires.
  A thousand piles the dusky horrors gild,
  And shoot a shady lustre o'er the field.
  Full fifty guards each flaming pile attend,
  Whose umber'd arms, by fits, thick flashes send,
  Loud neigh the coursers o'er their heaps of corn,
  And ardent warriors wait the rising morn.

                 [Illustration: THE SHIELD OF ACHILLES.]

                         THE SHIELD OF ACHILLES.





BOOK IX.


ARGUMENT.

THE EMBASSY TO ACHILLES.

Agamemnon, after the last day's defeat, proposes to the Greeks to quit the
siege, and return to their country. Diomed opposes this, and Nestor
seconds him, praising his wisdom and resolution. He orders the guard to be
strengthened, and a council summoned to deliberate what measures are to be
followed in this emergency. Agamemnon pursues this advice, and Nestor
further prevails upon him to send ambassadors to Achilles, in order to
move him to a reconciliation. Ulysses and Ajax are made choice of, who are
accompanied by old Phoenix. They make, each of them, very moving and
pressing speeches, but are rejected with roughness by Achilles, who
notwithstanding retains Phoenix in his tent. The ambassadors return
unsuccessfully to the camp, and the troops betake themselves to sleep.

This book, and the next following, take up the space of one night, which
is the twenty-seventh from the beginning of the poem. The scene lies on
the sea-shore, the station of the Grecian ships.

  Thus joyful Troy maintain'd the watch of night;
  While fear, pale comrade of inglorious flight,(199)
  And heaven-bred horror, on the Grecian part,
  Sat on each face, and sadden'd every heart.
  As from its cloudy dungeon issuing forth,
  A double tempest of the west and north
  Swells o'er the sea, from Thracia's frozen shore,
  Heaps waves on waves, and bids the AEgean roar:
  This way and that the boiling deeps are toss'd:
  Such various passions urged the troubled host,
  Great Agamemnon grieved above the rest;
  Superior sorrows swell'd his royal breast;
  Himself his orders to the heralds bears,
  To bid to council all the Grecian peers,
  But bid in whispers: these surround their chief,
  In solemn sadness and majestic grief.
  The king amidst the mournful circle rose:
  Down his wan cheek a briny torrent flows.
  So silent fountains, from a rock's tall head,
  In sable streams soft-trickling waters shed.
  With more than vulgar grief he stood oppress'd;
  Words, mix'd with sighs, thus bursting from his breast:

  "Ye sons of Greece! partake your leader's care;
  Fellows in arms and princes of the war!
  Of partial Jove too justly we complain,
  And heavenly oracles believed in vain.
  A safe return was promised to our toils,
  With conquest honour'd and enrich'd with spoils:
  Now shameful flight alone can save the host;
  Our wealth, our people, and our glory lost.
  So Jove decrees, almighty lord of all!
  Jove, at whose nod whole empires rise or fall,
  Who shakes the feeble props of human trust,
  And towers and armies humbles to the dust.
  Haste then, for ever quit these fatal fields,
  Haste to the joys our native country yields;
  Spread all your canvas, all your oars employ,
  Nor hope the fall of heaven-defended Troy."

  He said: deep silence held the Grecian band;
  Silent, unmov'd in dire dismay they stand;
  A pensive scene! till Tydeus' warlike son
  Roll'd on the king his eyes, and thus begun:
  "When kings advise us to renounce our fame,
  First let him speak who first has suffer'd shame.
  If I oppose thee, prince! thy wrath withhold,
  The laws of council bid my tongue be bold.
  Thou first, and thou alone, in fields of fight,
  Durst brand my courage, and defame my might:
  Nor from a friend the unkind reproach appear'd,
  The Greeks stood witness, all our army heard.
  The gods, O chief! from whom our honours spring,
  The gods have made thee but by halves a king:
  They gave thee sceptres, and a wide command;
  They gave dominion o'er the seas and land;
  The noblest power that might the world control
  They gave thee not--a brave and virtuous soul.
  Is this a general's voice, that would suggest
  Fears like his own to every Grecian breast?
  Confiding in our want of worth, he stands;
  And if we fly, 'tis what our king commands.
  Go thou, inglorious! from the embattled plain;
  Ships thou hast store, and nearest to the main;
  A noble care the Grecians shall employ,
  To combat, conquer, and extirpate Troy.
  Here Greece shall stay; or, if all Greece retire,
  Myself shall stay, till Troy or I expire;
  Myself, and Sthenelus, will fight for fame;
  God bade us fight, and 'twas with God we came."

  He ceased; the Greeks loud acclamations raise,
  And voice to voice resounds Tydides' praise.
  Wise Nestor then his reverend figure rear'd;
  He spoke: the host in still attention heard:(200)

  "O truly great! in whom the gods have join'd
  Such strength of body with such force of mind:
  In conduct, as in courage, you excel,
  Still first to act what you advise so well.
  These wholesome counsels which thy wisdom moves,
  Applauding Greece with common voice approves.
  Kings thou canst blame; a bold but prudent youth:
  And blame even kings with praise, because with truth.
  And yet those years that since thy birth have run
  Would hardly style thee Nestor's youngest son.
  Then let me add what yet remains behind,
  A thought unfinish'd in that generous mind;
  Age bids me speak! nor shall the advice I bring
  Distaste the people, or offend the king:

  "Cursed is the man, and void of law and right,
  Unworthy property, unworthy light,
  Unfit for public rule, or private care,
  That wretch, that monster, who delights in war;
  Whose lust is murder, and whose horrid joy,
  To tear his country, and his kind destroy!
  This night, refresh and fortify thy train;
  Between the trench and wall let guards remain:
  Be that the duty of the young and bold;
  But thou, O king, to council call the old;
  Great is thy sway, and weighty are thy cares;
  Thy high commands must spirit all our wars.
  With Thracian wines recruit thy honour'd guests,
  For happy counsels flow from sober feasts.
  Wise, weighty counsels aid a state distress'd,
  And such a monarch as can choose the best.
  See what a blaze from hostile tents aspires,
  How near our fleet approach the Trojan fires!
  Who can, unmoved, behold the dreadful light?
  What eye beholds them, and can close to-night?
  This dreadful interval determines all;
  To-morrow, Troy must flame, or Greece must fall."

  Thus spoke the hoary sage: the rest obey;
  Swift through the gates the guards direct their way.
  His son was first to pass the lofty mound,
  The generous Thrasymed, in arms renown'd:
  Next him, Ascalaphus, Ialmen, stood,
  The double offspring of the warrior-god:
  Deipyrus, Aphareus, Merion join,
  And Lycomed of Creon's noble line.
  Seven were the leaders of the nightly bands,
  And each bold chief a hundred spears commands.
  The fires they light, to short repasts they fall,
  Some line the trench, and others man the wall.

  The king of men, on public counsels bent,
  Convened the princes in his ample tent,
  Each seized a portion of the kingly feast,
  But stay'd his hand when thirst and hunger ceased.
  Then Nestor spoke, for wisdom long approved,
  And slowly rising, thus the council moved.

  "Monarch of nations! whose superior sway
  Assembled states, and lords of earth obey,
  The laws and sceptres to thy hand are given,
  And millions own the care of thee and Heaven.
  O king! the counsels of my age attend;
  With thee my cares begin, with thee must end.
  Thee, prince! it fits alike to speak and hear,
  Pronounce with judgment, with regard give ear,
  To see no wholesome motion be withstood,
  And ratify the best for public good.
  Nor, though a meaner give advice, repine,
  But follow it, and make the wisdom thine.
  Hear then a thought, not now conceived in haste,
  At once my present judgment and my past.
  When from Pelides' tent you forced the maid,
  I first opposed, and faithful, durst dissuade;
  But bold of soul, when headlong fury fired,
  You wronged the man, by men and gods admired:
  Now seek some means his fatal wrath to end,
  With prayers to move him, or with gifts to bend."

  To whom the king. "With justice hast thou shown
  A prince's faults, and I with reason own.
  That happy man, whom Jove still honours most,
  Is more than armies, and himself a host.
  Bless'd in his love, this wondrous hero stands;
  Heaven fights his war, and humbles all our bands.
  Fain would my heart, which err'd through frantic rage,
  The wrathful chief and angry gods assuage.
  If gifts immense his mighty soul can bow,(201)
  Hear, all ye Greeks, and witness what I vow.
  Ten weighty talents of the purest gold,
  And twice ten vases of refulgent mould:
  Seven sacred tripods, whose unsullied frame
  Yet knows no office, nor has felt the flame;
  Twelve steeds unmatch'd in fleetness and in force,
  And still victorious in the dusty course;
  (Rich were the man whose ample stores exceed
  The prizes purchased by their winged speed;)
  Seven lovely captives of the Lesbian line,
  Skill'd in each art, unmatch'd in form divine,
  The same I chose for more than vulgar charms,
  When Lesbos sank beneath the hero's arms:
  All these, to buy his friendship, shall be paid,
  And join'd with these the long-contested maid;
  With all her charms, Briseis I resign,
  And solemn swear those charms were never mine;
  Untouch'd she stay'd, uninjured she removes,
  Pure from my arms, and guiltless of my loves,(202)
  These instant shall be his; and if the powers
  Give to our arms proud Ilion's hostile towers,
  Then shall he store (when Greece the spoil divides)
  With gold and brass his loaded navy's sides:
  Besides, full twenty nymphs of Trojan race
  With copious love shall crown his warm embrace,
  Such as himself will choose; who yield to none,
  Or yield to Helen's heavenly charms alone.
  Yet hear me further: when our wars are o'er,
  If safe we land on Argos' fruitful shore,
  There shall he live my son, our honours share,
  And with Orestes' self divide my care.
  Yet more--three daughters in my court are bred,
  And each well worthy of a royal bed;
  Laodice and Iphigenia fair,(203)
  And bright Chrysothemis with golden hair;
  Her let him choose whom most his eyes approve,
  I ask no presents, no reward for love:
  Myself will give the dower; so vast a store
  As never father gave a child before.
  Seven ample cities shall confess his sway,
  Him Enope, and Pherae him obey,
  Cardamyle with ample turrets crown'd,
  And sacred Pedasus for vines renown'd;
  AEpea fair, the pastures Hira yields,
  And rich Antheia with her flowery fields:(204)
  The whole extent to Pylos' sandy plain,
  Along the verdant margin of the main
  There heifers graze, and labouring oxen toil;
  Bold are the men, and generous is the soil;
  There shall he reign, with power and justice crown'd,
  And rule the tributary realms around.
  All this I give, his vengeance to control,
  And sure all this may move his mighty soul.
  Pluto, the grisly god, who never spares,
  Who feels no mercy, and who hears no prayers,
  Lives dark and dreadful in deep hell's abodes,
  And mortals hate him, as the worst of gods
  Great though he be, it fits him to obey,
  Since more than his my years, and more my sway."

                          [Illustration: PLUTO.]

                                  PLUTO.


  The monarch thus. The reverend Nestor then:
  "Great Agamemnon! glorious king of men!
  Such are thy offers as a prince may take,
  And such as fits a generous king to make.
  Let chosen delegates this hour be sent
  (Myself will name them) to Pelides' tent.
  Let Phoenix lead, revered for hoary age,
  Great Ajax next, and Ithacus the sage.
  Yet more to sanctify the word you send,
  Let Hodius and Eurybates attend.
  Now pray to Jove to grant what Greece demands;
  Pray in deep silence,(205) and with purest hands."(206)

                 [Illustration: THE EMBASSY TO ACHILLES.]

                         THE EMBASSY TO ACHILLES.


  He said; and all approved. The heralds bring
  The cleansing water from the living spring.
  The youth with wine the sacred goblets crown'd,
  And large libations drench'd the sands around.
  The rite perform'd, the chiefs their thirst allay,
  Then from the royal tent they take their way;
  Wise Nestor turns on each his careful eye,
  Forbids to offend, instructs them to apply;
  Much he advised them all, Ulysses most,
  To deprecate the chief, and save the host.
  Through the still night they march, and hear the roar
  Of murmuring billows on the sounding shore.
  To Neptune, ruler of the seas profound,
  Whose liquid arms the mighty globe surround,
  They pour forth vows, their embassy to bless,
  And calm the rage of stern AEacides.
  And now, arrived, where on the sandy bay
  The Myrmidonian tents and vessels lay;
  Amused at ease, the godlike man they found,
  Pleased with the solemn harp's harmonious sound.
  (The well wrought harp from conquered Thebae came;
  Of polish'd silver was its costly frame.)
  With this he soothes his angry soul, and sings
  The immortal deeds of heroes and of kings.
  Patroclus only of the royal train,
  Placed in his tent, attends the lofty strain:
  Full opposite he sat, and listen'd long,
  In silence waiting till he ceased the song.
  Unseen the Grecian embassy proceeds
  To his high tent; the great Ulysses leads.
  Achilles starting, as the chiefs he spied,
  Leap'd from his seat, and laid the harp aside.
  With like surprise arose Menoetius' son:
  Pelides grasp'd their hands, and thus begun:

  "Princes, all hail! whatever brought you here.
  Or strong necessity, or urgent fear;
  Welcome, though Greeks! for not as foes ye came;
  To me more dear than all that bear the name."

  With that, the chiefs beneath his roof he led,
  And placed in seats with purple carpets spread.
  Then thus--"Patroclus, crown a larger bowl,
  Mix purer wine, and open every soul.
  Of all the warriors yonder host can send,
  Thy friend most honours these, and these thy friend."

  He said: Patroclus o'er the blazing fire
  Heaps in a brazen vase three chines entire:
  The brazen vase Automedon sustains,
  Which flesh of porker, sheep, and goat contains.
  Achilles at the genial feast presides,
  The parts transfixes, and with skill divides.
  Meanwhile Patroclus sweats, the fire to raise;
  The tent is brighten'd with the rising blaze:
  Then, when the languid flames at length subside,
  He strows a bed of glowing embers wide,
  Above the coals the smoking fragments turns
  And sprinkles sacred salt from lifted urns;
  With bread the glittering canisters they load,
  Which round the board Menoetius' son bestow'd;
  Himself, opposed to Ulysses full in sight,
  Each portion parts, and orders every rite.
  The first fat offering to the immortals due,
  Amidst the greedy flames Patroclus threw;
  Then each, indulging in the social feast,
  His thirst and hunger soberly repress'd.
  That done, to Phoenix Ajax gave the sign:
  Not unperceived; Ulysses crown'd with wine
  The foaming bowl, and instant thus began,
  His speech addressing to the godlike man.

  "Health to Achilles! happy are thy guests!
  Not those more honour'd whom Atrides feasts:
  Though generous plenty crown thy loaded boards,
  That, Agamemnon's regal tent affords;
  But greater cares sit heavy on our souls,
  Nor eased by banquets or by flowing bowls.
  What scenes of slaughter in yon fields appear!
  The dead we mourn, and for the living fear;
  Greece on the brink of fate all doubtful stands,
  And owns no help but from thy saving hands:
  Troy and her aids for ready vengeance call;
  Their threatening tents already shade our wall:
  Hear how with shouts their conquest they proclaim,
  And point at every ship their vengeful flame!
  For them the father of the gods declares,
  Theirs are his omens, and his thunder theirs.
  See, full of Jove, avenging Hector rise!
  See! heaven and earth the raging chief defies;
  What fury in his breast, what lightning in his eyes!
  He waits but for the morn, to sink in flame
  The ships, the Greeks, and all the Grecian name.
  Heavens! how my country's woes distract my mind,
  Lest Fate accomplish all his rage design'd!
  And must we, gods! our heads inglorious lay
  In Trojan dust, and this the fatal day?
  Return, Achilles: oh return, though late,
  To save thy Greeks, and stop the course of Fate;
  If in that heart or grief or courage lies,
  Rise to redeem; ah, yet to conquer, rise!
  The day may come, when, all our warriors slain,
  That heart shall melt, that courage rise in vain:
  Regard in time, O prince divinely brave!
  Those wholesome counsels which thy father gave.
  When Peleus in his aged arms embraced
  His parting son, these accents were his last:

  "'My child! with strength, with glory, and success,
  Thy arms may Juno and Minerva bless!
  Trust that to Heaven: but thou, thy cares engage
  To calm thy passions, and subdue thy rage:
  From gentler manners let thy glory grow,
  And shun contention, the sure source of woe;
  That young and old may in thy praise combine,
  The virtues of humanity be thine--'
  This now-despised advice thy father gave;
  Ah! check thy anger; and be truly brave.
  If thou wilt yield to great Atrides' prayers,
  Gifts worthy thee his royal hand prepares;
  If not--but hear me, while I number o'er
  The proffer'd presents, an exhaustless store.
  Ten weighty talents of the purest gold,
  And twice ten vases of refulgent mould;
  Seven sacred tripods, whose unsullied frame
  Yet knows no office, nor has felt the flame;
  Twelve steeds unmatched in fleetness and in force,
  And still victorious in the dusty course;
  (Rich were the man, whose ample stores exceed
  The prizes purchased by their winged speed;)
  Seven lovely captives of the Lesbian line,
  Skill'd in each art, unmatch'd in form divine,
  The same he chose for more than vulgar charms,
  When Lesbos sank beneath thy conquering arms.
  All these, to buy thy friendship shall be paid,
  And, join'd with these, the long-contested maid;
  With all her charms, Briseis he'll resign,
  And solemn swear those charms were only thine;
  Untouch'd she stay'd, uninjured she removes,
  Pure from his arms, and guiltless of his loves.
  These instant shall be thine; and if the powers
  Give to our arms proud Ilion's hostile towers,
  Then shalt thou store (when Greece the spoil divides)
  With gold and brass thy loaded navy's sides.
  Besides, full twenty nymphs of Trojan race
  With copious love shall crown thy warm embrace;
  Such as thyself shall chose; who yield to none,
  Or yield to Helen's heavenly charms alone.
  Yet hear me further: when our wars are o'er,
  If safe we land on Argos' fruitful shore,
  There shalt thou live his son, his honour share,
  And with Orestes' self divide his care.
  Yet more--three daughters in his court are bred,
  And each well worthy of a royal bed:
  Laodice and Iphigenia fair,
  And bright Chrysothemis with golden hair:
  Her shalt thou wed whom most thy eyes approve;
  He asks no presents, no reward for love:
  Himself will give the dower; so vast a store
  As never father gave a child before.
  Seven ample cities shall confess thy sway,
  The Enope and Pherae thee obey,
  Cardamyle with ample turrets crown'd,
  And sacred Pedasus, for vines renown'd:
  AEpea fair, the pastures Hira yields,
  And rich Antheia with her flowery fields;
  The whole extent to Pylos' sandy plain,
  Along the verdant margin of the main.
  There heifers graze, and labouring oxen toil;
  Bold are the men, and generous is the soil.
  There shalt thou reign, with power and justice crown'd,
  And rule the tributary realms around.
  Such are the proffers which this day we bring,
  Such the repentance of a suppliant king.
  But if all this, relentless, thou disdain,
  If honour and if interest plead in vain,
  Yet some redress to suppliant Greece afford,
  And be, amongst her guardian gods, adored.
  If no regard thy suffering country claim,
  Hear thy own glory, and the voice of fame:
  For now that chief, whose unresisted ire
  Made nations tremble, and whole hosts retire,
  Proud Hector, now, the unequal fight demands,
  And only triumphs to deserve thy hands."

  Then thus the goddess-born: "Ulysses, hear
  A faithful speech, that knows nor art nor fear;
  What in my secret soul is understood,
  My tongue shall utter, and my deeds make good.
  Let Greece then know, my purpose I retain:
  Nor with new treaties vex my peace in vain.
  Who dares think one thing, and another tell,
  My heart detests him as the gates of hell.

  "Then thus in short my fix'd resolves attend,
  Which nor Atrides nor his Greeks can bend;
  Long toils, long perils in their cause I bore,
  But now the unfruitful glories charm no more.
  Fight or not fight, a like reward we claim,
  The wretch and hero find their prize the same.
  Alike regretted in the dust he lies,
  Who yields ignobly, or who bravely dies.
  Of all my dangers, all my glorious pains,
  A life of labours, lo! what fruit remains?
  As the bold bird her helpless young attends,
  From danger guards them, and from want defends;
  In search of prey she wings the spacious air,
  And with the untasted food supplies her care:
  For thankless Greece such hardships have I braved,
  Her wives, her infants, by my labours saved;
  Long sleepless nights in heavy arms I stood,
  And sweat laborious days in dust and blood.
  I sack'd twelve ample cities on the main,(207)
  And twelve lay smoking on the Trojan plain:
  Then at Atrides' haughty feet were laid
  The wealth I gathered, and the spoils I made.
  Your mighty monarch these in peace possess'd;
  Some few my soldiers had, himself the rest.
  Some present, too, to every prince was paid;
  And every prince enjoys the gift he made:
  I only must refund, of all his train;
  See what pre-eminence our merits gain!
  My spoil alone his greedy soul delights:
  My spouse alone must bless his lustful nights:
  The woman, let him (as he may) enjoy;
  But what's the quarrel, then, of Greece to Troy?
  What to these shores the assembled nations draws,
  What calls for vengeance but a woman's cause?
  Are fair endowments and a beauteous face
  Beloved by none but those of Atreus' race?
  The wife whom choice and passion doth approve,
  Sure every wise and worthy man will love.
  Nor did my fair one less distinction claim;
  Slave as she was, my soul adored the dame.
  Wrong'd in my love, all proffers I disdain;
  Deceived for once, I trust not kings again.
  Ye have my answer--what remains to do,
  Your king, Ulysses, may consult with you.
  What needs he the defence this arm can make?
  Has he not walls no human force can shake?
  Has he not fenced his guarded navy round
  With piles, with ramparts, and a trench profound?
  And will not these (the wonders he has done)
  Repel the rage of Priam's single son?
  There was a time ('twas when for Greece I fought)
  When Hector's prowess no such wonders wrought;
  He kept the verge of Troy, nor dared to wait
  Achilles' fury at the Scaean gate;
  He tried it once, and scarce was saved by fate.
  But now those ancient enmities are o'er;
  To-morrow we the favouring gods implore;
  Then shall you see our parting vessels crown'd,
  And hear with oars the Hellespont resound.
  The third day hence shall Pthia greet our sails,(208)
  If mighty Neptune send propitious gales;
  Pthia to her Achilles shall restore
  The wealth he left for this detested shore:
  Thither the spoils of this long war shall pass,
  The ruddy gold, the steel, and shining brass:
  My beauteous captives thither I'll convey,
  And all that rests of my unravish'd prey.
  One only valued gift your tyrant gave,
  And that resumed--the fair Lyrnessian slave.
  Then tell him: loud, that all the Greeks may hear,
  And learn to scorn the wretch they basely fear;
  (For arm'd in impudence, mankind he braves,
  And meditates new cheats on all his slaves;
  Though shameless as he is, to face these eyes
  Is what he dares not: if he dares he dies;)
  Tell him, all terms, all commerce I decline,
  Nor share his council, nor his battle join;
  For once deceiv'd, was his; but twice were mine,
  No--let the stupid prince, whom Jove deprives
  Of sense and justice, run where frenzy drives;
  His gifts are hateful: kings of such a kind
  Stand but as slaves before a noble mind,
  Not though he proffer'd all himself possess'd,
  And all his rapine could from others wrest:
  Not all the golden tides of wealth that crown
  The many-peopled Orchomenian town;(209)
  Not all proud Thebes' unrivall'd walls contain,
  The world's great empress on the Egyptian plain
  (That spreads her conquests o'er a thousand states,
  And pours her heroes through a hundred gates,
  Two hundred horsemen and two hundred cars
  From each wide portal issuing to the wars);(210)
  Though bribes were heap'd on bribes, in number more
  Than dust in fields, or sands along the shore;
  Should all these offers for my friendship call,
  'Tis he that offers, and I scorn them all.
  Atrides' daughter never shall be led
  (An ill-match'd consort) to Achilles' bed;
  Like golden Venus though she charm'd the heart,
  And vied with Pallas in the works of art;
  Some greater Greek let those high nuptials grace,
  I hate alliance with a tyrant's race.
  If heaven restore me to my realms with life,
  The reverend Peleus shall elect my wife;
  Thessalian nymphs there are of form divine,
  And kings that sue to mix their blood with mine.
  Bless'd in kind love, my years shall glide away,
  Content with just hereditary sway;
  There, deaf for ever to the martial strife,
  Enjoy the dear prerogative of life.
  Life is not to be bought with heaps of gold.
  Not all Apollo's Pythian treasures hold,
  Or Troy once held, in peace and pride of sway,
  Can bribe the poor possession of a day!
  Lost herds and treasures we by arms regain,
  And steeds unrivall'd on the dusty plain:
  But from our lips the vital spirit fled,
  Returns no more to wake the silent dead.
  My fates long since by Thetis were disclosed,
  And each alternate, life or fame, proposed;
  Here, if I stay, before the Trojan town,
  Short is my date, but deathless my renown:
  If I return, I quit immortal praise
  For years on years, and long-extended days.
  Convinced, though late, I find my fond mistake,
  And warn the Greeks the wiser choice to make;
  To quit these shores, their native seats enjoy,
  Nor hope the fall of heaven-defended Troy.
  Jove's arm display'd asserts her from the skies!
  Her hearts are strengthen'd, and her glories rise.
  Go then to Greece, report our fix'd design;
  Bid all your counsels, all your armies join,
  Let all your forces, all your arts conspire,
  To save the ships, the troops, the chiefs, from fire.
  One stratagem has fail'd, and others will:
  Ye find, Achilles is unconquer'd still.
  Go then--digest my message as ye may--
  But here this night let reverend Phoenix stay:
  His tedious toils and hoary hairs demand
  A peaceful death in Pthia's friendly land.
  But whether he remain or sail with me,
  His age be sacred, and his will be free."

                      [Illustration: GREEK GALLEY.]

                              GREEK GALLEY.


  The son of Peleus ceased: the chiefs around
  In silence wrapt, in consternation drown'd,
  Attend the stern reply. Then Phoenix rose;
  (Down his white beard a stream of sorrow flows;)
  And while the fate of suffering Greece he mourn'd,
  With accent weak these tender words return'd.

                       [Illustration: PROSERPINE.]

                               PROSERPINE.


  "Divine Achilles! wilt thou then retire,
  And leave our hosts in blood, our fleets on fire?
  If wrath so dreadful fill thy ruthless mind,
  How shall thy friend, thy Phoenix, stay behind?
  The royal Peleus, when from Pthia's coast
  He sent thee early to the Achaian host;
  Thy youth as then in sage debates unskill'd,
  And new to perils of the direful field:
  He bade me teach thee all the ways of war,
  To shine in councils, and in camps to dare.
  Never, ah, never let me leave thy side!
