Our story took place at a period, when the Directors of the East India
Company, with that hardy and persevering policy which has raised to such
a height the British Empire in the East, had determined to send a large
reinforcement of European troops to the support of their power in India,
then threatened by the kingdom of Mysore, of which the celebrated
Hyder Ali had usurped the government, after dethroning his master.
Considerable difficulty was found in obtaining recruits for that
service. Those who might have been otherwise disposed to be soldiers,
were afraid of the climate, and of the species of banishment which the
engagement implied; and doubted also how far the engagements of the
Company might be faithfully observed towards them, when they were
removed from the protection of the British laws. For these and other
reasons, the military service of the King was preferred, and that of the
Company could only procure the worst recruits, although their zealous
agents scrupled not to employ the worst means. Indeed the practice of
kidnapping, or crimping, as it is technically called, was at that time
general, whether for the colonies, or even for the King's troops; and
as the agents employed in such transactions must be of course entirely
unscrupulous, there was not only much villany committed in the direct
prosecution of the trade, but it gave rise incidentally to remarkable
cases of robbery, and even murder. Such atrocities were of course
concealed from the authorities for whom the levies were made, and the
necessity of obtaining soldiers made men, whose conduct was otherwise
unexceptionable, cold in looking closely into the mode in which their
recruiting service was conducted.

The principal depot of the troops which were by these means assembled,
was in the Isle of Wight, where the season proving unhealthy, and the
men themselves being many of them of a bad habit of body, a fever of a
malignant character broke out amongst them, and speedily crowded with
patients the military hospital, of which Mr. Seelencooper, himself
an old and experienced crimp and kidnapper, had obtained the
superintendence. Irregularities began to take place also among the
soldiers who remained healthy, and the necessity of subjecting them to
some discipline before they sailed was so evident, that several officers
of the Company's naval service expressed their belief that otherwise
there would be dangerous mutinies on the passage.

To remedy the first of these evils, the Court of Directors sent down to
the island several of their medical servants, amongst whom was Hartley,
whose qualifications had been amply certified by a medical board, before
which he had passed an examination, besides his possessing a diploma
from the University of Edinburgh as M. D.

To enforce the discipline of their soldiers, the Court committed full
power to one of their own body, General Witherington. The General was
an officer who had distinguished himself highly in their service. He
had returned from India five or six years before, with a large fortune,
which he had rendered much greater by an advantageous marriage with a
rich heiress. The General and his lady went little into society, but
seemed to live entirely for their infant family, those in number being
three, two boys and a girl. Although he had retired from the service, he
willingly undertook the temporary charge committed to him, and taking a
house at a considerable distance from the town of Ryde, he proceeded to
enrol the troops into separate bodies, appoint officers of capacity to
each, and by regular training and discipline, gradually to bring them
into something resembling good order. He heard their complaints of ill
usage in the articles of provisions and appointments, and did them upon
all occasions the strictest justice, save that he was never known to
restore one recruit to his freedom from the service, however unfairly or
even illegally his attestation might have been obtained.

"It is none of my business," said General Witherington, "how you became
soldiers,--soldiers I found you, and soldiers I will leave you. But I
will take especial care, that as soldiers you shall have every thing,
to a penny or a pin's head, that you are justly entitled to." He went
to work without fear or favour, reported many abuses to the Board of
Directors, had several officers, commissaries, &c. removed from the
service, and made his name as great a terror to the peculators at home,
as it had been to the enemies of Britain in Hindostan.

Captain Seelencooper, and his associates in the hospital department,
heard and trembled, fearing that their turn should come next; but
the General, who elsewhere examined all with his own eyes, showed a
reluctance to visit the hospital in person. Public report industriously
imputed this to fear of infection. Such was certainly the motive; though
it was not fear for his own safety that influenced General Witherington,
but he dreaded lest he should carry the infection home to the nursery,
on which he doated. The alarm of his lady was yet more unreasonably
sensitive: she would scarcely suffer the children to walk abroad, if the
wind but blew from the quarter where the hospital was situated.

But Providence baffles the precautions of mortals. In a walk across the
fields, chosen as the most sheltered and sequestered, the children, with
their train of Eastern and European attendants, met a woman who carried
a child that was recovering from the small-pox. The anxiety of the
father, joined to some religious scruples on the mother's part, had
postponed inoculation, which was then scarcely come into general use.
The infection caught like a quick-match, and ran like wildfire through
all those in the family who had not previously had the disease. One of
the General's children, the second boy, died, and two of the Ayas, or
black female servants, had the same fate. The hearts of the father and
mother would have been broken for the child they had lost, had not their
grief been suspended by anxiety for the fate of those who lived, and
who were confessed to be in imminent danger. They were like persons
distracted, as the symptoms of the poor patients appeared gradually to
resemble more nearly that of the child already lost.

While the parents were in this agony of apprehension, the General's
principal servant, a native of Northumberland like himself, informed him
one morning that there was a young man from the same county among the
hospital doctors, who had publicly blamed the mode of treatment observed
towards the patients, and spoken of another which he had seen practised
with eminent success.

"Some impudent quack," said the General, "who would force himself into
business by bold assertions. Doctor Tourniquet and Doctor Lancelot are
men of high reputation."

"Do not mention their reputation," said the mother, with a mother's
impatience, "did they not let my sweet Reuben die? What avails the
reputation of the physician, when the patient perisheth?"

"If his honour would but see Doctor Hartley," said Winter, turning half
towards the lady, then turning back again to his master. "He is a very
decent young man, who, I am sure, never expected what he said to reach
your honour's ears;--and he is a native of Northumberland."

"Send a servant with a led horse," said the General; "let the young man
come hither instantly."

It is well known, that the ancient mode of treating the small-pox was to
refuse to the patient every thing which Nature urged him to desire;
and, in particular, to confine him to heated rooms, beds loaded with
blankets, and spiced wine, when Nature called for cold water and fresh
air. A different mode of treatment had of late been adventured upon by
some practitioners, who preferred reason to authority, and Gideon Gray
had followed it for several years with extraordinary success.

When General Witherington saw Hartley, he was startled at his youth; but
when he heard him modestly, but with confidence, state the difference
of the two modes of treatment, and the rationale of his practice, he
listened with the most serious attention. So did his lady, her streaming
eyes turning from Hartley to her husband, as if to watch what impression
the arguments of the former were making upon the latter. General
Witherington was silent for a few minutes after Hartley had finished
his exposition, and seemed buried in profound reflection. "To treat a
fever," he said, "in a manner which tends to produce one, seems indeed
to be adding fuel to fire."

"It is--it is," said the lady. "Let us trust this young man, General
Witherington. We shall at least give our darlings the comforts of the
fresh air and cold water, for which they are pining."

But the General remained undecided. "Your reasoning," he said to
Hartley, "seems plausible; but still it is only hypothesis. What can you
show to support your theory, in opposition to the general practice?"

"My own observation," replied the young man. "Here is a memorandum-book
of medical cases which I have witnessed. It contains twenty cases of
small-pox, of which eighteen were recoveries."

"And the two others?" said the General.

"Terminated fatally," replied Hartley; "we can as yet but partially
disarm this scourge of the human race."

"Young man," continued the General, "were I to say that a thousand gold
mohrs were yours in case my children live under your treatment, what
have you to peril in exchange?"

"My reputation," answered Hartley, firmly.

"And you could warrant on your reputation the recovery of your
patients?"

"God forbid I should be presumptuous! But I think I could warrant my
using those means, which, with God's blessing, afford the fairest chance
of a favourable result."

"Enough--you are modest and sensible, as well as bold, and I will trust
you."

The lady, on whom Hartley's words and manner had made a great
impression, and who was eager to discontinue a mode of treatment which
subjected the patients to the greatest pain and privation, and had
already proved unfortunate, eagerly acquiesced, and Hartley was placed
in full authority in the sick room.

Windows were thrown open, fires reduced or discontinued, loads of
bed-clothes removed, cooling drinks superseded mulled wine and spices.
The sick-nurses cried out murder. Doctors Tourniquet and Lancelot
retired in disgust, menacing something like a general pestilence, in
vengeance of what they termed rebellion against the neglect of the
aphorisms of Hippocrates. Hartley proceeded quietly and steadily, and
the patients got into a fair road of recovery.

The young Northumbrian was neither conceited nor artful; yet, with all
his plainness of character, he could not but know the influence which
a successful physician obtains over the parents of the children whom
he has saved from the grave, and especially before the cure is actually
completed. He resolved to use this influence in behalf of his old
companion, trusting that the military tenacity of General Witherington
would give way on consideration of the obligation so lately conferred
upon him.

On his way to the General's house, which was at present his constant
place of residence, he examined the package which Middlemas had put into
his hand. It contained the picture of Menie Gray, plainly set, and the
ring, with brilliants, which Doctor Gray had given to Richard, as his
mother's last gift. The first of these tokens extracted from honest
Hartley a sigh, perhaps a tear of sad remembrance. "I fear," he said,
"she has not chosen worthily; but she shall be happy, if I can make her
so."

Arrived at the residence of General Witherington, our Doctor went first
to the sick apartment, and then carried to their parents the delightful
account, that the recovery of the children might be considered as
certain.

"May the God of Israel bless thee, young man!" said the lady, trembling
with emotion; "thou hast wiped the tear from the eye of the despairing
mother. And yet--alas! alas! still it must flow when I think of
my cherub Reuben.--Oh! Mr. Hartley, why did we not know you a week
sooner!--my darling had not then died."

"God gives and takes away, my lady," answered Hartley; "and you must
remember that two are restored to you out of three. It is far from
certain, that the treatment I have used towards the convalescents would
have brought through their brother; for the case, as reported to me, waa
of a very inveterate description."

"Doctor," said Witherington, his voice testifying more emotion than he
usually or willingly gave way to, "you can comfort the sick in spirit as
well as the sick in body. But it is time we settle our wager. You betted
your reputation, which remains with you, increased by all the credit
due to your eminent success, against a thousand gold mohrs, the value of
which you will find in that pocketbook."

"General Witherington," said Hartley, "you are wealthy, and entitled
to be generous--I am poor, and not entitled to decline whatever may be,
even in a liberal sense, a compensation for my professional attendance.
But there is a bound to extravagance, both in giving and accepting; and
I must not hazard the newly acquired reputation with which you flatter
me, by giving room to have it said, that I fleeced the parents, when
their feelings were all afloat with anxiety for their children.--Allow
me to divide this large sum; one half I will thankfully retain, as a
most liberal recompense for my labour; and if you still think you owe
me any thing, let me have it in the advantage of your good opinion and
countenance."

"If I acquiesce in your proposal, Doctor Hartley," said the General,
reluctantly receiving back a part of the contents of the pocketbook, "it
is because I hope to serve you with my interest, even better than with
my purse."

"And indeed, sir," replied Hartley, "it was upon your interest that I am
just about to make a small claim."

The General and his lady spoke both in the same breath, to assure him
his boon was granted before asked.

"I am not so sure of that," said Hartley; "for it respects a point on
which I have heard say, that your Excellency is rather inflexible--the
discharge of a recruit."

"My duty makes me so," replied the General--"You know the sort of
fellows that we are obliged to content ourselves with--they get
drunk--grow pot-valiant--enlist over-night, and repent next morning. If
I am to dismiss all those who pretend to have been trepanned, we should
have few volunteers remain behind. Every one has some idle story of the
promises of a swaggering sergeant Kite--It is impossible to attend to
them. But let me hear yours, however."

"Mine is a very singular case. The party has been robbed of a thousand
pounds."

"A recruit for this service possessing a thousand pounds! My dear
Doctor, depend upon it, the fellow has gulled you. Bless my heart,
would a man who had a thousand pounds think of enlisting as a private
sentinel?"

"He had no such thoughts," answered Hartley. "He was persuaded by the
rogue whom he trusted, that he was to have a commission."

"Then his friend must have been Tom Hillary, or the devil; for no other
could possess so much cunning and impudence. He will certainly find
his way to the gallows at last. Still this story of the thousand pounds
seems a touch even beyond Tom Hillary. What reason have you to think
that this fellow ever had such a sum of money?"

"I have the best reason to know it for certain," answered Hartley; "he
and I served our time together, under the same excellent master; and
when he came of age, not liking the profession which he had studied,
and obtaining possession of his little fortune, he was deceived by the
promises of this same Hillary."

"Who has had him locked up in our well-ordered hospital yonder?" said
the General.

"Even so, please your Excellency," replied Hartley; "not, I think, to
cure him of any complaint, but to give him the opportunity of catching
one, which would silence all enquiries."

"The matter shall be closely looked into. But how miserably careless the
young man's friends must have been to let a raw lad go into the world
with such a companion and guide as Tom Hillary, and such a sum as a
thousand pounds in his pocket. His parents had better have knocked him
on the head. It certainly was not done like canny Northumberland, as my
servant Winter calls it."

"The youth must indeed have had strangely hard-hearted, or careless
parents," said Mrs. Witherington, in accents of pity.

"He never knew them, madam," said Hartley; "there was a mystery on the
score of his birth. A cold, unwilling, and almost unknown hand, dealt
him out his portion when he came of lawful age, and he was pushed into
the world like a bark forced from shore, without rudder, compass, or
pilot."

Here General Witherington involuntarily looked to his lady, while,
guided by a similar impulse, her looks were turned upon him. They
exchanged a momentary glance of deep and peculiar meaning, and then the
eyes of both were fixed on the ground.

"Were you brought up in Scotland?" said the lady, addressing herself, in
a faltering voice, to Hartley--"And what was your master's name?"

"I served my apprenticeship with Mr. Gideon Gray of the town of
Middlemas," said Hartley.

"Middlemas! Gray?" repeated the lady, and fainted away.

Hartley offered the succours of his profession; the husband flew to
support her head, and the instant that Mrs. Witherington began to
recover, he whispered to her, in a tone betwixt entreaty and warning,
"Zilia, beware--beware!"

Some imperfect sounds which she had begun to frame, died away upon her
tongue.

"Let me assist you to your dressing-room, my love," said her obviously
anxious husband.

She arose with the action of an automaton, which moves at a touch of a
spring, and half hanging upon her husband, half dragging herself on by
her own efforts, had nearly reached the door of the room, when Hartley
following, asked if he could be of any service.

"No, sir," said the General, sternly; "this is no case for a stranger's
interference; when you are wanted I will send for you."

Hartley stepped back on receiving a rebuff in a tone so different from
that which General Witherington had used towards him in their previous
intercourse, and felt disposed for the first time, to give credit to
public report, which assigned to that gentleman, with several good
qualities, the character of a very proud and haughty man. Hitherto, he
thought, I have seen him tamed by sorrow and anxiety, now the mind is
regaining its natural tension. But he must in decency interest himself
for this unhappy Middlemas.

The General returned into the apartment a minute or two afterwards, and
addressed Hartley in his usual tone of politeness, though apparently
still under great embarrassment, which he in vain endeavoured to
conceal.

"Mrs. Witherington is better," he said, "and will be glad to see you
before dinner. You dine with us, I hope?"

Hartley bowed.

"Mrs. Witherington is rather subject to this sort of nervous fits, and
she has been much harassed of late by grief and apprehension. When she
recovers from them it is a few minutes before she can collect her ideas,
and during such intervals--to speak very confidentially to you, my dear
Doctor Hartley--she speaks sometimes about imaginary events which have
never happened, and sometimes about distressing occurrences in an early
period of life. I am not, therefore, willing that any one but myself, or
her old attendant Mrs. Lopez, should be with her on such occasions."

