WARRENNE, Earl of Surrey, then went on to the Castle of Dunbar, before
which a battle was fought, and the whole Scottish army defeated with
great slaughter.  The victory being complete, the Earl of Surrey was left
as guardian of Scotland; the principal offices in that kingdom were given
to Englishmen; the more powerful Scottish Nobles were obliged to come and
live in England; the Scottish crown and sceptre were brought away; and
even the old stone chair was carried off and placed in Westminster Abbey,
where you may see it now.  Baliol had the Tower of London lent him for a
residence, with permission to range about within a circle of twenty
miles.  Three years afterwards he was allowed to go to Normandy, where he
had estates, and where he passed the remaining six years of his life: far
more happily, I dare say, than he had lived for a long while in angry
Scotland.

Now, there was, in the West of Scotland, a gentleman of small fortune,
named WILLIAM WALLACE, the second son of a Scottish knight.  He was a man
of great size and great strength; he was very brave and daring; when he
spoke to a body of his countrymen, he could rouse them in a wonderful
manner by the power of his burning words; he loved Scotland dearly, and
he hated England with his utmost might.  The domineering conduct of the
English who now held the places of trust in Scotland made them as
intolerable to the proud Scottish people as they had been, under similar
circumstances, to the Welsh; and no man in all Scotland regarded them
with so much smothered rage as William Wallace.  One day, an Englishman
in office, little knowing what he was, affronted _him_.  Wallace
instantly struck him dead, and taking refuge among the rocks and hills,
and there joining with his countryman, SIR WILLIAM DOUGLAS, who was also
in arms against King Edward, became the most resolute and undaunted
champion of a people struggling for their independence that ever lived
upon the earth.

The English Guardian of the Kingdom fled before him, and, thus
encouraged, the Scottish people revolted everywhere, and fell upon the
English without mercy.  The Earl of Surrey, by the King's commands,
raised all the power of the Border-counties, and two English armies
poured into Scotland.  Only one Chief, in the face of those armies, stood
by Wallace, who, with a force of forty thousand men, awaited the invaders
at a place on the river Forth, within two miles of Stirling.  Across the
river there was only one poor wooden bridge, called the bridge of
Kildean--so narrow, that but two men could cross it abreast.  With his
eyes upon this bridge, Wallace posted the greater part of his men among
some rising grounds, and waited calmly.  When the English army came up on
the opposite bank of the river, messengers were sent forward to offer
terms.  Wallace sent them back with a defiance, in the name of the
freedom of Scotland.  Some of the officers of the Earl of Surrey in
command of the English, with _their_ eyes also on the bridge, advised him
to be discreet and not hasty.  He, however, urged to immediate battle by
some other officers, and particularly by CRESSINGHAM, King Edward's
treasurer, and a rash man, gave the word of command to advance.  One
thousand English crossed the bridge, two abreast; the Scottish troops
were as motionless as stone images.  Two thousand English crossed; three
thousand, four thousand, five.  Not a feather, all this time, had been
seen to stir among the Scottish bonnets.  Now, they all fluttered.
'Forward, one party, to the foot of the Bridge!' cried Wallace, 'and let
no more English cross!  The rest, down with me on the five thousand who
have come over, and cut them all to pieces!'  It was done, in the sight
of the whole remainder of the English army, who could give no help.
Cressingham himself was killed, and the Scotch made whips for their
horses of his skin.

King Edward was abroad at this time, and during the successes on the
Scottish side which followed, and which enabled bold Wallace to win the
whole country back again, and even to ravage the English borders.  But,
after a few winter months, the King returned, and took the field with
more than his usual energy.  One night, when a kick from his horse as
they both lay on the ground together broke two of his ribs, and a cry
arose that he was killed, he leaped into his saddle, regardless of the
pain he suffered, and rode through the camp.  Day then appearing, he gave
the word (still, of course, in that bruised and aching state) Forward!
and led his army on to near Falkirk, where the Scottish forces were seen
drawn up on some stony ground, behind a morass.  Here, he defeated
Wallace, and killed fifteen thousand of his men.  With the shattered
remainder, Wallace drew back to Stirling; but, being pursued, set fire to
the town that it might give no help to the English, and escaped.  The
inhabitants of Perth afterwards set fire to their houses for the same
reason, and the King, unable to find provisions, was forced to withdraw
his army.

Another ROBERT BRUCE, the grandson of him who had disputed the Scottish
crown with Baliol, was now in arms against the King (that elder Bruce
being dead), and also JOHN COMYN, Baliol's nephew.  These two young men
might agree in opposing Edward, but could agree in nothing else, as they
were rivals for the throne of Scotland.  Probably it was because they
knew this, and knew what troubles must arise even if they could hope to
get the better of the great English King, that the principal Scottish
people applied to the Pope for his interference.  The Pope, on the
principle of losing nothing for want of trying to get it, very coolly
claimed that Scotland belonged to him; but this was a little too much,
and the Parliament in a friendly manner told him so.

In the spring time of the year one thousand three hundred and three, the
King sent SIR JOHN SEGRAVE, whom he made Governor of Scotland, with
twenty thousand men, to reduce the rebels.  Sir John was not as careful
as he should have been, but encamped at Rosslyn, near Edinburgh, with his
army divided into three parts.  The Scottish forces saw their advantage;
fell on each part separately; defeated each; and killed all the
prisoners.  Then, came the King himself once more, as soon as a great
army could be raised; he passed through the whole north of Scotland,
laying waste whatsoever came in his way; and he took up his winter
quarters at Dunfermline.  The Scottish cause now looked so hopeless, that
Comyn and the other nobles made submission and received their pardons.
Wallace alone stood out.  He was invited to surrender, though on no
distinct pledge that his life should be spared; but he still defied the
ireful King, and lived among the steep crags of the Highland glens, where
the eagles made their nests, and where the mountain torrents roared, and
the white snow was deep, and the bitter winds blew round his unsheltered
head, as he lay through many a pitch-dark night wrapped up in his plaid.
Nothing could break his spirit; nothing could lower his courage; nothing
could induce him to forget or to forgive his country's wrongs.  Even when
the Castle of Stirling, which had long held out, was besieged by the King
with every kind of military engine then in use; even when the lead upon
cathedral roofs was taken down to help to make them; even when the King,
though an old man, commanded in the siege as if he were a youth, being so
resolved to conquer; even when the brave garrison (then found with
amazement to be not two hundred people, including several ladies) were
starved and beaten out and were made to submit on their knees, and with
every form of disgrace that could aggravate their sufferings; even then,
when there was not a ray of hope in Scotland, William Wallace was as
proud and firm as if he had beheld the powerful and relentless Edward
lying dead at his feet.

Who betrayed William Wallace in the end, is not quite certain.  That he
was betrayed--probably by an attendant--is too true.  He was taken to the
Castle of Dumbarton, under SIR JOHN MENTEITH, and thence to London, where
the great fame of his bravery and resolution attracted immense concourses
of people to behold him.  He was tried in Westminster Hall, with a crown
of laurel on his head--it is supposed because he was reported to have
said that he ought to wear, or that he would wear, a crown there and was
found guilty as a robber, a murderer, and a traitor.  What they called a
robber (he said to those who tried him) he was, because he had taken
spoil from the King's men.  What they called a murderer, he was, because
he had slain an insolent Englishman.  What they called a traitor, he was
not, for he had never sworn allegiance to the King, and had ever scorned
to do it.  He was dragged at the tails of horses to West Smithfield, and
there hanged on a high gallows, torn open before he was dead, beheaded,
and quartered.  His head was set upon a pole on London Bridge, his right
arm was sent to Newcastle, his left arm to Berwick, his legs to Perth and
Aberdeen.  But, if King Edward had had his body cut into inches, and had
sent every separate inch into a separate town, he could not have
dispersed it half so far and wide as his fame.  Wallace will be
remembered in songs and stories, while there are songs and stories in the
English tongue, and Scotland will hold him dear while her lakes and
mountains last.

Released from this dreaded enemy, the King made a fairer plan of
Government for Scotland, divided the offices of honour among Scottish
gentlemen and English gentlemen, forgave past offences, and thought, in
his old age, that his work was done.

But he deceived himself.  Comyn and Bruce conspired, and made an
appointment to meet at Dumfries, in the church of the Minorites.  There
is a story that Comyn was false to Bruce, and had informed against him to
the King; that Bruce was warned of his danger and the necessity of
flight, by receiving, one night as he sat at supper, from his friend the
Earl of Gloucester, twelve pennies and a pair of spurs; that as he was
riding angrily to keep his appointment (through a snow-storm, with his
horse's shoes reversed that he might not be tracked), he met an
evil-looking serving man, a messenger of Comyn, whom he killed, and
concealed in whose dress he found letters that proved Comyn's treachery.
However this may be, they were likely enough to quarrel in any case,
being hot-headed rivals; and, whatever they quarrelled about, they
certainly did quarrel in the church where they met, and Bruce drew his
dagger and stabbed Comyn, who fell upon the pavement.  When Bruce came
out, pale and disturbed, the friends who were waiting for him asked what
was the matter?  'I think I have killed Comyn,' said he.  'You only think
so?' returned one of them; 'I will make sure!' and going into the church,
and finding him alive, stabbed him again and again.  Knowing that the
King would never forgive this new deed of violence, the party then
declared Bruce King of Scotland: got him crowned at Scone--without the
chair; and set up the rebellious standard once again.

When the King heard of it he kindled with fiercer anger than he had ever
shown yet.  He caused the Prince of Wales and two hundred and seventy of
the young nobility to be knighted--the trees in the Temple Gardens were
cut down to make room for their tents, and they watched their armour all
night, according to the old usage: some in the Temple Church: some in
Westminster Abbey--and at the public Feast which then took place, he
swore, by Heaven, and by two swans covered with gold network which his
minstrels placed upon the table, that he would avenge the death of Comyn,
and would punish the false Bruce.  And before all the company, he charged
the Prince his son, in case that he should die before accomplishing his
vow, not to bury him until it was fulfilled.  Next morning the Prince and
the rest of the young Knights rode away to the Border-country to join the
English army; and the King, now weak and sick, followed in a
horse-litter.

Bruce, after losing a battle and undergoing many dangers and much misery,
fled to Ireland, where he lay concealed through the winter.  That winter,
Edward passed in hunting down and executing Bruce's relations and
adherents, sparing neither youth nor age, and showing no touch of pity or
sign of mercy.  In the following spring, Bruce reappeared and gained some
victories.  In these frays, both sides were grievously cruel.  For
instance--Bruce's two brothers, being taken captives desperately wounded,
were ordered by the King to instant execution.  Bruce's friend Sir John
Douglas, taking his own Castle of Douglas out of the hands of an English
Lord, roasted the dead bodies of the slaughtered garrison in a great fire
made of every movable within it; which dreadful cookery his men called
the Douglas Larder.  Bruce, still successful, however, drove the Earl of
Pembroke and the Earl of Gloucester into the Castle of Ayr and laid siege
to it.

The King, who had been laid up all the winter, but had directed the army
from his sick-bed, now advanced to Carlisle, and there, causing the
litter in which he had travelled to be placed in the Cathedral as an
offering to Heaven, mounted his horse once more, and for the last time.
He was now sixty-nine years old, and had reigned thirty-five years.  He
was so ill, that in four days he could go no more than six miles; still,
even at that pace, he went on and resolutely kept his face towards the
Border.  At length, he lay down at the village of Burgh-upon-Sands; and
there, telling those around him to impress upon the Prince that he was to
remember his father's vow, and was never to rest until he had thoroughly
subdued Scotland, he yielded up his last breath.




CHAPTER XVII--ENGLAND UNDER EDWARD THE SECOND


King Edward the Second, the first Prince of Wales, was twenty-three years
old when his father died.  There was a certain favourite of his, a young
man from Gascony, named PIERS GAVESTON, of whom his father had so much
disapproved that he had ordered him out of England, and had made his son
swear by the side of his sick-bed, never to bring him back.  But, the
Prince no sooner found himself King, than he broke his oath, as so many
other Princes and Kings did (they were far too ready to take oaths), and
sent for his dear friend immediately.

Now, this same Gaveston was handsome enough, but was a reckless,
insolent, audacious fellow.  He was detested by the proud English Lords:
not only because he had such power over the King, and made the Court such
a dissipated place, but, also, because he could ride better than they at
tournaments, and was used, in his impudence, to cut very bad jokes on
them; calling one, the old hog; another, the stage-player; another, the
Jew; another, the black dog of Ardenne.  This was as poor wit as need be,
but it made those Lords very wroth; and the surly Earl of Warwick, who
was the black dog, swore that the time should come when Piers Gaveston
should feel the black dog's teeth.

It was not come yet, however, nor did it seem to be coming.  The King
made him Earl of Cornwall, and gave him vast riches; and, when the King
went over to France to marry the French Princess, ISABELLA, daughter of
PHILIP LE BEL: who was said to be the most beautiful woman in the world:
he made Gaveston, Regent of the Kingdom.  His splendid marriage-ceremony
in the Church of Our Lady at Boulogne, where there were four Kings and
three Queens present (quite a pack of Court Cards, for I dare say the
Knaves were not wanting), being over, he seemed to care little or nothing
for his beautiful wife; but was wild with impatience to meet Gaveston
again.

When he landed at home, he paid no attention to anybody else, but ran
into the favourite's arms before a great concourse of people, and hugged
him, and kissed him, and called him his brother.  At the coronation which
soon followed, Gaveston was the richest and brightest of all the
glittering company there, and had the honour of carrying the crown.  This
made the proud Lords fiercer than ever; the people, too, despised the
favourite, and would never call him Earl of Cornwall, however much he
complained to the King and asked him to punish them for not doing so, but
persisted in styling him plain Piers Gaveston.

The Barons were so unceremonious with the King in giving him to
understand that they would not bear this favourite, that the King was
obliged to send him out of the country.  The favourite himself was made
to take an oath (more oaths!) that he would never come back, and the
Barons supposed him to be banished in disgrace, until they heard that he
was appointed Governor of Ireland.  Even this was not enough for the
besotted King, who brought him home again in a year's time, and not only
disgusted the Court and the people by his doting folly, but offended his
beautiful wife too, who never liked him afterwards.

He had now the old Royal want--of money--and the Barons had the new power
of positively refusing to let him raise any.  He summoned a Parliament at
York; the Barons refused to make one, while the favourite was near him.
He summoned another Parliament at Westminster, and sent Gaveston away.
Then, the Barons came, completely armed, and appointed a committee of
themselves to correct abuses in the state and in the King's household.  He
got some money on these conditions, and directly set off with Gaveston to
the Border-country, where they spent it in idling away the time, and
feasting, while Bruce made ready to drive the English out of Scotland.
For, though the old King had even made this poor weak son of his swear
(as some say) that he would not bury his bones, but would have them
boiled clean in a caldron, and carried before the English army until
Scotland was entirely subdued, the second Edward was so unlike the first
that Bruce gained strength and power every day.

The committee of Nobles, after some months of deliberation, ordained that
the King should henceforth call a Parliament together, once every year,
and even twice if necessary, instead of summoning it only when he chose.
Further, that Gaveston should once more be banished, and, this time, on
pain of death if he ever came back.  The King's tears were of no avail;
he was obliged to send his favourite to Flanders.  As soon as he had done
so, however, he dissolved the Parliament, with the low cunning of a mere
fool, and set off to the North of England, thinking to get an army about
him to oppose the Nobles.  And once again he brought Gaveston home, and
heaped upon him all the riches and titles of which the Barons had
deprived him.

The Lords saw, now, that there was nothing for it but to put the
favourite to death.  They could have done so, legally, according to the
terms of his banishment; but they did so, I am sorry to say, in a shabby
manner.  Led by the Earl of Lancaster, the King's cousin, they first of
all attacked the King and Gaveston at Newcastle.  They had time to escape
by sea, and the mean King, having his precious Gaveston with him, was
quite content to leave his lovely wife behind.  When they were
comparatively safe, they separated; the King went to York to collect a
force of soldiers; and the favourite shut himself up, in the meantime, in
Scarborough Castle overlooking the sea.  This was what the Barons wanted.
They knew that the Castle could not hold out; they attacked it, and made
Gaveston surrender.  He delivered himself up to the Earl of Pembroke--that
Lord whom he had called the Jew--on the Earl's pledging his faith and
knightly word, that no harm should happen to him and no violence be done
him.

Now, it was agreed with Gaveston that he should be taken to the Castle of
Wallingford, and there kept in honourable custody.  They travelled as far
as Dedington, near Banbury, where, in the Castle of that place, they
stopped for a night to rest.  Whether the Earl of Pembroke left his
prisoner there, knowing what would happen, or really left him thinking no
harm, and only going (as he pretended) to visit his wife, the Countess,
who was in the neighbourhood, is no great matter now; in any case, he was
bound as an honourable gentleman to protect his prisoner, and he did not
do it.  In the morning, while the favourite was yet in bed, he was
required to dress himself and come down into the court-yard.  He did so
without any mistrust, but started and turned pale when he found it full
of strange armed men.  'I think you know me?' said their leader, also
armed from head to foot.  'I am the black dog of Ardenne!'  The time was
come when Piers Gaveston was to feel the black dog's teeth indeed.  They
set him on a mule, and carried him, in mock state and with military
music, to the black dog's kennel--Warwick Castle--where a hasty council,
composed of some great noblemen, considered what should be done with him.
Some were for sparing him, but one loud voice--it was the black dog's
bark, I dare say--sounded through the Castle Hall, uttering these words:
'You have the fox in your power.  Let him go now, and you must hunt him
again.'

They sentenced him to death.  He threw himself at the feet of the Earl of
Lancaster--the old hog--but the old hog was as savage as the dog.  He was
taken out upon the pleasant road, leading from Warwick to Coventry, where
the beautiful river Avon, by which, long afterwards, WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE
was born and now lies buried, sparkled in the bright landscape of the
beautiful May-day; and there they struck off his wretched head, and
stained the dust with his blood.

When the King heard of this black deed, in his grief and rage he
denounced relentless war against his Barons, and both sides were in arms
for half a year.  But, it then became necessary for them to join their
forces against Bruce, who had used the time well while they were divided,
and had now a great power in Scotland.

Intelligence was brought that Bruce was then besieging Stirling Castle,
and that the Governor had been obliged to pledge himself to surrender it,
unless he should be relieved before a certain day.  Hereupon, the King
ordered the nobles and their fighting-men to meet him at Berwick; but,
the nobles cared so little for the King, and so neglected the summons,
and lost time, that only on the day before that appointed for the
surrender, did the King find himself at Stirling, and even then with a
smaller force than he had expected.  However, he had, altogether, a
hundred thousand men, and Bruce had not more than forty thousand; but,
Bruce's army was strongly posted in three square columns, on the ground
lying between the Burn or Brook of Bannock and the walls of Stirling
Castle.

On the very evening, when the King came up, Bruce did a brave act that
encouraged his men.  He was seen by a certain HENRY DE BOHUN, an English
Knight, riding about before his army on a little horse, with a light
battle-axe in his hand, and a crown of gold on his head.  This English
Knight, who was mounted on a strong war-horse, cased in steel, strongly
armed, and able (as he thought) to overthrow Bruce by crushing him with
his mere weight, set spurs to his great charger, rode on him, and made a
thrust at him with his heavy spear.  Bruce parried the thrust, and with
one blow of his battle-axe split his skull.

The Scottish men did not forget this, next day when the battle raged.
RANDOLPH, Bruce's valiant Nephew, rode, with the small body of men he
commanded, into such a host of the English, all shining in polished
armour in the sunlight, that they seemed to be swallowed up and lost, as
if they had plunged into the sea.  But, they fought so well, and did such
dreadful execution, that the English staggered.  Then came Bruce himself
upon them, with all the rest of his army.  While they were thus hard
pressed and amazed, there appeared upon the hills what they supposed to
be a new Scottish army, but what were really only the camp followers, in
number fifteen thousand: whom Bruce had taught to show themselves at that
place and time.  The Earl of Gloucester, commanding the English horse,
made a last rush to change the fortune of the day; but Bruce (like Jack
the Giant-killer in the story) had had pits dug in the ground, and
covered over with turfs and stakes.  Into these, as they gave way beneath
the weight of the horses, riders and horses rolled by hundreds.  The
English were completely routed; all their treasure, stores, and engines,
were taken by the Scottish men; so many waggons and other wheeled
vehicles were seized, that it is related that they would have reached, if
they had been drawn out in a line, one hundred and eighty miles.  The
fortunes of Scotland were, for the time, completely changed; and never
was a battle won, more famous upon Scottish ground, than this great
battle of BANNOCKBURN.

Plague and famine succeeded in England; and still the powerless King and
his disdainful Lords were always in contention.  Some of the turbulent
chiefs of Ireland made proposals to Bruce, to accept the rule of that
country.  He sent his brother Edward to them, who was crowned King of
Ireland.  He afterwards went himself to help his brother in his Irish
wars, but his brother was defeated in the end and killed.  Robert Bruce,
returning to Scotland, still increased his strength there.

As the King's ruin had begun in a favourite, so it seemed likely to end
in one.  He was too poor a creature to rely at all upon himself; and his
new favourite was one HUGH LE DESPENSER, the son of a gentleman of
ancient family.  Hugh was handsome and brave, but he was the favourite of
a weak King, whom no man cared a rush for, and that was a dangerous place
to hold.  The Nobles leagued against him, because the King liked him; and
they lay in wait, both for his ruin and his father's.  Now, the King had
married him to the daughter of the late Earl of Gloucester, and had given
both him and his father great possessions in Wales.  In their endeavours
to extend these, they gave violent offence to an angry Welsh gentleman,
named JOHN DE MOWBRAY, and to divers other angry Welsh gentlemen, who
resorted to arms, took their castles, and seized their estates.  The Earl
of Lancaster had first placed the favourite (who was a poor relation of
his own) at Court, and he considered his own dignity offended by the
preference he received and the honours he acquired; so he, and the Barons
who were his friends, joined the Welshmen, marched on London, and sent a
message to the King demanding to have the favourite and his father
banished.  At first, the King unaccountably took it into his head to be
spirited, and to send them a bold reply; but when they quartered
themselves around Holborn and Clerkenwell, and went down, armed, to the
Parliament at Westminster, he gave way, and complied with their demands.

His turn of triumph came sooner than he expected.  It arose out of an
accidental circumstance.  The beautiful Queen happening to be travelling,
came one night to one of the royal castles, and demanded to be lodged and
entertained there until morning.  The governor of this castle, who was
one of the enraged lords, was away, and in his absence, his wife refused
admission to the Queen; a scuffle took place among the common men on
either side, and some of the royal attendants were killed.  The people,
who cared nothing for the King, were very angry that their beautiful
Queen should be thus rudely treated in her own dominions; and the King,
taking advantage of this feeling, besieged the castle, took it, and then
called the two Despensers home.  Upon this, the confederate lords and the
Welshmen went over to Bruce.  The King encountered them at Boroughbridge,
gained the victory, and took a number of distinguished prisoners; among
them, the Earl of Lancaster, now an old man, upon whose destruction he
was resolved.  This Earl was taken to his own castle of Pontefract, and
there tried and found guilty by an unfair court appointed for the
purpose; he was not even allowed to speak in his own defence.  He was
insulted, pelted, mounted on a starved pony without saddle or bridle,
carried out, and beheaded.  Eight-and-twenty knights were hanged, drawn,
and quartered.  When the King had despatched this bloody work, and had
made a fresh and a long truce with Bruce, he took the Despensers into
greater favour than ever, and made the father Earl of Winchester.

One prisoner, and an important one, who was taken at Boroughbridge, made
his escape, however, and turned the tide against the King.  This was
ROGER MORTIMER, always resolutely opposed to him, who was sentenced to
death, and placed for safe custody in the Tower of London.  He treated
his guards to a quantity of wine into which he had put a sleeping potion;
and, when they were insensible, broke out of his dungeon, got into a
kitchen, climbed up the chimney, let himself down from the roof of the
building with a rope-ladder, passed the sentries, got down to the river,
and made away in a boat to where servants and horses were waiting for
him.  He finally escaped to France, where CHARLES LE BEL, the brother of
the beautiful Queen, was King.  Charles sought to quarrel with the King
of England, on pretence of his not having come to do him homage at his
coronation.  It was proposed that the beautiful Queen should go over to
arrange the dispute; she went, and wrote home to the King, that as he was
sick and could not come to France himself, perhaps it would be better to
send over the young Prince, their son, who was only twelve years old, who
could do homage to her brother in his stead, and in whose company she
would immediately return.  The King sent him: but, both he and the Queen
remained at the French Court, and Roger Mortimer became the Queen's
lover.

When the King wrote, again and again, to the Queen to come home, she did
not reply that she despised him too much to live with him any more (which
was the truth), but said she was afraid of the two Despensers.  In short,
her design was to overthrow the favourites' power, and the King's power,
such as it was, and invade England.  Having obtained a French force of
two thousand men, and being joined by all the English exiles then in
France, she landed, within a year, at Orewell, in Suffolk, where she was
immediately joined by the Earls of Kent and Norfolk, the King's two
brothers; by other powerful noblemen; and lastly, by the first English
general who was despatched to check her: who went over to her with all
his men.  The people of London, receiving these tidings, would do nothing
for the King, but broke open the Tower, let out all his prisoners, and
threw up their caps and hurrahed for the beautiful Queen.

The King, with his two favourites, fled to Bristol, where he left old
Despenser in charge of the town and castle, while he went on with the son
to Wales.  The Bristol men being opposed to the King, and it being
impossible to hold the town with enemies everywhere within the walls,
Despenser yielded it up on the third day, and was instantly brought to
trial for having traitorously influenced what was called 'the King's
mind'--though I doubt if the King ever had any.  He was a venerable old
man, upwards of ninety years of age, but his age gained no respect or
mercy.  He was hanged, torn open while he was yet alive, cut up into
pieces, and thrown to the dogs.  His son was soon taken, tried at
Hereford before the same judge on a long series of foolish charges, found
guilty, and hanged upon a gallows fifty feet high, with a chaplet of
nettles round his head.  His poor old father and he were innocent enough
of any worse crimes than the crime of having been friends of a King, on
