pointed out to them that they had better go north and take shelter
among the Brigantes, as all the women of his tribe had done, except
those whose men were with them.

"You will be better off there than among the swamps, and we cannot
feed unnecessary mouths; nor have we means of transporting you
there. We, too, would shelter in the woods, were it not that we
mean to harass the Romans, so we need a place where they cannot
find us. But as you go spread the news that Aska has sought refuge
in the swamps with two hundred fighting Sarci, and that all capable
of bearing arms who choose to join them can do so. They must come
to the junction of the two rivers, and there they will hear of us."

As the villagers were unable to take away with them their stores of
grain, they disposed of them readily to Beric in exchange for gold
ornaments, with which they could purchase cattle or such things as
they required from the Brigantes; they also resigned all property
in their swine and cattle, which were to be left in the woods, to
be fetched as required. Aska and Beric having made these arrangements,
sat down to discuss what had best be done, as the twenty boats
would only carry sixty, and would be away for two days before they
returned for the second party. Boduoc was called into the council,
and after some discussion it was agreed that the best plan would
be for the whole party to go down together to the junction of the
rivers, each taking as large a burden of grain as he could carry,
and driving their cattle before them.

They heard from the headman that the whole country near the river
was densely covered with bushes, and that the ground was swampy and
very difficult to cross. They agreed, therefore, that they would
form a strong intrenchment at the spot where they were to embark.
It was unlikely in the extreme that the Romans would seek to
penetrate such a country, but if they did they were to be opposed
as soon as they entered the swamps, and a desperate stand was to
be made at the intrenchment, which would be approachable at one or
two points only. Six men were to be left at the village to receive
the women and children when they arrived. The guide was to return
as soon as he had led the main party to the point where the boats
were to meet them, and to lead the second party to the same point.

That evening, indeed, the women began to arrive, and said that
they believed all would be in on the following day. Among them
was Boduoc's mother, who told Beric that her eldest daughter had
started with Berenice and Cneius to meet the Romans as soon as the
news of the defeat reached them. When day broke, Beric's command,
with the women who had arrived, set off laden with as much grain
in baskets or cloths as they could carry, and driving the cattle
and pigs before them. The country soon became swampy, but their
guide knew the ground well, and by a winding path led them dry
footed through the bushes, though they could see water among the
roots and grass on either side of them. They had, however, great
difficulty with the cattle and pigs, but after several attempts to
break away, and being nearly lost in the swamps, from which many
of them had to be dragged out by sheer force, the whole reached
the river. The men of the rear guard in charge of the main body of
the swine and cattle did not arrive there until midday.

The spot to which the guide led them was on the river flowing east
and west, a mile from its junction with the main stream, as he told
them that the swamps were too deep near the junction of the river
for them to penetrate there.

Some of the boats were already at the spot. When they reached
it Aska and Beric at once began to mark out a semicircle, with a
radius of some fifty yards, on the river bank. Ten of the cattle
were killed and skinned, and as others of the party came up they
were set to work to cut down the trees and undergrowth within the
semicircle, and drag them to its edge, casting them down with their
heads outwards so as to form a formidable abbatis. Within half an
hour of the appointed time the twenty boats had arrived together
with as many more, in which the grain, hides, and other articles
agreed to be paid were to be carried off. Three of the cattle were
cut up, and their flesh divided among the twenty boats, in which
a quantity of grain was also placed. The seven remaining carcasses
were for the use of the camp, the ten hides, half the grain, swords,
spears, and arrowheads agreed upon, were handed over to the natives,
and Beric, as an extra gift, presented each of the three chiefs
who had come with the boats with one of the Roman shields, picked
up on the field of battle.

The chiefs were greatly pleased with the present, and showed more
goodwill than they had exhibited at their first interview. Aska had
arranged with Beric to remain behind in charge of the encampment.
As soon, therefore, as the presents had been handed over, Beric
with Boduoc and three men to each boat took their places and pushed
from shore. The boats of the Fenmen put off at the same time, and
the natives, of whom there was one in each of Beric's boats, poled
their way down the sluggish stream until they reached a wide river.
The chiefs here shouted an adieu and directed their course up the
river, while Beric's party crossed, proceeded down it for two miles,
and then turned up a narrow stream running into it. All day they
made their way along its windings; other streams came in on either
side or quitted it; and, indeed, for some hours they appeared to
be traversing a network of water from which rose trees and bushes.
The native in Beric's boat, which led, could speak the language
of the Iceni, and he explained to Beric that the waters were now
high, but that when they subsided the land appeared above them,
except in the course of the streams.

"It is always wet and swampy," he said; "and men cannot traverse
this part on foot except by means of flat boards fastened to the
feet by loops of leather; this prevents them from sinking deeply
in."

Late in the afternoon the country became drier, and the land showed
itself above the level of the water. The native now showed signs
of much perturbation, stopping frequently and listening.

"I have come much farther now," he said, "than I have ever been
before, and I dare not have ventured so far were it not that these
floods would have driven everything back; but I know from an old
man who once ventured to push farther, that this is the beginning
of rising ground, and that in a short time you will find it dry
enough to land. I advise you to call the other boats up so that in
case of danger you can support each other."

The stream they were following was now very narrow, the branches
of the trees meeting overhead.

"Can any of the other Fenmen in the boats speak our language?"
Beric asked.

The man replied in the negative.

"That is good," he said; "I don't want my men to be frightened with
stories about monsters. I don't believe in them myself, though I
do not say that in the old time monsters may not have dwelt here.
If anything comes we shall know how to fight it; but it is gloomy
and dark enough here to make men uncomfortable without anything
else to shake their courage."

At last they reached a spot where the bank was two feet above the
water, and they could see that it rose further inland. Several of
the other Fenmen had been shouting for some time to Beric's boatmen,
and their craft had been lagging behind. Beric therefore thought
it well to land at once. The boats were accordingly called up,
the meat and grain landed, and the men leapt ashore, the boatmen
instantly poling their crafts down stream at their utmost speed.

"We will go no farther tonight," Beric said; "but choose a comfortable
spot and make a fire. It will be time enough in the morning to
explore this place and fix on a spot for a permanent encampment."

A place was soon chosen and cleared of bushes. The men in several
of the boats had at starting brought brands with them from the
fires. These were carried across each other so as to keep the fire
in, and eight or ten of these brands being laid together in the
heart of the brushwood and fanned vigorously a bright flame soon
shot up. The men's spirits had sunk as they passed through the wild
expanse of swamp and water, but they rose now as the fire burned
up. Meat was speedily frying in the flames, and this was eaten as
soon as it was cooked, nothing being done with the grain, which they
had no means of pounding. They had also brought with them several
jars of beer from the village, and these were passed round after
they had eaten their fill of meat.

"We will place four sentries," Beric said, "there may well be wolves
or other wild beasts in these swamps."

After supper was over Boduoc questioned Beric privately as to the
monsters of which their boatman had spoken.

"It is folly," Beric said. "You know that we have legends among
ourselves, which we learned from the natives who were here before
we came, that at one time strange creatures wandered over the country;
but if there were such creatures they died long ago. These Fenmen
have a story among themselves that such beasts lived in the heart
of the swamp here when they first fled before us. It is quite
possible that this is true, for although they died ages ago on the
land they may have existed long afterwards among the swamps where
there were none to disturb them. I have read in some of the Roman
writers that there are creatures protected by a coat of scales in
a country named Egypt, and that they live hundreds of years. Possibly
these creatures, which the legends say were a sort of Dragon, may
have lingered here, but as they do not seem to have shown themselves
to the Fenmen since their first arrival here, it is not at all
likely that there are any of them left; if there are we shall have
to do battle with them."

"Do you think they will be very formidable, Beric?"

"I do not suppose so. They might be formidable to one man, but not
to sixty well armed as we are; but I have not any belief that we
shall meet with them."

The night passed quite quietly, and in the morning the band set
out to explore the country. It rose gradually until they were, as
Beric judged, from forty to fifty feet above the level of the swamp.
Large trees grew here, and the soil was perfectly dry. The ground
on the summit was level for about a quarter of a mile, and then
gradually sank again. A mile farther they were again at the edge
of a swamp.

"Nothing could have suited us better," Beric said. "At the top we
can form an encampment which will hold ten thousand men, and there
is dry ground a mile all round for the cattle and swine."

Presently there was a shout from some men who had wandered away,
and Beric, bidding others follow, ran to the spot. They found men
standing looking in wonder at a great number of bones lying in what
seemed a confused mass.

"Here is your monster," Beric said; "they are snake bones." This
was evident to all, and exclamations of wonder broke from them at
their enormous size. One man got hold of a pair of ribs, and placing
them upright they came up to his chin. The men looked apprehensively
round.

"You need not be afraid," Beric said. "The creature has probably
been dead hundreds of years. You see his skin is all decayed away,
and it must have been thick and tough indeed. By the way the bones
are piled together, he must have curled up here to die. He was
probably the last of his race. However, we will search the island
thoroughly, keeping together in readiness to encounter anything
that we may alight upon."

Great numbers of snakes were found, but none of any extraordinary
size.

"No doubt they fled here in the rains," Beric said, "when the water
rose and covered the swamps; we shall not be troubled with them
when the morasses dry. Anyhow they are quite harmless, and save
that they may kill a chicken or two when we get some, they will
give us no trouble. The swine will soon clear them off."

It was late in the day before the search was completed, and they
then returned to the camping ground of the night before, quite
assured that there was no creature of any size upon the island.
Just as evening was falling on the following day they heard shouts.

"Are you alive?" a voice, which Beric recognized as that of his
boatman, shouted.

"Yes," he exclaimed, "alive and well. There is nothing to be afraid
of here."

A few minutes later the twenty boats again came up. The Fenmen this
time ventured to land, but Beric's boatman questioned him anxiously
about the monsters. Beric, who thought it as well to maintain the
evil reputation of the place, told him that they had searched the
island and had found no living monsters, but had come across a dead
serpent, who must have been seventy or eighty feet long.

"There are no more of them here," he said, "but of course there
may be others that have been alarmed at the noises we made and have
taken to the swamps. This creature has been dead for a long time,
and may have been the last of his race. However, if one were to come
we should not be afraid of it with a hundred and twenty fighting
men here."

The Fenmen, after a consultation among themselves, agreed that it
would be safer to pass the night with the Iceni than to start in
the darkness among the swamps. When they left in the morning Beric
sent a message to Aska describing the place, and begging him to
send up some of the women with the next party with means of grinding
the grain. As soon as the boats were started Beric led the party up
to the top of the rise, and then work was begun in earnest, and in
a couple of days a large number of huts were constructed of saplings
and brushwood cleared off from the centre of the encampment.
Some women arrived with the next boat loads, and at once took the
preparation of food into their hands. Aska sent a message saying
that the numbers at his camp were undiminished, as most of the
fighting men belonging to the villages round who had survived the
battle had joined him at once with their wives, and that fresh
men were pouring in every hour. He urged Beric to leave Boduoc in
charge of the island, and to return with the empty boats in order
that they might have a consultation. This Beric did, and upon his
arrival he found that there were over four hundred men in camp, with
a proportionate number of women and children. There were several
subchiefs among them, and Aska invited them to join in the council.

"It is evident," he said, "that so large a number as this cannot
find food in one place in the swamps, at any rate until we have
learned to catch fish and snare wildfowl as the Fenmen do. The swine
we can take there, but these light boats would not carry cattle
in any numbers, though some might be thrown and carried there,
with their legs tied together. At present this place is safe from
attack. There is only one path, our guide says, by which it can
be approached. I propose that we cut wide gaps through this, and
throw beams and planks over them. These we can remove in case of
attack. When we hear of the Romans' approach we can throw up a high
defence of trees and bushes behind each gap."

"That will be excellent," Beric agreed, "and you would doubtless
be able to make a long defence against them on the causeway. But
you must not depend upon their keeping upon that. They will wade
through the swamp waist deep, and, if it be deeper still, will cut
down bushes and make faggots and move forward on these. So, though
you may check them on the causeway, they will certainly, by one
means or other, make their way up to your intrenchment, and you must
therefore strengthen this in every way. I should build up a great
bank behind it, so that if they break through or fire the defences
you can defend the bank. There is one thing that must be done without
delay; we must build more boats. There must be here many men from
the eastern coast, where they have much larger and stronger craft
than these coracles. I should put a strong party to work upon them.
Then, in case of an attack, you could, when you see that longer
resistance would be vain, take to the boats and join me; or, when
the Romans approach, send them off to fetch my party from the
island. Besides, we shall want to move bodies of men rapidly so as
to attack and harass the enemy when they are not expecting us.

"I should say that we ought to have at least twenty great flatboats
able to carry fifty men each. Speed would not be of much consequence,
as the Romans will have no boats to follow us; besides, except on
the Ouse and one or two of the larger streams, there is no room for
rowing, and they must be poled along. Let us keep none but fighting
men here. As all the villagers fled north there must be numbers of
cattle and swine wandering untended in all the woods, and in many
of the hamlets much grain must have been left behind, therefore I
should send out parties from time to time to bring them in. When
the large boats are built we can transport some of the cattle alive
to the island; till then they must be slaughtered here; but with
each party a few swine might be sent to the island, where they can
range about as they choose. What is the last news you have of the
Romans?"

"They are pressing steadily north, burning and slaying. I hear that
they spare none, and that the whole land of the Trinobantes, from
the Thames to the Stour, has been turned into a waste."

"It was only what we had to expect, Aska. Have any more of my people
come in since I left?"

"Only a young girl. She arrived last night. It is she that brought
the news that I am giving you. She is a sister of your friend
Boduoc, and her mother, who had given her up for lost, almost lost
her senses with delight when she returned. The family are fortunate,
for another son also came in two or three days ago."

Beric at once went in search of Boduoc's mother, whom he found
established with her girls in a little bower.

"I am glad indeed that your daughter has returned safe," he said,
as the old woman came out on hearing his voice.

"Yes, I began to think that I should never see her face again, Beric;
but I am fortunate indeed, when so many are left friendless, that
all my four children should be spared.

"Tell the chief how you fulfilled your mission," she said to the
girl.

"It was easy enough," she replied. "Had I been by myself I should
have returned here three days since, but the little lady could
not make long journeys, and it was three days after we left before
we saw any of the Romans. At last we came upon a column of horse.
When we saw them the little lady gave me this bracelet, and she put
this gold chain into my hand and said, 'Beric.' So I knew that it
was for you. Then I ran back and hid myself in the trees while they
went forward. When they got near the soldiers on horseback the man
lifted up his arms and cried something in a loud voice. Then they
rode up to them, and for some time I could see nothing. Then the
horsemen rode on again, all but two of them, who went on south. The
man rode behind one of them, and the little lady before another.
Then I turned and made hither, travelling without stopping, except
once for a few hours' sleep. There are many fugitives in the woods,
and from them I heard that the land of the Trinobantes was lit up
by burning villages, and that the Romans were slaughtering all.
Some of those I met in the wood had hid themselves, and had made
their way at night, and they saw numbers of dead bodies, women and
children as well as men, in the burned hamlets."

"You have done your mission well," Beric said. "Boduoc will be glad
when I tell him how you have carried out my wish. We must find a
good husband for you some day, and I will take care that you go to
him with a good store of cattle and swine. Where is your brother?"

"He is there," she said, "leaning against that tree waiting for
you."

"I am glad to see you safe among us," Beric said to the young man.
"How did you escape the battle?"

"I was driving the chariot with Parta's attendants, as I had from
the day we started. I kept close behind her chariot, and escaped with
her when the line of wagons was broken to let the queen pass. When
we got far away from the battle your mother stopped her chariot and
bade me go north. 'I have no more need of attendants,' she said;
'let them save themselves. Do you find my son if he has escaped
the battle, and tell him that I shall share the fate of Boadicea.
I have lived a free woman, and will die one. Tell him to fight to
the end against the Romans, and that I shall expect him to join
me before long in the Happy Island. Bid him not lament for me, but
rejoice, as he should, that I have gone to the Land where there
are no sorrows.' Then I turned my chariot and drove to your home
to await your coming there if you should have escaped. It was but
a few hours after that the messengers brought the news that you
were safe, and that the survivors of your band were to join you at
Soto with such men as might have escaped. As Parta's orders were to
take the women with me to the north, I drove them two days farther,
taking with me a lad, the brother of one of them. Then I handed over
the chariot to him, to convey them to the land of the Brigantes,
and started hither on foot to join you."

"You shall go on with me tomorrow, you and your mother and sisters.
Boduoc will be rejoiced to see you all. We have found a place where
even the Romans will hardly reach us."



CHAPTER IX: THE STRUGGLE IN THE SWAMP


That evening Beric had a long talk with Aska and four or five
men from the coast accustomed to the building of large boats. The
matter would be easy enough, they said, as the boats would not be
required to withstand the strain of the sea, and needed only to be
put together with flat bottoms and sides. With so large a number
of men they could hew down trees of suitable size, and thin them
down until they obtained a plank from each. They would then be
fastened together by strong pegs and dried moss driven in between
the crevices. Pitch, however, would be required to stop up the
seams, and of this they had none.

"Then," Beric said, "we must make some pitch. There is no great
difficulty about that. There are plenty of fir trees growing near
the edges of the swamps, and from the roots of these we can get
tar."

The men were all acquainted with the process, which was a simple
one. A deep hole was dug in the ground. The bottom of this was
lined with clay, hollowed out into a sort of bowl. The hole was then
filled with the roots of fir closely packed together. When it was
full a fire was lit above it. As soon as this had made its way
down earth was piled over it and beaten down hard, a small orifice
being left in the centre. In this way the wood was slowly converted
into charcoal, and the resin and tar, as they oosed out under the
heat, trickled down into the bowl of clay at the bottom. As little
or no smoke escaped after the fire was first lighted, the work
could be carried on without fear of attracting the attention of
any bodies of the enemy who might be searching the country.

Two months passed. By the end of that time the intrenchment on the
river bank had been made so strong that it could resist any attack
save by a very large body of men. That on the island had also been
completed, and strong banks thrown up at the only three points
where a landing could be effected from boats.

The swamps had been thoroughly explored in the neighbourhood, and
another island discovered, and on this three hundred men had been
established, while four hundred remained on the great island, and
as many in the camp on the river. There were over a thousand women
and children distributed among the three stations. Three hundred
men had laboured incessantly at the boats, and these were now
finished. While all this work had been going on considerable numbers
of fish and wildfowl had been obtained by barter from the Fenmen,
with whom they had before had dealings, and from other communities
living among the swamps to the north. Many of the Iceni, who came
from the marshy districts of the eastern rivers, were also accustomed
to fishing and fowling, and, as soon as the work on the defences
was finished and the tortuous channels through the swamps became
known to them, they began to lay nets, woven by the women, across
the streams, and to make decoys and snares of all sorts for the
wildfowl.

The framework for many coracles had been woven of withies by
the women, and the skins of all the cattle killed were utilized
as coverings, so that by the end of the two months they had quite
a fleet of little craft of this kind. As fast as the larger boats
were finished they were used for carrying cattle to the islands,
and a large quantity of swine were also taken over.

During this time the Romans had traversed the whole country of the
Iceni. The hamlets were fired, and all persons who fell into their
hands put to death; but the number of these was comparatively small,
as the greater part of the population had either moved north or
taken to the woods, which were so extensive that comparatively few
of the fugitives were killed by the search parties of the Romans.
From the few prisoners that the Romans took they heard reports
that many of the Iceni had taken refuge in the swamps, and several
strong bodies had moved along the edge of the marsh country without
attempting to penetrate it.

Aska and Beric had agreed that so long as they were undisturbed they
would remain quiet, confining themselves to their borders, except
when they sent parties to search for cattle in the woods or to
gather up grain that might have escaped destruction in the hamlets,
and that they would avoid any collision with the Romans until their
present vigilance abated or they attempted to plant settlers in
their neighbourhood.

Circumstances, however, defeated this intention. They learned from
the Fenmen that numerous fugitives had taken refuge in the southern
swamps, and that these sallying out had fallen upon parties of
Romans near Huntingdon, and had cut them to pieces. The Romans had
in consequence sent a considerable force to avenge this attack.
These had penetrated some distance into the swamps, but had there
been attacked and driven back with much slaughter. But a fortnight
later a legion had marched to Huntingdon, and crossing the river
there had established a camp opposite, which they called Godmancastra,
and, having collected a number of natives from the west, were
engaged in building boats in which they intended to penetrate the
swamp country and root out the fugitives.

"It was sure to come sooner or later," Aska said to Beric. "Nor
should we wish it otherwise. We came here not to pass our lives as
lurking fugitives, but to gather a force and avenge ourselves on
the Romans. If you like I will go up the river and see our friends
there, and ascertain their strength and means of resistance. Would
it be well, think you, to tell them of our strong place here and
