will; and I vowed to the good Saint in guerdon, that I would, in his
name, receive, and relieve; and maintain them."

"And did Saint Julian," said Oliver, "send your Majesty this long legged
importation from Scotland in answer to your prayers?"

Although the barber, who well knew that his master had superstition in
a large proportion to his want of religion, and that on such topics
nothing was more easy than to offend him--although, I say, he knew the
royal weakness, and therefore carefully put the preceding question in
the softest and most simple tone of voice, Louis felt the innuendo which
it contained, and regarded the speaker with high displeasure.

"Sirrah," he said, "thou art well called Oliver the Devil, who darest
thus to sport at once with thy master and with the blessed Saints. I
tell thee, wert thou one grain less necessary to me, I would have thee
hung up on yonder oak before the Castle, as an example to all who scoff
at things holy--Know, thou infidel slave, that mine eyes were no sooner
closed; than the blessed Saint Julian was visible to me, leading a young
man whom he presented to me, saying that his fortune should be to escape
the sword, the cord, the river, and to bring good fortune to the side
which he should espouse, and to the adventures in which he should be
engaged. I walked out on the succeeding morning and I met with this
youth, whose image I had seen in my dream. In his own country he hath
escaped the sword, amid the massacre of his whole family, and here
within the brief compass of two days, he hath been strangely rescued
from drowning and from the gallows, and hath already, on a particular
occasion, as I but lately hinted to thee, been of the most material
service to me. I receive him as sent hither by Saint Julian to serve me
in the most difficult, the most dangerous, and even the most desperate
services."

The King, as he thus expressed himself, doffed his hat, and selecting
from the numerous little leaden figures with which the hat band was
garnished that which represented Saint Julian, he placed it on the
table, as was often his wont when some peculiar feeling of hope, or
perhaps of remorse, happened to thrill across his mind, and, kneeling
down before it, muttered, with an appearance of profound devotion,
"Sancte Juliane, adsis precibus nostris! Ora, ora, pro nobis! [St.
Julian, give heed to our prayers. Plead, plead for us!]"

This was one of those ague fits of superstitious devotion which often
seized on Louis in such extraordinary times and places, that they gave
one of the most sagacious monarchs who ever reigned the appearance of
a madman, or at least of one whose mind was shaken by some deep
consciousness of guilt.

While he was thus employed, his favourite looked at him with an
expression of sarcastic contempt which he scarce attempted to disguise.
Indeed, it was one of this man's peculiarities, that in his whole
intercourse with his master, he laid aside that fondling, purring
affectation of officiousness and humility which distinguished his
conduct to others; and if he still bore some resemblance to a cat, it
was when the animal is on its guard,--watchful, animated, and alert
for sudden exertion. The cause of this change was probably Oliver's
consciousness that his Master was himself too profound a hypocrite not
to see through the hypocrisy of others.

"The features of this youth, then, if I may presume to speak," said
Oliver, "resemble those of him whom your dream exhibited?"

"Closely and intimately," said the King, whose imagination, like that
of superstitious people in general, readily imposed upon itself. "I
have had his horoscope cast, besides, by Galeotti Martivalle, and I have
plainly learned, through his art and mine own observation, that, in
many respects, this unfriended youth has his destiny under the same
constellation with mine."

Whatever Oliver might think of the causes thus boldly assigned for
the preference of an inexperienced stripling, he dared make no farther
objections, well knowing that Louis, who, while residing in exile,
had bestowed much of his attention on the supposed science of judicial
astrology, would listen to no raillery of any kind which impeached his
skill. He therefore only replied that he trusted the youth would prove
faithful in the discharge of a task so delicate.

"We will take care he hath no opportunity to be otherwise," said Louis;
"for he shall be privy to nothing, save that he is sent to escort the
Ladies of Croye to the residence of the Bishop of Liege. Of the probable
interference of William de la Marck he shall know as little as they
themselves. None shall know that secret but the guide; and Tristan or
thou must find one fit for our purpose."

"But in that case," said Oliver, "judging of him from his country and
his appearance, the young man is like to stand to his arms as soon as
the Wild Boar comes on them, and may not come off so easily from the
tusks as he did this morning."

"If they rend his heart strings," said Louis, composedly, "Saint Julian,
blessed be his name! can send me another in his stead. It skills as
little that the messenger is slain after his duty is executed, as that
the flask is broken when the wine is drunk out.--Meanwhile, we
must expedite the ladies' departure, and then persuade the Count de
Crevecoeur that it has taken place without our connivance; we having
been desirous to restore them to the custody of our fair cousin, which
their sudden departure has unhappily prevented."

"The Count is perhaps too wise, and his master too prejudiced, to
believe it."

"Holy Mother!" said Louis, "what unbelief would that be in Christian
men! But, Oliver, they shall believe us. We will throw into our whole
conduct towards our fair cousin, Duke Charles, such thorough and
unlimited confidence, that, not to believe we have been sincere with
him in every respect, he must be worse than an infidel. I tell thee,
so convinced am I that I could make Charles of Burgundy think of me in
every respect as I would have him, that, were it necessary for silencing
his doubts, I would ride unarmed, and on a palfrey, to visit him in his
tent, with no better guard about me than thine own simple person, friend
Oliver."

"And I," said Oliver, "though I pique not myself upon managing steel
in any other shape than that of a razor, would rather charge a Swiss
battalion of pikes, than I would accompany your Highness upon such a
visit of friendship to Charles of Burgundy, when he hath so many grounds
to be well assured that there is enmity in your Majesty's bosom against
him."

"Thou art a fool, Oliver," said the King, "with all thy pretensions
to wisdom--and art not aware that deep policy must often assume the
appearance of the most extreme simplicity, as courage occasionally
shrouds itself under the show of modest timidity. Were it needful,
full surely would I do what I have said--the Saints always blessing our
purpose, and the heavenly constellations bringing round in their course
a proper conjuncture for such an exploit."

In these words did King Louis XI give the first hint of the
extraordinary resolution which he afterwards adopted in order to dupe
his great rival, the subsequent execution of which had very nearly
proved his own ruin.

He parted with his counsellor, and presently afterwards went to the
apartment of the Ladies of Croye. Few persuasions beyond his mere
license would have been necessary to determine their retreat from the
Court of France, upon the first hint that they might not be eventually
protected against the Duke of Burgundy; but it was not so easy to induce
them to choose Liege for the place of their retreat. They entreated
and requested to be transferred to Bretagne or Calais, where, under
protection of the Duke of Bretagne or King of England, they might remain
in a state of safety, until the sovereign of Burgundy should relent in
his rigorous purpose towards them. But neither of these places of safety
at all suited the plans of Louis, and he was at last successful in
inducing them to adopt that which did coincide with them.

The power of the Bishop of Liege for their defence was not to be
questioned, since his ecclesiastical dignity gave him the means of
protecting the fugitives against all Christian Princes; while, on
the other hand, his secular forces, if not numerous, seemed at least
sufficient to defend his person, and all under his protection, from any
sudden violence. The difficulty was to reach the little Court of the
Bishop in safety; but for this Louis promised to provide, by spreading
a report that the Ladies of Croye had escaped from Tours by night, under
fear of being delivered up to the Burgundian Envoy, and had taken their
flight towards Bretagne. He also promised them the attendance of a small
but faithful retinue, and letters to the commanders of such towns and
fortresses as they might pass, with instructions to use every means for
protecting and assisting them in their journey.

The Ladies of Croye, although internally resenting the ungenerous and
discourteous manner in which Louis thus deprived them of the promised
asylum in his Court, were so far from objecting to the hasty departure
which he proposed, that they even anticipated his project, by entreating
to be permitted to set forward that same night. The Lady Hameline was
already tired of a place where there were neither admiring courtiers,
nor festivities to be witnessed; and the Lady Isabelle thought she had
seen enough to conclude that, were the temptation to become a little
stronger, Louis XI, not satisfied with expelling them from his Court,
would not hesitate to deliver her up to her irritated Suzerain, the Duke
of Burgundy. Lastly, Louis himself readily acquiesced in their hasty
departure, anxious to preserve peace with Duke Charles, and alarmed lest
the beauty of Isabelle should interfere with and impede the favourite
plan which he had formed for bestowing the hand of his daughter Joan
upon his cousin of Orleans.



CHAPTER XIII: THE JOURNEY

     Talk not of kings--I scorn the poor comparison;
     I am a sage and can command the elements--
     At least men think I can; and on that thought
     I found unbounded empire.

     ALBUMAZAR


Occupation and adventure might be said to crowd upon the young
Scottishman with the force of a spring tide; for he was speedily
summoned to the apartment of his Captain, the Lord Crawford, where, to
his astonishment, he again beheld the King. After a few words respecting
the honour and trust which were about to be reposed in him, which made
Quentin internally afraid that they were again about to propose to him
such a watch as he had kept upon the Count of Crevecoeur, or perhaps
some duty still more repugnant to his feelings, he was not relieved
merely, but delighted, with hearing that he was selected, with the
assistance of four others under his command, one of whom was a guide,
to escort the Ladies of Croye to the little Court of their relative,
the Bishop of Liege, in the safest and most commodious, and, at the same
time, in the most secret manner possible. A scroll was given him, in
which were set down directions for his guidance, for the places of
halt (generally chosen in obscure villages, solitary monasteries, and
situations remote from towns), and for the general precautions which he
was to attend to, especially on approaching the frontier of Burgundy. He
was sufficiently supplied with instructions what he ought to say and do
to sustain the personage of the Maitre d'Hotel of two English ladies of
rank, who had been on a pilgrimage to Saint Martin of Tours, and were
about to visit the holy city of Cologne, and worship the relics of the
sage Eastern Monarchs, who came to adore the nativity of Bethlehem [the
relics of the three kings, or Magi, were placed in the Cathedral of
Cologne in 1162]; for under that character the Ladies of Croye were to
journey.

Without having any defined notions of the cause of his delight, Quentin
Durward's heart leapt for joy at the idea of approaching thus nearly
to the person of the Beauty of the Turret, and in a situation which
entitled him to her confidence, since her protection was in so great a
degree intrusted to his conduct and courage. He felt no doubt in his own
mind that he should be her successful guide through the hazards of
her pilgrimage. Youth seldom thinks of dangers, and bred up free, and
fearless, and self confiding, Quentin, in particular, only thought of
them to defy them. He longed to be exempted from the restraint of the
Royal presence, that he might indulge the secret glee with which such
unexpected tidings filled him, and which prompted him to bursts of
delight which would have been totally unfitting for that society.

But Louis had not yet done with him. That cautious monarch had to
consult a counsellor of a different stamp from Oliver le Diable, who was
supposed to derive his skill from the superior and astral intelligences,
as men, judging from their fruits, were apt to think the counsels of
Oliver sprang from the Devil himself.

Louis therefore led the way, followed by the impatient Quentin, to a
separate tower of the castle of Plessis, in which was installed, in
no small ease and splendour; the celebrated astrologer, poet, and
philosopher, Galeotti Marti, or Martius, or Martivalle, a native of
Narni, in Italy, the author of the famous Treatise De Vulgo Incognitis
[concerning things unknown to the generality of mankind. S.], and the
subject of his age's admiration, and of the panegyrics of Paulus Jovius
[an Italian historian of the sixteenth century who lived at the Pope's
court]. He had long flourished at the court of the celebrated Matthias
Corvinus, King of Hungary, from whom he was in some measure decoyed by
Louis, who grudged the Hungarian monarch the society and the counsels of
a sage accounted so skilful in reading the decrees of Heaven.

[Martius Galeotti... was secretary to Matthias Carvinus, King of
Hungary. He left Hungary in 1477, and was made prisoner at Venice on
a charge of having propagated heterodox opinions.... He might have
suffered seriously but for the protection of Sixtus IV, then Pope, who
had been one of his scholars.... He attached himself to Louis XI, and
died in his service. S.]

Martivalle was none of those ascetic, withered, pale professors of
mystic learning of those days, who bleared their eyes over the midnight
furnace, and macerated their bodies by out watching the Polar Bear.
He indulged in all courtly pleasures, and until he grew corpulent, had
excelled in all martial sports and gymnastic exercises, as well as in
the use of arms; insomuch, that Janus Pannonius [a Hungarian poet of
the fifteenth century] has left a Latin epigram upon a wrestling match
betwixt Galeotti and a renowned champion of that art, in the presence
of the Hungarian King and Court, in which the Astrologer was completely
victorious.

The apartments of this courtly and martial sage were far more splendidly
furnished than any which Quentin had yet seen in the royal palace;
and the carving and ornamented woodwork of his library, as well as the
magnificence displayed in the tapestries, showed the elegant taste of
the learned Italian. Out of his study one door opened to his sleeping
apartment, another led to the turret which served as his observatory. A
large open table, in the midst of the chamber, was covered with a rich
Turkey carpet, the spoils of the tent of a Pacha, after the great battle
of Jaiza, where the Astrologer had fought abreast with the valiant
champion of Christendom, Matthias Corvinus. On the table lay a variety
of mathematical and astrological instruments, all of the most rich
materials and curious workmanship. His astrolabe of silver was the gift
of the Emperor of Germany, and his Jacob's staff of ebony [a divining
rod made of a hazel fork], jointed with gold and curiously inlaid, was a
mark of esteem from the reigning Pope.

There were various other miscellaneous articles disposed on the table,
or hanging around the walls; amongst others, two complete suits of
armour, one of mail, the other of plate, both of which, from their great
size, seemed to call the gigantic Astrologer their owner; a Spanish
toledo, a Scottish broadsword, a Turkish scymetar, with bows, quivers,
and other warlike weapons; musical instruments of several different
kinds; a silver crucifix, a sepulchral antique vase, and several of
the little brazen Penates of the ancient heathens, with other curious
nondescript articles, some of which, in the superstitious opinions of
that period, seemed to be designed for magical purposes. The library of
this singular character was of the same miscellaneous description
with its other effects. Curious manuscripts of classical antiquity lay
mingled with the voluminous labours of Christian divines, and of those
painstaking sages who professed the chemical science, and proffered to
guide their students into the most secret recesses of nature, by means
of the Hermetical Philosophy [a system of philosophy ascribed to the
Egyptian Hermes (Thoth) who was reputed to have written certain sacred
books treating of religion and the natural sciences]. Some were written
in the Eastern character, and others concealed their sense or nonsense
under the veil of hieroglyphics and cabalistic characters. The
whole apartment and its furniture of every kind, formed a scene
very impressive on the fancy, considering the general belief then
indisputably entertained concerning the truth of the occult sciences;
and that effect was increased by the manners and appearance of the
individual himself, who, seated in a huge chair, was employed in
curiously examining a specimen, just issued from the Frankfort press, of
the newly invented art of printing.

Galeotti Martivalle was a tall, bulky, yet stately man, considerably
past his prime, and whose youthful habits of exercise, though still
occasionally resumed, had not been able to contend with his natural
tendency to corpulence, increased by sedentary study, and indulgence in
the pleasures of the table. His features, though rather overgrown,
were dignified and noble, and a Santon might have envied the dark and
downward sweep of his long descending beard. His dress was a chamber
robe of the richest Genoa velvet, with ample sleeves, clasped with frogs
of gold, and lined with sables. It was fastened round his middle by a
broad belt of virgin parchment, round which were represented, in crimson
characters, the signs of the Zodiac. He rose and bowed to the King, yet
with the air of one to whom such exalted society was familiar, and who
was not at all likely, even in the royal presence, to compromise the
dignity then especially affected by the pursuers of science.

"You are engaged, father," said the King, "and, as I think, with this
new fashioned art of multiplying manuscripts by the intervention of
machinery. Can things of such mechanical and terrestrial import interest
the thoughts of one before whom Heaven has unrolled her own celestial
volumes?"

"My brother," replied Martivalle, "for so the tenant of this cell
must term even the King of France, when he deigns to visit him as
a disciple--believe me that in considering the consequences of this
invention, I read with as certain augury as by any combination of the
heavenly bodies, the most awful and portentous changes. When I reflect
with what slow and limited supplies the stream of science hath hitherto
descended to us, how difficult to be obtained by those most ardent in
its search, how certain to be neglected by all who regard their ease;
how liable to be diverted, altogether dried up, by the invasions of
barbarism; can I look forward without wonder and astonishment to the lot
of a succeeding generation on whom knowledge will descend like the first
and second rain, uninterrupted, unabated, unbounded; fertilizing some
grounds, and overflowing others; changing the whole form of social
life; establishing and overthrowing religions; erecting and destroying
kingdoms."

"Hold, Galeotti," said Louis, "shall these changes come in our time?"

"No, my royal brother," replied Martivalle; "this invention may be
likened to a young tree, which is now newly planted, but shall, in
succeeding generations, bear fruit as fatal, yet as precious, as that of
the Garden of Eden; the knowledge, namely, of good and evil."

Louis answered, after a moment's pause, "Let futurity look to what
concerns them--we are men of this age, and to this age we will confine
our care. Sufficient for the day is the evil thereof.

"Tell me, hast thou proceeded farther in the horoscope Which I sent to
thee, and of which you made me some report? I have brought the party
hither, that you may use palmistry, or chiromancy if such is your
pleasure. The matter is pressing."

The bulky sage arose from his seat, and, approaching the young soldier,
fixed on him his keen large dark eyes as if he were in the act of
internally spelling and dissecting every lineament and feature.

Blushing and borne down by this close examination on the part of one
whose expression was so reverend at once and commanding, Quentin bent
his eyes on the ground, and did not again raise them, till in the act
of obeying the sonorous command of the Astrologer, "Look up and be not
afraid, but hold forth thy hand."

When Martivalle had inspected his palm, according to the form of the
mystic arts which he practised, he led the King some steps aside.

"My royal brother," he said, "the physiognomy of this youth, together
with the lines impressed on his hand, confirm, in a wonderful degree,
the report which I founded on his horoscope, as well as that judgment
which your own proficiency in our sublime arts induced you at once to
form of him. All promises that this youth will be brave and fortunate."

"And faithful?" said the King; "for valour and fortune square not always
with fidelity."

"And faithful also," said the Astrologer; "for there is manly firmness
in look and eye, and his linea vitae [the line of life, a term used
in palmistry] is deeply marked and clear, which indicates a true and
upright adherence to those who do benefit or lodge trust in him. But
yet--"

"But what?" said the King; "Father Galeotti, wherefore do you now
pause?"

"The ears of Kings," said the sage, "are like the palates of those
dainty patients which are unable to endure the bitterness of the drugs
necessary for their recovery."

"My ears and my palate have no such niceness," said Louis; "let me
hear what is useful counsel, and swallow what is wholesome medicine.
I quarrel not with the rudeness of the one, or the harsh taste of the
other. I have not been cockered in wantonness or indulgence; my youth
was one of exile and suffering. My ears are used to harsh counsel, and
take no offence at it."

"Then plainly, Sire," replied Galeotti, "if you have aught in your
purposed commission which--which, in short, may startle a scrupulous
conscience--intrust it not to this youth, at least, not till a few
years' exercise in your service has made him as unscrupulous as others."

"And is this what you hesitated to speak, my good Galeotti? and didst
thou think thy speaking it would offend me?" said the King. "Alack, I
know that thou art well sensible that the path of royal policy cannot be
always squared (as that of private life ought invariably to be) by
the abstract maxims of religion and of morality. Wherefore do we, the
Princes of the earth, found churches and monasteries, make pilgrimages,
undergo penances, and perform devotions with which others may dispense,
unless it be because the benefit of the public, and the welfare of
our kingdoms, force us upon measures which grieve our consciences as
Christians? But Heaven has mercy, the Church, an unbounded stock of
merits and the intercession of Our Lady of Embrun and the blessed
saints, is urgent, everlasting, and omnipotent."

He laid his hat on the table, and devoutly kneeling before the images
stuck into the hat band, repeated in an earnest tone, "Sancte Huberte,
Sancte Juliane, Sancte Martine, Sancta Rosalia, Sancti quotquot adestis,
orate pro me peccatore!" [St. Hubert, St. Julian, St. Martin, St.
Rosalia, all ye saints who hear me, pray for me, a sinner.] He then
smote his breast, arose, reassumed his hat, and continued: "Be assured,
good father, that whatever there may be in our commission of the nature
at which you have hinted, the execution shall not be intrusted to this
youth, nor shall he be privy to such part of our purpose."

"In this," said the Astrologer, "you, my royal brother, will walk
wisely.--Something may be apprehended likewise from the rashness of
this your young commissioner, a failing inherent in those of sanguine
complexion. But I hold that, by the rules of art, this chance is not to
be weighed against the other properties discovered from his horoscope
and otherwise."

"Will this next midnight be a propitious hour in which to commence a
perilous journey?" said the King. "See, here is your Ephemerides--you
see the position of the moon in regard to Saturn, and the ascendence of
Jupiter.--That should argue, methinks, in submission to your better art,
success to him who sends forth the expedition at such an hour."

"To him who sends forth the expedition," said the Astrologer, after a
pause, "this conjunction doth indeed promise success; but, methinks,
that Saturn, being combust, threatens danger and infortune to the party
sent; whence I infer that the errand may be perilous, or even fatal
to those who are to journey. Violence and captivity, methinks, are
intimated in that adverse conjunction."

"Violence and captivity to those who are sent," answered the King,
"but success to the wishes of the sender.--Runs it not thus, my learned
father?"

"Even so," replied the Astrologer.

The King paused, without giving any farther indication how far
this presaging speech (probably hazarded by the Astrologer from his
conjecture that the commission related to some dangerous purpose)
squared with his real object, which, as the reader is aware, was to
betray the Countess Isabelle of Croye into the hands of William de la
Marck, a nobleman indeed of high birth, but degraded by his crimes into
a leader of banditti, distinguished for his turbulent disposition and
ferocious bravery.

The King then pulled forth a paper from his pocket, and, ere he gave
it to Martivalle, said, in a tone which resembled that of an apology,
"Learned Galeotti, be not surprised that, possessing in you an oracular
treasure, superior to that lodged in the breast of any now alive, not
excepting the great Nostradamus himself [a French astrologer of the
sixteenth century, author of a book of prophecies, which was condemned
by the papal court in 1781], I am desirous frequently to avail myself of
your skill in those doubts and difficulties which beset every Prince
who hath to contend with rebellion within his land, and with external
enemies, both powerful and inveterate."

"When I was honoured with your request, Sire," said the philosopher,
"and abandoned the Court of Buda for that of Plessis, it was with the
resolution to place at the command of my royal patron whatever my art
had, that might be of service to him."

"Enough, good Martivalle--I pray thee attend to the import of this
question."

He proceeded to read from the paper in his hand: "A person having on
hand a weighty controversy, which is like to draw to debate either
by law or by force of arms, is desirous, for the present, to seek
accommodation by a personal interview with his antagonist. He desires
to know what day will be propitious for the execution of such a purpose;
also what is likely to be the success of such a negotiation, and whether
his adversary will be moved to answer the confidence thus reposed in
him, with gratitude and kindness, or may rather be likely to abuse the
opportunity and advantage which such meeting may afford him."

"It is an important question," said Martivalle, when the King had done
reading, "and requires that I should set a planetary figure [to prepare
a diagram which would represent the heavens at that particular moment],
and give it instant and deep consideration."

"Let it be so, my good father in the sciences, and thou shalt know
what it is to oblige a King of France. We are determined, if the
constellations forbid not--and our own humble art leads us to think that
they approve our purpose--to hazard something, even in our own person,
to stop these anti-Christian wars."

"May the Saints forward your Majesty's pious intent," said the
Astrologer, "and guard your sacred person."

"Thanks, learned father. Here is something, the while, to enlarge your
curious library."

He placed under one of the volumes a small purse of gold; for,
economical even in his superstitions, Louis conceived the Astrologer
sufficiently bound to his service by the pensions he had assigned him,
and thought himself entitled to the use of his skill at a moderate rate,
even upon great exigencies.

Louis, having thus, in legal phrase, added a refreshing fee to his
general retainer, turned from him to address Durward.

"Follow me," he said, "my bonny Scot, as one chosen by Destiny and a
Monarch to accomplish a bold adventure. All must be got ready, that thou
mayest put foot in stirrup the very instant the bell of Saint Martin's
tolls twelve. One minute sooner, one minute later, were to forfeit the
favourable aspect of the constellations which smile on your adventure."

Thus saying, the King left the apartment, followed by his young
guardsman; and no sooner were they gone than the Astrologer gave way to
very different feelings from those which seemed to animate him during
the royal presence.

"The niggardly slave!" he said, weighing the purse in his hand--for,
being a man of unbounded expense, he had almost constant occasion for
money--"The base, sordid scullion! A coxswain's wife would give more to
know that her husband had crossed the narrow seas in safety. He acquire
any tincture of humane letters!--yes, when prowling foxes and yelling
wolves become musicians. He read the glorious blazoning of the
firmament!--ay, when sordid moles shall become lynxes. Post tot
promissa--after so many promises made, to entice me from the Court of
the magnificent Matthias, where Hun and Turk, Christian and Infidel, the
Czar of Muscovia and the Cham of Tartary themselves, contended to load
me with gifts--doth he think I am to abide in this old castle like a
bullfinch in a cage, fain to sing as oft as he chooses to whistle, and
all for seed and water? Not so--aut inveniam viam, aut faciam--I
will discover or contrive a remedy. The Cardinal Balue is politic and
liberal--this query shall to him, and it shall be his Eminence's own
fault if the stars speak not as he would have them."

He again took the despised guerdon, and weighed it in his hand. "It may
be," he said, "there is some jewel, or pearl of price, concealed in this
paltry case--I have heard he can be liberal even to lavishness, when it
suits his caprice or interest."

He emptied the purse, which contained neither more nor less than ten
gold pieces. The indignation of the Astrologer was extreme.

"Thinks he that for such paltry rate of hire I will practise that
celestial science which I have studied with the Armenian Abbot of
Istrahoff, who had not seen the sun for forty years--with the Greek
Dubravius, who is said to have raised the dead--and have even visited
the Sheik Ebn Hali in his cave in the deserts of Thebais? No, by
Heaven!--he that contemns art shall perish through his own ignorance.
Ten pieces!--a pittance which I am half ashamed to offer to Toinette, to
buy her new breast laces."

So saying, the indignant Sage nevertheless plunged the contemned pieces
of gold into a large pouch which he wore at his girdle, which Toinette,
and other abettors of lavish expense, generally contrived to empty fully
faster than the philosopher, with all his art, could find the means of
filling.



CHAPTER XIV: THE JOURNEY

     I see thee yet, fair France--thou favour'd land
     Of art and nature--thou art still before me,
     Thy sons, to whom their labour is a sport,
     So well thy grateful soil returns its tribute,
     Thy sunburnt daughters, with their laughing eyes
     And glossy raven locks. But, favour'd France,
     Thou hast had many a tale of woe to tell
     In ancient times as now.

     ANONYMOUS


Avoiding all conversation with any one (for such was his charge),
Quentin Durward proceeded hastily to array himself in a strong but plain
cuirass, with thigh and arm pieces, and placed on his head a good steel
cap without any visor. To these was added a handsome cassock of chamois
leather, finely dressed, and laced down the seams with some embroidery,
such as might become a superior officer in a noble household.

These were brought to his apartment by Oliver, who, with his quiet,
insinuating smile and manner, acquainted him that his uncle had been
summoned to mount guard purposely that he might make no inquiries
concerning these mysterious movements.

"Your excuse will be made to your kinsman," said Oliver, smiling again,
"and, my dearest son, when you return safe from the execution of this
pleasing trust, I doubt not you will be found worthy of such promotion
as will dispense with your accounting for your motions to any one, while
it will place you at the head of those who must render an account of
theirs to you."

So spoke Oliver le Diable, calculating, probably, in his own mind,
the great chance there was that the poor youth whose hand he squeezed
affectionately as he spoke, must necessarily encounter death or
captivity in the commission intrusted to his charge. He added to his
fair words a small purse of gold, to defray necessary expenses on the
road, as a gratuity on the King's part.

At a few minutes before twelve at midnight, Quentin, according to his
directions, proceeded to the second courtyard, and paused under the
Dauphin's Tower, which, as the reader knows, was assigned for the
temporary residence of the Countesses of Croye. He found, at this place
of rendezvous, the men and horses appointed to compose the retinue,
leading two sumpter mules already loaded with baggage, and holding three
palfreys for the two Countesses and a faithful waiting woman, with a
stately war horse for himself, whose steel plated saddle glanced in the
pale moonlight. Not a word of recognition was spoken on either side. The
men sat still in their saddles as if they were motionless, and by the
same imperfect light Quentin saw with pleasure that they were all armed,
and held long lances in their hands. They were only three in number, but
one of them whispered to Quentin, in a strong Gascon accent, that their
guide was to join them beyond Tours.

Meantime, lights glanced to and fro at the lattices of the tower, as
if there was bustle and preparation among its inhabitants. At length
a small door, which led from the bottom of the tower to the court, was
unclosed, and three females came forth attended by a man wrapped in a
cloak. They mounted in silence the palfreys which stood prepared for
them, while their attendant on foot led the way, and gave the passwords
and signals to the watchful guards, whose posts they passed in
succession. Thus they at length reached the exterior of these formidable
barriers. Here the man on foot, who had hitherto acted as their guide,
paused, and spoke low and earnestly to the two foremost females.

"May heaven bless you, Sire," said a voice which thrilled upon
Quentin Durward's ear, "and forgive you, even if your purposes be more
interested than your words express! To be placed in safety under the
protection of the good Bishop of Liege, is the utmost extent of my
desire."

The person whom she thus addressed muttered an inaudible answer, and
retreated back through the barrier gate, while Quentin thought that, by
the moon glimpse, he recognized in him the King himself, whose anxiety
for the departure of his guests had probably induced him to give his
presence, in case scruples should arise on their part, or difficulties
on that of the guards of the Castle.

When the riders were beyond the Castle, it was necessary for some time
to ride with great precaution, in order to avoid the pitfalls, snares,
