
"A pretty preacher, and a pretty practitioner!" says Mr. Wolfe, with a
shrug of his shoulders.

"Why, I thought the discourse did not last ten minutes, and madam did
not sleep one single wink during the sermon, didst thou, Molly?"

"Did you see when the fellow came into church?" asked the indignant
Colonel Wolfe. "He came in at the open door of the common, just in time,
and as the psalm was over."

"Well, he had been reading the service probably to some sick person;
there are many here," remarks Mrs. Lambert.

"Reading the service! Oh, my good Mrs. Lambert! Do you know where I
found him? I went to look for your young scapegrace of a Virginian."

"His own name is a very pretty name, I'm sure," cries out Hetty. "It
isn't Scapegrace! It is Henry Esmond Warrington, Esquire."

"Miss Hester, I found the parson in his cassock, and Henry Esmond
Warrington, Esquire, in his bedgown, at a quarter before eleven o'clock
in the morning, when all the Sunday bells were ringing, and they were
playing over a game of piquet they had had the night before!"

"Well, numbers of good people play at cards of a Sunday. The King plays
at cards of a Sunday."

"Hush, my dear!"

"I know he does," says Hetty, "with that painted person we saw
yesterday--that Countess what-d'you-call-her?"

"I think, my dear Miss Hester, a clergyman had best take to God's books
instead of the Devil's books on that day--and so I took the liberty of
telling your parson." Hetty looked as if she thought it was a liberty
which Mr. Wolfe had taken. "And I told our young friend that I thought
he had better have been on his way to church than there in his bedgown."

"You wouldn't have Harry go to church in a dressing-gown and nightcap,
Colonel Wolfe? That would be a pretty sight, indeed!" again says Hetty,
fiercely.

"I would have my little girl's tongue not wag quite so fast," remarks
papa, patting the girl's flushed little cheek.

"Not speak when a friend is attacked, and nobody says a word in his
favour? No; nobody!"

Here the two lips of the little mouth closed on each other: the whole
little frame shook: the child flung a parting look of defiance at Mr.
Wolfe, and went out of the room, just in time to close the door, and
burst out crying on the stair.

Mr. Wolfe looked very much discomfited. "I am sure, Aunt Lambert, I did
not intend to hurt Hester's feelings."

"No, James," she said, very kindly--the young officer used to call her
Aunt Lambert in quite early days--and she gave him her hand.

Mr. Lambert whistled his favourite tune of "Over the hills and far
away," with a drum accompaniment performed by his fingers on the window.
"I say, you mustn't whistle on Sunday, papa!" cries the artless young
gown-boy from Grey Friars; and then suggested that it was three hours
from breakfast, and he should like to finish Theo's cheese-cake.

"Oh, you greedy child!" cries Theo. But here, hearing a little
exclamatory noise outside, she ran out of the room, closing the door
behind her. And we will not pursue her. The noise was that sob which
broke from Hester's panting, overloaded heart; and, though we cannot
see, I am sure the little maid flung herself on her sister's neck, and
wept upon Theo's kind bosom.

Hetty did not walk out in the afternoon when the family took the air
on the common, but had a headache and lay on her bed, where her mother
watched her. Charley had discovered a comrade from Grey Friars: Mr.
Wolfe of course paired off with Miss Lowther: and Theo and her father,
taking their sober walk in the Sabbath sunshine, found Madame Bernstein
basking on a bench under a tree, her niece and nephew in attendance.
Harry ran up to greet his dear friends: he was radiant with pleasure at
beholding them--the elder ladies were most gracious to the Colonel and
his wife, who had so kindly welcomed their Harry.

How noble and handsome he looked! Theo thought: she called him by his
Christian name, as if he were really her brother. "Why did we not see
you sooner to-day, Harry?" she asked.

"I never thought you were here, Theo."

"But you might have seen us if you wished."

"Where?" asked Harry.

"There, sir," she said, pointing to the church. And she held her hand
up as if in reproof; but a sweet kindness beamed in her honest face.
Ah, friendly young reader, wandering on the world and struggling with
temptation, may you also have one or two pure hearts to love and pray
for you!




CHAPTER XXXIII. Contains a Soliloquy by Hester


Martin Lambert's first feeling, upon learning the little secret which
his younger daughter's emotion had revealed, was to be angry with the
lad who had robbed his child's heart away from him and her family. "A
plague upon all scapegraces, English or Indian!" cried the Colonel to
his wife. "I wish this one had broke his nose against any doorpost but
ours."

"Perhaps we are to cure him of being a scapegrace, my dear," says Mrs.
Lambert, mildly interposing, "and the fall at our door hath something
providential in it. You laughed at me, Mr. Lambert, when I said so
before; but if Heaven did not send the young gentleman to us, who did?
And it may be for the blessing and happiness of us all that he came,
too."

"It's hard, Molly!" groaned the Colonel. "We cherish and fondle and rear
'em: we tend them through sickness and health: we toil and we scheme:
we hoard away money in the stocking, and patch our own old coats: if
they've a headache we can't sleep for thinking of their ailment; if
they have a wish or fancy, we work day and night to compass it, and 'tis
darling daddy and dearest pappy, and whose father is like ours? and so
forth. On Tuesday morning I am king of my house and family. On Tuesday
evening Prince Whippersnapper makes his appearance, and my reign is
over. A whole life is forgotten and forsworn for a pair of blue eyes, a
pair of lean shanks, and a head of yellow hair."

"'Tis written that we women should leave all to follow our husband. I
think our courtship was not very long, dear Martin!" said the matron,
laying her hand on her husband's arm.

"'Tis human nature, and what can you expect of the jade?" sighed the
Colonel.

"And I think I did my duty to my husband, though I own I left my papa
for him," added Mrs. Lambert, softly.

"Excellent wench! Perdition catch my soul! but I do love thee, Molly!"
says the good Colonel; "but, then, mind you, your father never did me;
and if ever I am to have sons-in-law----"

"Ever, indeed! Of course my girls are to have husbands, Mr. Lambert!"
cries mamma.

"Well, when they come, I'll hate them, madam, as your father did me; and
quite right too, for taking his treasure away from him."

"Don't be irreligious and unnatural, Martin Lambert! I say you are
unnatural, sir!" continues the matron.

"Nay, my dear, I have an old tooth in my left jaw, here; and 'tis
natural that the tooth should come out. But when the toothdrawer pulls
it, 'tis natural that I should feel pain. Do you suppose, madam, that
I don't love Hetty better than any tooth in my head?" asks Mr. Lambert.
But no woman was ever averse to the idea of her daughter getting a
husband, however fathers revolt against the invasion of the son-in-law.
As for mothers and grandmothers, those good folks are married over again
in the marriage of their young ones; and their souls attire themselves
in the laces and muslins of twenty-forty years ago; the postillion's
white ribbons bloom again, and they flutter into the postchaise, and
drive away. What woman, however old, has not the bridal favours and
raiment stowed away, and packed in lavender, in the inmost cupboards of
her heart?

"It will be a sad thing, parting with her," continued Mrs. Lambert, with
a sigh.

"You have settled that point already, Molly," laughs the Colonel. "Had I
not best go out and order raisins and corinths for the wedding-cake?"

"And then I shall have to leave the house in their charge when I go to
her, you know, in Virginia. How many miles is it to Virginia, Martin? I
should think it must be thousands of miles."

"A hundred and seventy-three thousand three hundred and ninety-one and
three-quarters, my dear, by the near way," answers Lambert, gravely;
"that through Prester John's country. By the other route, through
Persia----"

"Oh, give me the one where there is the least of the sea, and your
horrid ships, which I can't bear!" cries the Colonel's spouse. "I hope
Rachel Esmond and I shall be better friends. She had a very high spirit
when we were girls at school."

"Had we not best go about the baby-linen, Mrs. Martin Lambert?" here
interposed her wondering husband. Now, Mrs. Lambert, I dare say, thought
there was no matter for wonderment at all, and had remarked some very
pretty lace caps and bibs in Mrs. Bobbinit's toy-shop. And on that
Sunday afternoon, when the discovery was made, and while little Hetty
was lying upon her pillow with feverish cheeks, closed eyes, and a
piteous face, her mother looked at the child with the most perfect ease
of mind, and seemed to be rather pleased than otherwise at Hetty's woe.

The girl was not only unhappy, but enraged with herself for having
published her secret. Perhaps she had not known it until the sudden
emotion acquainted her with her own state of mind; and now the little
maid chose to be as much ashamed as if she had done a wrong, and been
discovered in it. She was indignant with her own weakness, and broke
into transports of wrath against herself. She vowed she never would
forgive herself for submitting to such a humiliation. So the young pard,
wounded by the hunter's dart, chafes with rage in the forest, is angry
with the surprise of the rankling steel in her side, and snarls and
bites at her sister-cubs, and the leopardess, her spotted mother.

Little Hetty tore and gnawed, and growled, so that I should not like to
have been her fraternal cub, or her spotted dam or sire. "What business
has any young woman," she cried out, "to indulge in any such nonsense?
Mamma, I ought to be whipped, and sent to bed. I know perfectly well
that Mr. Warrington does not care a fig about me. I dare say he likes
French actresses and the commonest little milliner-girl in the toy-shop
better than me. And so he ought, and so they are better than me. Why,
what a fool I am to burst out crying like a ninny about nothing, and
because Mr. Wolfe said Harry played cards of a Sunday! I know he is not
clever, like papa. I believe he is stupid--I am certain he is stupid:
but he is not so stupid as I am. Why, of course, I can't marry him.
How am I to go to America, and leave you and Theo? Of course, he likes
somebody else, at America, or at Tunbridge, or at Jericho, or somewhere.
He is a prince in his own country, and can't think of marrying a poor
half-pay officer's daughter, with twopence to her fortune. Used not you
to tell me how, when I was a baby, I cried and wanted the moon? I am
a baby now, a most absurd, silly, little baby--don't talk to me, Mrs.
Lambert, I am. Only there is this to be said, he don't know anything
about it, and I would rather cut my tongue out than tell him."

Dire were the threats with which Hetty menaced Theo, in case her
sister should betray her. As for the infantile Charley, his mind being
altogether set on cheese-cakes, he had not remarked or been moved by
Miss Hester's emotion; and the parents and the kind sister of course all
promised not to reveal the little maid's secret.

"I begin to think it had been best for us to stay at home," sighed Mrs.
Lambert to her husband.

"Nay, my dear," replied the other. "Human nature will be human nature;
surely Hetty's mother told me herself that she had the beginning of a
liking for a certain young curate before she fell over head and ears in
love with a certain young officer of Kingsley's. And as for me, my
heart was wounded in a dozen places ere Miss Molly Benson took entire
possession of it. Our sons and daughters must follow in the way of their
parents before them, I suppose. Why, but yesterday, you were scolding me
for grumbling at Miss Het's precocious fancies. To do the child justice,
she disguises her feelings entirely, and I defy Mr. Warrington to know
from her behaviour how she is disposed towards him."

"A daughter of mine and yours, Martin," cries the mother, with great
dignity, "is not going to fling herself at a gentleman's head!"

"Neither herself nor the teacup, my dear," answers the Colonel. Little
Miss Het treats Mr. Warrington like a vixen. He never comes to us, but
she boxes his ears in one fashion or t'other. I protest she is barely
civil to him; but, knowing what is going on in the young hypocrite's
mind, I am not going to be angry at her rudeness."

"She hath no need to be rude at all, Martin; and our girl is good
enough for any gentleman in England or America. Why, if their ages suit,
shouldn't they marry after all, sir?"

"Why, if he wants her, shouldn't he ask her, my dear? I am sorry we
came. I am for putting the horses into the carriage, and turning their
heads towards home again."

But mamma fondly said, "Depend on it, my dear, that these matters are
wisely ordained for us. Depend upon it, Martin, it was not for nothing
that Harry Warrington was brought to our gate in that way; and that he
and our children are thus brought together again. If that marriage has
been decreed in Heaven, a marriage it will be."

"At what age, Molly, I wonder, do women begin and leave off
match-making? If our little chit falls in love and falls out again, she
will not be the first of her sex, Mrs. Lambert. I wish we were on our
way home again, and, if I had my will, would trot off this very night."

"He has promised to drink his tea here to-night. You would not take away
our child's pleasure, Martin?" asked the mother, softly.

In his fashion, the father was not less good-natured. "You know, my
dear," says Lambert, "that if either of 'em had a fancy to our ears, we
would cut them off and serve them in a fricassee."

Mary Lambert laughed at the idea of her pretty little delicate ears
being so served. When her husband was most tender-hearted, his habit
was to be most grotesque. When he pulled the pretty little delicate ear,
behind which the matron's fine hair was combed back, wherein twinkled
a shining line or two of silver, I dare say he did not hurt her much. I
dare say she was thinking of the soft, well-remembered times of her own
modest youth and sweet courtship. Hallowed remembrances of sacred times!
If the sight of youthful love is pleasant to behold, how much more
charming the aspect of the affection that has survived years, sorrows,
faded beauty perhaps, and life's doubts, differences, trouble!

In regard of her promise to disguise her feelings for Mr. Warrington in
that gentleman's presence, Miss Hester was better, or worse if you will,
than her word. Harry not only came to take tea with his friends, but
invited them for the next day to an entertainment at the Rooms, to be
given in their special honour.

"A dance, and given for us!" cries Theo. "Oh, Harry, how delightful! I
wish we could begin this very minute!"

"Why, for a savage Virginian, I declare, Harry Warrington, thou art the
most civilised young man possible!" says the Colonel. "My dear, shall we
dance a minuet together?"

"We have done such a thing before, Martin Lambert!" says the soldier's
fond wife. Her husband hums a minuet tune; whips a plate from the
tea-table, and makes a preparatory bow and flourish with it as if it
were a hat, whilst madam performs her best curtsey.

Only Hetty, of the party, persists in looking glum and displeased. "Why,
child, have you not a word of thanks to throw to Mr. Warrington?" asks
Theo of her sister.

"I never did care for dancing much," says Hetty. "What is the use of
standing up opposite a stupid man, and dancing down a room with him?"

"Merci du compliment!" says Mr. Warrington.

"I don't say that you are stupid--that is--that is, I--I only meant
country dances," says Hetty, biting her lips, as she caught her sister's
eye. She remembered she had said Harry was stupid, and Theo's droll
humorous glance was her only reminder.

But with this Miss Hetty chose to be as angry as if it had been quite a
cruel rebuke. "I hate dancing--there--I own it," she says, with a toss
of her head.

"Nay, you used to like it well enough, child!!" interposes her mother.

"That was when she was a child: don't you see she is grown up to be an
old woman?" remarks Hetty's father. "Or perhaps Miss Hester has got the
gout?"

"Fiddle!" says Hester, snappishly, drubbing with her little feet.

"What's a dance without a fiddle?" says imperturbed papa.

Darkness has come over Harry Warrington's face. "I come to try my best,
and give them pleasure and a dance," he thinks, "and the little thing
tells me she hates dancing. We don't practise kindness, or acknowledge
hospitality so in our country. No--nor speak to our parents so,
neither." I am afraid, in this particular usages have changed in the
United States during the last hundred years, and that the young folks
there are considerably Hettified.

Not content with this, Miss Hester must proceed to make such fun of
all the company at the Wells, and especially of Harry's own immediate
pursuits and companions, that the honest lad was still further pained at
her behaviour; and, when he saw Mrs. Lambert alone, asked how or in
what he had again offended, that Hester was so angry with him? The kind
matron felt more than ever well disposed towards the boy, after her
daughter's conduct to him. She would have liked to tell the secret
which Hester hid so fiercely. Theo, too, remonstrated with her sister in
private; but Hester would not listen to the subject, and was as angry in
her bedroom, when the girls were alone, as she had been in the parlour
before her mother's company. "Suppose he hates me?" says she. "I expect
he will. I hate myself, I do, and scorn myself for being such an idiot.
How ought he to do otherwise than hate me? Didn't I abuse him, call him
goose, all sorts of names? And know he is not clever all the time. I
know I have better wits than he has. It is only because he is tall, and
has blue eyes, and a pretty nose that I like him. What an absurd fool a
girl must be to like a man merely because he has a blue nose and hooked
eyes! So I am a fool, and I won't have you say a word to the contrary,
Theo!"

Now Theo thought that her little sister, far from being a fool, was
a wonder of wonders, and that if any girl was worthy of any prince in
Christendom, Hetty was that spinster. "You are silly sometimes, Hetty,"
says Theo, "that is when you speak unkindly to people who mean you well,
as you did to Mr. Warrington at tea to-night. When he proposed to us his
party at the Assembly Rooms, and nothing could be more gallant of him,
why did you say you didn't care for music, or dancing, or tea? You know
you love them all!"

"I said it merely to vex myself, Theo, and annoy myself, and whip
myself, as I deserve, child. And, besides, how can you expect such an
idiot as I am to say anything but idiotic things? Do you know, it
quite pleased me to see him angry. I thought, ah! now I have hurt his
feelings! Now he will say, Hetty Lambert is an odious little set-up,
sour-tempered vixen. And that will teach him, and you, and mamma, and
papa, at any rate, that I am not going to set my cap at Mr. Harry. No;
our papa is ten times as good as he is. I will stay by our papa, and if
he asked me to go to Virginia with him to-morrow, I wouldn't, Theo. My
sister is worth all the Virginians that ever were made since the world
began."

And here, I suppose, follow osculations between the sisters, and
mother's knock comes to the door, who has overheard their talk through
the wainscot, and calls out, "Children, 'tis time to go to sleep."
Theo's eyes close speedily, and she is at rest; but ob, poor little
Hetty! Think of the hours tolling one after another, and the child's
eyes wide open, as she lies tossing and wakeful with the anguish of the
new wound!

"It is a judgment upon me," she says, "for having thought and spoke
scornfully of him. Only, why should there be a judgment upon me? I was
only in fun. I knew I liked him very much all the time: but I thought
Theo liked him too, and I would give up anything for my darling Theo. If
she had, no tortures should ever have drawn a word from me--I would have
got a rope-ladder to help her to run away with Harry, that I would,
or fetched the clergyman to marry them. And then I would have retired
alone, and alone, and alone, and taken care of papa and mamma, and of
the poor in the village, and have read sermons, though I hate 'em, and
would have died without telling a word--not a word--and I shall die
soon, I know I shall." But when the dawn rises, the little maid is
asleep, nestling by her sister, the stain of a tear or two upon her
flushed downy cheek.

Most of us play with edged tools at some period of our lives, and cut
ourselves accordingly. At first the cut hurts and stings, and down drops
the knife, and we cry out like wounded little babies as we are. Some
very very few and unlucky folks at the game cut their heads sheer off,
or stab themselves mortally, and perish outright, and there is an end
of them. But,--heaven help us!--many people have fingered those ardentes
sagittas which Love sharpens on his whetstone, and are stabbed, scarred,
pricked, perforated, tattooed all over with the wounds, who recovered,
and live to be quite lively. Wir auch have tasted das irdische Glueck;
we also have gelebt and--und so weiter. Warble your death-song, sweet
Thekla! Perish off the face of the earth, poor pulmonary victim, if so
minded! Had you survived to a later period of life, my dear, you would
have thought of a sentimental disappointment without any reference to
the undertaker. Let us trust there is no present need of a sexton for
Miss Hetty. But meanwhile, the very instant she wakes, there, tearing
at her little heart, will that Care be, which has given her a few hours'
respite, melted, no doubt, by her youth and her tears.




CHAPTER XXXIV. In which Mr. Warrington treats the Company with Tea and a
Ball


Generous with his very easily gotten money, hospitable and cordial to
all, our young Virginian, in his capacity of man of fashion, could
not do less than treat his country friends to an entertainment at the
Assembly Rooms, whither, according to the custom of the day, he invited
almost all the remaining company at the Wells. Card-tables were set in
one apartment, for all those who could not spend an evening without the
pastime then common to all European society: a supper with champagne in
some profusion and bowls of negus was prepared in another chamber: the
large assembly-room was set apart for the dance, of which enjoyment
Harry Warrington's guests partook in our ancestors' homely fashion. I
cannot fancy that the amusement was especially lively. First, minuets
were called, two or three of which were performed by as many couple. The
spinsters of the highest rank in the assembly went out for the minuet,
and my Lady Maria Esmond, being an earl's daughter, and the person of
the highest rank present (with the exception of Lady Augusta Crutchley,
who was lame), Mr. Warrington danced the first minuet with his cousin,
acquitting himself to the satisfaction of the whole room, and performing
much more elegantly than Mr. Wolfe, who stood up with Miss Lowther.
Having completed the dance with Lady Maria, Mr. Warrington begged Miss
Theo to do him the honour of walking the next minuet, and accordingly
Miss Theo, blushing and looking very happy, went through her exercise to
the great delight of her parents and the rage of Miss Humpleby, Sir John
Humpleby's daughter, of Liphook, who expected, at least, to have stood
up next after my Lady Maria. Then, after the minuets, came country
dances, the music being performed by a harp, fiddle, and flageolet,
perched in a little balcony, and thrumming through the evening rather
feeble and melancholy tunes. Take up an old book of music, and play a
few of those tunes now, and one wonders how people at any time could
have found the airs otherwise than melancholy. And yet they loved and
frisked and laughed and courted to that sad accompaniment. There is
scarce one of the airs that has not an amari aliquid, a tang of sadness.
Perhaps it is because they are old and defunct, and their plaintive
echoes call out to us from the limbo of the past, whither they have been
consigned for this century. Perhaps they were gay when they were alive;
and our descendants when they hear--well, never mind names--when they
hear the works of certain maestri now popular, will say: Bon Dieu, is
this the music which amused our forefathers?

Mr. Warrington had the honour of a duchess's company at his
tea-drinking--Colonel Lambert's and Mr. Prior's heroine, the Duchess
of Queensberry. And though the duchess carefully turned her back upon a
countess who was present, laughed loudly, glanced at the latter over her
shoulder, and pointed at her with her fan, yet almost all the company
pushed, and bowed, and cringed, and smiled, and backed before this
countess, scarcely taking any notice of her Grace of Queensberry and her
jokes, and her fan, and her airs. Now this countess was no other than
the Countess of Yarmouth-Walmoden, the lady whom his Majesty George the
Second, of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, King, Defender of the
Faith, delighted to honour. She had met Harry Warrington in the walks
that morning, and had been mighty gracious to the young Virginian. She
had told him they would have a game at cards that night; and purblind
old Colonel Blinkinsop, who fancied the invitation had been addressed to
him, had made the profoundest of bows. "Pooh! pooh!" said the Countess
of England and Hanover, "I don't mean you. I mean the young Firshinian!"
And everybody congratulated the youth on his good fortune. At night, all
the world, in order to show their loyalty, doubtless, thronged round
my Lady Yarmouth; my Lord Bamborough was eager to make her parti at
quadrille. My Lady Blanche Pendragon, that model of virtue; Sir Lancelot
Quintain, that pattern of knighthood and valour; Mr. Dean of Ealing,
that exemplary divine and preacher; numerous gentlemen, noblemen,
generals, colonels, matrons, and spinsters of the highest rank, were
on the watch for a smile from her, or eager to jump up and join her
card-table. Lady Maria waited upon her with meek respect, and Madame
de Bernstein treated the Hanoverian lady with profound gravity and
courtesy.

Harry's bow had been no lower than hospitality required; but, such as it
was, Miss Hester chose to be indignant with it. She scarce spoke a word
to her partner during their dance together; and when he took her to the
supper-room for refreshment she was little more communicative. To
enter that room they had to pass by Madame Walmoden's card-table, who
good-naturedly called out to her host as he was passing, and asked him
if his "breddy liddle bardner liked tanzing?"

"I thank your ladyship, I don't like tanzing, and I don't like cards,"
says Miss Hester, tossing up her head; and, dropping a curtsey like a
"cheese," she strutted away from the Countess's table.

Mr. Warrington was very much offended. Sarcasm from the young to the old
pained him: flippant behaviour towards himself hurt him. Courteous in
his simple way to all persons whom he met, he expected a like politeness
from them. Hetty perfectly well knew what offence she was giving; could
mark the displeasure reddening on her partner's honest face, with a
sidelong glance of her eye; nevertheless she tried to wear her most
ingenuous smile; and, as she came up to the sideboard where the
refreshments were set, artlessly said:

"What a horrid, vulgar old woman that is; don't you think so?"

"What woman?" asked the young man.

"That German woman--my Lady Yarmouth--to whom all the men are bowing and
cringing."

"Her ladyship has been very kind to me," says Harry, grimly. "Won't you
have some of this custard?"

"And you have been bowing to her, too! You look as if your negus was not
nice," harmlessly continues Miss Hetty.

"It is not very good negus," says Harry, with a gulp.

"And the custard is bad too! I declare 'tis made with bad eggs!" cries
Miss Lambert.

"I wish, Hester, that the entertainment and the company had been better
to your liking," says poor Harry.

"'Tis very unfortunate; but I dare say you could not help it," cries the
young woman, tossing her little curly head.

Mr. Warrington groaned in spirit, perhaps in body, and clenched his
fists and his teeth. The little torturer artlessly continued, "You seem
disturbed: shall we go to my mamma?"

"Yes, let us go to your mamma," cries Mr. Warrington, with glaring eyes
and a "Curse you, why are you always standing in the way?" to an unlucky
waiter.

"La! Is that the way you speak in Virginia?" asks Miss Pertness.

"We are rough there sometimes, madam, and can't help being disturbed,"
he says slowly, and with a quiver in his whole frame, looking down upon
her with fire flashing out of his eyes. Hetty saw nothing distinctly
afterwards, and until she came to her mother. Never had she seen Harry
look so handsome or so noble.

"You look pale, child!" cries mamma, anxious, like all pavidae matres.

"'Tis the cold--no, I mean the heat. Thank you, Mr. Warrington." And
she makes him a faint curtsey, as Harry bows a tremendous bow, and
walks elsewhere amongst his guests. He hardly knows what is happening at
first, so angry is he.

He is aroused by another altercation, between his aunt and the Duchess
of Queensberry. When the royal favourite passed the Duchess, her Grace
gave her Ladyship an awful stare out of eyes that were not so bright now
as they had been in the young days when they "set the world on fire;"
turned round with an affected laugh to her neighbour, and shot at
the jolly Hanoverian lady a ceaseless fire of giggles and sneers.
The Countess pursued her game at cards, not knowing, or not choosing,
perhaps, to know how her enemy was gibing at her. There had been a feud
of many years' date between their Graces of Queensberry and the family
on the throne.

"How you all bow down to the idol! Don't tell me! You are as bad as
the rest, my good Madame Bernstein!" the Duchess says. "Ah, what a true
Christian country this is! and how your dear first husband, the Bishop,
would have liked to see such a sight!"

"Forgive me, if I fail quite to understand your Grace."

"We are both of us growing old, my good Bernstein, or, perhaps, we won't
understand when we don't choose to understand. That is the way with us
women, my good young Iroquois."

"Your Grace remarked, that it was a Christian country," said Madame de
Bernstein, "and I failed to perceive the point of the remark."

"Indeed, my good creature, there is very little point in it! I meant
we were such good Christians, because we were so forgiving. Don't
you remember reading, when you were young, or your husband the Bishop
reading, when he was in the pulpit, how when a woman amongst the Jews
was caught doing wrong, the Pharisees were for stoning her out of hand?
Far from stoning such a woman now, look, how fond we are of her! Any man
in this room would go round it on his knees if yonder woman bade him.
Yes, Madame Walmoden, you may look up from your cards with your great
painted face, and frown with your great painted eyebrows at me. You know
I am talking about you; and intend to go on talking about you, too. I
say any man here would go round the room on his knees, if you bade him!"

"I think, madam, I know two or three who wouldn't!" says Mr. Warrington,
with some spirit.

"Quick, let me hug them to my heart of hearts!" cries the old Duchess.
"Which are they? Bring 'em to me, my dear Iroquois! Let us have a game
of four--of honest men and women; that is to say, if we can find a
couple more partners, Mr. Warrington!"

"Here are we three," says the Baroness Bernstein, with a forced laugh;
"let us play a dummy."

"Pray, madam, where is the third?" asks the old Duchess, looking round.

"Madam!" cries out the other elderly lady, "I leave your Grace to boast
of your honesty, which I have no doubt is spotless: but I will thank you
not to doubt mine before my own relatives and children!"

"See how she fires up at a word! I am sure, my dear creature, you are
quite as honest as most of the company," says the Duchess.

"Which may not be good enough for her Grace the Duchess of Queensberry
and Dover, who, to be sure, might have stayed away in such a case, but
it is the best my nephew could get, madam, and his best he has given
you. You look astonished, Harry, my dear--and well you may. He is not
used to our ways, madam."

"Madam, he has found an aunt who can teach him our ways, and a great
deal more!" cries the Duchess, rapping her fan.

"She will teach him to try and make all his guests welcome, old or
young, rich or poor. That is the Virginian way, isn't it, Harry? She
will tell him, when Catherine Hyde is angry with his old aunt, that they
were friends as girls, and ought not to quarrel now they are old women.
And she will not be wrong, will she, Duchess?" And herewith the
one dowager made a superb curtsey to the other, and the battle just
impending between them passed away.

"Egad, it was like Byng and Galissoniere!" cried Chaplain Sampson, as
Harry talked over the night's transactions with his tutor next morning.
"No power on earth, I thought, could have prevented those two from going
into action!"

"Seventy-fours at least--both of 'em!" laughs Harry.

"But the Baroness declined the battle, and sailed out of fire with
inimitable skill."

"Why should she be afraid? I have heard you say my aunt is as witty as
any woman alive, and need fear the tongue of no dowager in England."

"Hem! Perhaps she had good reasons for being peaceable!" Sampson knew
very well what they were, and that poor Bernstein's reputation was so
hopelessly flawed and cracked, that any sarcasms levelled at Madame
Walmoden were equally applicable to her.

"Sir," cried Harry, in great amazement, "you don't mean to say there is
anything against the character of my aunt, the Baroness de Bernstein!"

The chaplain looked at the young Virginian with such an air of utter
wonderment, that the latter saw there must be some history against his
aunt, and some charge which Sampson did not choose to reveal. "Good
heavens!" Harry groaned out, "are there two then in the family, who
are----?"

"Which two?" asked the chaplain.

But here Harry stopped, blushing very red. He remembered, and we shall
presently have to state, whence he had got his information regarding the
other family culprit, and bit his lip, and was silent.

"Bygones are always unpleasant things, Mr. Warrington," said the
chaplain; "and we had best hold our peace regarding them. No man or
woman can live long in this wicked world of ours without some scandal
attaching to them, and I fear our excellent Baroness has been no more
fortunate than her neighbours. We cannot escape calumny, my dear young
friend! You have had sad proof enough of that in your brief stay amongst
us. But we can have clear consciences, and that is the main point!" And
herewith the chaplain threw his handsome eyes upward, and tried to look
as if his conscience was as white as the ceiling.

"Has there been anything very wrong, then, about my Aunt Bernstein?"
continued Harry, remembering how at home his mother had never spoken of
the Baroness.

"O sancta simplicitas!" the chaplain muttered to himself. "Stories, my
dear sir, much older than your time or mine. Stories such as were told
about everybody, de me, de te; you know with what degree of truth in
your own case."

"Confound the villain! I should like to hear any scoundrel say a word
against the dear old lady," cries the young gentleman. "Why, this world,
parson, is full of lies and scandal!"

"And you are just beginning to find it out, my dear sir," cries the
clergyman, with his most beatified air. "Whose character has not been
attacked? My lord's, yours, mine,--every one's. We must bear as well as
we can, and pardon to the utmost of our power."

"You may. It's your cloth, you know; but, by George, I won't!" cries Mr.
Warrington, and again goes down the fist with a thump on the table. "Let
any fellow say a word in my hearing against that dear old creature, and
I'll pull his nose, as sure as my name is Harry Esmond. How do you do,
Colonel Lambert? You find us late again, sir. Me and his reverence kept
it up pretty late with some of the young fellows, after the ladies
went away. I hope the dear ladies are well, sir?" and here Harry rose,
greeting his friend the Colonel very kindly, who had come to pay him
a morning visit, and had entered the room followed by Mr. Gumbo (the
latter preferred walking very leisurely about all the affairs of life),
just as Harry--suiting the action to the word--was tweaking the nose of
Calumny.

"The ladies are purely. Whose nose were you pulling when I came in, Mr.
Warrington?" says the Colonel, laughing.

"Isn't it a shame, sir? The parson, here, was telling me that there
are villains here who attack the character of my aunt, the Baroness of
Bernstein!"

"You don't mean to say so!" cries Mr. Lambert.

"I tell Mr. Harry that everybody is calumniated!" says the chaplain,
with a clerical intonation; but, at the same time, he looks at Colonel
Lambert and winks, as much as to say, "He knows nothing--keep him in the
dark."

The Colonel took the hint. "Yes," says he, "the jaws of slander are for
ever wagging. Witness that story about the dancing-girl, that we all
believed against you, Harry Warrington."

"What, all, sir?"

"No, not all. One didn't--Hetty didn't. You should have heard her
standing up for you, Harry, t'other day, when somebody--a little
bird--brought us another story about you; about a game at cards on
Sunday morning, when you and a friend of yours might have been better
employed." And here there was a look of mingled humour and reproof at
the clergyman.

"Faith, I own it, sir!" says the chaplain. "It was mea culpa, mea
maxima--no, mea minima culpa, only the rehearsal of an old game at
piquet, which we had been talking over."

"And did Miss Hester stand up for me?" says Harry.

"Miss Hester did. But why that wondering look?" asks the Colonel.

"She scolded me last night like--like anything," says downright Harry.
"I never heard a young girl go on so. She made fun of everybody--hit
about at young and old--so that I couldn't help telling her, sir, that
in our country, leastways in Virginia (they say the Yankees are very
pert), young people don't speak of their elders so. And, do you know,
sir, we had a sort of a quarrel, and I'm very glad you've told me she
spoke kindly of me," says Harry, shaking his friend's hand, a ready
boyish emotion glowing in his cheeks and in his eyes.

"You won't come to much hurt if you find no worse enemy than Hester, Mr.
Warrington," said the girl's father, gravely, looking not without a
deep thrill of interest at the flushed face and moist eyes of his young
friend. "Is he fond of her?" thought the Colonel. "And how fond? 'Tis
evident he knows nothing, and Miss Het has been performing some of
her tricks. He is a fine, honest lad, and God bless him!" And Colonel
Lambert looked towards Harry with that manly, friendly kindness which
our lucky young Virginian was not unaccustomed to inspire, for he was
comely to look at, prone to blush, to kindle, nay, to melt, at a kind
story. His laughter was cheery to hear: his eyes shone confidently: his
voice spoke truth.

"And the young lady of the minuet? She distinguished herself to
perfection: the whole room admired," asked the courtly chaplain. "I
trust Miss--Miss----"

"Miss Theodosia is perfectly well, and ready to dance at this minute
with your reverence," says her father. "Or stay, Chaplain, perhaps you
only dance on Sunday?" The Colonel then turned to Harry again. "You
paid your court very neatly to the great lady, Mr. Flatterer. My Lady
Yarmouth has been trumpeting your praises at the Pump Room. She says
she has got a leedel boy in Hannover dat is wery like you, and you are a
sharming young mans."

"If her ladyship were a queen, people could scarcely be more respectful
to her," says the chaplain.

"Let us call her a vice-queen, parson," says the Colonel, with a twinkle
of his eye.

"Her Majesty pocketed forty of my guineas at quadrille," cries Mr.
Warrington, with a laugh.

"She will play you on the same terms another day. The Countess is fond
of play, and she wins from most people," said the Colonel, drily. "Why
don't you bet her ladyship five thousand on a bishopric, parson? I have
heard of a clergyman who made such a bet, and who lost it, and who paid
it, and who got the bishopric.

"Ah! who will lend me the five thousand? Will you, sir? asked the
chaplain.

"No, sir! I won't give her five thousand to be made Commander-in-Chief
or Pope of Rome," says the Colonel, stoutly. "I shall fling no stones
at the woman; but I shall bow no knee to her, as I see a pack of rascals
do. No offence--I don't mean you. And I don't mean Harry Warrington,
who was quite right to be civil to her, and to lose his money with
good-humour. Harry, I am come to bid thee farewell, my boy. We have had
our pleasuring--my money is run out, and we must jog back to Oakhurst.
Will you ever come and see the old place again?"

"Now, sir, now! I'll ride back with you!" cries Harry, eagerly.

"Why--no--not now," says the Colonel, in a hurried manner. "We haven't
got room--that is, we're--we're expecting some friends." ["The Lord
forgive me for the lie!" he mutters.] "But--but you'll come to us
when--when Tom's at home--yes, when Tom's at home. That will be
famous fun--and I'd have you to know, sir, that my wife and I love you
sincerely, sir--and so do the girls, however much they scold you. And if
you ever are in a scrape--and such things have happened, Mr. Chaplain!
you will please to count upon me. Mind that, sir!"

And the Colonel was for taking leave of Harry then and there, on the
spot, but the young man followed him down the stairs, and insisted upon
saying good-bye to his dear ladies.

Instead, however, of proceeding immediately to Mr. Lambert's lodging,
the two gentlemen took the direction of the common, where, looking
from Harry's windows, Mr. Sampson saw the pair in earnest conversation.
First, Lambert smiled and looked roguish. Then, presently, at a farther
stage of the talk, he flung up both his hands and performed other
gestures indicating surprise and agitation.

"The boy is telling him," thought the chaplain. When Mr. Warrington came
back in an hour, he found his reverence deep in the composition of a
sermon. Harry's face was grave and melancholy; he flung down his hat,
buried himself in a great chair, and then came from his lips something
like an execration.

"The young ladies are going, and our heart is affected?" said the
chaplain, looking up from his manuscript.

"Heart!" sneered Harry.

"Which of the young ladies is the conqueror, sir? I thought the
youngest's eyes followed you about at your ball."

"Confound the little termagant!" broke out Harry. "What does she mean by
being so pert to me? She treats me as if I was a fool!"

"And no man is, sir, with a woman!" said the scribe of the sermon.

"Ain't they, Chaplain?" And Harry growled out more naughty words
expressive of inward disquiet.

"By the way, have you heard anything of your lost property?" asked the
chaplain, presently looking up from his pages.

Harry said "No!" with another word, which I would not print for the
world.

"I begin to suspect, sir, that there was more money than you like to own
in that book. I wish I could find some."

"There were notes in it," said Harry, very gloomily, "and--and papers
that I am very sorry to lose. What the deuce has come of it? I had it
when we dined together."

"I saw you put it in your pocket," cried the chaplain. "I saw you take
it out and pay at the toy-shop a bill for a gold thimble and workbox for
one of your young ladies. Of course you have asked there, sir?"

"Of course I have," says Mr. Warrington, plunged in melancholy.

"Gumbo put you to bed--at least, if I remember right. I was so cut
myself that I scarce remember anything. Can you trust those black
fellows, sir?"

"I can trust him with my head. With my head?" groaned out Mr.
Warrington, bitterly., "I can't trust myself with it."

"'Oh, that a man should put an enemy into his mouth to steal away his
brains!'"

"You may well call it an enemy, Chaplain. Hang it, I have a great mind
to make a vow never to drink another drop! A fellow says anything when
he is in drink."

The chaplain laughed. "You, sir," he said, "are close enough!" And the
truth was, that, for the last few days, no amount of wine would unseal
Mr. Warrington's lips, when the artless Sampson by chance touched on the
subject of his patron's loss.

"And so the little country nymphs are gone, or going, sir?" asked the
chaplain. "They were nice, fresh little things; but I think the mother
was the finest woman of the three. I declare, a woman at five-and-thirty
or so is at her prime. What do you say, sir?"

Mr. Warrington looked, for a moment, askance at the clergyman. "Confound
all women, I say!" muttered the young misogynist. For which sentiment
every well-conditioned person will surely rebuke him.




CHAPTER XXXV. Entanglements


Our good Colonel had, no doubt, taken counsel with his good wife, and
they had determined to remove their little Hetty as speedily as possible
out of the reach of the charmer. In complaints such as that under which
the poor little maiden was supposed to be suffering, the remedy of
absence and distance often acts effectually with men; but I believe
women are not so easily cured by the alibi treatment. Some of them will
go away ever so far, and forever so long, and the obstinate disease
hangs by them, spite of distance or climate. You may whip, abuse,
torture, insult them, and still the little deluded creatures will
persist in their fidelity. Nay, if I may speak, after profound and
extensive study and observation, there are few better ways of securing
the faithfulness and admiration of the beautiful partners of our
existence than a little judicious ill-treatment, a brisk dose of
occasional violence as an alterative, and, for general and wholesome
diet, a cooling but pretty constant neglect. At sparing intervals
administer small quantities of love and kindness; but not every day, or
too often, as this medicine, much taken, loses its effect. Those dear
creatures who are the most indifferent to their husbands, are those who
are cloyed by too much surfeiting of the sugar-plums and lollipops of
Love. I have known a young being, with every wish gratified, yawn in her
adoring husband's face, and prefer the conversation and petits soins
of the merest booby and idiot; whilst, on the other hand, I have seen
Chloe,--at whom Strephon has flung his bootjack in the morning, or whom
he has cursed before the servants at dinner,--come creeping and fondling
to his knee at tea-time, when he is comfortable after his little nap and
his good wine; and pat his head and play him his favourite tunes; and,
when old John, the butler, or old Mary, the maid, comes in with the
bed-candles, look round proudly, as much as to say, Now, John, look how
good my dearest Henry is! Make your game, gentlemen, then! There is the
coaxing, fondling, adoring line, when you are henpecked, and Louisa
is indifferent, and bored out of her existence. There is the manly,
selfish, effectual system, where she answers to the whistle and comes in
at "Down Charge;" and knows her master; and frisks and fawns about him;
and nuzzles at his knees; and "licks the hand that's raised"--that's
raised to do her good, as (I quote from memory) Mr. Pope finely
observes. What used the late lamented O'Connell to say, over whom a
grateful country has raised such a magnificent testimonial? "Hereditary
bondsmen," he used to remark, "know ye not, who would be free,
themselves must strike the blow?" Of course you must, in political as in
domestic circles. So up with your cudgels, my enslaved, injured boys!

Women will be pleased with these remarks, because they have such a taste
for humour and understand irony; and I should not be surprised if young
Grubstreet, who corresponds with three penny papers and describes the
persons and conversation of gentlemen whom he meets at his "clubs,"
will say, "I told you so! He advocates the thrashing of women! He has
no nobility of soul! He has no heart!" Nor have I, my eminent young
Grubstreet! any more than you have ears. Dear ladies! I assure you I am
only joking in the above remarks,--I do not advocate the thrashing of
your sex at all,--and, as you can't understand the commonest bit of fun,
beg leave flatly to tell you, that I consider your sex a hundred times
more loving and faithful than ours.

So, what is the use of Hetty's parents taking her home, if the little
maid intends to be just as fond of Harry absent as of Harry present?
Why not let her see him before Ball and Dobbin are put to, and say,
"Good-bye, Harry! I was very wilful and fractious last night, and you
were very kind: but good-bye, Harry!" She will show no special emotion:
she is so ashamed of her secret, that she will not betray it. Harry is
too much preoccupied to discover it for himself. He does not know what
grief is lying behind Hetty's glances, or hidden under the artifice of
her innocent young smiles. He has, perhaps, a care of his own. He will
part from her calmly, and fancy she is happy to get back to her music
and her poultry and her flower-garden.

He did not even ride part of the way homewards by the side of his
friend's carriage. He had some other party arranged for, that afternoon,
and when he returned thence, the good Lamberts were gone from Tunbridge
Wells. There were their windows open, and the card in one of them
signifying that the apartments were once more to let. A little passing
sorrow at the blank aspect of the rooms lately enlivened by countenances
so frank and friendly, may have crossed the young gentleman's mind; but
he dines at the White Horse at four o'clock, and eats his dinner and
calls fiercely for his bottle. Poor little Hester will choke over her
tea about the same hour when the Lamberts arrive to sleep at the house
of their friends at Westerham. The young roses will be wan in her cheeks
in the morning, and there will be black circles round her eyes. It was
the thunder: the night was hot: she could not sleep: she will be better
when she gets home again the next day. And home they come. There is the
gate where he fell. There is the bed he lay in, the chair in which he
used to sit--what ages seem to have passed! What a gulf between to-day
and yesterday! Who is that little child calling her chickens, or
watering her roses yonder? Are she and that girl the same Hester
Lambert? Why, she is ever so much older than Theo now--Theo, who has
always been so composed, and so clever, and so old for her age. But in
a night or two Hester has lived--oh, long, long years! So have many
besides: and poppy and mandragora will never medicine them to the sweet
sleep they tasted yesterday.

Maria Esmond saw the Lambert cavalcade drive away, and felt a grim
relief. She looks with hot eyes at Harry when he comes into his aunt's
card-tables, flushed with Barbeau's good wine. He laughs, rattles in
reply to his aunt, who asks him which of the girls is his sweetheart? He
gaily says he loves them both like sisters. He has never seen a better
gentleman, nor better people, than the Lamberts. Why is Lambert not a
general? He has been a most distinguished officer: his Royal Highness
the Duke is very fond of him. Madame Bernstein says that Harry must make
interest with Lady Yarmouth for his protege.

"Elle ravvole de fous, cher bedid anche!" says Madame Bernstein,
mimicking the Countess's German accent. The Baroness is delighted with
her boy's success. "You carry off the hearts of all the old women,
doesn't he, Maria?" she says, with a sneer at her niece, who quivers
under the stab.

"You were quite right, my dear, not to perceive that she cheated
at cards, and you play like a grand seigneur," continues Madame de
Bernstein.

"Did she cheat?" cries Harry, astonished. "I am sure, ma'am, I saw no
unfair play."

"No more did I, my dear, but I am sure she cheated. Bah! every woman
cheats, I and Maria included, when we can get a chance. But when you
play with the Walmoden, you don't do wrong to lose in moderation; and
many men cheat in that way. Cultivate her. She has taken a fancy to your
beaux yeux. Why should your Excellency not be Governor of Virginia,
sir? You must go and pay your respects to the Duke and his Majesty at
Kensington. The Countess of Yarmouth will be your best friend at court."

"Why should you not introduce me, aunt?" asked Harry.

The old lady's rouged cheek grew a little redder. "I am not in favour at
Kensington," she said. "I may have been once; and there are no faces
so unwelcome to kings as those they wish to forget. All of us want to
forget something or somebody. I dare say our ingenu here would like to
wipe a sum or two off the slate. Wouldst thou not, Harry?"

Harry turned red, too, and so did Maria, and his aunt laughed one of
those wicked laughs which are not altogether pleasant to hear. What
meant those guilty signals on the cheeks of her nephew and niece? What
account was scored upon the memory of either, which they were desirous
to efface? I fear Madame Bernstein was right, and that most folks have
some ugly reckonings written up on their consciences, which we were glad
to be quit of.

Had Maria known one of the causes of Harry's disquiet, the middle-aged
spinster would have been more unquiet still. For some days he had missed
a pocket-book. He had remembered it in his possession on that day when
he drank so much claret at the White Horse, and Gumbo carried him to
bed. He sought for it in the morning, but none of his servants had seen
it. He had inquired for it at the White Horse, but there were no traces
of it. He could not cry the book, and could only make very cautious
inquiries respecting it. He must not have it known that the book was
lost. A pretty condition of mind Lady Maria Esmond would be in, if she
knew that the outpourings of her heart were in the hands of the public!
The letters contained all sorts of disclosures: a hundred family secrets
were narrated by the artless correspondent: there were ever so much
satire and abuse of persons with whom she and Mr. Warrington came in
contact. There were expostulations about his attentions to other ladies.
There was scorn, scandal, jokes, appeals, protests of eternal fidelity;
the usual farrago, dear madam, which you may remember you wrote to your
Edward, when you were engaged to him, and before you became Mrs.
Jones. Would you like those letters to be read by any one else? Do you
recollect what you said about the Miss Browns in two or three of those
letters, and the unfavourable opinion you expressed of Mrs. Thompson's
character? Do you happen to recall the words which you used regarding
Jones himself, whom you subsequently married (for in consequence of
disputes about the settlements your engagement with Edward was broken
off)? and would you like Mr. J. to see those remarks? You know you
wouldn't. Then be pleased to withdraw that imputation which you have
already cast in your mind upon Lady Maria Esmond. No doubt her letters
were very foolish, as most love-letters are, but it does not follow that
there was anything wrong in them. They are foolish when written by young
folks to one another, and how much more foolish when written by an old
man to a young lass, or by an old lass to a young lad! No wonder
Lady Maria should not like her letters to be read. Why, the very
spelling--but that didn't matter so much in her ladyship's days, and
people are just as foolish now, though they spell better. No, it is not
the spelling which matters so much; it is the writing at all. I for one,
and for the future, am determined never to speak or write my mind out
regarding anything or anybody. I intend to say of every woman that she
is chaste and handsome; of every man that he is handsome, clever, and
rich; of every book that it is delightfully interesting; of Snobmore's
manners that they are gentlemanlike; of Screwby's dinners that they are
luxurious; of Jawkins's conversation that it is lively and amusing; of
Xantippe, that she has a sweet temper; of Jezebel, that her colour is
natural; of Bluebeard, that he really was most indulgent to his wives,
and that very likely they died of bronchitis. What? a word against the
spotless Messalina? What an unfavourable view of human nature! What?
King Cheops was not a perfect monarch? Oh, you railer at royalty and
slanderer of all that is noble and good! When this book is concluded, I
shall change the jaundiced livery which my books have worn since I began
to lisp in numbers, have rose-coloured coats for them with cherubs on
the cover, and all the characters within shall be perfect angels.

Meanwhile we are in a society of men and women, from whose shoulders
no sort of wings have sprouted as yet, and who, without any manner of
doubt, have their little failings. There is Madame Bernstein: she has
fallen asleep after dinner, and eating and drinking too much,--those are
her ladyship's little failings. Mr. Harry Warrington has gone to play
a match at billiards with Count Caramboli: I suspect idleness is his
failing. That is what Mr. Chaplain Sampson remarks to Lady Maria, as
they are talking together in a low tone, so as not to interrupt Aunt
Bernstein's doze in the neighbouring room.

"A gentleman of Mr. Warrington's means can afford to be idle," says Lady
Maria. "Why, sure you love cards and billiards yourself, my good Mr.
Sampson?"

"I don't say, madam, my practice is good, only my doctrine is sound,"
says Mr. Chaplain with a sigh. "This young gentleman should have some
employment. He should appear at court, and enter the service of his
country, as befits a man of his station. He should settle down, and
choose a woman of a suitable rank as his wife." Sampson looks in her
ladyship's face as he speaks.

"Indeed, my cousin is wasting his time," says Lady Maria, blushing
slightly.

"Mr. Warrington might see his relatives of his father's family,"
suggests Mr. Chaplain.

"Suffolk country boobies drinking beer and hallooing after foxes! I
don't see anything to be gained by his frequenting them, Mr. Sampson!"

"They are of an ancient family, of which the chief has been knight of
the shire these hundred years," says the chaplain. "I have heard Sir
Miles hath a daughter of Mr. Harry's age--and beauty, too."

"I know nothing, sir, about Sir Miles Warrington, and his daughters, and
his beauties!" cries Maria, in a fluster.

"The Baroness stirred--no--her ladyship is in a sweet sleep," says the
chaplain, in a very soft voice. "I fear, madam, for your ladyship's
cousin, Mr. Warrington. I fear for his youth; for designing persons who
may get about him; for extravagances, follies, intrigues even into which
he will be led, and into which everybody will try to tempt him. His
lordship, my kind patron, bade me to come and watch over him, and I am
here accordingly, as your ladyship knoweth. I know the follies of young
men. Perhaps I have practised them myself. I own it with a blush," adds
Mr. Sampson with much unction--not, however, bringing the promised blush
forward to corroborate the asserted repentance.

"Between ourselves, I fear Mr. Warrington is in some trouble now,
madam," continues the chaplain, steadily looking at Lady Maria.

"What, again?" shrieks the lady.

"Hush! Your ladyship's dear invalid!" whispers the chaplain again
pointing towards Madame Bernstein. "Do you think your cousin has any
partiality for any--any member of Mr. Lambert's family? for example,
Miss Lambert?"

"There is nothing between him and Miss Lambert," says Lady Maria.

"Your ladyship is certain?"

"Women are said to have good eyes in such matters, my good Sampson,"
says my lady, with an easy air. "I thought the little girl seemed to be
following him."

"Then I am at fault once more," the frank chaplain said. "Mr. Warrington
said of the young lady, that she ought to go back to her doll, and
called her a pert, stuck-up little hussy."

"Ah!" sighed Lady Maria, as if relieved by the news.

"Then, madam, there must be somebody else," said the chaplain. Has he
confided nothing to your ladyship?"

"To me, Mr. Sampson? What? Where? How?" exclaims Maria.

"Some six days ago, after we had been dining at the White Horse, and
drinking too freely, Mr. Warrington lost a pocket-book containing
letters."

"Letters?" gasps Lady Maria.

"And probably more money than he likes to own," continues Mr. Sampson,
with a grave nod of the head. "He is very much disturbed about the
book. We have both made cautious inquiries about it. We have----Gracious
powers, is your ladyship ill?"

Here my Lady Maria gave three remarkably shrill screams, and tumbled off
her chair.

