
  Alas, alas again!

XERXES

  Shriek with a cry of agony, and lead the doleful train!

CHORUS

  Alas, alas, the Persian land is woeful now to tread!

XERXES

  Cry out and mourn! the city now doth wail above the dead!

CHORUS

  I sob and moan!

XERXES

  I bid ye now be delicate in grief!

CHORUS

  Alas, the Persian land is sad and knoweth not relief!

XERXES

  Alas, the triple banks of oars and those who died thereby!

CHORUS

  Pass! I will lead you, bring you home, with many a broken sigh!
                                                      [_Exeunt_




THE SEVEN AGAINST THEBES




DRAMATIS PERSONAE

  ETEOCLES.
  A SPY.
  CHORUS OF CADMEAN MAIDENS.
  ANTIGONE.
  ISMENE.
  A HERALD.


ETEOCLES

  Clansmen of Cadmus, at the signal given
  By time and season must the ruler speak
  Who sets the course and steers the ship of State
  With hand upon the tiller, and with eye
  Watchful against the treachery of sleep.
  For if all go aright, _thank Heaven_, men say,
  But if adversely--which may God forefend!--
  One name on many lips, from street to street,
  Would bear the bruit and rumour of the time,
  _Down with Eteocles_!--a clamorous curse,
  A dirge of ruin. May averting Zeus
  Make good his title here, in Cadmus' hold!
  You it beseems now boys unripened yet
  To lusty manhood, men gone past the prime
  And increase of the full begetting seed,
  And those whom youth and manhood well combined
  Array for action--all to rise in aid
  Of city, shrines, and altars of all powers
  Who guard our land; that ne'er, to end of time,
  Be blotted out the sacred service due
  To our sweet mother-land and to her brood.
  For she it was who to their guest-right called
  Your waxing youth, was patient of the toil,
  And cherished you on the land's gracious lap,
  Alike to plant the hearth and bear the shield
  In loyal service, for an hour like this.
  Mark now! until to-day, luck rules our scale;
  For we, though long beleaguered, in the main
  Have with our sallies struck the foemen hard.
  But now the seer, the feeder of the birds,
  (Whose art unerring and prophetic skill
  Of ear and mind divines their utterance
  Without the lore of fire interpreted)
  Foretelleth, by the mastery of his art,
  That now an onset of Achaea's host
  Is by a council of the night designed
  To fall in double strength upon our walls.
  Up and away, then, to the battlements,
  The gates, the bulwarks!  don your panoplies,
  Array you at the breast-work, take your stand
  On floorings of the towers, and with good heart
  Stand firm for sudden sallies at the gates,
  Nor hold too heinous a respect for hordes
  Sent on you from afar: some god will guard!
  I too, for shrewd espial of their camp,
  Have sent forth scouts, and confidence is mine
  They will not fail nor tremble at their task,
  And, with their news, I fear no foeman's guile.
                                                 [_Enter_ A SPY.

THE SPY

  Eteocles, high king of Cadmus' folk,
  I stand here with news certified and sure
  From Argos' camp, things by myself descried.
  Seven warriors yonder, doughty chiefs of might,
  Into the crimsoned concave of a shield
  Have shed a bull's blood, and, with hands immersed
  Into the gore of sacrifice, have sworn
  By Ares, lord of fight, and by thy name,
  Blood-lapping Terror, _Let our oath be heard--
  Either to raze the walls, make void the hold
  Of Cadmus--strive his children as they may--
  Or, dying here, to make the foemen's land
  With blood impasted_. Then, as memory's gift
  Unto their parents at the far-off home,
  Chaplets they hung upon Adrastus' car,
  With eyes tear-dropping, but no word of moan.
  For their steeled spirit glowed with high resolve,
  As lions pant, with battle in their eyes.
  For them, no weak alarm delays the clear
  Issues of death or life! I parted thence
  Even as they cast the lots, how each should lead,
  Against which gate, his serried company.
  Rank then thy bravest, with what speed thou may'st,
  Hard by the gates, to dash on them, for now,
  Full-armed, the onward ranks of Argos come!
  The dust whirls up, and from their panting steeds
  White foamy flakes like snow bedew the plain.
  Thou therefore, chieftain! like a steersman skilled,
  Enshield the city's bulwarks, ere the blast
  Of war comes darting on them! hark, the roar
  Of the great landstorm with its waves of men!
  Take Fortune by the forelock! for the rest,
  By yonder dawn-light will I scan the field
  Clear and aright, and surety of my word
  Shall keep thee scatheless of the coming storm.

ETEOCLES

  O Zeus and Earth and city-guarding gods,
  And thou, my father's Curse, of baneful might,
  Spare ye at least this town, nor root it up,
  By violence of the foemen, stock and stem!
  For here, from home and hearth, rings Hellas' tongue.
  Forbid that e'er the yoke of slavery
  Should bow this land of freedom, Cadmus' hold!
  Be ye her help! your cause I plead with mine--
  A city saved doth honour to her gods!
            [_Exit_ ETEOCLES, _etc. Enter the_ CHORUS OF MAIDENS.

CHORUS

  I wail in the stress of my terror,
      and shrill is my cry of despair.
  The foemen roll forth from their camp
      as a billow, and onward they bear!
  Their horsemen are swift in the forefront,
      the dust rises up to the sky,
  A signal, though speechless, of doom,
      a herald more clear than a cry!
  Hoof-trampled, the land of my love
      bears onward the din to mine ears.
  As a torrent descending a mountain,
      it thunders and echoes and nears!
  The doom is unloosened and cometh!
      O kings and O queens of high Heaven,
  Prevail that it fall not upon us:
      the sign for their onset is given--
  They stream to the walls from without,
      white-shielded and keen for the fray.
  They storm to the citadel gates--
      what god or what goddess can stay
  The rush of their feet? to what shrine
      shall I bow me in terror and pray?
  O gods high-throned in bliss,
      we must crouch at the shrines in your home!
  Not here must we tarry and wail:
      shield clashes on shield as they come--
  And now, even now is the hour
      for the robes and the chaplets of prayer!
  Mine eyes feel the flash of the sword,
      the clang is instinct with the spear!
  Is thy hand set against us, O Ares,
      in ruin and wrath to o'erwhelm
  Thine own immemorial land,
      O god of the golden helm?
  Look down upon us, we beseech thee,
      on the land that thou lovest of old,
  And ye, O protecting gods,
      in pity your people behold!
  Yea, save us, the maidenly troop,
      from the doom and despair of the slave,
  For the crests of the foemen come onward,
      their rush is the rush of a wave
  Rolled on by the war-god's breath!
      almighty one, hear us and save
  From the grasp of the Argives' might!
      to the ramparts of Cadmus they crowd,
  And, clenched in the teeth of the steeds,
      the bits clink horror aloud!
  And seven high chieftains of war,
      with spear and with panoply bold,
  Are set, by the law of the lot,
      to storm the seven gates of our hold!
  Be near and befriend us, O Pallas,
      the Zeus-born maiden of might!
  O lord of the steed and the sea,
      be thy trident uplifted to smite
  In eager desire of the fray, Poseidon!
      and Ares come down,
  In fatherly presence revealed,
      to rescue Harmonia's town!
  Thine too, Aphrodite, we are!
      thou art mother and queen of our race,
  To thee we cry out in our need,
      from thee let thy children have grace!
  Ye too, to scare back the foe,
      be your cry as a wolf's howl wild,
  Thou, O the wolf-lord, and thou,
      of she-wolf Leto the child!
  Woe and alack for the sound,
      for the rattle of cars to the wall,
  And the creak of the grinding axles!
      O Hera, to thee is our call!
  Artemis, maiden beloved!
      the air is distraught with the spears,
  And whither doth destiny drive us,
      and where is the goal of our fears?
  The blast of the terrible stones
      on the ridge of our wall is not stayed,
  At the gates is the brazen clash
      of the bucklers--Apollo to aid!
  Thou too, O daughter of Zeus,
      who guidest the wavering fray
  To the holy decision of fate,
      Athena! be with us to-day!
  Come down to the sevenfold gates
      and harry the foemen away!
  O gods and O sisters of gods,
      our bulwark and guard! we beseech
  That ye give not our war-worn hold
      to a rabble of alien speech!
  List to the call of the maidens,
      the hands held up for the right,
  Be near us, protect us, and show
      that the city is dear in your sight!

  Have heed for her sacrifice holy,
      and thought of her offerings take,
  Forget not her love and her worship,
      be near her and smite for her sake!
                                        [_Re-enter_ ETEOCLES.
ETEOCLES

  Hark to my question, things detestable!
  Is this aright and for the city's weal,
  And helpful to our army thus beset,
  That ye before the statues of our gods
  Should fling yourselves, and scream and shriek your fears?
  Immodest, uncontrolled! Be this my lot--
  Never in troublous nor in peaceful days
  To dwell with aught that wears a female form!
  Where womankind has power, no man can house,
  Where womankind feeds panic, ruin rules
  Alike in house and city! Look you now--
  Your flying feet, and rumour of your fears,
  Have spread a soulless panic on our walls,
  And they without do go from strength to strength,
  And we within make breach upon ourselves!
  Such fate it brings, to house with womankind.
  Therefore if any shall resist my rule--
  Or man, or woman, or some sexless thing--
  The vote of sentence shall decide their doom,
  And stones of execution, past escape,
  Shall finish all. Let not a woman's voice
  Be loud in council! for the things without,
  A man must care; let women keep within--
  Even then is mischief all too probable!
  Hear ye? or speak I to unheeding ears?

CHORUS

  Ah, but I shudder, child of Oedipus!
    I heard the clash and clang!
  The axles rolled and rumbled; woe to us
    Fire-welded bridles rang!

ETEOCLES

  Say--when a ship is strained and deep in brine,
  Did e'er a seaman mend his chance, who left
  The helm, t'invoke the image at the prow?

CHORUS

  Ah, but I fled to the shrines, I called to our helpers on high,
    When the stone-shower roared at the portals!
  I sped to the temples aloft, and loud was my call and my cry,
    _Look down and deliver. Immortals_!

ETEOCLES

  Ay, pray amain that stone may vanquish steel!
  Were not that grace of gods? ay, ay--methinks,
  When cities fall, the gods go forth from them!

CHORUS

  Ah, let me die, or ever I behold
    The gods go forth, in conflagration dire!
  The foemen's rush and raid, and all our hold
    Wrapt in the burning fire!

ETEOCLES

  Cry not: on Heaven, in impotent debate!
  What saith the saw?--_Good saving Strength, in verity,
  Out of Obedience breeds the babe Prosperity_.

CHORUS

  'Tis true: yet stronger is the power divine,
    And oft, when man's estate is overbowed
  With bitter pangs, disperses from his eyne
    The heavy, hanging cloud!

ETEOCLES

  Let men with sacrifice and augury
  Approach the gods, when comes the tug of war;
  Maids must be silent and abide within.

CHORUS

  By grace of the gods we hold it,
      a city untamed of the spear,
  And the battlement wards from the wall
      the foe and his aspect of fear!
  What need of displeasure herein?

ETEOCLES

  Ay, pay thy vows to Heaven; I grudge them not,
  But--so thou strike no fear into our men--
  Have calm at heart, nor be too much afraid.

CHORUS

  Alack, it is fresh in mine ears,
    the clamour and crash of the fray,
  And up to our holiest height
    I sped on my timorous way,
  Bewildered, beset by the din!

ETEOCLES

  Now, if ye hear the bruit of death or wounds,
  Give not yourselves o'ermuch to shriek and scream,
  For Ares ravens upon human flesh.

CHORUS

  Ah, but the snorting of the steeds I hear!

ETEOCLES

  Then, if thou hearts, hear them not too well!

CHORUS

  Hark, the earth rumbles, as they close us round!

ETEOCLES

  Enough if I am here, with plans prepared.

CHORUS

  Alack, the battering at the gates is loud!

ETEOCLES

  Peace! stay your tongue, or else the town may hear!

CHORUS
