graceless baggage, a foolish lack-brain, with no thought above the
hemming of shifts. And he so kindly and hendy and long-suffering! You
would--ha, you may well flee the room!"

She had spoken with a rising voice, and a clasping and opening of her
long white fingers, so that it was no marvel that ere the speech was
over the skirts of Agatha were whisking round the door and the click of
her sobs to be heard dying swiftly away down the corridor.

Alleyne stared open-eyed at this tigress who had sprung so suddenly
to his rescue. "There is no need for such anger," he said mildly. "The
maid's words have done me no scath. It is you yourself who have erred."

"I know it," she cried, "I am a most wicked woman. But it is bad enough
that one should misuse you. Ma foi! I will see that there is not a
second one."

"Nay, nay, no one has misused me," he answered. "But the fault lies
in your hot and bitter words. You have called her a baggage and a
lack-brain, and I know not what."

"And you are he who taught me to speak the truth," she cried. "Now I
have spoken it, and yet I cannot please you. Lack-brain she is, and
lack-brain I shall call her."

Such was a sample of the sudden janglings which marred the peace of that
little class. As the weeks passed, however, they became fewer and less
violent, as Alleyne's firm and constant nature gained sway and influence
over the Lady Maude. And yet, sooth to say, there were times when he had
to ask himself whether it was not the Lady Maude who was gaining sway
and influence over him. If she were changing, so was he. In drawing her
up from the world, he was day by day being himself dragged down towards
it. In vain he strove and reasoned with himself as to the madness of
letting his mind rest upon Sir Nigel's daughter. What was he--a younger
son, a penniless clerk, a squire unable to pay for his own harness--that
he should dare to raise his eyes to the fairest maid in Hampshire? So
spake reason; but, in spite of all, her voice was ever in his ears and
her image in his heart. Stronger than reason, stronger than cloister
teachings, stronger than all that might hold him back, was that old, old
tyrant who will brook no rival in the kingdom of youth.

And yet it was a surprise and a shock to himself to find how deeply
she had entered into his life; how completely those vague ambitions and
yearnings which had filled his spiritual nature centred themselves now
upon this thing of earth. He had scarce dared to face the change which
had come upon him, when a few sudden chance words showed it all up hard
and clear, like a lightning flash in the darkness.

He had ridden over to Poole, one November day, with his fellow-squire,
Peter Terlake, in quest of certain yew-staves from Wat Swathling, the
Dorsetshire armorer. The day for their departure had almost come, and
the two youths spurred it over the lonely downs at the top of their
speed on their homeward course, for evening had fallen and there was
much to be done. Peter was a hard, wiry, brown faced, country-bred lad
who looked on the coming war as the schoolboy looks on his holidays.
This day, however, he had been sombre and mute, with scarce a word a
mile to bestow upon his comrade.

"Tell me Alleyne Edricson," he broke out, suddenly, as they clattered
along the winding track which leads over the Bournemouth hills, "has it
not seemed to you that of late the Lady Maude is paler and more silent
than is her wont?"

"It may be so," the other answered shortly.

"And would rather sit distrait by her oriel than ride gayly to the chase
as of old. Methinks, Alleyne, it is this learning which you have taught
her that has taken all the life and sap from her. It is more than she
can master, like a heavy spear to a light rider."

"Her lady-mother has so ordered it," said Alleyne.

"By our Lady! and withouten disrespect," quoth Terlake, "it is in my
mind that her lady-mother is more fitted to lead a company to a storming
than to have the upbringing of this tender and milk-white maid. Hark ye,
lad Alleyne, to what I never told man or woman yet. I love the fair Lady
Maude, and would give the last drop of my heart's blood to serve her."
He spoke with a gasping voice, and his face flushed crimson in the
moonlight.

Alleyne said nothing, but his heart seemed to turn to a lump of ice in
his bosom.

"My father has broad acres," the other continued, "from Fareham Creek to
the slope of the Portsdown Hill. There is filling of granges, hewing
of wood, malting of grain, and herding of sheep as much as heart could
wish, and I the only son. Sure am I that Sir Nigel would be blithe at
such a match."

"But how of the lady?" asked Alleyne, with dry lips.

"Ah, lad, there lies my trouble. It is a toss of the head and a droop of
the eyes if I say one word of what is in my mind. 'Twere as easy to woo
the snow-dame that we shaped last winter in our castle yard. I did but
ask her yesternight for her green veil, that I might bear it as a token
or lambrequin upon my helm; but she flashed out at me that she kept it
for a better man, and then all in a breath asked pardon for that she had
spoke so rudely. Yet she would not take back the words either, nor would
she grant the veil. Has it seemed to thee, Alleyne, that she loves any
one?"

"Nay, I cannot say," said Alleyne, with a wild throb of sudden hope in
his heart.

"I have thought so, and yet I cannot name the man. Indeed, save myself,
and Walter Ford, and you, who are half a clerk, and Father Christopher
of the Priory, and Bertrand the page, who is there whom she sees?"

"I cannot tell," quoth Alleyne shortly; and the two squires rode on
again, each intent upon his own thoughts.

Next day at morning lesson the teacher observed that his pupil was
indeed looking pale and jaded, with listless eyes and a weary manner. He
was heavy-hearted to note the grievous change in her.

"Your mistress, I fear, is ill, Agatha," he said to the tire-woman, when
the Lady Maude had sought her chamber.

The maid looked aslant at him with laughing eyes. "It is not an illness
that kills," quoth she.

"Pray God not!" he cried. "But tell me, Agatha, what it is that ails
her?"

"Methinks that I could lay my hand upon another who is smitten with the
same trouble," said she, with the same sidelong look. "Canst not give a
name to it, and thou so skilled in leech-craft?"

"Nay, save that she seems aweary."

"Well, bethink you that it is but three days ere you will all be gone,
and Castle Twynham be as dull as the Priory. Is there not enough there
to cloud a lady's brow?"

"In sooth, yes," he answered; "I had forgot that she is about to lose
her father."

"Her father!" cried the tire-woman, with a little trill of laughter. "Oh
simple, simple!" And she was off down the passage like arrow from bow,
while Alleyne stood gazing after her, betwixt hope and doubt, scarce
daring to put faith in the meaning which seemed to underlie her words.



CHAPTER XIII. HOW THE WHITE COMPANY SET FORTH TO THE WARS.


St. Luke's day had come and had gone, and it was in the season of
Martinmas, when the oxen are driven in to the slaughter, that the White
Company was ready for its journey. Loud shrieked the brazen bugles from
keep and from gateway, and merry was the rattle of the war-drum, as the
men gathered in the outer bailey, with torches to light them, for the
morn had not yet broken. Alleyne, from the window of the armory, looked
down upon the strange scene--the circles of yellow flickering light,
the lines of stern and bearded faces, the quick shimmer of arms, and the
lean heads of the horses. In front stood the bow-men, ten deep, with a
fringe of under-officers, who paced hither and thither marshalling the
ranks with curt precept or short rebuke. Behind were the little clump
of steel-clad horsemen, their lances raised, with long pensils drooping
down the oaken shafts. So silent and still were they, that they might
have been metal-sheathed statues, were it not for the occasional quick,
impatient stamp of their chargers, or the rattle of chamfron against
neck-plates as they tossed and strained. A spear's length in front of
them sat the spare and long-limbed figure of Black Simon, the Norwich
fighting man, his fierce, deep-lined face framed in steel, and the
silk guidon marked with the five scarlet roses slanting over his right
shoulder. All round, in the edge of the circle of the light, stood the
castle servants, the soldiers who were to form the garrison, and little
knots of women, who sobbed in their aprons and called shrilly to their
name-saints to watch over the Wat, or Will, or Peterkin who had turned
his hand to the work of war.

The young squire was leaning forward, gazing at the stirring and martial
scene, when he heard a short, quick gasp at his shoulder, and there was
the Lady Maude, with her hand to her heart, leaning up against the wall,
slender and fair, like a half-plucked lily. Her face was turned away
from him, but he could see, by the sharp intake of her breath, that she
was weeping bitterly.

"Alas! alas!" he cried, all unnerved at the sight, "why is it that you
are so sad, lady?"

"It is the sight of these brave men," she answered; "and to think how
many of them go and how few are like to find their way back. I have seen
it before, when I was a little maid, in the year of the Prince's great
battle. I remember then how they mustered in the bailey, even as they do
now, and my lady-mother holding me in her arms at this very window that
I might see the show."

"Please God, you will see them all back ere another year be out," said
he.

She shook her head, looking round at him with flushed cheeks and eyes
that sparkled in the lamp-light. "Oh, but I hate myself for being a
woman!" she cried, with a stamp of her little foot. "What can I do that
is good? Here I must bide, and talk and sew and spin, and spin and sew
and talk. Ever the same dull round, with nothing at the end of it. And
now you are going too, who could carry my thoughts out of these gray
walls, and raise my mind above tapestry and distaffs. What can I do? I
am of no more use or value than that broken bowstave."

"You are of such value to me," he cried, in a whirl of hot, passionate
words, "that all else has become nought. You are my heart, my life, my
one and only thought. Oh, Maude, I cannot live without you, I cannot
leave you without a word of love. All is changed to me since I have
known you. I am poor and lowly and all unworthy of you; but if great
love may weigh down such defects, then mine may do it. Give me but one
word of hope to take to the wars with me--but one. Ah, you shrink, you
shudder! My wild words have frightened you."

Twice she opened her lips, and twice no sound came from them. At last
she spoke in a hard and measured voice, as one who dare not trust
herself to speak too freely.

"This is over sudden," she said; "it is not so long since the world was
nothing to you. You have changed once; perchance you may change again."

"Cruel!" he cried, "who hath changed me?"

"And then your brother," she continued with a little laugh, disregarding
his question. "Methinks this hath become a family custom amongst the
Edricsons. Nay, I am sorry; I did not mean a jibe. But, indeed, Alleyne,
this hath come suddenly upon me, and I scarce know what to say."

"Say some word of hope, however distant--some kind word that I may
cherish in my heart."

"Nay, Alleyne, it were a cruel kindness, and you have been too good and
true a friend to me that I should use you despitefully. There cannot be
a closer link between us. It is madness to think of it. Were there no
other reasons, it is enough that my father and your brother would both
cry out against it."

"My brother, what has he to do with it? And your father----"

"Come, Alleyne, was it not you who would have me act fairly to all men,
and, certes, to my father amongst them?"

"You say truly," he cried, "you say truly. But you do not reject me,
Maude? You give me some ray of hope? I do not ask pledge or promise. Say
only that I am not hateful to you--that on some happier day I may hear
kinder words from you."

Her eyes softened upon him, and a kind answer was on her lips, when a
hoarse shout, with the clatter of arms and stamping of steeds, rose up
from the bailey below. At the sound her face set her eyes sparkled, and
she stood with flushed cheek and head thrown back--a woman's body, with
a soul of fire.

"My father hath gone down," she cried. "Your place is by his side. Nay,
look not at me, Alleyne. It is no time for dallying. Win my father's
love, and all may follow. It is when the brave soldier hath done his
devoir that he hopes for his reward. Farewell, and may God be with you!"
She held out her white, slim hand to him, but as he bent his lips over
it she whisked away and was gone, leaving in his outstretched hand the
very green veil for which poor Peter Terlake had craved in vain. Again
the hoarse cheering burst out from below, and he heard the clang of the
rising portcullis. Pressing the veil to his lips, he thrust it into the
bosom of his tunic, and rushed as fast as feet could bear him to arm
himself and join the muster.

The raw morning had broken ere the hot spiced ale had been served round
and the last farewell spoken. A cold wind blew up from the sea and
ragged clouds drifted swiftly across the sky.

The Christchurch townsfolk stood huddled about the Bridge of Avon, the
women pulling tight their shawls and the men swathing themselves in
their gaberdines, while down the winding path from the castle came the
van of the little army, their feet clanging on the hard, frozen road.
First came Black Simon with his banner, bestriding a lean and powerful
dapple-gray charger, as hard and wiry and warwise as himself. After him,
riding three abreast, were nine men-at-arms, all picked soldiers, who
had followed the French wars before, and knew the marches of Picardy as
they knew the downs of their native Hampshire. They were armed to the
teeth with lance, sword, and mace, with square shields notched at the
upper right-hand corner to serve as a spear-rest. For defence each man
wore a coat of interlaced leathern thongs, strengthened at the shoulder,
elbow, and upper arm with slips of steel. Greaves and knee-pieces were
also of leather backed by steel, and their gauntlets and shoes were of
iron plates, craftily jointed. So, with jingle of arms and clatter of
hoofs, they rode across the Bridge of Avon, while the burghers shouted
lustily for the flag of the five roses and its gallant guard.

Close at the heels of the horses came two-score archers bearded and
burly, their round targets on their backs and their long yellow bows,
the most deadly weapon that the wit of man had yet devised, thrusting
forth from behind their shoulders. From each man's girdle hung sword or
axe, according to his humor, and over the right hip there jutted out the
leathern quiver with its bristle of goose, pigeon, and peacock feathers.
Behind the bowmen strode two trumpeters blowing upon nakirs, and two
drummers in parti-colored clothes. After them came twenty-seven sumpter
horses carrying tent-poles, cloth, spare arms, spurs, wedges, cooking
kettles, horse-shoes, bags of nails and the hundred other things which
experience had shown to be needful in a harried and hostile country. A
white mule with red trappings, led by a varlet, carried Sir Nigel's own
napery and table comforts. Then came two-score more archers, ten more
men-at-arms, and finally a rear guard of twenty bowmen, with big John
towering in the front rank and the veteran Aylward marching by the side,
his battered harness and faded surcoat in strange contrast with the
snow-white jupons and shining brigandines of his companions. A quick
cross-fire of greetings and questions and rough West Saxon jests flew
from rank to rank, or were bandied about betwixt the marching archers
and the gazing crowd.

"Hola, Gaffer Higginson!" cried Aylward, as he spied the portly figure
of the village innkeeper. "No more of thy nut-brown, mon gar. We leave
it behind us."

"By St. Paul, no!" cried the other. "You take it with you. Devil a drop
have you left in the great kilderkin. It was time for you to go."

"If your cask is leer, I warrant your purse is full, gaffer," shouted
Hordle John. "See that you lay in good store of the best for our
home-coming."

"See that you keep your throat whole for the drinking of it archer,"
cried a voice, and the crowd laughed at the rough pleasantry.

"If you will warrant the beer, I will warrant the throat," said John
composedly.

"Close up the ranks!" cried Aylward. "En avant, mes enfants! Ah, by my
finger bones, there is my sweet Mary from the Priory Mill! Ma foi, but
she is beautiful! Adieu, Mary ma cherie! Mon coeur est toujours a
toi. Brace your belt, Watkins, man, and swing your shoulders as a free
companion should. By my hilt! your jerkins will be as dirty as mine ere
you clap eyes on Hengistbury Head again."

The Company had marched to the turn of the road ere Sir Nigel Loring
rode out from the gateway, mounted on Pommers, his great black
war-horse, whose ponderous footfall on the wooden drawbridge echoed
loudly from the gloomy arch which spanned it. Sir Nigel was still in his
velvet dress of peace, with flat velvet cap of maintenance, and curling
ostrich feather clasped in a golden brooch. To his three squires riding
behind him it looked as though he bore the bird's egg as well as its
feather, for the back of his bald pate shone like a globe of ivory. He
bore no arms save the long and heavy sword which hung at his saddle-bow;
but Terlake carried in front of him the high wivern-crested bassinet,
Ford the heavy ash spear with swallow-tail pennon, while Alleyne was
entrusted with the emblazoned shield. The Lady Loring rode her palfrey
at her lord's bridle-arm, for she would see him as far as the edge
of the forest, and ever and anon she turned her hard-lined face
up wistfully to him and ran a questioning eye over his apparel and
appointments.

"I trust that there is nothing forgot," she said, beckoning to Alleyne
to ride on her further side. "I trust him to you, Edricson. Hosen,
shirts, cyclas, and under-jupons are in the brown basket on the left
side of the mule. His wine he takes hot when the nights are cold,
malvoisie or vernage, with as much spice as would cover the thumb-nail.
See that he hath a change if he come back hot from the tilting. There is
goose-grease in a box, if the old scars ache at the turn of the weather.
Let his blankets be dry and----"

"Nay, my heart's life," the little knight interrupted, "trouble not now
about such matters. Why so pale and wan, Edricson? Is it not enow
to make a man's heart dance to see this noble Company, such valiant
men-at-arms, such lusty archers? By St. Paul! I would be ill to please
if I were not blithe to see the red roses flying at the head of so noble
a following!"

"The purse I have already given you, Edricson," continued the lady.
"There are in it twenty-three marks, one noble, three shillings and
fourpence, which is a great treasure for one man to carry. And I pray
you to bear in mind, Edricson, that he hath two pair of shoes, those of
red leather for common use, and the others with golden toe-chains,
which he may wear should he chance to drink wine with the Prince or with
Chandos."

"My sweet bird," said Sir Nigel, "I am right loth to part from you,
but we are now at the fringe of the forest, and it is not right that I
should take the chatelaine too far from her trust."

"But oh, my dear lord," she cried with a trembling lip, "let me bide
with you for one furlong further--or one and a half perhaps. You may
spare me this out of the weary miles that you will journey along."

"Come, then, my heart's comfort," he answered. "But I must crave a gage
from thee. It is my custom, dearling, and hath been since I have
first known thee, to proclaim by herald in such camps, townships, or
fortalices as I may chance to visit, that my lady-love, being beyond
compare the fairest and sweetest in Christendom, I should deem it great
honor and kindly condescension if any cavalier would run three courses
against me with sharpened lances, should he chance to have a lady whose
claim he was willing to advance. I pray you then my fair dove, that you
will vouchsafe to me one of those doeskin gloves, that I may wear it as
the badge of her whose servant I shall ever be."

"Alack and alas for the fairest and sweetest!" she cried. "Fair and
sweet I would fain be for your dear sake, my lord, but old I am and
ugly, and the knights would laugh should you lay lance in rest in such a
cause."

"Edricson," quoth Sir Nigel, "you have young eyes, and mine are somewhat
bedimmed. Should you chance to see a knight laugh, or smile, or even,
look you, arch his brows, or purse his mouth, or in any way show
surprise that I should uphold the Lady Mary, you will take particular
note of his name, his coat-armor, and his lodging. Your glove, my life's
desire!"

The Lady Mary Loring slipped her hand from her yellow leather gauntlet,
and he, lifting it with dainty reverence, bound it to the front of his
velvet cap.

"It is with mine other guardian angels," quoth he, pointing at the
saints' medals which hung beside it. "And now, my dearest, you have come
far enow. May the Virgin guard and prosper thee! One kiss!" He bent down
from his saddle, and then, striking spurs into his horse's sides, he
galloped at top speed after his men, with his three squires at his
heels. Half a mile further, where the road topped a hill, they looked
back, and the Lady Mary on her white palfrey was still where they had
left her. A moment later they were on the downward slope, and she had
vanished from their view.



CHAPTER XIV. HOW SIR NIGEL SOUGHT FOR A WAYSIDE VENTURE.


For a time Sir Nigel was very moody and downcast, with bent brows and
eyes upon the pommel of his saddle. Edricson and Terlake rode behind him
in little better case, while Ford, a careless and light-hearted youth,
grinned at the melancholy of his companions, and flourished his lord's
heavy spear, making a point to right and a point to left, as though
he were a paladin contending against a host of assailants. Sir Nigel
happened, however, to turn himself in his saddle--Ford instantly became
as stiff and as rigid as though he had been struck with a palsy. The
four rode alone, for the archers had passed a curve in the road, though
Alleyne could still hear the heavy clump, clump of their marching, or
catch a glimpse of the sparkle of steel through the tangle of leafless
branches.

"Ride by my side, friends, I entreat of you," said the knight, reining
in his steed that they might come abreast of him. "For, since it hath
pleased you to follow me to the wars, it were well that you should know
how you may best serve me. I doubt not, Terlake, that you will show
yourself a worthy son of a valiant father; and you, Ford, of yours; and
you, Edricson, that you are mindful of the old-time house from which
all men know that you are sprung. And first I would have you bear
very steadfastly in mind that our setting forth is by no means for the
purpose of gaining spoil or exacting ransom, though it may well happen
that such may come to us also. We go to France, and from thence I trust
to Spain, in humble search of a field in which we may win advancement
and perchance some small share of glory. For this purpose I would have
you know that it is not my wont to let any occasion pass where it is in
any way possible that honor may be gained. I would have you bear this
in mind, and give great heed to it that you may bring me word of all
cartels, challenges, wrongs, tyrannies, infamies, and wronging of
damsels. Nor is any occasion too small to take note of, for I have
known such trifles as the dropping of a gauntlet, or the flicking of
a breadcrumb, when well and properly followed up, lead to a most noble
spear-running. But, Edricson, do I not see a cavalier who rides down
yonder road amongst the nether shaw? It would be well, perchance, that
you should give him greeting from me. And, should he be of gentle blood
it may be that he would care to exchange thrusts with me."

"Why, my lord," quoth Ford, standing in his stirrups and shading his
eyes, "it is old Hob Davidson, the fat miller of Milton!"

"Ah, so it is, indeed," said Sir Nigel, puckering his cheeks; "but
wayside ventures are not to be scorned, for I have seen no finer
passages than are to be had from such chance meetings, when cavaliers
are willing to advance themselves. I can well remember that two leagues
from the town of Rheims I met a very valiant and courteous cavalier of
France, with whom I had gentle and most honorable contention for upwards
of an hour. It hath ever grieved me that I had not his name, for he
smote upon me with a mace and went upon his way ere I was in condition
to have much speech with him; but his arms were an allurion in chief
above a fess azure. I was also on such an occasion thrust through the
shoulder by Lyon de Montcourt, whom I met on the high road betwixt
Libourne and Bordeaux. I met him but the once, but I have never seen
a man for whom I bear a greater love and esteem. And so also with the
squire Le Bourg Capillet, who would have been a very valiant captain had
he lived."

"He is dead then?" asked Alleyne Edricson.

"Alas! it was my ill fate to slay him in a bickering which broke out in
a field near the township of Tarbes. I cannot call to mind how the
thing came about, for it was in the year of the Prince's ride through
Languedoc, when there was much fine skirmishing to be had at barriers.
By St. Paul! I do not think that any honorable cavalier could ask for
better chance of advancement than might be had by spurring forth before
the army and riding to the gateways of Narbonne, or Bergerac or Mont
Giscar, where some courteous gentleman would ever be at wait to do
what he might to meet your wish or ease you of your vow. Such a one at
Ventadour ran three courses with me betwixt daybreak and sunrise, to the
great exaltation of his lady."

"And did you slay him also, my lord?" asked Ford with reverence.

"I could never learn, for he was carried within the barrier, and as I
had chanced to break the bone of my leg it was a great unease for me
to ride or even to stand. Yet, by the goodness of heaven and the pious
intercession of the valiant St. George, I was able to sit my charger
in the ruffle of Poictiers, which was no very long time afterwards. But
what have we here? A very fair and courtly maiden, or I mistake."

It was indeed a tall and buxom country lass, with a basket of
spinach-leaves upon her head, and a great slab of bacon tucked under one
arm. She bobbed a frightened curtsey as Sir Nigel swept his velvet hat
from his head and reined up his great charger.

"God be with thee, fair maiden!" said he.

"God guard thee, my lord!" she answered, speaking in the broadest West
Saxon speech, and balancing herself first on one foot and then on the
other in her bashfulness.

"Fear not, my fair damsel," said Sir Nigel, "but tell me if perchance
a poor and most unworthy knight can in any wise be of service to you.
Should it chance that you have been used despitefully, it may be that I
may obtain justice for you."

"Lawk no, kind sir," she answered, clutching her bacon the tighter, as
though some design upon it might be hid under this knightly offer. "I
be the milking wench o' fairmer Arnold, and he be as kind a maister as
heart could wish."

"It is well," said he, and with a shake of the bridle rode on down the
woodland path. "I would have you bear in mind," he continued to his
squires, "that gentle courtesy is not, as is the base use of so many
false knights, to be shown only to maidens of high degree, for there
is no woman so humble that a true knight may not listen to her tale of
