dare to think of such a thing!'

'My dear madam, that's the whole case. I know it would be like his
impudence. It is like Ned's impudence to do as he has done; but you
would not on that account, or because of a few tears from your beautiful
daughter, refrain from checking their inclinations in their birth. I
meant to have reasoned thus with your husband when I saw him at Mrs
Rudge's this evening--'

'My husband,' said Mrs Varden, interposing with emotion, 'would be a
great deal better at home than going to Mrs Rudge's so often. I don't
know what he does there. I don't see what occasion he has to busy
himself in her affairs at all, sir.'

'If I don't appear to express my concurrence in those last sentiments of
yours,' returned Mr Chester, 'quite so strongly as you might desire,
it is because his being there, my dear madam, and not proving
conversational, led me hither, and procured me the happiness of
this interview with one, in whom the whole management, conduct, and
prosperity of her family are centred, I perceive.'

With that he took Mrs Varden's hand again, and having pressed it to his
lips with the highflown gallantry of the day--a little burlesqued
to render it the more striking in the good lady's unaccustomed
eyes--proceeded in the same strain of mingled sophistry, cajolery,
and flattery, to entreat that her utmost influence might be exerted to
restrain her husband and daughter from any further promotion of Edward's
suit to Miss Haredale, and from aiding or abetting either party in any
way. Mrs Varden was but a woman, and had her share of vanity, obstinacy,
and love of power. She entered into a secret treaty of alliance,
offensive and defensive, with her insinuating visitor; and really did
believe, as many others would have done who saw and heard him, that in
so doing she furthered the ends of truth, justice, and morality, in a
very uncommon degree.

Overjoyed by the success of his negotiation, and mightily amused within
himself, Mr Chester conducted her downstairs in the same state as
before; and having repeated the previous ceremony of salutation, which
also as before comprehended Dolly, took his leave; first completing the
conquest of Miss Miggs's heart, by inquiring if 'this young lady' would
light him to the door.

'Oh, mim,' said Miggs, returning with the candle. 'Oh gracious me, mim,
there's a gentleman! Was there ever such an angel to talk as he is--and
such a sweet-looking man! So upright and noble, that he seems to despise
the very ground he walks on; and yet so mild and condescending, that
he seems to say "but I will take notice on it too." And to think of
his taking you for Miss Dolly, and Miss Dolly for your sister--Oh, my
goodness me, if I was master wouldn't I be jealous of him!'

Mrs Varden reproved her handmaid for this vain-speaking; but very gently
and mildly--quite smilingly indeed--remarking that she was a foolish,
giddy, light-headed girl, whose spirits carried her beyond all bounds,
and who didn't mean half she said, or she would be quite angry with her.

'For my part,' said Dolly, in a thoughtful manner, 'I half believe Mr
Chester is something like Miggs in that respect. For all his politeness
and pleasant speaking, I am pretty sure he was making game of us, more
than once.'

'If you venture to say such a thing again, and to speak ill of people
behind their backs in my presence, miss,' said Mrs Varden, 'I shall
insist upon your taking a candle and going to bed directly. How dare
you, Dolly? I'm astonished at you. The rudeness of your whole behaviour
this evening has been disgraceful. Did anybody ever hear,' cried the
enraged matron, bursting into tears, 'of a daughter telling her own
mother she has been made game of!'

What a very uncertain temper Mrs Varden's was!



Chapter 28


Repairing to a noted coffee-house in Covent Garden when he left the
locksmith's, Mr Chester sat long over a late dinner, entertaining
himself exceedingly with the whimsical recollection of his recent
proceedings, and congratulating himself very much on his great
cleverness. Influenced by these thoughts, his face wore an expression
so benign and tranquil, that the waiter in immediate attendance upon him
felt he could almost have died in his defence, and settled in his own
mind (until the receipt of the bill, and a very small fee for very great
trouble disabused it of the idea) that such an apostolic customer was
worth half-a-dozen of the ordinary run of visitors, at least.

A visit to the gaming-table--not as a heated, anxious venturer, but
one whom it was quite a treat to see staking his two or three pieces in
deference to the follies of society, and smiling with equal benevolence
on winners and losers--made it late before he reached home. It was his
custom to bid his servant go to bed at his own time unless he had orders
to the contrary, and to leave a candle on the common stair. There was a
lamp on the landing by which he could always light it when he came home
late, and having a key of the door about him he could enter and go to
bed at his pleasure.

He opened the glass of the dull lamp, whose wick, burnt up and swollen
like a drunkard's nose, came flying off in little carbuncles at the
candle's touch, and scattering hot sparks about, rendered it matter
of some difficulty to kindle the lazy taper; when a noise, as of a man
snoring deeply some steps higher up, caused him to pause and listen.
It was the heavy breathing of a sleeper, close at hand. Some fellow
had lain down on the open staircase, and was slumbering soundly.
Having lighted the candle at length and opened his own door, he softly
ascended, holding the taper high above his head, and peering cautiously
about; curious to see what kind of man had chosen so comfortless a
shelter for his lodging.

With his head upon the landing and his great limbs flung over
half-a-dozen stairs, as carelessly as though he were a dead man
whom drunken bearers had thrown down by chance, there lay Hugh, face
uppermost, his long hair drooping like some wild weed upon his wooden
pillow, and his huge chest heaving with the sounds which so unwontedly
disturbed the place and hour.

He who came upon him so unexpectedly was about to break his rest by
thrusting him with his foot, when, glancing at his upturned face, he
arrested himself in the very action, and stooping down and shading the
candle with his hand, examined his features closely. Close as his first
inspection was, it did not suffice, for he passed the light, still
carefully shaded as before, across and across his face, and yet observed
him with a searching eye.

While he was thus engaged, the sleeper, without any starting or turning
round, awoke. There was a kind of fascination in meeting his steady gaze
so suddenly, which took from the other the presence of mind to withdraw
his eyes, and forced him, as it were, to meet his look. So they remained
staring at each other, until Mr Chester at last broke silence, and asked
him in a low voice, why he lay sleeping there.

'I thought,' said Hugh, struggling into a sitting posture and gazing at
him intently, still, 'that you were a part of my dream. It was a curious
one. I hope it may never come true, master.'

'What makes you shiver?'

'The--the cold, I suppose,' he growled, as he shook himself and rose. 'I
hardly know where I am yet.'

'Do you know me?' said Mr Chester.

'Ay, I know you,' he answered. 'I was dreaming of you--we're not where I
thought we were. That's a comfort.'

He looked round him as he spoke, and in particular looked above his
head, as though he half expected to be standing under some object
which had had existence in his dream. Then he rubbed his eyes and shook
himself again, and followed his conductor into his own rooms.

Mr Chester lighted the candles which stood upon his dressing-table, and
wheeling an easy-chair towards the fire, which was yet burning, stirred
up a cheerful blaze, sat down before it, and bade his uncouth visitor
'Come here,' and draw his boots off.

'You have been drinking again, my fine fellow,' he said, as Hugh went
down on one knee, and did as he was told.

'As I'm alive, master, I've walked the twelve long miles, and waited
here I don't know how long, and had no drink between my lips since
dinner-time at noon.'

'And can you do nothing better, my pleasant friend, than fall asleep,
and shake the very building with your snores?' said Mr Chester. 'Can't
you dream in your straw at home, dull dog as you are, that you need come
here to do it?--Reach me those slippers, and tread softly.'

Hugh obeyed in silence.

'And harkee, my dear young gentleman,' said Mr Chester, as he put them
on, 'the next time you dream, don't let it be of me, but of some dog or
horse with whom you are better acquainted. Fill the glass once--you'll
find it and the bottle in the same place--and empty it to keep yourself
awake.'

Hugh obeyed again even more zealously--and having done so, presented
himself before his patron.

'Now,' said Mr Chester, 'what do you want with me?'

'There was news to-day,' returned Hugh. 'Your son was at our house--came
down on horseback. He tried to see the young woman, but couldn't get
sight of her. He left some letter or some message which our Joe had
charge of, but he and the old one quarrelled about it when your son had
gone, and the old one wouldn't let it be delivered. He says (that's the
old one does) that none of his people shall interfere and get him into
trouble. He's a landlord, he says, and lives on everybody's custom.'

'He's a jewel,' smiled Mr Chester, 'and the better for being a dull
one.--Well?'

'Varden's daughter--that's the girl I kissed--'

'--and stole the bracelet from upon the king's highway,' said Mr
Chester, composedly. 'Yes; what of her?'

'She wrote a note at our house to the young woman, saying she lost the
letter I brought to you, and you burnt. Our Joe was to carry it, but
the old one kept him at home all next day, on purpose that he shouldn't.
Next morning he gave it to me to take; and here it is.'

'You didn't deliver it then, my good friend?' said Mr Chester, twirling
Dolly's note between his finger and thumb, and feigning to be surprised.

'I supposed you'd want to have it,' retorted Hugh. 'Burn one, burn all,
I thought.'

'My devil-may-care acquaintance,' said Mr Chester--'really if you do not
draw some nicer distinctions, your career will be cut short with most
surprising suddenness. Don't you know that the letter you brought to
me, was directed to my son who resides in this very place? And can you
descry no difference between his letters and those addressed to other
people?'

'If you don't want it,' said Hugh, disconcerted by this reproof, for he
had expected high praise, 'give it me back, and I'll deliver it. I don't
know how to please you, master.'

'I shall deliver it,' returned his patron, putting it away after a
moment's consideration, 'myself. Does the young lady walk out, on fine
mornings?'

'Mostly--about noon is her usual time.'

'Alone?'

'Yes, alone.'

'Where?'

'In the grounds before the house.--Them that the footpath crosses.'

'If the weather should be fine, I may throw myself in her way to-morrow,
perhaps,' said Mr Chester, as coolly as if she were one of his ordinary
acquaintance. 'Mr Hugh, if I should ride up to the Maypole door, you
will do me the favour only to have seen me once. You must suppress your
gratitude, and endeavour to forget my forbearance in the matter of the
bracelet. It is natural it should break out, and it does you honour; but
when other folks are by, you must, for your own sake and safety, be as
like your usual self as though you owed me no obligation whatever, and
had never stood within these walls. You comprehend me?'

Hugh understood him perfectly. After a pause he muttered that he hoped
his patron would involve him in no trouble about this last letter;
for he had kept it back solely with the view of pleasing him. He was
continuing in this strain, when Mr Chester with a most beneficent and
patronising air cut him short by saying:

'My good fellow, you have my promise, my word, my sealed bond (for a
verbal pledge with me is quite as good), that I will always protect you
so long as you deserve it. Now, do set your mind at rest. Keep it at
ease, I beg of you. When a man puts himself in my power so thoroughly as
you have done, I really feel as though he had a kind of claim upon me. I
am more disposed to mercy and forbearance under such circumstances
than I can tell you, Hugh. Do look upon me as your protector, and rest
assured, I entreat you, that on the subject of that indiscretion, you
may preserve, as long as you and I are friends, the lightest heart that
ever beat within a human breast. Fill that glass once more to cheer you
on your road homewards--I am really quite ashamed to think how far you
have to go--and then God bless you for the night.'

'They think,' said Hugh, when he had tossed the liquor down, 'that I am
sleeping soundly in the stable. Ha ha ha! The stable door is shut, but
the steed's gone, master.'

'You are a most convivial fellow,' returned his friend, 'and I love your
humour of all things. Good night! Take the greatest possible care of
yourself, for my sake!'

It was remarkable that during the whole interview, each had endeavoured
to catch stolen glances of the other's face, and had never looked full
at it. They interchanged one brief and hasty glance as Hugh went out,
averted their eyes directly, and so separated. Hugh closed the double
doors behind him, carefully and without noise; and Mr Chester remained
in his easy-chair, with his gaze intently fixed upon the fire.

'Well!' he said, after meditating for a long time--and said with a deep
sigh and an uneasy shifting of his attitude, as though he dismissed some
other subject from his thoughts, and returned to that which had held
possession of them all the day--'the plot thickens; I have thrown the
shell; it will explode, I think, in eight-and-forty hours, and should
scatter these good folks amazingly. We shall see!'

He went to bed and fell asleep, but had not slept long when he started
up and thought that Hugh was at the outer door, calling in a strange
voice, very different from his own, to be admitted. The delusion was so
strong upon him, and was so full of that vague terror of the night
in which such visions have their being, that he rose, and taking his
sheathed sword in his hand, opened the door, and looked out upon the
staircase, and towards the spot where Hugh had lain asleep; and even
spoke to him by name. But all was dark and quiet, and creeping back
to bed again, he fell, after an hour's uneasy watching, into a second
sleep, and woke no more till morning.



Chapter 29


The thoughts of worldly men are for ever regulated by a moral law of
gravitation, which, like the physical one, holds them down to earth. The
bright glory of day, and the silent wonders of a starlit night, appeal
to their minds in vain. There are no signs in the sun, or in the moon,
or in the stars, for their reading. They are like some wise men, who,
learning to know each planet by its Latin name, have quite forgotten
such small heavenly constellations as Charity, Forbearance, Universal
Love, and Mercy, although they shine by night and day so brightly that
the blind may see them; and who, looking upward at the spangled sky,
see nothing there but the reflection of their own great wisdom and
book-learning.

It is curious to imagine these people of the world, busy in thought,
turning their eyes towards the countless spheres that shine above us,
and making them reflect the only images their minds contain. The man who
lives but in the breath of princes, has nothing in his sight but stars for
courtiers' breasts. The envious man beholds his neighbours' honours
even in the sky; to the money-hoarder, and the mass of worldly folk, the
whole great universe above glitters with sterling coin--fresh from the
mint--stamped with the sovereign's head--coming always between them and
heaven, turn where they may. So do the shadows of our own desires stand
between us and our better angels, and thus their brightness is eclipsed.

Everything was fresh and gay, as though the world were but that morning
made, when Mr Chester rode at a tranquil pace along the Forest road.
Though early in the season, it was warm and genial weather; the trees
were budding into leaf, the hedges and the grass were green, the air was
musical with songs of birds, and high above them all the lark poured
out her richest melody. In shady spots, the morning dew sparkled on
each young leaf and blade of grass; and where the sun was shining, some
diamond drops yet glistened brightly, as in unwillingness to leave so
fair a world, and have such brief existence. Even the light wind, whose
rustling was as gentle to the ear as softly-falling water, had its hope
and promise; and, leaving a pleasant fragrance in its track as it went
fluttering by, whispered of its intercourse with Summer, and of his
happy coming.

The solitary rider went glancing on among the trees, from sunlight
into shade and back again, at the same even pace--looking about him,
certainly, from time to time, but with no greater thought of the day
or the scene through which he moved, than that he was fortunate (being
choicely dressed) to have such favourable weather. He smiled very
complacently at such times, but rather as if he were satisfied with
himself than with anything else: and so went riding on, upon his
chestnut cob, as pleasant to look upon as his own horse, and probably
far less sensitive to the many cheerful influences by which he was
surrounded.

In the course of time, the Maypole's massive chimneys rose upon his
view: but he quickened not his pace one jot, and with the same cool
gravity rode up to the tavern porch. John Willet, who was toasting
his red face before a great fire in the bar, and who, with surpassing
foresight and quickness of apprehension, had been thinking, as he looked
at the blue sky, that if that state of things lasted much longer, it
might ultimately become necessary to leave off fires and throw the
windows open, issued forth to hold his stirrup; calling lustily for
Hugh.

'Oh, you're here, are you, sir?' said John, rather surprised by the
quickness with which he appeared. 'Take this here valuable animal into
the stable, and have more than particular care of him if you want to
keep your place. A mortal lazy fellow, sir; he needs a deal of looking
after.'

'But you have a son,' returned Mr Chester, giving his bridle to Hugh as
he dismounted, and acknowledging his salute by a careless motion of his
hand towards his hat. 'Why don't you make HIM useful?'

'Why, the truth is, sir,' replied John with great importance, 'that my
son--what, you're a-listening are you, villain?'

'Who's listening?' returned Hugh angrily. 'A treat, indeed, to hear YOU
speak! Would you have me take him in till he's cool?'

'Walk him up and down further off then, sir,' cried old John, 'and when
you see me and a noble gentleman entertaining ourselves with talk, keep
your distance. If you don't know your distance, sir,' added Mr Willet,
after an enormously long pause, during which he fixed his great dull
eyes on Hugh, and waited with exemplary patience for any little property
in the way of ideas that might come to him, 'we'll find a way to teach
you, pretty soon.'

Hugh shrugged his shoulders scornfully, and in his reckless swaggering
way, crossed to the other side of the little green, and there, with
the bridle slung loosely over his shoulder, led the horse to and fro,
glancing at his master every now and then from under his bushy eyebrows,
with as sinister an aspect as one would desire to see.

Mr Chester, who, without appearing to do so, had eyed him attentively
during this brief dispute, stepped into the porch, and turning abruptly
to Mr Willet, said,

'You keep strange servants, John.'

'Strange enough to look at, sir, certainly,' answered the host; 'but out
of doors; for horses, dogs, and the likes of that; there an't a better
man in England than is that Maypole Hugh yonder. He an't fit for
indoors,' added Mr Willet, with the confidential air of a man who felt
his own superior nature. 'I do that; but if that chap had only a little
imagination, sir--'

'He's an active fellow now, I dare swear,' said Mr Chester, in a musing
tone, which seemed to suggest that he would have said the same had there
been nobody to hear him.

'Active, sir!' retorted John, with quite an expression in his face;
'that chap! Hallo there! You, sir! Bring that horse here, and go and
hang my wig on the weathercock, to show this gentleman whether you're
one of the lively sort or not.'

Hugh made no answer, but throwing the bridle to his master, and
snatching his wig from his head, in a manner so unceremonious and hasty
that the action discomposed Mr Willet not a little, though performed at
his own special desire, climbed nimbly to the very summit of the maypole
before the house, and hanging the wig upon the weathercock, sent it
twirling round like a roasting jack. Having achieved this performance,
he cast it on the ground, and sliding down the pole with inconceivable
rapidity, alighted on his feet almost as soon as it had touched the
earth.

'There, sir,' said John, relapsing into his usual stolid state, 'you
won't see that at many houses, besides the Maypole, where there's good
accommodation for man and beast--nor that neither, though that with him
is nothing.'

This last remark bore reference to his vaulting on horseback, as upon Mr
Chester's first visit, and quickly disappearing by the stable gate.

'That with him is nothing,' repeated Mr Willet, brushing his wig with
his wrist, and inwardly resolving to distribute a small charge for dust
and damage to that article of dress, through the various items of his
guest's bill; 'he'll get out of a'most any winder in the house. There
never was such a chap for flinging himself about and never hurting his
bones. It's my opinion, sir, that it's pretty nearly allowing to his
not having any imagination; and that if imagination could be (which it
can't) knocked into him, he'd never be able to do it any more. But we
was a-talking, sir, about my son.'

'True, Willet, true,' said his visitor, turning again towards the
landlord with his accustomed serenity of face. 'My good friend, what
about him?'

It has been reported that Mr Willet, previously to making answer,
winked. But as he was never known to be guilty of such lightness of
conduct either before or afterwards, this may be looked upon as
a malicious invention of his enemies--founded, perhaps, upon the
undisputed circumstance of his taking his guest by the third breast
button of his coat, counting downwards from the chin, and pouring his
reply into his ear:

'Sir,' whispered John, with dignity, 'I know my duty. We want no
love-making here, sir, unbeknown to parents. I respect a certain young
gentleman, taking him in the light of a young gentleman; I respect a
certain young lady, taking her in the light of a young lady; but of the
two as a couple, I have no knowledge, sir, none whatever. My son, sir,
is upon his patrole.'

'I thought I saw him looking through the corner window but this moment,'
said Mr Chester, who naturally thought that being on patrole, implied
walking about somewhere.

'No doubt you did, sir,' returned John. 'He is upon his patrole of
honour, sir, not to leave the premises. Me and some friends of mine that
use the Maypole of an evening, sir, considered what was best to be done
with him, to prevent his doing anything unpleasant in opposing your
desires; and we've put him on his patrole. And what's more, sir, he
won't be off his patrole for a pretty long time to come, I can tell you
that.'

When he had communicated this bright idea, which had its origin in the
perusal by the village cronies of a newspaper, containing, among other
matters, an account of how some officer pending the sentence of some
court-martial had been enlarged on parole, Mr Willet drew back from his
guest's ear, and without any visible alteration of feature, chuckled
thrice audibly. This nearest approach to a laugh in which he ever
indulged (and that but seldom and only on extreme occasions), never even
curled his lip or effected the smallest change in--no, not so much as a
slight wagging of--his great, fat, double chin, which at these times, as
at all others, remained a perfect desert in the broad map of his face;
one changeless, dull, tremendous blank.

Lest it should be matter of surprise to any, that Mr Willet adopted this
bold course in opposition to one whom he had often entertained, and who
had always paid his way at the Maypole gallantly, it may be remarked
that it was his very penetration and sagacity in this respect, which
occasioned him to indulge in those unusual demonstrations of jocularity,
just now recorded. For Mr Willet, after carefully balancing father and
son in his mental scales, had arrived at the distinct conclusion that
the old gentleman was a better sort of a customer than the young one.
Throwing his landlord into the same scale, which was already turned by
this consideration, and heaping upon him, again, his strong desires
to run counter to the unfortunate Joe, and his opposition as a general
principle to all matters of love and matrimony, it went down to the very
ground straightway, and sent the light cause of the younger gentleman
flying upwards to the ceiling. Mr Chester was not the kind of man to be
by any means dim-sighted to Mr Willet's motives, but he thanked him as
graciously as if he had been one of the most disinterested martyrs that
ever shone on earth; and leaving him, with many complimentary reliances
on his great taste and judgment, to prepare whatever dinner he might
deem most fitting the occasion, bent his steps towards the Warren.

Dressed with more than his usual elegance; assuming a gracefulness of
manner, which, though it was the result of long study, sat easily upon
him and became him well; composing his features into their most serene
and prepossessing expression; and setting in short that guard upon
himself, at every point, which denoted that he attached no slight
importance to the impression he was about to make; he entered the bounds
of Miss Haredale's usual walk. He had not gone far, or looked about him
long, when he descried coming towards him, a female figure. A glimpse
of the form and dress as she crossed a little wooden bridge which lay
between them, satisfied him that he had found her whom he desired to
see. He threw himself in her way, and a very few paces brought them
close together.

He raised his hat from his head, and yielding the path, suffered her to
pass him. Then, as if the idea had but that moment occurred to him, he
turned hastily back and said in an agitated voice:

'I beg pardon--do I address Miss Haredale?'

She stopped in some confusion at being so unexpectedly accosted by a
stranger; and answered 'Yes.'

'Something told me,' he said, LOOKING a compliment to her beauty, 'that
it could be no other. Miss Haredale, I bear a name which is not unknown
to you--which it is a pride, and yet a pain to me to know, sounds
pleasantly in your ears. I am a man advanced in life, as you see. I am
the father of him whom you honour and distinguish above all other
men. May I for weighty reasons which fill me with distress, beg but a
minute's conversation with you here?'

Who that was inexperienced in deceit, and had a frank and youthful
heart, could doubt the speaker's truth--could doubt it too, when the
voice that spoke, was like the faint echo of one she knew so well, and
so much loved to hear? She inclined her head, and stopping, cast her
eyes upon the ground.

'A little more apart--among these trees. It is an old man's hand, Miss
Haredale; an honest one, believe me.'

She put hers in it as he said these words, and suffered him to lead her
to a neighbouring seat.

'You alarm me, sir,' she said in a low voice. 'You are not the bearer of
any ill news, I hope?'

'Of none that you anticipate,' he answered, sitting down beside her.
'Edward is well--quite well. It is of him I wish to speak, certainly;
but I have no misfortune to communicate.'

She bowed her head again, and made as though she would have begged him
to proceed; but said nothing.

'I am sensible that I speak to you at a disadvantage, dear Miss
Haredale. Believe me that I am not so forgetful of the feelings of my
younger days as not to know that you are little disposed to view me
with favour. You have heard me described as cold-hearted, calculating,
selfish--'

'I have never, sir,'--she interposed with an altered manner and a firmer
voice; 'I have never heard you spoken of in harsh or disrespectful
terms. You do a great wrong to Edward's nature if you believe him
capable of any mean or base proceeding.'

'Pardon me, my sweet young lady, but your uncle--'

'Nor is it my uncle's nature either,' she replied, with a heightened
colour in her cheek. 'It is not his nature to stab in the dark, nor is
it mine to love such deeds.'

She rose as she spoke, and would have left him; but he detained her with
a gentle hand, and besought her in such persuasive accents to hear him
but another minute, that she was easily prevailed upon to comply, and so
sat down again.

'And it is,' said Mr Chester, looking upward, and apostrophising the
air; 'it is this frank, ingenuous, noble nature, Ned, that you can wound
so lightly. Shame--shame upon you, boy!'

She turned towards him quickly, and with a scornful look and flashing
eyes. There were tears in Mr Chester's eyes, but he dashed them
hurriedly away, as though unwilling that his weakness should be known,
and regarded her with mingled admiration and compassion.

'I never until now,' he said, 'believed, that the frivolous actions of a
young man could move me like these of my own son. I never knew till now,
the worth of a woman's heart, which boys so lightly win, and lightly
fling away. Trust me, dear young lady, that I never until now did
know your worth; and though an abhorrence of deceit and falsehood has
impelled me to seek you out, and would have done so had you been the
poorest and least gifted of your sex, I should have lacked the fortitude
to sustain this interview could I have pictured you to my imagination as
you really are.'

Oh! If Mrs Varden could have seen the virtuous gentleman as he said
these words, with indignation sparkling from his eyes--if she could have
heard his broken, quavering voice--if she could have beheld him as he
stood bareheaded in the sunlight, and with unwonted energy poured forth
his eloquence!

With a haughty face, but pale and trembling too, Emma regarded him in
silence. She neither spoke nor moved, but gazed upon him as though she
would look into his heart.

'I throw off,' said Mr Chester, 'the restraint which natural affection
would impose on some men, and reject all bonds but those of truth and
duty. Miss Haredale, you are deceived; you are deceived by your unworthy
lover, and my unworthy son.'

Still she looked at him steadily, and still said not one word.

'I have ever opposed his professions of love for you; you will do me
the justice, dear Miss Haredale, to remember that. Your uncle and myself
were enemies in early life, and if I had sought retaliation, I might
have found it here. But as we grow older, we grow wiser--bitter, I would
fain hope--and from the first, I have opposed him in this attempt. I
foresaw the end, and would have spared you, if I could.'

'Speak plainly, sir,' she faltered. 'You deceive me, or are deceived
yourself. I do not believe you--I cannot--I should not.'

'First,' said Mr Chester, soothingly, 'for there may be in your mind
some latent angry feeling to which I would not appeal, pray take this
letter. It reached my hands by chance, and by mistake, and should have
accounted to you (as I am told) for my son's not answering some other
note of yours. God forbid, Miss Haredale,' said the good gentleman, with
great emotion, 'that there should be in your gentle breast one causeless
ground of quarrel with him. You should know, and you will see, that he
was in no fault here.'

There appeared something so very candid, so scrupulously honourable,
so very truthful and just in this course something which rendered the
upright person who resorted to it, so worthy of belief--that Emma's
heart, for the first time, sunk within her. She turned away and burst
into tears.

'I would,' said Mr Chester, leaning over her, and speaking in mild and
quite venerable accents; 'I would, dear girl, it were my task to banish,
not increase, those tokens of your grief. My son, my erring son,--I will
not call him deliberately criminal in this, for men so young, who have
been inconstant twice or thrice before, act without reflection, almost
without a knowledge of the wrong they do,--will break his plighted faith
to you; has broken it even now. Shall I stop here, and having given you
this warning, leave it to be fulfilled; or shall I go on?'

'You will go on, sir,' she answered, 'and speak more plainly yet, in
justice both to him and me.'

'My dear girl,' said Mr Chester, bending over her more affectionately
still; 'whom I would call my daughter, but the Fates forbid, Edward
seeks to break with you upon a false and most unwarrantable pretence. I
have it on his own showing; in his own hand. Forgive me, if I have had
a watch upon his conduct; I am his father; I had a regard for your peace
and his honour, and no better resource was left me. There lies on his
desk at this present moment, ready for transmission to you, a letter,
in which he tells you that our poverty--our poverty; his and mine, Miss
Haredale--forbids him to pursue his claim upon your hand; in which he
offers, voluntarily proposes, to free you from your pledge; and talks
magnanimously (men do so, very commonly, in such cases) of being in
time more worthy of your regard--and so forth. A letter, to be plain, in
which he not only jilts you--pardon the word; I would summon to your
aid your pride and dignity--not only jilts you, I fear, in favour of the
object whose slighting treatment first inspired his brief passion for
yourself and gave it birth in wounded vanity, but affects to make a
merit and a virtue of the act.'

She glanced proudly at him once more, as by an involuntary impulse, and
with a swelling breast rejoined, 'If what you say be true, he takes much
needless trouble, sir, to compass his design. He's very tender of my
peace of mind. I quite thank him.'

'The truth of what I tell you, dear young lady,' he replied, 'you will
test by the receipt or non-receipt of the letter of which I speak.
Haredale, my dear fellow, I am delighted to see you, although we meet
under singular circumstances, and upon a melancholy occasion. I hope you
are very well.'

At these words the young lady raised her eyes, which were filled with
tears; and seeing that her uncle indeed stood before them, and being
quite unequal to the trial of hearing or of speaking one word more,
hurriedly withdrew, and left them. They stood looking at each other, and
at her retreating figure, and for a long time neither of them spoke.

'What does this mean? Explain it,' said Mr Haredale at length. 'Why are
you here, and why with her?'

'My dear friend,' rejoined the other, resuming his accustomed manner
with infinite readiness, and throwing himself upon the bench with a
weary air, 'you told me not very long ago, at that delightful old
tavern of which you are the esteemed proprietor (and a most charming
establishment it is for persons of rural pursuits and in robust health,
who are not liable to take cold), that I had the head and heart of an
evil spirit in all matters of deception. I thought at the time; I
really did think; you flattered me. But now I begin to wonder at your
discernment, and vanity apart, do honestly believe you spoke the truth.
Did you ever counterfeit extreme ingenuousness and honest indignation?
My dear fellow, you have no conception, if you never did, how faint the
effort makes one.'

Mr Haredale surveyed him with a look of cold contempt. 'You may evade an
explanation, I know,' he said, folding his arms. 'But I must have it. I
can wait.'

'Not at all. Not at all, my good fellow. You shall not wait a moment,'
returned his friend, as he lazily crossed his legs. 'The simplest thing
in the world. It lies in a nutshell. Ned has written her a letter--a
boyish, honest, sentimental composition, which remains as yet in
his desk, because he hasn't had the heart to send it. I have taken a
liberty, for which my parental affection and anxiety are a sufficient
excuse, and possessed myself of the contents. I have described them
to your niece (a most enchanting person, Haredale; quite an angelic
creature), with a little colouring and description adapted to our
purpose. It's done. You may be quite easy. It's all over. Deprived of
their adherents and mediators; her pride and jealousy roused to the
utmost; with nobody to undeceive her, and you to confirm me; you will
find that their intercourse will close with her answer. If she receives
Ned's letter by to-morrow noon, you may date their parting from
to-morrow night. No thanks, I beg; you owe me none. I have acted for
myself; and if I have forwarded our compact with all the ardour even you
could have desired, I have done so selfishly, indeed.'

'I curse the compact, as you call it, with my whole heart and soul,'
returned the other. 'It was made in an evil hour. I have bound myself
to a lie; I have leagued myself with you; and though I did so with a
righteous motive, and though it cost me such an effort as haply few men
know, I hate and despise myself for the deed.'

'You are very warm,' said Mr Chester with a languid smile.

'I AM warm. I am maddened by your coldness. 'Death, Chester, if your
blood ran warmer in your veins, and there were no restraints upon me,
such as those that hold and drag me back--well; it is done; you tell me
so, and on such a point I may believe you. When I am most remorseful
for this treachery, I will think of you and your marriage, and try to
justify myself in such remembrances, for having torn asunder Emma and
your son, at any cost. Our bond is cancelled now, and we may part.'

Mr Chester kissed his hand gracefully; and with the same tranquil face
he had preserved throughout--even when he had seen his companion
so tortured and transported by his passion that his whole frame was
shaken--lay in his lounging posture on the seat and watched him as he
walked away.

'My scapegoat and my drudge at school,' he said, raising his head
to look after him; 'my friend of later days, who could not keep his
mistress when he had won her, and threw me in her way to carry off the
prize; I triumph in the present and the past. Bark on, ill-favoured,
ill-conditioned cur; fortune has ever been with me--I like to hear you.'

The spot where they had met, was in an avenue of trees. Mr Haredale not
passing out on either hand, had walked straight on. He chanced to turn
his head when at some considerable distance, and seeing that his late
companion had by that time risen and was looking after him, stood still
as though he half expected him to follow and waited for his coming up.

'It MAY come to that one day, but not yet,' said Mr Chester, waving his
hand, as though they were the best of friends, and turning away. 'Not
yet, Haredale. Life is pleasant enough to me; dull and full of heaviness
to you. No. To cross swords with such a man--to indulge his humour
unless upon extremity--would be weak indeed.'

For all that, he drew his sword as he walked along, and in an
absent humour ran his eye from hilt to point full twenty times. But
thoughtfulness begets wrinkles; remembering this, he soon put it up,
smoothed his contracted brow, hummed a gay tune with greater gaiety of
manner, and was his unruffled self again.



Chapter 30


A homely proverb recognises the existence of a troublesome class of
persons who, having an inch conceded them, will take an ell. Not to
quote the illustrious examples of those heroic scourges of mankind,
whose amiable path in life has been from birth to death through blood,
and fire, and ruin, and who would seem to have existed for no better
purpose than to teach mankind that as the absence of pain is pleasure,
so the earth, purged of their presence, may be deemed a blessed
place--not to quote such mighty instances, it will be sufficient to
refer to old John Willet.

Old John having long encroached a good standard inch, full measure, on
the liberty of Joe, and having snipped off a Flemish ell in the matter
of the parole, grew so despotic and so great, that his thirst for
conquest knew no bounds. The more young Joe submitted, the more absolute
old John became. The ell soon faded into nothing. Yards, furlongs, miles
arose; and on went old John in the pleasantest manner possible, trimming
off an exuberance in this place, shearing away some liberty of speech
or action in that, and conducting himself in his small way with as much
high mightiness and majesty, as the most glorious tyrant that ever had
his statue reared in the public ways, of ancient or of modern times.

As great men are urged on to the abuse of power (when they need urging,
which is not often), by their flatterers and dependents, so old John was
impelled to these exercises of authority by the applause and admiration
of his Maypole cronies, who, in the intervals of their nightly pipes and
pots, would shake their heads and say that Mr Willet was a father of the
good old English sort; that there were no new-fangled notions or modern
ways in him; that he put them in mind of what their fathers were when
they were boys; that there was no mistake about him; that it would be
well for the country if there were more like him, and more was the pity
that there were not; with many other original remarks of that nature.
Then they would condescendingly give Joe to understand that it was
all for his good, and he would be thankful for it one day; and in
particular, Mr Cobb would acquaint him, that when he was his age, his
father thought no more of giving him a parental kick, or a box on the
ears, or a cuff on the head, or some little admonition of that sort,
than he did of any other ordinary duty of life; and he would further
remark, with looks of great significance, that but for this judicious
bringing up, he might have never been the man he was at that present
speaking; which was probable enough, as he was, beyond all question,
the dullest dog of the party. In short, between old John and old
John's friends, there never was an unfortunate young fellow so bullied,
badgered, worried, fretted, and brow-beaten; so constantly beset, or
made so tired of his life, as poor Joe Willet.

This had come to be the recognised and established state of things; but
as John was very anxious to flourish his supremacy before the eyes of Mr
Chester, he did that day exceed himself, and did so goad and chafe his
son and heir, that but for Joe's having made a solemn vow to keep
his hands in his pockets when they were not otherwise engaged, it is
impossible to say what he might have done with them. But the longest day
has an end, and at length Mr Chester came downstairs to mount his horse,
which was ready at the door.

As old John was not in the way at the moment, Joe, who was sitting in
the bar ruminating on his dismal fate and the manifold perfections of
Dolly Varden, ran out to hold the guest's stirrup and assist him to
mount. Mr Chester was scarcely in the saddle, and Joe was in the very
act of making him a graceful bow, when old John came diving out of the
porch, and collared him.

'None of that, sir,' said John, 'none of that, sir. No breaking of
patroles. How dare you come out of the door, sir, without leave? You're
trying to get away, sir, are you, and to make a traitor of yourself
again? What do you mean, sir?'

'Let me go, father,' said Joe, imploringly, as he marked the smile upon
their visitor's face, and observed the pleasure his disgrace afforded
him. 'This is too bad. Who wants to get away?'

'Who wants to get away!' cried John, shaking him. 'Why you do, sir,
you do. You're the boy, sir,' added John, collaring with one hand, and
aiding the effect of a farewell bow to the visitor with the other,
'that wants to sneak into houses, and stir up differences between noble
gentlemen and their sons, are you, eh? Hold your tongue, sir.'

Joe made no effort to reply. It was the crowning circumstance of his
degradation. He extricated himself from his father's grasp, darted an
angry look at the departing guest, and returned into the house.

'But for her,' thought Joe, as he threw his arms upon a table in the
common room, and laid his head upon them, 'but for Dolly, who I couldn't
bear should think me the rascal they would make me out to be if I ran
away, this house and I should part to-night.'

It being evening by this time, Solomon Daisy, Tom Cobb, and Long Parkes,
were all in the common room too, and had from the window been witnesses
of what had just occurred. Mr Willet joining them soon afterwards,
received the compliments of the company with great composure, and
lighting his pipe, sat down among them.

'We'll see, gentlemen,' said John, after a long pause, 'who's the master
of this house, and who isn't. We'll see whether boys are to govern men,
or men are to govern boys.'

'And quite right too,' assented Solomon Daisy with some approving nods;
'quite right, Johnny. Very good, Johnny. Well said, Mr Willet. Brayvo,
sir.'

John slowly brought his eyes to bear upon him, looked at him for a long
time, and finally made answer, to the unspeakable consternation of his
hearers, 'When I want encouragement from you, sir, I'll ask you for
it. You let me alone, sir. I can get on without you, I hope. Don't you
tackle me, sir, if you please.'

'Don't take it ill, Johnny; I didn't mean any harm,' pleaded the little
man.

'Very good, sir,' said John, more than usually obstinate after his late
success. 'Never mind, sir. I can stand pretty firm of myself, sir, I
believe, without being shored up by you.' And having given utterance to
this retort, Mr Willet fixed his eyes upon the boiler, and fell into a
kind of tobacco-trance.

The spirits of the company being somewhat damped by this embarrassing
line of conduct on the part of their host, nothing more was said for a
long time; but at length Mr Cobb took upon himself to remark, as he rose
to knock the ashes out of his pipe, that he hoped Joe would thenceforth
learn to obey his father in all things; that he had found, that day, he
was not one of the sort of men who were to be trifled with; and that
he would recommend him, poetically speaking, to mind his eye for the
future.

'I'd recommend you, in return,' said Joe, looking up with a flushed
face, 'not to talk to me.'

'Hold your tongue, sir,' cried Mr Willet, suddenly rousing himself, and
turning round.

'I won't, father,' cried Joe, smiting the table with his fist, so that
the jugs and glasses rung again; 'these things are hard enough to bear
from you; from anybody else I never will endure them any more. Therefore
I say, Mr Cobb, don't talk to me.'

'Why, who are you,' said Mr Cobb, sneeringly, 'that you're not to be
talked to, eh, Joe?'

To which Joe returned no answer, but with a very ominous shake of the
head, resumed his old position, which he would have peacefully preserved
until the house shut up at night, but that Mr Cobb, stimulated by the
wonder of the company at the young man's presumption, retorted with
sundry taunts, which proved too much for flesh and blood to bear.
Crowding into one moment the vexation and the wrath of years, Joe
started up, overturned the table, fell upon his long enemy, pummelled
him with all his might and main, and finished by driving him with
surprising swiftness against a heap of spittoons in one corner; plunging
into which, head foremost, with a tremendous crash, he lay at full
length among the ruins, stunned and motionless. Then, without waiting to
receive the compliments of the bystanders on the victory he had won, he
retreated to his own bedchamber, and considering himself in a state
of siege, piled all the portable furniture against the door by way of
barricade.
