breastplates, swords, and carbines of the dragoons.

I observed that Saxon rode with his chin upon his shoulder, casting
continual uneasy glances behind him, and halting at every piece of
rising ground to make sure that there were no pursuers at our heels. It
was not until, after many weary miles of marching, the lights of Taunton
could be seen twinkling far off in the valley beneath us that he at last
heaved a deep sigh of relief, and expressed his belief that all danger
was over.

'I am not prone to be fearful upon small occasion,' he remarked, 'but
hampered as we are with wounded men and prisoners, it might have puzzled
Petrinus himself to know what we should have done had the cavalry
overtaken us. I can now, Master Pettigrue, smoke my pipe in peace,
without pricking up my ears at every chance rumble of a wheel or shout
of a village roisterer.'

'Even had they pursued us,' said the minister stoutly, 'as long as the
hand of the Lord shall shield us, why should we fear them?'

'Aye, aye!' Saxon answered impatiently, 'but the devil prevaileth at
times. Were not the chosen people themselves overthrown and led into
captivity? How say you, Clarke?'

'One such skirmish is enough for a day,' I remarked. 'Faith! if instead
of charging us they had continued that carbine fire, we must either have
come forth or been shot where we lay.'

'For that reason I forbade our friends with the muskets to answer it,'
said Saxon. 'Our silence led them to think that we had but a pistol or
two among us, and so brought them to charge us. Thus our volley became
the more terrifying since it was unexpected. I'll wager there was not a
man amongst them who did not feel that he had been led into a trap. Mark
you how the rogues wheeled and fled with one accord, as though it had
been part of their daily drill!'

'The peasants stood to it like men,' I remarked.

'There is nothing like a tincture of Calvinism for stiffening a line of
battle,' said Saxon. 'Look at the Swede when he is at home. What more
honest, simple-hearted fellow could you find, with no single soldierly
virtue, save that he could put away more spruce beer than you would care
to pay for. Yet if you do but cram him with a few strong, homely texts,
place a pike in his hand, and give him a Gustavus to lead him, there is
no infantry in the world that can stand against him. On the other hand,
I have seen young Turks, untrained to arms, strike in on behalf of the
Koran as lustily as these brave fellows behind us did for the Bible
which Master Pettigrue held up in front of them.'

'I trust, sir,' said the minister gravely, 'that you do not, by
these remarks, intend to institute any comparison between our sacred
scriptures and the writings of the impostor Mahomet, or to infer that
there is any similarity between the devil-inspired fury of the infidel
Saracens and the Christian fortitude of the struggling faithful!'

'By no means,' Saxon answered, grinning at me over the minister's head.
'I was but showing how closely the Evil One can imitate the workings of
the Spirit.'

'Too true, Master Saxon, too true!' the clergyman answered sadly. 'Amid
the conflict and discord it is hard to pick out the true path. But
I marvel much that amidst the snares and temptations that beset a
soldier's life you have kept yourself unsullied, with your heart still
set upon the true faith.'

'It was through no strength of mine own,' said Saxon piously.

'In very truth, such men as you are much needed in Monmouth's army,'
Master Joshua exclaimed. 'They have there several, as I understand, from
Holland, Brandenburg, and Scotland, who have been trained in arms, but
who care so little for the cause which we uphold that they curse and
swear in a manner that affrights the peasants, and threatens to call
down a judgment upon the army. Others there are who cling close to the
true faith, and have been born again among the righteous; but alas! they
have had no experience of camps and fields. Our blessed Master can work
by means of weak instruments, yet the fact remains that a man may be
a chosen light in a pulpit, and yet be of little avail in an onslaught
such as we have seen this day. I can myself arrange my discourse to the
satisfaction of my flock, so that they grieve when the sand is run out;
(Note E. Appendix) but I am aware that this power would stand me in
little stead when it came to the raising of barricades and the use of
carnal weapons. In this way it comes about, in the army of the faithful,
that those who are fit to lead are hateful to the people, while those to
whose words the people will hearken know little of war. Now we have this
day seen that you are ready of head and of hand, of much experience of
battle, and yet of demure and sober life, full of yearnings after the
word, and strivings against Apollyon. I therefore repeat that you shall
be as a very Joshua amongst them, or as a Samson, destined to tear
down the twin pillars of Prelacy and Popery, so as to bury this corrupt
government in its fall.'

Decimus Saxon's only reply to this eulogy was one of those groans which
were supposed, among the zealots, to be the symbol of intense inner
conflict and emotion. So austere and holy was his expression, so solemn
his demeanour, and so frequent the upturnings of his eyes, clasping
of his hands, and other signs which marked the extreme sectary, that
I could not but marvel at the depths and completeness of the hypocrisy
which had cast so complete a cloak over his rapacious self. For very
mischief's sake I could not refrain from reminding him that there was
one at least who valued his professions at their real value.

'Have you told the worthy minister,' said I, 'of your captivity amongst
the Mussulmans, and of the noble way in which you did uphold the
Christian faith at Stamboul?'

'Nay,' cried our companion, 'I would fain hear the tale. I marvel much
that one so faithful and unbending as thyself was ever let loose by the
unclean and bloodthirsty followers of Mahomet.'

'It does not become me to tell the tale,' Saxon answered with great
presence of mind, casting at the same time a most venomous sidelong
glance at me. 'It is for my comrades in misfortune and not for me to
describe what I endured for the faith. I have little doubt, Master
Pettigrue, that you would have done as much had you been there. The town
of Taunton lies very quiet beneath us, and there are few lights for so
early an hour, seeing that it has not yet gone ten. It is clear that
Monmouth's forces have not reached it yet, else had there been some show
of camp-fires in the valley; for though it is warm enough to lie out in
the open, the men must have fires to cook their victual.'

'The army could scarce have come so far,' said the pastor. 'They have,
I hear, been much delayed by the want of arms and by the need of
discipline. Bethink ye, it was on the eleventh day of the month that
Monmouth landed at Lyme, and it is now but the night of the fourteenth.
There was much to be done in the time.'

'Four whole days!' growled the old soldier. 'Yet I expected no better,
seeing that they have, so far as I can hear, no tried soldiers amongst
them. By my sword, Tilly or Wallenstein would not have taken four days
to come from Lyme to Taunton, though all James Stuart's cavalry barred
the way. Great enterprises are not pushed through in this halting
fashion. The blow should be sharp and sudden. But tell me, worthy sir,
all that you know about the matter, for we have heard little upon the
road save rumour and surmise. Was there not some fashion of onfall at
Bridport?'

'There was indeed some shedding of blood at that place. The first two
days were consumed, as I understand, in the enrolling of the faithful
and the search for arms wherewith to equip them. You may well shake your
head, for the hours were precious. At last five hundred men were broken
into some sort of order, and marched along the coast under command of
Lord Grey of Wark and Wade the lawyer. At Bridport they were opposed
by the red Dorset militia and part of Portman's yellow coats. If all
be true that is said, neither side had much to boast of. Grey and his
cavalry never tightened bridle until they were back in Lyme once more,
though it is said their flight had more to do with the hard mouths
of their horses than with the soft hearts of the riders. Wade and his
footmen did bravely, and had the best of it against the King's troops.
There was much outcry against Grey in the camp, but Monmouth can
scarce afford to be severe upon the only nobleman who hath joined his
standard.'

'Pshaw!' cried Saxon peevishly. 'There was no great stock of noblemen in
Cromwell's army, I trow, and yet they held their own against the King,
who had as many lords by him as there are haws in a thicket. If ye have
the people on your side, why should ye crave for these bewigged fine
gentlemen, whose white hands and delicate rapiers are of as much service
as so many ladies' bodkins?'

'Faith!' said I, 'if all the fops are as careless for their lives as our
friend Sir Gervas, I could wish no better comrades in the field.'

'In good sooth, yes!' cried Master Pettigrue heartily. 'What though he
be clothed in a Joseph's coat of many colours, and hath strange turns
of speech! No man could have fought more stoutly or shown a bolder front
against the enemies of Israel. Surely the youth hath good in his heart,
and will become a seat of grace and a vessel of the Spirit, though
at present he be entangled in the net of worldly follies and carnal
vanities.'

'It is to be hoped so,' quoth Saxon devoutly. 'And what else can you
tell us of the revolt, worthy sir?'

'Very little, save that the peasants have flocked in in such numbers
that many have had to be turned away for want of arms. Every tithing-man
in Somersetshire is searching for axes and scythes. There is not
a blacksmith but is at his forge from morn to night at work upon
pike-heads. There are six thousand men of a sort in the camp, but
not one in five carries a musket. They have advanced, I hear, upon
Axminster, where they must meet the Duke of Albemarle, who hath set out
from Exeter with four thousand of the train bands.'

'Then we shall be too late, after all,' I exclaimed.

'You will have enough of battles before Monmouth exchanges his
riding-hat for a crown, and his laced roquelaure for the royal purple,'
quoth Saxon. 'Should our worthy friend here be correctly informed and
such an engagement take place, it will but be the prologue to the play.
When Feversham and Churchill come up with the King's own troops, it is
then that Monmouth takes the last spring, that lands him either on the
throne or the scaffold.'

Whilst this conversation had been proceeding we had been walking our
horses down the winding track which leads along the eastern slope of
Taunton Deane. For some time past we had been able to see in the valley
beneath us the lights of Taunton town and the long silver strip of
the river Tone. The moon was shining brightly in a cloudless heaven,
throwing a still and peaceful radiance over the fairest and richest of
English valleys. Lordly manorial houses, pinnacled towers, clusters of
nestling thatch-roofed cottages, broad silent stretches of cornland,
dark groves with the glint of lamp-lit windows shining from their
recesses--it all lay around us like the shadowy, voiceless landscapes
which stretch before us in our dreams. So calm and so beautiful was the
scene that we reined up our horses at the bend of the pathway, the tired
and footsore peasants came to a halt, while even the wounded raised
themselves in the waggon in order to feast their eyes upon this land of
promise. Suddenly, in the stillness, a strong fervent voice was heard
calling upon the source of all life to guard and preserve that which
He had created. It was Joshua Pettigrue, who had flung himself upon his
knees, and who, while asking for future guidance, was returning thanks
for the safe deliverance which his flock had experienced from the many
perils which had beset them upon their journey. I would, my children,
that I had one of those magic crystals of which we have read, that I
might show you that scene. The dark figures of the horsemen, the grave,
earnest bearing of the rustics as they knelt in prayer or leaned upon
their rude weapons, the half-cowed, half-sneering expression of the
captive dragoons, the line of white pain-drawn faces that peeped
over the side of the waggon, and the chorus of groans, cries, and
ejaculations which broke in upon the steady earnest voice of the pastor.
Above us the brilliant heavens, beneath us the beautiful sloping valley,
stretching away in the white moonlight as far as the eye could reach.
Could I but paint such a scene with the brush of a Verrio or Laguerre, I
should have no need to describe it in these halting and feeble words.

Master Pettigrue had concluded his thanksgiving, and was in the act of
rising to his feet, when the musical peal of a bell rose up from the
sleeping town before us. For a minute or more it rose and fell in its
sweet clear cadence. Then a second with a deeper, harsher note joined
in, and then a third, until he air was filled with the merry jangling.
At the same time a buzz of shouting or huzzaing could be heard, which
increased and spread until it swelled into a mighty uproar. Lights
flashed in the windows, drums beat, and the whole place was astir. These
sudden signs of rejoicing coming at the heels of the minister's prayer
were seized upon as a happy omen by the superstitious peasants, who set
up a glad cry, and pushing onwards were soon within the outskirts of the
town.

The footpaths and causeway were black with throngs of the townsfolk,
men, women, and children, many of whom were bearing torches and
lanthorns, all flocking in the same direction. Following them we found
ourselves in the market-place, where crowds of apprentice lads were
piling up faggots for a bonfire, while others were broaching two or
three great puncheons of ale. The cause of this sudden outbreak of
rejoicing was, we learned, that news had just come in that Albemarle's
Devonshire militia had partly deserted and partly been defeated at
Axminster that very morning. On hearing of our own successful skirmish
the joy of the people became more tumultuous than ever. They rushed in
amongst us, pouring blessings on our heads, in their strange burring
west-country speech, and embracing our horses as well as ourselves.
Preparations were soon made for our weary companions. A long empty wool
warehouse, thickly littered with straw, was put at their disposal, with
a tub of ale and a plentiful supply of cold meats and wheaten bread.
For our own part we made our way down East Street through the clamorous
hand-shaking crowd to the White Hart Inn, where after a hasty meal we
were right glad to seek our couches. Late into the night, however, our
slumbers were disturbed by the rejoicings of the mob, who, having burned
the effigies of Lord Sunderland and of Gregory Alford, Mayor of Lyme,
continued to sing west-country songs and Puritan hymns into the small
hours of the morning.



Chapter XVII. Of the Gathering in the Market-square

The fair town in which we now found ourselves was, although Monmouth
had not yet reached it, the real centre of the rebellion. It was a
prosperous place, with a great woollen and kersey trade, which gave
occupation to as many as seven thousand inhabitants. It stood high,
therefore, amongst English boroughs, being inferior only to Bristol,
Norwich, Bath, Exeter, York, Worcester, and Nottingham amongst the
country towns. Taunton had long been famous not only for its own
resources and for the spirit of its inhabitants, but also for the
beautiful and highly cultivated country which spread around it, and gave
rise to a gallant breed of yeomen. From time immemorial the town had
been a rallying-point for the party of liberty, and for many years it
had leaned to the side of Republicanism in politics and of Puritanism
in religion. No place in the kingdom had fought more stoutly for
the Parliament, and though it had been twice besieged by Goring, the
burghers, headed by the brave Robert Blake, had fought so desperately,
that the Royalists had been compelled each time to retire discomfited.
On the second occasion the garrison had been reduced to dog's-flesh and
horse-flesh, but no word of surrender had come either from them or
their heroic commander, who was the same Blake under whom the old seaman
Solomon Sprent had fought against the Dutch. After the Restoration the
Privy Council had shown their recollection of the part played by the
Somersetshire town, by issuing a special order that the battlements
which fenced round the maiden stronghold should be destroyed. Thus,
at the time of which I speak, nothing but a line of ruins and a few
unsightly mounds represented the massive line of wall which had been
so bravely defended by the last generation of townsmen. There were not
wanting, however, many other relics of those stormy times. The houses on
the outskirts were still scarred and splintered from the effects of
the bombs and grenades of the Cavaliers. Indeed, the whole town bore a
grimly martial appearance, as though she were a veteran among boroughs
who had served in the past, and was not averse to seeing the flash of
guns and hearing the screech of shot once more.

Charles's Council might destroy the battlements which his soldiers had
been unable to take, but no royal edict could do away with the resolute
spirit and strong opinions of the burghers. Many of them, born and bred
amidst the clash of civil strife, had been fired from their infancy by
the tales of the old war, and by reminiscences of the great assault when
Lunsford's babe-eaters were hurled down the main breach by the strong
arms of their fathers. In this way there was bred in Taunton a fiercer
and more soldierly spirit than is usual in an English country town, and
this flame was fanned by the unwearied ministerings of a chosen band
of Nonconformist clergymen, amongst whom Joseph Alleine was the most
conspicuous. No better focus for a revolt could have been chosen, for
no city valued so highly those liberties and that creed which was in
jeopardy.

A large body of the burghers had already set out to join the rebel army,
but a good number had remained behind to guard the city, and these were
reinforced by gangs of peasants, like the one to which we had attached
ourselves, who had trooped in from the surrounding country, and now
divided their time between listening to their favourite preachers and
learning to step in line and to handle their weapons. In yard, street,
and market-square there was marching and drilling, night, morning, and
noon. As we rode out after breakfast the whole town was ringing with the
shouting of orders and the clatter of arms. Our own friends of yesterday
marched into the market-place at the moment we entered it, and no sooner
did they catch sight of us than they plucked off their hats and cheered
lustily, nor would they desist until we cantered over to them and took
our places at their head.

'They have vowed that none other should lead them,' said the minister,
standing by Saxon's stirrup.

'I could not wish to lead stouter fellows,' said he. 'Let them deploy
into double line in front of the town-hall. So, so, smartly there, rear
rank!' he shouted, facing his horse towards them. 'Now swing round into
position. Keep your ground, left flank, and let the others pivot upon
you. So--as hard and as straight as an Andrea Ferrara. I prythee,
friend, do not carry your pike as though it were a hoe, though I trust
you will do some weeding in the Lord's vineyard with it. And you, sir,
your musquetoon should be sloped upon your shoulder, and not borne under
your arm like a dandy's cane. Did ever an unhappy soldier find himself
called upon to make order among so motley a crew! Even my good friend
the Fleming cannot so avail here, nor does Petrinus, in his "De re
militari," lay down any injunctions as to the method of drilling a man
who is armed with a sickle or a scythe.'

'Shoulder scythe, port scythe, present scythe--mow!' whispered Reuben to
Sir Gervas, and the pair began to laugh, heedless of the angry frowns of
Saxon.

'Let us divide them,' he said, 'into three companies of eighty men. Or
stay--how many musketeers have we in all? Five-and-fifty. Let them stand
forward, and form the first line or company. Sir Gervas Jerome, you have
officered the militia of your county, and have doubtless some knowledge
of the manual exercise. If I am commandant of this force I hand over the
captaincy of this company to you. It shall be the first line in battle,
a position which I know you will not be averse to.'

'Gad, they'll have to powder their heads,' said Sir Gervas, with
decision.

'You shall have the entire ordering of them,' Saxon answered. 'Let the
first company take six paces to the front--so! Now let the pikemen stand
out. Eighty-seven, a serviceable company! Lockarby, do you take these
men in hand, and never forget that the German wars have proved that the
best of horse has no more chance against steady pikemen than the waves
against a crag. Take the captaincy of the second company, and ride at
their head.'

'Faith! If they don't fight better than their captain rides,' whispered
Reuben, 'it will be an evil business. I trust they will be firmer in the
field than I am in the saddle.'

'The third company of scythesmen I commit to your charge, Captain Micah
Clarke,' continued Saxon. 'Good Master Joshua Pettigrue will be our
field-chaplain. Shall not his voice and his presence be to us as
manna in the wilderness, and as springs of water in dry places? The
under-officers I see that you have yourselves chosen, and your captains
shall have power to add to the number from those who smite boldly and
spare not. Now one thing I have to say to you, and I speak it that all
may hear, and that none may hereafter complain that the rules he serves
under were not made clear to him. For I tell you now that when the
evening bugle calls, and the helm and pike are laid aside, I am as you
and you as I, fellow-workers in the same field, and drinkers from the
same wells of life. Lo, I will pray with you, or preach with you, or
hearken with you, or expound to you, or do aught that may become a
brother pilgrim upon the weary road. But hark you, friends! when we are
in arms and the good work is to be done, on the march, in the field, or
on parade, then let your bearing be strict, soldierly, and scrupulous,
quick to hear and alert to obey, for I shall have no sluggards or
laggards, and if there be any such my hand shall be heavy upon them,
yea, even to the cutting of them off. I say there shall be no mercy for
such,' here he paused and surveyed his force with a set face and his
eyelids drawn low over his glinting, shifting eyes. 'If, then,' he
continued, 'there is any man among you who fears to serve under a hard
discipline, let him stand forth now, and let him betake him to some
easier leader, for I say to you that whilst I command this corps,
Saxon's regiment of Wiltshire foot shall be worthy to testify in this
great and soul-raising cause.'

The Colonel stopped and sat silent upon his mare. The long lines of
rustic faces looked up, some stolidly, some admiringly, some with an
expression of fear at his stern, gaunt face and baneful eyes. None
moved, however, so he continued.

'Worthy Master Timewell, the Mayor of this fair town of Taunton, who
has been a tower of strength to the faithful during these long and
spirit-trying times, is about to inspect us when the others shall have
assembled. Captains, to your companies then! Close up there on the
musqueteers, with three paces between each line. Scythesmen, take ground
to your left. Let the under-officers stand on the flanks and rear. So!
'tis smartly done for a first venture, though a good adjutant with a
prugel after the Imperial fashion might find work to do.'

Whilst we were thus rapidly and effectively organising ourselves into a
regiment, other bodies of peasantry more or less disciplined had marched
into the market-square, and had taken up their position there. Those
on our right had come from Frome and Radstock, in the north of
Somersetshire, and were a mere rabble armed with flails, hammers, and
other such weapons, with no common sign of order or cohesion save the
green boughs which waved in their hat-bands. The body upon our left, who
bore a banner amongst them announcing that they were men of Dorset, were
fewer in number but better equipped, having a front rank, like our own,
entirely armed with muskets.

The good townsmen of Taunton, with their wives and their daughters,
had meanwhile been assembling on the balconies and at the windows which
overlooked the square, whence they might have a view of the pageant. The
grave, square-bearded, broadclothed burghers, and their portly dames in
velvet and three-piled taffeta, looked down from every post of vantage,
while here and there a pretty, timid face peeping out from a Puritan
coif made good the old claim, that Taunton excelled in beautiful women
as well as in gallant men. The side-walks were crowded with the commoner
folk--old white-bearded wool-workers, stern-faced matrons, country
lasses with their shawls over their heads, and swarms of children, who
cried out with their treble voices for King Monmouth and the Protestant
succession.

'By my faith!' said Sir Gervas, reining back his steed until he was
abreast of me, 'our square-toed friends need not be in such post-haste
to get to heaven when they have so many angels among them on earth.
Gad's wounds, are they not beautiful? Never a patch or a diamond amongst
them, and yet what would not our faded belles of the Mall or the Piazza
give for their innocence and freshness?'

'Nay, for Heaven's sake do not smile and bow at them,' said I. 'These
courtesies may pass in London, but they may be misunderstood among
simple Somerset maidens and their hot-headed, hard-handed kinsfolk.'

I had hardly spoken before the folding-doors of the town-hall were
thrown open, and a procession of the city fathers emerged into the
market-place. Two trumpeters in parti-coloured jerkins preceded them,
who blew a flourish upon their instruments as they advanced. Behind came
the aldermen and councilmen, grave and reverend elders, clad in their
sweeping gowns of black silk, trimmed and tippeted with costly furs.
In rear of these walked a pursy little red-faced man, the town clerk,
bearing a staff of office in his hand, while the line of dignitaries
was closed by the tall and stately figure of Stephen Timewell, Mayor of
Taunton.

There was much in this magistrate's appearance to attract attention, for
all the characteristics of the Puritan party to which he belonged were
embodied and exaggerated in his person. Of great height he was and very
thin, with a long-drawn, heavy eyelidded expression, which spoke of
fasts and vigils. The bent shoulders and the head sunk upon the breast
proclaimed the advances of age, but his bright steel-grey eyes and the
animation of his eager face showed how the enthusiasm of religion
could rise superior to bodily weakness. A peaked, straggling grey beard
descended half-way to his waist, and his long snow-white hairs fluttered
out from under a velvet skull-cap. The latter was drawn tightly down
upon his head, so as to make his ears protrude in an unnatural manner
on either side, a custom which had earned for his party the title of
'prickeared,' so often applied to them by their opponents. His attire
was of studious plainness and sombre in colour, consisting of his black
mantle, dark velvet breeches, and silk hosen, with velvet bows upon his
shoes instead of the silver buckles then in vogue. A broad chain of gold
around his neck formed the badge of his office. In front of him strutted
the fat red-vested town clerk, one hand upon his hip, the other extended
and bearing his wand of office, looking pompously to right and left,
and occasionally bowing as though the plaudits were entirely on his own
behalf. This little man had tied a huge broadsword to his girdle, which
clanked along the cobble stones when he walked and occasionally inserted
itself between his legs, when he would gravely cock his foot over it
again and walk on without any abatement of his dignity. At last, finding
these interruptions become rather too frequent, he depressed the hilt of
his great sword in order to elevate the point, and so strutted onwards
like a bantam cock with a tingle straight feather in its tail.

Having passed round the front and rear of the various bodies, and
inspected them with a minuteness and attention which showed that his
years had not dulled his soldier's faculties, the Mayor faced round with
the evident intention of addressing us. His clerk instantly darted in
front of him, and waving his arms began to shout 'Silence, good people!
Silence for his most worshipful the Mayor of Taunton! Silence for
the worthy Master Stephen Timewell!' until in the midst of his
gesticulations and cries he got entangled once more with his overgrown
weapon, and went sprawling on his hands and knees in the kennel.

'Silence yourself, Master Tetheridge,' said the chief magistrate
severely. 'If your sword and your tongue were both clipped, it would be
as well for yourself and us. Shall I not speak a few words in season
to these good people but you must interrupt with your discordant
bellowings?'

The busybody gathered himself together and slunk behind the group of
councilmen, while the Mayor slowly ascended the steps of the market
cross. From this position he addressed us, speaking in a high piping
voice which gathered strength as he proceeded, until it was audible at
the remotest corners of the square.

'Friends in the faith,' he said, 'I thank the Lord that I have been
spared in my old age to look down upon this goodly assembly. For we of
Taunton have ever kept the flame of the Covenant burning amongst us,
obscured it may be at times by time-servers and Laodiceans, but none the
less burning in the hearts of our people. All round us, however,
there was a worse than Egyptian darkness, where Popery and Prelacy,
Arminianism, Erastianism, and Simony might rage and riot unchecked and
unconfined. But what do I see now? Do I see the faithful cowering
in their hiding-places and straining their ears for the sound of the
horsehoof's of their oppressors? Do I see a time-serving generation,
with lies on their lips and truth buried in their hearts? No! I see
before me godly men, not from this fair city only, but from the broad
country round, and from Dorset, and from Wiltshire, and some even as I
hear from Hampshire, all ready and eager to do mighty work in the cause
of the Lord. And when I see these faithful men, and when I think that
every broad piece in the strong boxes of my townsmen is ready to support
them, and when I know that the persecuted remnant throughout the country
is wrestling hard in prayer for us, then a voice speaks within me and
tells me that we shall tear down the idols of Dagon, and build up in
this England of ours such a temple of the true faith that not Popery,
nor Prelacy, nor idolatry, nor any other device of the Evil One shall
ever prevail against it.'

A deep irrepressible hum of approval burst from the close ranks of
the insurgent infantry, with a clang of arms as musquetoon or pike was
grounded upon the stone pavement.

Saxon half-turned his fierce face, raising an impatient hand, and the
hoarse murmur died away among our men, though our less-disciplined
companions to right and left continued to wave their green boughs and to
clatter their arms. The Taunton men opposite stood grim and silent, but
their set faces and bent brows showed that their townsman's oratory had
stirred the deep fanatic spirit which distinguished them.

'In my hands,' continued the Mayor, drawing a roll of paper from his
bosom, 'is the proclamation which our royal leader hath sent in advance
of him. In his great goodness and self-abnegation he had, in his early
declaration given forth at Lyme, declared that he should leave the
choice of a monarch to the Commons of England, but having found that
his enemies did most scandalously and basely make use of this his
self-denial, and did assert that he had so little confidence in his own
cause that he dared not take publicly the title which is due to him, he
hath determined that this should have an end. Know, therefore, that it
is hereby proclaimed that James, Duke of Monmouth, is now and henceforth
rightful King of England; that James Stuart, the Papist and fratricide,
is a wicked usurper, upon whose head, dead or alive, a price of five
thousand guineas is affixed; and that the assembly now sitting at
Westminster, and calling itself the Commons of England, is an illegal
assembly, and its acts are null and void in the sight of the law. God
bless King Monmouth and the Protestant religion!'

The trumpeters struck up a flourish and the people huzzaed, but the
Mayor raised his thin white hands as a signal for silence. 'A messenger
hath reached me this morning from the King,' he continued. 'He sends a
greeting to all his faithful Protestant subjects, and having halted at
Axminster to rest after his victory, he will advance presently and be
with ye in two days at the latest.

'Ye will grieve to hear that good Alderman Rider was struck down in the
thick of the fray. He hath died like a man and a Christian, leaving all
his worldly goods, together with his cloth-works and household property,
to the carrying on of the war. Of the other slain there are not more
than ten of Taunton birth. Two gallant young brothers have been cut off,
Oliver and Ephraim Hollis, whose poor mother--'

'Grieve not for me, good Master Timewell,' cried a female voice from the
crowd. 'I have three others as stout, who shall all be offered in the
same quarrel.'

'You are a worthy woman, Mistress Hollis,' the Mayor answered, 'and your
children shall not be lost to you. The next name upon my list is Jesse
Trefail, then come Joseph Millar, and Aminadab Holt--'

An elderly musqueteer in the first line of the Taunton foot pulled his
hat down over his brows and cried out in a loud steady voice, 'The Lord
hath given and the Lord hath taken away. Blessed be the name of the
Lord.'

'It is your only son, Master Holt,' said the Mayor, 'but the Lord also
sacrificed His only Son that you and I might drink the waters of eternal
life. The others are Path of Light Regan, James Fletcher, Salvation
Smith, and Robert Johnstone.'

The old Puritan gravely rolled up his papers, and having stood for a
few moments with his hands folded across his breast in silent prayer, he
descended from the market cross, and moved off, followed by the aldermen
and councilmen. The crowd began likewise to disperse in sedate and sober
fashion, with grave earnest faces and downcast eyes. A large number of
the countryfolk, however, more curious or less devout than the citizens,
gathered round our regiment to see the men who had beaten off the
