that, when he had left the city to escort his son to Athens for the
benefit of his education, he had returned on ascertaining that the two
were publicly estranged.

[-16-] Besides these events which took place that year Servilius
Isauricus died at a very advanced age. I have mentioned him both for that
fact and to show how the Romans of that period respected men who were
prominent through merit and hated those who behaved insolently, even on
the very slightest grounds. This Servilius while walking had once met on
the road a man on horseback, who so far from dismounting on his approach
spurned him violently aside. Later he recognized the fellow in a
defendant of a case in court, and when he mentioned the affair to the
judge, they paid no further attention to the man's plea, but unanimously
condemned him.


[B.C. 43 (_a u_. 711)]

[-17-] In the consulship of Aldus Hirtius (who was now appointed consul
in spite of the fact that his father's name had been posted on the
tablets of Sulla), with his colleague Gaius Vibius, a meeting of the
senate was held and votes were taken for three successive days, including
the first of the month itself. As a result of the war which was upon them
and the portents, very numerous and extremely unfavorable, which took
place, they were so excited that they failed to pass over these _dies
nefasti_ on which they ought not to deliberate on any matter touching
their interests. Ominous had been the falling of great numbers of
thunderbolts, some of which descended on the shrine sacred to Capitoline
Jupiter, that stood in the temple of Victory. Also a great wind arose
which snapped and scattered the columns erected about the temple of
Saturn and the shrine of Fides, and likewise knocked down and shattered
the statue of Minerva the Protectress, which Cicero had set up on the
Capitol before his exile. This portended, of course, the death of Cicero
himself. Another thing that frightened the rest of the population was
a great earthquake which occurred, and the fact that a bull which was
sacrificed on account of it in the temple of Vesta leaped up after the
ceremony. In addition to these clear indications of danger a flash darted
across from the place of the rising sun to the place of its setting and a
new star was seen for several days. Then the light of the sun seemed to
be diminished and even extinguished, and at times to appear in three
circles, one of which was surmounted by a fiery crown of sheaves. This,
if anything, proved as clear a sign as possible to them. For three men
were in power,--I mean Caesar and Lepidus and Antony,--and of them Caesar
subsequently secured the victory. At the same time that these things
occurred all sorts of oracles tending to the downfall of the democracy
were recited. Crows, moreover, flew into the temple of the Dioscuri and
pecked out the names of the consuls and of Antony and of Dolabella, which
were inscribed there somewhere on a tablet. And by night dogs in large
numbers gathered throughout the city and especially near the house of the
high priest, Lepidus, and set up howls. Again, the Po, which had flooded
a large portion of the surrounding territory, suddenly receded and left
behind on the dry land a vast number of snakes. Countless fish were cast
up from the sea on the shore near the mouth of the Tiber. Succeeding
these terrors a plague spread over nearly the whole of Italy in a
malignant form, and in view of this the senate voted that the Curia
Hostilia[7] should be rebuilt and the spot where the naval battle had
taken place be filled up. However, the curse did not appear disposed to
rest even at this point, especially when during Vibius's conduct of the
initial sacrifices on the first of the month one of his lictors suddenly
fell down and died. Because of these events many men in the course of
those days took one side or the other in their speeches and advice, and
among the deliverances was the following, of Cicero:--[-18-] "You have
heard recently, Conscript Fathers, when I made a statement to you about
the matter, why I made preparations for my departure as if I were going
to be absent from the city a very long time and then returned rapidly
with the idea that I could benefit you greatly. I would not endure an
existence under a sovereignty or a tyranny, since under such forms of
government I can not enjoy the rights of free[8] citizenship nor speak
my mind safely nor die in a way that is of service to you; and again, if
opportunity is afforded to obey any of duty's calls, I would not shrink
from action, though it involved danger. I deem it the task of an upright
man equally to keep watch over himself for his country's interests
(guarding himself that he may not perish uselessly), and in this course
of action not to fail to say or do whatever is requisite, even if it be
necessary to suffer some harm in preserving his native land.

[-19-] "These assumptions granted, a large degree of safety was afforded
by Caesar both to you and to me for the discussion of pressing questions.
And since you have further voted to assemble under guard, we must frame
all our words and behavior this day in such a fashion as to establish
the present state of affairs and provide for the future, that we may
not again be compelled to decide in a similar way about it. That our
condition is difficult and dangerous and requires much care and attention
you yourselves have made evident, if in no other way, at least by this
measure. For you would not have voted to keep the senate-house under
guard, if it had been possible for you to deliberate at all with your
accustomed orderliness, and in quiet, free from fear. It is necessary for
us even on account of the presence of the soldiers to accomplish some
measure of importance, that we may not incur the disgrace that would
certainly follow from asking for them as if we feared somebody, and then
neglecting affairs as if we were liable to no danger. We shall appear to
have acquired them only nominally in behalf of the city against Antony,
but to have given them in reality to him against our own selves, and it
will look as if in addition to the other legions which he gathers against
his country he needed to acquire these very men and so prevent your
passing any vote against him even to-day.

[-20-] "Yet some have attained such a height of shamelessness as to dare
to say that he is not warring against the State and have credited you
with so great folly as to think that they will persuade you to attend to
their words rather than to his acts. But who would choose to desist from
regarding his performances and the campaign which he has made against our
allies without any orders from the senate or the people, the countries
which he is overrunning, the cities which he is besieging, and the hopes
upon which he is building in his entire course,--who would distrust, I
say, the evidence of his own eyes, and to his ruin yield credence to the
words of these men and their false statements, by which they put you off
with pretexts and excuses?

I myself am far from asserting that in doing this he is carrying out any
legal act of administration. On the contrary, because he has abandoned
the province of Macedonia, which was assigned to him by lot, and because
he chose instead the province of Gaul, which in no way pertained to him,
and because he assumed control of the legions which Caesar had sent ahead
against the Parthians, keeping them about him though no danger threatens
Italy, and because he has left the city during the period of his
consulship to go about pillaging and injuring the country,--for all these
reasons I declare that he has long been an enemy of us all. [-21-] If you
did not perceive it immediately at the start or experience vexation
at each of his actions, he deserves to be hated all the more on
this account, in that he does not cease injuring you, who are so
long-suffering. He might perchance have obtained pardon for the errors
which he committed at first, but now by his perseverance in evil he has
reached such a pitch of knavery that he ought to be brought to book for
his former offences as well. And you ought to be especially careful in
regard to the situation, noticing and considering this point,--that the
man who has so often despised you in such weighty matters cannot submit
to be corrected by the same gentleness and kindliness that you have
shown, but must now against his will, even though never previously, be
chastised by force of arms.

"And because he partly persuaded and partly compelled you to vote
him some privileges, do not think that this makes him less guilty or
deserving of less punishment. Quite the reverse,--for this very procedure
in particular he merits the infliction of a penalty: he determined from
the outset to commit many outrages, and after accomplishing some of them
through you, he employed against your own selves the resources which came
from you, which by deception, he forced you to vote to him, though you
neither knew nor foresaw any such result. On what occasion did you
voluntarily abolish the commands given by Caesar or by the lot to each
man, and allow this person to distribute many appointments to his friends
and companions, sending his brother Gaius to Macedonia, and assigning
Gaul to himself with the aid of the legions which he was not by any means
keeping to use in your defence? Do you not remember how, when he found
you startled at Caesar's demise, he carried out all the plans that
he chose, communicating some to you carefully dissimulated and at
inopportune moments, and on his own responsibility executing others that
inflicted injuries, while all his acts were characterized by violence? He
used soldiers, and barbarians at that, against you. And need any one be
surprised that in those days some vote was passed which should not have
been, when even now we have not obtained a free hand to speak and do what
is requisite in any other way than by the aid of a body-guard? If we had
been formerly endued with this power, he would not have obtained what any
one may say he has obtained, nor would he have risen to the prominence
enabling him to do the deeds that were a natural sequence. Accordingly,
let no one retort that the rights which we were seen to give him under
command and compulsion and amid laments were legally and rightfully
bestowed. For, even in private business, that is not considered binding
which a man does under compulsion from another.

[-23-] "And yet all these measures which you are seen to have voted you
will find to be slight and varying but little from established custom.
What was there dreadful in the fact that one man was destined to govern
Macedonia or Gaul in place of another? Or what was the harm if a man
obtained soldiers during his consulship? But these are the facts that are
harmful and abominable,--that your land should be damaged, allied cities
besieged, that our soldiers should be armed against us and our means
expended to our detriment: this you neither voted nor intended. Do not,
merely because you have granted him some privileges, allow him to usurp
what was not granted him; and do not think that just as you have conceded
some points he ought similarly to be permitted to do what has not been
conceded. Quite the reverse: you should for this very reason both hate
and punish him, because he has dared not only in this case but in all
other cases to use the honor and kindness that you bestowed against you.
Look at the matter. Through my influence you voted that there should be
peace and harmony between individuals. This man was ordered to manage the
business, and conducted it in such a way (taking Caesar's funeral as a
pretext) that almost the whole city was burned down and great numbers
were once more slaughtered. You ratified all the grants made to various
persons and all the laws laid down by Caesar, not because they were
all excellent--far from it! ,--but because our mutual and unsuspecting
association, quite free from any disguise, was not furthered by changing
any one of those enactments. This man, appointed to examine into them,
has abolished many of his acts and has substituted many others in the
documents. He has taken away lands and citizenship and exemption from
taxes and many other honors from the possessors,--private individuals,
kings, and cities,--and has given them to men who had not received any,
altering the memoranda of Caesar; from those who were unwilling to give
up anything to his grasp he took away even what had been given them,
and sold this and everything else to such as wished to buy. Yet you,
foreseeing this very possibility, had voted that no tablet should be set
up after Caesar's death which might contain any article given by him to
any person. Notwithstanding, it happened many times after that. He also
said it was necessary for some provisions found in Caesar's papers to be
specially noted and put into effect. You then assigned to him, in company
with the foremost men, the task of making these excerpts; but he, paying
no attention to his colleagues, carried out everything alone according to
his wishes, in regard to the laws, the exiles, and other points which I
enumerated a few moments since. This is the way in which he wishes to
execute all your decrees.

[-24-] "Has he then shown himself such a character only in these affairs,
while managing the rest rightly? In what instance? On what motive? He was
ordered to search for and declare the public money left behind by Caesar,
and did he not seize it, paying some of it to his creditors and spending
some on high living so that he no longer has even any of this left? You
hated the name of dictator on account of Caesar's sovereignty and rejected
it entirely from the constitution: but is it not true that Antony, though
he has avoided adopting it (as if the name in itself could do any harm),
has exhibited the behavior belonging to it and the greed for gain, under
the title of consulship? You assigned to him the duty of promoting
harmony, and has he not on his own responsibility begun this great war,
neither necessary nor sanctioned, against Caesar and Decimus, whom you
approve? Innumerable cases might be mentioned, if one wished to go into
details, in which you entrusted business to him to manage as consul, and
he has not conducted a single bit of it as the circumstances demanded,
but has done quite the opposite, using against you the authority that you
imparted. Now will you assume to yourself also these errors that he has
committed and say that you yourselves are responsible for all that has
happened, because you assigned to him the management and investigation of
the matters in question? It is ridiculous. If some general or envoy that
had been chosen should fail in every way to do his duty, you who sent him
would not incur the blame for this. It would be a sorry state of things,
if all who are elected to perform some work should themselves receive the
advantages and the honors, but lay upon you the complaints and the blame.
[-25-] Accordingly, there is no sense in paying any heed to him when he
says: 'It was you who permitted me to govern Gaul, you ordered me to
administer the public finances, you gave me the legions from Macedonia.'
Perhaps these measures were voted--yet ought you to put it that way, and
not instead exact punishment from him for his action in compelling you to
make that decision? At any rate, you never at any time gave him the
right to restore the exiles, to add laws surreptitiously, to sell the
privileges of citizenship and exemption from taxes, to steal the public
funds, to plunder the possessions of allies, to abuse the cities, or
to undertake to play the tyrant over his native country. And you never
conceded to any one else all that was desired, though you have granted by
your votes many things to many persons; on the contrary you have always
punished such men so far as you could, as you will also punish him, if
you take my advice. For it is not in these matters alone that he has
shown himself to be such a man as you know and have seen him to be, but
briefly in all undertakings which he has ever attempted to perform for
the commonwealth.

[-26-] "His private life and his private examples of licentiousness
and avarice I shall willingly pass over, not because one would fail to
discover that he had committed many abominable outrages in the course of
them, but because, by Hercules, I am ashamed to describe minutely and
separately--especially to you who know it as well as I--how he conducted
his youth among you who were boys at the time, how he auctioned off
the vigor of his prime, his secret lapses from chastity, his open
fornications, what he let be done to him as long as it was possible, what
he did as early as he could, his revels, his periods of drunkenness, and
all the rest that follows in their train. It is impossible for a person
brought up in so great licentiousness and shamelessness to avoid defiling
his entire life: and so from his private concerns he brought his lewdness
and greed to bear upon public matters. On this I will refrain from
dilating, and likewise by Jupiter on his visit to Gabinius in Egypt
and his flight to Caesar in Gaul, that I may not be charged with going
minutely into every detail; for I feel ashamed for you, that knowing him
to be such a man you appointed him tribune and master of the horse and
subsequently consul. I will at present recite only his drunken insolence
and abuses in these very positions.

[-27-] "Well, then, when he was tribune he first of all prevented you
from settling suitably the work you then had in hand by shouting and
bawling and alone of all the people opposing the public peace of the
State, until you became vexed and because of his conduct passed the vote
that you did. Then, though by law he was not permitted to be absent from
town a single night, he escaped from the city, abandoning the duties of
his office, and, having gone as a deserter to Caesar's camp, guided the
latter back as a foe to his country, drove you out of Rome and all the
rest of Italy, and, in short, became the prime cause of all the civil
disorders that have since taken place among you. Had he not at that time
acted contrary to your wishes, Caesar would never have found an excuse for
the war and could not, in spite of all his shamelessness, have gathered a
competent force in defiance of your resolutions; but he would have
either voluntarily laid down his arms, or been brought to his senses
unwillingly. As it is, this fellow is the man who furnished him with the
excuses, who destroyed the prestige of the senate, who increased the
audacity of the soldiers. He it is who planted the seeds of evils which
sprang up afterward: he it is who has proved the common bane not only of
us, but also of practically the whole world, as, indeed, Heaven rather
plainly indicated. When, that is to say, he proposed those astonishing
laws, the whole air was filled with thunder and lightning. Yet this
accursed wretch paid no attention to them, though he claims to be a
soothsayer, but filled not only the city but the whole world with the
evils and wars which I mentioned.

[-28-] "Now after this is there any need of mentioning that he served as
master of the horse an entire year, something which had never before been
done? Or that during this period also he was drunk and abusive and in the
assemblies would frequently vomit the remains of yesterday's debauch on
the rostra itself, in the midst of his harangues? Or that he went about
Italy at the head of pimps and prostitutes and buffoons, women as well as
men, in company with the lictors bearing festoons of laurel? Or that he
alone of mankind dared to buy the property of Pompey, having no regard
for his own dignity or the great man's memory, but grasping eagerly those
possessions over which we even now as at that time shed a tear? He threw
himself upon this and many other estates with the evident intention of
making no recompense for them. Yet with all his insolence and violence
the price was nevertheless collected, for Caesar took this way of
discountenancing his act. And all that he has acquired, vast in extent
and gathered from every source, he has consumed in dicing, consumed in
harlotry, consumed in feasting, consumed in drinking, like a second
Charybdis.

[-29-] "Of this behavior I shall make no chronicle. But on the subject of
the insults which he offered to the State and the assassinations which
he caused throughout the whole city alike how can any man be silent? Is
memory lacking of how oppressive the very sight of him was to you, but
most of all his deeds? He dared, O thou earth and ye gods, first in
this place, within the wall, in the Forum, in the senate-house, on the
Capitol, at one and the same time to array himself in the purple-bordered
garb, to gird a sword on his thigh, to employ lictors, and to be escorted
by armed soldiers. Next, whereas he might have checked the turmoil of the
citizens, he not only failed to do so, but set you at variance when you
were in concord, partly by his own acts and partly through the medium
of others. Moreover he directed his attention in turn to the latter
themselves, and by now assisting them and now abandoning them[9] incurred
full responsibility for great numbers of them being slain and for the
fact that the entire region of Pontus and of the Parthians was not
subdued at that time immediately after the victory over Pharnaces. Caesar,
being called hither in haste to see what he was doing, did not finish
entirely any of those projects, as he was surely intending.

[-30-] "Even this result did not sober him, but when he was consul he
came naked, naked, Conscript Fathers, and anointed into the Forum, taking
the Lupercalia as an excuse, then proceeded in company with his lictors
to the rostra, and there harangued us from the elevation. From the day
the city was founded no one can point to any one else, even a praetor or
tribune or aedile, let alone a consul, who has done such a thing. To be
sure it was the festival of the Lupercalia, and the Lupercalia had been
put in charge of the Julian College[10]; yes, and Sextus Clodius had
trained him to conduct himself so, upon receipt of two thousand plethra
of the land of Leontini[11]. But you were consul, respected sir (for I
will address you as though you were present), and it was neither proper
nor permissible for you as such to speak in such a way in the Forum, hard
by the rostra, with all of us present, and to cause us both to behold
your remarkable body, so corpulent and detestable, and to hear your
accursed voice, choked with unguent, speaking those outrageous words; for
I will preferably confine my comment to this point about your mouth. The
Lupercalia would not have missed its proper reverence, but you disgraced
the whole city at once,--not to speak a word yet about your remarks on
that occasion. Who is unaware that the consulship is public, the property
of the whole people, that its dignity must be preserved everywhere, and
that its holder must nowhere strip naked or behave wantonly? [-31-] Did
he perchance imitate the famous Horatius of old or Cloelia of bygone
days? But the latter swam across the river with all her clothing, and
the former cast himself with his armor into the flood. It would be
fitting--would it not?--to set up also a statue of this consul, so that
people might contrast the one man armed in the Tiber and the other naked
in the Forum. It was by such conduct as has been cited that those heroes
of yore were wont to preserve us and give us liberty, while he took away
all our liberty from us, so far as was in his power, destroyed the whole
democracy, set up a despot in place of a consul, a tyrant in place of
a dictator over us. You remember the nature of his language when he
approached the rostra, and the style of his behavior when he had ascended
it. But when a man who is a Roman and a consul has dared to name any one
King of the Romans in the Roman Forum, close to the rostra of liberty, in
the presence of the entire people and the entire senate, and straightway
to set the diadem upon his head and further to affirm falsely in the
hearing of us all that we ourselves bade him say and do this, what most
outrageous deed will that man not dare, and from what action, however
revolting, will he refrain? [-32-] Did we lay this injunction upon you,
Antony, we who expelled the Tarquins, who cherished Brutus, who hurled
Capitolinus headlong, who put to death the Spurii?[12] Did we order you
to salute any one as king, when we have laid a curse upon the very name
of monarch and furthermore upon that of dictator as the most similar? Did
we command you to appoint any one tyrant, we who repulsed Pyrrhus from
Italy, who drove back Antiochus beyond the Taurus, who put an end to the
tyranny even in Macedonia? No, by the rods of Valerius and the law of
Porcius, no, by the leg of Horatius and the hand of Mucius, no, by the
spear of Decius and the sword of Brutus! But you, unspeakable villain,
begged and pleaded to be made a slave as Postumius pleaded to be
delivered to the Samnites, as Regulus to be given back to the
Carthaginians, as Curtius to be thrown into the chasm. And where did
you find this recorded? In the same place where you discovered that the
Cretans had been made free after Brutus was their governor, when we voted
after Caesar's death that he should govern them.

[-33-] "So then, seeing that you have detected his baneful disposition
in so many and so great enterprises, will you not take vengeance on him
instead of waiting to learn by experience what the man who caused so much
trouble naked will do to you when he is armed? Do you think that he is
not eager for the tyrant's power, that he does not pray to obtain it some
day, or that he will put the pursuit of it out of his thoughts, when he
has once allowed it a resting-place in his mind, and that he will ever
abandon the hope of sole rulership for which he has spoken and acted so
impudently without punishment! What human being who, while master of his
own voice, would undertake to help some one else secure an honor, would
not appropriate it himself when he became powerful? Who that has dared
to nominate another as tyrant over his country and himself at once would
himself refuse to be monarch? [-34-] Hence, even if you spared him
formerly, you must hate him now for these acts. Do not desire to learn
what he will do when his success equals his wishes, but on the basis of
his previous ventures plan beforehand to suffer no further outrages. What
defence could any one make of what took place? That Caesar acted rightly
at that time in accepting neither the name of king nor the diadem? If so,
this man did wrong to offer something which pleased not even Caesar. Or,
on the other hand, that the latter erred in enduring at all to look on at
and listen to such proceedings? If so, and Caesar justly suffered death
for this error, does not this man, admitted in a certain way that he
desired a tyranny, most richly deserve to perish? That this is so is
evident from what I have previously said, but is proved most clearly by
what he did after that. What other end than supremacy had he in mind that
he has undertaken to cause agitation and to meddle in private business,
when he might have enjoyed quiet with safety? What other end, that he has
entered upon campaigns and warfare, when it was in his power to remain at
home without danger? For what reason, when many have disliked to go out
and take charge even of the offices that belonged to them, does he not
only lay claim to Gaul, which pertains to him in not the slightest
degree, but use force upon it because of its unwillingness? For what
reason, when Decimus Brutus is ready to surrender to us himself and
his soldiers and the cities, has this man not imitated him, instead of
besieging and shutting him up? The only interpretation to be put upon it
is that he is strengthening himself in this and every other way against
us, and to no other end.

[-35-] "Seeing this, do we delay and give way to weakness and train up so
monstrous a tyrant against our own selves? Is it not disgraceful that our
forefathers, brought up in slavery, felt the desire for liberty, but we
who have lived under an independent government become slaves of our own
free will? Or again, that we were glad to rid ourselves of the dominion
of Caesar, though we had first received many favors from his hands, and
accept in his stead this man, a self-elected despot, who is far worse
than he; this allegation is proved by the fact that Caesar spared many
after his victories in war, but this follower of his before attaining any
power has slaughtered three hundred soldiers, among them some centurions,
guilty of no wrong, at home, in his own quarters, before the face and
eyes of his wife, so that she too was defiled with blood. What do you
think that the man who treated them so cruelly, when he owed them
care, will refrain from doing to all of you,--aye, down to the utmost
outrage,--if he shall conquer? And how can you believe that the man who
has lived so licentiously even to the present time will not proceed to
