which he had beard his Indian friends speak with great pleasure, and he
greatly wished to enjoy it. The canoe was immediately commenced; and as
it merely consisted of the trunk of a straight tulip-tree, hollowed out
by means of fire, and shaped with a hatchet, it was completed in a
couple of days.

The light spears that were to pierce the fish were prepared, and long
slender lines of twisted grass were fastened to their shafts for the
purpose of drawing in their prey; and the following morning, when the
hunters were ready to set out on their usual expedition, Coubitant
desired Henrich to accompany him to the river side, where their little
bark lay ready to receive them.  Why, on hearing this proposal, did
Jyanough still linger when all the rest of the hunters were mounted,
and his own steed was pawing the ground, impatient of his master's
delay? And why, after gazing a few moments at Coubitant's dark
countenance, did he declare his wish to join the fishing party, and
requested the Nausett to allow him to take a place in the canoe? Did he
see treachery in that eye of fire? Jyanough could lend his horse to the
pale-face, if he should happen to wish to hunt.

His request was, however, negatived decidedly by Coubitant; who assured
him, with assumed courtesy, that he regretted the size of the boat was
too small to admit of its carrying a third sportsman with safety; but
invited him to join him in the same sport the following day, when, he
added--with that smile that Oriana hated--Jyanough could lend his horse
to the pale-face, if he should happen to wish to hunt.

The young Cree was baffled. He would gladly have pre vented his friend
from accompanying Coubitant on the expedition; but be had no means of
doing so, or even of putting him on his guard against any possible evil
designs on the part of his companion. So he sprang upon his eager
horse, and galloped after the hunters, hoping that his fears and
suspicions were unfounded.

Oriana and Mailah, attended by their faithful companion Rodolph, walked
down to the edge of the river, to see the fishermen embark in their
frail vessel; and, for some time, they watched the sport with
considerable interest, and admired the skill with which Coubitant
pierced and brought up several large fish. These he attracted towards
the canoe by means of some preparation that he scattered on the surface
of the water; and when the fish appeared within reach of his spear, he
darted it with unerring aim, and drew in his struggling victim with the
line that was attached to it. Henrich was also provided with weapons;
but as the sport was entirely new to him, he found it difficult to take
a steady aim, and his success was slight.

Coubitant, however, had soon secured a considerable stock of fish, and
he rowed to the shore, and requested Oriana and her companion to convey
them to the Sachem's lodge; adding, in a careless tone, that it would
not be worth their while to return to the river, as he was going to a
reach at some distance down the stream, towards the head of the
cataract, where he expected to show Henrich excellent sport.

The two young women returned to the camp; and, having committed the
fine fish to the care of the inferior squaws, they agreed to go again
towards the river, and take this opportunity of visiting the falls,
which they much desired to see, and near which they should probably
again meet the fishermen. They rambled through the wood, taking a
direct course towards the cataract, the sound of whose waters soon
became sufficiently audible to guide them in their unknown way.
Sometimes they came in sight of the river; and again they saw the
little canoe, either standing motionless on the smooth surface of the
water where the stream was wide and unbroken, or else passing, under
the skilful guidance of Coubitant, between the rocks that occasionally
disturbed its course, and formed foaming rapids, down which the little
bark darted with fearful velocity.

The last reach of the broad river was as calm and smooth as a lake. It
seemed as if the collected mass of water, which had gathered there from
many a broken and troubled stream, and had struggled through many
windings and many difficulties, was reposing there, and gaining
strength for its last great leap over the dark precipice. As Oriana and
Mailah approached the verge of the scattered forest, and stood to gaze
on the magnificent scene before them, they perceived the canoe descend
a narrow rapid, and then take up a position below an elevated mass of
rock, where the water was perfectly still, and where the fishermen
could quietly pursue their occupation. They evidently did not perceive
their female friends, and the roar of the cataract was now so loud as
to prevent all possibility of their hearing their voices. For a short
time Oriana and her friend watched their movements, and saw several
fish captured; and then proceeded along the steep and rocky bank, in
order to obtain a still better view of the waterfall.

It was a beautiful scene on which those two young Indians looked; and
they felt its power and grandeur, and stood silent and motionless. The
cataract was beneath them; and its roar came up like thunder from the
dark deep basin into which its weight of waters fell, and threw up a
cloud of foam and spray; and then it rushed away again, as if in
gladness at its safe descent and free course, until the shining stream
was hidden by the rocks and overhanging trees that marked its winding
course. The natural platform on which Oriana and Mailah stood,
commanded a view not only of the wild cataract and the lower stretch of
the river, but also of the bold steep rocks on the opposite side, and
the dark forest that stretched away to the distant mountains that
bounded the horizon.  It likewise enabled them to perceive the small
canoe, lying motionless on the water, in the shadow of the projecting
rock.

By and by the boat was rowed into the center of the river, and
Coubitant appeared to be seeking for a good fishing spot, as he pointed
in different directions, and once or twice darted his spear into the
water, and drew it out again without any success. Meanwhile, the canoe
floated slowly down the stream, but its motion gradually increased as
it approached the fall; and Oriana gazed at it, expecting every moment
that Coubitant, who had now taken the oar in his powerful grasp, would
turn its course, and either draw towards the shore; or else row back
again up the river, and land below the first rapids. To her surprise,
and somewhat to her anxiety, he still continued, however, to allow the
canoe to proceed; and she saw Henrich take a dart in his hand, and
stand erect as if to strike at something beneath the surface, to which
Coubitant pointed with the paddle. Another instant, and her white
brother was in the water, and struggling to catch the side of the
canoe! Breathlessly she gazed; and she distinctly saw the paddle which
Coubitant held, extended towards the uplifted hand of Henrich. Still he
did not grasp it! O! why was this? And then the boat, which bad already
floated perilously near to the fall, was Suddenly turned, and she
beheld Coubitant making violent efforts to overcome the force of the
current, and row to the opposite and nearest shore. He was alone!

And where was Henrich? Where was the brave young stranger? Battling
desperately with the rapid stream which was carrying him onward to
destruction. He rose and sank, rose again, and the current bore him on
with resistless force. For a moment, Oriana clasped her hands over her
eyes, to shut out the dreadful sight; and then, as if inspired by a
gleam of supernatural hope, she darted forward, calling Rodolph, and
pointing to the stream. The intelligent creature had seen the form of
Henrich in the water, and only waited his mistress's command to risk
his life in the attempt to save him.  But his sagacity taught him that
it was useless to enter the river above the fall; and he bounded down
the steep bank that led to its foot, and stood eager, and panting, on a
point of rock that overhung the basin. Oriana was quickly on the same
spot, followed by Mailah; but ere they reached it, the dog had plunged
into the foaming waters, and now appeared, upholding the inanimate form
of Henrich, and struggling fearfully to drag him from the whirlpool.

O, it was a sickening sight! and Oriana's heart stood still in the
agony of suspense She could not aid her brother! She could not cope
with that mad whirl of water! But she leaped down the steep rocks, and
stood on the narrow ledge of shore below, to wait the moment for
action. At length--after what appeared almost a hopeless conflict with
the dashing waters--Rodolph appeared through the cloud of foam and
slowly and feebly swam towards the shore, still supporting the lifeless
burden that seemed almost to drag him beneath the surface.

Now was the time for the Indian girl to prove her skill and courage.
Lightly she sprang into the water, and in a moment she was at Rodolph's
side; and, with one arm sustaining the drooping head of Henrich, while,
with the other, she dexterously swam back to the spot where Mailah
stood ready to assist her. With much difficulty they lifted the
senseless form of Henrich on the shore, and proceeded to adopt every
means in their power to restore suspended animation; while Rodolph--the
faithful devoted Rodolph--lay down panting and exhausted, but still
keeping a watchful eye on him whom he had so daringly rescued. Long the
two young Indians labored in silence, and almost in despair; for no
color returned to those pallid lips, and no warmth was perceptible in
the chilled and stiffened hands, that fell powerless by his side.
Still they persevered: and no tear, no lamentation, betrayed the
anguish that wrung the heart of Oriana, while she believed that all was
in vain. But her soul was lifted up in prayer to the One True God, in
whom she had been taught to put her trust by her beloved  'white
brother': and in His mercy was her only hope.

Nor was that hope in vain. The warm beams of the mid-day sun fell
powerfully on that sheltered spot where the little group were gathered,
and, combined with the continued friction that Oriana and Mailah
employed, at length brought back the life-blood to Henrich's cheeks and
lips, and his anxious nurses had the joy of perceiving that he
breathed. A few minutes more, and he opened his deep blue eyes, and
looked wildly around him, and spoke some English words that Oriana
heard amid the din of the falling waters, and knew were of his home and
his kindred. And then he uttered her own name, and attempted to rise,
but fell back again into her arms, and smiled sweetly and gratefully
when her eyes met his, and he saw that she was watching over him.
There was joy--deep joy and gratitude--in those young hearts at that
moment; but Henrich's weakness, and the noise of, the roaring cataract,
prevented them from communicating their feelings in words, and Oriana
forbore to ask any questions of Henrich relative to the cause of his
perilous adventure.

After some time he seemed greatly to recover, and, rising from the
ground, he slowly mounted the bank, supported by Oriana and her friend.
But it was evident that he was quite unable to proceed on foot to the
camp, and it was agreed that Mailah should return as quickly as
possible and bring such assistance as she could procure from thence,
while Henrich and Oriana should advance as far as his enfeebled state
would admit of.

Mailah's light form soon disappeared in the wood, and it was not long
ere she reached the camp, and hastened to the tent of Tisquantum, who,
on that day, had not joined the hunting party. She told her story, in
which the old Chief showed the deepest interest; and she observed a
dark frown on his brow while she related the unsuccessful attempts of
Coubitant to draw Henrich from the water with his paddle; but he made
no remark.

The hunters were still absent, and few men remained in the camp. These
were all engaged in felling wood and other laborious employments, and
Tisquantum prepared to lead his own horse out to meet his adopted son.
But, just as he and Mailah were leaving the camp for this purpose,
Coubitant came rapidly up from the river's brink, and, hurrying towards
them, began to relate, with expressions of grief and consternation, the
sad fate which he believed to have befallen the young stranger, and the
exertions that he had made to save his life, but which had, unhappily,
proved unavailing to avert the calamity. The sorrow of the Nausett
Indian seemed excessive; and Tisquantum probably considered it so, for
he listened with perfect calmness to his recital, and then merely
replied, 'Happily, the youth is safe.  Mahneto has succored him, and I
go to bring him back to the camp.'

Coubitant started: and he looked embarrassed for a moment, when he
caught the penetrating eye of Mailah fixed on his countenance. But he
quickly recovered his self-possession, and manifested such joy at the
escape of the white stranger from a watery grave, that Mailah almost
chid herself for her dreadful suspicions.

Coubitant accompanied her and the Sachem on their way through the
forest, and when they met Henrich and Oriana, he again assumed such an
appearance of pleasure, and so warmly congratulated the former on his
miraculous deliverance, that the generous English youth strove to
banish from his mind the fearful thoughts that had arisen there while
he struggled for life close to the canoe, and wondered at the want of
skill and strength displayed by his companion in his abortive attempts
to save him. Oriana coldly received his greeting.  She had long
suspected that he regarded Henrich with hatred and jealousy; and her
worst suspicions had that day received a strong confirmation. Still she
resolved to conceal them--at least at present--from all but Jyanough,
whose friendship for Henrich would, she knew, render him peculiarly
alive to all that concerned his safety.

She had not long to wait, for the hunters soon returned; and she
observed that, when Jyanough heard the story of the day's adventure,
he cast a glance on Coubitant that made the conscious savage quail.
But when she related to the young Cree all that she and Mailah had
observed, he could restrain his feelings no longer, and plainly told
her that he was convinced that Coubitant was the author of the
calamity, and that it was not the first attempt he had made at
Henrich's life.

They resolved that he should communicate all his suspicions to the
Sachem the following morning, and urge him to take measures for the
safety of his adopted son: but what was Jyanough's surprise, when he
opened the subject to Tisquantum, at being informed that Coubitant had
already left the camp with the Pequodees! Jyanough knew that it was
their intention that morning, at day-break, to set off on their return
to their own woods and plains, and he found that the wily Nausett had
expressed a desire to accompany them, and join in the war that was
going on between their tribe and some of their neighbors, in order to
distinguish himself as a warrior. It was not the Sachem's intention to
rejoin his tribe for a considerable time. He was fond of wandering, and
proposed to travel towards the north when the hunting season should be
over; and he also felt a reluctance to take his now greatly beloved
captive back to that part of the country where it was possible he might
gain intelligence of his friends, or, perhaps, even make his escape to
them. He had, therefore, consented to Coubitant's request, and
evidently felt an undefined satisfaction in his absence.

This being the case, and the departure of Coubitant having removed all
present danger to Henrich from his malicious schemes, Jyanough forbore
to express all he felt to the old Sachem; and he returned to Oriana
with the pleasant intelligence that the enemy of her white brother had
departed.

To the young Squaw-Sachem this news imparted infinite relief; and even
Henrich could not regret it, although he found it difficult to believe
that all the suspicions of his friends were well-founded.  Still the
events of the preceding day were quite sufficient to make him doubt
more than ever the sincerity of Coubitant's professed regard; and he
felt that he should be happier now that the dark-browed savage was
gone. To his pleasant life of freedom we will now leave him, and return
to New Plymouth, where many events--deeply interesting to the
settlers--had occurred since his involuntary departure, and supposed
death.



CHAPTER  XI.

'There went a dirge through the forest's gloom.
...An exile was borne to a lonely tomb,
"Brother;"--so the chant was sung
In the slumberer's native tongue--
"Friend and brother! not for thee
Shall the sound of weeping be."'     HEMANS.

Sadly and slowly the Pilgrim Fathers passed along the scattered village
of log huts which was their home in their voluntary exile, and wound up
the pathway that led towards the summit of the mount, afterwards called
'the Burying Hill,' on which they had constructed a rude fort or
storehouse, and whither they were now bearing to his last earthly home
the chief and the most respected of their community. The Governor
Carver--he who had presided over their councils, and directed all their
movements since the memorable day of their landing, and had been the
friend, the physician, the comforter of his little flock, through all
their trials and all their sufferings--had fallen a victim to disease
and over-exertion, just as spring, with all its brighter hopes for the
future, had set in.

It was but a few days after Henrich's capture that this heavy
affliction befell the colony, and added greatly to the gloom which the
loss of young Maitland had already cast over the whole village. The
departure, also, of the vessel in which the Pilgrims had come out to
America, occurred at the same time; and, although not one of the exiles
desired to return to the land of their birth, and to abandon the
enterprise on which they had entered so devotedly, yet it was a
melancholy hour when they bade adieu to the captain and his crew, and
saw the Mayflower sail away towards their still much-loved, country.

The scurvy and other diseases--combined with the hardships and
privations to which they had been exposed during the winter and early
spring--had fearfully reduced the number of the ship's company; and of
those who remained, the greater part were weakened by illness, and
dispirited by the loss of so many of their brave comrades, whose graves
they had dug on the bleak shores of New England. The return of spring,
and the supply of provisions that the settlers were able to obtain from
the friendly Indians, had checked the progress of the fatal complaints
that had so fearfully ravaged the colony during the severity of winter;
and had restored the survivors of the ship's crew to comparative health
and strength. The captain was, therefore, glad to seize the first
opportunity of abandoning a shore which had presented to him so
cheerless and melancholy an aspect, and of leaving the steadfast and
devoted exiles to the fate which they had chosen, and which they were
resolved to abide in faith and hope.

On the very day that the Mayflower set sail, and while its white sails
could still be distinguished in the eastern horizon, the Governor--who
took an active part in every occupation, and even every labor that
engaged the settlers--was busily employed in sowing corn in the fields
that were considered as the common property of the colony. In directing
and superintending this work, he was greatly assisted by the skill and
experience of Squanto, the native who, as we have already related, had
been so treacherously carried off to England by Hunt, and had, on his
return to America, sought out, and attached himself to, the settlers.
By them he was greatly regarded, and his knowledge of the English
language rendered his services of inestimable value in all their
intercourse with the Indian tribes; while his acquaintance with the
soil on which they had established themselves, and the native modes of
cultivating grain and other vegetable produce, was of the greatest use
to men who were only accustomed to European agriculture.

The maize and other grain were sown in the fields that had been richly
manured with fish, to ensure an abundant crop;[*] and the laborers
returned in a body to the village, led by their venerable and respected
President; but no sooner had Carver re-entered his dwelling than he
swooned away and never recovered his consciousness. In a few days he
breathed his last, to the unutterable grief of his widow, and the deep
regret of all the settlers, whose love and confidence he had won during
his brief government, by his clear-sighted wisdom and his universal
kindness.

[Footnote: It was the custom of the Indians to manure their fields with
_shads_ or _allezes,_ a small fish that comes up the rivers in vast
numbers at the spawning season. About a thousand fish were used for
every acre of land; and a single alleze was usually put into every
corn-hill, when they buried their grain for winter consumption;
probably as a charm to keep off the evil demons and hostile wandering
spirits.]

As his funeral procession wound up the hill, tears might be seen on the
cheek of many a sturdy Pilgrim; and sobs and lamentations broke forth
from the women and children. After his remains were laid in their
resting-place, a fervent prayer was offered up by Brewster (whose age
and character caused him to be regarded as the pastor of the colony,
although he had never been called to the ministry after the custom of
the Puritans); and then a hymn was sung by the united voices of the
whole congregation.

When this simple ceremony was over, and the grave of the departed
President was closed, and laid level with the surrounding ground--in
order to conceal it from the prowling Indians--the assembly repaired to
the fort, or store-house, that stood on the summit of the hill, and
which also served the purpose of a meeting-house or chapel. Its rude
end unadorned simplicity suited, the peculiar ideas of the Puritans,
who, in their zeal to escape from the elaborate ornaments and pompous
ceremonial employed by the Papists, had rushed into the opposite
extreme, and desired that both their place of worship, and their mode
of performing it, should be divested of every external decoration and
every prescribed form. The more their place of meeting for prayer
resembled an ordinary habitation, the better they considered it suited
to the sacred purpose; and they were, therefore, perfectly satisfied to
possess no other church than the rude fort, built of logs and posts,
and used indifferently as a granary for the public stores, and as a
fortress for the defense of the colony from any incursions of the
hostile tribes.

In this primitive chapel, Brewster was accustomed to lead the devotions
of the Pilgrims and their families, every 'Lord's Day' morning and
afternoon;[*] and also on any other occasion of their assembling
together. But as they were in continual expectation of the arrival of
the venerated John Robinson, to resume his office of regular pastor of
the flock, they had not taken any measures to gratify their ardent
desire of hearing the _'blessed sermon'_ three times en every Lord's
Day, from some holy man entirely devoted to the service of God. The
addresses occasionally delivered to the congregation by Brewster, or by
any other of the ruling elders who might preside at a meeting, were
called _'discourses'_ not sermons; and the interpretation of certain
portions of Scripture, which was sometimes undertaken by any member of
the congregation who felt equal to it, was called _'prophesying.'_
These were the only modes of spiritual instruction employed by the
first settlers, until they procured clergymen from England, or
appointed ministers from among their own elders; and these means were
highly valued by the settlers, who had abandoned home, and kindred, and
the comforts of civilized life, for no other motive than to secure to
themselves the privilege of worshipping God according to their own
