
"By the jarl's bracelet that you wear, surely."

"So you are a real Dane--not an English-bred one like myself. That is
good. You and I will have many a talk together. Odin, how good it is to
meet a housecarl who speaks as man to man and does not cringe to me! Who
are you?"

"Radbard Grimsson of Grimsby, housecarl just now to this King of Lindsey."

"And your comrade?"

I was about to tell this friendly countryman Havelok's name without
thought, but stopped in time. Of all the things I had been brought up to
dread most for him, that an English Dane should find him out was the
worst, so I said, "He is called Curan, and he is a Lindsey marshman."

"Who can talk Danish though his name is Welsh. That is strange. Well,
you are right about me. I am Ragnar of Norwich, the earl, as the English
for jarl goes. Now I want to see Alsi the king straightway."

"That is a matter for the captain," I said, and I called for him.

Eglaf came out and made a deep reverence when he saw the earl, knowing
at once who he was, and as this was just what the earl had said that he
did not like, he looked quaintly at me across Eglaf's broad bent back,
so that I had to grin perforce.

All unknowing of which the captain heard the earl's business, and then
told me to see him to the palace gates, and take his horse to the
stables when he had dismounted and was in the hands of Berthun.

So I went, and Havelok turned away and went on some errand down the
steep street.

This Ragnar was one of whom I had often heard, for he was the governor
of all the North folk for Alsi until the Lady Goldberga should take her
place. He was her cousin, being the son of Ethelwald's sister, who was
of course a Dane. Danish, and from the old country, was his father also,
being one of the men who had come over to the court of East Anglia when
Ethelwald was made king.

All the way to the door we talked of Denmark, but it was not far. There
Berthun came out and greeted the earl in court fashion, and I thought
that I was done with, because the grooms had run to take the great bay
horse as they heard the trampling. But, as it happened, I was wanted.

Ragnar went in, saying to me that he would find me out again presently;
and I saw him walk across the great hall to the hearth, and stand there
while Berthun went to the king's presence to tell him of the new
arrival. Then I stood for a minute to look at the horse, for the grooms
had had no orders to take him away; and mindful of Eglaf's word to me, I
was going to tell them to do so, and to see it done, when Berthun came
hurriedly and called me.

"Master Housecarl," he said rather breathlessly, "by the king's order
you are to come within the hall and guard the doorway."

I shouldered my spear and followed him, and as we were out of hearing of
the grooms I said that the captain had ordered me to take the horse to
the stables.

"I will see to that," he said. "Now you are to bide at the door while
the king speaks with Earl Ragnar, for there will be none else present.
Let no one pass in without the king's leave."

We passed through the great door as he said that, and he closed it after
him. Ragnar was yet standing near the high seat, and turned as he heard
the sound, and smiled when he saw me. Berthun went quickly away through
a side entrance, and the hail was empty save for us two. The midday meal
was over an hour since, and the long tables had been cleared away, so
that the place seemed desolate to me, as I had only seen it before when
I sat with the other men at the cross tables for meals. It was not so
good a hall as was Jarl Sigurd's in Denmark, for it was not rich with
carving and colour as was his, and the arms on the wall were few, and
the hangings might have been brighter and better in a king's place.

"Our king does not seem to keep much state," Ragnar said, looking round
as I was looking, and we both laughed.

Then the door on the high place opened, and the king came in, soberly
dressed, and with a smile on his face which seemed to me to have been
made on purpose for this greeting, for he mostly looked sour enough. Nor
did it seem that his eyes had any pleasure in them.

"Welcome, kinsman," he said, seeming hearty enough, however; "I had
looked for you before this. What news from our good town of Norwich?"

He held out his hand to Ragnar, who took it frankly, and his strong grip
twisted the king's set smile into a grin of pain for a moment.

"All was well there three weeks ago when I left there to go to London.
Now, I have ridden on to say that the Lady Goldberga is not far hence,
so that her coming may be prepared for."

Now, as the earl said this, the king's smile went from his face, and
black enough he looked for a moment. The look passed quickly, and the
smile came back, but it seemed hard to keep it up.

"Why, that is well," he said; "so you fell in with her on the way."

"I have attended her from London," answered the earl, looking
steadfastly at Alsi, "and it was as well that I did so, as it happened."

"What has been amiss?" asked the king sharply, and trying to look
troubled. He let the smile go now altogether.

"Your henchman, Griffin the Welshman, had no guard with her that was
fitting for our princess," Ragnar said. "He had but twenty men, and
these not of the best. It is in my mind also that I should have been
told of this journey, for I am surely the right man to have guarded my
queen who is to be."

At that Alsi's face went ashy pale, and I did not rightly know why at
the time, but it seemed more in anger than aught else. But he had to
make some answer.

"We sent a messenger to you," he said hastily; "I cannot tell why he did
not reach you."

"He must have come too late, and after I had heard of this from others;
so I had already gone to meet the princess. I am glad that I was sent
for, and it may pass. Well, it is lucky that I was in time, for we were
attacked on the road, and but for my men there would have been trouble."

Then Alsi broke into wrath, which was real enough.

"This passes all. Where and by whom were you attacked? and why should
any fall on the party?"

"Five miles on the other side of Ancaster town, where the Ermin Street
runs among woods, we were fallen on, but who the men were I cannot say.
Why they should fall on us seems plain enough, seeing that the ransom of
a princess is likely to be a great sum."

"Was it a sharp fight?"

"It was not," answered Ragnar, "for it seemed to me that the men looked
only to find your Welsh thane Griffin and his men. When they saw my
Norfolk housecarls, they waited no longer, and we only rode down one or
two of them. But I have somewhat against this Griffin, for he helped me
not at all. Until this day he and his men had ridden fairly with us, but
by the time this attack came they were half a mile behind us."

"Do you mean to say that you think Griffin in league with these--
outlaws, as one may suppose them?" said Alsi, with wrath and more else
written in twitching mouth and crafty eyes.

"I would not have said that," Ragnar answered, looking in some surprise
at the king, "it had never come into my head. But I will say that as the
Ermin Street is straight as an arrow, and he was in full sight of us, he
might have spurred his horses to our help, whereas he never quickened
his pace till he saw that the outlaws, or whoever they were, had gone. I
put this as a complaint to you."

"These men seem to have scared you, at least," sneered the king.

Ragnar flushed deeply.

"For the princess--yes. It is not fitting that a man who is in charge
of so precious a lady should hold back in danger, even of the least
seeming, as did Griffin. And I told him so."

Now I thought that Alsi would have been as angry with Griffin as was the
earl, and that he would add that he also would speak his mind to him,
hut instead of that he went off in another way.

"It was a pity that a pleasant journey with a fair companion was thus
broken in upon. But it was doubtless pleasant that the lady should see
that her kinsman was not unwilling to draw sword for her. A pretty
little jest this, got up between Griffin and yourself, and such as a
young man may be forgiven for playing. I shall hear Goldberga complain
of honest Griffin presently, and now I shall know how to answer her. Ay,
I will promise him the like talking to that you gave him, and then we
three will laugh over it all together."

And with that the king broke into a cackle of laughter, catching hold of
the earl's arm in his glee. And I never saw any man look so altogether
bewildered as did Ragnar.

"Little jest was there in the matter, lord king, let me tell you," he
said, trying to draw his arm away.

"Nay, I am not angry with you, kinsman; indeed, I am not. We have been
young and eager that bright eyes should see our valour ourselves ere
now," and he shook his finger at the earl gaily. "I only wonder that you
induced that fiery Welshman to take a rating in the hearing of the
princess quietly."

"What I had to say to him I said apart. I will not say that he did take
it quietly."

"Meaning--that you had a good laugh over it;" and Alsi shook the
earl's arm as in glee. "There now, you have made a clean breast, and I
am not one to spoil sport. Go and meet Goldberga at the gates, and bring
her to me in state, and you shall be lodged here, if you will. Quite
right of you to tell me this, or Griffin would have been in trouble. But
I must not have the lady scared again, mind you."

He turned quickly away, then, with a sort of stifled laugh, as if he
wanted to get away to enjoy a good jest, and left Ragnar staring
speechless at him as he crossed the high place and went through the
private door.

Then the earl turned to me, "By Loki, fellow countryman, there is
somewhat wrong here. What does he mean by feigning to think the whole
affair a jest? It won't be much of a jest if Griffin and I slay one
another tomorrow, as we mean to do, because of what was not done, and
what was said about it."

"It has seemed to me, jarl," I said plainly, "that all this is more like
a jest between the king and Griffin."

"Call it a jest, as that is loyal, at least. But I think that you are
right. If Goldberga had been carried off--Come, we shall be saying too
much in these walls."

I had only been told to wait while the king and earl spoke together, and
so I opened the door and followed him out. The horse was yet there
waiting for him, and it was plain that the king had not meant him to stay.

"Bid the grooms lead the horse after us, and we will go to your captain.
Then you shall take me to one of my friends, for you will know where
their houses are."

But at that moment a man from the palace ran after us, bringing an order
from the king that I was to go back to him. So Ragnar bade me farewell.

"Come to me tonight at the gatehouse," he said. "I will speak to the
captain to let you off duty."

"Say nothing to him, jarl, for it is needless. I am only with him for a
time, and am my own master. I have no turn on watch tonight, and so am
free."

So I went back, and found the king in the hall again, and he was still
smiling. If he had looked me straight in the face, I suppose that he
might have seen that I was not a man to whom he was used, but he did
not. He seemed not to wish to do so.

"So, good fellow," he said, "you have heard a pleasant jest of our young
kinsman's contriving, but I will that you say nothing of it. It is a
pity to take a good guardroom story from you, however, without some
recompense, and therefore--"

With that he put a little bag into my hand, and it was heavy. I said
nothing, but bowed in the English way, and he went on, "You understand;
no word is to be said of what you have heard unless I bid you repeat it.
That I may have to do, lest it is said that Griffin the thane is
'nidring' [9] by any of his enemies. You know all the
story--how the earl and he planned a sham attack on the princess's
party, that Ragnar might show his valour, which, of course, he could not
do if Griffin was there. Therefore the thane held back. But maybe you
heard all, and understood it."

"I heard all, lord king, and I will say naught."

The king waved his hand in sign that I was dismissed, and I bowed and
went. There were five rings of gold in the bag, worth about the whole
year's wage of a courtman, and I thought that for keeping a jest to
myself that was good pay indeed. There must be more behind that
business, as it had seemed to me already.

Now, as I crossed the green within the old walls on my way to the gate,
it happened that Havelok came back from the town, and as he came I heard
him whistling softly to himself a strange wild call, as it were, of a
hunting horn, very sweet, and one that I had never heard before.

"Ho, brother!" I said, for there was no one near us. "What is that call
you are whistling?"

He started and looked up at me suddenly, and I saw that his trouble was
on him again.

"In my dream," he said slowly, "there is a man on a great horse, and he
wears such bracelets as Ragnar of Norwich, and he winds his horn with
that call, and I run to him; and then I myself am on the horse, and I go
to the stables, and after that there is nothing but the call that I
hear. Now it has gone again."

And his hand went up in the way that made me sad to see.

"It will come back by-and-by. Trouble not about it."

"I would that we were back in Grimsby," he said, with a great sigh.
"This is a place of shadows. Ghosts are these of days that I think can
never have been."

"Well," said I, wanting to take him out of himself, "this is no ghost,
at all events. I would that one of our brothers would come from home
that I might send it to them in Grimsby. We do not need it."

So I showed him the gold, and he wondered at it, and laughed, saying
that the housecarls had the best place after all. And so he went on, and
I back to the gate.

Surely he minded at last the days when Gunnar his father had ridden home
to the gate, as the Danish earl had ridden even now, and had called his
son to him with that call. It was all coming back, as one thing or
another brought it to his mind; and I wondered what should be when he
knew that the dream was the truth. For what should Havelok, foster-son
of the fisher, do against a king who for twelve long years had held his
throne? And who in all the old land would believe that he was indeed the
son of the lost king? Better, it seemed to me, that this had not
happened, and that he had been yet the happy, careless, well-loved son
of Grim, with no thought of aught higher than the good of the folk he knew.

When I got back to the gate, we were marched down the town, that we
might be ready to receive the princess; and as I went through the
market, I saw one of the porters whom I knew, and I beckoned to him, so
that he came alongside me in the ranks, and I asked him if he would go
to Grimsby for me for a silver penny. He would do it gladly; and so I
sent him with word to Arngeir that I needed one of them here to take a
gift that I had for them. I would meet whoever came at the widow's
house, and I set a time when I would look for them. I thought it was
well that the king's gold should not be wasted, even for a day's use, if
I could help it. And I wearied to see one of the brothers, and hear all
that was going on.


    CHAPTER XI. THE COMING OF THE PRINCESS.

There is no need for me to tell aught of the entry of the Lady Goldberga
into the town, for anyone may know how the people cheered her, and how
the party were met by the Norfolk thanes and many others, and so rode on
up the hill to the palace. What the princess was like I hardly noticed
at that time, for she was closely hooded, and her maidens were round
her. And I had something else to think of; for foremost, and richly
dressed, with a gold chain round his neck, rode a man whose strange way
of carrying his head caught my eye at once, so that I looked more than a
second time at him.

And at last I knew him. It was that man of ours whose neck had been
twisted by the way in which he had been hauled on board at the time of
the wreck, and had afterwards gone to Ethelwald's court. One would say
that this Mord had prospered exceedingly, for he was plainly a man of
some consequence in the princess's household. He did not know me, though
it happened that he looked right at me for a moment; but I did not
expect him to do so after twelve years, seeing that I was but a boy when
we parted. I thought that I would seek him presently.

Then I saw Griffin, the Welsh thane, and I did not like the looks of him
at all. He was a black-haired man, clean shaven, so that the cruel
thinness of his lips was not hidden, and his black eyes were restless,
and never stayed anywhere, unless he looked at Ragnar for a moment, and
