of Hermes who graciously met him on the way. There by the counsels of
Argus the chieftains put them ashore.

And they two by the pathway came to the sacred grove, seeking the huge
oak tree on which was hung the fleece, like to a cloud that blushes red
with the fiery beams of the rising sun. But right in front the serpent
with his keen sleepless eyes saw them coming, and stretched out his long
neck and hissed in awful wise; and all round the long banks of the river
echoed and the boundless grove. Those heard it who dwelt in the Colchian
land very far from Titanian Aea, near the outfall of Lycus, the river
which parts from loud-roaring Araxes and blends his sacred stream with
Phasis, and they twain flow on together in one and pour their waters
into the Caucasian Sea. And through fear young mothers awoke, and round
their new-born babes, who were sleeping in their arms, threw their hands
in agony, for the small limbs started at that hiss. And as when above a
pile of smouldering wood countless eddies of smoke roll up mingled with
soot, and one ever springs up quickly after another, rising aloft from
beneath in wavering wreaths; so at that time did that monster roll his
countless coils covered with hard dry scales. And as he writhed, the
maiden came before his eyes, with sweet voice calling to her aid Sleep,
highest of gods, to charm the monster; and she cried to the queen of the
underworld, the night-wanderer, to be propitious to her enterprise. And
Aeson's son followed in fear, but the serpent, already charmed by her
song, was relaxing the long ridge of his giant spine, and lengthening
out his myriad coils, like a dark wave, dumb and noiseless, rolling over
a sluggish sea; but still he raised aloft his grisly head, eager to
enclose them both in his murderous jaws. But she with a newly cut spray
of juniper, dipping and drawing untempered charms from her mystic brew,
sprinkled his eyes, while she chanted her song; and all around the
potent scent of the charm cast sleep; and on the very spot he let his
jaw sink down; and far behind through the wood with its many trees were
those countless coils stretched out.

Hereupon Jason snatched the golden fleece from the oak, at the maiden's
bidding; and she, standing firm, smeared with the charm the monster's
head, till Jason himself bade her turn back towards their ship, and she
left the grove of Ares, dusky with shade. And as a maiden catches on her
finely wrought robe the gleam of the moon at the full, as it rises above
her high-roofed chamber; and her heart rejoices as she beholds the fair
ray; so at that time did Jason uplift the mighty fleece in his hands;
and from the shimmering of the flocks of wool there settled on his fair
cheeks and brow a red flush like a flame. And great as is the hide of a
yearling ox or stag, which huntsmen call a brocket, so great in extent
was the fleece all golden above. Heavy it was, thickly clustered with
flocks; and as he moved along, even beneath his feet the sheen rose up
from the earth. And he strode on now with the fleece covering his left
shoulder from the height of his neck to his feet, and now again he
gathered it up in his hands; for he feared exceedingly, lest some god or
man should meet him and deprive him thereof.

Dawn was spreading over the earth when they reached the throng of
heroes; and the youths marvelled to behold the mighty fleece, which
gleamed like the lightning of Zeus. And each one started up eager to
touch it and clasp it in his hands. But the son of Aeson restrained them
all, and threw over it a mantle newly-woven; and he led the maiden to
the stern and seated her there, and spake to them all as follows:

"No longer now, my friends, forbear to return to your fatherland. For
now the task for which we dared this grievous voyage, toiling with
bitter sorrow of heart, has been lightly fulfilled by the maiden's
counsels. Her--for such is her will--I will bring home to be my wedded
wife; do ye preserve her, the glorious saviour of all Achaea and of
yourselves. For of a surety, I ween, will Aeetes come with his host to
bar our passage from the river into the sea. But do some of you toil at
the oars in turn, sitting man by man; and half of you raise your shields
of oxhide, a ready defence against the darts of the enemy, and guard our
return. And now in our hands we hold the fate of our children and dear
country and of our aged parents; and on our venture all Hellas depends,
to reap either the shame of failure or great renown."

Thus he spake, and donned his armour of war; and they cried aloud,
wondrously eager. And he drew his sword from the sheath and cut the
hawsers at the stern. And near the maiden he took his stand ready armed
by the steersman Ancaeus, and with their rowing the ship sped on as they
strained desperately to drive her clear of the river.

By this time Medea's love and deeds had become known to haughty Aeetes
and to all the Colchians. And they thronged to the assembly in arms; and
countless as the waves of the stormy sea when they rise crested by the
wind, or as the leaves that fall to the ground from the wood with its
myriad branches in the month when the leaves fall--who could reckon
their tale?--so they in countless number poured along the banks of the
river shouting in frenzy; and in his shapely chariot Aeetes shone forth
above all with his steeds, the gift of Helios, swift as the blasts of
the wind. In his left hand he raised his curved shield, and in his right
a huge pine-torch, and near him in front stood up his mighty spear. And
Apsyrtus held in his hands the reins of the steeds. But already the ship
was cleaving the sea before her, urged on by stalwart oarsmen, and the
stream of the mighty river rushing down. But the king in grievous
anguish lifted his hands and called on Helios and Zeus to bear witness
to their evil deeds; and terrible threats he uttered against all his
people, that unless they should with their own hands seize the maiden,
either on the land or still finding the ship on the swell of the open
sea, and bring her back, that so he might satisfy his eager soul with
vengeance for all those deeds, at the cost of their own lives they
should learn and abide all his rage and revenge.

Thus spake Aeetes; and on that same day the Colchians launched their
ships and cast the tackle on board, and on that same day sailed forth on
the sea; thou wouldst not say so mighty a host was a fleet of ships, but
that a countless flight of birds, swarm on swarm, was clamouring over
the sea.

Swiftly the wind blew, as the goddess Hera planned, so that most quickly
Aeaean Medea might reach the Pelasgian land, a bane to the house of
Pelias, and on the third morn they bound the ship's stern cables to the
shores of the Paphlagonians, at the mouth of the river Halys. For Medea
bade them land and propitiate Hecate with sacrifice. Now all that the
maiden prepared for offering the sacrifice may no man know, and may my
soul not urge me to sing thereof. Awe restrains my lips, yet from that
time the altar which the heroes raised on the beach to the goddess
remains till now, a sight to men of a later day.

And straightway Aeson's son and the rest of the heroes bethought them of
Phineus, how that he had said that their course from Aea should be
different, but to all alike his meaning was dim. Then Argus spake, and
they eagerly hearkened:

"We go to Orchomenus, whither that unerring seer, whom ye met aforetime,
foretold your voyage. For there is another course, signified by those
priests of the immortal gods, who have sprung from Tritonian Thebes. As
yet all the stars that wheel in the heaven were not, nor yet, though one
should inquire, could aught be heard of the sacred race of the Danai.
Apidanean Arcadians alone existed, Arcadians who lived even before the
moon, it is said, eating acorns on the hills; nor at that time was the
Pelasgian land ruled by the glorious sons of Deucalion, in the days when
Egypt, mother of men of an older time, was called the fertile
Morning-land, and the river fair-flowing Triton, by which all the
Morning-land is watered; and never does the rain from Zeus moisten the
earth; but from the flooding of the river abundant crops spring up. From
this land, it is said, a king[1] made his way all round through the
whole of Europe and Asia, trusting in the might and strength and courage
of his people; and countless cities did he found wherever he came,
whereof some are still inhabited and some not; many an age hath passed
since then. But Aea abides unshaken even now and the sons of those men
whom that king settled to dwell in Aea. They preserve the writings of
their fathers, graven on pillars, whereon are marked all the ways and
the limits of sea and land as ye journey on all sides round. There is a
river, the uttermost horn of Ocean, broad and exceeding deep, that a
merchant ship may traverse; they call it Ister and have marked it far
off; and for a while it cleaves the boundless tilth alone in one stream;
for beyond the blasts of the north wind, far off in the Rhipaean
mountains, its springs burst forth with a roar. But when it enters the
boundaries of the Thracians and Scythians, here, dividing its stream
into two, it sends its waters partly into the Ionian sea,[2] and partly
to the south into a deep gulf that bends upwards from the Trinacrian
sea, that sea which lies along your land, if indeed Achelous flows forth
from your land."

[Footnote 1: The allusion is to Sesostris, see Herod, ii. 102 foll.]

[Footnote 2: Or, reading [Greek: hemeteren], "into our sea." The Euxine
is meant in any case and the word Ionian is therefore wrong.]

Thus he spake, and to them the goddess granted a happy portent, and all
at the sight shouted approval, that this was their appointed path. For
before them appeared a trail of heavenly light, a sign where they might
pass. And gladly they left behind there the son of Lycus and with canvas
outspread sailed over the sea, with their eyes on the Paphlagonian
mountains. But they did not round Carambis, for the winds and the gleam
of the heavenly fire stayed with them till they reached Ister's mighty
stream.

Now some of the Colchians, in a vain search, passed out from Pontus
through the Cyanean rocks; but the rest went to the river, and them
Apsyrtus led, and, turning aside, he entered the mouth called Fair.
Wherefore he outstripped the heroes by crossing a neck of land into the
furthest gulf of the Ionian sea. For a certain island is enclosed by
Ister, by name Peuce, three-cornered, its base stretching along the
coast, and with a sharp angle towards the river; and round it the
outfall is cleft in two. One mouth they call the mouth of Narex, and the
other, at the lower end, the Fair mouth. And through this Apsyrtus and
his Colchians rushed with all speed; but the heroes went upwards far
away towards the highest part of the island. And in the meadows the
country shepherds left their countless flocks for dread of the ships,
for they deemed that they were beasts coming forth from the
monster-teeming sea. For never yet before had they seen seafaring ships,
neither the Scythians mingled with the Thracians, nor the Sigynni, nor
yet the Graucenii, nor the Sindi that now inhabit the vast desert plain
of Laurium. But when they had passed near the mount Angurum, and the
cliff of Cauliacus, far from the mount Angurum, round which Ister,
dividing his stream, falls into the sea on this side and on that, and
the Laurian plain, then indeed the Colchians went forth into the Cronian
sea and cut off all the ways, to prevent their foes' escape. And the
heroes came down the river behind and reached the two Brygean isles of
Artemis near at hand. Now in one of them was a sacred temple; and on the
other they landed, avoiding the host of Apsyrtus; for the Colchians had
left these islands out of many within the river, just as they were,
through reverence for the daughter of Zeus; but the rest, thronged by
the Colchians, barred the ways to the sea. And so on other islands too,
close by, Apsyrtus left his host as far as the river Salangon and the
Nestian land.

There the Minyae would at that time have yielded in grim fight, a few to
many; but ere then they made a covenant, shunning a dire quarrel; as to
the golden fleece, that since Aeetes himself had so promised them if
they should fulfil the contests, they should keep it as justly won,
whether they carried it off by craft or even openly in the king's
despite; but as to Medea--for that was the cause of strife--that they
should give her in ward to Leto's daughter apart from the throng, until
some one of the kings that dispense justice should utter his doom,
whether she must return to her father's home or follow the chieftains to
the land of Hellas.

Now when the maiden had mused upon all this, sharp anguish shook her
heart unceasingly; and quickly she called forth Jason alone apart from
his comrades, and led him aside until they were far away, and before his
face uttered her speech all broken with sobs:

"What is this purpose that ye are now devising about me, O son of Aeson?
Has thy triumph utterly cast forgetfulness upon thee, and reckest thou
nothing of all that thou spakest when held fast by necessity? whither
are fled the oaths by Zeus the suppliants' god, whither are fled thy
honied promises? for which in no seemly wise, with shameless will, I
have left my country, the glories of my home and even my parents--things
that were dearest to me; and far away all alone I am borne over the sea
with the plaintive kingfishers because of thy trouble, in order that I
might save thy life in fulfilling the contests with the oxen and the
earthborn men. Last of all the fleece--when the matter became known, it
was by my folly thou didst win it; and a foul reproach have I poured on
womankind. Wherefore I say that as thy child, thy bride and thy sister,
I follow thee to the land of Hellas. Be ready to stand by me to the end,
abandon me not left forlorn of thee when thou dost visit the kings. But
only save me; let justice and right, to which we have both agreed, stand
firm; or else do thou at once shear through this neck with the sword,
that I may gain the guerdon due to my mad passion. Poor wretch! if the
king, to whom you both commit your cruel covenant, doom me to belong to
my brother. How shall I come to my father's sight? Will it be with a
good name? What revenge, what heavy calamity shall I not endure in agony
for the terrible deeds I have done? And wilt thou win the return that
thy heart desires? Never may Zeus' bride, the queen of all, in whom thou
dost glory, bring that to pass. Mayst thou some time remember me when
thou art racked with anguish; may the fleece like a dream vanish into
the nether darkness on the wings of the wind! And may my avenging Furies
forthwith drive thee from thy country, for all that I have suffered
through thy cruelty! These curses will not be allowed to fall
unaccomplished to the ground. A mighty oath hast thou transgressed,
ruthless one; but not long shalt thou and thy comrades sit at ease
casting eyes of mockery upon me, for all your covenants."

Thus she spake, seething with fierce wrath; and she longed to set fire
to the ship and to hew it utterly in pieces, and herself to fall into
the raging flame. But Jason, half afraid, thus addressed her with gentle
words:

"Forbear, lady; me too this pleases not. But we seek some respite from
battle, for such a cloud of hostile men, like to a fire, surrounds us,
on thy account. For all that inhabit this land are eager to aid
Apsyrtus, that they may lead thee back home to thy father, like some
captured maid. And all of us would perish in hateful destruction, if we
closed with them in fight; and bitterer still will be the pain, if we
are slain and leave thee to be their prey. But this covenant will weave
a web of guile to lead him to ruin. Nor will the people of the land for
thy sake oppose us, to favour the Colchians, when their prince is no
longer with them, who is thy champion and thy brother; nor will I shrink
from matching myself in fight with the Colchians, if they bar my way
homeward."

Thus he spake soothing her; and she uttered a deadly speech: "Take heed
now. For when sorry deeds are done we must needs devise sorry counsel,
since at first I was distraught by my error, and by heaven's will it was
I wrought the accomplishment of evil desires. Do thou in the turmoil
shield me from the Colchians' spears; and I will beguile Apsyrtus to
come into thy hands--do thou greet him with splendid gifts--if only I
could persuade the heralds on their departure to bring him alone to
hearken to my words. Thereupon if this deed pleases thee, slay him and
raise a conflict with the Colchians, I care not."

So they two agreed and prepared a great web of guile for Apsyrtus, and
provided many gifts such as are due to guests, and among them gave a
sacred robe of Hypsipyle, of crimson hue. The Graces with their own
hands had wrought it for Dionysus in sea-girt Dia, and he gave it to his
son Thoas thereafter, and Thoas left it to Hypsipyle, and she gave that
fair-wrought guest-gift with many another marvel to Aeson's son to wear.
Never couldst thou satisfy thy sweet desire by touching it or gazing on
it. And from it a divine fragrance breathed from the time when the king
of Nysa himself lay to rest thereon, flushed with wine and nectar as he
clasped the beauteous breast of the maiden-daughter of Minos, whom once
Theseus forsook in the island of Dia, when she had followed him from
Cnossus. And when she had worked upon the heralds to induce her brother
to come, as soon as she reached the temple of the goddess, according to
the agreement, and the darkness of night surrounded them that so she
might devise with him a cunning plan for her to take the mighty fleece
of gold and return to the home of Aeetes, for, she said, the sons of
Phrixus had given her by force to the strangers to carry off; with such
beguiling words she scattered to the air and the breezes her witching
charms, which even from afar would have drawn down the savage beast from
the steep mountain-height.

Ruthless Love, great bane, great curse to mankind, from thee come deadly
strifes and lamentations and groans, and countless pains as well have
their stormy birth from thee. Arise, thou god, and arm thyself against
the sons of our foes in such guise as when thou didst fill Medea's heart
with accursed madness. How then by evil doom did she slay Apsyrtus when
he came to meet her? For that must our song tell next.

When the heroes had left the maiden on the island of Artemis, according
to the covenant, both sides ran their ships to land separately. And
Jason went to the ambush to lie in wait for Apsyrtus and then for his
comrades. But he, beguiled by these dire promises, swiftly crossed the
swell of the sea in his ship, and in dark night set foot on the sacred
island; and faring all alone to meet her he made trial in speech of his
sister, as a tender child tries a wintry torrent which not even strong
men can pass through, to see if she would devise some guile against the
strangers. And so they two agreed together on everything; and
straightway Aeson's son leapt forth from the thick ambush, lifting his
bare sword in his hand, and quickly the maiden turned her eyes aside and
covered them with her veil that she might not see the blood of her
brother when he was smitten. And Jason marked him and struck him down,
as a butcher strikes down a mighty strong-horned bull, hard by the
temple which the Brygi on the mainland opposite had once built for
Artemis. In its vestibule he fell on his knees; and at last the hero
breathing out his life caught up in both hands the dark blood as it
welled from the wound; and he dyed with red his sister's silvery veil
and robe as she shrank away. And with swift side-glance the irresistible
pitiless Fury beheld the deadly deed they had done. And the hero,
Aeson's son, cut off the extremities of the dead man, and thrice licked
up some blood and thrice spat the pollution from his teeth, as it is
right for the slayer to do, to atone for a treacherous murder. And the
clammy corpse he hid in the ground where even now those bones lie among
the Apsyrtians.

Now as soon as the heroes saw the blaze of a torch, which the maiden
raised for them as a sign to pursue, they laid their own ship near the
Colchian ship, and they slaughtered the Colchian host, as kites slay the
tribes of wood-pigeons, or as lions of the wold, when they have leapt
amid the steading, drive a great flock of sheep huddled together. Nor
did one of them escape death, but the heroes rushed upon the whole crew,
destroying them like a flame; and at last Jason met them, and was eager
to give aid where none was needed; but already they were taking thought
for him too. Thereupon they sat to devise some prudent counsel for their
voyage, and the maiden came upon them as they pondered, but Peleus spake
his word first:

"I now bid you embark while it is still night, and take with your oars
the passage opposite to that which the enemy guards, for at dawn when
they see their plight I deem that no word urging to further pursuit of
us will prevail with them; but as people bereft of their king, they will
be scattered in grievous dissension. And easy, when the people are
scattered, will this path be for us on our return."

Thus he spake; and the youths assented to the words of Aeacus' son. And
quickly they entered the ship, and toiled at their oars unceasingly
until they reached the sacred isle of Electra, the highest of them all,
near the river Eridanus.

But when the Colchians learnt the death of their prince, verily they
were eager to pursue Argo and the Minyans through all the Cronian sea.
But Hera restrained them by terrible lightnings from the sky. And at
last they loathed their own homes in the Cytaean land, quailing before
Aeetes' fierce wrath; so they landed and made abiding homes there,
scattered far and wide. Some set foot on those very islands where the
heroes had stayed, and they still dwell there, bearing a name derived
from Apsyrtus; and others built a fenced city by the dark deep Illyrian
river, where is the tomb of Harmonia and Cadmus, dwelling among the
Encheleans; and others live amid the mountains which are called the
Thunderers, from the day when the thunders of Zeus, son of Cronos,
prevented them from crossing over to the island opposite.

Now the heroes, when their return seemed safe for them, fared onward and
made their hawsers fast to the land of the Hylleans. For the islands lay
thick in the river and made the path dangerous for those who sailed
thereby. Nor, as aforetime, did the Hylleans devise their hurt, but of
their own accord furthered their passage, winning as guerdon a mighty
tripod of Apollo. For tripods twain had Phoebus given to Aeson's son to
carry afar in the voyage he had to make, at the time when he went to
sacred Pytho to enquire about this very voyage; and it was ordained by
fate that in whatever land they should be placed, that land should never
be ravaged by the attacks of foemen. Therefore even now this tripod is
hidden in that land near the pleasant city of Hyllus, far beneath the
earth, that it may ever be unseen by mortals. Yet they found not King
Hyllus still alive in the land, whom fair Melite bare to Heracles in the
land of the Phaeacians. For he came to the abode of Nausithous and to
Macris, the nurse of Dionysus, to cleanse himself from the deadly murder
of his children; here he loved and overcame the water nymph Melite, the
daughter of the river Aegaeus, and she bare mighty Hyllus. But when he
had grown up he desired not to dwell in that island under the rule of
Nausithous the king; but he collected a host of native Phaeacians and
came to the Cronian sea; for the hero King Nausithous aided his journey,
and there he settled, and the Mentores slew him as he was fighting for
the oxen of his field.

Now, goddesses, say how it is that beyond this sea, near the land of
Ausonia and the Ligystian isles, which are called Stoechades, the mighty
