
"If so, I suppose I must obey; but I wish I had not been sent on the
expedition."

"It is to test your loyalty."

"Then it shall be proved. I have no personal motives of gratitude
towards Dunstan."

"Rather the contrary."

"Rather the contrary, as you say. But what sound was that? Surely
something stirred the bush!"

"A rabbit or a hare. You are becoming fanciful and timid. Well, you will
remember that tomorrow there must be no timidity, no yielding to what
some would call conscience, but wise men the scruples of superstition.
We shall not reach the monastery till dark, most of the visitors will
then have quitted it, and we shall take the old fox in a trap."

"You will not slay him in cold blood!"

"No. I shall bid him follow me to the king, and if he and his resist, as
probably they will, then their blood be on their own heads. But surely--"

At that moment a large stone, which Alfred had most inopportunely
dislodged, rolled down the bank, and made Elfric, who was in its path,
leap aside. Alfred, whose foot had rested upon it, slipped, and for a
moment seemed in danger of following the stone, but he had happily time
to grasp the tree securely, and by its aid he drew himself back and
darted into the wood.

Luckily there was moonlight enough to guide him by the track he had
hitherto followed, and he ran forward, dreading nothing so much as to
fall into the hands of the friends of his brother, and trusting that he
might prevent the execution of the foul deed he had heard meditated. He
ran for a long distance before he paused, when he became aware that
pursuers were on his track. Luckily his life had been spent so much in
the open air that he was capable of great exertion, and could run well.
So he resumed his course, although he knew not where it would lead him,
and soon had the pleasure of feeling that he was distancing his
pursuers. Yet every time he ran over a piece of smooth turf he fancied
he could hear them in his rear, and it was with the greatest feeling of
relief that he suddenly emerged from the wood upon the Foss Way, and saw
the lights of the hostelry at no great distance below him.

His pursuers did not follow him farther, probably unwilling to betray
their presence to the neighbourhood, and perhaps utterly unconscious
that the intruder upon their peace was possessed of any dangerous
secrets, or other than some rustic woodman belated on his homeward way,
who would be unable in any degree to interfere with them or to guess
their designs.

But it was not till the ardour of his flight had abated, that Alfred
could fully realise that his unhappy brother was committed to a deed of
scandalous atrocity, and the discovery was hard for him to bear. The
strong impression which his dream had made upon him--an impression
that he was to be the means of saving his brother from some great sin--
came upon him now with greater force than ever, and was of great
comfort. The identity of the scenery he had seen in dreamland with the
actual scenery he had gone through, made him feel that he was under the
special guidance of Providence.

Returning to the inn he sought Father Cuthbert, and found him somewhat
uneasy at his long absence, and to him he communicated all that he had
seen and heard.

The good father was a man of sound sense but of much affection, and at
first he could not credit that the boy he had loved so well, Elfric of
Aescendune, should have grown to be the associate of murderers, for such
only could either he or Alfred style the agents of Edwy's wrath.

But, once fully convinced, he was equal to the emergency.

"We will not start at once, we should but break down on the road, and
defeat our own object. We must rest quietly, and sleep soundly if
possible, and start with the earliest dawn. We shall reach Glastonbury
by midday, and be able to warn the holy abbot of his danger in good time."

So Alfred was forced to curb his impatience and to try to sleep soundly.
Father Cuthbert soon gave good assurance that he was asleep; but the
noisy manner in which the assurance was given banished sleep from the
eyelids of his anxious pupil. At length he yielded to weariness both of
mind and body, and the overwrought brain was still.

He was but little refreshed when he heard Father Cuthbert's morning
salutation, "_Benedicamus Domino_," and could hardly stammer out the
customary reply, "_Deo gratias_."

Every one rose early in those days, and the timely departure of the
party from Aescendune excited no special comment. Hundreds of pilgrims
were on the road, and Alfred expressed his conviction that there would
be force enough at Glastonbury to protect Dunstan, to which Father
Cuthbert replied--"If he would accept such protection."

On former days their journey had been frequently impeded by broken
bridges and dangerous fords; but as they drew near Glastonbury the
presence of a mighty civilising power became manifest. The fields were
well tilled, for the possessions for miles around the abbey were let to
tenant farmers by the monks, who had first reclaimed them from the
wilderness. The farm houses and the abodes of the poor were better
constructed, and the streams were all bridged over, while the old Roman
road was kept in tolerable repair.

A short distance before they reached the city, the pilgrims, who were a
space in advance of the party, came in sight of the towers of the
monastery, whereupon they all paused for one moment, and raised the
solemn strain then but recently composed--

I.
Founded on the Rock of Ages,
Salem, city of the blest,
Built of living stones most precious,
Vision of eternal rest,
Angel hands, in love attending,
Thee in bridal robes invest.
II.
Down from God all new descending
Thee our joyful eyes behold,
Like a bride adorned for spousals,
Decked with radiant wealth untold;
All thy streets and walls are fashioned,
All are bright with purest gold!
III.
Gates of pearl, for ever open,
Welcome there the loved, the lost;
Ransomed by their Saviour's merits;
This the price their freedom cost:
City of eternal refuge,
Haven of the tempest-tost.
IV.
Fierce the blow, and firm the pressure,
Which hath polished thus each stone:
Well the Mastermind hath fitted
To his chosen place each one.
When the Architect takes reck'ning,
He will count the work His Own.
V.
Glory be to God, the Father;
Glory to th' Eternal Son;
Glory to the Blessed Spirit:
One in Three, and Three in One.
Glory, honour, might, dominion,
While eternal ages run.
Amen.[xx]

The grand strains seemed to bring assurance of Divine aid to Alfred, and
he could but imitate Father Cuthbert, who lifted up his stentorian voice
and thundered out in chorus, as they drew near the pilgrims.

Here they left the Foss Way for the side road leading to the monastery,
now only a short distance from them.


    CHAPTER XI. THE FLIGHT OF DUNSTAN.

It was the day of St. Alban, the protomartyr of England, and the saint
was greatly honoured at Glastonbury, where, as we have seen, Dunstan was
in residence, and, as a natural consequence, every department of the
monastic life was quickened by his presence. The abbey was full of monks
who had professed the Benedictine rule, and having but recently been
rebuilt, it possessed many improvements hardly yet introduced into
English architecture in general. The greater part of the building was of
stone, and it was not, in its general features, unlike some of the older
colleges at Oxford or Cambridge, although the order of the architecture
was, of course, exclusively that of the Saxon period, characterised by
the heavy and massive, yet imposing, circular arch.

But upon the church or abbey chapel all the skill of the architect had
been concentrated, and it seemed worthy alike of its founder and of its
object. Seen upon the morning in question, when the bright summer sun
filled every corner with gladsome light, just as the long procession of
white-robed priests, and monks in their sombre garb, with their hoods
thrown back, were entering for high mass, and the choral psalm arose, it
was peculiarly imposing.

The procession had not long entered the church, when the party of
pilgrims we have described, closely followed by our friends from
Aescendune, entered the quadrangle, and crossed it to the great porch of
the church. It was with the greatest difficulty they could enter, for
the whole floor of the huge building was crowded with kneeling
worshippers. The portion of Scripture appointed for the epistle was
being chanted, and the words struck Alfred's ears as he entered--"He
pleased God, and was beloved of Him, so that, living among sinners, he
was translated."

The words seemed to come upon him with special application to the danger
the great abbot was in, and the thought that the martyr's day might be
stained by a deed of blood, or, as some might say, hallowed by another
martyrdom, added to his agitation.

And now he had gained a position where the high altar was in full view,
illuminated by its countless tapers, and fragrant with aromatic odours.
There, in the centre of the altar, his face turned to the people as the
sequence was ended, and the chanting of the gospel from the rood loft
began, stood the celebrant, and Alfred gazed for the first time upon the
face of Dunstan, brought out in strong relief by the glare of the
artificial light.

He strove earnestly to concentrate his thoughts upon the sacred words.
They were from the sixteenth of St. Matthew, beginning at the words:

"Then said Jesus unto His disciples, If any man will come after Me, let
him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow Me.

"For whosoever will save his life, shall lose it and whosoever will lose
his life for My sake, shall find it."

He could not but feel the strange coincidence that words such as these
should come to strengthen him, when he felt he had most need to shelter
himself under the shadow of the Cross. The service proceeded, the creed,
sanctus, and other choral portions being sung by the whole monastic body
in sonorous strains; and for a time Alfred was able to make a virtue of
necessity, and to give himself wholly to the solemnity; but when it was
over and the procession left the church, he sought an immediate
interview with the abbot, in company with Father Cuthbert.

Dunstan had removed his sacerdotal garments, and had returned to his own
cell, which only differed in size from the cells of his brethren. The
furniture was studiously plain: hard wooden chairs; an unvarnished
table; a wooden bedstead, with no bed, and only a loose coverlet of
sackcloth; the walls uncovered by tapestry; the floor unfurnished with
rushes;--such was the chamber of the man who had ruled England, and
still exercised the most unbounded spiritual influence in the land.

There was no ostentation in this; every monk in the monastery lived in
similar simplicity. Precious books and manuscripts, deeply laden with
gold and colours, were deposited on coarse wooden shelves, while the
Benedictine Breviary lay on the table, written by some learned and
painstaking scribe, skilful in illumination.

The appearance of the abbot was little changed since we last beheld him;
perhaps care had traced a few more lines in his countenance, and his
general manner was more prompt and decided, now that danger menaced him,
for menace him he knew it did, although he hardly knew from what quarter
the bolt would fall.

A lay brother brought him some slight refreshment, the first he had
taken during the day.

The humility inculcated by each precept of the order forbade the brother
in question to speak until his superior gave him leave to do so; but
Dunstan read at once the desire of his subordinate, and said:

"What hast thou to tell me, Brother Osgood?"

"Many people are without, seeking speech of thee."

"This is the case each day; are there any whose business appears pressing?"

"A company has arrived from Aescendune, or some such place in Mercia,
and two of the party--a priest and a young layman--seek an immediate
interview, saying their business is of life and death."

"Aescendune!--admit them first."

The brother left the cell at once, and soon returned, ushering in Father
Cuthbert and Alfred, who saluted the great churchman with all due
humility, and waited for him to speak, not without much evident
uneasiness; perhaps some little impatience was also manifest.

"Are you of the house of Aescendune, my son?" enquired Dunstan of
Alfred. "Methinks I know you by your likeness to your brother Elfric."

"I am the son of Ella, father; we have been sent on pressing business,
which is notified by this parchment" (presenting the formal request on
the part of the brethren of Aescendune, which was the original cause of
their journey) "but we have yet a more pressing matter to bring before
you: wicked men seek your life, my father."

"I am well aware of that; surely you do not dream, my son, that my eyes
are closed to a fact known throughout unhappy England."

"But, my father, I speak of immediate danger, which God in His great
mercy enabled me to discover but last night; this very night the abbey
will be attacked, and your life or liberty in danger."

"This night!" said Dunstan, in surprise; "and how have you discovered
this? Do not hesitate, my son tell me all."

Thus adjured, Alfred repeated the whole story of his discovery of the
concealed expedition.

"You saw the leaders closely then?" said Dunstan, when he had finished;
"describe the elder one to me."

"A tall dark man, like a foreign soldier, in plain but rich apparel, a
scar on the right cheek."

"Stay, my son, I know him; his name is Redwald, and he is the captain of
the king's bodyguard. Now describe the other with whom he held converse."

"Father, I cannot."

"My son--" but Dunstan paused, for he saw that poor Alfred had covered
his face with his hands, and he at once divined the truth, with full
conviction, at the same time, of the truth and earnestness of Alfred's
statement.

"My son, God can dispose and turn the hearts of all men as seemeth best
to His wisdom; and I doubt not, in answer to our fervent prayers, He
will turn the heart of your poor brother. Meanwhile, we ourselves will
take such precautions as shall spare him the guilt of sacrilege.

"Brother Osgood, summon the prior to my presence, and cause the brethren
to assemble, one and all, in the chapter house: we have need of instant
deliberation."

The lay brother departed, and Dunstan, whose cheerfulness did not desert
him for one moment, chatted familiarly with Father Cuthbert, or perused
the parchment the good father had just presented through Alfred.

"It is a great and pleasing thing," he said, "to behold how our Order is
spreading through this benighted land, and how spiritual children arise
everywhere to our holy father Benedict; surely the time is near at hand
when the wilderness shall blossom as the rose."

The prior, Father Guthlac, entered at this moment, and Dunstan talked
