the sharpest, undoubtedly, Jennet. If I wished to adopt any one, which
unfortunately I'm not in a condition to do, having only bachelor's
chambers in Chancery Lane, it should be you. But I can put you in a way
of making your fortune, Jennet, and that's the next best thing to
adopting you. Indeed, it's much better in my case."

"May my fortune!" cried the little girl, pricking up her ears, "ey
should loike to knoa how ye wad contrive that."

"I'll show you how directly, Jennet," returned Potts. "Pay particular
attention to what I say, and think it over carefully, when you are by
yourself. You are quite aware that there is a great talk about witches
in these parts; and, I may speak it without offence to you, your own
family come under the charge. There is your grandmother Demdike, for
instance, a notorious witch--your mother, Dame Device, suspected--your
brother James suspected."

"Weel, sir," cried Jennet, eyeing him sharply, "what does all this
suspicion tend to?"

"You shall hear, my little dear," returned Potts. "It would not surprise
me, if every one of your family, including yourself, should be arrested,
shut up in Lancaster Castle, and burnt for witches!"

"Alack a day! an this ye ca' makin my fortin," cried Jennet, derisively.
"Much obleeged to ye, sir, boh ey'd leefer be without the luck."

"Listen to me," pursued Potts, chuckling, "and I will point out to you a
way of escaping the general fate of your family--not merely of escaping
it--but of acquiring a large reward. And that is by giving evidence
against them--by telling all you know--you understand--eh!"

"Yeigh, ey think ey _do_ onderstond," replied Jennet, sullenly. "An so
this is your grand scheme, eh, sir?"

"This is my scheme, Jennet," said Potts, "and a notable scheme it is,
my little lass. Think it over. You're an admissible and indeed a
desirable witness; for our sagacious sovereign has expressly observed
that 'bairns,' (I believe you call children 'bairns' in Lancashire,
Jennet; your uncouth dialect very much resembles the Scottish language,
in which our learned monarch writes as well as speaks)--'bairns,' says
he, 'or wives, or never so defamed persons, may of our law serve for
sufficient witnesses and proofs; for who but witches can be proofs, and
so witnesses of the doings of witches.'"

"Boh, ey am neaw witch, ey tell ye, mon," cried Jennet, angrily.

"But you're a witch's bairn, my little lassy," replied Potts, "and
that's just as bad, and you'll grow up to be a witch in due time--that
is, if your career be not cut short. I'm sure you must have witnessed
some strange things when you visited your grandmother at Malkin
Tower--that, if I mistake not, is the name of her abode?--and a fearful
and witch-like name it is;--you must have heard frequent mutterings and
curses, spells, charms, and diabolical incantations--beheld strange and
monstrous visions--listened to threats uttered against people who have
afterwards perished unaccountably."

"Ey've heerd an seen nowt o't sort," replied Jennet; "boh ey' han heerd
my mother threaten yo."

"Ah, indeed," cried Potts, forcing a laugh, but looking rather blank
afterwards; "and how did she threaten me, Jennet, eh?--But no matter.
Let that pass for the moment. As I was saying, you must have seen
mysterious proceedings both at Malkin Tower and your own house. A black
gentleman with a club foot must visit you occasionally, and your mother
must, now and then--say once a week--take a fancy to riding on a
broomstick. Are you quite sure you have never ridden on one yourself,
Jennet, and got whisked up the chimney without being aware of it? It's
the common witch conveyance, and said to be very expeditious and
agreeable--but I can't vouch for it myself--ha! ha! Possibly--though you
are rather young--but possibly, I say, you may have attended a witch's
Sabbath, and seen a huge He-Goat, with four horns on his head, and a
large tail, seated in the midst of a large circle of devoted admirers.
If you have seen this, and can recollect the names and faces of the
assembly, it would be highly important."

"When ey see it, ey shanna forget it," replied Jennet. "Boh ey am nah
quite so familiar wi' Owd Scrat os yo seem to suppose."

"Has it ever occurred to you that Alizon might be addicted to these
practices?" pursued Potts, "and that she obtained her extraordinary and
otherwise unaccountable beauty by some magical process--some charm--some
diabolical unguent prepared, as the Lord Keeper of the Privy Seals, the
singularly learned Lord Bacon, declares, from fat of unbaptised babes,
compounded with henbane, hemlock, mandrake, moonshade, and other
terrible ingredients. She could not be so beautiful without some such
aid."

"That shows how little yo knoaw about it," replied Jennet. "Alizon is os
good as she's protty, and dunna yo think to wheedle me into sayin' out
agen her, fo' yo winna do it. Ey'd dee rayther than harm a hure o' her
heaod."

"Very praiseworthy, indeed, my little dear," replied Potts, ironically.
"I honour you for your sisterly affection; but, notwithstanding all
this, I cannot help thinking she has bewitched Mistress Nutter."

"Licker, Mistress Nutter has bewitched her," replied Jennet.

"Then you think Mistress Nutter is a witch, eh?" cried Potts, eagerly.

"Ey'st neaw tell ye what ey think, mon," rejoined Jennet, doggedly.

"But hear me," cried Potts, "I have my own suspicions, also, nay, more
than suspicions."

"If ye're shure, yo dunna want me," said Jennet.

"But I want a witness," pursued Potts, "and if you'll serve as one--"

"Whot'll ye gi' me?" said Jennet.

"Whatever you like," rejoined Potts. "Only name the sum. So you can
prove the practice of witchcraft against Mistress Nutter--eh?"

Jennet nodded. "Wad ye loike to knoa why brother Jem is gone to Pendle
to-neet?" she said.

"Very much, indeed," replied Potts, drawing still nearer to her. "Very
much, indeed."

The little girl was about to speak, but on a sudden a sharp convulsion
agitated her frame; her utterance totally failed her; and she fell back
in the seat insensible.

Very much startled, Potts flew in search of some restorative, and on
doing so, he perceived Mistress Nutter moving away from this part of the
hall.

"She has done it," he cried. "A piece of witchcraft before my very eyes.
Has she killed the child? No; she breathes, and her pulse beats, though
faintly. She is only in a swoon, but a deep and deathlike one. It would
be useless to attempt to revive her; she must come to in her own way, or
at the pleasure of the wicked woman who has thrown her into this
condition. I have now an assured witness in this girl. But I must keep
watch upon Mistress Nutter's further movements."

And he walked cautiously after her.

As Richard had anticipated, his explanation was perfectly satisfactory
to Dorothy; and the young lady, who had suffered greatly from the
restraint she had imposed upon herself, flew to Alizon, and poured
forth excuses, which were as readily accepted as they were freely made.
They were instantly as great friends as before, and their brief
estrangement only seemed to make them dearer to each other. Dorothy
could not forgive herself, and Alizon assured her there was nothing to
be forgiven, and so they took hands upon it, and promised to forget all
that had passed. Richard stood by, delighted with the change, and
wrapped in the contemplation of the object of his love, who, thus
engaged, seemed to him more beautiful than he had ever beheld her.

Towards the close of the evening, while all three were still together.
Nicholas came up and took Richard aside. The squire looked flushed; and
there was an undefined expression of alarm in his countenance.

"What is the matter?" inquired Richard, dreading to hear of some new
calamity.

"Have you not noticed it, Dick?" said Nicholas, in a hollow tone. "The
portrait is gone."

"What portrait?" exclaimed Richard, forgetting the previous
circumstances.

"The portrait of Isole de Heton," returned Nicholas, becoming more
sepulchral in his accents as he proceeded; "it has vanished from the
wall. See and believe."

"Who has taken it down?" cried Richard, remarking that the picture had
certainly disappeared.

"No mortal hand," replied Nicholas. "It has come down of itself. I knew
what would happen, Dick. I told you the fair votaress gave me the _clin
d'oeil_--the wink. You would not believe me then--and now you see your
mistake."

"I see nothing but the bare wall," said Richard.

"But you will see something anon, Dick," rejoined Nicholas, with a
hollow laugh, and in a dismally deep tone. "You will see Isole herself.
I was foolhardy enough to invite her to dance the brawl with me. She
smiled her assent, and winked at me thus--very significantly, I protest
to you--and she will be as good as her word."

"Absurd!" exclaimed Richard.

"Absurd, sayest thou--thou art an infidel, and believest nothing, Dick,"
cried Nicholas. "Dost thou not see that the picture is gone? She will be
here presently. Ha! the brawl is called for--the very dance I invited
her to. She must be in the room now. I will go in search of her. Look
out, Dick. Thou wilt behold a sight presently shall make thine hair
stand on end."

And he moved away with a rapid but uncertain step.

"The potent wine has confused his brain," said Richard. "I must see that
no mischance befalls him."

And, waving his hand to his sister, he followed the squire, who moved
on, staring inquisitively into the countenance of every pretty damsel he
encountered.

Time had flown fleetly with Dorothy and Alizon, who, occupied with each
other, had taken little note of its progress, and were surprised to find
how quickly the hours had gone by. Meanwhile several dances had been
performed; a Morisco, in which all the May-day revellers took part, with
the exception of the queen herself, who, notwithstanding the united
entreaties of Robin Hood and her gentleman-usher, could not be prevailed
upon to join it: a trenchmore, a sort of long country-dance, extending
from top to bottom of the hall, and in which the whole of the rustics
stood up: a galliard, confined to the more important guests, and in
which both Alizon and Dorothy were included, the former dancing, of
course, with Richard, and the latter with one of her cousins, young
Joseph Robinson: and a jig, quite promiscuous and unexclusive, and not
the less merry on that account. In this way, what with the dances, which
were of some duration--the trenchmore alone occupying more than an
hour--and the necessary breathing-time between them, it was on the
stroke of ten without any body being aware of it. Now this, though a
very early hour for a modern party, being about the time when the first
guest would arrive, was a very late one even in fashionable assemblages
at the period in question, and the guests began to think of retiring,
when the brawl, intended to wind up the entertainment, was called. The
highest animation still prevailed throughout the company, for the
generous host had taken care that the intervals between the dances
should be well filled up with refreshments, and large bowls of spiced
wines, with burnt oranges and crabs floating in them, were placed on the
side-table, and liberally dispensed to all applicants. Thus all seemed
destined to be brought to a happy conclusion.

Throughout the evening Alizon had been closely watched by Mistress
Nutter, who remarked, with feelings akin to jealousy and distrust, the
marked predilection exhibited by her for Richard and Dorothy Assheton,
as well as her inattention to her own expressed injunctions in remaining
constantly near them. Though secretly displeased by this, she put a calm
face upon it, and neither remonstrated by word or look. Thus Alizon,
feeling encouraged in the course she had adopted, and prompted by her
inclinations, soon forgot the interdiction she had received. Mistress
Nutter even went so far in her duplicity as to promise Dorothy, that
Alizon should pay her an early visit at Middleton--though inwardly
resolving no such visit should ever take place. However, she now
received the proposal very graciously, and made Alizon quite happy in
acceding to it.

"I would fain have her go back with me to Middleton when I return," said
Dorothy, "but I fear you would not like to part with your newly-adopted
daughter so soon; neither would it be quite fair to rob you of her. But
I shall hold you to your promise of an early visit."

Mistress Nutter replied by a bland smile, and then observed to Alizon
that it was time for them to retire, and that she had stayed on her
account far later than she intended--a mark of consideration duly
appreciated by Alizon. Farewells for the night were then exchanged
between the two girls, and Alizon looked round to bid adieu to Richard,
but unfortunately, at this very juncture, he was engaged in pursuit of
Nicholas. Before quitting the hall she made inquiries after Jennet, and
receiving for answer that she was still in the hall, but had fallen
asleep in a chair at one corner of the side-table, and could not be
wakened, she instantly flew thither and tried to rouse her, but in vain;
when Mistress Nutter, coming up the next moment, merely touched her
brow, and the little girl opened her eyes and gazed about her with a
bewildered look.

"She is unused to these late hours, poor child," said Alizon. "Some one
must be found to take her home."

"You need not go far in search of a convoy," said Potts, who had been
hovering about, and now stepped up; "I am going to the Dragon myself,
and shall be happy to take charge of her."

"You are over-officious, sir," rejoined Mistress Nutter, coldly; "when
we need your assistance we will ask it. My own servant, Simon
Blackadder, will see her safely home."

And at a sign from her, a tall fellow with a dark, scowling countenance,
came from among the other serving-men, and, receiving his instructions
from his mistress, seized Jennet's hand, and strode off with her. During
all this time, Mistress Nutter kept her eyes steadily fixed on the
little girl, who spoke not a word, nor replied even by a gesture to
Alizon's affectionate good-night, retaining her dazed look to the moment
of quitting the hall.

"I never saw her thus before," said Alizon. "What can be the matter with
her?"

"I think I could tell you," rejoined Potts, glancing maliciously and
significantly at Mistress Nutter.

The lady darted an ireful and piercing look at him, which seemed to
produce much the same consequences as those experienced by Jennet, for
his visage instantly elongated, and he sank back in a chair.

"Oh dear!" he cried, putting his hand to his head; "I'm struck all of a
heap. I feel a sudden qualm--a giddiness--a sort of don't-know-
howishness. Ho, there! some aquavitae--or imperial water--or
cinnamon water--or whatever reviving cordial may be at hand. I feel very
ill--very ill, indeed--oh dear!"

While his requirements were attended to, Mistress Nutter moved away with
her daughter; but they had not proceeded far when they encountered
Richard, who, having fortunately descried them, came up to say
good-night.

The brawl, meanwhile, had commenced, and the dancers were whirling
round giddily in every direction, somewhat like the couples in a grand
polka, danced after a very boisterous, romping, and extravagant fashion.

"Who is Nicholas dancing with?" asked Mistress Nutter suddenly.

"Is he dancing with any one?" rejoined Richard, looking amidst the
crowd.

"Do you not see her?" said Mistress Nutter; "a very beautiful woman with
flashing eyes: they move so quickly, that I can scarce discern her
features; but she is habited like a nun."

"Like a nun!" cried Richard, his blood growing chill in his veins. "'Tis
she indeed, then! Where is he?"

"Yonder, yonder, whirling madly round," replied Mistress Nutter.

"I see him now," said Richard, "but he is alone. He has lost his wits to
dance in that strange manner by himself. How wild, too, is his gaze!"

"I tell you he is dancing with a very beautiful woman in the habit of a
nun," said Mistress Nutter. "Strange I should never have remarked her
before. No one in the room is to be compared with her in loveliness--not
even Alizon. Her eyes seem to flash fire, and she bounds like the wild
roe."

"Does she resemble the portrait of Isole de Heton?" asked Richard,
shuddering.

"She does--she does," replied Mistress Nutter. "See! she whirls past us
now."

"I can see no one but Nicholas," cried Richard.

"Nor I," added Alizon, who shared in the young man's alarm.

"Are you sure you behold that figure?" said Richard, drawing Mistress
Nutter aside, and breathing the words in her ear. "If so, it is a
phantom--or he is in the power of the fiend. He was rash enough to
invite that wicked votaress, Isole de Heton, condemned, it is said, to
penal fires for her earthly enormities, to dance with him, and she has
come."

"Ha!" exclaimed Mistress Nutter.

"She will whirl him round till he expires," cried Richard; "I must free
him at all hazards."

"Stay," said Mistress Nutter; "it is I who have been deceived. Now I
look again, I see that Nicholas is alone."

"But the nun's dress--the wondrous beauty--the flashing eyes!" cried
Richard. "You described Isole exactly."

"It was mere fancy," said Mistress Nutter. "I had just been looking at
her portrait, and it dwelt on my mind, and created the image."

"The portrait is gone," cried Richard, pointing to the empty wall.

Mistress Nutter looked confounded.

And without a word more, she took Alizon, who was full of alarm and
astonishment, by the arm, and hurried her out of the hall.

As they disappeared, the young man flew towards Nicholas, whose
extraordinary proceedings had excited general amazement. The other
dancers had moved out of the way, so that free space was left for his
mad gyrations. Greatly scandalised by the exhibition, which he looked
upon as the effect of intoxication, Sir Ralph called loudly to him to
stop, but he paid no attention to the summons, but whirled on with
momently-increasing velocity, oversetting old Adam Whitworth, Gregory,
and Dickon, who severally ventured to place themselves in his path, to
enforce their master's injunctions, until at last, just as Richard
reached him, he uttered a loud cry, and fell to the ground insensible.
By Sir Ralph's command he was instantly lifted up and transported to his
own chamber.

This unexpected and extraordinary incident put an end to the ball, and
the whole of the guests, after taking a respectful and grateful leave of
the host, departed--not in "most admired" disorder, but full of wonder.
By most persons the squire's "fantastical vagaries," as they were
termed, were traced to the vast quantity of wine he had drunk, but a few
others shook their heads, and said he was evidently bewitched, and that
Mother Chattox and Nance Redferne were at the bottom of it. As to the
portrait of Isole de Heton, it was found under the table, and it was
said that Nicholas himself had pulled it down; but this he obstinately
denied, when afterwards taken to task for his indecorous behaviour; and
to his dying day he asserted, and believed, that he had danced the brawl
with Isole de Heton. "And never," he would say, "had mortal man such a
partner."

From that night the two portraits in the banqueting-hall were regarded
with great awe by the inmates of the Abbey.




CHAPTER X.--THE NOCTURNAL MEETING.


On gaining the head of the staircase leading to the corridor, Mistress
Nutter, whose movements had hitherto been extremely rapid, paused with
her daughter to listen to the sounds arising from below. Suddenly was
heard a loud cry, and the music, which had waxed fast and furious in
order to keep pace with the frenzied boundings of the squire, ceased at
once, showing some interruption had occurred, while from the confused
noise that ensued, it was evident the sudden stoppage had been the
result of accident. With blanched cheek Alizon listened, scarcely daring
to look at her mother, whose expression of countenance, revealed by the
lamp she held in her hand, almost frightened her; and it was a great
relief to hear the voices and laughter of the serving-men as they came
forth with Nicholas, and bore him towards another part of the mansion;
and though much shocked, she was glad when one of them, who appeared to
be Nicholas's own servant, assured the others "that it was only a
drunken fit and that the squire would wake up next morning as if nothing
had happened."

Apparently satisfied with this explanation, Mistress Nutter moved on;
but a new feeling of uneasiness came over Alizon as she followed her
down the long dusky corridor, in the direction of the mysterious
chamber, where they were to pass the night. The fitful flame of the lamp
fell upon many a grim painting depicting the sufferings of the early
martyrs; and these ghastly representations did not serve to re-assure
her. The grotesque carvings on the panels and ribs of the vaulted roof,
likewise impressed her with vague terror, and there was one large piece
of sculpture--Saint Theodora subjected to diabolical temptation, as
described in the Golden Legend--that absolutely scared her. Their
footsteps echoed hollowly overhead, and more than once, deceived by the
sound, Alizon turned to see if any one was behind them. At the end of
the corridor lay the room once occupied by the superior of the religious
establishment, and still known from that circumstance as the "Abbot's
Chamber." Connected with this apartment was the beautiful oratory built
by Paslew, wherein he had kept his last vigils; and though now no longer
applied to purposes of worship, still wearing from the character of its
architecture, its sculptured ornaments, and the painted glass in its
casements, a dim religious air. The abbot's room was allotted to Dorothy
Assheton; and from its sombre magnificence, as well as the ghostly tales
connected with it, had impressed her with so much superstitious
misgiving, that she besought Alizon to share her couch with her, but the
young girl did not dare to assent. Just, however, as Mistress Nutter was
about to enter her own room, Dorothy appeared on the corridor, and,
calling to Alizon to stay a moment, flew quickly towards her, and
renewed the proposition. Alizon looked at her mother, but the latter
decidedly, and somewhat sternly, negatived it.

The young girls then said good-night, kissing each other affectionately,
after which Alizon entered the room with Mistress Nutter, and the door
was closed. Two tapers were burning on the dressing-table, and their
light fell upon the carved figures of the wardrobe, which still
exercised the same weird influence over her. Mistress Nutter neither
seemed disposed to retire to rest immediately, nor willing to talk, but
sat down, and was soon lost in thought. After awhile, an impulse of
curiosity which she could not resist, prompted Alizon to peep into the
closet, and pushing aside the tapestry, partly drawn over the entrance,
she held the lamp forward so as to throw its light into the little
chamber. A mere glance was all she was allowed, but it sufficed to show
her the large oak chest, though the monkish robe lately suspended above
it, and which had particularly attracted her attention, was gone.
Mistress Nutter had noticed the movement, and instantly and somewhat
sharply recalled her.

As Alizon obeyed, a slight tap was heard at the door. The young girl
turned pale, for in her present frame of mind any little matter affected
her. Nor were her apprehensions materially allayed by the entrance of
Dorothy, who, looking white as a sheet, said she did not dare to remain
in her own room, having been terribly frightened, by seeing a monkish
figure in mouldering white garments, exactly resembling one of the
carved images on the wardrobe, issue from behind the hangings on the
wall, and glide into the oratory, and she entreated Mistress Nutter to
let Alizon go back with her. The request was peremptorily refused, and
the lady, ridiculing Dorothy for her fears, bade her return; but she
still lingered. This relation filled Alizon with inexpressible alarm,
for though she did not dare to allude to the disappearance of the
monkish gown, she could not help connecting the circumstance with the
ghostly figure seen by Dorothy.

Unable otherwise to get rid of the terrified intruder, whose presence
was an evident restraint to her, Mistress Nutter, at length, consented
to accompany her to her room, and convince her of the folly of her
fears, by an examination of the oratory. Alizon went with them, her
mother not choosing to leave her behind, and indeed she herself was most
anxious to go.

The abbot's chamber was large and gloomy, nearly twice the size of the
room occupied by Mistress Nutter, but resembling it in many respects, as
well as in the No interdusky hue of its hangings and furniture, most of
which had been undisturbed since the days of Paslew. The very bed, of
carved oak, was that in which he had slept, and his arms were still
displayed upon it, and on the painted glass of the windows. As Alizon
entered she looked round with apprehension, but nothing occurred to
justify her uneasiness. Having raised the arras, from behind which
Dorothy averred the figure had issued, and discovering nothing but a
panel of oak; with a smile of incredulity, Mistress Nutter walked boldly
towards the oratory, the two girls, hand in hand, following tremblingly
after her; but no fearful object met their view. A dressing-table, with
a large mirror upon it, occupied the spot where the altar had formerly
stood; but, in spite of this, and of other furniture, the little place
of prayer, as has previously been observed, retained much of its
original character, and seemed more calculated to inspire sentiments of
devotional awe than any other.

After remaining for a short time in the oratory, during which she
pointed out the impossibility of any one being concealed there, Mistress
Nutter assured Dorothy she might rest quite easy that nothing further
would occur to alarm her, and recommending her to lose the sense of her
fears as speedily as she could in sleep, took her departure with Alizon.

But the recommendation was of little avail. The poor girl's heart died
within her, and all her former terrors returned, and with additional
force. Sitting down, she looked fixedly at the hangings till her eyes
ached, and then covering her face with her hands, and scarcely daring to
breathe, she listened intently for the slightest sound. A rustle would
have made her scream--but all was still as death, so profoundly quiet,
that the very hush and silence became a new cause of disquietude, and
longing for some cheerful sound to break it, she would have spoken aloud
but from a fear of hearing her own voice. A book lay before her, and she
essayed to read it, but in vain. She was ever glancing fearfully
round--ever listening intently. This state could not endure for ever,
and feeling a drowsiness steal over her she yielded to it, and at length
dropped asleep in her chair. Her dreams, however, were influenced by her
mental condition, and slumber was no refuge, as promised by Mistress
Nutter, from the hauntings of terror.

At last a jarring sound aroused her, and she found she had been awakened
by the clock striking twelve. Her lamp required trimming and burnt
dimly, but by its imperfect light she saw the arras move. This could be
no fancy, for the next moment the hangings were raised, and a figure
looked from behind them; and this time it was not the monk, but a female
robed in white. A glimpse of the figure was all Dorothy caught, for it
instantly retreated, and the tapestry fell back to its place against the
wall. Scared by this apparition, Dorothy rushed out of the room so
hurriedly that she forgot to take her lamp, and made her way, she
scarcely knew how, to the adjoining chamber. She did not tap at the
door, but trying it, and finding it unfastened, opened it softly, and
closed it after her, resolved if the occupants of the room were asleep
not to disturb them, but to pass the night in a chair, the presence of
some living beings beside her sufficing, in some degree, to dispel her
terrors. The room was buried in darkness, the tapers being extinguished.

Advancing on tiptoe she soon discovered a seat, when what was her
surprise to find Alizon asleep within it. She was sure it was
Alizon--for she had touched her hair and face, and she felt surprised
that the contact had not awakened her. Still more surprised did she feel
that the young girl had not retired to rest. Again she stepped forward
in search of another chair, when a gleam of light suddenly shot from one
side of the bed, and the tapestry, masking the entrance to the closet,
was slowly drawn aside. From behind it, the next moment, appeared the
same female figure, robed in white, that she had previously beheld in
the abbot's chamber. The figure held a lamp in one hand, and a small
box in the other, and, to her unspeakable horror, disclosed the livid
and contorted countenance of Mistress Nutter.

[Illustration: ALIZON ALARMED AT THE APPEARANCE OF MRS. NUTTER.]

Dreadful though undefined suspicions crossed her mind, and she feared,
if discovered, she should be sacrificed to the fury of this strange and
terrible woman. Luckily, where she stood, though Mistress Nutter was
revealed to her, she herself was screened from view by the hangings of
the bed, and looking around for a hiding-place, she observed that the
mysterious wardrobe, close behind her, was open, and without a moment's
hesitation, she slipped into the covert and drew the door to,
noiselessly. But her curiosity overmastered her fear, and, firmly
believing some magical rite was about to be performed, she sought for
means of beholding it; nor was she long in discovering a small
eyelet-hole in the carving which commanded the room.

Unconscious of any other presence than that of Alizon, whose stupor
appeared to occasion her no uneasiness, Mistress Nutter, placed the lamp
upon the table, made fast the door, and, muttering some unintelligible
words, unlocked the box. It contained two singularly-shaped glass
vessels, the one filled with a bright sparkling liquid, and the other
with a greenish-coloured unguent. Pouring forth a few drops of the
liquid into a glass near her, Mistress Nutter swallowed them, and then
taking some of the unguent upon her hands, proceeded to anoint her face
and neck with it, exclaiming as she did so, "Emen hetan! Emen
hetan!"--words that fixed themselves upon the listener's memory.

Wondering what would follow, Dorothy gazed on, when she suddenly lost
sight of Mistress Nutter, and after looking for her as far as her range
of vision, limited by the aperture, would extend, she became convinced
that she had left the room. All remaining quiet, she ventured, after
awhile, to quit her hiding-place, and flying to Alizon, tried to waken
her, but in vain. The poor girl retained the same moveless attitude, and
appeared plunged in a deathly stupor.

Much frightened, Dorothy resolved to alarm the house, but some fears of
Mistress Nutter restrained her, and she crept towards the closet to see
whether that dread lady could be there. All was perfectly still; and
somewhat emboldened, she returned to the table, where the box, which was
left open and its contents unguarded, attracted her attention.

What was the liquid in the phial? What could it do? These were questions
she asked herself, and longing to try the effect, she ventured at last
to pour forth a few drops and taste it. It was like a potent
distillation, and she became instantly sensible of a strange bewildering
excitement. Presently her brain reeled, and she laughed wildly. Never
before had she felt so light and buoyant, and wings seemed scarcely
wanting to enable her to fly. An idea occurred to her. The wondrous
liquid might arouse Alizon. The experiment should be tried at once, and,
dipping her finger in the phial, she touched the lips of the sleeper,
who sighed deeply and opened her eyes. Another drop, and Alizon was on
her feet, gazing at her in astonishment, and laughing wildly as herself.

Poor girls! how wild and strange they looked--and how unlike themselves!

"Whither are you going?" cried Alizon.

"To the moon! to the stars!--any where!" rejoined Dorothy, with a laugh
of frantic glee.

"I will go with you," cried Alizon, echoing the laugh.

"Here and there!--here and there!" exclaimed Dorothy, taking her hand.
"Emen hetan! Emen hetan!"

As the mystic words were uttered they started away. It seemed as if no
impediments could stop them; how they crossed the closet, passed through
a sliding panel into the abbot's room, entered the oratory, and from it
descended, by a secret staircase, to the garden, they knew not--but
there they were, gliding swiftly along in the moonlight, like winged
spirits. What took them towards the conventual church they could not
say. But they were drawn thither, as the ship was irresistibly dragged
towards the loadstone rock described in the Eastern legend. Nothing
surprised them then, or they might have been struck by the dense vapour,
enveloping the monastic ruins, and shrouding them from view; nor was it
until they entered the desecrated fabric, that any consciousness of what
was passing around returned to them.

Their ears were then assailed by a wild hubbub of discordant sounds,
hootings and croakings as of owls and ravens, shrieks and jarring cries
as of night-birds, bellowings as of cattle, groans and dismal sounds,
mixed with unearthly laughter. Undefined and extraordinary shapes,
whether men or women, beings of this world or of another they could not
tell, though they judged them the latter, flew past with wild whoops and
piercing cries, flapping the air as if with great leathern bat-like
wings, or bestriding black, monstrous, misshapen steeds. Fantastical and
grotesque were these objects, yet hideous and appalling. Now and then a
red and fiery star would whiz crackling through the air, and then
exploding break into numerous pale phosphoric lights, that danced awhile
overhead, and then flitted away among the ruins. The ground seemed to
heave and tremble beneath the footsteps, as if the graves were opening
to give forth their dead, while toads and hissing reptiles crept forth.

Appalled, yet partly restored to herself by this confused and horrible
din, Alizon stood still and kept fast hold of Dorothy, who, seemingly
under a stronger influence than herself, was drawn towards the eastern
end of the fane, where a fire appeared to be blazing, a strong ruddy
glare being cast upon the broken roof of the choir, and the mouldering
arches around it. The noises around them suddenly ceased, and all the
uproar seemed concentrated near the spot where the fire was burning.
Dorothy besought her friend so earnestly to let her see what was going
forward, that Alizon reluctantly and tremblingly assented, and they
moved slowly towards the transept, taking care to keep under the shelter
of the columns.

On reaching the last pillar, behind which they remained, an
extraordinary and fearful spectacle burst upon them. As they had
supposed, a large fire was burning in the midst of the choir, the smoke
of which, ascending in eddying wreaths, formed a dark canopy overhead,
where it was mixed with the steam issuing from a large black bubbling
caldron set on the blazing embers. Around the fire were ranged, in a
wide circle, an assemblage of men and women, but chiefly the latter, and
of these almost all old, hideous, and of malignant aspect, their grim
and sinister features looking ghastly in the lurid light. Above them,
amid the smoke and steam, wheeled bat and flitter-mouse, horned owl and
screech-owl, in mazy circles. The weird assemblage chattered together in
some wild jargon, mumbling and muttering spells and incantations,
chanting fearfully with hoarse, cracked voices a wild chorus, and anon
breaking into a loud and long-continued peal of laughter. Then there was
more mumbling, chattering, and singing, and one of the troop producing a
wallet, hobbled forward.

She was a fearful old crone; hunchbacked, toothless, blear-eyed,
bearded, halt, with huge gouty feet swathed in flannel. As she cast in
the ingredients one by one, she chanted thus:--


          "Head of monkey, brain of cat,
           Eye of weasel, tail of rat,
           Juice of mugwort, mastic, myrrh--
           All within the pot I stir."

"Well sung, Mother Mould-heels," cried a little old man, whose doublet
and hose were of rusty black, with a short cloak, of the same hue, over
his shoulders. "Well sung, Mother Mould-heels," he cried, advancing as
the old witch retired, amidst a roar of laughter from the others, and
chanting as he filled the caldron:

          "Here is foam from a mad dog's lips,
           Gather'd beneath the moon's eclipse,
           Ashes of a shroud consumed,
           And with deadly vapour fumed.
           These within the mess I cast--
           Stir the caldron--stir it fast!"

A red-haired witch then took his place, singing,

          "Here are snakes from out the river,
           Bones of toad and sea-calf's liver;
           Swine's flesh fatten'd on her brood,
           Wolf's tooth, hare's foot, weasel's blood.
           Skull of ape and fierce baboon,
           And panther spotted like the moon;
           Feathers of the horned owl,
           Daw, pie, and other fatal fowl.
           Fruit from fig-tree never sown,
           Seed from cypress never grown.
           All within the mess I cast,
           Stir the caldron--stir it fast!"

Nance Redferne then advanced, and, taking from her wallet a small clay
image, tricked out in attire intended to resemble that of James Device,
plunged several pins deeply into its breast, singing as she did so,
thus,--

          "In his likeness it is moulded,
           In his vestments 'tis enfolded.
           Ye may know it, as I show it!
           In its breast sharp pins I stick,
           And I drive them to the quick.
           They are in--they are in--
           And the wretch's pangs begin.
           Now his heart,
           Feels the smart;
           Through his marrow,
           Sharp as arrow,
           Torments quiver
           He shall shiver,
           He shall burn,
           He shall toss, and he shall turn.
           Unavailingly.
           Aches shall rack him,
           Cramps attack him,
           He shall wail,
           Strength shall fail,
           Till he die
           Miserably!"

As Nance retired, another witch advanced, and sung thus:

          "Over mountain, over valley, over woodland, over waste,
           On our gallant broomsticks riding we have come with
               frantic haste,
           And the reason of our coming, as ye wot well, is to see
           Who this night, as new-made witch, to our ranks shall
               added be."

A wild burst of laughter followed this address, and another wizard
succeeded, chanting thus:

          "Beat the water, Demdike's daughter!
               Till the tempest gather o'er us;
           Till the thunder strike with wonder
               And the lightnings flash before us!
           Beat the water, Demdike's daughter!
           Ruin seize our foes and slaughter!"

As the words were uttered, a woman stepped from out the circle, and
throwing back the grey-hooded cloak in which she was enveloped,
disclosed the features of Elizabeth Device. Her presence in that fearful
assemblage occasioned no surprise to Alizon, though it increased her
horror. A pail of water was next set before the witch, and a broom being
placed in her hand, she struck the lymph with it, sprinkling it aloft,
and uttering this spell:

          "Mount, water, to the skies!
           Bid the sudden storm arise.
           Bid the pitchy clouds advance,
           Bid the forked lightnings glance,
           Bid the angry thunder growl,
           Bid the wild wind fiercely howl!
           Bid the tempest come amain,
           Thunder, lightning, wind, and rain!"

[Illustration: THE INCANTATION.]

As she concluded, clouds gathered thickly overhead, obscuring the
stars that had hitherto shone down from the heavens. The wind suddenly
arose, but in lieu of dispersing the vapours it seemed only to condense
them. A flash of forked lightning cut through the air, and a loud peal
of thunder rolled overhead.

Then the whole troop sang together--

          "Beat the water, Demdike's daughter!
               See the tempests gathers o'er us,
           Lightning flashes--thunder crashes,
               Wild winds sing in lusty chorus!"

For a brief space the storm raged fearfully, and recalled the terror of
that previously witnessed by Alizon, which she now began to think might
have originated in a similar manner. The wind raved around the ruined
pile, but its breath was not felt within it, and the rain was heard
descending in deluging showers without, though no drop came through the
open roof. The thunder shook the walls and pillars of the old fabric,
and threatened to topple them down from their foundations, but they
resisted the shocks. The lightning played around the tall spire
springing from this part of the fane, and ran down from its shattered
summit to its base, without doing any damage. The red bolts struck the
ground innocuously, though they fell at the very feet of the weird
assemblage, who laughed wildly at the awful tumult.

Whilst the storm was at its worst, while the lightning was flashing
fiercely, and the thunder rattling loudly, Mother Chattox, with a
chafing-dish in her hand, advanced towards the fire, and placing the pan
upon it, threw certain herbs and roots into it, chanting thus:--


          "Here is juice of poppy bruised,
           With black hellebore infused;
           Here is mandrake's bleeding root,
           Mixed with moonshade's deadly fruit;
           Viper's bag with venom fill'd,
           Taken ere the beast was kill'd;
           Adder's skin and raven's feather,
           With shell of beetle blent together;
           Dragonwort and barbatus,
           Hemlock black and poisonous;
           Horn of hart, and storax red,
           Lapwing's blood, at midnight shed.
           In the heated pan they burn,
           And to pungent vapours turn.
           By this strong suffumigation,
           By this potent invocation,
           Spirits! I compel you here!
           All who list may call appear!"

After a moment's pause, she resumed as follows:--

          "White-robed brethren, who of old,
           Nightly paced yon cloisters cold,
           Sleeping now beneath the mould!
                              I bid ye rise.

          "Abbots! by the weakling fear'd,
           By the credulous revered,
           Who this mighty fabric rear'd!
                              I bid ye rise!

          "And thou last and guilty one!
           By thy lust of power undone,
           Whom in death thy fellows shun!
                              I bid thee come!

          "And thou fair one, who disdain'd
           To keep the vows thy lips had feign'd;
           And thy snowy garments stain'd!
                              I bid thee come!"

During this invocation, the glee of the assemblage ceased, and they
looked around in hushed expectation of the result. Slowly then did a
long procession of monkish forms, robed in white, glide along the
aisles, and gather round the altar. The brass-covered stones within the
presbytery were lifted up, as if they moved on hinges, and from the
yawning graves beneath them arose solemn shapes, sixteen in number, each
with mitre on head and crosier in hand, which likewise proceeded to the
altar. Then a loud cry was heard, and from a side chapel burst the
monkish form, in mouldering garments, which Dorothy had seen enter the
oratory, and which would have mingled with its brethren at the altar,
but they waved it off menacingly. Another piercing shriek followed, and
a female shape, habited like a nun, and of surpassing loveliness, issued
from the opposite chapel, and hovered near the fire. Content with this
proof of her power, Mother Chattox waved her hand, and the long shadowy
train glided off as they came. The ghostly abbots returned to their
tombs, and the stones closed over them. But the shades of Paslew and
Isole de Heton still lingered.

The storm had wellnigh ceased, the thunder rolled hollowly at intervals,
and a flash of lightning now and then licked the walls. The weird crew
had resumed their rites, when the door of the Lacy chapel flew open, and
a tall female figure came forward.

Alizon doubted if she beheld aright. Could that terrific woman in the
strangely-fashioned robe of white, girt by a brazen zone graven with
mystic characters, with a long glittering blade in her hand, infernal
fury in her wildly-rolling orbs, the livid hue of death on her cheeks,
and the red brand upon her brow--could that fearful woman, with the
black dishevelled tresses floating over her bare shoulders, and whose
gestures were so imperious, be Mistress Nutter? Mother no longer, if it
indeed were she! How came she there amid that weird assemblage? Why did
they so humbly salute her, and fall prostrate before her, kissing the
