and drop silently into the river: Then we must swim to one of those
small wherries which lie at anchor beside the sleeping barges. I
know exactly what course to steer for that; and once aboard, we cut
her loose, and row for dear life down with the tide, till we can
find some deserted spot where we can land, and thence we make our
way back to the coast through the friendly forest, as we planned."

"On foot?"

"Ay, we must leave our good steeds behind; it would be madness to
seek to take them. We are young and strong, and this frost makes
walking easy. We shall speed so well that we may chance to reach
the shelter of the Priory ere night falls on us again, and then the
worst of our troubles will be over. Say, Paul, will you come with
me? Will you follow me?"

"To the death, my prince," answered Paul with enthusiasm; yet even
as he spoke a sort of shiver came over him, as though he had
pronounced his own doom. But he shook it off, and fell to upon the
simple preparations to be made.

These were very simple, and consisted of rolling up into a compact
bundle their outer dress and a change of under tunic, which they
fastened, together with their food wallet and arms, upon their
heads, in the hope that they might keep them from the water. They
slung their boots about their necks, and then, with as little
clothing as possible upon them, commenced their stealthy descent
down the rope, which had been firmly attached as suggested by the
prince. Edward went first, whilst Paul remained in the room to
guard against surprise, and to hold the end if it slipped or gave.
But no such casualty befell; and the moment he heard the slight
splash which told that the prince had reached the water, he swung
himself lightly down the rope, and fell with a soft splash beside
him.

But oh, how cold it was in that dark water! Hardy though the pair
were, it seemed impossible to live in that fearful cold; but they
struck out valiantly into midstream, and presently the exercise of
swimming brought a little life into their benumbed limbs. But glad
indeed was Paul to reach the side of the little wherry which they
intended to purloin, and it was all that their united efforts could
do to clamber in and cut the cord which bound it to the barge.

"We must row hard, Edward," said Paul, with chattering teeth; "it
is our only chance of life. We shall freeze to death if we cannot
get some warmth into our blood. I feel like a block of ice."

They were too much benumbed to try and dress themselves yet, but as
they rowed their hardest along the dark, still water, the life came
ebbing back into their chilled limbs, and with the welcome warmth
came that exultation of heart which always follows escape from
deadly peril. With more and more vigour they bent to their oars,
and at last Edward spoke in a natural voice again.

"Let us float down quietly with the stream a while, Paul, whilst we
don our dry garments, if indeed they are dry. It will be better
here than on shore, where we might chance to be seen and suspected.
I am glowing hot now, freezing night though it be; but I confess I
should be more comfortable rid of these soaking clothes."

So stripping off these, they found, to their great satisfaction,
that the leather jerkins in which the other clothing had been
wrapped had kept everything dry, and the feel of warm and
sufficient clothing was grateful indeed after the icy bath they had
encountered. Their boots were wet, but that mattered little to the
hardy striplings; and when, dressed and armed, they bent to their
oars again, it seemed as if all their spirit and confidence had
come back.

"We have made so good a start that we shall surely prosper," cried
Edward boldly. "Our good friend the peddler will look blank enough
when morning comes and they find the birds are flown."

But Paul could not triumph quite so soon; he was still far from
feeling assured of safety, and feared their escape might be quickly
made known, in which case pursuit would be hot. The best hope lay
in getting into the forest, which might give them shelter, and
enable them to baffle pursuit; but responsibility lay sore upon
him, and he could not be quite as gay as his comrade.

The moon shone out from behind the clouds, and presently they
slipped beneath the arches of the old bridge, and past the grim
fortress of the Tower. Very soon after that, they were gliding
between green and lonely banks in a marshy land, and they presently
effected a landing and struck northward, guiding themselves by the
position of the moon.

It was a strange, desolate country they traversed, and glad enough
was Paul that it was night when they had to cross this unprotected
fiat land. By day they would be visible for miles to the trained
eye of a highwayman, and if pursued would fall an easy prey. But by
crossing this desolate waste at night, when not a living thing was
to be seen, they might gain the dark aisles of the wood by the time
the tardy dawn stole upon them, and once there Paul thought he
could breathe freely again.

All through the long hours of the night the lads trudged onwards
side by side. Paul was more anxious than weary, for he had been
inured to active exercise all his life, and had spent many long
days stalking deer or wandering in search of game across the bleak
hillsides. But Edward, though a hardy youth by nature, and not
altogether ignorant of hardship, had lived of late in the softer
air of courts, and as the daylight struggled into the sky he was so
weary he could scarce set one foot before another.

Yet even as Paul's anxious glance lighted on him he smiled bravely
and pointed onwards, and there before them, in the rising sunlight,
lay the great black forest, stretching backwards as far as eye
could see; and Edward, throwing off his exhaustion by a manful
effort, redoubled his speed, until the pair stood within the
encircling belt of forest land, and paused by mutual consent at the
door of a woodman's cabin.

Travellers were rare in that lone part, but the good folks of the
hut were kindly and hospitable and unsuspicious. Paul produced some
small pieces of silver and asked for food and shelter for a few
hours, as he and his comrade had been benighted, and had been
wandering about in the darkness many hours. The fare was very
coarse and homely, but the famished lads were not disposed to find
fault; and the cabin, if close, was at least warm, and, when a peat
fire had been lighted, was a not altogether uncomfortable place for
wanderers like themselves.

As soon as his hunger was satisfied, Edward lay down upon the floor
and was soon sound asleep; but Paul had no disposition for slumber,
and sat gazing into the glowing turves with earnest, anxious eyes.
The heir of England was in his care, and already probably sought in
many directions by cruel and implacable foes. Until Edward were in
safety, he himself should know no peace. And as if suddenly
inspired by some new thought, he started up and went in search of
the good woman of the cabin, with whom he held a long and earnest
conversation.

When he came back to the other room, it was with a smile of
satisfaction on his face and a queer bundle in his arms, and the
old woman was looking with great wonderment at a gold piece lying
on her palm, and marvelling at the strange caprice of the young and
rich.



Chapter 6: In The Hands Of The Robbers


"But wherefore should I disguise myself rather than you?" cried
Edward, resisting Paul's efforts to clothe him in a long smock
frock, such as the woodmen of those days wore when going about
their avocations. "Our peril is the same, and it is I who have led
you into danger. I will not have it so. We will share in all things
alike. If we are pursued and cannot escape, we will sell our lives
dear, and die together. But let it never be said that I left my
friend and companion to face a danger from which I fled myself."

The boy's eyes flashed as he spoke--he looked the very image of a
prince; and Paul's heart swelled with loving pride, although he
still persisted in his design.

"Listen, Edward," he said, speaking very gravely and resolutely.
"It is needful for our joint safety that we be not seen together,
now that we are entering a region of country where we may easily be
recognized, and where watch may be kept for us. Yes, these woods
may be watched, although, as you have said, it is probable they
will watch even more closely the other routes to the coast. But we
have come slowly, toiling along on foot, and there has been ample
time for a mounted messenger to ride back and give the warning to
such of the robbers as are yet here. They know that the twain of us
are travelling together. Wherefore, for the few miles that separate
us now from the kindly shelter of the Priory, it will be better
that we journey alone. This smock and battered hat will protect you
from recognition, the more so when I have blackened your face with
charcoal, as I have means to do, and have hidden away all your
bright curls so that none shall see them. Walk with bent shoulders
and heavy gait, as the aged country folks do, and I warrant none
will guess who you are or molest you. Tonight, when we meet to
laugh at our adventures over the prior's roaring fire, we shall
forget the perils and the weariness of our long tramp."

"But, Paul, I love not this clumsy disguise. It befits not a prince
thus to clothe himself. Wear it yourself, good comrade, for your
peril is as great as mine."

"Nay, Edward, speak not thus idly," said Paul, with unwonted
gravity. "Princes must think not of themselves alone, but of the
nation's weal. Edward, listen. If harm befalls you, then farewell
to all the fond hopes of half of the people who obey the sway of
England's sceptre. You are not your own master; you are the servant
of your loyal and true-hearted subjects, who have suffered already
so much in the cause. To throw your life away, nay, even to run
into needless peril, were a sin to them and to the country. I say
nothing of your mother's despair, of the anguish of your bride, if
harm befell you: that you must know better than I can do. But I am
a subject. I know what your subjects feel; and were you to neglect
any safeguard, however trivial, in these remaining hours of
threatened danger, you would be doing England a wrong which might
be utterly irreparable."

Edward was struck by this argument, and hesitated.

"I only wish to do what is right; but I cannot bear to play the
coward's part, and save myself when you are still in peril."

"Tush!" answered Paul lightly, "I am tougher than you, Edward; you
are so footsore and weary you can scarce put one leg before the
other. If foes were to spring upon us, you would fall an easy prey
at once. I am strong and full of life. I could lead them a fine
chase yet. But we may never sight an adversary. These woods are
still and silent, and we have heard no sounds of dread import all
these long, weary miles. It may well be that we shall reach the
Priory in safety yet; but it were better now to part company and
take different routes thither. And you must don this warm though
clumsy dress; it will keep you the safer, and shield you from the
piercing cold, which you feel more than I do."

In truth, the youthful prince was nigh worn out from fatigue,
notwithstanding the fact that Paul had contrived to give him almost
the whole of their scanty provision, and had helped him tenderly
over the roughest of the way. It was true, indeed, that had they
been attacked Edward would have fallen an easy prey; but alone in
this disguise, hobbling along with the heavy gait of an aged
rustic, he would attract no suspicion from any robber band. And
Paul was eager to see him thus equipped; for they had reached the
part of the wood which was familiar to both, and the prince could
easily find the shortest and most direct way to the Priory, whilst
he himself would make a short circuit and arrive from another point
with as little delay as possible.

A strong will and a sound argument generally win the day. Edward
submitted at last to be arrayed in the woodman's homely garments,
and was grateful for the warmth they afforded; for he was feeling
the bitter cold of the northern latitude, and was desperately tired
from his long day and night of walking. There was no pretence about
the limping, shuffling gait adopted; for his feet were blistered
and his limbs stiff and aching.

Paul watched him hobbling away, his face looking swarthy and old
beneath the shade of the hat, his shoulders bent, and his blackened
hands grasping a tough ash stick to help himself along; and a smile
of triumph stole over his own countenance as he heaved a long sigh
of relief--for he felt quite certain that in the gathering dusk no
one would suspect the true character of the weary pedestrian, and
that he would reach the shelter of the Priory in safety.

It seemed as if a millstone were rolled from Paul's neck as he
turned from contemplating that retiring figure. The strain upon his
faculties during the past twenty-four hours had been intense, and
when it was removed he felt an immense sensation of relief. But
with that relief came a greater access of fatigue than he had been
conscious of before. He had been spurred along the road by the
sense of responsibility--by the feeling that the safety and perhaps
the life of the young Prince of Wales depended in a great measure
upon his sagacity, endurance, and foresight. To get the prince to
Leigh's Priory, beneath the care of the good monks who were stanch
to the cause of the saintly Henry, was the one aim and object of
his thoughts. He had known all along that the last miles of the
journey would be those most fraught with peril, and to lessen this
peril had been the main purpose on his mind. Having seen the prince
start off on the direct path, so disguised that it was impossible
to anticipate detection, he felt as though his life's work for the
moment were ended, and heaving a great sigh of relief, he sank down
upon a heap of dead leaves, and gave himself up to a brief spell of
repose, which his weary frame did indeed seem to require.

The cold, together with the exhaustion of hunger and fatigue,
sealed his senses for a brief space, and he remembered nothing
more. He fancied his eyes had been closed but for a few seconds,
when some noise close at hand caused him to raise his head with a
start. But the dusk had deepened in the great wood, and he saw that
he must have been asleep for quite half an hour.

He started and listened intently. Yes, there was no mistaking the
sounds. A party of mounted horsemen were approaching him along the
narrow track which wandered through the wood. Paul would have
started to his feet and fled to the thicket, but his benumbed limbs
refused their office. It was freezing hard upon the ground, and he
had lain there till his blood had almost ceased to circulate, and
he was powerless to move.

Yet even then his thoughts were first for Edward, and only second
for himself. He rapidly reviewed the situation.

"They are on the path that he has taken. He has the start, but they
are mounted. Are they in pursuit of anyone? They have dogs with
them: that looks as if they were hunting something. It were better
that they should not come up with Edward. In another half hour he
will be safe at the Priory, if he make good speed, as methinks he
will; for with the hope of speedy ease and rest, even the weariest
traveller plucks up heart and spirit. If they are following him, to
find even me will delay them. If not, they will pass me by
unheeded. I am not likely even to attract their notice. I cannot
escape if I would. I am sore, weary, and chilled beyond power of
flight, and the dogs would hunt me down directly. My best chance is
to rest quiet and tranquil, as if I knew not fear. Perchance they
then will let me go unscathed."

Possibly had Paul's faculties been less benumbed by fatigue and the
bitter cold, he would scarce have argued the case so calmly; but he
was calm with the calmness of physical exhaustion, and in truth his
chance of escape would have been small indeed. He could have made
no real effort at flight, and the very fact of his trying to hide
himself would have brought upon him instant pursuit and capture.

So he lay still, crouching in his nest of leaves, until one of the
dogs suddenly gave a deep bay, and came rushing upon him, as if
indeed he had been the quarry pursued.

"Halt there!" cried a deep voice in the gloom; "the dogs have
found. They never give tongue for a different trail than the right
one.

"Dicon, dismount and see what it is; there is something moving
there be neath that bush."

Seeing himself discovered, Paul rose to his feet, and made a step
forward, though uncertainly, as if his limbs still almost refused
to obey him.

"I am a poor benighted traveller," he said; "I pray you, can you
direct me where I can get food and shelter for the night? I have
been wandering many hours in this forest, and am weary well-nigh to
death."

"Turn the lantern upon him, fellows," said the same voice that had
spoken before; and immediately a bright gleam of light was cast
upon Paul's pale, tired face and golden curling hair.
