sustained by it from the earthquake was slight. The famous Sutro baths,
located near the Cliff House, with the hundreds of thousands of square
feet of glass roofing, also were practically unharmed. Only a few of
the windows in the Sutro baths and the Cliff House were broken, and
the lofty chimney of the pumping plant of the former establishment
was cracked only a trifle. When the situation was finally summed
up, however, nearly three-fourths of the city had to be rebuilt or
remodeled, and the cost of doing this was enough to appal the strongest
hearts.

Financially the prospect was encouraging. Not a bank lost the contents
of its fireproof vaults and remained practically unharmed, so far as
credit was concerned.

For a number of days it was impossible to open any strong boxes on
account of the great heat which the thick walls retained, and this
naturally caused some embarrassment and lack of ready money. Nearly all
of them, however, had strong connections in Eastern cities and large
balances to their credit in other banks of America and Europe. They
were also favored by the fact that the United States Mint and the
Sub-Treasury held between them some $245,000,000 in ready money. The
Secretary of the Treasury immediately deposited $10,000,000 to the
credit of the local banks, and financiers of the great business centres
of the country added to public confidence by prompt statements that they
would facilitate the reconstruction of the city by a liberal advancement
of funds.

One prominent Eastern capitalist expressed the general conviction in the
following words:

"No great city, unless it dried up entirely from lack of commercial life
blood, was ever annihilated by such a disaster as that of San Francisco.
Pompeii and Herculaneum were not great cities in the first place, and in
the second, they were completely covered, smothered as it were, with the
ashes and molten lava of the adjoining volcano, and nearly all of
their inhabitants perished. If it be admitted that three-fourths of the
superstructures, so to speak, of San Francisco, estimated according to
valuation, is destroyed, we have yet the fact remaining that the lives
of only about one four-hundredth of its population have been lost.

"San Francisco was not merely land and the buildings erected upon
it, but it was people, and one of the most active, most hopeful, most
vivacious human communities on the face of the earth. You cannot long
discourage such a community, unless you wipe out three-fourths of
its members. Will San Francisco rise again? Most certainly it will.
Galveston and Baltimore, not to mention Charleston, Boston and Chicago,
showed the spirit of material resurrection in American communities,
sore-smitten by calamity. After Galveston had been made a desert of sand
and debris, there were predictions that it would never rise again. What
was the outcome? A finer Galveston than before, and finer than many
years of slow improvement in the natural course would have made it.
Baltimore is busier commercially than it was before the great fire.

"San Francisco is exceedingly fortunate in the fact that its moneyed
institutions remain strong, with abundant supplies of funds. It is
true that many of them undoubtedly hold large numbers of real estate
mortgages as securities for loans, and that much of the property thus
represented is now in ashes. But with care and an accommodating spirit
practically all of those mortgaged can be so nursed that they will be
made absolutely good. The banks will be found to be only too eager to
afford new loans which will enable realty owners to rebuild. You will
see San Francisco rise a more splendid city than ever, and better
prepared to resist future earthquake shocks. Because it has had this
dreadful visitation is no reason for apprehension that another like it
will come within the life of the present generation, or two or three
after. The destruction of Lisbon in the middle of the eighteenth
century and its subsequent immunity from seismic damage is a reassuring
example."

The municipality was in excellent financial condition to meet and rise
above the extraordinary needs of the situation. It had a bonded debt
of only $4,245,100, while its realty valuation was $402,127,261 and
its personalty $122,258,406. The question of issuing further amounts
of bonds was therefore one of the first measures considered by Mayor
Schmitz and his co-workers, and an appeal was made to the Federal
Government to guarantee the proposed loans, so that the most urgent work
which lay in the city's province could be undertaken at once and without
an excessive burden of interest.

The vast insurance loss was divided among 107 companies, and, though
only a little more than half the damage was covered by policies, the
total swelled toward the colossal sum of $150,000,000. Several of the
largest companies were seriously crippled by the disaster and some were
forced into liquidation. To the great relief of the entire country,
nevertheless, the financial situation was not severely affected, and
there was every reason to believe that the great bulk of the insurance
would be paid.



CHAPTER XIV.

The Earthquake Wave Felt Round the Earth.


The outbreak of earth forces at San Francisco did not stand alone. There
were others elsewhere at nearly the same time, the whole seeming to
indicate a general disturbance in the interior of the earth's crust.
Some scientists, indeed, declared that no possible connection could
exist between the eruption of Mount Vesuvius and the earthquake at San
Francisco, but others were inclined to view certain facts in regard to
recent seismic and volcanic activity as, to say the least, suggestive.

As to the actual cause of the California earthquake, the wisest
confession we can make is that of ignorance, there being almost as
little known as to the origin, period and coming of earthquakes as when
Pliny wrote 1,800 years ago. The Roman observer knew that the tremor
passed like a wave through the surface of the earth; he knew that it
had a given direction, and he knew that certain regions were rife with
seismic disturbance. More he could not say, and when this is said all
has been said that is known to-day.

Setting aside these general considerations, let us return to the
question of the disaster at San Francisco on that fatal morning of April
18th. The shock did not come unexpectedly. A month previous there had
been a severe earthquake in the Island of Formosa, and many lives were
lost there, while an enormous amount of damage was done. Only a few days
before the event in San Francisco there was another earthquake in the
same island. Still greater havoc was caused by it than by the earthquake
in March, but fewer lives were lost, the reason being that the people
were warned in time. Early in April the eruption of Mount Vesuvius
reached its height and devastated the country around the volcano,
covering an enormous territory with ashes, and caused the loss of
hundreds of lives.

On Tuesday night, April 17th, word was received from Piatigorsk,
Circassia, that there had been two severe earthquake shocks the previous
day in Northern Caucasia. The same night a telegram from Madrid said
that the newspapers there reported that the long-dormant volcano on
Palma, the largest of the Canary Islands, was showing signs of eruption,
columns of smoke issuing from the crater.


WIDESPREAD EARTH TREMORS.


While scientists as a rule doubt that there was any connection between
these volcanic phenomena and the earthquake at San Francisco, yet
reports from the Mount Weather observation station in Virginia, a few
miles from Washington, show that the eruptions of Vesuvius acted on
the magnetic instruments by electro-magnetic waves in such a way as
to disturb the electrical potentials at that place. Be this as it may,
there is one remarkable circumstance in regard to all this activity. All
the places mentioned--Formosa, Southern Italy, Caucasia, and the Canary
Islands--lie within a belt bounded by lines a little north of the
fortieth parallel and a little south of the thirtieth parallel. San
Francisco is just south of the fortieth parallel, while Naples is just
north of it. The latitude of Calabria, where the terrible earthquakes
occurred in 1905, is the same as that of the territory affected by the
recent earthquake in the United States. This may or may not have some
bearing on the question.

Whatever be thought of all this, one thing is certain, the earthquake
which laid San Francisco in ruins was felt the world over, wherever
there were instruments in position to detect and record it. The
seismograph in the government observatory at Washington showed that
the first wave, on April 18th, came at 8.19--equivalent to 5.19 at San
Francisco; that at 8.25 there was a stronger wave motion, and that from
8.32 to 8.35 the recording pen was carried off the paper. The vibrations
did not entirely cease until 12.35 P. M., during this period there
having been nearly half an inch of to and fro motion in the surface of
the earth.


RECORDS OF FOREIGN OBSERVATIONS.


From far away New Zealand, on the same date, the government seismograph
at the capital, Wellington, recorded seismic waves that apparently
passed round the earth five times at intervals of about four hours each.

Across the Atlantic, at Heidelberg, in Germany, the records showed
vibrations lasting one hour. At Sarayevo, in Bosnia, there was a sharp
shock at 11 A. M., undulating from west to east. At Funfkirchen, in
Hungary, at Laibach, in Austria, in the Isle of Wight, off the coast
of England, and all through Italy, from north to south, the shocks were
felt.

At Hancock, Mich., a shock was felt on April 19th a mile below the
surface in the Quincy mine of such severity that one man was killed and
four injured by a fall of rock loosened by the trembling of the earth.
There is no evidence, however, that this had any connection with the
California disaster, the dates not coinciding.

Turning to the Far East, across the Pacific, seismographs in the
Imperial University of Tokio showed that the earthquake was felt there
eleven minutes later than in San Francisco, and similar instruments in
Manila detected the arrival of the seismic waves twenty minutes after
the San Francisco shock. In this there was a slight difference in time
compared with Tokio, but, considering the distance, near enough to prove
that the disturbances came from the same source.

Not until the day following was any noticeable disturbance felt in
Honolulu, but on April 19th shocks were plainly felt for six minutes and
the water in the harbor rose rapidly. Panic seemed imminent just before
the shocks subsided. While earthquakes are by no means infrequent in
these islands, this was more severe than any recorded in recent years,
causing buildings to sway to and fro and partly demolishing some of
frail construction.

If, as the majority of men qualified to discuss earthquakes seem to
think, the San Francisco earthquake had no connection with volcanic
action, but was caused by what is technically known as a "fault" in the
formation of the crust of the earth, it seems easy enough to account
for these wave motions travelling round the earth. How widely this may
really have made itself felt it is not possible to say. Several of the
great earthquakes in Japan have been recorded in the seismographs of
the observatories on every continent and in Australia, showing that in
severe disturbances of this kind the whole surface strata quiver, alike
under the oceans and over the continents and islands. At the time of a
shock, of course, half of the world is in darkness and asleep. This is
taken to account for the fact that so far only a few observatories have
reported catching the San Francisco vibrations.

The instruments invented for the recording of the motions of the
earth's crust are looked upon by scientists as the most delicate of all
machines. So highly sensitive are they, indeed, that the very slightest
vibratory motion is recorded perfectly. Even the tread of feet cannot
escape this instrument if sufficient to cause a vibration.

There are three classes of instruments for the automatic recording
of earth tremors, each with its own particular function. First is the
seismoscope, which will merely detect and record the fact that there
has been such a tremor. Some of these are so equipped as to indicate the
time of the disturbance.

Second, is the seismometer, the function of which is to measure the
maximum force of the shock, either with or without an indication of its
direction. The third instrument is the seismograph, which is so arranged
that it will accurately record the number, succession, direction,
amplitude and period of successive oscillations. This last instrument is
by far the most delicate of the three.

In the construction of this earthquake recording machine the maker must
so suspend a heavy body that when its normal position is disturbed in
the most infinitesimal degree no reactionary force will be developed
tending to restore it to its original position. The inventor has never
been found who could accomplish this suspension of a body to perfection.
The seismograph of to-day, however, has reached a stage of perfection
where close approximations are obtained in the records made.



CHAPTER XV.

Vesuvius Devastates the Region of Naples.


We have in other chapters described the terrible work of Mount Vesuvius
in the past, from the far-off era of the destruction of Pompeii down to
the end of the last century. There comes before us now another frightful
eruption, one of the greatest in its history, that of 1906. For thirty
years before this outbreak the mighty volcano had been comparatively
quiet, rarely ceasing, indeed, to smoke and fume, but giving little
indication of the vast forces buried in its heart. It showed some
sympathy with Mont Pelee in 1902, and continued restless after that
time, but it was not until about the middle of February, 1906, that it
became threatening, lava beginning to overflow from the crater and make
its lurid way down the mountain's side.

It was in the middle of the first week of April that these indications
rose to the danger point, the flow of lava suddenly swelling from a
rivulet to a river, pouring in a gleaming flood over the crater's rim,
and meeting the other streams that came streaming down the volcano's
rugged flank. While this went on the mountain remained comparatively
quiet, there being no explosions, though a huge cloud of volcanic ash
and cinders rose high in the air until it hung over the crater in the
shape of an enormous pine tree, while from it a shower of dust and sand,
soon to become terrible, began to descend upon the surrounding fields
and towns.

Dangerous as is Vesuvius at any time, the people of the vicinity dare
its perils for the allurement of its fertile soil. A ring of populous
villages encircles it, flourishing vineyards and olive groves extend
on all sides, and the hand of industry does not hesitate to attack its
threatening flanks. The intervals between its death-dealing throes are
so long that the peasants are always ready to dare destruction for the
hope of winning the means of life from its soil.


THE RIVERS OF LAVA.


All this locality was now a field of terror and death. Down on the
vineyards and villages poured the smothering ashes in an ever increasing
rain; toward them slowly and threateningly crawled the fiery serpents
of the lava streams; and from their homes fled thousands of the
terror-stricken people, frantic with horror and dismay. A number of
populous villages were threatened by the lurid lava streams, the most
endangered being Bosco Trecase, with its 10,000 inhabitants. Toward this
devoted town poured steadily the irresistible flood of molten rock. The
soldiers who had been hurried to the front sought to divert its flow by
digging a wide ditch across its course and throwing up a high bank of
earth, but they worked in vain. The demon of destruction was not to be
robbed of its prey. The liquid stream advanced like a colossal serpent
of fire, turning its head like a crawling snake to the right and left,
but keeping steadily on toward the fated town. The ditch was filled; the
bank gave way; the first house was reached and burst into flames; the
creeping stream of fire pushed on to the next houses in its way; only
then did the despairing people desert their homes and flee for their
lives, carrying with them the little they could snatch of their
treasured possessions.

F. Marion Crawford, the novelist, who was present at this scene, thus
describes the flight of the terrified people:

"I saw men, women and children and infants, whose mothers carried them
at the breast or in their aprons, fleeing in an endless procession.
Dogs, too, and cats were on the carts, and sometimes even chickens, tied
together by the legs, and piles of mattresses and pillows and shapeless
bundles of clothes. All were white with dust. Under the lurid glare I
saw one old woman lying on her back across a cart, ghastly white and,
if not dead already of fear and heat and suffocation, certainly almost
gone. We ourselves could hardly breathe."

It was on Saturday, the 7th, that Bosco Trecase became the prey of the
river of molten rock. During that night and the following day the crisis
of the eruption came. The observatory on the mountain side was occupied
by Professor Matteucci, his assistant, Professor Perret, of New York,
and two domestics, all others having been sent away. Their description
of the scene in which they found themselves is vividly picturesque. At
midnight the situation in the observatory was terrible. The forces
of the earthquake were let loose and the ground rocked so that it
was almost impossible to stand. The roaring of the main crater was
deafening, while the volcano poured forth its contents like a fountain,
and the electric display was terrifying, constant claps of thunder
following the lurid flashes of lightning, which gave the sky a blood-red
hue.

Shortly after three o'clock in the morning the explosive energy of the
mighty mass culminated. The whole cone burst open with a tremendous
earthquake shock, from the heart of the recently silent mountain came a
deafening roar, and red-hot rocks, like the balls from nature's mighty
artillery, were hurled a half mile into the air, while a dense mass of
ashes and sand was flung to three or four times this height. All the
next day the terrible detonation kept up, and a hail of bullet-like
stones poured downward from the skies. Rarely has a more terrible Sunday
been seen. It was as if the demons of earth and air were let loose and
were seeking to destroy man and his puny works.


THE CRISIS OF THE ERUPTION.


This frightful explosion of the 8th of April was the worst of the
dreadful display of volcanic forces, but the work kept up with
diminishing intensity much of the following week. The ashes and cinders
continued to pour down in suffocating showers, covering the ground to
a depth of four or five feet in the vicinity of the volcano and to a
considerable depth at Naples, ten miles away. The sun disappeared
behind the thick cloud that filled the air, and the scene resembled that
described by Pliny more than eighteen hundred years before.

Of Bosco Trecase nothing was left but the large stone church and a few
houses. Another river of lava reached the outskirts of Torre del Greco,
and a third stopped at the cemetery of Torre Annunziata. Those towns
escaped, but thousands of acres of fertile cultivated land, with farm
houses and stock, were destroyed. The peninsular railway up the mountain
was ruined and the large hotel burned. One writer tells the following
tale of what he saw on that fatal Saturday and Sunday:

"On the road I met hundreds of families in flight, carrying their few
miserable possessions. The spectacle of collapsing carts and fainting
women was frequently seen. When one reached the lava stream a stupefying
spectacle presented itself. From a point on the mountain between the
towns I saw four rivers of molten fire, one of which, 200 feet wide
and over 40 deep, was moving slowly and majestically onward, devouring
vineyards and olive groves. I witnessed the destruction of a farm house
enveloped on three sides by lava. Immediately overhead the great crater
was belching incandescent rock and scoria for an incredible distance.
The whole scene was wreathed with flames, and a perpetual roar was
heard. Ever and anon the cone of the volcano was encircled with vivid
electric phenomena, amid which a downpour of liquid fire on all sides of
the crater was revealed in magnificent awfulness. In the evening there
was a frightful shock of earthquake, which was repeated at two o'clock
on Sunday morning. Simultaneously the lava streams redoubled their
onrush, and men, women and children fled precipitately toward the sea.
The lava had invaded the road behind them."


A REIGN OF TERROR.


The great loss of life was due to the vast fall of ashes, which crushed
in hundreds of roofs and buried the occupants within the ruins of their
homes. In all the neighboring towns buildings were destroyed in great
numbers, an early estimate being that fully 5,000 houses had been partly
crushed or utterly destroyed. On the Ottajano side of the mountain,
where the ashes fell in greatest profusion, all the houses of the
villages were damaged, and Ottajano itself was left a wreck, several
hundred dead bodies being taken from its ruins. In Naples the ash fall
was so incessant that those who could afford it wore automobile coats,
caps and goggles, while the people generally sought to save their
eyes and faces by the aid of paper masks and umbrellas. The drivers of
trolley cars were obliged to wear masks of some transparent material
under the vizors of their caps.


DISASTERS AT SAN GIUSEPPE AND NAPLES.


There were two special disasters attended by serious loss of life. On
the 9th, while a congregation of two hundred or more were attending mass
in the church at San Giuseppe, the roof crushed in from the weight of
ashes upon it and fell upon the worshippers below, few or none of whom
escaped unhurt. Fifty-four dead bodies were taken from the ruins and a
large number were severely injured. The Mayor of the town was dismissed
from his office for leaving his post of duty in the face of danger.

The second disaster, one of the same character, took place at Naples.
This was on Tuesday, April 10th. Just previous to it the people had been
marching in religious processions through the streets, to render thanks
for the apparent cessation of the activity of Vesuvius. Motley but
picturesque processions were these, headed by boys carrying candles,
which burned simply in the full sunshine and bearing aloft images of the
Madonna or saints, clad in gorgeous robes of cheap blue or yellow
satin. Their joy was suddenly changed to grief by tidings of a frightful
disaster. The roof of the Monte Oliveto market, fronting on the Toledo,
the main thoroughfare, had suddenly crushed in, burying more than 200
people beneath its heavy fall.

The market had been crowded with buyers and their children, and it was
the busiest hours of the day in the great roofed courtyard, covering a
space 600 feet square, when, with scarcely a tremor of warning, there
came a frightful crash and a dense cloud of dust covered the scene, from
out of which came heartrending screams of agony. The volcanic ash which,
unnoticed, had gathered thickly on the roof, had broken it in by its
weight.

The news set the people frantic with grief and indignation. They
insisted that the authorities knew that the roof was unsafe and had
neglected their duty. Cursing and screaming in their intense excitement,
they surrounded the market, endeavoring with frantic haste to remove the
heavy beams from beneath which came the appealing calls for help, many
of the rescuers sobbing aloud as they worked. It required a large force
of police and soldiers to keep them back and permit the firemen and
other trained workers to carry on more systematically the work of
relief. Twelve persons proved to have been killed, two fatally injured,
twenty-four seriously hurt and over a hundred badly bruised and cut.
Among these were many children, whose parents had sent them to do the
marketing without a dream of danger, and the grief of the parents was
intense. The Duke of Aosta, Prefect of Naples, directed the work of
rescue, while his wife assisted in the care of the injured. As the
Duchess bent in the hospital to give a cooling drink to a badly bruised
little girl she felt a kiss upon her hand. Looking down, she saw a woman
kneeling at her feet, who gratefully said: "Your Excellency, she is all
I have. I am a widow. May God reward you."

While this scene of horror was taking place in Naples the fate of the
town and villages grouped around the foot of the volcano seemed as
