Ethelred there shall be peace from him, and you will but do what
the Danes of Guthrum's host did in the old days--hold the land you
have won from an English overlord."

"A fine overlord, forsooth," said the Dane; "maybe one would think
of it had he been a second Alfred--but Ethelred the Unredy! Not so,
King Olaf. Will you own Cnut, or must we make you?"

"It seems that we shall not agree until we have fought out this
question," said Olaf, laughing a little.

The Dane laughed back.

"Aye, I suppose not. I would that you had a few more men. But that
is a hard lot in the centre."

And so he looked down our line with an unmoved face, and turned his
horse and rode slowly back to his own men. Olaf came back to us
with a confident look enough.

"There is a man worth fighting," he said to me; "he is foster
brother of Thorkel the High, who leads young Cnut, and he seems an
honest warrior enough."

Then all at once his face hardened, and he spoke in the sharp tone
of command:

"Get your spearmen forward--the horsemen are coming first."

And I saw even before he spoke that this was so, for they were
closing in across their line from the wings, and forming up for an
attack that they maybe thought would break the grim ranks of Olaf's
crew who were the strength of our centre.

So I gave the word, and my spearmen came quickly forward through
the viking line, and there stood two deep, setting the butt ends of
their spears firmly in the ground at their feet, and lowering the
points to meet the horses breast high. Olaf bade the front rank
kneel on one knee and take both hands to the spear shaft, and then
the thick hedge of glittering points was double. I had never seen
this plan before, but it was what Olaf had bidden us do if there
was a charge of horsemen. And I stood in the second rank with Prat
beside me, and behind me were the men of Olaf's shield wall. I took
my axe in my right hand instead of the sword, for the heavier
weapon seemed best against what was coming.

Now were the foes ready, even as the spearmen knelt, and a chief
rode out before them and gave the word to charge, and with a great
roar they answered him, spurring their horses and flying down on
us. The arrow shafts rattled on the bow staves as Olaf's vikings
made ready, and I cried to my spearmen to stand steady, for it
seemed as if that thundering charge must sweep the crouching lines
like chaff before it. And as it came we were silent, and no spear
wavered in all the long hedge to right and left of me.

They were but fifty paces from us; and then with hiss and rattle as
of the first gust of a storm in dry branches the arrows flew among
them, smiting man and horse alike, and down went full half of the
foremost line, while over the fallen leapt and plunged those behind
them unchecked, and were upon us sword in air; and the tough spear
shafts bent and cracked, and a great shout went up, and over the
shoulders of my men flashed the viking axes, falling on horses and
dismounted men, and the Danish riders recoiled from the steadfast
spearmen whose line they could not break though they had gapped it
here and there, while the arrows and javelins flew among them
unceasingly.

They drew back disordered, and then from the wings charged our
horsemen and broke them, chasing them back towards their own men in
disorder, while my stolid spearmen closed up again shoulder to
shoulder, and the level hedge of spear points was ready again. But
now they shone no longer, for they were dulled with the crimson
token of their work.

Then the Danish ranks opened, and their horsemen passed through to
the rear, and at once our men wheeled back to their posts on the
wings, shouting in the faces of the Danes as they galloped past
their lines. Then was the ground open between the forces again, but
now it was cumbered with fallen men and horses, and below our spear
points was a ghastly barrier of those who had dared to rush on
them, for spear had begun and axe had finished the work.

"Well done, spearmen!" Olaf cried to us, "now is our turn."

And at his word his vikings took our place, and we were content.
For we had borne the first shock of the battle after all, and had
earned praise. Moreover the whole line cheered us as we fell back
into the second line.

"Now comes the real fighting," said Olaf to me; "stay by my side,
cousin, and you and I will see some sword play together."

So I stood on the left hand, and Ottar was on his right with the
standard, and Prat of Sudbury was next to me. The viking line was
two deep before us, and Olaf's shieldmen and mine were between us
and the rear rank, and my spearmen leant on their weapons behind us
again. But it took us less time to fall into place thus than it has
taken to say how we stood.

And hardly were we steady again before the whole Danish line broke
out into their war song and advanced. Then the song became a hoarse
roar, and their line lapped round to compass our bowed front, and
man to man they flung themselves on us as the storm of darts and
arrows crossed from side to side between us. Then rang the war
chime, the clang of steel on steel loud over Leavenheath, and there
came into my heart again the longing to wipe out the memory of old
defeats, and I gripped my axe and shield and waited for my turn to
come.

There was a little time while I might see all that happened, and at
the first rush I saw Biorn's men give back a pace--no more--and win
their place again. I saw our horsemen watching for a chance to
charge in on the Danish flank, and I saw the Danish riders wheeling
to meet them. Then I must keep my eyes for what was before me, for
men were falling. Then Ottar began to sing, and his voice rose over
the cries of battle, and rang in tune with the sword strokes as it
seemed to me, and with his singing came to me, as to many, the
longing to do great deeds and to fall if I might but be sung thus.

Then I saw a Dane fell one of the vikings, and leap at the men of
Olaf's shield wall, and an axe flashed and he went down. The
fighting was coming nearer to me, and I watched and waited, and I
knew that I had never seen so stern a fight as this, for before me
Olaf's veterans fought against Swein's--the trained thingmen who
held the towns. And neither side had ever known defeat, and it
seemed to me that surely we must fight till all were slain, for
these were men who would not yield.

Then was a gap in the ranks before me for a moment, and through it
glanced like light a long spear with a hook that caught the edge of
Prat's red shield and tore it aside; and I smote it and cut the
shaft in twain, so that it was but wood that darted against Prat's
mail, and he said, "Thanks, master," and smiled at me, for the
ranks had closed up again.

Then before me I saw Egil's black armour, and the mighty form of
the chief who had led the mounted Danes; and they rushed on us and
their men followed them, and in a moment one was shield to shield
with me, and I took his blow on mine, and my stroke went home on
his helm, and he fell at my feet, swaying backwards, while over him
tripped Egil, and lost his footing, and came with a heavy fall
against me, so close and suddenly that I could not strike him or he
me, and I grappled with him and we went down together.

Then my spearmen roared "Out, out!" and charged on the Danes who
had broken our line thus, and I heard Olaf's voice shouting, and
then I was inside our line behind the heels of the men who fought,
and struggling with the Danish chief for mastery.

That was a tough wrestle, but I had been in training with Olaf, and
the Dane had been shut up in the town at ease; and at last he gave
way, and I knelt on his broad chest, drew my seax, and bade him
yield.

"Not I," he said, panting for breath.

But I would not slay a brave warrior who had fallen as I knew by
chance, and so I said--for fighting was too hot for any man to pay
heed to us, as his Danes were trying to reach him through my
spearmen:

"You had better. For you have fought well, and this is but chance."

"Tie me up, then," he growled. "Who are you?"

"Olaf's cousin," said I.

"I can yield to you, then," he said; "take my sword and tie me up,
for I will escape if I can."

Then two spearmen turned and shouted, and went to drive their
weapons into the body of my foe, and I put my shield in the way.

"Strike not a fallen man," I said, and they forebore, ashamed.

Then I loosed the baldric that his sword hung in--his axe was gone
as he fell or wrestled--and took the weapon. And lo! it was sword
Foe's Bane, my father's sword; and I cast away my axe and gripped
the well-known hilt, and bade the spearmen guard my captive, and
turned back into the fight. And all this had gone by in a whirl, as
it were, and the Danes were still striving to regain their lord,
while Olaf and Ottar were smiting unceasingly. Only Prat was gone,
while now our whole line was of spearmen and vikings mingled, and
the Danish line was in no sort of order, but I thought they
prepared for another rush on us.

Then it came, and we were driven back fighting; it slackened, and
we took our ground again. And then I know not what sign Olaf saw in
the faces of the Danes before him, but suddenly he spoke, and our
war horns brayed. Then Ottar raised the standard and pointed it
forward, and there rose a thundering cheer from our whole line as
we charged and swept the Danes before us, spear and axe and sword
cleaving their way unchecked. And surely sword Foe's Bane wiped out
the dishonour of biding in a foeman's power that day.

Then rode our horsemen among the disordered crowd, and that was the
end. The Danes broke and fled, and Olaf had won his seventh battle,
and I had seen victory at last; moreover the sword of Thorgeir was
in my hand.

The light-armed men and the riders followed the flying Danes, and
Olaf sheathed his red sword with the light of victory shining on
his face, and while the men cheered around us he put his hand on my
shoulder and asked if I were hurt.

"I saw you fall, cousin," he said, "but I could not win to you. The
Danes pressed on to reach the man you had down."

"It was Egil," I said. "I am not hurt--are you touched?"

And he was not, but it was our good mail that had saved us both.
There would be work for the armourer by and by before we could wear
it again, for after Egil had fallen I had been beside the king, and
there was no lack of blows before the time had come when our charge
ended the matter. Only three of his six shield men and two of mine
were left.

But Prat was slain, and many another good warrior lay dead where
our line had been.

Now when I looked for Egil he was gone. The two spearmen lay where
I thought he had been, and I looked to find him slain also. So I
asked the men round me, and at last found one who had seen him
dragged up by the rush that bore us back. And so he had escaped.

"That is the chance of war," said Olaf, "but you could not have
slain him with honour."

"Nevertheless," said Ottar, "Redwald has a sure token there that he
overcame him," and he pointed to my sword.

"It is my father's sword," I said. "It has come back to me, even as
you said it would."

"They have not said too much of sword Foe's Bane," Ottar answered.
"For I have seen you use it--and I think that Hneitir is hardly
more handsome."

Now came that which is the most terrible part of a battle, even for
the victors, and that is the calling of the roll. And sad enough
were we when that was done, for the loss was heavy. Yet what the
loss was to the Danes I cannot say, for our men chased them till
there were no two left together to make a stand among those who had
not found safety in the woods that fringe the heath.

Then we bore back our wounded--and they were many--to Bures, and it
was noonday when we reached there. But there was no rest for Olaf
yet, for Colchester must be barred against the Danes.

He and I therefore took a hundred of our men, mounting them on the
freshest of the horses, and covered the nine miles between us and
the town as quickly as we might. Very fair the old place looked to
me as we crossed the Colne and saw the walls among the trees on the
steep hillside, and the houses nestling against it. The gates were
shut, and there was a strong guard along the ramparts on either
side, and we halted and summoned the townsfolk to surrender to
Ethelred in peace.

Doubtless some flying Danes had brought news of how the battle had
gone, for at once the gates were opened to us, and the chief men
came out and prayed for favour at Olaf's hands, and he told them
that Ethelred their king would take no revenge on them for having
bowed to Swein and his mighty force. So there was rejoicing in
Colchester, for it seemed to the townsfolk that peace had surely
come at last, and with it relief from the oppression of the
thingmen. For these warriors had carried matters with a high hand,
so that no Anglian dared to call them aught but lord--it must be
"lord Dane" if they spoke even to the meanest of the hosts and the
gravest burgher must give way to some footman of Swein's if they
met in street or on bridge. So they were not loved.

Olaf bade the townspeople prove their loyalty by taking all the
Danish warriors who were in the place, and bringing them to him on
the market hill where the great roads cross. Then was fighting in
Colchester for a while, but in the end, towards sunset, there was a
sullen gathering of them enough, and many were wounded.

Then the king went and spoke to them.

"What think you that I will do to you?" he asked.

"Even as we would do to you," one said.

"Hang me, maybe?" said Olaf.

"Aye, what else?" the man answered in a careless way, but looking
more anxious than he would wish one to see.

"I do not hang good warriors," the king said. "What would you do if
I gave you life?"

"What bargain do you want to make?" said the Dane.

"If I put you into a ship and let you go, will you promise to take
a message for me to Cnut, and not to come back to England as foes?"

"If that is all, we will do it," the man answered, while his look
grew less careful, and the other men assented readily enough with
the fierce townsmen and their broad spears waiting around them.

"Go and tell Cnut, then, that Ethelred is king, and how you have
fared. That is all I bid you. Are there any Norsemen among you?"

There were eight or ten among the six-score prisoners, and Olaf
spoke aside with them.

"Go back to our own land and say what you have seen of the dealings
of Olaf Haraldsson with those who fight bravely though against him.
And if when you hear that I have returned to Norway you come and
mind me of today, I will give you a place among my own men."

Then they said that they would fain serve him now; but he would not
have that, and then they said that they would surely come to him if
they heard that he was anywhere in their land.

There were two trading busses in the river, and into these vessels
we put the Danes, giving them all they needed to take them back to
Denmark, but leaving them no arms. The townsfolk would have it that
they would return and take revenge in spite of their promise, but
Olaf told them that they must not fear so few men, but rather take
care to be ready against the coming of more.

So the Danes sailed away down the river and to sea, and whether
they kept their promise or not I cannot say. But I think that Olaf
had done somewhat towards preparing a welcome for himself when he
should return to his own land by acting thus. I would that Ethelred
and Eadmund had been wise as he, for by forgiveness they would have
won men to them. But evil counsel was ever waiting on them, and
maybe they are not to blame so much as is he who gave it.

There were no men of note among these Danes whom we took, and we
thought that Ulfkytel would maybe hear of Egil before long, if he
could by any means get his scattered forces together. Yet the rout
was very complete, else he would have been back in Colchester
before us.

The townsfolk made a great feast in Colchester for us that night,
and next day Olaf called the headmen and set all in order for
Ethelred the king. And we thought that the town was safe for him,
for a levy would be made to hold the place at once. We rode back to
Bures in the evening, therefore, taking a few of our men as a guard
lest there should be parties of Danes on the road--a likely thing
enough, as a beaten and disbanded force in a hostile land must live
by plunder, for a time at least. But we met none.



Chapter 8: The White Lady Of Wormingford Mere.


As we rode over the uplands we saw that the Sudbury men would do
all honour to those who had fallen fighting beside them, for they
made a great mound over Olaf's men, and Ailwin our priest was there
with us to see that they had Christian burial with such solemnity
as might be in those troubled days. There might be no chanting of
choir or swinging of censer at that burying; but when the holy
rites were ended Ottar the scald sang the deeds of those who were
gone, while the mound was closed. And that would be what those
valiant warriors loved to hear.

So passed the day, and then were our wounded to be seen; but at
last I might sit quietly in the house on the green and speak all
that I would with Ailwin, and we had much to say. I know not if I
longed or feared now to speak of Hertha, but I would do so. Yet
first I asked Ailwin how he himself had fared when the Danes came;
for I had thought that he would have been slain.

"Aye, my son, that I should have surely been," he said, "but I
found a hiding place until their fury was past, and the host swept
on, leaving but a few among us. Some of these were wounded men, and
you mind that I am skilled in leechcraft. So I dressed myself in a
freeman's garb and tended them, winning their respect at least, if
not gratitude. So I have been the leech ever since, for the church
was burnt, and many a priest was slain, and these Danes are but
half Christian if they are not open pagans; and I might not don my
frock, else would there have been no one left to christen and say
mass and marry for our poor folk in quiet places."

Then I said:

"Where did you find a hiding place, father?"

"It was shown me by one who made me promise--aye and take oath,
moreover, as if my word were not enough--that I would tell no man
where it is. For such a place once known to any but those who use
it is safe no longer."

