
"And the third?"

"Damad Ibrahim, the Grand Vizier. His body we flung out into the piazza
in front of the Seraglio, at the foot of the very fountains which he
himself caused to be built."

Halil Patrona cast a searching look at the Sheik's face, and coldly
replied:

"Know then, oh, Sheik Suleiman, that thou liest, the third corpse was
_not_ the body of Damad Ibrahim the Grand Vizier. It was the body of a
sailor named Manoli, who greatly resembled him, and sacrificed himself
in Damad's behalf. But the Grand Vizier has escaped and none can tell
where he is. Go now, and tell that to those who sent thee hither!"




CHAPTER IX.

THE SETTING AND THE RISING SUN.


The dead bodies of the victims were still lying in the streets when
Sultan Achmed summoned the Ulemas to the cupolaed chamber. His
countenance was dejected and sad.

Before coming to the council-chamber he had kissed all his children, one
by one, and when it came to the turn of his little ten-year-old child,
Bajazid, he saw that the little fellow's eyes were full of tears and he
inquired the reason why. The child replied:

"Father, it is well with those who are thy enemies and grievous for them
that love thee. What then will be our fate who love thee best of all?
Amongst the wives of our brethren thou wilt find more than one in grey
mourning weeds. Look, I prythee, at the face of Ummettulah; look at the
eyes of Sabiha, and the appearance of Ezma. They are all of them widows
and orphans, and it is thou who hast caused their fathers and husbands
to be slain."

"To save thee I have done it," stammered Achmed, pressing the child to
his breast.

"Thou wilt see that thou shalt not save us after all," sighed Bajazid.

In the years to come these words were to be as an eternal echo in the
ears of Achmed.

So he sat on his throne and the Ulemas took their places around him on
the divans covered with kordofan leather. Opposite to him sat the chief
imam, Ispirizade. Sulali sat beside him.

"Lo, the blood of the victims has now been poured forth," said Achmed in
a gloomy, tremulous voice, "I have sacrificed my most faithful servants.
Speak! What more do the rebels require? Why do they still blow their
field trumpets? Why do they still kindle their bivouac fires? What more
do they want?"

And the words of his little son rang constantly in his ears: "It is well
with those who are thy enemies and grievous for them that love thee."

No one replied to the words of the Sultan.

"Answer, I say! What think ye concerning the matter?"

Once more deep silence prevailed. The Ulemas looked at one another. Many
of them began to nudge Sulali, who stood up as if to speak, but
immediately sat down again without opening his mouth.

"Speak, I pray you! I have not called you hither to look at me and at
one another, but to give answers to my questions."

And still the Ulemas kept silence. Dumbly they sat around as if they
were not living men but only embalmed corpses, such as are to be found
in the funeral vaults of the Pharaohs grouped around the royal tombs.

"'Tis wondrous indeed!" said Achmed, when the whole Council had remained
dumb for more than a quarter of an hour. "Are ye all struck dumb then
that ye give me no answer?"

Then at last Ispirizade rose from his place.

"Achmed!" he began--with such discourteous curtness did he address the
Sultan!

"Achmed! 'tis the wish of Halil Patrona that thou descend from the
throne and give it up to Sultan Mahmud...."

Achmed sat bolt upright in his chair. After the words just uttered every
voice in the council-chamber was mute, and in the midst of this dreadful
silence the Ulemas were terrified to behold the Padishah stand on the
steps of the throne, extend his arm towards the imam, fix his eyes
steadily upon him, and open his lips from which never a word proceeded.

Thus for a long time he stood upon the throne with hand outstretched and
parted lips, and his stony eyes fixed steadily upon the imam, and those
who saw it were convulsed by a feeling of horror, and Ispirizade felt
his limbs turn to stone and the light of day grow dim before his eyes
in the presence of that dreadful figure which regarded him and pointed
at him. It was, as it were, a dumb curse--a dumb, overpowering spell,
which left it to God and His destroying angels to give expression to his
wishes, and read in his heart and accomplish that which he himself was
incapable of pronouncing.

The whole trembling assembly collapsed before the Sultan's throne,
crawled to his feet and, moistening them with their tears, exclaimed:

"Pardon, O master! pardon!"

An hour before they had unanimously resolved that Achmed must be made to
abdicate, and now they unanimously begged for pardon. But the deed had
already been done.

The hand of the Padishah that had been raised to curse sank slowly down
again, his eyes half closed, his lips were pressed tightly together, he
thrust his hands into the girdle of his mantle, looked down for a long
time upon the Ulemas, and then quietly descended the steps of the
throne. On reaching the pavement he remained standing by the side of the
throne, and cried in a hollow tremulous voice:

"I have ceased to reign, let a better than I take my place. I demand but
one thing, let those who are at this moment the lords of the dominion of
Osman swear that they will do no harm to my children. Let them swear it
to me on the Alkoran. Take two from amongst you and let them convey my
desire to Halil."

Again a deep silence followed upon Achmed's words. The Ulemas fixed
their gaze upon the ground, not one of them moved or made even a show of
conveying the message.

"Perhaps, then, ye wish the death of my children also? Or is there not
one of you with courage enough to go and speak to them?"

A very aged, tremulous, half paralyzed Ulema was there among them, the
dervish Mohammed, and he it was who at length ventured to speak.

"Oh, my master! who is valiant enough to speak with a raging lion, who
hath wit enough to come to terms with the burning tempest of the Samum,
or who would venture to go on an embassy to the tempest-tost sea and
bandy words therewith?"

Achmed gazed darkly, doubtfully upon the Ulema, and his face wore an
expression of repressed despair.

Sulali had compassion on the Sultan.

"I will go to them," he said reassuringly; "remain here, oh, my master,
till I return. Of a truth I tell thee that I will not come back till
they have sworn to do what thou desirest."

And now Ispirizade said that he also would go with Sulali. He had not
sufficient strength of mind to endure the gaze of the Sultan till
Sulali should return. Far rather would he go with him also to the
rebels. Besides they already understood each other very well.

The envoys found Halil sitting under his tent in the Etmeidan.

Sulali drew near to him and delivered the message of the Sultan.

But he did not deliver it in the words of Achmed. He neither begged nor
implored, nor mingled his request with bitter lamentations as Achmed had
done, but he spoke boldly and sternly, without picking his words, as
Achmed ought to have done.

"The Padishah would have his own life and the lives of his children
guaranteed by oath," said he to the assembled leaders of the people.
"Swear, therefore, on the Alkoran that you will respect them, and swear
it in the names of your comrades likewise. The Padishah is resolved that
if you refuse to take this oath he will blow up the Seraglio and every
living soul within it into the air with gunpowder."

The rebels were impressed by this message, only Halil Patrona smiled. He
knew very well that such a threat as this never arose in the breast of
Achmed. His gentle soul was incapable of such a thing. So he folded his
arms across his breast and smiled.

Then the chief imam fell down in the dust before him, and said in a
humble voice:

"Listen not, O Halil, to the words of my companion. The Padishah humbly
implores you for his life and the lives of his children."

Halil wrinkled his brow and exclaimed angrily:

"Rise up, Ulema, grovel not before me in the name of the Sultan. Those
who would slay him deal not half so badly with them as thou who dost
humiliate him. Sulali is right. The Sultan is capable of great deeds. I
know that the cellars of the Seraglio are full of gunpowder, and I would
not that the blossoms of the Sheik-ul-Islam and the descendants of the
Prophet should perish. Behold, I am ready, and my comrades also, to
swear on the Alkoran to do no harm either to Sultan Achmed, or his sons,
or his daughters, or his daughters' husbands. Whosoever shall raise his
hand against them his head I myself will cut in twain, and make the
avenging Angels of Allah split his soul in twain also, so that each half
may never again find its fellow. Go back and peace rest upon Achmed."

Sulali flew back with the message, but Ispirizade hastened to the Aja
Sophia mosque to give directions for the enthronement of the new Sultan.

Meanwhile Achmed had assembled his sons around him in the cupolaed
chamber, and sitting down on the last step of the throne made them take
their places round his feet, and awaited the message which was to bear
the issues of life and death.

Sulali entered the room with a radiant countenance, carrying in his hand
the copy of the Alkoran, on which Halil and his associates had sworn the
oath required of them. He laid it at the Sultan's feet.

"Live for ever, oh, Sultan!" he cried, "and may thy heart rejoice in the
prosperity of thy children!"

Achmed looked up with a face full of gratitude, and thanked Allah, the
Giver of all good and perfect gifts.

His children embraced him with tears in their eyes, and Achmed did not
forget to extend his hand to Sulali, who first raised it to his forehead
and then pressed it to his lips.

Then Achmed sent the Kizlar-Aga for Sultan Mahmud, surnamed "the White
Prince," from the pallor of his face, to summon him to his presence.

Half an hour later, accompanied by Elhaj Beshir, Prince Mahmud arrived.
He was the son of Mustapha II., who had renounced the throne in favour
of Achmed just as Achmed was now resigning the throne in favour of
Mahmud.

The Sultan arose, hastened towards him, embraced him, and kissed him on
the forehead.

"The people desire thee to ascend the throne. Be merciful to my children
just as I was merciful to thy father's children."

Sultan Mahmud did obeisance to his uncle, and seizing his hand, as if it
were worthy of all honour, reverently kissed it.

Then Achmed beckoned to his sons, and one by one they approached Mahmud,
and kissed his hand. And all the time the Ulemas remained prostrate on
the ground around them.

Then Achmed took the new sovereign by the right hand, and personally
conducted him into the chamber of the Mantle of the Prophet. There,
standing in front of the throne, he took from his hand the diamond
clasp, the symbol of dominion, and with his own hand fastened it to the
turban of the new Sultan, and placing his hand upon his head, solemnly
blessed him.

"Rule and prosper! May those thou lovest love thee also, and may those
that thou hatest fear thee. Be glorious and powerful while thou livest,
and may men bless thy name and magnify thy memory when thou art dead!"

Then Achmed and his children thrice did obeisance to Mahmud, whereupon
taking his two youngest sons by the hand, with a calm and quiet dignity,
he quitted the halls of dominion which he was never to behold again,
abandoning, one after another, every single thing which had hitherto
been so dear to him.

In the Hall of Audience he gave up the Sword of the Prophet to the
Silihdar, who unbuckled it from his body, and when he came to the door
leading to the harem he handed over his children to the Kizlar-Aga,
telling him to greet the Sultana Asseki in his name, and bid her
remember him and teach his little children their father's name.

For henceforth he will see no more his sharp sword, or the fair Adsalis,
or the other dear damsels, or his darling children. He must remain for
ever far away from them behind the walls of a dungeon. A deposed Sultan
has nought whatever to do with swords or wives or children. The same
fate befell Mustapha II. six-and-twenty years before. He also had to
part with his sword, his wives, and his children in just the same way.
And this Achmed had good cause to remember, for then it was that he
ascended the throne. And now he, in his turn, descended from the throne,
and now that had happened to him for his successor's sake which had
happened to his predecessor for his sake.

       *       *       *       *       *

But the great men of the realm bowed their heads to the ground before
Sultan Mahmud and did him homage.

The long procession of those who came to do him obeisance filled all the
apartments of the Seraglio and lasted till midnight. The whole Court
bent head and knee before the new Sultan, and the chief officers of
state, the clergy, and the eunuchs followed suit. Only the captains of
the host and Halil Patrona still remained behind.

Hastily written letters were dispatched to all the captains and to all
the rebels, informing them that Sultan Achmed had been deposed and
Sultan Mahmud was reigning in his stead; let them all come, therefore,
at dawn of day next morning and do homage to the new Padishah.

The moon had long been high in the heavens and was shining through the
coloured windows of the Seraglio when the magnates withdrew and Mahmud
remained alone.

Only the Kizlar-Aga awaited his pleasure--the Kizlar-Aga whose sooty
face seemed to cast a black shadow upon itself.

Mahmud extended his hand to him with a smile that he might kiss it.

And then Elhaj Beshir conducted him to the door of those secret
apartments within which bloom the flowers of bliss and rapture, and
throwing it open bent low while the new Sultan passed through.

Only three among the peris of loveliness had preferred eternal loveless
slavery to the favours of the new Padishah, and among those who smiled
upon the young Sultan as he entered the room, the one who had the
happiest, the most radiant face, was the fair Adsalis, who still
remained the favourite wife, the Sultana Asseki, even after the great
revolution which had turned the whole Empire upside down and made the
least to be the greatest and the greatest to stand lowest of all.

Among so many smiling faces hers was the one towards which the
tremulously happy and enraptured Sultan hastened full of tender
infatuation; she it was whom he raised to his breast and in whose arms
he soothed himself with dreams of glory, while she stifled his anxieties
with her kisses.

Everything was asleep in the Halls of Felicity, only Love was still
awake. Mahmud, forgetful alike of himself and his empire, pressed to his
bosom his dear enchanting Sultana, the most precious of all the
treasures he had won that day; but the fair Sultana shuddered from time
to time in the midst of his burning embrace. It seemed to her as if
someone was standing behind her back, sobbing and sighing and touching
her warm bosom with his cold fingers.

Perchance she could hear the sighing and the sobbing of him who lay
sleepless far, far below that bower of rapture, in one of the cold
vaults of the Place of Oblivion, thinking of his lost Empire and his
lost Eden!

       *       *       *       *       *

Early next morning the chief captains of the host, the Bashas and the
Sheiks, appeared in the Seraglio to greet the new Sultan. It was only
the leaders of the rebels who did not come.

Ever since Sulali had frightened the insurgents by telling them that the
cellars of the Seraglio were full of gunpowder, they did not so much as
venture to draw near it, and when the public criers recited the
invitation of Mahmud in front of the mosques, thousands and thousands of
voices shouted as if from one throat:

"We will not come!"

Not one of them would listen to the invitation from the Seraglio.

"It is a mere ruse," observed the wise Reis-Effendi. "They only want to
entice us into a mouse-trap to crush us all at a blow like flies caught
in honey."

"A short cut into Paradise that would be," scornfully observed Orli,
who, despite his office of softa, did not hesitate to speak
disrespectfully even of Paradise, whither every true believer ought
joyfully to hasten.

Last of all "crazy" Ibrahim gave them a piece of advice.

"'Twill be best," said he, "to gather together from among us our least
useful members--any murderers there may happen to be, or escaped
gaol-birds for instance; call them Halil, Musli, and Suleiman, deck them
out in the garments of Agas, Begs, and Ulemas, and send them to the
Seraglio. Then, if we see them return to us safe and sound, we can, of
course, go ourselves."

This crazy counsel instantly met with general applause. Everyone
approved of it, of that there could be no doubt.

Halil Patrona regarded them all in contemptuous silence. Only when
"crazy" Ibrahim's proposal had been resolved upon did he stand up and
say:

"I myself will go to the Seraglio."

Some of them regarded him with amazement, others laughed. Musli clapped
his hands together in his desperation.

"Halil! dost thou dream or art thou beside thyself? Dost thou imagine
thyself to be one of the Princes of the Thousand and One Nights who can
hew his way through monsters and spectres, or art thou wearied of
beholding the sun from afar and must needs go close up to him?"

"'Tis no concern of thine what I do, and if I am not afraid what need is
there for thee to be afraid on my account?"

"But, prythee, bethink thee, Halil! It would be a much more sensible
jest on thy part to leap into the den of a lioness suckling her young;
and thou wouldst be a much wiser man if thou wert to adventure thyself
in the sulphur holes of Balsorah, or cause thyself to be let down, for
the sake of a bet, into the coral-beds at the bottom of the Sea of
Candia to pick up a bronze asper,[2] instead of going to the Seraglio
where there are now none but thine enemies, and where the very
atmosphere and the spider crawling down the wall is venomous to thee and
