"Perhaps, then, this one may be crying for Baltinglas; for his turn is
likely to come next--not that I believe in such old wives' tales."

"Shamus, my man," said Amyas to the guide, "do you hear that cry in the
bog?"

The guide put on the most stolid of faces, and answered in broken
English--

"Shamus hear naught. Perhaps--what you call him?--fishing in ta pool."

"An otter, he means, and I believe he is right. Stay, no! Did you not
hear it then, Shamus? It was a woman's voice."

"Shamus is shick in his ears ever since Christmas."

"Shamus will go after Desmond if he lies," said Amyas. "Ancient, we had
better send a few men to see what it is; there may be a poor soul taken
by robbers, or perhaps starving to death, as I have seen many a one."

"And I too, poor wretches; and by no fault of their own or ours either:
but if their lords will fall to quarrelling, and then drive each other's
cattle, and waste each other's lands, sir, you know--"

"I know," said Amyas, impatiently; "why dost not take the men, and go?"

"Cry you mercy, noble captain, but--I fear nothing born of woman."

"Well, what of that?" said Amyas, with a smile.

"But these pucks, sir. The wild Irish do say that they haunt the pools;
and they do no manner of harm, sir, when you are coming up to them; but
when you are past, sir, they jump on your back like to apes, sir,--and
who can tackle that manner of fiend?"

"Why, then, by thine own showing, ancient," said Raleigh, "thou may'st
go and see all safely enough, and then if the puck jumps on thee as thou
comest back, just run in with him here, and I'll buy him of thee for a
noble; or thou may'st keep him in a cage, and make money in London by
showing him for a monster."

"Good heavens forefend, Captain Raleigh! but you talk rashly! But if I
must, Captain Leigh--

           'Where duty calls
            To brazen walls,
     How base the slave who flinches'

Lads, who'll follow me?"

"Thou askest for volunteers, as if thou wert to lead a forlorn hope.
Pull away at the usquebaugh, man, and swallow Dutch courage, since thine
English is oozed away. Stay, I'll go myself."

"And I with you," said Raleigh. "As the queen's true knight-errant, I
am bound to be behindhand in no adventure. Who knows but we may find a
wicked magician, just going to cut off the head of some saffron-mantled
princess?" and he dismounted.

"Oh, sirs, sirs, to endanger your precious--"

"Pooh," said Raleigh. "I wear an amulet, and have a spell of art-magic
at my tongue's end, whereby, sir ancient, neither can a ghost see me,
nor I see them. Come with us, Yeo, the Desmond-slayer, and we will shame
the devil, or be shamed by him."

"He may shame me, sir, but he will never frighten me," quoth Yeo; "but
the bog, captains?"

"Tut! Devonshire men, and heath-trotters born, and not know our way over
a peat moor!"

And the three strode away.

They splashed and scrambled for some quarter of a mile to the knoll,
while the cry became louder and louder as they neared.

"That's neither ghost nor otter, sirs, but a true Irish howl, as Captain
Leigh said; and I'll warrant Master Shamus knew as much long ago," said
Yeo.

And in fact, they could now hear plainly the "Ochone, Ochonorie," of
some wild woman; and scrambling over the boulders of the knoll, in
another minute came full upon her.

She was a young girl, sluttish and unkempt, of course, but fair enough:
her only covering, as usual, was the ample yellow mantle. There she sat
upon a stone, tearing her black dishevelled hair, and every now and then
throwing up her head, and bursting into a long mournful cry, "for all
the world," as Yeo said, "like a dumb four-footed hound, and not a
Christian soul."

On her knees lay the head of a man of middle age, in the long soutane of
a Romish priest. One look at the attitude of his limbs told them that he
was dead.

The two paused in awe; and Raleigh's spirit, susceptible of all poetical
images, felt keenly that strange scene,--the bleak and bitter sky, the
shapeless bog, the stunted trees, the savage girl alone with the corpse
in that utter desolation. And as she bent her head over the still face,
and called wildly to him who heard her not, and then, utterly unmindful
of the intruders, sent up again that dreary wail into the dreary air,
they felt a sacred horror, which almost made them turn away, and leave
her unquestioned: but Yeo, whose nerves were of tougher fibre, asked
quietly--

"Shall I go and search the fellow, captain?"

"Better, I think," said Amyas.

Raleigh went gently to the girl, and spoke to her in English. She looked
up at him, his armor and his plume, with wide and wondering eyes, and
then shook her head, and returned to her lamentation.

Raleigh gently laid his hand on her arm, and lifted her up, while Yeo
and Amyas bent over the corpse.

It was the body of a large and coarse-featured man, but wasted and
shrunk as if by famine to a very skeleton. The hands and legs were
cramped up, and the trunk bowed together, as if the man had died of cold
or famine. Yeo drew back the clothes from the thin bosom, while the girl
screamed and wept, but made no effort to stop him.

"Ask her who it is? Yeo, you know a little Irish," said Amyas.

He asked, but the girl made no answer. "The stubborn jade won't tell, of
course, sir. If she were but a man, I'd make her soon enough."

"Ask her who killed him?"

"No one, she says; and I believe she says true, for I can find no wound.
The man has been starved, sirs, as I am a sinful man. God help him,
though he is a priest; and yet he seems full enough down below. What's
here? A big pouch, sirs, stuffed full of somewhat."

"Hand it hither."

The two opened the pouch; papers, papers, but no scrap of food. Then a
parchment. They unrolled it.

"Latin," said Amyas; "you must construe, Don Scholar."

"Is it possible?" said Raleigh, after reading a moment. "This is indeed
a prize! This is Saunders himself!"

Yeo sprang up from the body as if he had touched an adder. "Nick
Saunders, the Legacy, sir?"

"Nicholas Saunders, the legate."

"The villain! why did not he wait for me to have the comfort of killing
him? Dog!" and he kicked the corpse with his foot.

"Quiet! quiet! Remember the poor girl," said Amyas, as she shrieked at
the profanation, while Raleigh went on, half to himself:

"Yes, this is Saunders. Misguided fool, and this is the end! To this
thou hast come with thy plotting and thy conspiring, thy lying and thy
boasting, consecrated banners and Pope's bulls, Agnus Deis and holy
waters, the blessing of all saints and angels, and thy Lady of the
Immaculate Conception! Thou hast called on the heavens to judge between
thee and us, and here is their answer! What is that in his hand, Amyas?
Give it me. A pastoral epistle to the Earl of Ormond, and all nobles of
the realm of Ireland; 'To all who groan beneath the loathsome tyranny
of an illegitimate adulteress, etc., Nicholas Saunders, by the grace
of God, Legate, etc.' Bah! and this forsooth was thy last meditation!
Incorrigible pedant! Victrix causa Diis placuit, sed victa Catoni!"

He ran his eye through various other documents, written in the usual
strain: full of huge promises from the Pope and the king of Spain;
frantic and filthy slanders against Elizabeth, Burghley, Leicester,
Essex (the elder), Sidney, and every great and good man (never mind
of which party) who then upheld the commonweal; bombastic attempts to
terrify weak consciences, by denouncing endless fire against those who
opposed the true faith; fulsome ascriptions of martyrdom and sanctity to
every rebel and traitor who had been hanged for the last twenty
years; wearisome arguments about the bull In Caena Domini, Elizabeth's
excommunication, the nullity of English law, the sacred duty of
rebellion, the right to kill a prince impenitently heretical, and the
like insanities and villainies, which may be read at large in Camden,
the Phoenix Britannicus, Fox's Martyrs, or, surest of all, in the
writings of the worthies themselves.

With a gesture of disgust, Raleigh crammed the foul stuff back again
into the pouch. Taking it with them, they walked back to the company,
and then remounting, marched away once more towards the lands of the
Desmonds; and the girl was left alone with the dead.

An hour had passed, when another Englishman was standing by the wailing
girl, and round him a dozen shockheaded kernes, skene on thigh and
javelin in hand, were tossing about their tawny rags, and adding their
lamentations to those of the lonely watcher.

The Englishman was Eustace Leigh; a layman still, but still at his old
work. By two years of intrigue and labor from one end of Ireland to the
other, he had been trying to satisfy his conscience for rejecting "the
higher calling" of the celibate; for mad hopes still lurked within that
fiery heart. His brow was wrinkled now; his features harshened; the
scar upon his face, and the slight distortion which accompanied it, was
hidden by a bushy beard from all but himself; and he never forgot it for
a day, nor forgot who had given it to him.

He had been with Desmond, wandering in moor and moss for many a month
in danger of his life; and now he was on his way to James Fitz-Eustace,
Lord Baltinglas, to bring him the news of Desmond's death; and with
him a remnant of the clan, who were either too stout-hearted, or too
desperately stained with crime, to seek peace from the English, and, as
their fellows did, find it at once and freely.

There Eustace stood, looking down on all that was left of the most
sacred personage of Ireland; the man who, as he once had hoped, was to
regenerate his native land, and bring the proud island of the West once
more beneath that gentle yoke, in which united Christendom labored for
the commonweal of the universal Church. There he was, and with him all
Eustace's dreams, in the very heart of that country which he had vowed,
and believed as he vowed, was ready to rise in arms as one man, even to
the baby at the breast (so he had said), in vengeance against the Saxon
heretic, and sweep the hated name of Englishman into the deepest abysses
of the surge which walled her coasts; with Spain and the Pope to back
him, and the wealth of the Jesuits at his command; in the midst
of faithful Catholics, valiant soldiers, noblemen who had pledged
themselves to die for the cause, serfs who worshipped him as a
demigod--starved to death in a bog! It was a pretty plain verdict on the
reasonableness of his expectations; but not to Eustace Leigh.

It was a failure, of course; but it was an accident; indeed, to have
been expected, in a wicked world whose prince and master, as all
knew, was the devil himself; indeed, proof of the righteousness of
the cause--for when had the true faith been other than persecuted and
trampled under foot? If one came to think of it with eyes purified from
the tears of carnal impatience, what was it but a glorious martyrdom?

"Blest Saunders!" murmured Eustace Leigh; "let me die the death of the
righteous, and let my last end he like this! Ora pro me, most excellent
martyr, while I dig thy grave upon this lonely moor, to wait there for
thy translation to one of those stately shrines, which, cemented by the
blood of such as thee, shall hereafter rise restored toward heaven, to
make this land once more 'The Isle of Saints.'"

The corpse was buried; a few prayers said hastily; and Eustace Leigh was
away again, not now to find Baltinglas; for it was more than his life
was worth. The girl had told him of the English soldiers who had passed,
and he knew that they would reach the earl probably before he did. The
game was up; all was lost. So he retraced his steps, as a desperate
resource, to the last place where he would be looked for, and after a
month of disguising, hiding, and other expedients, found himself again
in his native county of Devon, while Fitz-Eustace Viscount Baltinglas
had taken ship for Spain, having got little by his famous argument
to Ormond in behalf of his joining the Church of Rome, "Had not thine
ancestor, blessed Thomas of Canterbury, died for the Church of Rome,
thou hadst never been Earl of Ormond." The premises were certainly
sounder than those of his party were wont to be; for it was to expiate
the murder of that turbulent hero that the Ormond lands had been granted
by Henry II.: but as for the conclusion therefrom, it was much on a par
with the rest.

And now let us return to Raleigh and Amyas, as they jog along their
weary road. They have many things to talk of; for it is but three days
since they met.

Amyas, as you see, is coming fast into Raleigh's old opinion of Ireland.
Raleigh, under the inspiration of a possible grant of Desmond's lands,
looks on bogs and rocks transfigured by his own hopes and fancy, as if
by the glory of a rainbow. He looked at all things so, noble fellow,
even thirty years after, when old, worn out, and ruined; well for him
had it been otherwise, and his heart had grown old with his head! Amyas,
who knows nothing about Desmond's lands, is puzzled at the change.

"Why, what is this, Raleigh? You are like children sitting in the
market-place, and nothing pleases you. You wanted to get to Court, and
you have got there; and are lord and master, I hear, or something very
like it, already--and as soon as fortune stuffs your mouth full of
sweet-meats, do you turn informer on her?"

Raleigh laughed insignificantly, but was silent.

"And how is your friend Mr. Secretary Spenser, who was with us at
Smerwick?"

"Spenser? He has thriven even as I have; and he has found, as I have,
that in making one friend at Court you make ten foes; but 'Oderint dum
metuant' is no more my motto than his, Leigh. I want to be great--great
I am already, they say, if princes' favor can swell the frog into an ox;
but I want to be liked, loved--I want to see people smile when I enter."

"So they do, I'll warrant," said Amyas.

"So do hyenas," said Raleigh; "grin because they are hungry, and I may
throw them a bone; I'll throw you one now, old lad, or rather a good
sirloin of beef, for the sake of your smile. That's honest, at least,
I'll warrant, whosoever's else is not. Have you heard of my brother
Humphrey's new project?"

"How should I hear anything in this waste howling wilderness?"

"Kiss hands to the wilderness, then, and come with me to Newfoundland!"

"You to Newfoundland?"

"Yes. I to Newfoundland, unless my little matter here is settled at
once. Gloriana don't know it, and sha'n't till I'm off. She'd send me to
the Tower, I think, if she caught me playing truant. I could hardly get
leave to come hither; but I must out, and try my fortune. I am over ears
in debt already, and sick of courts and courtiers. Humphrey must go next
spring and take possession of his kingdom beyond seas, or his patent
expires; and with him I go, and you too, my circumnavigating giant."

And then Raleigh expounded to Amyas the details of the great
Newfoundland scheme, which whoso will may read in the pages of Hakluyt.

Sir Humphrey Gilbert, Raleigh's half-brother, held a patent for
"planting" the lands of Newfoundland and "Meta Incognita" (Labrador).
He had attempted a voyage thither with Raleigh in 1578, whereof I never
could find any news, save that he came back again, after a heavy brush
with some Spanish ships (in which his best captain, Mr. Morgan, was
killed), having done nothing, and much impaired his own estate: but now
he had collected a large sum; Sir Gilbert Peckham of London, Mr. Hayes
of South Devon, and various other gentlemen, of whom more hereafter, had
adventured their money; and a considerable colony was to be sent out the
next year, with miners, assayers, and, what was more, Parmenius Budaeus,
Frank's old friend, who had come to England full of thirst to see the
wonders of the New World; and over and above this, as Raleigh told Amyas
in strictest secrecy, Adrian Gilbert, Humphrey's brother, was turning
every stone at Court for a patent of discovery in the North-West;
and this Newfoundland colony, though it was to produce gold, silver,
merchandise, and what not, was but a basis of operations, a halfway
house from whence to work out the North-West passage to the Indies--that
golden dream, as fatal to English valor as the Guiana one to
Spanish--and yet hardly, hardly to be regretted, when we remember the
seamanship, the science, the chivalry, the heroism, unequalled in the
history of the English nation, which it has called forth among those
our later Arctic voyagers, who have combined the knight-errantry of the
middle age with the practical prudence of the modern, and dared for duty
more than Cortez or Pizarro dared for gold.

Amyas, simple fellow, took all in greedily; he knew enough of the
dangers of the Magellan passage to appreciate the boundless value of a
road to the East Indies which would (as all supposed then) save half the
distance, and be as it were a private possession of the English, safe
from Spanish interference; and he listened reverently to Sir Humphrey's
quaint proofs, half true, half fantastic, of such a passage, which
Raleigh detailed to him--of the Primum Mobile, and its diurnal motion
from east to west, in obedience to which the sea-current flowed westward
ever round the Cape of Good Hope, and being unable to pass through the
narrow strait between South America and the Antarctic Continent, rushed
up the American shore, as the Gulf Stream, and poured northwestward
between Greenland and Labrador towards Cathay and India; of that most
crafty argument of Sir Humphrey's--how Aristotle in his book "De Mundo,"
and Simon Gryneus in his annotations thereon, declare that the world
(the Old World) is an island, compassed by that which Homer calls the
river Oceanus; ergo, the New World is an island also, and there is
a North-West passage; of the three brothers (names unknown) who had
actually made the voyage, and named what was afterwards called Davis's
Strait after themselves; of the Indians who were cast ashore in Germany
in the reign of Frederic Barbarossa who, as Sir Humphrey had learnedly
proved per modum tollendi, could have come only by the North-West; and
above all, of Salvaterra, the Spaniard, who in 1568 had told Sir Henry
Sidney (Philip's father), there in Ireland, how he had spoken with a
Mexican friar named Urdaneta, who had himself come from Mar del Zur (the
Pacific) into Germany by that very North-West passage; at which last
Amyas shook his head, and said that friars were liars, and seeing
believing; "but if you must needs have an adventure, you insatiable soul
you, why not try for the golden city of Manoa?"

"Manoa?" asked Raleigh, who had heard, as most had, dim rumors of the
place. "What do you know of it?"

Whereon Amyas told him all that he had gathered from the Spaniard; and
Raleigh, in his turn, believed every word.

"Humph!" said he after a long silence. "To find that golden emperor;
offer him help and friendship from the queen of England; defend him
against the Spaniards; if we became strong enough, conquer back all Peru
from the Popish tyrants, and reinstate him on the throne of the Incas,
with ourselves for his body-guard, as the Norman Varangians were to
the effeminate emperors of Byzant--Hey, Amyas? You would make a gallant
chieftain of Varangs. We'll do it, lad!"

"We'll try," said Amyas; "but we must be quick, for there's one Berreo
sworn to carry out the quest to the death; and if the Spaniards once get
thither, their plan of works will be much more like Pizarro's than like
yours; and by the time we come, there will be neither gold nor city
left."

"Nor Indians either, I'll warrant the butchers; but, lad, I am promised
to Humphrey; I have a bark fitting out already, and all I have, and
more, adventured in her; so Manoa must wait."

"It will wait well enough, if the Spaniards prosper no better on the
Amazon than they have done; but must I come with you? To tell the truth,
I am quite shore-sick, and to sea I must go. What will my mother say?"

"I'll manage thy mother," said Raleigh; and so he did; for, to cut a
long story short, he went back the month after, and he not only took
home letters from Amyas to his mother, but so impressed on that good
lady the enormous profits and honors to be derived from Meta Incognita,
and (which was most true) the advantage to any young man of sailing
with such a general as Humphrey Gilbert, most pious and most learned of
seamen and of cavaliers, beloved and honored above all his compeers by
Queen Elizabeth, that she consented to Amyas's adventuring in the
voyage some two hundred pounds which had come to him as his share of
prize-money, after the ever memorable circumnavigation. For Mrs.
Leigh, be it understood, was no longer at Burrough Court. By Frank's
persuasion, she had let the old place, moved up to London with her
eldest son, and taken for herself a lodging somewhere by Palace Stairs,
which looked out upon the silver Thames (for Thames was silver then),
with its busy ferries and gliding boats, across to the pleasant fields
of Lambeth, and the Archbishop's palace, and the wooded Surrey hills;
and there she spent her peaceful days, close to her Frank and to the
Court. Elizabeth would have had her re-enter it, offering her a small
place in the household: but she declined, saying that she was too old
and heart-weary for aught but prayer. So by prayer she lived, under the
sheltering shadow of the tall minster where she went morn and even to
worship, and to entreat for the two in whom her heart was bound up; and
Frank slipped in every day if but for five minutes, and brought with him
Spenser, or Raleigh, or Dyer, or Budaeus or sometimes Sidney's self: and
there was talk of high and holy things, of which none could speak better
than could she; and each guest went from that hallowed room a humbler
and yet a loftier man. So slipped on the peaceful months, and few
and far between came Irish letters, for Ireland was then farther from
Westminster than is the Black Sea now; but those were days in which
wives and mothers had learned (as they have learned once more, sweet
souls!) to walk by faith and not by sight for those they love: and Mrs.
Leigh was content (though when was she not content?) to hear that Amyas
was winning a good report as a brave and prudent officer, sober, just,
and faithful, beloved and obeyed alike by English soldiers and Irish
kernes.

Those two years, and the one which followed, were the happiest which she
had known since her husband's death. But the cloud was fast coming up
the horizon, though she saw it not. A little longer, and the sun would
be hid for many a wintry day.

Amyas went to Plymouth (with Yeo, of course, at his heels), and there
beheld, for the first time, the majestic countenance of the philosopher
of Compton castle. He lodged with Drake, and found him not over-sanguine
as to the success of the voyage.

"For learning and manners, Amyas, there's not his equal; and the queen
may well love him, and Devon be proud of him: but book-learning is not
business: book-learning didn't get me round the world; book-learning
didn't make Captain Hawkins, nor his father neither, the best
ship-builders from Hull to Cadiz; and book-learning, I very much fear,
won't plant Newfoundland."

However, the die was cast, and the little fleet of five sail assembled
in Cawsand Bay. Amyas was to go as a gentleman adventurer on board of
Raleigh's bark; Raleigh himself, however, at the eleventh hour, had been
forbidden by the queen to leave England. Ere they left, Sir Humphrey
Gilbert's picture was painted by some Plymouth artist, to be sent up to
Elizabeth in answer to a letter and a gift sent by Raleigh, which, as a
specimen of the men and of the time, I here transcribe*--


"BROTHER--I have sent you a token from her Majesty, an anchor guided
by a lady, as you see. And further, her Highness willed me to send you
word, that she wisheth you as great good hap and safety to your ship as
if she were there in person, desiring you to have care of yourself as of
that which she tendereth and, therefore, for her sake, you must provide
for it accordingly. Furthermore, she commandeth that you leave your
picture with her. For the rest I leave till our meeting, or to the
report of the bearer, who would needs be the messenger of this good
news. So I commit you to the will and protection of God, who send us
such life and death as he shall please, or hath appointed.

"Richmond, this Friday morning,

"Your true Brother,

"W. RALEIGH."

     * This letter was a few years since in the possession of Mr.
     Pomeroy Gilbert, fort-major at Dartmouth, a descendant of
     the admiral's.

"Who would not die, sir, for such a woman?" said Sir Humphrey (and he
said truly), as he showed that letter to Amyas.

"Who would not? But she bids you rather live for her."

"I shall do both, young man; and for God too, I trust. We are going in
God's cause; we go for the honor of God's Gospel, for the deliverance of
poor infidels led captive by the devil; for the relief of my distressed
countrymen unemployed within this narrow isle; and to God we commit our
cause. We fight against the devil himself; and stronger is He that is
within us than he that is against us."

Some say that Raleigh himself came down to Plymouth, accompanied the
fleet a day's sail to sea, and would have given her majesty the slip,
and gone with them Westward-ho, but for Sir Humphrey's advice. It is
likely enough: but I cannot find evidence for it. At all events, on the
11th June the fleet sailed out, having, says Mr. Hayes, "in number about
260 men, among whom we had of every faculty good choice, as shipwrights,
masons, carpenters, smiths, and such like, requisite for such an action;
also mineral men and refiners. Beside, for solace of our people and
allurement of the savages, we were provided of musique in good variety;
not omitting the least toys, as morris-dancers, hobby-horses, and
May-like conceits, to delight the savage people, whom we intended to win
by all fair means possible." An armament complete enough, even to that
tenderness towards the Indians, which is so striking a feature of
the Elizabethan seamen (called out in them, perhaps, by horror at the
Spanish cruelties, as well as by their more liberal creed), and to the
daily service of God on board of every ship, according to the simple
old instructions of Captain John Hawkins to one of his little squadrons,
"Keep good company; beware of fire; serve God daily; and love one
another"--an armament, in short, complete in all but men. The sailors
had been picked up hastily and anywhere, and soon proved themselves a
mutinous, and, in the case of the bark Swallow, a piratical set. The
mechanics were little better. The gentlemen-adventurers, puffed up with
vain hopes of finding a new Mexico, became soon disappointed and surly
at the hard practical reality; while over all was the head of a sage and
an enthusiast, a man too noble to suspect others, and too pure to
make allowances for poor dirty human weaknesses. He had got his scheme
perfect upon paper; well for him, and for his company, if he had asked
Francis Drake to translate it for him into fact! As early as the second
day, the seeds of failure began to sprout above ground. The men of
Raleigh's bark, the Vice-Admiral, suddenly found themselves seized, or
supposed themselves seized, with a contagious sickness, and at midnight
forsook the fleet, and went back to Plymouth; whereto Mr. Hayes can only
say, "The reason I never could understand. Sure I am that Mr. Raleigh
spared no cost in setting them forth. And so I leave it unto God!"

But Amyas said more. He told Butler the captain plainly that, if the
bark went back, he would not; that he had seen enough of ships deserting
their consorts; that it should never be said of him that he had followed
Winter's example, and that, too, on a fair easterly wind; and finally
that he had seen Doughty hanged for trying to play such a trick; and
that he might see others hanged too before he died. Whereon Captain
Butler offered to draw and fight, to which Amyas showed no repugnance;
whereon the captain, having taken a second look at Amyas's thews and
sinews, reconsidered the matter, and offered to put Amyas on board of
Sir Humphrey's Delight, if he could find a crew to row him.

Amyas looked around.

"Are there any of Sir Francis Drake's men on board?"

"Three, sir," said Yeo. "Robert Drew, and two others."

"Pelicans!" roared Amyas, "you have been round the world, and will you
turn back from Westward-ho?"

There was a moment's silence, and then Drew came forward.

"Lower us a boat, captain, and lend us a caliver to make signals with,
while I get my kit on deck; I'll after Captain Leigh, if I row him
aboard all alone to my own hands."

"If I ever command a ship, I will not forget you," said Amyas.

"Nor us either, sir, we hope; for we haven't forgotten you and your
honest conditions," said both the other Pelicans; and so away over the
side went all the five, and pulled away after the admiral's lantern,
firing shots at intervals as signals. Luckily for the five desperadoes,
the night was all but calm. They got on board before the morning, and so
away into the boundless West.*

     * The Raleigh, the largest ship of the squadron, was of only
     200 tons burden; The Golden Hind, Hayes' ship, which
     returned safe, of 40; and The Squirrel (whereof more
     hereafter), of 10 tons!  In such cockboats did these old
     heroes brave the unknown seas.



CHAPTER XII

HOW BIDEFORD BRIDGE DINED AT ANNERY HOUSE

     "Three lords sat drinking late yestreen,
     And ere they paid the lawing,
     They set a combat them between,
     To fight it in the dawing"--Scotch Ballad.

Every one who knows Bideford cannot but know Bideford bridge; for it is
the very omphalos, cynosure, and soul, around which the town, as a body,
has organized itself; and as Edinburgh is Edinburgh by virtue of its
castle, Rome Rome by virtue of its capitol, and Egypt Egypt by virtue of
its pyramids, so is Bideford Bideford by virtue of its bridge. But all
do not know the occult powers which have advanced and animated the
said wondrous bridge for now five hundred years, and made it the chief
wonder, according to Prince and Fuller, of this fair land of Devon:
being first an inspired bridge, a soul-saving bridge, an alms-giving
bridge, an educational bridge, a sentient bridge, and last, but not
least, a dinner-giving bridge. All do not know how, when it began to
be built some half mile higher up, hands invisible carried the stones
down-stream each night to the present site; until Sir Richard Gurney,
parson of the parish, going to bed one night in sore perplexity and fear
of the evil spirit who seemed so busy in his sheepfold, beheld a vision
of an angel, who bade build the bridge where he himself had so kindly
transported the materials; for there alone was sure foundation amid the
broad sheet of shifting sand. All do not know how Bishop Grandison of
Exeter proclaimed throughout his diocese indulgences, benedictions, and
"participation in all spiritual blessings for ever," to all who would
promote the bridging of that dangerous ford; and so, consulting alike
the interests of their souls and of their bodies, "make the best of both
worlds."

All do not know, nor do I, that "though the foundation of the bridge
is laid upon wool, yet it shakes at the slightest step of a horse;" or
that, "though it has twenty-three arches, yet one Wm. Alford (another
Milo) carried on his back for a wager four bushels salt-water measure,
all the length thereof;" or that the bridge is a veritable esquire,
bearing arms of its own (a ship and bridge proper on a plain field),
and owning lands and tenements in many parishes, with which the said
miraculous bridge has, from time to time, founded charities, built
schools, waged suits at law, and finally (for this concerns us most)
given yearly dinners, and kept for that purpose (luxurious and liquorish
bridge that it was) the best stocked cellar of wines in all Devon.

To one of these dinners, as it happened, were invited in the year 1583
all the notabilities of Bideford, and beside them Mr. St. Leger
of Annery close by, brother of the marshal of Munster, and of Lady
Grenville; a most worthy and hospitable gentleman, who, finding riches
a snare, parted with them so freely to all his neighbors as long as he
lived, that he effectually prevented his children after him from falling
into the temptations thereunto incident.

Between him and one of the bridge trustees arose an argument, whether
a salmon caught below the bridge was better or worse than one caught
above; and as that weighty question could only be decided by practical
experiment, Mr. St. Leger vowed that as the bridge had given him a good
dinner, he would give the bridge one; offered a bet of five pounds that
he would find them, out of the pool below Annery, as firm and flaky a
salmon as the Appledore one which they had just eaten; and then, in the
fulness of his heart, invited the whole company present to dine with him
at Annery three days after, and bring with them each a wife or daughter;
and Don Guzman being at table, he was invited too.

So there was a mighty feast in the great hall at Annery, such as had
seldom been since Judge Hankford feasted Edward the Fourth there; and
while every one was eating their best and drinking their worst, Rose
Salterne and Don Guzman were pretending not to see each other, and
watching each other all the more. But Rose, at least, had to be very
careful of her glances; for not only was her father at the table, but
just opposite her sat none other than Messrs. William Cary and Arthur
St. Leger, lieutenants in her majesty's Irish army, who had returned on
furlough a few days before.

Rose Salterne and the Spaniard had not exchanged a word in the last six
months, though they had met many times. The Spaniard by no means avoided
her company, except in her father's house; he only took care to obey
her carefully, by seeming always unconscious of her presence, beyond the
stateliest of salutes at entering and departing. But he took care, at
the same time, to lay himself out to the very best advantage whenever
he was in her presence; to be more witty, more eloquent, more romantic,
more full of wonderful tales than he ever yet had been. The cunning
Don had found himself foiled in his first tactic; and he was now
trying another, and a far more formidable one. In the first place, Rose
deserved a very severe punishment, for having dared to refuse the love
of a Spanish nobleman; and what greater punishment could he inflict than
withdrawing the honor of his attentions, and the sunshine of his smiles?
There was conceit enough in that notion, but there was cunning too;
for none knew better than the Spaniard, that women, like the world, are
pretty sure to value a man (especially if there be any real worth in
him) at his own price; and that the more he demands for himself, the
more they will give for him.

And now he would put a high price on himself, and pique her pride, as
she was too much accustomed to worship, to be won by flattering it. He
might have done that by paying attention to some one else: but he was
too wise to employ so coarse a method, which might raise indignation, or
disgust, or despair in Rose's heart, but would have never brought her to
his feet--as it will never bring any woman worth bringing. So he quietly
and unobtrusively showed her that he could do without her; and she, poor
fool, as she was meant to do, began forthwith to ask herself--why? What
was the hidden treasure, what was the reserve force, which made him
independent of her, while she could not say that she was independent of
him? Had he a secret? how pleasant to know it! Some huge ambition? how
pleasant to share in it! Some mysterious knowledge? how pleasant to
learn it! Some capacity of love beyond the common? how delicious to have
it all for her own! He must be greater, wiser, richer-hearted than she
was, as well as better-born. Ah, if his wealth would but supply her
poverty! And so, step by step, she was being led to sue in forma
pauperis to the very man whom she had spurned when he sued in like form
to her. That temptation of having some mysterious private treasure, of
being the priestess of some hidden sanctuary, and being able to thank
Heaven that she was not as other women are, was becoming fast too much
for Rose, as it is too much for most. For none knew better than the
Spaniard how much more fond women are, by the very law of their sex,
of worshipping than of being worshipped, and of obeying than of being
obeyed; how their coyness, often their scorn, is but a mask to hide
their consciousness of weakness; and a mask, too, of which they
themselves will often be the first to tire.

And Rose was utterly tired of that same mask as she sat at table at
Annery that day; and Don Guzman saw it in her uneasy and downcast looks,
and thinking (conceited coxcomb) that she must be by now sufficiently
punished, stole a glance at her now and then, and was not abashed when
he saw that she dropped her eyes when they met his, because he saw her
silence and abstraction increase, and something like a blush steal into
her cheeks. So he pretended to be as much downcast and abstracted as she
was, and went on with his glances, till he once found her, poor thing,
looking at him to see if he was looking at her; and then he knew his
prey was safe, and asked her, with his eyes, "Do you forgive me?" and
saw her stop dead in her talk to her next neighbor, and falter, and drop
her eyes, and raise them again after a minute in search of his, that
he might repeat the pleasant question. And then what could she do but
answer with all her face and every bend of her pretty neck, "And do you
forgive me in turn?"

Whereon Don Guzman broke out jubilant, like nightingale on bough, with
story, and jest, and repartee; and became forthwith the soul of the
whole company, and the most charming of all cavaliers. And poor Rose
knew that she was the cause of his sudden change of mood, and blamed
herself for what she had done, and shuddered and blushed at her own
delight, and longed that the feast was over, that she might hurry home
and hide herself alone with sweet fancies about a love the reality of
which she felt she dared not face.

It was a beautiful sight, the great terrace at Annery that afternoon;
with the smart dames in their gaudy dresses parading up and down in twos
and threes before the stately house; or looking down upon the park, with
the old oaks, and the deer, and the broad land-locked river spread out
like a lake beneath, all bright in the glare of the midsummer sun; or
listening obsequiously to the two great ladies who did the honors, Mrs.
St. Leger the hostess, and her sister-in-law, fair Lady Grenville. All
chatted, and laughed, and eyed each other's dresses, and gossiped about
each other's husbands and servants: only Rose Salterne kept apart, and
longed to get into a corner and laugh or cry, she knew not which.

"Our pretty Rose seems sad," said Lady Grenville, coming up to her.
"Cheer up, child! we want you to come and sing to us."

Rose answered she knew not what, and obeyed mechanically.

She took the lute, and sat down on a bench beneath the house, while the
rest grouped themselves round her.

"What shall I sing?"

"Let us have your old song, 'Earl Haldan's Daughter.'"

Rose shrank from it. It was a loud and dashing ballad, which chimed in
but little with her thoughts; and Frank had praised it too, in happier
days long since gone by. She thought of him, and of others, and of her
pride and carelessness; and the song seemed ominous to her: and yet for
that very reason she dared not refuse to sing it, for fear of suspicion
where no one suspected; and so she began per force--


I.

"It was Earl Haldan's daughter, She look'd across the sea; She look'd
across the water, And long and loud laugh'd she; 'The locks of six
princesses Must be my marriage-fee, So hey bonny boat, and ho bonny
boat! Who comes a wooing me?'

II.

"It was Earl Haldan's daughter, She walk'd along the sand; When she was
aware of a knight so fair, Come sailing to the land. His sails were all
of velvet, His mast of beaten gold, And 'hey bonny boat, and ho bonny
boat, Who saileth here so bold?'

III.

"'The locks of five princesses I won beyond the sea; I shore their
golden tresses, To fringe a cloak for thee. One handful yet is wanting,
But one of all the tale; So hey bonny boat, and ho bonny boat! Furl up
thy velvet sail!'

IV.

"He leapt into the water, That rover young and bold; He gript Earl
Haldan's daughter, He shore her locks of gold; 'Go weep, go weep, proud
maiden, The tale is full to-day. Now hey bonny boat, and ho bonny boat!
Sail Westward-ho, and away!'"


As she ceased, a measured voice, with a foreign accent, thrilled through
her.

"In the East, they say the nightingale sings to the rose; Devon, more
happy, has nightingale and rose in one."

"We have no nightingales in Devon, Don Guzman," said Lady Grenville;
"but our little forest thrushes sing, as you hear, sweetly enough to
content any ear. But what brings you away from the gentlemen so early?"

"These letters," said he, "which have just been put into my hand; and
as they call me home to Spain, I was loath to lose a moment of that
delightful company from which I must part so soon."

"To Spain?" asked half-a-dozen voices: for the Don was a general
favorite.

"Yes, and thence to the Indies. My ransom has arrived, and with it
the promise of an office. I am to be Governor of La Guayra in Caracas.
Congratulate me on my promotion."

A mist was over Rose's eyes. The Spaniard's voice was hard and flippant.
Did he care for her, after all? And if he did, was it nevertheless
hopeless? How her cheeks glowed! Everybody must see it! Anything to turn
away their attention from her, and in that nervous haste which makes
people speak, and speak foolishly too, just because they ought to be
silent, she asked--

"And where is La Guayra?"

"Half round the world, on the coast of the Spanish Main. The loveliest
place on earth, and the loveliest governor's house, in a forest of palms
at the foot of a mountain eight thousand feet high: I shall only want a
wife there to be in paradise."

"I don't doubt that you may persuade some fair lady of Seville to
accompany you thither," said Lady Grenville.

"Thanks, gracious madam: but the truth is, that since I have had the
bliss of knowing English ladies, I have begun to think that they are the
only ones on earth worth wooing."

"A thousand thanks for the compliment; but I fear none of our free
English maidens would like to submit to the guardianship of a duenna.
Eh, Rose? how should you like to be kept under lock and key all day by
an ugly old woman with a horn on her forehead?"

Poor Rose turned so scarlet that Lady Grenville knew her secret on the
spot, and would have tried to turn the conversation: but before she
could speak, some burgher's wife blundered out a commonplace about
the jealousy of Spanish husbands; and another, to make matters better,
giggled out something more true than delicate about West Indian masters
and fair slaves.

"Ladies," said Don Guzman, reddening, "believe me that these are but the
calumnies of ignorance. If we be more jealous than other nations, it is
because we love more passionately. If some of us abroad are profligate,
it is because they, poor men, have no helpmate, which, like the
amethyst, keeps its wearer pure. I could tell you stories, ladies, of
the constancy and devotion of Spanish husbands, even in the Indies, as
strange as ever romancer invented."

"Can you? Then we challenge you to give us one at least."

"I fear it would be too long, madam."

"The longer the more pleasant, senor. How can we spend an hour better
this afternoon, while the gentlemen within are finishing their wine?"

Story-telling, in those old times, when books (and authors also, lucky
for the public) were rarer than now, was a common amusement; and as the
Spaniard's accomplishments in that line were well known, all the ladies
crowded round him; the servants brought chairs and benches; and Don
Guzman, taking his seat in the midst, with a proud humility, at Lady
Grenville's feet, began--

"Your perfections, fair and illustrious ladies, must doubtless have
heard, ere now, how Sebastian Cabota, some forty-five years ago, sailed
forth with a commission from my late master, the Emperor Charles the
Fifth, to discover the golden lands of Tarshish, Ophir, and Cipango; but
being in want of provisions, stopped short at the mouth of that mighty
South American river to which he gave the name of Rio de la Plata, and
sailing up it, discovered the fair land of Paraguay. But you may not
have heard how, on the bank of that river, at the mouth of the Rio
Terceiro, he built a fort which men still call Cabot's Tower; nor have
you, perhaps, heard of the strange tale which will ever make the tower a
sacred spot to all true lovers.

"For when he returned to Spain the year after, he left in his tower a
garrison of a hundred and twenty men, under the command of Nuno de Lara,
Ruiz Moschera, and Sebastian da Hurtado, old friends and fellow-soldiers
of my invincible grandfather Don Ferdinando da Soto; and with them
a jewel, than which Spain never possessed one more precious, Lucia
Miranda, the wife of Hurtado, who, famed in the court of the emperor
no less for her wisdom and modesty than for her unrivalled beauty,
had thrown up all the pomp and ambition of a palace, to marry a poor
adventurer, and to encounter with him the hardships of a voyage round
the world. Mangora, the cacique of the neighboring Timbuez Indians (with
whom Lara had contrived to establish a friendship), cast his eyes on
this fair creature, and no sooner saw than he coveted; no sooner coveted
than he plotted, with the devilish subtilty of a savage, to seize by
force what he knew he could never gain by right. She soon found out his
passion (she was wise enough--what every woman is not--to know when she
is loved), and telling her husband, kept as much as she could out of her
new lover's sight; while the savage pressed Hurtado to come and visit
him, and to bring his lady with him. Hurtado, suspecting the snare, and
yet fearing to offend the cacique, excused himself courteously on
the score of his soldier's duty; and the savage, mad with desire and
disappointment, began plotting against Hurtado's life.

"So went on several weeks, till food grew scarce, and Don Hurtado and
Don Ruiz Moschera, with fifty soldiers, were sent up the river on a
foraging party. Mangora saw his opportunity, and leapt at it forthwith.

"The tower, ladies, as I have heard from those who have seen it, stands
on a knoll at the meeting of the two rivers, while on the land side
stretches a dreary marsh, covered with tall grass and bushes; a fit
place for the ambuscade of four thousand Indians, which Mangora, with
devilish cunning, placed around the tower, while he himself went boldly
up to it, followed by thirty men, laden with grain, fruit, game, and all
the delicacies which his forests could afford.

"There, with a smiling face, he told the unsuspecting Lara his sorrow
for the Spaniards' want of food; besought him to accept the provision he
had brought, and was, as he had expected, invited by Lara to come in and
taste the wines of Spain.

"In went he and his thirty fellow-bandits, and the feast continued,
with songs and libations, far into the night, while Mangora often looked
round, and at last boldly asked for the fair Miranda: but she had shut
herself into her lodging, pleading illness.

"A plea, fair ladies, which little availed that hapless dame, for no
sooner had the Spaniards retired to rest, leaving (by I know not what
madness) Mangora and his Indians within, than they were awakened by the
cry of fire, the explosion of their magazine, and the inward rush of the
four thousand from the marsh outside.

"Why pain your gentle ears with details of slaughter? A few fearful
minutes sufficed to exterminate my bewildered and unarmed countrymen, to
bind the only survivors, Miranda (innocent cause of the whole tragedy)
and four other women with their infants, and to lead them away in
triumph across the forest towards the Indian town.

"Stunned by the suddenness of the evils which had passed, and still
more by the thought of those worse which were to come (as she too
well foresaw), Miranda travelled all night through the forest, and was
brought in triumph at day-dawn before the Indian king to receive her
doom. Judge of her astonishment, when, on looking up, she saw that he
was not Mangora.

"A ray of hope flashed across her, and she asked where he was.

