He who would enter the sea of Santo Tome[198-1] ought to stand for a good
league across the mouth to a flat island in the middle, which was named
La Amiga,[198-2] pointing her head towards it. When the ship is within a
stone's-throw of it the course should be altered to make for the eastern
shore, leaving the west side, and this shore, and not the other, should
be kept on board, because a great reef runs out from the west, and even
beyond that there are three sunken rocks. This reef comes within a
lombard-shot of the Amiga island. Between them there are seven fathoms at
least, with a gravelly bottom. Within, a harbor will be found large
enough for all the ships in the world, which would be there without need
of cables. There is another reef with sunken rocks, on the east side of
the island of Amiga, which are extensive and run out to sea, reaching
within two leagues of the cape. But it appeared that between them there
was an entrance, within two lombard-shots of Amiga, on the west side of
Monte Caribatan, where there was a good and very large port.[199-1]


_Tuesday, 25th of December. Christmas_

Navigating yesterday, with little wind, from Santo Tome to Punta Santa,
and being a league from it, at about eleven o'clock at night the Admiral
went down to get some sleep, for he had not had any rest for two days and
a night. As it was calm, the sailor who steered the ship thought he would
go to sleep, leaving the tiller in charge of a boy.[199-2] The Admiral
had forbidden this throughout the voyage, whether it was blowing or
whether it was calm. The boys were never to be entrusted with the helm.
The Admiral had no anxiety respecting sand-banks and rocks, because, when
he sent the boats to that king on Sunday, they had passed to the east of
Punta Santa at least three leagues and a half, and the sailors had seen
all the coast, and the rocks there are from Punta Santa, for a distance
of three leagues to the E.S.E. They saw the course that should be taken,
which had not been the case before, during this voyage. It pleased our
Lord that, at twelve o'clock at night, when the Admiral had retired to
rest, and when all had fallen asleep, seeing that it was a dead calm and
the sea like glass, the tiller being in the hands of a boy, the current
carried the ship on one of the sand-banks. If it had not been night the
bank could have been seen, and the surf on it could be heard for a good
league. But the ship ran upon it so gently that it could scarcely be
felt. The boy, who felt the helm and heard the rush of the sea, cried
out. The Admiral at once came up, and so quickly that no one had felt
that the ship was aground. Presently the master of the ship,[200-1] whose
watch it was, came on deck. The Admiral ordered him and others to launch
the boat, which was on the poop, and lay out an anchor astern. The
master, with several others, got into the boat, and the Admiral thought
that they did so with the object of obeying his orders. But they did so
in order to take refuge with the caravel, which was half a league to
leeward. The caravel would not allow them to come on board acting
judiciously, and they therefore returned to the ship; but the caravel's
boat arrived first. When the Admiral saw that his own people fled in this
way, the water rising and the ship being across the sea, seeing no other
course, he ordered the masts to be cut away and the ship to be lightened
as much as possible, to see if she would come off. But, as the water
continued to rise, nothing more could be done. Her side fell over across
the sea, but it was nearly calm. Then the timbers opened, and the ship
was lost.[200-2] The Admiral went to the caravel to arrange about the
reception of the ship's crew, and as a light breeze was blowing from the
land, and continued during the greater part of the night, while it was
unknown how far the bank extended, he hove her to until daylight. He then
went back to the ship, inside the reef; first having sent a boat on shore
with Diego de Arana of Cordova, alguazil of the fleet, and Pedro
Gutierrez, gentleman of the king's bedchamber, to inform the king, who
had invited the ships to come on the previous Saturday. His town was
about a league and a half from the sand-bank. They reported that he wept
when he heard the news, and he sent all his people with large canoes to
unload the ship. This was done, and they landed all there was between
decks in a very short time. Such was the great promptitude and diligence
shown by that king. He himself, with brothers and relations, was actively
assisting as well in the ship as in the care of the property when it was
landed, that all might be properly guarded. Now and then he sent one of
his relations weeping to the Admiral, to console him, saying that he must
not feel sorrow or annoyance, for he would supply all that was needed.
The Admiral assured the Sovereigns that there could not have been such
good watch kept in any part of Castile, for that there was not even a
needle missing. He ordered that all the property should be placed by some
houses which the king placed at his disposal, until they were emptied,
when everything would be stowed and guarded in them. Armed men were
placed round the stores to watch all night. "The king and all his people
wept [says the Admiral]. They are a loving people, without covetousness,
and fit for anything; and I assure your Highnesses that there is no
better land nor people. They love their neighbors as themselves, and
their speech is the sweetest and gentlest in the world, and always with a
smile. Men and women go as naked as when their mothers bore them. Your
Highnesses should believe that they have very good customs among
themselves. The king is a man of remarkable presence, and with a certain
self-contained manner that is a pleasure to see. They have good memories,
wish to see everything, and ask the use of what they see." All this is
written by the Admiral.


_Wednesday, 26th of December_

To-day, at sunrise, the king of that land came to the caravel Nina where
the Admiral was, and said to him, almost weeping, that he need not be
sorry, for that he would give him all he had; that he had placed two
large houses at the disposal of the Christians who were on shore, and
that he would give more if they were required, and as many canoes as
could load from the ship and discharge on shore, with as many people as
were wanted. This had all been done yesterday, without so much as a
needle being missed. "So honest are they," says the Admiral, "without any
covetousness for the goods of others, and so above all was that virtuous
king." While the Admiral was talking to him, another canoe arrived from a
different place, bringing some pieces of gold, which the people in the
canoe wanted to exchange for a hawk's bell; for there was nothing they
desired more than these bells. They had scarcely come alongside when they
called and held up the gold, saying _Chuq chuq_ for the bells, for they
are quite mad about them. After the king had seen this, and when the
canoes which came from other places had departed, he called the Admiral
and asked him to give orders that one of the bells was to be kept for
another day, when he would bring four pieces of gold the size of a man's
hand. The Admiral rejoiced to hear this, and afterwards a sailor, who
came from the shore, told him that it was wonderful what pieces of gold
the men on shore were getting in exchange for next to nothing. For a
needle they got a piece of gold worth two _castellanos_, and that this
was nothing to what it would be within a month. The king rejoiced much
when he saw that the Admiral was pleased. He understood that his friend
wanted much gold, and he said, by signs, that he knew where there was, in
the vicinity, a very large quantity; so that he must be in good heart,
for he should have as much as he wanted. He gave some account of it,
especially saying that in Cipango, which they call Cibao,[202-1] it is so
abundant that it is of no value, and that they will bring it, although
there is also much more in the island of Espanola, which they call Bohio,
and in the province of Caritaba. The king dined on board the caravel with
the Admiral and afterwards went on shore, where he received the Admiral
with much honor. He gave him a collation consisting of three or four
kinds of _ajes_, with shrimps and game, and other viands they have,
besides the bread they call _cazavi_.[202-2] He then took the Admiral to
see some groves of trees near the houses, and they were accompanied by
at least a thousand people, all naked. The lord had on a shirt and a pair
of gloves, given to him by the Admiral, and he was more delighted with
the gloves than with anything else. In his manner of eating, both as
regards the high-bred air and the peculiar cleanliness he clearly showed
his nobility. After he had eaten, he remained some time at table, and
they brought him certain herbs, with which he rubbed his hands. The
Admiral thought that this was done to make them soft, and they also gave
him water for his hands. After the meal he took the Admiral to the beach.
The Admiral then sent for a Turkish bow and a quiver of arrows, and took
a shot at a man of his company, who had been warned. The chief, who knew
nothing about arms, as they neither have them nor use them, thought this
a wonderful thing. He, however, began to talk of those of Caniba, whom
they call Caribes. They come to capture the natives, and have bows and
arrows without iron, of which there is no memory in any of these lands,
nor of steel, nor any other metal except gold and copper. Of copper the
Admiral had only seen very little. The Admiral said, by signs, that the
Sovereigns of Castile would order the Caribs to be destroyed, and that
all should be taken with their hands tied together. He ordered a lombard
and a hand-gun to be fired off, and seeing the effect caused by its force
and what the shots penetrated, the king was astonished. When his people
heard the explosion they all fell on the ground. They brought the Admiral
a large mask, which had pieces of gold for the eyes and ears and in other
parts, and this they gave, with other trinkets of gold that the same king
had put on the head and round the neck of the Admiral, and of other
Christians, to whom they also gave many pieces. The Admiral received much
pleasure and consolation from these things, which tempered the anxiety
and sorrow he felt at the loss of the ship. He knew our Lord had caused
the ship to stop here, that a settlement might be formed. "From this," he
says, "originated so many things that, in truth, the disaster was really
a piece of good fortune. For it is certain that, if I had not lost the
ship, I should have gone on without anchoring in this place, which is
within a great bay, having two or three reefs of rock. I should not have
left people in the country during this voyage, nor even if I had desired
to leave them, should I have been able to obtain so much information, nor
such supplies and provisions for a fortress. And true it is that many
people had asked me to give them leave to remain. Now I have given orders
for a tower and a fort, both well built, and a large cellar, not because
I believe that such defences will be necessary. I believe that with the
force I have with me I could subjugate the whole island, which I believe
to be larger than Portugal, and the population double.[204-1] But they
are naked and without arms and hopelessly timid. Still, it is advisable
to build this tower being so far from your Highnesses. The people may
thus know the skill of the subjects of your Highnesses, and what they can
do; and will obey them with love and fear. So they make preparations to
build the fortress, with provision of bread and wine for more than a
year, with seeds for sowing, the ship's boat, a caulker and carpenter, a
gunner and cooper. Many among these men have a great desire to serve your
Highnesses and to please me, by finding out where the mine is whence the
gold is brought. Thus everything is got in readiness to begin the work.
Above all, it was so calm that there was scarcely wind or wave when the
ship ran aground." This is what the Admiral says; and he adds more to
show that it was great good luck, and the settled design of God, that the
ship should be lost in order that people might be left behind. If it had
not been for the treachery of the master and his boat's crew, who were
all or mostly his countrymen,[204-2] in neglecting to lay out the anchor
so as to haul the ship off in obedience to the Admiral's orders, she
would have been saved. In that case, the same knowledge of the land as
has been gained in these days would not have been secured, for the
Admiral always proceeded with the object of discovering, and never
intended to stop more than a day at any one place, unless he was detained
by the wind. Still the ship was very heavy and unsuited for discovery. It
was the people of Palos who obliged him to take such a ship, by not
complying "with what they had promised to the King and Queen, namely, to
supply suitable vessels for this expedition. This they did not do. Of all
that there was on board the ship, not a needle, nor a board, nor a nail
was lost, for she remained as whole as when she sailed, except that it
was necessary to cut away and level down in order to get out the jars and
merchandise, which were landed and carefully guarded." He trusted in God
that, when he returned from Spain, according to his intention, he would
find a tun of gold collected by barter by those he was to leave behind,
and that they would have found the mine, and spices in such quantities
that the Sovereigns would, in three years, be able to undertake and fit
out an expedition to go and conquer the Holy Sepulchre. "With this in
view," he says, "I protested to your Highnesses that all the profits of
this my enterprise should be spent in the conquest of Jerusalem, and your
Highnesses laughed and said that it pleased them, and that, without this,
they entertained that desire." These are the Admiral's words.


_Thursday, 27th of December_

The king of that land came alongside the caravel at sunrise, and said
that he had sent for gold, and that he would collect all he could before
the Admiral departed; but he begged him not to go. The king and one of
his brothers, with another very intimate relation, dined with the
Admiral, and the two latter said they wished to go to Castile with him.
At this time the news came that the caravel _Pinta_ was in a river at the
end of this island. Presently the cacique sent a canoe there, and the
Admiral sent a sailor in it. For it was wonderful how devoted the cacique
was to the Admiral. The necessity was now evident of hurrying on
preparations for the return to Castile.


_Friday, 28th of December_

The Admiral went on shore to give orders and hurry on the work of
building the fort, and to settle what men should remain behind.[206-1]
The king, it would seem, had watched him getting into the boat, and
quickly went into his house dissimulating, sending one of his brothers to
receive the Admiral and conduct him to one of the houses that had been
set aside for the Spaniards, which was the largest and best in the town.
In it there was a couch made of palm matting, where they sat down.
Afterward the brother sent an attendant to say that the Admiral was
there, as if the king did not know that he had come. The Admiral,
however, believed that this was a feint in order to do him honor more.
The attendant gave the message, and the cacique came in great haste, and
put a large soft piece of gold he had in his hand round the Admiral's
neck. They remained together until the evening, arranging what had to be
done.


_Saturday, 29th of December_

A very youthful nephew of the king came to the caravel at sunrise, who
showed a good understanding and disposition. As the Admiral was always
working to find out the origin of the gold, he asked everyone, for he
could now understand somewhat by signs. This youth told him that, at a
distance of four days' journey, there was an island to the eastward
called Guarionex, and others called Macorix, Mayonic, Fuma, Cibao, and
Coroay,[206-2] in which there was plenty of gold. The Admiral wrote
these names down, and now understood what had been said by a brother of
the king, who was annoyed with him, as the Admiral understood. At other
times the Admiral had suspected that the king had worked against his
knowing where the gold had its origin and was collected, that he might
not go away to barter in another part of the island. For there are such a
number of places in this same island that it is wonderful. After
nightfall the king sent a large mask of gold, and asked for a washhand
basin and jug. The Admiral thought he wanted them for patterns to copy
from, and therefore sent them.


_Sunday, 30th of December_

The Admiral went on shore to dinner, and came at a time when five kings
had arrived, all with their crowns, who were subject to this king, named
Guacanagari. They represented a very good state of affairs, and the
Admiral says to the Sovereigns that it would have given them pleasure to
see the manner of their arrival. On landing, the Admiral was received by
the king, who led him by the arms to the same house where he was
yesterday, where there were chairs, and a couch on which the Admiral sat.
Presently the king took the crown off his head and put it on the
Admiral's head, and the Admiral took from his neck a collar of beautiful
beads of several different colors, which looked very well in all its
parts, and put it on the king. He also took off a cloak of fine material,
in which he had dressed himself that day, and dressed the king in it, and
sent for some colored boots, which he put on his feet, and he put a large
silver ring on his finger, because he had heard that he had admired
greatly a silver ornament worn by one of the sailors. The king was highly
delighted and well satisfied, and two of those kings who were with him
came with him to where the Admiral was, and each gave him a piece of
gold. At this time an Indian came and reported that it was two days since
he left the caravel _Pinta_ in a port to the eastward. The Admiral
returned to the caravel and Vincent Anes,[207-1] the captain, said that
he had seen the rhubarb plant, and that they had it on the island Amiga,
which is at the entrance of the sea of Santo Tome, six leagues off, and
that he had recognized the branches and roots. They say that rhubarb
forms small branches above ground, and fruit like green mulberries,
almost dry, and the stalk, near the root, is as yellow and delicate as
the best color for painting, and underground the root grows like a large
pear.


_Monday, 31st of December_

To-day the Admiral was occupied in seeing that water and fuel were taken
on board for the voyage to Spain, to give early notice to the Sovereigns,
that they might despatch ships to complete the discoveries. For now the
business appeared to be so great and important that the Admiral was
astonished.[208-1] He did not wish to go until he had examined all the
land to the eastward, and explored the coast, so as to know the route to
Castile, with a view to sending sheep and cattle.[208-2] But as he had
been left with only a single vessel, it did not appear prudent to
encounter the dangers that are inevitable in making discoveries. He
complained that all this inconvenience had been caused by the caravel
_Pinta_ having parted company.


_Tuesday, 1st of January, 1493_

At midnight the Admiral sent a boat to the island Amiga to bring the
rhubarb. It returned at vespers with a bundle of it. They did not bring
more because they had no spade to dig it up with; it was taken to be
shown to the Sovereigns. The king of that land said that he had sent many
canoes for gold. The canoe returned that had been sent for tidings of the
_Pinta_, without having found her. The sailor who went in the canoe said
that twenty leagues from there he had seen a king who wore two large
plates of gold on his head, but when the Indians in the canoe spoke to
him he took them off. He also saw much gold on other people. The Admiral
considered that the King Guacanagari ought to have prohibited his people
from selling gold to the Christians, in order that it might all pass
through his hands. But the king knew the places, as before stated, where
there was such a quantity that it was not valued. The supply of spices
also is extensive, and is worth more than pepper or manegueta.[209-1] He
left instructions to those who wished to remain that they were to collect
as much as they could.


_Wednesday, 2nd of January_

In the morning the Admiral went on shore to take leave of the King
Guacanagari, and to depart from him in the name of the Lord. He gave him
one of his shirts. In order to show him the force of the lombards, and
what effect they had, he ordered one to be loaded and fired into the side
of the ship that was on shore, for this was apposite to the conversation
respecting the Caribs, with whom Guacanagari was at war. The king saw
whence the lombard-shot came, and how it passed through the side of the
ship and went far away over the sea. The Admiral also ordered a skirmish
of the crews of the ships, fully armed, saying to the cacique that he
need have no fear of the Caribs even if they should come. All this was
done that the king might look upon the men who were left behind as
friends, and that he might also have a proper fear of them. The king took
the Admiral to dinner at the house where he was established, and the
others who came with him. The Admiral strongly recommended to his
friendship Diego de Arana, Pedro Gutierrez, and Rodrigo Escovedo, whom he
left jointly as his lieutenants over the people who remained behind, that
all might be well regulated and governed for service of their Highnesses.
The cacique showed much love for the Admiral, and great sorrow at his
departure, especially when he saw him go on board. A relation of that
king said to the Admiral that he had ordered a statue of pure gold to be
made, as big as the Admiral, and that it would be brought within ten
days. The Admiral embarked with the intention of sailing presently, but
there was no wind.

He left on that island of Espanola, which the Indians called Bohio, 39
men[210-1] with the fortress, and he says that they were great friends of
Guacanagari. The lieutenants placed over them were Diego de Arana of
Cordova, Pedro Gutierrez, keeper of the king's drawing-room, and servant
of the chief butler, and Rodrigo de Escovedo, a native of Segovia, nephew
of Fray Rodrigo Perez, with all the powers he himself received from the
Sovereigns. He left behind all the merchandise which had been provided
for bartering, which was much, that they might trade for gold. He also
left the ship's boat, that they, most of them being sailors, might go,
when the time seemed convenient, to discover the gold mine, in order that
the Admiral, on his return, might find much gold. They were also to find
a good site for a town, for this was not altogether a desirable port;
especially as the gold the natives brought came from the east; also, the
farther to the east the nearer to Spain. He also left seeds for sowing,
and his officers, the alguazil and secretary, as well as a ship's
carpenter, a caulker, a good gunner familiar with engineering (_que sabe
bien de ingenios_), a cooper, a physician, and a tailor, all being seamen
as well.[210-2]


_Thursday, 3rd of January_

The Admiral did not go to-day, because three of the Indians whom he had
brought from the islands, and who had staid behind, arrived, and said
that the others with their women would be there at sunrise.[211-1] The
sea also was rather rough, so that they could not land from the boat. He
determined to depart to-morrow, with the grace of God. The Admiral said
that if he had the caravel _Pinta_ with him he could make sure of
shipping a tun of gold, because he could then follow the coasts of these
islands, which he would not do alone, for fear some accident might impede
his return to Castile, and prevent him from reporting all he had
discovered to the Sovereigns. If it was certain that the caravel _Pinta_
would arrive safely in Spain with Martin Alonso Pinzon, he would not
hesitate to act as he desired; but as he had no certain tidings of him,
and as he might return and tell lies to the Sovereigns, that he might not
receive the punishment he deserved for having done so much harm in having
parted company without permission, and impeded the good service that
might have been done, the Admiral could only trust in our Lord that he
would grant favorable weather, and remedy all things.


_Friday, 4th of January_

At sunrise the Admiral weighed the anchor, with little wind, and turned
her head N.W. to get clear of the reef, by another channel wider than the
one by which he entered, which, with others, is very good for coming in
front of the Villa de la Navidad, in all which the least depth is from 3
to 9 fathoms. These two channels run N.W. and S.E., and the reefs are
long, extending from the Cabo Santo to the Cabo de Sierpe for more than
six leagues, and then a good three leagues out to sea. At a league
outside Cabo Santo there are not more than 8 fathoms of depth, and inside
that cape, on the east side, there are many sunken rocks, and channels to
enter between them. All this coast trends N.W. and S.E., and it is all
beach, with the land very level for about a quarter of a league inland.
After that distance there are very high mountains, and the whole is
peopled with a very good race, as they showed themselves to the
Christians. Thus the Admiral navigated to the east, shaping a course for
a very high mountain, which looked like an island, but is not one, being
joined to the mainland by a very low neck. The mountain has the shape of
a very beautiful tent. He gave it the name of Monte Cristi. It is due
east of Cabo Santo, at a distance of 18 leagues.[212-1] That day, owing
to the light wind, they could not reach within six leagues of Monte
Cristi. He discovered four very low and sandy islets,[212-2] with a reef
extending N.W. and S.E. Inside, there is a large gulf,[212-3] which
extends from this mountain to the S.E. at least twenty leagues,[212-4]
which must all be shallow, with many sandbanks, and inside numerous
rivers which are not navigable. At the same time the sailor who was sent
in the canoe to get tidings of the _Pinta_ reported that he saw a
river[212-5] into which ships might enter. The Admiral anchored at a
distance of 6 leagues[212-6] from Monte Cristi, in 19 fathoms, and so
kept clear of many rocks and reefs. Here he remained for the night. The
Admiral gives notice to those who would go to the Villa de la Navidad
that, to make Monte Cristi, he should stand off the land two leagues,
etc. (But as the coast is now known it is not given here.) The Admiral
concluded that Cipango was in that island, and that it contained much
gold, spices, mastic, and rhubarb.


_Saturday, 5th of January_

At sunrise the Admiral made sail with the land-breeze, and saw that to
the S.S.E.[212-7] of Monte Cristi, between it and an island, there
seemed to be a good port to anchor in that night. He shaped an E.S.E.
course, afterward S.S.E., for six leagues round the high land, and found
a depth of 17 fathoms, with a very clean bottom, going on for three
leagues with the same soundings. Afterwards it shallowed to 12 fathoms up
to the promontory of the mountain, and off the promontory, at one league,
the depth of 9 fathoms was found, the bottom clean, and all fine sand.
The Admiral followed the same course until he came between the mountain
and the island,[213-1] where he found 3-1/2 fathoms at low water, a very
good port, and here he anchored.[213-2] He went in the boat to the islet,
where he found remains of fire and footmarks, showing that fishermen had
been there. Here they saw many stones painted in colors, or a quarry of
such stones, very beautifully worked by nature, suited for the building
of a church or other public work, like those he found on the island of
San Salvador. On this islet he also found many plants of mastic. He says
that this Monte Cristi is very fine and high, but accessible, and of a
very beautiful shape, all the land round it being low, a very fine plain,
from which the height rises, looking at a distance like an island
disunited from other land. Beyond the mountain, to the east, he saw a
cape at a distance of 24 miles, which he named Cabo del Becerro,[213-3]
whence to the mountain for two leagues there are reefs of rocks, though
it appeared as if there were navigable channels between them. It would,
however, be advisable to approach in daylight, and to send a boat ahead
to sound. From the mountain eastward to Cabo del Becerro, for four
leagues, there is a beach, and the land is low, but the rest is very
high, with beautiful mountains and some cultivation. Inland, a chain of
mountains runs N.E. and S.W., the most beautiful he had seen, appearing
like the hills of Cordova. Some other very lofty mountains appear in the
distance toward the south and S.E., and very extensive green valleys with
large rivers: all this in such quantity that he did not believe he had
exaggerated a thousandth part. Afterwards he saw, to the eastward of the
mountain, a land which appeared like that of Monte Cristi in size and
beauty. Further to the east and N.E. there is land which is not so high,
extending for some hundred miles or near it.


_Sunday, 6th of January_

That port is sheltered from all winds, except north and N.W., and these
winds seldom blow in this region. Even when the wind is from those
quarters, shelter may be found near the islet in 3 or 4 fathoms. At
sunrise the Admiral made sail to proceed along the coast, the course
being east, except that it is necessary to look out for several reefs of
stone and sand, within which there are good anchorages, with channels
leading to them. After noon it blew fresh from the east. The Admiral
ordered a sailor to go to the mast-head to look out for reefs, and he saw
the caravel _Pinta_ coming, with the wind aft, and she joined the
Admiral.[214-1] As there was no place to anchor, owing to the rocky
bottom, the Admiral returned for ten leagues to Monte Cristi, with the
_Pinta_ in company. Martin Alonso Pinzon came on board the caravel
_Nina_, where the Admiral was, and excused himself by saying that he had
parted company against his will, giving reasons for it. But the Admiral
says that they were all false; and that on the night when Pinzon parted
company he was influenced by pride and covetousness. He could not
understand whence had come the insolence and disloyalty with which Pinzon
had treated him during the voyage. The Admiral had taken no notice,
because he did not wish to give place to the evil works of Satan, who
desired to impede the voyage. It appeared that one of the Indians, who
had been put on board the caravel by the Admiral with others, had said
that there was much gold in an island called Baneque, and, as Pinzon's
vessel was light and swift, he determined to go there, parting company
with the Admiral, who wished to remain and explore the coasts of Juana
and Espanola, with an easterly course. When Martin Alonso arrived at the
island of Baneque[215-1] he found no gold. He then went to the coast of
Espanola, on information from the Indians that there was a great quantity
of gold and many mines in that island of Espanola, which the Indians call
Bohio. He thus arrived near the Villa de Navidad, about 15 leagues from
it, having then been absent more than twenty days, so that the news
brought by the Indians was correct, on account of which the King
Guacanagari sent a canoe, and the Admiral put a sailor on board; but the
_Pinta_ must have gone before the canoe arrived. The Admiral says that
the _Pinta_ obtained much gold by barter, receiving large pieces the size
of two fingers in exchange for a needle. Martin Alonso took half,
dividing the other half among the crew. The Admiral then says: "Thus I am
convinced that our Lord miraculously caused that vessel to remain here,
this being the best place in the whole island to form a settlement, and
the nearest to the gold mines." He also says that he knew of another
great island, to the south of the island of Juana, in which there is more
gold than in this island, so that they collect it in bits the size of
beans, while in Espanola they find the pieces the size of grains of
wheat. They call that island Yamaye.[215-2] The Admiral also heard of an
island further east, in which there were only women, having been told
this by many people.[215-3] He was also informed that Yamaye and the
island of Espanola were ten days' journey in a canoe from the mainland,
which would be about 70 or 80 leagues, and that there the people wore
clothes.[215-4]


_Monday, 7th of January_

This day the Admiral took the opportunity of calking the caravel, and the
sailors were sent to cut wood. They found mastic and aloes in abundance.


_Tuesday, 8th of January_

As the wind was blowing fresh from the east and S.E., the Admiral did not
get under way this morning. He ordered the caravel to be filled up with
wood and water and with all other necessaries for the voyage. He wished
to explore all the coast of Espanola in this direction. But those he
appointed to the caravels as captains were brothers, namely, Martin
Alonso Pinzon and Vicente Anes. They also had followers who were filled
with pride and avarice, considering that all now belonged to them, and
unmindful of the honor the Admiral had done them. They had not and did
not obey his orders, but did and said many unworthy things against him;
while Martin Alonso had deserted him from the 21st of November until the
6th of January without cause or reason, but from disaffection. All these
things had been endured in silence by the Admiral in order to secure a
good end to the voyage. He determined to return as quickly as possible,
to get rid of such an evil company, with whom he thought it necessary to
dissimulate, although they were a mutinous set, and though he also had
with him many good men; for it was not a fitting time for dealing out
punishment.

The Admiral got into the boat and went up the river[216-1] which is near,
toward the S.S.W. of Monte Cristi, a good league. This is where the
sailors went to get fresh water for the ships. He found that the sand at
the mouth of the river, which is very large and deep, was full of very
fine gold, and in astonishing quantity. The Admiral thought that it was
pulverized in the drift down the river, but in a short time he found
many grains as large as lentils, while there was a great deal of the fine
powder.

As the fresh water mixed with the salt when it entered the sea, he
ordered the boat to go up for the distance of a stone's-throw. They
filled the casks from the boat, and when they went back to the caravel
they found small bits of gold sticking to the hoops of the casks and of
the barrel. The Admiral gave the name of Rio del Oro to the river.[217-1]
Inside the bar it is very deep, though the mouth is shallow and very
wide. The distance to the Villa de la Navidad is 17 leagues,[217-2] and
there are several large rivers on the intervening coast, especially three
which probably contain much more gold than this one, because they are
larger. This river is nearly the size of the Guadalquivir at Cordova, and
from it to the gold mines the distance is not more than 20
leagues.[217-3] The Admiral further says that he did not care to take the
sand containing gold, because their Highnesses would have it all as their
property at their town of Navidad; and because his first object was now
to bring the news and to get rid of the evil company that was with him,
whom he had always said were a mutinous set.


_Wednesday, 9th of January_

The Admiral made sail at midnight, with the wind S.E., and shaped an
E.N.E. course, arriving at a point named Punta Roja,[217-4] which is 60
miles[217-5] east of Monte Cristi, and anchored under its lee three hours
before nightfall. He did not venture to go out at night, because there
are many reefs, until they are known. Afterwards, if, as will probably be
the case, channels are found between them, the anchorage, which is good
and well sheltered, will be profitable. The country between Monte Cristi
and this point where the Admiral anchored is very high land, with
beautiful plains, the range running east and west, all green and
cultivated, with numerous streams of water, so that it is wonderful to
see such beauty. In all this country there are many turtles, and the
sailors took several when they came on shore to lay their eggs at Monte
Cristi, as large as a great wooden buckler.

On the previous day, when the Admiral went to the Rio del Oro, he saw
three mermaids,[218-1] which rose well out of the sea; but they are not
so beautiful as they are painted, though to some extent they have the
form of a human face. The Admiral says that he had seen some, at other
times, in Guinea, on the coast of the Manequeta.[218-2]

The Admiral says that this night, in the name of our Lord, he would set
out on his homeward voyage without any further delay whatever, for he had
