him, and he will throw no spells over you. Show him all there is to
see in the city; but go not far away, for we shall have frequent
occasions to speak to him. He will have a seat in the council, and
at our own table. See that all know that we most highly esteem and
desire to honor him."

Bowing deeply to the king, queen, and princess, Roger followed the
young noble into whose charge he had been given. For a long time
they continued their way down passages and corridors, until it
seemed to Roger that it was a town, rather than a building, that he
was traversing. At last his conductor pushed aside a hanging, and
entered an apartment.

"These are my rooms," he said. "You are now master here. All the
nobles of the council, and those whom the king wishes to have about
his person, have suites of apartments in the palace. I hope some
day to have the pleasure of entertaining you on my own estate,
which lies a day's journey away to the northeast of the lake. Now,
you will doubtless be glad to retire to rest at once, for you have
had a long and weary time."

So saying, he led the way to a small chamber, leading out of the
larger one. Here a luxurious couch was arranged, and it was not
many minutes before Roger was asleep; for he was indeed completely
worn out, and was too much fatigued even to think over the strange
position in which he found himself.

He woke early, for upon his journeys the caravan had always started
at daybreak, so as to get as much as possible of the journey done
before the heat of the day set in. For a moment he wondered vaguely
where he was, and then, as recollection returned to him, he leaped
from his couch, threw back the hangings before the window, and
gazed out.

Glass was unknown in Mexico, nor was it a requisite in the balmy
climate of the valley. The prospect was a charming one. Before him
lay a garden, more beautiful than any he had ever beheld. It was
filled with shrubs and flowers, and a delightful perfume filled the
air. Fountains of bright water threw their jets high above the
sweet-scented groves and shrubberies. Several large ponds glistened
in the morning sun. On some of these were islands accessible by
light bridges, and on the islands were fanciful pavilions.
Waterfowl floated on the surface of the ponds, or stalked
fearlessly on the marble pavement that surrounded them. The songs
of innumerable birds filled the air. Roger was gazing in delight at
the scene, when Cuitcatl's voice saluted him.

"So you are up betimes; are you ready for your bath, or will you
take some chocolate first?"

"Bath first, please," Roger replied; and his guide led the way
across the large room and, drawing a hanging aside, showed Roger
into a bathroom.

The walls and floors were entirely covered with marble. In the
center was a bath, some seven feet square, with a stream of water
running into it from the mouth of a grotesque animal's head.

"Every apartment has its bathroom," Cuitcatl said. "The water runs
for an hour after sunrise only, but it can be turned on at any
hour. It seems a waste, but we are far above the lower portion of
the garden, and the water therefore runs into a tank and thence
works the fountains there. Would you like your attendant to rub you
in the bath, or when you come out of it? For both methods are in
use with us."

Roger declined both alternatives, and it was not very long before
he rejoined his companion in the central apartment. Chocolate,
light cakes, and fruit were at once served.

"We had best visit the gardens first, before the sun gains too much
power. There are charming arbors and pavilions, in shady spots, for
taking one's ease at the middle of the day; but for walking about,
the early hours are the best."

The gardens were of great extent, and Roger was surprised at the
extreme fearlessness of the innumerable birds, of all kinds, that
seemed to regard them as their natural home.

"Why should they not be fearless?" Cuitcatl said, when he expressed
his surprise. "They have never been frightened, and regard all who
come here as their friends, rather than as their enemies. They have
abundance of the food which they love best. They make their nests
among the plants, or in the trees which they would use, were they
wild. The ponds are full of fish, and the water birds can find a
far richer supply, here, than elsewhere. When the ladies come, the
birds flock around them and settle on their heads and shoulders,
and take crumbs of sweet cake from their hands.

"Many birds must, of course, be caged, and you will see that there
are large aviaries scattered here and there in the garden. In these
are the hawks and eagles, and many other birds which could not be
tamed so far as to remain in the garden, unconfined."

After wandering for nearly two hours in the garden, they returned
to the palace; and afterwards went down to the marketplace, which
was crowded, as it was the fifth day of the week. Cuitcatl had
taken with them six officials of the palace, to clear the way and
prevent the people from crowding in upon them.

Roger was struck with the orderly demeanor of the people. They
seemed merry and lively, but their mirth was of a quiet kind; and
there was, everywhere, an air of decorum and gentleness, in strong
contrast to that of a European crowd.

"Why," he said to himself, "there is more noise at home, when two
or three boats come in laden with pilchards, than is made by all
these thousands and thousands of people!"

There was no pressing or pushing, and the order of the officials,
"Make way for the king's guest, the great Roger Hawkshaw!" was at
once obeyed; and the people drew aside, gazing at him curiously but
respectfully, and saluting as if to one of their own great nobles.

The market was an extensive square, surrounded by deep porticoes,
and each description of merchandise had its allotted quarter. In
one was seen cotton piled up in bales, or manufactured into dresses
and articles of domestic use, such as tapestry, curtains and
coverings. The goldsmiths had a quarter assigned to them. There
Roger admired bracelets, necklaces and earrings, delicately chased
and carved, together with many curious toys made in imitation of
birds and fishes, with scales and feathers alternately of gold and
silver, and with movable heads and bodies.

In another quarter were the stores of the potters, with dishes and
plates, cups and basins of every degree of fineness, for the use of
poor and rich, vases of wood elaborately carved, varnished or gilt.
Near these Roger examined some hatchets made of copper, alloyed
with tin; and as he felt the hardness of the metal, thought to
himself that the natives, if informed as to the size and
proportions of cannon, would have no difficulty in founding those
weapons.

Then there were certain shops devoted to the sale of articles
needed by soldiers. The helmets, fashioned into the shape of the
head of some wild animal, with grinning teeth and bristling crest;
the quilted doublets of cotton; the rich surcoats of feather; mail
and weapons of all sorts; copper-headed lances and arrows; and the
broad Mexican sword, with its sharp blade of itztli, a hard
polished stone, which served many of the purposes of steel to the
Aztecs. Of this material were the razors made, with which barbers
were engaged in operating in their booths.

Many shops were well provided with drugs, roots, and different
medicinal preparations; for Mexico abounded in medicinal plants,
and the study of their uses was considered one of the most useful
of the sciences, and in this respect the Mexicans were considerably
in advance of the people of Europe. There were shops for the sale
of blank books, or rolls, for the hieroglyphic picture writing.
Under some of the porticoes were hides, raw and dressed; and
various articles for domestic or personal use, made of leather.

Animals, both wild and tame, were offered for sale; and near them
Roger saw a gang of slaves, with collars round their necks, and
these were also, Cuitcatl told him, for sale.

The portion of the market devoted to the sale of provisions was a
large one. Here were meats of all kinds, domestic poultry, game
from the neighboring mountains, and fish from the streams; together
with an immense variety of fruit, green vegetables, and maize. Here
were ready-cooked foods for immediate use--sold hot to passers by,
and eaten as they stood--with stalls of pastry of many kinds,
bread, cakes, and confectionery; chocolate, flavored with vanilla
and other spices, and pulque, prepared with many varying flavors,
tempted the passers by. All these commodities, and every stall and
portico, were set out and well-nigh covered with flowers.

After leaving the market, Roger proceeded with his companion to the
edge of the lake. It was dotted with countless canoes, traversing
it in all directions, filled with people passing to and fro between
the great capitals or neighboring cities, bent either upon pleasure
or trade. After feasting his eyes for a considerable time upon the
lovely and animated scene, Roger returned with his companion to the
palace.

In the afternoon there was a great gathering of nobles at the
palace, to enable a far wider circle than those assembled the
evening before to see and hear the king's white guest. One of the
old counselors, who had been present at the previous meeting, acted
as questioner, and this enabled Roger to escape certain queries to
which he would have had difficulty in replying; and while the
assembly heard much of the various wonders of the white people,
they learned nothing of the manner in which the stranger had
reached their shores, or the object of his coming; and at the end,
the general impression that remained upon them was that he was a
mysterious and supernatural being, who had come to teach the people
new arts and inventions.

When the meeting was over, Roger retired again to the private
apartments, and entertained the ladies there with many details of
European life and manners, and by sketching for them houses, and
ships, and other objects they demanded.

Two hours later, Cacama came in. He was evidently vexed and
anxious.

"I am sorry to say, Roger Hawkshaw," he said, "that tomorrow you
must accompany me across the lake to Mexico. I have had four
dispatches today from my Uncle Montezuma. He blames me for having
permitted you to enter the city before consulting the priests at
his capital. You know they are all powerful there. Montezuma, with
all his pride and haughtiness, is but their humble servant. He says
that sacrifices have been offered up, and that the auguries are
unfavorable, and that the priests proclaim your presence to be a
danger to Mexico.

"I have no doubt that, when they see you, this opinion will be
changed; and I shall do my best to prepare the way for you. I have
already sent a private messenger to the high priest, speaking in
the highest terms of you, and strengthening my recommendation by
some valuable presents, to which priests are not more than other
men inaccessible."

Roger saw, by the look of dismay upon the faces of the queen and
the princess, that they considered the news very grave.

"Must he go?" the queen asked, in a low voice.

"How can it be helped?" Cacama replied. "Montezuma is supreme; and
he and the priests, together, are all powerful. Roger is not like
other men. Were he so, I would tell him when night falls to fly,
and Cuitcatl would risk the consequences, I am sure, and act as his
guide; but being as he is, where could he go, or where could he
hide? Were it known in the morning that he was missing, a hundred
messengers from Mexico would carry the news to every town and
village in the country. Even if we colored his skin and his hair,
his height would attract attention; for he is taller by half a
head, and broader, by far, than any Mexican. But even did he, by
traveling by night and hiding by day, get at last beyond the
boundary of our kingdoms, what would then be his fate?--To die of
hunger or thirst, or to be slain by wild tribes.

"What say you, Roger Hawkshaw? Will you risk these unknown dangers,
or will you go to Montezuma tomorrow?"

"Were I sure that the priests would decide against me, and that I
should be sacrificed to their great idol, I would risk death in any
other form, rather than that," Roger replied. "But it may be that,
when they see I have no evil intentions, and neither thought nor
power of injuring Mexico, they may lay aside their animosity
against me."

"They do not believe that you will injure Mexico," Amenche said,
passionately. "They only want you for a sacrifice. They think that
a being so strange and rare as a white man would be, of all, the
most acceptable victim to their god.

"My brother, do not let him go," and the girl burst into tears.

"My little sister," Cacama said tenderly, "you know that I am
powerless in the matter. In my grandfather's time, he would have
answered a demand that a guest of his should be given up by a
message of defiance; but times have changed since then, and the
greater part of my kingdom no longer remains to me. My brother, who
disputed my right to the throne, reigns over a large portion of it.
Montezuma has seized fertile provinces. I am little more than the
lord of a city; and could offer no resistance, for a single day, to
the power of the Emperor.

"But you must remember that, as yet, we do not know that the
priests will decide against him. I myself shall go with him, and I
have already, as I have told you, taken some steps to incline the
priests in his favor. When I arrive there tomorrow, I will exert
myself personally. I have many friends among the highest at
Montezuma's court, and will also pray these to use their influence.

"Should I fail, all will not be lost. It is likely that, if they
decide upon sacrificing you, Roger, they will make you the victim
to the god Tezcatlepoca, 'the soul of the world.' For him is always
chosen the captive most distinguished for his appearance. For a
year he is treated as the representative of the god. He is nobly
cared for, he is attended by a train of royal pages, is worshiped
by the people as he passes through the street, and is feasted at
the tables of the nobles. Were you selected for this, as we
consider it, great honor, there would be at least a year before
you; and you might then, in some manner, make your escape beyond
our boundaries. At any rate, some time is sure to elapse before
your fate will be determined upon; and I can promise that I will do
all in my power to aid you to escape, should you determine upon
flight."

"I thank you most heartily," Roger said. "I have no fear of death
in battle, but to me it would be very horrible to be put to death
as a victim, on a festival; and I would rather escape and drown
myself in the lake, than that such should be my fate. Still, if it
must be so, it must; and I trust that I may behave as befits an
Englishman, in such an extremity."

Amenche here stepped forward to her brother, and spoke earnestly in
his ear.

"My sister reminds me," he said, "that we have sometimes another
form of sacrifice; and that if I can do naught else, I might be
able to persuade the priests to pronounce in favor of that. It is
only adopted in the case of a captive of distinction; who, instead
of being sacrificed, is sometimes matched against a number of
Mexicans. The combat takes place on a great circular stone, in the
sight of the whole city. The captive is provided with arms, and
meets his opponents one by one. If he defeat them all--which has
more than once happened in our history--he is allowed to go free."

"That would suit me best, by far," Roger said eagerly. "I have no
doubt but that I should be killed, still, I should die in fair
fighting against numbers; and it would be no worse than if I had
fallen fighting the Moorish pirates, on the deck of our ship."

"I should think that it could be managed," Cacama said. "I should
tell them that, at present, none could say whether you were a
superhuman being or no; and that it might bring some misfortune
upon the nation, were a messenger of the gods put to death. This
trial would prove that. If the gods protected you, you would
triumph. If they were not on your side, you would be defeated."

"I should do my best," Roger said quietly. "I have been well taught
the use of arms, and in our long voyage here we practiced daily. In
point of skill I could hold my own with any on board, though there
were many to whom I was but a child, in point of strength. In that
matter, however, I have doubtless gained much since then.

"I shall be thankful indeed, Prince, if you can persuade them to
fix on this mode of execution for me; and I thank you very
gratefully, Princess, for suggesting it."

They talked for some time longer, and then Roger retired to his
apartment. The next morning, soon after sunrise, he embarked with
Cacama in a canoe, paddled by six rowers.

"My wife and sister bade me say farewell to you," Cacama said.
"They are sorely grieved at your going, and hope that you may
return with me this afternoon. But if not, they bade me say that
they will do all that is in their power; and women can exert
influence, as well as men, on your behalf."

It was a long row across the lake to Mexico. Large as was the
population of Tezcuco, which was estimated by the Spaniards to
contain a hundred and twenty thousand inhabitants, that of Mexico
was fully three times as great. As Montezuma had not yet determined
upon the course which was to be pursued towards this mysterious
stranger, the people had not been informed of his coming. A strong
guard of soldiers, with several officers of the palace, met the
party upon its landing, surrounded them, and marched quickly
through the streets to the palace.

The buildings resembled those of Tezcuco, and were massive and
solid in character; but were not, Roger thought, grander or more
splendid than those in the rival capital. The town was intersected
by canals, and the bridges across these could be raised, adding
largely to the defensive power of the place.

Upon reaching the palace the soldiers drew back, and the palace
guard took charge of the party and led them into a large apartment,
where they waited until the emperor was ready to receive them.
Presently two court officials entered and, placing a mantle of
coarse cotton over Roger, signed to him to take off his sandals.
Cacama had already informed him that even the highest nobles of the
land, with the exception of those of royal blood, were obliged to
enter Montezuma's presence in this attire, as emblematic of their
humility. He also charged Roger that it was the etiquette that all
should keep their eyes fixed on the ground, until addressed by
Montezuma.

Accompanied by Cacama, Roger followed the officials. Passing
through several corridors they entered a vast hall. Roger was aware
that at the farther end the emperor was seated, surrounded by a
numerous body of nobles; but the instant he entered the room he
followed the instructions of Cacama, and saluted to the ground, and
then advanced with downcast eyes until the officials by his side
ordered him to pause.

Montezuma was a victim of superstition, and had been seriously
discomposed at the news of the arrival of this mysterious visitor;
the more so that the priests, themselves, were unable to decide
whether his visit was a good or evil augury. As he looked at the
tall figure before him, with its strange-colored skin and hair, and
the air of independence and fearlessness that was visible in the
pose, notwithstanding the downcast eyes, he could not but be
favorably impressed, despite his fears.

"You are welcome to our court," he said, "if you come in peace and
goodwill."

"I come in peace and goodwill to your Majesty and your empire,"
Roger said.

"We have heard that you come from far beyond the seas, where dwell
a people having strange ways, who live in floating castles, and who
fight with weapons making thunder."

Roger bowed.

"Your Majesty has been correctly informed."

"Do the people there worship the same gods that we do?"

"They do not, your Majesty. The people there worship the one Great
God--the God of the skies, the air, and the earth."

"And that God sent you hither?" Montezuma asked.

"Assuredly, Sire. He directs all things."

"Each country has its gods. The gods of Mexico have given us
victory over all the peoples from sea to sea."

Roger bowed. He did not feel called upon to contradict the emperor.

"How is it that you came alone to this land?"

"I wished to see it," Roger said, "reports of its greatness and
power having reached across the seas. Had I come with others, it
might have been thought that I came as an enemy; but coming alone,
and without arms, it could not be suspected that my intentions were
other than friendly."

Montezuma appeared impressed with this answer. The audience lasted
for upwards of half an hour, Montezuma asking many questions about
the ships, the arms, the mode of government, and other matters
among the white people, He then bowed his head.

The official signified that the audience was over, and that Roger
was to retire. As he had been instructed by Cacama he withdrew,
keeping his face to the emperor.

He was conducted to a different apartment. Here a table was laid,
and he was served by attendants of the court; who, however, made no
reply to any questions he asked them, and had evidently received
orders to hold no verbal communication with him.



Chapter 10: News From The Coast.


It was with a feeling of pleasure and relief that, after some
hours, Roger saw the hangings drawn aside, and Cacama enter.

"Come, my friend, the council is over, and you may return with me."

Cacama was evidently anxious to be off at once, and Roger followed
him without a question. One of the pages of the palace led the way
through a long series of passages, and at last Roger found himself
outside the palace, where a door opened into a canal. Here Cacama's
boat was lying. The young king and Roger took their seats, and the
canoe dashed off at once.

"It has been a hard fight in the council," Cacama said. "No two men
were of the same opinion. Even the priests were divided among
themselves; and Montezuma was as undecided, at the end, as he was
at the beginning; so that the decision is postponed. Then the
question arose, were you to be treated as a guest or as a prisoner?
And this I settled by saying that I would take you back with me to
Tezcuco, and produce you whenever required. So in order to avoid
excitement among the people, I sent word for the boat to be brought
round to that quiet entrance to the palace, by which means we
avoided passing through the streets, altogether.

"At one time it seemed to me that the decision would go against
you, on the ground that, had you been a supernatural being, you
would have had new arts to teach the people. Fortunately, I had
brought with me the pictures you made for my wife and sister, and
these I showed them. I pointed out that they were altogether
different from the work of our own scribes; that these drew stiff
images that looked like representations, not of men and animals,
but of wooden creatures, while in your drawings it seemed as if the
men and animals were moving across the paper; and that, were you to
teach our scribes thus to portray objects, it would make a profound
alteration in Mexican art.

"This made a great impression upon them. Many of the nobles belonging
to the Council of Education were present, and Montezuma himself is
fond of art. All were greatly struck with your paintings, and these
certainly went a long way towards strengthening my party. When we get
back, you shall do some pictures of things such as they see here, and
are accustomed to.  Perhaps you could do even better, still, if you
were to try."

"I could make much more finished pictures," Roger said. "These were
only sketched off in haste, and with such colors as came to hand;
but if I had pigments, and could mix the colors as I wanted them, I
could produce very much better effect."

Roger, as a child, had been placed by his father, during the
latter's long absences from home, at a school kept by some monks at
a monastery at Plymouth, in order that he might learn to read and
write--as these accomplishments would be of great use to him, as a
master mariner. His fondness for painting attracted the attention
of one of the old monks, who illuminated missals; and he had
permitted him to copy many of the manuscripts in the monastery, and
had given him instructions in the art. He had, indeed, been so
struck with the talent the boy showed, that he told Reuben Hawkshaw
that if he would let his son devote himself to art, he would make a
famous painter. The sailor had scoffed at the idea; and Roger
himself, fond as he was of painting, would have been reluctant to
abandon the idea of going to sea.

The instructions he had obtained, however, up to the age of twelve,
when he went on his first voyage with his father, had been of great
assistance to him. Thanks to his natural talent, his visits to the
churches at the various ports at which the ship touched, and to the
fact that he had plenty of time on board to practice the art, his
pictures were surprisingly good, and had excited a great deal of
attention on the part of the friends and acquaintances of Master
Diggory Beggs.

Upon his return to Tezcuco, Cacama ordered the scribes to furnish
him with large sheets of the best paper, brushes, and pigments. The
colors were all bright and glaring ones; but by mixing them, and
adding some sombre dyes he obtained in the market, Roger succeeded
in getting the required tints. Taking his place in the garden, at a
point where he commanded the lake, near at hand, dotted with
canoes; and the city of Mexico, with its background of hills, in
the distance, Roger set to work. To the surprise of the scribe who
had been ordered to assist him, he mixed the colors with oil
instead of water, and then began his picture. He worked as long as
there was sufficient light, and recommenced it the next morning,
directly after sunrise, and continued at work all day; and by
evening had finished the picture, three feet by two, which,
although it would not be considered remarkable in Europe, excited
the most lively admiration on the part of Cacama and the ladies.

He explained to the king that, as he had none of the spirit that
was used in conjunction with the oil to make it dry rapidly, it
would be some days before the picture would be sufficiently dry to
be touched. Cacama, however, sent it off the next morning under
charge of his principal scribe to Montezuma, who sent back word
that he was astonished, indeed, at this work of art, which seemed
to him to be almost magical; and he sent, in return, a large golden
goblet to Roger, in token of his satisfaction.

Cacama was summoned to a council on the following day; and
returned, saying that the picture had quite turned the scale in
Roger's favor; that it had been examined by the chief scribes and
the men of science, who all agreed that no such thing had been seen
