like all strong hearts, hers had a superstitious corner, she paid no
attention to the omen. The party travelled on in silence. "Already
parted?" Mademoiselle de Verneuil was saying to herself. "Yet no one
about us has uttered one word. Could it be Corentin? It is not his
interest to speak. Who can have come to this spot and accused me? Just
loved, and already abandoned! I sow attraction, and I reap contempt. Is
it my perpetual fate to see happiness and ever lose it?" Pangs hitherto
unknown to her wrung her heart, for she now loved truly and for the
first time. Yet she had not so wholly delivered herself to her lover
that she could not take refuge from her pain in the natural pride and
dignity of a young and beautiful woman. The secret of her love--a secret
often kept by women under torture itself--had not escaped her lips.
Presently she rose from her reclining attitude, ashamed that she had
shown her passion by her silent sufferings; she shook her head with a
light-hearted action, and showed a face, or rather a mask, that was gay
and smiling, then she raised her voice to disguise the quiver of it.

"Where are we?" she said to Captain Merle, who kept himself at a certain
distance from the carriage.

"About six miles from Fougeres, mademoiselle."

"We shall soon be there, shall we not?" she went on, to encourage a
conversation in which she might show some preference for the young
captain.

"A Breton mile," said Merle much delighted, "has the disadvantage of
never ending; when you are at the top of one hill you see a valley
and another hill. When you reach the summit of the slope we are now
ascending you will see the plateau of Mont Pelerine in the distance.
Let us hope the Chouans won't take their revenge there. Now, in going up
hill and going down hill one doesn't make much headway. From La Pelerine
you will still see--"

The young _emigre_ made a movement at the name which Marie alone
noticed.

"What is La Pelerine?" she asked hastily, interrupting the captain's
description of Breton topography.

"It is the summit of a mountain," said Merle, "which gives its name to
the Maine valley through which we shall presently pass. It separates
this valley from that of Couesnon, at the end of which is the town
of Fougeres, the chief town in Brittany. We had a fight there last
Vendemiaire with the Gars and his brigands. We were escorting Breton
conscripts, who meant to kill us sooner than leave their own land; but
Hulot is a rough Christian, and he gave them--"

"Did you see the Gars?" she asked. "What sort of man is he?"

Her keen, malicious eyes never left the so-called vicomte's face.

"Well, mademoiselle," replied Merle, nettled at being always
interrupted, "he is so like citizen du Gua, that if your friend did not
wear the uniform of the Ecole Polytechnique I could swear it was he."

Mademoiselle de Verneuil looked fixedly at the cold, impassible young
man who had scorned her, but she saw nothing in him that betrayed the
slightest feeling of alarm. She warned him by a bitter smile that she
had now discovered the secret so treacherously kept; then in a jesting
voice, her nostrils dilating with pleasure, and her head so turned
that she could watch the young man and yet see Merle, she said to the
Republican: "That new leader gives a great deal of anxiety to the First
Consul. He is very daring, they say; but he has the weakness of rushing
headlong into adventures, especially with women."

"We are counting on that to get even with him," said the captain. "If we
catch him for only an hour we shall put a bullet in his head. He'll do
the same to us if he meets us, so _par pari_--"

"Oh!" said the _emigre_, "we have nothing to fear. Your soldiers cannot
go as far as La Pelerine, they are tired, and, if you consent, we can
all rest a short distance from here. My mother stops at La Vivetiere,
the road to which turns off a few rods farther on. These ladies might
like to stop there too; they must be tired with their long drive from
Alencon without resting; and as mademoiselle," he added, with forced
politeness, "has had the generosity to give safety as well as pleasure
to our journey, perhaps she will deign to accept a supper from my
mother; and I think, captain," he added, addressing Merle, "the times
are not so bad but what we can find a barrel of cider for your men. The
Gars can't have taken all, at least my mother thinks not--"

"Your mother?" said Mademoiselle de Verneuil, interrupting him in a tone
of irony, and making no reply to his invitation.

"Does my age seem more improbable to you this evening, mademoiselle?"
said Madame du Gua. "Unfortunately I was married very young, and my son
was born when I was fifteen."

"Are you not mistaken, madame?--when you were thirty, perhaps."

Madame du Gua turned livid as she swallowed the sarcasm. She would have
liked to revenge herself on the spot, but was forced to smile, for she
was determined at any cost, even that of insult, to discover the nature
of the feelings that actuated the young girl; she therefore pretended
not to have understood her.

"The Chouans have never had a more cruel leader than the Gars, if we are
to believe the stories about him," she said, addressing herself vaguely
to both Francine and her mistress.

"Oh, as for cruel, I don't believe that," said Mademoiselle de Verneuil;
"he knows how to lie, but he seems rather credulous himself. The leader
of a party ought not to be the plaything of others."

"Do you know him?" asked the _emigre_, quietly.

"No," she replied, with a disdainful glance, "but I thought I did."

"Oh, mademoiselle, he's a _malin_, yes a _malin_," said Captain Merle,
shaking his head and giving with an expressive gesture the peculiar
meaning to the word which it had in those days but has since lost.
"Those old families do sometimes send out vigorous shoots. He has just
returned from a country where, they say, the _ci-devants_ didn't find
life too easy, and men ripen like medlars in the straw. If that fellow
is really clever he can lead us a pretty dance. He has already formed
companies of light infantry who oppose our troops and neutralize the
efforts of the government. If we burn a royalist village he burns two of
ours. He can hold an immense tract of country and force us to spread out
our men at the very moment when we want them on one spot. Oh, he knows
what he is about."

"He is cutting his country's throat," said Gerard in a loud voice,
interrupting the captain.

"Then," said the _emigre_, "if his death would deliver the nation, why
don't you catch him and shoot him?"

As he spoke he tried to look into the depths of Mademoiselle de
Verneuil's soul, and one of those voiceless scenes the dramatic
vividness and fleeting sagacity of which cannot be reproduced in
language passed between them in a flash. Danger is always interesting.
The worst criminal threatened with death excites pity. Though
Mademoiselle de Verneuil was now certain that the lover who had cast her
off was this very leader of the Chouans, she was not ready to verify her
suspicions by giving him up; she had quite another curiosity to satisfy.
She preferred to doubt or to believe as her passion led her, and she
now began deliberately to play with peril. Her eyes, full of scornful
meaning, bade the young chief notice the soldiers of the escort; by thus
presenting to his mind triumphantly an image of his danger she made him
feel that his life depended on a word from her, and her lips seemed
to quiver on the verge of pronouncing it. Like an American Indian, she
watched every muscle of the face of her enemy, tied, as it were, to the
stake, while she brandished her tomahawk gracefully, enjoying a revenge
that was still innocent, and torturing like a mistress who still loves.

"If I had a son like yours, madame," she said to Madame du Gua, who
was visibly frightened, "I should wear mourning from the day when I had
yielded him to danger; I should know no peace of mind."

No answer was made to this speech. She turned her head repeatedly to
the escort and then suddenly to Madame du Gua, without detecting the
slightest secret signal between the lady and the Gars which might have
confirmed her suspicions on the nature of their intimacy, which she
longed to doubt. The young chief calmly smiled, and bore without
flinching the scrutiny she forced him to undergo; his attitude and the
expression of his face were those of a man indifferent to danger; he
even seemed to say at times: "This is your chance to avenge your wounded
vanity--take it! I have no desire to lessen my contempt for you."

Mademoiselle de Verneuil began to study the young man from the
vantage-ground of her position with coolness and dignity; at the
bottom of her heart she admired his courage and tranquillity. Happy
in discovering that the man she loved bore an ancient title (the
distinctions of which please every woman), she also found pleasure in
meeting him in their present situation, where, as champion of a cause
ennobled by misfortune, he was fighting with all the faculties of a
strong soul against a Republic that was constantly victorious. She
rejoiced to see him brought face to face with danger, and still
displaying the courage and bravery so powerful on a woman's heart; again
and again she put him to the test, obeying perhaps the instinct which
induces a woman to play with her victim as a cat plays with a mouse.

"By virtue of what law do you put the Chouans to death?" she said to
Merle.

"That of the 14th of last Fructidor, which outlaws the insurgent
departments and proclaims martial law," replied the Republican.

"May I ask why I have the honor to attract your eyes?" she said
presently to the young chief, who was attentively watching her.

"Because of a feeling which a man of honor cannot express to any woman,
no matter who she is," replied the Marquis de Montauran, in a low voice,
bending down to her. "We live in times," he said aloud, "when women do
the work of the executioner and wield the axe with even better effect."

She looked at de Montauran fixedly; then, delighted to be attacked
by the man whose life she held in her hands, she said in a low voice,
smiling softly: "Your head is a very poor one; the executioner does not
want it; I shall keep it myself."

The marquis looked at the inexplicable girl, whose love had overcome
all, even insult, and who now avenged herself by forgiving that which
women are said never to forgive. His eyes grew less stern, less cold;
a look of sadness came upon his face. His love was stronger than he
suspected. Mademoiselle de Verneuil, satisfied with these faint signs of
a desired reconciliation, glanced at him tenderly, with a smile that was
like a kiss; then she leaned back once more in the carriage, determined
not to risk the future of this happy drama, believing she had assured
it with her smile. She was so beautiful! She knew so well how to conquer
all obstacles to love! She was so accustomed to take all risks and
push on at all hazards! She loved the unexpected, and the tumults of
life--why should she fear?

Before long the carriage, under the young chief's directions, left the
highway and took a road cut between banks planted with apple-trees, more
like a ditch than a roadway, which led to La Vivetiere. The carriage
now advanced rapidly, leaving the escort to follow slowly towards the
manor-house, the gray roofs of which appeared and disappeared among the
trees. Some of the men lingered on the way to knock the stiff clay of
the road-bed from their shoes.

"This is devilishly like the road to Paradise," remarked Beau-Pied.

Thanks to the impatience of the postilion, Mademoiselle de Verneuil soon
saw the chateau of La Vivetiere. This house, standing at the end of a
sort of promontory, was protected and surrounded by two deep lakelets,
and could be reached only by a narrow causeway. That part of the little
peninsula on which the house and gardens were placed was still further
protected by a moat filled with water from the two lakes which it
connected. The house really stood on an island that was well-nigh
impregnable,--an invaluable retreat for a chieftain, who could be
surprised there only by treachery.

Mademoiselle de Verneuil put her head out of the carriage as she heard
the rusty hinges of the great gates open to give entrance to an arched
portal which had been much injured during the late war. The gloomy
colors of the scene which met her eyes almost extinguished the thoughts
of love and coquetry in which she had been indulging. The carriage
entered a large courtyard that was nearly square, bordered on each side
by the steep banks of the lakelets. Those sterile shores, washed by
water, which was covered with large green patches, had no other ornament
than aquatic trees devoid of foliage, the twisted trunks and hoary
heads of which, rising from the reeds and rushes, gave them a certain
grotesque likeness to gigantic marmosets. These ugly growths seemed
to waken and talk to each other when the frogs deserted them with much
croaking, and the water-fowl, startled by the sound of the wheels,
flew low upon the surface of the pools. The courtyard, full of rank and
seeded grasses, reeds, and shrubs, either dwarf or parasite, excluded
all impression of order or of splendor. The house appeared to have
been long abandoned. The roof seemed to bend beneath the weight of the
various vegetations which grew upon it. The walls, though built of the
smooth, slaty stone which abounds in that region, showed many rifts and
chinks where ivy had fastened its rootlets. Two main buildings, joined
at the angle by a tall tower which faced the lake, formed the whole of
the chateau, the doors and swinging, rotten shutters, rusty balustrades,
and broken windows of which seemed ready to fall at the first tempest.
The north wind whistled through these ruins, to which the moon, with her
indefinite light, gave the character and outline of a great spectre.
But the colors of those gray-blue granites, mingling with the black and
tawny schists, must have been seen in order to understand how vividly
a spectral image was suggested by the empty and gloomy carcass of the
building. Its disjointed stones and paneless windows, the battered tower
and broken roofs gave it the aspect of a skeleton; the birds of prey
which flew from it, shrieking, added another feature to this vague
resemblance. A few tall pine-trees standing behind the house waved their
dark foliage above the roof, and several yews cut into formal shapes at
the angles of the building, festooned it gloomily like the ornaments on
a hearse. The style of the doors, the coarseness of the decorations,
the want of harmony in the architecture, were all characteristic of the
feudal manors of which Brittany was proud; perhaps justly proud, for
they maintained upon that Gaelic ground a species of monumental history
of the nebulous period which preceded the establishment of the French
monarchy.

Mademoiselle de Verneuil, to whose imagination the word "chateau"
brought none but its conventional ideas, was affected by the funereal
aspect of the scene. She sprang from the carriage and stood apart gazing
at in terror, and debating within herself what action she ought to take.
Francine heard Madame du Gua give a sigh of relief as she felt herself
in safety beyond reach of the Blues; an exclamation escaped her when the
gates were closed, and she saw the carriage and its occupants within the
walls of this natural fortress.

The Marquis de Montauran turned hastily to Mademoiselle de Verneuil,
divining the thoughts that crowded in her mind.

"This chateau," he said, rather sadly, "was ruined by the war, just as
my plans for our happiness have been ruined by you."

"How ruined?" she asked in surprise.

"Are you indeed 'beautiful, brilliant, and of noble birth'?" he asked
ironically, repeating the words she had herself used in their former
conversation.

"Who has told you to the contrary?"

"Friends, in whom I put faith; who care for my safety and are on the
watch against treachery."

"Treachery!" she exclaimed, in a sarcastic tone. "Have you forgotten
Hulot and Alencon already? You have no memory,--a dangerous defect
in the leader of a party. But if friends," she added, with increased
sarcasm, "are so all-powerful in your heart, keep your friends. Nothing
is comparable to the joys of friendship. Adieu; neither I nor the
soldiers of the Republic will stop here."

She turned towards the gateway with a look of wounded pride and scorn,
and her motions as she did so displayed a dignity and also a despair
which changed in an instant the thoughts of the young man; he felt that
the cost of relinquishing his desires was too great, and he gave himself
up deliberately to imprudence and credulity. He loved; and the lovers
had no desire now to quarrel with each other.

"Say but one word and I will believe you," he said, in a supplicating
voice.

"One word?" she answered, closing her lips tightly, "not a single word;
not even a gesture."

"At least, be angry with me," he entreated, trying to take the hand she
withheld from him,--"that is, if you dare to be angry with the leader of
the rebels, who is now as sad and distrustful as he was lately happy and
confiding."

Marie gave him a look that was far from angry, and he added: "You have
my secret, but I have not yours."

The alabaster brow appeared to darken at these words; she cast a look
of annoyance on the young chieftain, and answered, hastily: "Tell you my
secret? Never!"

In love every word, every glance has the eloquence of the moment; but on
this occasion Mademoiselle de Verneuil's exclamation revealed nothing,
and, clever as Montauran might be, its secret was impenetrable to him,
though the tones of her voice betrayed some extraordinary and unusual
emotion which piqued his curiosity.

"You have a singular way of dispelling suspicion," he said.

"Do you still suspect me?" she replied, looking him in the eye, as if to
say, "What rights have you over me?"

"Mademoiselle," said the young man, in a voice that was submissive
and yet firm, "the authority you exercise over Republican troops, this
escort--"

"Ah, that reminds me! My escort and I," she asked, in a slightly
satirical tone, "your protectors, in short,--will they be safe here?"

"Yes, on the word of a gentleman. Whoever you be, you and your party
have nothing to fear in my house."

The promise was made with so loyal and generous an air and manner that
Mademoiselle de Verneuil felt absolutely secure as to the safety of
the Republican soldiers. She was about to speak when Madame du Gua's
approach silenced her. That lady had either overheard or guessed part of
their conversation, and was filled with anxiety at no longer perceiving
any signs of animosity between them. As soon as the marquis caught sight
of her, he offered his hand to Mademoiselle de Verneuil and led her
hastily towards the house, as if to escape an undesired companion.

"I am in their way," thought Madame du Gua, remaining where she was.
She watched the lovers walking slowly towards the portico, where they
stopped, as if satisfied to have placed some distance between themselves
and her. "Yes, yes, I am in their way," she repeated, speaking to
herself; "but before long that creature will not be in mine; the lake,
God willing, shall have her. I'll help him keep his word as a gentleman;
once under the water, she has nothing to fear,--what can be safer than
that?"

She was looking fixedly at the still mirror of the little lake to the
right when suddenly she heard a rustling among the rushes and saw in the
moonlight the face of Marche-a-Terre rising behind the gnarled trunk
of an old willow. None but those who knew the Chouan well could have
distinguished him from the tangle of branches of which he seemed a part.
Madame du Gua looked about her with some distrust; she saw the postilion
leading his horses to a stable in the wing of the chateau which was
opposite to the bank where Marche-a-Terre was hiding; Francine, with her
back to her, was going towards the two lovers, who at that moment had
forgotten the whole earth. Madame du Gua, with a finger on her lip to
demand silence, walked towards the Chouan, who guessed rather than heard
her question, "How many of you are here?"

"Eighty-seven."

"They are sixty-five; I counted them."

"Good," said the savage, with sullen satisfaction.

Attentive to all Francine's movements, the Chouan disappeared behind
the willow, as he saw her turn to look for the enemy over whom she was
keeping an instinctive watch.

Six or eight persons, attracted by the noise of the carriage-wheels,
came out on the portico, shouting: "It is the Gars! it is he; here he
is!" On this several other men ran out, and their coming interrupted
the lovers. The Marquis de Montauran went hastily up to them, making an
imperative gesture for silence, and pointing to the farther end of the
causeway, where the Republican escort was just appearing. At the sight
of the well-known blue uniforms with red facings, and the glittering
bayonets, the amazed conspirators called out hastily, "You have surely
not betrayed us?"

"If I had, I should not warn you," said the marquis, smiling bitterly.
"Those Blues," he added, after a pause, "are the escort of this young
lady, whose generosity has delivered us, almost miraculously, from
a danger we were in at Alencon. I will tell you about it later.
Mademoiselle and her escort are here in safety, on my word as a
gentleman, and we must all receive them as friends."

Madame du Gua and Francine were now on the portico; the marquis offered
his hand to Mademoiselle de Verneuil, the group of gentlemen parted in
two lines to allow them to pass, endeavoring, as they did so, to catch
sight of the young lady's features; for Madame du Gua, who was following
behind, excited their curiosity by secret signs.

Mademoiselle de Verneuil saw, with surprise, that a large table was set
in the first hall, for about twenty guests. The dining-room opened into
a vast salon, where the whole party were presently assembled. These
