
They all held their peace; but there was among the Trojans a certain
man named Dolon, son of Eumedes, the famous herald--a man rich in gold
and bronze. He was ill-favoured, but a good runner, and was an only son
among five sisters. He it was that now addressed the Trojans. "I,
Hector," said he, "Will to the ships and will exploit them. But first
hold up your sceptre and swear that you will give me the chariot,
bedight with bronze, and the horses that now carry the noble son of
Peleus. I will make you a good scout, and will not fail you. I will go
through the host from one end to the other till I come to the ship of
Agamemnon, where I take it the princes of the Achaeans are now
consulting whether they shall fight or fly."

When he had done speaking Hector held up his sceptre, and swore him his
oath saying, "May Jove the thundering husband of Juno bear witness that
no other Trojan but yourself shall mount those steeds, and that you
shall have your will with them for ever."

The oath he swore was bootless, but it made Dolon more keen on going.
He hung his bow over his shoulder, and as an overall he wore the skin
of a grey wolf, while on his head he set a cap of ferret skin. Then he
took a pointed javelin, and left the camp for the ships, but he was not
to return with any news for Hector. When he had left the horses and the
troops behind him, he made all speed on his way, but Ulysses perceived
his coming and said to Diomed, "Diomed, here is some one from the camp;
I am not sure whether he is a spy, or whether it is some thief who
would plunder the bodies of the dead; let him get a little past us, we
can then spring upon him and take him. If, however, he is too quick for
us, go after him with your spear and hem him in towards the ships away
from the Trojan camp, to prevent his getting back to the town."

With this they turned out of their way and lay down among the corpses.
Dolon suspected nothing and soon passed them, but when he had got about
as far as the distance by which a mule-plowed furrow exceeds one that
has been ploughed by oxen (for mules can plow fallow land quicker than
oxen) they ran after him, and when he heard their footsteps he stood
still, for he made sure they were friends from the Trojan camp come by
Hector's orders to bid him return; when, however, they were only a
spear's cast, or less, away from him, he saw that they were enemies and ran
as fast as his legs could take him. The others gave chase at once, and as
a couple of well-trained hounds press forward after a doe or hare that
runs screaming in front of them, even so did the son of Tydeus and
Ulysses pursue Dolon and cut him off from his own people. But when he
had fled so far towards the ships that he would soon have fallen in
with the outposts, Minerva infused fresh strength into the son of
Tydeus for fear some other of the Achaeans might have the glory of
being first to hit him, and he might himself be only second; he
therefore sprang forward with his spear and said, "Stand, or I shall
throw my spear, and in that case I shall soon make an end of you."

He threw as he spoke, but missed his aim on purpose. The dart flew over
the man's right shoulder, and then stuck in the ground. He stood stock
still, trembling and in great fear; his teeth chattered, and he turned
pale with fear. The two came breathless up to him and seized his hands,
whereon he began to weep and said, "Take me alive; I will ransom
myself; we have great store of gold, bronze, and wrought iron, and from
this my father will satisfy you with a very large ransom, should he
hear of my being alive at the ships of the Achaeans."

"Fear not," replied Ulysses, "let no thought of death be in your mind;
but tell me, and tell me true, why are you thus going about alone in
the dead of night away from your camp and towards the ships, while
other men are sleeping? Is it to plunder the bodies of the slain, or
did Hector send you to spy out what was going on at the ships? Or did
you come here of your own mere notion?"

Dolon answered, his limbs trembling beneath him: "Hector, with his vain
flattering promises, lured me from my better judgement. He said he
would give me the horses of the noble son of Peleus and his
bronze-bedizened chariot; he bade me go through the darkness of the
flying night, get close to the enemy, and find out whether the ships
are still guarded as heretofore, or whether, now that we have beaten
them, the Achaeans design to fly, and through sheer exhaustion are
neglecting to keep their watches."

Ulysses smiled at him and answered, "You had indeed set your heart upon
a great reward, but the horses of the descendant of Aeacus are hardly
to be kept in hand or driven by any other mortal man than Achilles
himself, whose mother was an immortal. But tell me, and tell me true,
where did you leave Hector when you started? Where lies his armour and
his horses? How, too, are the watches and sleeping-ground of the
Trojans ordered? What are their plans? Will they stay here by the ships
and away from the city, or now that they have worsted the Achaeans,
will they retire within their walls?"

And Dolon answered, "I will tell you truly all. Hector and the other
councillors are now holding conference by the monument of great Ilus,
away from the general tumult; as for the guards about which you ask me,
there is no chosen watch to keep guard over the host. The Trojans have
their watchfires, for they are bound to have them; they, therefore, are
awake and keep each other to their duty as sentinels; but the allies
who have come from other places are asleep and leave it to the Trojans
to keep guard, for their wives and children are not here."

Ulysses then said, "Now tell me; are they sleeping among the Trojan
troops, or do they lie apart? Explain this that I may understand it."

"I will tell you truly all," replied Dolon. "To the seaward lie the
Carians, the Paeonian bowmen, the Leleges, the Cauconians, and the
noble Pelasgi. The Lysians and proud Mysians, with the Phrygians and
Meonians, have their place on the side towards Thymbra; but why ask
about all this? If you want to find your way into the host of the
Trojans, there are the Thracians, who have lately come here and lie
apart from the others at the far end of the camp; and they have Rhesus
son of Eioneus for their king. His horses are the finest and strongest
that I have ever seen, they are whiter than snow and fleeter than any
wind that blows. His chariot is bedight with silver and gold, and he
has brought his marvellous golden armour, of the rarest
workmanship--too splendid for any mortal man to carry, and meet only
for the gods. Now, therefore, take me to the ships or bind me securely
here, until you come back and have proved my words whether they be
false or true."

Diomed looked sternly at him and answered, "Think not, Dolon, for all
the good information you have given us, that you shall escape now you
are in our hands, for if we ransom you or let you go, you will come
some second time to the ships of the Achaeans either as a spy or as an
open enemy, but if I kill you and an end of you, you will give no more
trouble."

On this Dolon would have caught him by the beard to beseech him
further, but Diomed struck him in the middle of his neck with his sword
and cut through both sinews so that his head fell rolling in the dust
while he was yet speaking. They took the ferret-skin cap from his head,
and also the wolf-skin, the bow, and his long spear. Ulysses hung them
up aloft in honour of Minerva the goddess of plunder, and prayed
saying, "Accept these, goddess, for we give them to you in preference
to all the gods in Olympus: therefore speed us still further towards
the horses and sleeping-ground of the Thracians."

With these words he took the spoils and set them upon a tamarisk tree,
and they marked the place by pulling up reeds and gathering boughs of
tamarisk that they might not miss it as they came back through the
flying hours of darkness. The two then went onwards amid the fallen
armour and the blood, and came presently to the company of Thracian
soldiers, who were sleeping, tired out with their day's toil; their
goodly armour was lying on the ground beside them all orderly in three
rows, and each man had his yoke of horses beside him. Rhesus was
sleeping in the middle, and hard by him his horses were made fast to
the topmost rim of his chariot. Ulysses from some way off saw him and
said, "This, Diomed, is the man, and these are the horses about which
Dolon whom we killed told us. Do your very utmost; dally not about your
armour, but loose the horses at once--or else kill the men yourself,
while I see to the horses."

Thereon Minerva put courage into the heart of Diomed, and he smote them
right and left. They made a hideous groaning as they were being hacked
about, and the earth was red with their blood. As a lion springs
furiously upon a flock of sheep or goats when he finds them without
their shepherd, so did the son of Tydeus set upon the Thracian soldiers
till he had killed twelve. As he killed them Ulysses came and drew them
aside by their feet one by one, that the horses might go forward freely
without being frightened as they passed over the dead bodies, for they
were not yet used to them. When the son of Tydeus came to the king, he
killed him too (which made thirteen), as he was breathing hard, for by
the counsel of Minerva an evil dream, the seed of Oeneus, hovered that
night over his head. Meanwhile Ulysses untied the horses, made them
fast one to another and drove them off, striking them with his bow, for
he had forgotten to take the whip from the chariot. Then he whistled as
a sign to Diomed.

But Diomed stayed where he was, thinking what other daring deed he
might accomplish. He was doubting whether to take the chariot in which
the king's armour was lying, and draw it out by the pole, or to lift
the armour out and carry it off; or whether again, he should not kill
some more Thracians. While he was thus hesitating Minerva came up to
him and said, "Get back, Diomed, to the ships or you may be driven
thither, should some other god rouse the Trojans."

Diomed knew that it was the goddess, and at once sprang upon the
horses. Ulysses beat them with his bow and they flew onward to the
ships of the Achaeans.

But Apollo kept no blind look-out when he saw Minerva with the son of
Tydeus. He was angry with her, and coming to the host of the Trojans he
roused Hippocoon, a counsellor of the Thracians and a noble kinsman of
Rhesus. He started up out of his sleep and saw that the horses were no
longer in their place, and that the men were gasping in their
death-agony; on this he groaned aloud, and called upon his friend by
name. Then the whole Trojan camp was in an uproar as the people kept
hurrying together, and they marvelled at the deeds of the heroes who
had now got away towards the ships.

When they reached the place where they had killed Hector's scout,
Ulysses stayed his horses, and the son of Tydeus, leaping to the
ground, placed the blood-stained spoils in the hands of Ulysses and
remounted: then he lashed the horses onwards, and they flew forward
nothing loth towards the ships as though of their own free will. Nestor
was first to hear the tramp of their feet. "My friends," said he,
"princes and counsellors of the Argives, shall I guess right or
wrong?--but I must say what I think: there is a sound in my ears as of
the tramp of horses. I hope it may be Diomed and Ulysses driving in
horses from the Trojans, but I much fear that the bravest of the
Argives may have come to some harm at their hands."

He had hardly done speaking when the two men came in and dismounted,
whereon the others shook hands right gladly with them and congratulated
them. Nestor knight of Gerene was first to question them. "Tell me,"
said he, "renowned Ulysses, how did you two come by these horses? Did
you steal in among the Trojan forces, or did some god meet you and give
them to you? They are like sunbeams. I am well conversant with the
Trojans, for old warrior though I am I never hold back by the ships,
but I never yet saw or heard of such horses as these are. Surely some
god must have met you and given them to you, for you are both of you
dear to Jove, and to Jove's daughter Minerva."

And Ulysses answered, "Nestor son of Neleus, honour to the Achaean
name, heaven, if it so will, can give us even better horses than these,
for the gods are far mightier than we are. These horses, however, about
which you ask me, are freshly come from Thrace. Diomed killed their
king with the twelve bravest of his companions. Hard by the ships we
took a thirteenth man--a scout whom Hector and the other Trojans had
sent as a spy upon our ships."

He laughed as he spoke and drove the horses over the ditch, while the
other Achaeans followed him gladly. When they reached the strongly
built quarters of the son of Tydeus, they tied the horses with thongs
of leather to the manger, where the steeds of Diomed stood eating their
sweet corn, but Ulysses hung the blood-stained spoils of Dolon at the
stern of his ship, that they might prepare a sacred offering to
Minerva. As for themselves, they went into the sea and washed the sweat
from their bodies, and from their necks and thighs. When the sea-water
had taken all the sweat from off them, and had refreshed them, they
went into the baths and washed themselves. After they had so done and
had anointed themselves with oil, they sat down to table, and drawing
from a full mixing-bowl, made a drink-offering of wine to Minerva.



BOOK XI

  In the forenoon the fight is equal, but Agamemnon turns the
  fortune of the day towards the Achaeans until he gets
  wounded and leaves the field--Hector then drives everything
  before him till he is wounded by Diomed--Paris wounds
  Diomed--Ulysses, Nestor, and Idomeneus perform prodigies
  of valour--Machaon is wounded--Nestor drives him off in
  his chariot--Achilles sees the pair driving towards the camp
  and sends Patroclus to ask who it is that is wounded--This
  is the beginning of evil for Patroclus--Nestor makes a long
  speech.

AND now as Dawn rose from her couch beside Tithonus, harbinger of light
alike to mortals and immortals, Jove sent fierce Discord with the
ensign of war in her hands to the ships of the Achaeans. She took her
stand by the huge black hull of Ulysses' ship which was middlemost of
all, so that her voice might carry farthest on either side, on the one
hand towards the tents of Ajax son of Telamon, and on the other towards
those of Achilles--for these two heroes, well-assured of their own
strength, had valorously drawn up their ships at the two ends of the
line. There she took her stand, and raised a cry both loud and shrill
that filled the Achaeans with courage, giving them heart to fight
resolutely and with all their might, so that they had rather stay there
and do battle than go home in their ships.

The son of Atreus shouted aloud and bade the Argives gird themselves
for battle while he put on his armour. First he girded his goodly
greaves about his legs, making them fast with ankle-clasps of silver;
and about his chest he set the breastplate which Cinyras had once given
him as a guest-gift. It had been noised abroad as far as Cyprus that
the Achaeans were about to sail for Troy, and therefore he gave it to
the king. It had ten courses of dark cyanus, twelve of gold, and ten of
tin. There were serpents of cyanus that reared themselves up towards
the neck, three upon either side, like the rainbows which the son of
Saturn has set in heaven as a sign to mortal men. About his shoulders
he threw his sword, studded with bosses of gold; and the scabbard was
of silver with a chain of gold wherewith to hang it. He took moreover
the richly-dight shield that covered his body when he was in
battle--fair to see, with ten circles of bronze running all round it.
On the body of the shield there were twenty bosses of white tin, with
another of dark cyanus in the middle: this last was made to show a
Gorgon's head, fierce and grim, with Rout and Panic on either side. The
band for the arm to go through was of silver, on which there was a
writhing snake of cyanus with three heads that sprang from a single
neck, and went in and out among one another. On his head Agamemnon set
a helmet, with a peak before and behind, and four plumes of horse-hair
that nodded menacingly above it; then he grasped two redoubtable
bronze-shod spears, and the gleam of his armour shot from him as a
flame into the firmament, while Juno and Minerva thundered in honour of
the king of rich Mycene.

Every man now left his horses in charge of his charioteer to hold them
in readiness by the trench, while he went into battle on foot clad in
full armour, and a mighty uproar rose on high into the dawning. The
chiefs were armed and at the trench before the horses got there, but
these came up presently. The son of Saturn sent a portent of evil sound
about their host, and the dew fell red with blood, for he was about to
send many a brave man hurrying down to Hades.

The Trojans, on the other side upon the rising slope of the plain, were
gathered round great Hector, noble Polydamas, Aeneas who was honoured
by the Trojans like an immortal, and the three sons of Antenor,
Polybus, Agenor, and young Acamas beauteous as a god. Hector's round
shield showed in the front rank, and as some baneful star that shines
for a moment through a rent in the clouds and is again hidden beneath
them; even so was Hector now seen in the front ranks and now again in
the hindermost, and his bronze armour gleamed like the lightning of
aegis-bearing Jove.

And now as a band of reapers mow swathes of wheat or barley upon a rich
man's land, and the sheaves fall thick before them, even so did the
Trojans and Achaeans fall upon one another; they were in no mood for
yielding but fought like wolves, and neither side got the better of the
other. Discord was glad as she beheld them, for she was the only god
that went among them; the others were not there, but stayed quietly
each in his own home among the dells and valleys of Olympus. All of
them blamed the son of Saturn for wanting to give victory to the
Trojans, but father Jove heeded them not: he held aloof from all, and
sat apart in his all-glorious majesty, looking down upon the city of
the Trojans, the ships of the Achaeans, the gleam of bronze, and alike
upon the slayers and on the slain.

Now so long as the day waxed and it was still morning, their darts
rained thick on one another and the people perished, but as the hour
drew nigh when a woodman working in some mountain forest will get his
midday meal--for he has felled till his hands are weary; he is tired
out, and must now have food--then the Danaans with a cry that rang
through all their ranks, broke the battalions of the enemy. Agamemnon
led them on, and slew first Bienor, a leader of his people, and
afterwards his comrade and charioteer Oileus, who sprang from his
chariot and was coming full towards him; but Agamemnon struck him on
the forehead with his spear; his bronze visor was of no avail against
the weapon, which pierced both bronze and bone, so that his brains were
battered in and he was killed in full fight.

Agamemnon stripped their shirts from off them and left them with their
breasts all bare to lie where they had fallen. He then went on to kill
Isus and Antiphus two sons of Priam, the one a bastard, the other born
in wedlock; they were in the same chariot--the bastard driving, while
noble Antiphus fought beside him. Achilles had once taken both of them
prisoners in the glades of Ida, and had bound them with fresh withes as
they were shepherding, but he had taken a ransom for them; now,
however, Agamemnon son of Atreus smote Isus in the chest above the
nipple with his spear, while he struck Antiphus hard by the ear and
threw him from his chariot. Forthwith he stripped their goodly armour
from off them and recognized them, for he had already seen them at
ships when Achilles brought them in from Ida. As a lion fastens on the
fawns of a hind and crushes them in his great jaws, robbing them of
their tender life while he on his way back to his lair--the hind can do
nothing for them even though she be close by, for she is in an agony of
fear, and flies through the thick forest, sweating, and at her utmost
speed before the mighty monster--so, no man of the Trojans could help
Isus and Antiphus, for they were themselves flying in panic before the
Argives.

Then King Agamemnon took the two sons of Antimachus, Pisander and brave
Hippolochus. It was Antimachus who had been foremost in preventing
Helen's being restored to Menelaus, for he was largely bribed by
Alexandrus; and now Agamemnon took his two sons, both in the same
chariot, trying to bring their horses to a stand--for they had lost
hold of the reins and the horses were mad with fear. The son of Atreus
sprang upon them like a lion, and the pair besought him from their
chariot. "Take us alive," they cried, "son of Atreus, and you shall
receive a great ransom for us. Our father Antimachus has great store of
gold, bronze, and wrought iron, and from this he will satisfy you with
a very large ransom should he hear of our being alive at the ships of
the Achaeans."

With such piteous words and tears did they beseech the king, but they
heard no pitiful answer in return. "If," said Agamemnon, "you are sons
of Antimachus, who once at a council of Trojans proposed that Menelaus
and Ulysses, who had come to you as envoys, should be killed and not
suffered to return, you shall now pay for the foul iniquity of your
father."

As he spoke he felled Pisander from his chariot to the earth, smiting
him on the chest with his spear, so that he lay face uppermost upon the
ground. Hippolochus fled, but him too did Agamemnon smite; he cut off
his hands and his head--which he sent rolling in among the crowd as
though it were a ball. There he let them both lie, and wherever the
ranks were thickest thither he flew, while the other Achaeans followed.
Foot soldiers drove the foot soldiers of the foe in rout before them,
and slew them; horsemen did the like by horsemen, and the thundering
tramp of the horses raised a cloud of dust from off the plain. King
Agamemnon followed after, ever slaying them and cheering on the
Achaeans. As when some mighty forest is all ablaze--the eddying gusts
whirl fire in all directions till the thickets shrivel and are consumed
before the blast of the flame--even so fell the heads of the flying
Trojans before Agamemnon son of Atreus, and many a noble pair of steeds
drew an empty chariot along the highways of war, for lack of drivers
who were lying on the plain, more useful now to vultures than to their
wives.

Jove drew Hector away from the darts and dust, with the carnage and din
of battle; but the son of Atreus sped onwards, calling out lustily to
the Danaans. They flew on by the tomb of old Ilus, son of Dardanus, in
the middle of the plain, and past the place of the wild fig-tree making
always for the city--the son of Atreus still shouting, and with hands
all bedrabbled in gore; but when they had reached the Scaean gates and
the oak tree, there they halted and waited for the others to come up.
Meanwhile the Trojans kept on flying over the middle of the plain like
a herd of cows maddened with fright when a lion has attacked them in
the dead of night--he springs on one of them, seizes her neck in the
grip of his strong teeth and then laps up her blood and gorges himself
upon her entrails--even so did King Agamemnon son of Atreus pursue the
foe, ever slaughtering the hindmost as they fled pell-mell before him.
Many a man was flung headlong from his chariot by the hand of the son
of Atreus, for he wielded his spear with fury.

But when he was just about to reach the high wall and the city, the
father of gods and men came down from heaven and took his seat,
thunderbolt in hand, upon the crest of many-fountained Ida. He then
told Iris of the golden wings to carry a message for him. "Go," said
he, "fleet Iris, and speak thus to Hector--say that so long as he sees
Agamemnon heading his men and making havoc of the Trojan ranks, he is
to keep aloof and bid the others bear the brunt of the battle, but when
Agamemnon is wounded either by spear or arrow, and takes to his
chariot, then will I vouchsafe him strength to slay till he reach the
ships and night falls at the going down of the sun."

Iris hearkened and obeyed. Down she went to strong Ilius from the
crests of Ida, and found Hector son of Priam standing by his chariot
and horses. Then she said, "Hector son of Priam, peer of gods in
counsel, father Jove has sent me to bear you this message--so long as
you see Agamemnon heading his men and making havoc of the Trojan ranks,
you are to keep aloof and bid the others bear the brunt of the battle,
but when Agamemnon is wounded either by spear or arrow, and takes to
his chariot, then will Jove vouchsafe you strength to slay till you
reach the ships, and till night falls at the going down of the sun."

When she had thus spoken Iris left him, and Hector sprang full armed
from his chariot to the ground, brandishing his spear as he went about
everywhere among the host, cheering his men on to fight, and stirring
the dread strife of battle. The Trojans then wheeled round, and again
met the Achaeans, while the Argives on their part strengthened their
battalions. The battle was now in array and they stood face to face
with one another, Agamemnon ever pressing forward in his eagerness to
be ahead of all others.

Tell me now ye Muses that dwell in the mansions of Olympus, who,
whether of the Trojans or of their allies, was first to face Agamemnon?
It was Iphidamas son of Antenor, a man both brave and of great stature,
who was brought up in fertile Thrace, the mother of sheep. Cisses, his
mother's father, brought him up in his own house when he was a
child--Cisses, father to fair Theano. When he reached manhood, Cisses
would have kept him there, and was for giving him his daughter in
marriage, but as soon as he had married he set out to fight the
Achaeans with twelve ships that followed him: these he had left at
Percote and had come on by land to Ilius. He it was that now met
Agamemnon son of Atreus. When they were close up with one another, the
son of Atreus missed his aim, and Iphidamas hit him on the girdle below
the cuirass and then flung himself upon him, trusting to his strength
of arm; the girdle, however, was not pierced, nor nearly so, for the
point of the spear struck against the silver and was turned aside as
though it had been lead: King Agamemnon caught it from his hand, and
drew it towards him with the fury of a lion; he then drew his sword,
and killed Iphidamas by striking him on the neck. So there the poor
fellow lay, sleeping a sleep as it were of bronze, killed in the
defence of his fellow-citizens, far from his wedded wife, of whom he
had had no joy though he had given much for her: he had given a
hundred-head of cattle down, and had promised later on to give a
thousand sheep and goats mixed, from the countless flocks of which he
was possessed. Agamemnon son of Atreus then despoiled him, and carried
off his armour into the host of the Achaeans.

When noble Coon, Antenor's eldest son, saw this, sore indeed were his
eyes at the sight of his fallen brother. Unseen by Agamemnon he got
beside him, spear in hand, and wounded him in the middle of his arm
below the elbow, the point of the spear going right through the arm.
