
CHAPTER XXIII

WESTWARD TO THE MEKONG RIVER

Snow--Photographing natives--The Snow Mountain again--The Shih-ku
ferry--Cranes--"Brahminy ducks"--A well-deserved beating--Chinese soldiers

CHAPTER XXIV

DOWN THE MEKONG VALLEY

Arrival at Wei-hsi--The Mekong River--Lutzu natives--Difficulties in the
valley--An unexpected goral--Christmas--The salt wells--A snow covered
pass--Duck shooting--Return to Ta-li Fu

CHAPTER XXV

MISSIONARIES WE HAVE KNOWN

Our observations on work of missionaries in Fukien and Yuen-nan
Provinces--Mode of living--Servants--Voluntary exile--Medical
missionaries--A missionary's experience with the brigands at Yuchi

CHAPTER XXVI

CHINESE NEW YEAR AT YUNG-CHANG

Y.B.A.

Traveling to Yung-chang--New Year's customs--Inhabitants of the
city--Foot-binding--Caves--Water buffaloes--Chinese
cow-caravans--Yung-chang mentioned by Marco Polo

CHAPTER XXVII

TRAVELING TOWARD THE TROPICS

Shih-tien plain--Curious inhabitants of the city--A tropical valley at
Ma-po-lo--"A little more far"--A splendid camp--Many new mammals--Preparing
specimens--Sambur--Trapping

CHAPTER XXVIII

MENG-TING: A VILLAGE: OF MANY TONGUES

The first Shan village--Priscilla and John Alden--Meng-ting--The Shan
mandarin--Young priests--The market--Photographing under
difficulties--Suppression of opium growing

CHAPTER XXIX

CAMPING ON THE NAM-TING RIVER

A beautiful camp--The "Dying Rabbit"--Sambur hunting--Jungle
fowl--Civets--Pole cats and other animals

CHAPTER XXX

MONKEY HUNTING

Strange calls in the jungle--Our first gibbons--Relationship and
habits--Langurs and baboons--A night in the jungle

CHAPTER XXXI

THE SHANS OF THE BURMA BORDER

An unfriendly chief--Honest natives--Houses at Nam-ka--Tattooing--Shan
tribe--Dress

CHAPTER XXXII

PRISONERS OF WAR IN BURMA

Y.B.A.

The mythical Ma-li-ling--Across the frontier into Burma--The _mafus_
rebel--Ma-li-pa--Captain Clive--Guarding the border--Life at Ma-li-pa

CHAPTER XXXIII

HUNTING PEACOCKS ON THE SALWEEN RIVER

The valley at Changlung--The ferry--Peacocks--The stalker stalked--Habits
of peafowls

CHAPTER XXXIV

THE GIBBONS OF HO-MU-SHU

Climbing out of the Salween Valley--A Shan village--Ho-mu-shu--Camping on a
mountain pass--Gibbons--An exciting hunt and a narrow escape--Habits of the
"hoolock"

CHAPTER XXXV

TENG-YUEH: A LINK WITH CIVILIZATION

Tai-ping-pu--Flying squirrels--Lisos--A bat cave--Mail--Teng-yueh--Mr.
Ralph Grierson--Tibetan bear cubs

CHAPTER XXXVI

A BIG GAME PARADISE

Gorals at Hui-yao--Deer--Splendid hunts

CHAPTER XXXVII

SEROW AND SAMBUR

Monkeys at Hui-yao--Muntjacs--A new serow--We move camp to Wa-tien--A fine
sambur

CHAPTER XXXVIII

LAST DAYS IN CHINA

Return to Teng-yueh--Packing the specimens--Results of the Expedition--On
the road to Bhamo--The chair coolies--Burma _vs._ China--In civilization
again--Farewell to the Orient




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


Our camp on the Snow Mountain at an altitude of 12,000 feet.

Yvette Borup Andrews with a pet Yuen-nan squirrel
Edmund Heller
Roy Chapman Andrews and a goral

A Chinese hunter and a muntjac
Brigands killed in the Yen-ping Rebellion

The Ling-suik monastery
A priest of Ling-suik

A Chinese mother with her children
Chinese women of the coolie class with bound feet

Cormorant fishers on the lake at Yuen-nan Fu
Our camp at Chou Chou on the way to Ta-li Fu

The Pagodas at Ta-li Fu
The dead of China

The residence of Rev. William J. Hanna at Ta-li-Fu
The gate and main street of Ta-li Fu

One of the pagodas at Ta-li Fu

A Moso herder
A Moso woman

The Snow Mountain

A cheek gun used by one of our hunters
The first goral killed on the Snow Mountain

Hotenfa, one of our Moso hunters, bringing in a goral
Another Moso hunter with a porcupine

A typical goral cliff on the Snow Mountain

A serow killed on the Snow Mountain
The head of a serow

The "white water"

A Liso hunter carrying a flying squirrel
The chief of our Lolo hunters

A Lolo village
Lolos seeing their photographs for the first time

Travelers in the Mekong valley
Two Tibetans

The gorge of the Yangtze River

A quiet curve of the Mekong River

The temple in which we camped at Ta-li Fu
A crested muntjac

The south gate at Yung-chang
A Chinese bride returning to her mother's home at New Year's

A Chinese patriarch
Young China

A Shan village
A Shan woman spinning

A Kachin woman in the market at Meng-ting
One of our Shan hunters with two yellow gibbons

Our camp on the Nam-ting River
The Shan village at Nam-ka

The head of a gibbon killed on the Nam-ting River
A civet

A Shan girl
A Shan boy

A suspension bridge
Mrs. Andrews feeding one of our bear cubs

A sambur killed at Wa-tien
The head of a muntjac

A mountain chair
The waterfall at Teng-Yueh

MAP I. The red line indicates the travels of the Expedition

MAP II. Route of the Expedition in Yuen-nan





CAMPS AND TRAILS IN CHINA




CHAPTER I


THE OBJECT OF THE EXPEDITION

The earliest remains of primitive man probably will be found somewhere in
the vast plateau of Central Asia, north of the Himalaya Mountains. From
this region came the successive invasions that poured into Europe from the
east, to India from the north, and to China from the west; the migration
route to North America led over the Bering Strait and spread fanwise south
and southeast to the farthest extremity of South America. The Central Asian
plateau at the beginning of the Pleistocene was probably less arid than it
is today and there is reason to believe that this general region was not
only the distributing center of man but also of many of the forms of
mammalian life which are now living in other parts of the world. For
instance, our American moose, the wapiti or elk, Rocky Mountain sheep, the
so-called mountain goat, and other animals are probably of Central Asian
origin.

Doubtless there were many contributing causes to the extensive wanderings
of primitive tribes, but as they were primarily hunters, one of the most
important must have been the movements of the game upon which they lived.
Therefore the study of the early human races is, necessarily, closely
connected with, and dependent upon, a knowledge of the Central Asian
mammalian life and its distribution. No systematic palaeontological,
archaeological, or zooelogical study of this region on a large scale has
ever been attempted, and there is no similar area of the inhabited surface
of the earth about which so little is known.

The American Museum of Natural History hopes in the near future to conduct
extensive explorations in this part of the world along general scientific
lines. The country itself and its inhabitants, however, present unusual
obstacles to scientific research. Not only is the region one of vast
intersecting mountain ranges, the greatest of the earth, but the climate is
too cold in winter to permit of continuous work. The people have a natural
dislike for foreigners, and the political events of the last half century
have not tended to decrease their suspicions.

It is possible to overcome such difficulties, but the plans for extensive
research must be carefully prepared. One of the most important steps is the
sending out of preliminary expeditions to gain a general knowledge of the
natives and fauna and of the conditions to be encountered. For the first
reconnoissance, which was intended to be largely a mammalian survey, the
Asiatic Zooelogical Expedition left New York in March, 1916.

Its destination was Yuen-nan, a province in southwestern China. This is one
of the least known parts of the Chinese Republic and, because of its
southern latitude and high mountain systems, the climate and faunal range
is very great. It is about equal in size to the state of California and
topographically might be likened to the ocean in a furious gale, for the
greater part of its surface has been thrown into vast mountain waves which
divide and cross one another in hopeless confusion.

Yuen-nan is bordered on the north by Tibet and S'suchuan, on the west by
Burma, on the south by Tonking, and on the east by Kwei-chau Province.
Faunistically the entire northwestern part of Yuen-nan is essentially
Tibetan, and the plateaus and mountain peaks range from altitudes of 8,000
feet to 20,000 feet above sea level. In the south and west along the
borders of Burma and Tonking, in the low fever-stricken valleys, the
climate is that of the mid-tropics, and the native life, as well as the
fauna and flora, is of a totally different type from that found in the
north.

The natives of Yuen-nan are exceptionally interesting. There are about
thirty non-Chinese tribes in the province, some of whom, such as the Shans
and Lolos, represent the aboriginal inhabitants of China, and it is safe to
say that in no similar area of the world is there such a variety of
language and dialects as in this region.

Although the main work of the Expedition was to be conducted in Yuen-nan, we
decided to spend a short time in Fukien Province, China, and endeavor to
obtain a specimen of the so-called "blue tiger" which has been seen twice
by the Reverend Harry R. Caldwell, a missionary and amateur naturalist, who
has done much hunting in the vicinity of Foochow.

The white members of the first Asiatic Zooelogical Expedition included Mr.
Edmund Heller, my wife (Yvette Borup Andrews) and myself. A Chinese
interpreter, Wu Hung-tao, with five native assistants and ten muleteers,
completed the personnel.

Mr. Heller is a collector of wide experience. His early work, which was
done in the western United States and the Galapagos Islands, was followed
by many years of collecting in Mexico, Alaska, South America, and Africa.
He first visited British East Africa with Mr. Carl E. Akeley, next with
ex-President Theodore Roosevelt, and again with Mr. Paul J. Rainey. During
the Asiatic Zooelogical Expedition Mr. Heller devoted most of his time to
the gathering and preparation of small mammals. He joined our party late in
July in China.

Mrs. Andrews was the photographer of the Expedition. She had studied
photography as an amateur in Germany, France, and Italy, as well as in New
York, and had devoted especial attention to the taking of photographs in
natural colors. Such work requires infinite care and patience, but the
results are well worth the efforts expended.

Wu Hung-tao is a native of Foochow, China, and studied English at the
Anglo-Chinese College in that city. He lived for some time in Teng-yueh,
Yuen-nan, in the employ of Mr. F.W. Carey, Commissioner of Customs, and not
only speaks mandarin Chinese but also several native dialects. He acted as
interpreter, head "boy," and general field manager. My own work was devoted
mainly to the direction of the Expedition and the hunting of big game.

In order to reduce the heavy transportation charges we purchased only such
equipment in New York as could not be obtained in Shanghai or Hongkong.
Messrs. Shoverling, Daly & Gales furnished our guns, ammunition, tents, and
general camp equipment, and gave excellent satisfaction in attention to the
minor details which often assume alarming importance when an expedition is
in the field and defects cannot be remedied. All food and commissary
supplies were purchased in Hongkong (_see_ Chapter IX).

       *       *       *       *       *

When the announcement of the Expedition was made by the American Museum of
Natural History it received wide publicity in America and other parts of
the world. Immediately we began to discover how many strange persons make
up the great cities of the United States, and we received letters and
telegrams from hundreds of people who wished to take part in the
Expedition. Men and boys were the principal applicants, but there was no
