    Thenceforth, though, seated there, long time I watch'd.
      He ended; I my studded faulchion huge                          320
    Athwart my shoulder cast, and seized my bow,
    Then bade him lead me thither by the way
    Himself had gone; but with both hands my knees
    He clasp'd, and in wing'd accents sad exclaim'd.
      My King! ah lead me not unwilling back,
    But leave me here; for confident I judge
    That neither thou wilt bring another thence,
    Nor come thyself again. Haste--fly we swift
    With these, for we, at least, may yet escape.
      So he, to whom this answer I return'd.                         330
    Eurylochus! abiding here, eat thou
    And drink thy fill beside the sable bark;
    I go; necessity forbids my stay.
      So saying, I left the galley and the shore.
    But ere that awful vale ent'ring, I reach'd
    The palace of the sorceress, a God
    Met me, the bearer of the golden wand,
    Hermes. He seem'd a stripling in his prime,
    His cheeks cloath'd only with their earliest down,
    For youth is then most graceful; fast he lock'd                  340
    His hand in mine, and thus, familiar, spake.
      Unhappy! whither, wand'ring o'er the hills,
    Stranger to all this region, and alone,
    Go'st thou? Thy people--they within the walls
    Are shut of Circe, where as swine close-pent
    She keeps them. Comest thou to set them free?
    I tell thee, never wilt thou thence return
    Thyself, but wilt be prison'd with the rest.
    Yet hearken--I will disappoint her wiles,
    And will preserve thee. Take this precious drug;                 350
    Possessing this, enter the Goddess' house
    Boldly, for it shall save thy life from harm.
    Lo! I reveal to thee the cruel arts
    Of Circe; learn them. She will mix for thee
    A potion, and will also drug thy food
    With noxious herbs; but she shall not prevail
    By all her pow'r to change thee; for the force
    Superior of this noble plant, my gift,
    Shall baffle her. Hear still what I advise.
    When she shall smite thee with her slender rod,                  360
    With faulchion drawn and with death-threat'ning looks
    Rush on her; she will bid thee to her bed
    Affrighted; then beware. Decline not thou
    Her love, that she may both release thy friends,
    And may with kindness entertain thyself.
    But force her swear the dreaded oath of heav'n
    That she will other mischief none devise
    Against thee, lest she strip thee of thy might,
    And, quenching all thy virtue, make thee vile.
      So spake the Argicide, and from the earth                      370
    That plant extracting, placed it in my hand,
    Then taught me all its pow'rs. Black was the root,
    Milk-white the blossom; Moly is its name
    In heav'n; not easily by mortal man
    Dug forth, but all is easy to the Gods.
    Then, Hermes through the island-woods repair'd
    To heav'n, and I to Circe's dread abode,
    In gloomy musings busied as I went.
    Within the vestibule arrived, where dwelt
    The beauteous Goddess, staying there my steps,                   380
    I call'd aloud; she heard me, and at once
    Issuing, threw her splendid portals wide,
    And bade me in. I follow'd, heart-distress'd.
    Leading me by the hand to a bright throne
    With argent studs embellish'd, and beneath
    Footstool'd magnificent, she made me sit.
    Then mingling for me in a golden cup
    My bev'rage, she infused a drug, intent
    On mischief; but when I had drunk the draught
    Unchanged, she smote me with her wand, and said.                 390
      Hence--seek the sty. There wallow with thy friends.
    She spake; I drawing from beside my thigh
    My faulchion keen, with death-denouncing looks
    Rush'd on her; she with a shrill scream of fear
    Ran under my rais'd arm, seized fast my knees,
    And in wing'd accents plaintive thus began.
      Who? whence? thy city and thy birth declare.
    Amazed I see thee with that potion drench'd,
    Yet uninchanted; never man before
    Once pass'd it through his lips, and liv'd the same;             400
    But in thy breast a mind inhabits, proof
    Against all charms. Come then--I know thee well.
    Thou art Ulysses artifice-renown'd,
    Of whose arrival here in his return
    From Ilium, Hermes of the golden wand
    Was ever wont to tell me. Sheath again
    Thy sword, and let us, on my bed reclined,
    Mutual embrace, that we may trust thenceforth
    Each other, without jealousy or fear.
      The Goddess spake, to whom I thus replied.                     410
    O Circe! canst thou bid me meek become
    And gentle, who beneath thy roof detain'st
    My fellow-voyagers transform'd to swine?
    And, fearing my escape, invit'st thou me
    Into thy bed, with fraudulent pretext
    Of love, that there, enfeebling by thy arts
    My noble spirit, thou may'st make me vile?
    No--trust me--never will I share thy bed
    Till first, O Goddess, thou consent to swear
    The dread all-binding oath, that other harm                      420
    Against myself thou wilt imagine none.
      I spake. She swearing as I bade, renounced
    All evil purpose, and (her solemn oath
    Concluded) I ascended, next, her bed
    Magnificent. Meantime, four graceful nymphs
    Attended on the service of the house,
    Her menials, from the fountains sprung and groves,
    And from the sacred streams that seek the sea.
    Of these, one cast fine linen on the thrones,
    Which, next, with purple arras rich she spread;                  430
    Another placed before the gorgeous seats
    Bright tables, and set on baskets of gold.
    The third, an argent beaker fill'd with wine
    Delicious, which in golden cups she served;
    The fourth brought water, which she warm'd within
    An ample vase, and when the simm'ring flood
    Sang in the tripod, led me to a bath,
    And laved me with the pleasant stream profuse
    Pour'd o'er my neck and body, till my limbs
    Refresh'd, all sense of lassitude resign'd.                      440
    When she had bathed me, and with limpid oil
    Anointed me, and cloathed me in a vest
    And mantle, next, she led me to a throne
    Of royal state, with silver studs emboss'd,
    And footstool'd soft beneath; then came a nymph
    With golden ewer charged and silver bowl,
    Who pour'd pure water on my hands, and placed
    The polish'd board before me, which with food
    Various, selected from her present stores,
    The cat'ress spread, then, courteous, bade me eat.               450
    But me it pleas'd not; with far other thoughts
    My spirit teem'd, on vengeance more intent.
    Soon, then, as Circe mark'd me on my seat
    Fast-rooted, sullen, nor with outstretch'd hands
    Deigning to touch the banquet, she approach'd,
    And in wing'd accents suasive thus began.
      Why sits Ulysses like the Dumb, dark thoughts
    His only food? loaths he the touch of meat,
    And taste of wine? Thou fear'st, as I perceive,
    Some other snare, but idle is that fear,                         460
    For I have sworn the inviolable oath.
      She ceas'd, to whom this answer I return'd.
    How can I eat? what virtuous man and just,
    O Circe! could endure the taste of wine
    Or food, till he should see his prison'd friends
    Once more at liberty? If then thy wish
    That I should eat and drink be true, produce
    My captive people; let us meet again.
      So I; then Circe, bearing in her hand
    Her potent rod, went forth, and op'ning wide                     470
    The door, drove out my people from the sty,
    In bulk resembling brawns of the ninth year.
    They stood before me; she through all the herd
    Proceeding, with an unctuous antidote
    Anointed each, and at the wholesome touch
    All shed the swinish bristles by the drug
    Dread Circe's former magic gift, produced.
    Restored at once to manhood, they appear'd
    More vig'rous far, and sightlier than before.
    They knew me, and with grasp affectionate                        480
    Hung on my hand. Tears follow'd, but of joy,
    And with loud cries the vaulted palace rang.
    Even the awful Goddess felt, herself,
    Compassion, and, approaching me, began.
      Laertes' noble son, for wiles renown'd!
    Hence to the shore, and to thy gallant bark;
    First, hale her safe aground, then, hiding all
    Your arms and treasures in the caverns, come
    Thyself again, and hither lead thy friends.
    So spake the Goddess, and my gen'rous mind                       490
    Persuaded; thence repairing to the beach,
    I sought my ship; arrived, I found my crew
    Lamenting miserably, and their cheeks
    With tears bedewing ceaseless at her side.
    As when the calves within some village rear'd
    Behold, at eve, the herd returning home
    From fruitful meads where they have grazed their fill,
    No longer in the stalls contain'd, they rush
    With many a frisk abroad, and, blaring oft,
    With one consent, all dance their dams around,                   500
    So they, at sight of me, dissolved in tears
    Of rapt'rous joy, and each his spirit felt
    With like affections warm'd as he had reach'd
    Just then his country, and his city seen,
    Fair Ithaca, where he was born and rear'd.
    Then in wing'd accents tender thus they spake.
      Noble Ulysses! thy appearance fills
    Our soul with transports, such as we should feel
    Arrived in safety on our native shore.
    Speak--say how perish'd our unhappy friends?                     510
      So they; to whom this answer mild I gave.
    Hale we our vessel first ashore, and hide
    In caverns all our treasures and our arms,
    Then, hasting hence, follow me, and ere long
    Ye shall behold your friends, beneath the roof
    Of Circe banqueting and drinking wine
    Abundant, for no dearth attends them there.
      So I; whom all with readiness obey'd,
    All save Eurylochus; he sought alone
    To stay the rest, and, eager, interposed.                        520
      Ah whither tend we, miserable men?
    Why covet ye this evil, to go down
    To Circe's palace? she will change us all
    To lions, wolves or swine, that we may guard
    Her palace, by necessity constrain'd.
    So some were pris'ners of the Cyclops erst,
    When, led by rash Ulysses, our lost friends
    Intruded needlessly into his cave,
    And perish'd by the folly of their Chief.
      He spake, whom hearing, occupied I stood                       530
    In self-debate, whether, my faulchion keen
    Forth-drawing from beside my sturdy thigh,
    To tumble his lopp'd head into the dust,
    Although he were my kinsman in the bonds
    Of close affinity; but all my friends
    As with one voice, thus gently interposed.
      Noble Ulysses! we will leave him here
    Our vessel's guard, if such be thy command,
    But us lead thou to Circe's dread abode.
      So saying, they left the galley, and set forth                 540
    Climbing the coast; nor would Eurylochus
    Beside the hollow bark remain, but join'd
    His comrades by my dreadful menace awed.
    Meantime the Goddess, busily employ'd,
    Bathed and refresh'd my friends with limpid oil,
    And clothed them. We, arriving, found them all
    Banqueting in the palace; there they met;
    These ask'd, and those rehearsed the wond'rous tale,
    And, the recital made, all wept aloud
    Till the wide dome resounded. Then approach'd                    550
    The graceful Goddess, and address'd me thus.
      Laertes' noble son, for wiles renown'd!
    Provoke ye not each other, now, to tears.
    I am not ignorant, myself, how dread
    Have been your woes both on the fishy Deep,
    And on the land by force of hostile pow'rs.
    But come--Eat now, and drink ye wine, that so
    Your freshen'd spirit may revive, and ye
    Courageous grow again, as when ye left
    The rugged shores of Ithaca, your home.                          560
    For now, through recollection, day by day,
    Of all your pains and toils, ye are become
    Spiritless, strengthless, and the taste forget
    Of pleasure, such have been your num'rous woes.
      She spake, whose invitation kind prevail'd,
    And won us to her will. There, then, we dwelt
    The year complete, fed with delicious fare
    Day after day, and quaffing gen'rous wine.
    But when (the year fulfill'd) the circling hours
    Their course resumed, and the successive months                  570
    With all their tedious days were spent, my friends,
    Summoning me abroad, thus greeted me.
      Sir! recollect thy country, if indeed
    The fates ordain thee to revisit safe
    That country, and thy own glorious abode.
      So they; whose admonition I receiv'd
    Well-pleas'd. Then, all the day, regaled we sat
    At Circe's board with sav'ry viands rare,
    And quaffing richest wine; but when, the sun
    Declining, darkness overshadow'd all,                            580
    Then, each within the dusky palace took
    Custom'd repose, and to the Goddess' bed
    Magnificent ascending, there I urged
    My earnest suit, which gracious she receiv'd,
    And in wing'd accents earnest thus I spake.
      O Circe! let us prove thy promise true;
    Dismiss us hence. My own desires, at length,
    Tend homeward vehement, and the desires
    No less of all my friends, who with complaints
    Unheard by thee, wear my sad heart away.                         590
      So I; to whom the Goddess in return.
    Laertes' noble son, Ulysses famed
    For deepest wisdom! dwell not longer here,
    Thou and thy followers, in my abode
    Reluctant; but your next must be a course
    Far diff'rent; hence departing, ye must seek
    The dreary house of Ades and of dread
    Persephone there to consult the Seer
    Theban Tiresias, prophet blind, but blest
    With faculties which death itself hath spared.                   600
    To him alone, of all the dead, Hell's Queen
    Gives still to prophesy, while others flit
    Mere forms, the shadows of what once they were.
      She spake, and by her words dash'd from my soul
    All courage; weeping on the bed I sat,
    Reckless of life and of the light of day.
    But when, with tears and rolling to and fro
    Satiate, I felt relief, thus I replied.
      O Circe! with what guide shall I perform
    This voyage, unperform'd by living man?                          610
      I spake, to whom the Goddess quick replied.
    Brave Laertiades! let not the fear
    To want a guide distress thee. Once on board,
    Your mast erected, and your canvas white
    Unfurl'd, sit thou; the breathing North shall waft
    Thy vessel on. But when ye shall have cross'd
    The broad expanse of Ocean, and shall reach
    The oozy shore, where grow the poplar groves
    And fruitless willows wan of Proserpine,
    Push thither through the gulphy Deep thy bark,                   620
    And, landing, haste to Pluto's murky abode.
    There, into Acheron runs not alone
    Dread Pyriphlegethon, but Cocytus loud,
    From Styx derived; there also stands a rock,
    At whose broad base the roaring rivers meet.
    There, thrusting, as I bid, thy bark ashore,
    O Hero! scoop the soil, op'ning a trench
    Ell-broad on ev'ry side; then pour around
    Libation consecrate to all the dead,
    First, milk with honey mixt, then luscious wine,                 630
    Then water, sprinkling, last, meal over all.
    Next, supplicate the unsubstantial forms
    Fervently of the dead, vowing to slay,
    (Return'd to Ithaca) in thy own house,
    An heifer barren yet, fairest and best
    Of all thy herds, and to enrich the pile
    With delicacies such as please the shades;
    But, in peculiar, to Tiresias vow
    A sable ram, noblest of all thy flocks.
    When thus thou hast propitiated with pray'r                      640
    All the illustrious nations of the dead,
    Next, thou shalt sacrifice to them a ram
    And sable ewe, turning the face of each
    Right toward Erebus, and look thyself,
    Meantime, askance toward the river's course.
    Souls num'rous, soon, of the departed dead
    Will thither flock; then, strenuous urge thy friends,
    Flaying the victims which thy ruthless steel
    Hath slain, to burn them, and to sooth by pray'r
    Illustrious Pluto and dread Proserpine.                          650
    While thus is done, thou seated at the foss,
    Faulchion in hand, chace thence the airy forms
    Afar, nor suffer them to approach the blood,
    Till with Tiresias thou have first conferr'd.
    Then, glorious Chief! the Prophet shall himself
    Appear, who will instruct thee, and thy course
    Delineate, measuring from place to place
    Thy whole return athwart the fishy flood.
      While thus she spake, the golden dawn arose,
    When, putting on me my attire, the nymph                         660
    Next, cloath'd herself, and girding to her waist
    With an embroider'd zone her snowy robe
    Graceful, redundant, veil'd her beauteous head.
    Then, ranging the wide palace, I aroused
    My followers, standing at the side of each--
    Up! sleep no longer! let us quick depart,
    For thus the Goddess hath, herself, advised.
      So I, whose early summons my brave friends
    With readiness obey'd. Yet even thence
    I brought not all my crew. There was a youth,                    670
    Youngest of all my train, Elpenor; one
    Not much in estimation for desert
    In arms, nor prompt in understanding more,
    Who overcharged with wine, and covetous
    Of cooler air, high on the palace-roof
    Of Circe slept, apart from all the rest.
    Awaken'd by the clamour of his friends
    Newly arisen, he also sprang to rise,
    And in his haste, forgetful where to find
    The deep-descending stairs, plunged through the roof.            680
    With neck-bone broken from the vertebrae
    Outstretch'd he lay; his spirit sought the shades.
      Then, thus to my assembling friends I spake.
    Ye think, I doubt not, of an homeward course,
    But Circe points me to the drear abode
    Of Proserpine and Pluto, to consult
    The spirit of Tiresias, Theban seer.
      I ended, and the hearts of all alike
    Felt consternation; on the earth they sat
    Disconsolate, and plucking each his hair,                        690
    Yet profit none of all their sorrow found.
      But while we sought my galley on the beach
    With tepid tears bedewing, as we went,
    Our cheeks, meantime the Goddess to the shore
    Descending, bound within the bark a ram
    And sable ewe, passing us unperceived.
    For who hath eyes that can discern a God
    Going or coming, if he shun the view?


FOOTNOTES:

[38] It is supposed by Eustathius that the pastures being infested by gad
flies and other noxious insects in the day-time, they drove their sheep
a-field in the morning, which by their wool were defended from them, and
their cattle in the evening, when the insects had withdrawn. It is one of
the few passages in Homer that must lie at the mercy of conjecture.

[39] The word has the authority of Shakspeare, and signifies overhanging.




BOOK XI

ARGUMENT

Ulysses relates to Alcinoues his voyage to the infernal regions, his
conference there with the prophet Tiresias concerning his return to
Ithaca, and gives him an account of the heroes, heroines, and others whom
he saw there.


    Arriving on the shore, and launching, first,
    Our bark into the sacred Deep, we set
    Our mast and sails, and stow'd secure on board
    The ram and ewe, then, weeping, and with hearts
    Sad and disconsolate, embark'd ourselves.
    And now, melodious Circe, nymph divine,
    Sent after us a canvas-stretching breeze,
    Pleasant companion of our course, and we
    (The decks and benches clear'd) untoiling sat,
    While managed gales sped swift the bark along.                    10
    All day, with sails distended, e'er the Deep
    She flew, and when the sun, at length, declined,
    And twilight dim had shadow'd all the ways,
    Approach'd the bourn of Ocean's vast profound.
    The city, there, of the Cimmerians stands
    With clouds and darkness veil'd, on whom the sun
    Deigns not to look with his beam-darting eye,
    Or when he climbs the starry arch, or when
    Earthward he slopes again his west'ring wheels,[40]
    But sad night canopies the woeful race.                           20
    We haled the bark aground, and, landing there
    The ram and sable ewe, journey'd beside
    The Deep, till we arrived where Circe bade.
    Here, Perimedes' son Eurylochus
    Held fast the destined sacrifice, while I
    Scoop'd with my sword the soil, op'ning a trench
    Ell-broad on ev'ry side, then pour'd around
    Libation consecrate to all the dead,
    First, milk with honey mixt, then luscious wine,
    Then water, sprinkling, last, meal over all.                      30
    This done, adoring the unreal forms
    And shadows of the dead, I vow'd to slay,
    (Return'd to Ithaca) in my own abode,
    An heifer barren yet, fairest and best
    Of all my herds, and to enrich the pile
    With delicacies, such as please the shades.
    But, in peculiar, to the Theban seer
    I vow'd a sable ram, largest and best
    Of all my flocks. When thus I had implored
    With vows and pray'r, the nations of the dead,                    40
    Piercing the victims next, I turn'd them both
    To bleed into the trench; then swarming came
    From Erebus the shades of the deceased,
    Brides, youths unwedded, seniors long with woe
    Oppress'd, and tender girls yet new to grief.
    Came also many a warrior by the spear
    In battle pierced, with armour gore-distain'd,
    And all the multitude around the foss
    Stalk'd shrieking dreadful; me pale horror seized.
    I next, importunate, my people urged,                             50
    Flaying the victims which myself had slain,
    To burn them, and to supplicate in pray'r
    Illustrious Pluto and dread Proserpine.
    Then down I sat, and with drawn faulchion chased
    The ghosts, nor suffer'd them to approach the blood,
    Till with Tiresias I should first confer.
      The spirit, first, of my companion came,
    Elpenor; for no burial honours yet
    Had he received, but we had left his corse
    In Circe's palace, tombless, undeplored,                          60
    Ourselves by pressure urged of other cares.
    Touch'd with compassion seeing him, I wept,
    And in wing'd accents brief him thus bespake.
      Elpenor! how cam'st thou into the realms
    Of darkness? Hast thou, though on foot, so far
    Outstripp'd my speed, who in my bark arrived?
      So I, to whom with tears he thus replied.
    Laertes' noble son, for wiles renown'd!
    Fool'd by some daemon and the intemp'rate bowl,
    I perish'd in the house of Circe; there                           70
    The deep-descending steps heedless I miss'd,
    And fell precipitated from the roof.
    With neck-bone broken from the vertebrae
    Outstretch'd I lay; my spirit sought the shades.
    But now, by those whom thou hast left at home,
    By thy Penelope, and by thy fire,
    The gentle nourisher of thy infant growth,
    And by thy only son Telemachus
    I make my suit to thee. For, sure, I know
    That from the house of Pluto safe return'd,                       80
    Thou shalt ere long thy gallant vessel moor
    At the AEaean isle. Ah! there arrived
    Remember me. Leave me not undeplored
    Nor uninhumed, lest, for my sake, the Gods
    In vengeance visit thee; but with my arms
    (What arms soe'er I left) burn me, and raise
    A kind memorial of me on the coast,
    Heap'd high with earth; that an unhappy man
    May yet enjoy an unforgotten name.
    Thus do at my request, and on my hill                             90
    Funereal, plant the oar with which I row'd,
    While yet I lived a mariner of thine.
      He spake, to whom thus answer I return'd.
    Poor youth! I will perform thy whole desire.
      Thus we, there sitting, doleful converse held,
    With outstretch'd faulchion, I, guarding the blood,
    And my companion's shadowy semblance sad
    Meantime discoursing me on various themes.
    The soul of my departed mother, next,
    Of Anticleia came, daughter of brave                             100
    Autolycus; whom, when I sought the shores
    Of Ilium, I had living left at home.
    Seeing her, with compassion touch'd, I wept,
    Yet even her, (although it pain'd my soul)
    Forbad, relentless, to approach the blood,
    Till with Tiresias I should first confer.
    Then came the spirit of the Theban seer
    Himself, his golden sceptre in his hand,
    Who knew me, and, enquiring, thus began.
      Why, hapless Chief! leaving the cheerful day,                  110
    Arriv'st thou to behold the dead, and this
    Unpleasant land? but, from the trench awhile
    Receding, turn thy faulchion keen away,
    That I may drink the blood, and tell thee truth.
      He spake; I thence receding, deep infix'd
    My sword bright-studded in the sheath again.
    The noble prophet then, approaching, drank
    The blood, and, satisfied, address'd me thus.
      Thou seek'st a pleasant voyage home again,
    Renown'd Ulysses! but a God will make                            120
    That voyage difficult; for, as I judge,
    Thou wilt not pass by Neptune unperceiv'd,
    Whose anger follows thee, for that thou hast
    Deprived his son Cyclops of his eye.
    At length, however, after num'rous woes
    Endur'd, thou may'st attain thy native isle,
    If thy own appetite thou wilt controul
    And theirs who follow thee, what time thy bark
    Well-built, shall at Thrinacia's shore arrive,[41]
    Escaped from perils of the gloomy Deep.                          130
    There shall ye find grazing the flocks and herds
    Of the all-seeing and all-hearing Sun,
    Which, if attentive to thy safe return,
    Thou leave unharm'd, though after num'rous woes,
    Ye may at length arrive in Ithaca.
    But if thou violate them, I denounce
    Destruction on thy ship and all thy band,
    And though thyself escape, late shalt thou reach
    Thy home and hard-bested,[42] in a strange bark,
    All thy companions lost; trouble beside                          140
    Awaits thee there, for thou shalt find within
    Proud suitors of thy noble wife, who waste
    Thy substance, and with promis'd spousal gifts
    Ceaseless solicit her to wed; yet well
    Shalt thou avenge all their injurious deeds.
    That once perform'd, and ev'ry suitor slain
    Either by stratagem, or face to face,
    In thy own palace, bearing, as thou go'st,
    A shapely oar, journey, till thou hast found
    A people who the sea know not, nor eat                           150
    Food salted; they trim galley crimson prow'd
    Have ne'er beheld, nor yet smooth-shaven oar,
    With which the vessel wing'd scuds o'er the waves.
    Well thou shalt know them; this shall be the sign--
    When thou shalt meet a trav'ler, who shall name
    The oar on thy broad shoulder borne, a van,[43]
    There, deep infixing it within the soil,
    Worship the King of Ocean with a bull,
    A ram, and a lascivious boar, then seek
    Thy home again, and sacrifice at home                            160
    An hecatomb to the Immortal Gods,
    Adoring each duly, and in his course.
    So shalt thou die in peace a gentle death,
    Remote from Ocean; it shall find thee late,
    In soft serenity of age, the Chief
    Of a blest people.--I have told thee truth.
      He spake, to whom I answer thus return'd.
    Tiresias! thou, I doubt not, hast reveal'd
    The ordinance of heav'n. But tell me, Seer!
    And truly. I behold my mother's shade;                           170
    Silent she sits beside the blood, nor word
