body."

"How miserable not to be free!"

"Don't be downcast. Since Mazarin has sent for you, it is because he
wants you. I congratulate you! Many a long year has passed since any one
has wanted to employ me; so you see in what a situation I am."

"Make your complaints known; that's my advice."

"Listen, Rochefort; let us make a compact. We are friends, are we not?"

"Egad! I bear the traces of our friendship--three slits or slashes from
your sword."

"Well, if you should be restored to favor, don't forget me."

"On the honor of a Rochefort; but you must do the like for me."

"There's my hand,--I promise."

"Therefore, whenever you find any opportunity of saying something in my
behalf----"

"I shall say it, and you?"

"I shall do the same."

"Apropos, are we to speak of your friends also, Athos, Porthos, and
Aramis? or have you forgotten them?"

"Almost."

"What has become of them?"

"I don't know; we separated, as you know. They are alive, that's all
that I can say about them; from time to time I hear of them indirectly,
but in what part of the world they are, devil take me if I know, No, on
my honor, I have not a friend in the world but you, Rochefort."

"And the illustrious--what's the name of the lad whom I made a sergeant
in Piedmont's regiment?"

"Planchet!"

"The illustrious Planchet. What has become of him?"

"I shouldn't wonder if he were at the head of the mob at this very
moment. He married a woman who keeps a confectioner's shop in the Rue
des Lombards, for he's a lad who was always fond of sweetmeats; he's now
a citizen of Paris. You'll see that that queer fellow will be a sheriff
before I shall be a captain."

"Come, dear D'Artagnan, look up a little! Courage! It is when one is
lowest on the wheel of fortune that the merry-go-round wheels and
rewards us. This evening your destiny begins to change."

"Amen!" exclaimed D'Artagnan, stopping the carriage.

"What are you doing?" asked Rochefort.

"We are almost there and I want no one to see me getting out of your
carriage; we are supposed not to know each other."

"You are right. Adieu."

"Au revoir. Remember your promise."

In five minutes the party entered the courtyard and D'Artagnan led the
prisoner up the great staircase and across the corridor and
ante-chamber.

As they stopped at the door of the cardinal's study, D'Artagnan was
about to be announced when Rochefort slapped him on his shoulder.

"D'Artagnan, let me confess to you what I've been thinking about during
the whole of my drive, as I looked out upon the parties of citizens who
perpetually crossed our path and looked at you and your four men with
fiery eyes."

"Speak out," answered D'Artagnan.

"I had only to cry out 'Help!' for you and for your companions to be cut
to pieces, and then I should have been free."

"Why didn't you do it?" asked the lieutenant.

"Come, come!" cried Rochefort. "Did we not swear friendship? Ah! had any
one but you been there, I don't say----"

D'Artagnan bowed. "Is it possible that Rochefort has become a better man
than I am?" he said to himself. And he caused himself to be announced to
the minister.

"Let M. de Rochefort enter," said Mazarin, eagerly, on hearing their
names pronounced; "and beg M. d'Artagnan to wait; I shall have further
need of him."

These words gave great joy to D'Artagnan. As he had said, it had been a
long time since any one had needed him; and that demand for his services
on the part of Mazarin seemed to him an auspicious sign.

Rochefort, rendered suspicious and cautious by these words, entered the
apartment, where he found Mazarin sitting at the table, dressed in his
ordinary garb and as one of the prelates of the Church, his costume
being similar to that of the abbes in that day, excepting that his scarf
and stockings were violet.

As the door was closed Rochefort cast a glance toward Mazarin, which was
answered by one, equally furtive, from the minister.

There was little change in the cardinal; still dressed with sedulous
care, his hair well arranged and curled, his person perfumed, he looked,
owing to his extreme taste in dress, only half his age. But Rochefort,
who had passed five years in prison, had become old in the lapse of a
few years; the dark locks of this estimable friend of the defunct
Cardinal Richelieu were now white; the deep bronze of his complexion had
been succeeded by a mortal pallor which betokened debility. As he gazed
at him Mazarin shook his head slightly, as much as to say, "This is a
man who does not appear to me fit for much."

After a pause, which appeared an age to Rochefort, Mazarin took from a
bundle of papers a letter, and showing it to the count, he said:

"I find here a letter in which you sue for liberty, Monsieur de
Rochefort. You are in prison, then?"

Rochefort trembled in every limb at this question. "But I thought," he
said, "that your eminence knew that circumstance better than any
one----"

"I? Oh no! There is a congestion of prisoners in the Bastile, who were
cooped up in the time of Monsieur de Richelieu; I don't even know their
names."

"Yes, but in regard to myself, my lord, it cannot be so, for I was
removed from the Chatelet to the Bastile owing to an order from your
eminence."

"You think you were."

"I am certain of it."

"Ah, stay! I fancy I remember it. Did you not once refuse to undertake a
journey to Brussels for the queen?"

"Ah! ah!" exclaimed Rochefort. "There is the true reason! Idiot that I
am, though I have been trying to find it out for five years, I never
found it out."

"But I do not say it was the cause of your imprisonment. I merely ask
you, did you not refuse to go to Brussels for the queen, whilst you had
consented to go there to do some service for the late cardinal?"

"That is the very reason I refused to go back to Brussels. I was there
at a fearful moment. I was sent there to intercept a correspondence
between Chalais and the archduke, and even then, when I was discovered I
was nearly torn to pieces. How could I, then, return to Brussels? I
should injure the queen instead of serving her."

"Well, since the best motives are liable to misconstruction, the queen
saw in your refusal nothing but a refusal--a distinct refusal she had
also much to complain of you during the lifetime of the late cardinal;
yes, her majesty the queen----"

Rochefort smiled contemptuously.

"Since I was a faithful servant, my lord, to Cardinal Richelieu during
his life, it stands to reason that now, after his death, I should serve
you well, in defiance of the whole world."

"With regard to myself, Monsieur de Rochefort," replied Mazarin, "I am
not, like Monsieur de Richelieu, all-powerful. I am but a minister, who
wants no servants, being myself nothing but a servant of the queen's.
Now, the queen is of a sensitive nature. Hearing of your refusal to obey
her she looked upon it as a declaration of war, and as she considers you
a man of superior talent, and consequently dangerous, she desired me to
make sure of you; that is the reason of your being shut up in the
Bastile. But your release can be managed. You are one of those men who
can comprehend certain matters and having understood them, can act with
energy----"

"Such was Cardinal Richelieu's opinion, my lord."

"The cardinal," interrupted Mazarin, "was a great politician and therein
shone his vast superiority over me. I am a straightforward, simple man;
that's my great disadvantage. I am of a frankness of character quite
French."

Rochefort bit his lips in order to prevent a smile.

"Now to the point. I want friends; I want faithful servants. When I say
I want, I mean the queen wants them. I do nothing without her
commands--pray understand that; not like Monsieur de Richelieu, who went
on just as he pleased. So I shall never be a great man, as he was, but
to compensate for that, I shall be a good man, Monsieur de Rochefort,
and I hope to prove it to you."

Rochefort knew well the tones of that soft voice, in which sounded
sometimes a sort of gentle lisp, like the hissing of young vipers.

"I am disposed to believe your eminence," he replied; "though I have had
but little evidence of that good-nature of which your eminence speaks.
Do not forget that I have been five years in the Bastile and that no
medium of viewing things is so deceptive as the grating of a prison."

"Ah, Monsieur de Rochefort! have I not told you already that I had
nothing to do with that? The queen--cannot you make allowances for the
pettishness of a queen and a princess? But that has passed away as
suddenly as it came, and is forgotten."

"I can easily suppose, sir, that her majesty has forgotten it amid the
fetes and the courtiers of the Palais Royal, but I who have passed those
years in the Bastile----"

"Ah! mon Dieu! my dear Monsieur de Rochefort! do you absolutely think
that the Palais Royal is the abode of gayety? No. We have had great
annoyances there. As for me, I play my game squarely, fairly, and above
board, as I always do. Let us come to some conclusion. Are you one of
us, Monsieur de Rochefort?"

"I am very desirous of being so, my lord, but I am totally in the dark
about everything. In the Bastile one talks politics only with soldiers
and jailers, and you have not an idea, my lord, how little is known of
what is going on by people of that sort; I am of Monsieur de
Bassompierre's party. Is he still one of the seventeen peers of France?"

"He is dead, sir; a great loss. His devotion to the queen was boundless;
men of loyalty are scarce."

"I think so, forsooth," said Rochefort, "and when you find any of them,
you march them off to the Bastile. However, there are plenty in the
world, but you don't look in the right direction for them, my lord."

"Indeed! explain to me. Ah! my dear Monsieur de Rochefort, how much you
must have learned during your intimacy with the late cardinal! Ah! he
was a great man."

"Will your eminence be angry if I read you a lesson?"

"I! never! you know you may say anything to me. I try to be beloved, not
feared."

"Well, there is on the wall of my cell, scratched with a nail, a
proverb, which says, 'Like master, like servant.'"

"Pray, what does that mean?"

"It means that Monsieur de Richelieu was able to find trusty servants,
dozens and dozens of them."

"He! the point aimed at by every poniard! Richelieu, who passed his life
in warding off blows which were forever aimed at him!"

"But he did ward them off," said De Rochefort, "and the reason was, that
though he had bitter enemies he possessed also true friends. I have
known persons," he continued--for he thought he might avail himself of
the opportunity of speaking of D'Artagnan--"who by their sagacity and
address have deceived the penetration of Cardinal Richelieu; who by
their valor have got the better of his guards and spies; persons without
money, without support, without credit, yet who have preserved to the
crowned head its crown and made the cardinal crave pardon."

"But those men you speak of," said Mazarin, smiling inwardly on seeing
Rochefort approach the point to which he was leading him, "those men
were not devoted to the cardinal, for they contended against him."

"No; in that case they would have met with more fitting reward. They had
the misfortune to be devoted to that very queen for whom just now you
were seeking servants."

"But how is it that you know so much of these matters?"

"I know them because the men of whom I speak were at that time my
enemies; because they fought against me; because I did them all the harm
I could and they returned it to the best of their ability; because one
of them, with whom I had most to do, gave me a pretty sword-thrust, now
about seven years ago, the third that I received from the same hand; it
closed an old account."

"Ah!" said Mazarin, with admirable suavity, "could I but find such men!"

"My lord, there has stood for six years at your very door a man such as
I describe, and during those six years he has been unappreciated and
unemployed by you."

"Who is it?"

"It is Monsieur d'Artagnan."

"That Gascon!" cried Mazarin, with well acted surprise.

"'That Gascon' has saved a queen and made Monsieur de Richelieu confess
that in point of talent, address and political skill, to him he was only
a tyro."

"Really?"

"It is as I have the honor of telling it to your excellency."

"Tell me a little about it, my dear Monsieur de Rochefort."

"That is somewhat difficult, my lord," said Rochefort, with a smile.

"Then he will tell it me himself."

"I doubt it, my lord."

"Why do you doubt it?"

"Because the secret does not belong to him; because, as I have told you,
it has to do with a great queen."

"And he was alone in achieving an enterprise like that?"

"No, my lord, he had three colleagues, three brave men, men such as you
were wishing for just now."

"And were these four men attached to each other, true in heart, really
united?"

"As if they had been one man--as if their four hearts had pulsated in
one breast."

"You pique my curiosity, dear Rochefort; pray tell me the whole story."

"That is impossible; but I will tell you a true story, my lord."

"Pray do so, I delight in stories," cried the cardinal.

"Listen, then," returned Rochefort, as he spoke endeavoring to read in
that subtle countenance the cardinal's motive. "Once upon a time there
lived a queen--a powerful monarch--who reigned over one of the greatest
kingdoms of the universe; and a minister; and this minister wished much
to injure the queen, whom once he had loved too well. (Do not try, my
lord, you cannot guess who it is; all this happened long before you came
into the country where this queen reigned.) There came to the court an
ambassador so brave, so magnificent, so elegant, that every woman lost
her heart to him; and the queen had even the indiscretion to give him
certain ornaments so rare that they could never be replaced by any like
them.

"As these ornaments were given by the king the minister persuaded his
majesty to insist upon the queen's appearing in them as part of her
jewels at a ball which was soon to take place. There is no occasion to
tell you, my lord, that the minister knew for a fact that these
ornaments had sailed away with the ambassador, who was far away, beyond
seas. This illustrious queen had fallen low as the least of her
subjects--fallen from her high estate."

"Indeed!"

"Well, my lord, four men resolved to save her. These four men were not
princes, neither were they dukes, neither were they men in power; they
were not even rich. They were four honest soldiers, each with a good
heart, a good arm and a sword at the service of those who wanted it.
They set out. The minister knew of their departure and had planted
people on the road to prevent them ever reaching their destination.
Three of them were overwhelmed and disabled by numerous assailants; one
of them alone arrived at the port, having either killed or wounded those
who wished to stop him. He crossed the sea and brought back the set of
ornaments to the great queen, who was able to wear them on her shoulder
on the appointed day; and this very nearly ruined the minister. What do
you think of that exploit, my lord?"

"It is magnificent!" said Mazarin, thoughtfully.

"Well, I know of ten such men."

Mazarin made no reply; he reflected.

Five or six minutes elapsed.

"You have nothing more to ask of me, my lord?" said Rochefort.

"Yes. And you say that Monsieur d'Artagnan was one of those four men?"

"He led the enterprise."

"And who were the others?"

"I leave it to Monsieur d'Artagnan to name them, my lord. They were his
friends and not mine. He alone would have any influence with them; I do
not even know them under their true names."

"You suspect me, Monsieur de Rochefort; I want him and you and all to
aid me."

"Begin with me, my lord; for after five or six years of imprisonment it
is natural to feel some curiosity as to one's destination."

"You, my dear Monsieur de Rochefort, shall have the post of confidence;
you shall go to Vincennes, where Monsieur de Beaufort is confined; you
will guard him well for me. Well, what is the matter?"

"The matter is that you have proposed to me what is impossible," said
Rochefort, shaking his head with an air of disappointment.

"What! impossible? And why is it impossible?"

"Because Monsieur de Beaufort is one of my friends, or rather, I am one
of his. Have you forgotten, my lord, that it is he who answered for me
to the queen?"

"Since then Monsieur de Beaufort has become an enemy of the State."

"That may be, my lord; but since I am neither king nor queen nor
minister, he is not my enemy and I cannot accept your offer."

"This, then, is what you call devotion! I congratulate you. Your
devotion does not commit you too far, Monsieur de Rochefort."

"And then, my lord," continued Rochefort, "you understand that to emerge
from the Bastile in order to enter Vincennes is only to change one's
prison."

"Say at once that you are on the side of Monsieur de Beaufort; that will
be the most sincere line of conduct," said Mazarin.

"My lord, I have been so long shut up, that I am only of one party--I am
for fresh air. Employ me in any other way; employ me even actively, but
let it be on the high roads."

"My dear Monsieur de Rochefort," Mazarin replied in a tone of raillery,
"you think yourself still a young man; your spirit is that of the
phoenix, but your strength fails you. Believe me, you ought now to take
a rest. Here!"

"You decide, then, nothing about me, my lord?"

"On the contrary, I have come to a decision."

Bernouin came into the room.

"Call an officer of justice," he said; "and stay close to me," he added,
in a low tone.

The officer entered. Mazarin wrote a few words, which he gave to this
man; then he bowed.

"Adieu, Monsieur de Rochefort," he said.

Rochefort bent low.

"I see, my lord, I am to be taken back to the Bastile."

"You are sagacious."

"I shall return thither, my lord, but it is a mistake on your part not
to employ me."

"You? the friend of my greatest foes? Don't suppose that you are the
only person who can serve me, Monsieur de Rochefort. I shall find many
men as able as you are."

"I wish you may, my lord," replied De Rochefort.

He was then reconducted by the little staircase, instead of passing
through the ante-chamber where D'Artagnan was waiting. In the courtyard
the carriage and the four musketeers were ready, but he looked around in
vain for his friend.

"Ah!" he muttered to himself, "this changes the situation, and if there
is still a crowd of people in the streets we will try to show Mazarin
that we are still, thank God, good for something else than keeping guard
over a prisoner;" and he jumped into the carriage with the alacrity of a
man of five-and-twenty.




4. Anne of Austria at the Age of Forty-six.


When left alone with Bernouin, Mazarin was for some minutes lost in
thought. He had gained much information, but not enough. Mazarin was a
cheat at the card-table. This is a detail preserved to us by Brienne. He
called it using his advantages. He now determined not to begin the game
with D'Artagnan till he knew completely all his adversary's cards.

"My lord, have you any commands?" asked Bernouin.

"Yes, yes," replied Mazarin. "Light me; I am going to the queen."

Bernouin took up a candlestick and led the way.

There was a secret communication between the cardinal's apartments and
those of the queen; and through this corridor* Mazarin passed whenever
he wished to visit Anne of Austria.

    _*This secret passage is still to be seen in the Palais Royal._

In the bedroom in which this passage ended, Bernouin encountered Madame
de Beauvais, like himself intrusted with the secret of these
subterranean love affairs; and Madame de Beauvais undertook to prepare
Anne of Austria, who was in her oratory with the young king, Louis XIV.,
to receive the cardinal.

Anne, reclining in a large easy-chair, her head supported by her hand,
her elbow resting on a table, was looking at her son, who was turning
over the leaves of a large book filled with pictures. This celebrated
woman fully understood the art of being dull with dignity. It was her
practice to pass hours either in her oratory or in her room, without
either reading or praying.

When Madame de Beauvais appeared at the door and announced the cardinal,
the child, who had been absorbed in the pages of Quintus Curtius,
enlivened as they were by engravings of Alexander's feats of arms,
frowned and looked at his mother.

"Why," he said, "does he enter without first asking for an audience?"

Anne colored slightly.

"The prime minister," she said, "is obliged in these unsettled days to
inform the queen of all that is happening from time to time, without
exciting the curiosity or remarks of the court."

"But Richelieu never came in this manner," said the pertinacious boy.

"How can you remember what Monsieur de Richelieu did? You were too young
to know about such things."

"I do not remember what he did, but I have inquired and I have been told
all about it."

"And who told you about it?" asked Anne of Austria, with a movement of
impatience.

"I know that I ought never to name the persons who answer my questions,"
answered the child, "for if I do I shall learn nothing further."

At this very moment Mazarin entered. The king rose immediately, took his
book, closed it and went to lay it down on the table, near which he
continued standing, in order that Mazarin might be obliged to stand
also.

Mazarin contemplated these proceedings with a thoughtful glance. They
explained what had occurred that evening.

He bowed respectfully to the king, who gave him a somewhat cavalier
reception, but a look from his mother reproved him for the hatred which,
from his infancy, Louis XIV. had entertained toward Mazarin, and he
endeavored to receive the minister's homage with civility.

Anne of Austria sought to read in Mazarin's face the occasion of this
unexpected visit, since the cardinal usually came to her apartment only
after every one had retired.

The minister made a slight sign with his head, whereupon the queen said
to Madame Beauvais:

"It is time for the king to go to bed; call Laporte."

The queen had several times already told her son that he ought to go to
bed, and several times Louis had coaxingly insisted on staying where he
was; but now he made no reply, but turned pale and bit his lips with
anger.

In a few minutes Laporte came into the room. The child went directly to
him without kissing his mother.

"Well, Louis," said Anne, "why do you not kiss me?"

"I thought you were angry with me, madame; you sent me away."

"I do not send you away, but you have had the small-pox and I am afraid
that sitting up late may tire you."

"You had no fears of my being tired when you ordered me to go to the
palace to-day to pass the odious decrees which have raised the people to
rebellion."

"Sire!" interposed Laporte, in order to turn the subject, "to whom does
your majesty wish me to give the candle?"

"To any one, Laporte," the child said; and then added in a loud voice,
"to any one except Mancini."

Now Mancini was a nephew of Mazarin's and was as much hated by Louis as
the cardinal himself, although placed near his person by the minister.

And the king went out of the room without either embracing his mother or
even bowing to the cardinal.

"Good," said Mazarin, "I am glad to see that his majesty has been
brought up with a hatred of dissimulation."

"Why do you say that?" asked the queen, almost timidly.

"Why, it seems to me that the way in which he left us needs no
explanation. Besides, his majesty takes no pains to conceal how little
affection he has for me. That, however, does not hinder me from being
entirely devoted to his service, as I am to that of your majesty."

"I ask your pardon for him, cardinal," said the queen; "he is a child,
not yet able to understand his obligations to you."

The cardinal smiled.

"But," continued the queen, "you have doubtless come for some important
purpose. What is it, then?"

Mazarin sank into a chair with the deepest melancholy painted on his
countenance.

"It is likely," he replied, "that we shall soon be obliged to separate,
unless you love me well enough to follow me to Italy."

"Why," cried the queen; "how is that?"

"Because, as they say in the opera of 'Thisbe,' 'The whole world
conspires to break our bonds.'"

"You jest, sir!" answered the queen, endeavoring to assume something of
her former dignity.

"Alas! I do not, madame," rejoined Mazarin. "Mark well what I say. The
whole world conspires to break our bonds. Now as you are one of the
whole world, I mean to say that you also are deserting me."

"Cardinal!"

"Heavens! did I not see you the other day smile on the Duke of Orleans?
or rather at what he said?"

"And what was he saying?"

"He said this, madame: 'Mazarin is a stumbling-block. Send him away and
all will then be well.'"

"What do you wish me to do?"

"Oh, madame! you are the queen!"

"Queen, forsooth! when I am at the mercy of every scribbler in the
Palais Royal who covers waste paper with nonsense, or of every country
squire in the kingdom."

"Nevertheless, you have still the power of banishing from your presence
those whom you do not like!"

"That is to say, whom you do not like," returned the queen.

"I! persons whom I do not like!"

"Yes, indeed. Who sent away Madame de Chevreuse after she had been
persecuted twelve years under the last reign?"

"A woman of intrigue, who wanted to keep up against me the spirit of
cabal she had raised against M. de Richelieu."

"Who dismissed Madame de Hautefort, that friend so loyal that she
refused the favor of the king that she might remain in mine?"

"A prude, who told you every night, as she undressed you, that it was a
sin to love a priest, just as if one were a priest because one happens
to be a cardinal."

"Who ordered Monsieur de Beaufort to be arrested?"

"An incendiary the burden of whose song was his intention to assassinate
me."

"You see, cardinal," replied the queen, "that your enemies are mine."

"That is not enough madame, it is necessary that your friends should be
also mine."

"My friends, monsieur?" The queen shook her head. "Alas, I have them no
longer!"

"How is it that you have no friends in your prosperity when you had many
in adversity?"

"It is because in my prosperity I forgot those old friends, monsieur;
because I have acted like Queen Marie de Medicis, who, returning from
her first exile, treated with contempt all those who had suffered for
her and, being proscribed a second time, died at Cologne abandoned by
every one, even by her own son."

"Well, let us see," said Mazarin; "isn't there still time to repair the
evil? Search among your friends, your oldest friends."

"What do you mean, monsieur?"

"Nothing else than I say--search."

"Alas, I look around me in vain! I have no influence with any one.
Monsieur is, as usual, led by his favorite; yesterday it was Choisy,
to-day it is La Riviere, to-morrow it will be some one else. Monsieur le
Prince is led by the coadjutor, who is led by Madame de Guemenee."

"Therefore, madame, I ask you to look, not among your friends of to-day,
but among those of other times."

"Among my friends of other times?" said the queen.

"Yes, among your friends of other times; among those who aided you to
contend against the Duc de Richelieu and even to conquer him."

"What is he aiming at?" murmured the queen, looking uneasily at the
cardinal.

"Yes," continued his eminence; "under certain circumstances, with that
strong and shrewd mind your majesty possesses, aided by your friends,
you were able to repel the attacks of that adversary."

"I!" said the queen. "I suffered, that is all."

"Yes," said Mazarin, "as women suffer in avenging themselves. Come, let
us come to the point. Do you know Monsieur de Rochefort?"

"One of my bitterest enemies--the faithful friend of Cardinal
Richelieu."

"I know that, and we sent him to the Bastile," said Mazarin.

"Is he at liberty?" asked the queen.

"No; still there, but I only speak of him in order that I may introduce
the name of another man. Do you know Monsieur d'Artagnan?" he added,
looking steadfastly at the queen.

Anne of Austria received the blow with a beating heart.

"Has the Gascon been indiscreet?" she murmured to herself, then said
aloud:

"D'Artagnan! stop an instant, the name seems certainly familiar.
D'Artagnan! there was a musketeer who was in love with one of my women.
Poor young creature! she was poisoned on my account."

"That's all you know of him?" asked Mazarin.

The queen looked at him, surprised.

"You seem, sir," she remarked, "to be making me undergo a course of
cross-examination."

"Which you answer according to your fancy," replied Mazarin.

"Tell me your wishes and I will comply with them."

The queen spoke with some impatience.

"Well, madame," said Mazarin, bowing, "I desire that you give me a share
in your friends, as I have shared with you the little industry and
talent that Heaven has given me. The circumstances are grave and it will
be necessary to act promptly."

"Still!" said the queen. "I thought that we were finally quit of
Monsieur de Beaufort."

"Yes, you saw only the torrent that threatened to overturn everything
and you gave no attention to the still water. There is, however, a
proverb current in France relating to water which is quiet."

"Continue," said the queen.

"Well, then, madame, not a day passes in which I do not suffer affronts
from your princes and your lordly servants, all of them automata who do
not perceive that I wind up the spring that makes them move, nor do they
see that beneath my quiet demeanor lies the still scorn of an injured,
irritated man, who has sworn to himself to master them one of these
days. We have arrested Monsieur de Beaufort, but he is the least
dangerous among them. There is the Prince de Conde----"

"The hero of Rocroy. Do you think of him?"

"Yes, madame, often and often, but pazienza, as we say in Italy; next,
after Monsieur de Conde, comes the Duke of Orleans."

"What are you saying? The first prince of the blood, the king's uncle!"

"No! not the first prince of the blood, not the king's uncle, but the
base conspirator, the soul of every cabal, who pretends to lead the
brave people who are weak enough to believe in the honor of a prince of
the blood--not the prince nearest to the throne, not the king's uncle, I
repeat, but the murderer of Chalais, of Montmorency and of Cinq-Mars,
who is playing now the same game he played long ago and who thinks that
he will win the game because he has a new adversary--instead of a man
who threatened, a man who smiles. But he is mistaken; I shall not leave
so near the queen that source of discord with which the deceased
cardinal so often caused the anger of the king to rage above the boiling
point."

Anne blushed and buried her face in her hands.

"What am I to do?" she said, bowed down beneath the voice of her tyrant.

"Endeavor to remember the names of those faithful servants who crossed
the Channel, in spite of Monsieur de Richelieu, tracking the roads along
which they passed by their blood, to bring back to your majesty certain
jewels given by you to Buckingham."

Anne arose, full of majesty, and as if touched by a spring, and looking
at the cardinal with the haughty dignity which in the days of her youth
had made her so powerful: "You are insulting me!" she said.

"I wish," continued Mazarin, finishing, as it were, the speech this
sudden movement of the queen had cut; "I wish, in fact, that you should
now do for your husband what you formerly did for your lover."

"Again that accusation!" cried the queen. "I thought that calumny was
stifled or extinct; you have spared me till now, but since you speak of
it, once for all, I tell you----"

"Madame, I do not ask you to tell me," said Mazarin, astounded by this
returning courage.

"I will tell you all," replied Anne. "Listen: there were in truth, at
that epoch, four devoted hearts, four loyal spirits, four faithful
swords, who saved more than my life--my honor----"

"Ah! you confess it!" exclaimed Mazarin.

"Is it only the guilty whose honor is at the sport of others, sir? and
cannot women be dishonored by appearances? Yes, appearances were against
me and I was about to suffer dishonor. However, I swear I was not
guilty, I swear it by----"

The queen looked around her for some sacred object by which she could
swear, and taking out of a cupboard hidden in the tapestry, a small
coffer of rosewood set in silver, and laying it on the altar:

"I swear," she said, "by these sacred relics that Buckingham was not my
lover."

"What relics are those by which you swear?" asked Mazarin, smiling. "I
am incredulous."

The queen untied from around her throat a small golden key which hung
there, and presented it to the cardinal.

"Open, sir," she said, "and look for yourself."

Mazarin opened the coffer; a knife, covered with rust, and two letters,
one of which was stained with blood, alone met his gaze.

"What are these things?" he asked.

"What are these things?" replied Anne, with queen-like dignity,
extending toward the open coffer an arm, despite the lapse of years,
still beautiful. "These two letters are the only ones I ever wrote to
him. This knife is the knife with which Felton stabbed him. Read the
letters and see if I have lied or spoken the truth."

But Mazarin, notwithstanding this permission, instead of reading the
letters, took the knife which the dying Buckingham had snatched out of
the wound and sent by Laporte to the queen. The blade was red, for the
blood had become rust; after a momentary examination during which the
queen became as white as the cloth which covered the altar on which she
was leaning, he put it back into the coffer with an involuntary shudder.

"It is well, madame, I believe your oath."

"No, no, read," exclaimed the queen, indignantly; "read, I command you,
for I am resolved that everything shall be finished to-night and never
will I recur to this subject again. Do you think," she said, with a
ghastly smile, "that I shall be inclined to reopen this coffer to answer
any future accusations?"

Mazarin, overcome by this determination, read the two letters. In one
the queen asked for the ornaments back again. This letter had been
conveyed by D'Artagnan and had arrived in time. The other was that which
Laporte had placed in the hands of the Duke of Buckingham, warning him
that he was about to be assassinated; that communication had arrived too
late.

"It is well, madame," said Mazarin; "nothing can gainsay such
testimony."

"Sir," replied the queen, closing the coffer and leaning her hand upon
it, "if there is anything to be said, it is that I have always been
ungrateful to the brave men who saved me--that I have given nothing to
that gallant officer, D'Artagnan, you were speaking of just now, but my
hand to kiss and this diamond."

As she spoke she extended her beautiful hand to the cardinal and showed
him a superb diamond which sparkled on her finger.

"It appears," she resumed, "that he sold it---he sold it in order to
save me another time--to be able to send a messenger to the duke to warn
him of his danger--he sold it to Monsieur des Essarts, on whose finger I
remarked it. I bought it from him, but it belongs to D'Artagnan. Give it
back to him, sir, and since you have such a man in your service, make
him useful."

"Thank you, madame," said Mazarin. "I will profit by the advice."

"And now," added the queen, her voice broken by her emotion, "have you
any other question to ask me?"

"Nothing,"--the cardinal spoke in his most conciliatory manner--"except
to beg of you to forgive my unworthy suspicions. I love you so tenderly
that I cannot help being jealous, even of the past."

A smile, which was indefinable, passed over the lips of the queen.

"Since you have no further interrogations to make, leave me, I beseech
you," she said. "I wish, after such a scene, to be alone."

Mazarin bent low before her.

"I will retire, madame. Do you permit me to return?"

"Yes, to-morrow."

The cardinal took the queen's hand and pressed it with an air of
gallantry to his lips.

Scarcely had he left her when the queen went into her son's room, and
inquired from Laporte if the king was in bed. Laporte pointed to the
child, who was asleep.

Anne ascended the steps side of the bed and softly kissed the placid
forehead of her son; then she retired as silently as she had come,
merely saying to Laporte:

"Try, my dear Laporte, to make the king more courteous to Monsieur le
Cardinal, to whom both he and I are under such important obligations."




5. The Gascon and the Italian.


Meanwhile the cardinal returned to his own room; and after asking
Bernouin, who stood at the door, whether anything had occurred during
his absence, and being answered in the negative, he desired that he
might be left alone.

When he was alone he opened the door of the corridor and then that of
the ante-chamber. There D'Artagnan was asleep upon a bench.

The cardinal went up to him and touched his shoulder. D'Artagnan
started, awakened himself, and as he awoke, stood up exactly like a
soldier under arms.

"Here I am," said he. "Who calls me?"

"I," said Mazarin, with his most smiling expression.

"I ask pardon of your eminence," said D'Artagnan, "but I was so
fatigued----"

"Don't ask my pardon, monsieur," said Mazarin, "for you fatigued
yourself in my service."

D'Artagnan admired Mazarin's gracious manner. "Ah," said he, between his
teeth, "is there truth in the proverb that fortune comes while one
sleeps?"

"Follow me, monsieur," said Mazarin.

"Come, come," murmured D'Artagnan, "Rochefort has kept his promise, but
where in the devil is he?" And he searched the cabinet even to the
smallest recesses, but there was no sign of Rochefort.

"Monsieur d'Artagnan," said the cardinal, sitting down on a fauteuil,
"you have always seemed to me to be a brave and honorable man."

"Possibly," thought D'Artagnan, "but he has taken a long time to let me
know his thoughts;" nevertheless, he bowed to the very ground in
gratitude for Mazarin's compliment.

"Well," continued Mazarin, "the time has come to put to use your talents
and your valor."

There was a sudden gleam of joy in the officer's eyes, which vanished
immediately, for he knew nothing of Mazarin's purpose.

"Order, my lord," he said; "I am ready to obey your eminence."

"Monsieur d'Artagnan," continued the cardinal, "you performed sundry
superb exploits in the last reign."

"Your eminence is too good to remember such trifles in my favor. It is
true I fought with tolerable success."

"I don't speak of your warlike exploits, monsieur," said Mazarin;
"although they gained you much reputation, they were surpassed by
others."

D'Artagnan pretended astonishment.

"Well, you do not reply?" resumed Mazarin.

"I am waiting, my lord, till you tell me of what exploits you speak."

"I speak of the adventure--Eh, you know well what I mean."

"Alas, no, my lord!" replied D'Artagnan, surprised.

"You are discreet--so much the better. I speak of that adventure in
behalf of the queen, of the ornaments, of the journey you made with
three of your friends."

"Aha!" thought the Gascon; "is this a snare or not? Let me be on my
guard."

And he assumed a look of stupidity which Mendori or Bellerose, two of
the first actors of the day, might have envied.

"Bravo!" cried Mazarin; "they told me that you were the man I wanted.
Come, let us see what you will do for me."

"Everything that your eminence may please to command me," was the reply.

"You will do for me what you have done for the queen?"

"Certainly," D'Artagnan said to himself, "he wishes to make me speak
out. He's not more cunning than De Richelieu was! Devil take him!" Then
he said aloud:

"The queen, my lord? I don't comprehend."

"You don't comprehend that I want you and your three friends to be of
use to me?"

"Which of my friends, my lord?"

"Your three friends--the friends of former days."

"Of former days, my lord! In former days I had not only three friends, I
had thirty; at two-and-twenty one calls every man one's friend."

"Well, sir," returned Mazarin, "prudence is a fine thing, but to-day you
might regret having been too prudent."

"My lord, Pythagoras made his disciples keep silence for five years that
they might learn to hold their tongues."

"But you have been silent for twenty years, sir. Speak, now the queen
herself releases you from your promise."

"The queen!" said D'Artagnan, with an astonishment which this time was
not pretended.

"Yes, the queen! And as a proof of what I say she commanded me to show
you this diamond, which she thinks you know."

And so saying, Mazarin extended his hand to the officer, who sighed as
he recognized the ring so gracefully given to him by the queen on the
night of the ball at the Hotel de Ville and which she had repurchased
from Monsieur des Essarts.

"'Tis true. I remember well that diamond, which belonged to the queen."

"You see, then, that I speak to you in the queen's name. Answer me
without acting as if you were on the stage; your interests are concerned
in your so doing."

"Faith, my lord, it is very necessary for me to make my fortune, your
eminence has so long forgotten me."

"We need only a week to amend all that. Come, you are accounted for, you
are here, but where are your friends?"

"I do not know, my lord. We have parted company this long time; all
three have left the service."

"Where can you find them, then?"

"Wherever they are, that's my business."

"Well, now, what are your conditions, if I employ you?"

"Money, my lord, as much money as what you wish me to undertake will
require. I remember too well how sometimes we were stopped for want of
money, and but for that diamond, which I was obliged to sell, we should
have remained on the road."

"The devil he does! Money! and a large sum!" said Mazarin. "Pray, are
you aware that the king has no money in his treasury?"

"Do then as I did, my lord. Sell the crown diamonds. Trust me, don't let
us try to do things cheaply. Great undertakings come poorly off with
paltry means."

"Well," returned Mazarin, "we will satisfy you."

"Richelieu," thought D'Artagnan, "would have given me five hundred
pistoles in advance."

"You will then be at my service?" asked Mazarin.

"Yes, if my friends agree."

"But if they refuse can I count on you?"

"I have never accomplished anything alone," said D'Artagnan, shaking his
head.

"Go, then, and find them."

"What shall I say to them by way of inducement to serve your eminence?"

"You know them better than I. Adapt your promises to their respective
characters."

"What shall I promise?"

"That if they serve me as well as they served the queen my gratitude
shall be magnificent."

"But what are we to do?"

"Make your mind easy; when the time for action comes you shall be put in
full possession of what I require from you; wait till that time arrives
and find out your friends."

"My lord, perhaps they are not in Paris. It is even probable that I
shall have to make a journey. I am only a lieutenant of musketeers, very
poor, and journeys cost money.

"My intention," said Mazarin, "is not that you go with a great
following; my plans require secrecy, and would be jeopardized by a too
extravagant equipment."

"Still, my lord, I can't travel on my pay, for it is now three months
behind; and I can't travel on my savings, for in my twenty-two years of
service I have accumulated nothing but debts."

Mazarin remained some moments in deep thought, as if he were fighting
with himself; then, going to a large cupboard closed with a triple lock,
he took from it a bag of silver, and weighing it twice in his hands
before he gave it to D'Artagnan:

"Take this," he said with a sigh, "'tis merely for your journey."

"If these are Spanish doubloons, or even gold crowns," thought
D'Artagnan, "we shall yet be able to do business together." He saluted
the cardinal and plunged the bag into the depths of an immense pocket.

"Well, then, all is settled; you are to set off," said the cardinal.

"Yes, my lord."

"Apropos, what are the names of your friends?"

"The Count de la Fere, formerly styled Athos; Monsieur du Vallon, whom
we used to call Porthos; the Chevalier d'Herblay, now the Abbe
d'Herblay, whom we styled Aramis----"

The cardinal smiled.

"Younger sons," he said, "who enlisted in the musketeers under feigned
names in order not to lower their family names. Long swords but light
purses. Was that it?"

"If, God willing, these swords should be devoted to the service of your
eminence," said D'Artagnan, "I shall venture to express a wish, which
is, that in its turn the purse of your eminence may become light and
theirs heavy--for with these three men your eminence may rouse all
Europe if you like."

"These Gascons," said the cardinal, laughing, "almost beat the Italians
in effrontery."

"At all events," answered D'Artagnan, with a smile almost as crafty as
the cardinal's, "they beat them when they draw their swords."

He then withdrew, and as he passed into the courtyard he stopped near a
