who recalls you. Long ago he has forgiven and blest the soft hand that
wounded him: but the mark is there, and the wound is cicatrized only--no
time, tears, caresses, or repentance, can obliterate the scar. We are
indocile to put up with grief, however. Reficimus rates quassas: we
tempt the ocean again and again, and try upon new ventures. Esmond
thought of his early time as a novitiate, and of this past trial as
an initiation before entering into life--as our young Indians undergo
tortures silently before they pass to the rank of warriors in the tribe.

The officers, meanwhile, who were not let into the secret of the grief
which was gnawing at the side of their silent young friend, and being
accustomed to such transactions, in which one comrade or another was
daily paying the forfeit of the sword, did not, of course, bemoan
themselves very inconsolably about the fate of their late companion in
arms. This one told stories of former adventures of love, or war,
or pleasure, in which poor Frank Esmond had been engaged; t'other
recollected how a constable had been bilked, or a tavern-bully beaten:
whilst my lord's poor widow was sitting at his tomb worshipping him as
an actual saint and spotless hero--so the visitors said who had news of
Lady Castlewood; and Westbury and Macartney had pretty nearly had all
the town to come and see them.

The duel, its fatal termination, the trial of the two peers and the
three commoners concerned, had caused the greatest excitement in the
town. The prints and News Letters were full of them. The three gentlemen
in Newgate were almost as much crowded as the bishops in the Tower, or
a highwayman before execution. We were allowed to live in the Governor's
house, as hath been said, both before trial and after condemnation,
waiting the King's pleasure; nor was the real cause of the fatal quarrel
known, so closely had my lord and the two other persons who knew it kept
the secret, but every one imagined that the origin of the meeting was
a gambling dispute. Except fresh air, the prisoners had, upon payment,
most things they could desire. Interest was made that they should not
mix with the vulgar convicts, whose ribald choruses and loud laughter
and curses could be heard from their own part of the prison, where they
and the miserable debtors were confined pell-mell.




CHAPTER II.

I COME TO THE END OF MY CAPTIVITY, BUT NOT OF MY TROUBLE.


Among the company which came to visit the two officers was an old
acquaintance of Harry Esmond; that gentleman of the Guards, namely,
who had been so kind to Harry when Captain Westbury's troop had been
quartered at Castlewood more than seven years before. Dick the Scholar
was no longer Dick the Trooper now, but Captain Steele of Lucas's
Fusiliers, and secretary to my Lord Cutts, that famous officer of King
William's, the bravest and most beloved man of the English army. The
two jolly prisoners had been drinking with a party of friends (for
our cellar and that of the keepers of Newgate, too, were supplied
with endless hampers of Burgundy and Champagne that the friends of the
Colonels sent in); and Harry, having no wish for their drink or their
conversation, being too feeble in health for the one and too sad in
spirits for the other, was sitting apart in his little room, reading
such books as he had, one evening, when honest Colonel Westbury, flushed
with liquor, and always good-humored in and out of his cups, came
laughing into Harry's closet and said, "Ho, young Killjoy! here's a
friend come to see thee; he'll pray with thee, or he'll drink with thee;
or he'll drink and pray turn about. Dick, my Christian hero, here's the
little scholar of Castlewood."

Dick came up and kissed Esmond on both cheeks, imparting a strong
perfume of burnt sack along with his caress to the young man.

"What! is this the little man that used to talk Latin and fetch our
bowls? How tall thou art grown! I protest I should have known thee
anywhere. And so you have turned ruffian and fighter; and wanted to
measure swords with Mohun, did you? I protest that Mohun said at the
Guard dinner yesterday, where there was a pretty company of us, that the
young fellow wanted to fight him, and was the better man of the two."

"I wish we could have tried and proved it, Mr. Steele," says Esmond,
thinking of his dead benefactor, and his eyes filling with tears.

With the exception of that one cruel letter which he had from his
mistress, Mr. Esmond heard nothing from her, and she seemed determined
to execute her resolve of parting from him and disowning him. But he had
news of her, such as it was, which Mr. Steele assiduously brought him
from the Prince's and Princess's Court, where our honest Captain had
been advanced to the post of gentleman waiter. When off duty there,
Captain Dick often came to console his friends in captivity; a good
nature and a friendly disposition towards all who were in ill-fortune
no doubt prompting him to make his visits, and good-fellowship and good
wine to prolong them.

"Faith," says Westbury, "the little scholar was the first to begin the
quarrel--I mind me of it now--at Lockit's. I always hated that fellow
Mohun. What was the real cause, of the quarrel betwixt him and poor
Frank? I would wager 'twas a woman."

"'Twas a quarrel about play--on my word, about play," Harry said. "My
poor lord lost great sums to his guest at Castlewood. Angry words passed
between them; and, though Lord Castlewood was the kindest and most
pliable soul alive, his spirit was very high; and hence that meeting
which has brought us all here," says Mr. Esmond, resolved never to
acknowledge that there had ever been any other cause but cards for the
duel.

"I do not like to use bad words of a nobleman," says Westbury; "but
if my Lord Mohun were a commoner, I would say, 'twas a pity he was not
hanged. He was familiar with dice and women at a time other boys are at
school being birched; he was as wicked as the oldest rake, years ere he
had done growing; and handled a sword and a foil, and a bloody one, too,
before he ever used a razor. He held poor Will Mountford in talk that
night, when bloody Dick Hill ran him through. He will come to a bad end,
will that young lord; and no end is bad enough for him," says honest
Mr. Westbury: whose prophecy was fulfilled twelve years after, upon that
fatal day when Mohun fell, dragging down one of the bravest and greatest
gentlemen in England in his fall.

From Mr. Steele, then, who brought the public rumor, as well as his own
private intelligence, Esmond learned the movements of his unfortunate
mistress. Steele's heart was of very inflammable composition; and the
gentleman usher spoke in terms of boundless admiration both of the widow
(that most beautiful woman, as he said) and of her daughter, who, in
the Captain's eyes, was a still greater paragon. If the pale widow, whom
Captain Richard, in his poetic rapture compared to a Niobe in tears--to
a Sigismunda--to a weeping Belvidera, was an object the most lovely
and pathetic which his eyes had ever beheld, or for which his heart had
melted, even her ripened perfections and beauty were as nothing compared
to the promise of that extreme loveliness which the good Captain saw
in her daughter. It was matre pulcra filia pulcrior. Steele composed
sonnets whilst he was on duty in his Prince's ante-chamber, to the
maternal and filial charms. He would speak for hours about them to Harry
Esmond; and, indeed, he could have chosen few subjects more likely to
interest the unhappy young man, whose heart was now as always devoted
to these ladies; and who was thankful to all who loved them, or praised
them, or wished them well.

Not that his fidelity was recompensed by any answering kindness, or
show of relenting even, on the part of a mistress obdurate now after ten
years of love and benefactions. The poor young man getting no answer,
save Tusher's, to that letter which he had written, and being too proud
to write more, opened a part of his heart to Steele, than whom no man,
when unhappy, could find a kinder hearer, or more friendly emissary;
described (in words which were no doubt pathetic, for they came imo
pectore, and caused honest Dick to weep plentifully) his youth, his
constancy, his fond devotion to that household which had reared him; his
affection, how earned, and how tenderly requited until but yesterday,
and (as far as he might) the circumstances and causes for which that
sad quarrel had made of Esmond a prisoner under sentence, a widow and
orphans of those whom in life he held dearest. In terms that might well
move a harder-hearted man than young Esmond's confidant--for, indeed,
the speaker's own heart was half broke as he uttered them--he described
a part of what had taken place in that only sad interview which his
mistress had granted him; how she had left him with anger and almost
imprecation, whose words and thoughts until then had been only blessing
and kindness; how she had accused him of the guilt of that blood, in
exchange for which he would cheerfully have sacrificed his own (indeed,
in this the Lord Mohun, the Lord Warwick, and all the gentlemen engaged,
as well as the common rumor out of doors--Steele told him--bore out the
luckless young man); and with all his heart, and tears, he besought
Mr. Steele to inform his mistress of her kinsman's unhappiness, and to
deprecate that cruel anger she showed him. Half frantic with grief
at the injustice done him, and contrasting it with a thousand soft
recollections of love and confidence gone by, that made his present
misery inexpressibly more bitter, the poor wretch passed many a lonely
day and wakeful night in a kind of powerless despair and rage against
his iniquitous fortune. It was the softest hand that struck him, the
gentlest and most compassionate nature that persecuted him. "I would as
lief," he said, "have pleaded guilty to the murder, and have suffered
for it like any other felon, as have to endure the torture to which my
mistress subjects me."

Although the recital of Esmond's story, and his passionate appeals and
remonstrances, drew so many tears from Dick who heard them, they had
no effect upon the person whom they were designed to move. Esmond's
ambassador came back from the mission with which the poor young
gentleman had charged him, with a sad blank face and a shake of the
head, which told that there was no hope for the prisoner; and scarce a
wretched culprit in that prison of Newgate ordered for execution, and
trembling for a reprieve, felt more cast down than Mr. Esmond, innocent
and condemned.

As had been arranged between the prisoner and his counsel in their
consultations, Mr. Steele had gone to the dowager's house in Chelsey,
where it has been said the widow and her orphans were, had seen my Lady
Viscountess, and pleaded the cause of her unfortunate kinsman. "And I
think I spoke well, my poor boy," says Mr. Steele; "for who would not
speak well in such a cause, and before so beautiful a judge? I did not
see the lovely Beatrix (sure her famous namesake of Florence was never
half so beautiful), only the young Viscount was in the room with the
Lord Churchill, my Lord of Marlborough's eldest son. But these young
gentlemen went off to the garden; I could see them from the window
tilting at each other with poles in a mimic tournament (grief touches
the young but lightly, and I remember that I beat a drum at the coffin
of my own father). My Lady Viscountess looked out at the two boys at
their game and said--'You see, sir, children are taught to use weapons
of death as toys, and to make a sport of murder;' and as she spoke she
looked so lovely, and stood there in herself so sad and beautiful, an
instance of that doctrine whereof I am a humble preacher, that had I not
dedicated my little volume of the 'Christian Hero'--(I perceive, Harry,
thou hast not cut the leaves of it. The sermon is good, believe me,
though the preacher's life may not answer it)--I say, hadn't I dedicated
the volume to Lord Cutts, I would have asked permission to place her
ladyship's name on the first page. I think I never saw such a beautiful
violet as that of her eyes, Harry. Her complexion is of the pink of the
blush-rose, she hath an exquisite turned wrist and dimpled hand, and I
make no doubt--"

"Did you come to tell me about the dimples on my lady's hand?" broke out
Mr. Esmond, sadly.

"A lovely creature in affliction seems always doubly beautiful to me,"
says the poor Captain, who indeed was but too often in a state to see
double, and so checked he resumed the interrupted thread of his story.
"As I spoke my business," Mr. Steele said, "and narrated to your
mistress what all the world knows, and the other side hath been eager to
acknowledge--that you had tried to put yourself between the two lords,
and to take your patron's quarrel on your own point; I recounted the
general praises of your gallantry, besides my Lord Mohun's particular
testimony to it; I thought the widow listened with some interest, and
her eyes--I have never seen such a violet, Harry--looked up at mine once
or twice. But after I had spoken on this theme for a while she suddenly
broke away with a cry of grief. 'I would to God, sir,' she said, 'I had
never heard that word gallantry which you use, or known the meaning of
it. My lord might have been here but for that; my home might be happy;
my poor boy have a father. It was what you gentlemen call gallantry came
into my home, and drove my husband on to the cruel sword that killed
him. You should not speak the word to a Christian woman, sir, a poor
widowed mother of orphans, whose home was happy until the world came
into it--the wicked godless world, that takes the blood of the innocent,
and lets the guilty go free.'

"As the afflicted lady spoke in this strain, sir," Mr. Steele
continued, "it seemed as if indignation moved her, even more than grief.
'Compensation!' she went on passionately, her cheeks and eyes kindling;
'what compensation does your world give the widow for her husband, and
the children for the murderer of their father? The wretch who did the
deed has not even a punishment. Conscience! what conscience has he, who
can enter the house of a friend, whisper falsehood and insult to a woman
that never harmed him, and stab the kind heart that trusted him? My
Lord--my Lord Wretch's, my Lord Villain's, my Lord Murderer's peers meet
to try him, and they dismiss him with a word or two of reproof and send
him into the world again, to pursue women with lust and falsehood, and
to murder unsuspecting guests that harbor him. That day, my Lord--my
Lord Murderer--(I will never name him)--was let loose, a woman was
executed at Tyburn for stealing in a shop. But a man may rob another of
his life, or a lady of her honor, and shall pay no penalty! I take my
child, run to the throne, and on my knees ask for justice, and the King
refuses me. The King! he is no king of mine--he never shall be. He, too,
robbed the throne from the king his father--the true king--and he has
gone unpunished, as the great do.'

"I then thought to speak for you," Mr. Steele continued, "and I
interposed by saying, 'There was one, madam, who, at least, would have
put his own breast between your husband's and my Lord Mohun's sword.
Your poor young kinsman, Harry Esmond, hath told me that he tried to
draw the quarrel on himself.'

"'Are you come from HIM?' asked the lady (so Mr. Steele went on) rising
up with a great severity and stateliness. 'I thought you had come from
the Princess. I saw Mr. Esmond in his prison, and bade him farewell. He
brought misery into my house. He never should have entered it.'

"'Madam, madam, he is not to blame,' I interposed," continued Mr.
Steele.

"'Do I blame him to you, sir?' asked the widow. 'If 'tis he who sent
you, say that I have taken counsel, where'--she spoke with a very
pallid cheek now, and a break in her voice--'where all who ask may have
it;--and that it bids me to part from him, and to see him no more. We
met in the prison for the last time--at least for years to come. It
may be, in years hence, when--when our knees and our tears and our
contrition have changed our sinful hearts, sir, and wrought our pardon,
we may meet again--but not now. After what has passed, I could not bear
to see him. I wish him well, sir; but I wish him farewell, too; and if
he has that--that regard towards us which he speaks of, I beseech him to
prove it by obeying me in this.'

"'I shall break the young man's heart, madam, by this hard sentence,'"
Mr. Steele said.

"The lady shook her head," continued my kind scholar. "'The hearts of
young men, Mr. Steele, are not so made,' she said. 'Mr. Esmond will find
other--other friends. The mistress of this house has relented very much
towards the late lord's son,' she added, with a blush, 'and has promised
me, that is, has promised that she will care for his fortune. Whilst I
live in it, after the horrid horrid deed which has passed, Castlewood
must never be a home to him--never. Nor would I have him write to
me--except--no--I would have him never write to me, nor see him more.
Give him, if you will, my parting--Hush! not a word of this before my
daughter.'

"Here the fair Beatrix entered from the river, with her cheeks flushing
with health, and looking only the more lovely and fresh for the mourning
habiliments which she wore. And my Lady Viscountess said--

"'Beatrix, this is Mr. Steele, gentleman-usher to the Prince's Highness.
When does your new comedy appear, Mr. Steele?' I hope thou wilt be out
of prison for the first night, Harry."

The sentimental Captain concluded his sad tale, saying, "Faith, the
beauty of Filia pulcrior drove pulcram matrem out of my head; and yet
as I came down the river, and thought about the pair, the pallid dignity
and exquisite grace of the matron had the uppermost, and I thought her
even more noble than the virgin!"


The party of prisoners lived very well in Newgate, and with comforts
very different to those which were awarded to the poor wretches there
(his insensibility to their misery, their gayety still more frightful,
their curses and blasphemy, hath struck with a kind of shame since--as
proving how selfish, during his imprisonment, his own particular grief
was, and how entirely the thoughts of it absorbed him): if the three
gentlemen lived well under the care of the Warden of Newgate, it was
because they paid well: and indeed the cost at the dearest ordinary
or the grandest tavern in London could not have furnished a longer
reckoning, than our host of the "Handcuff Inn"--as Colonel Westbury
called it. Our rooms were the three in the gate over Newgate--on the
second story looking up Newgate Street towards Cheapside and Paul's
Church. And we had leave to walk on the roof, and could see thence
Smithfield and the Bluecoat Boys' School, Gardens, and the Chartreux,
where, as Harry Esmond remembered, Dick the Scholar, and his friend Tom
Tusher, had had their schooling.

Harry could never have paid his share of that prodigious heavy reckoning
which my landlord brought to his guests once a week: for he had but
three pieces in his pockets that fatal night before the duel, when the
gentlemen were at cards, and offered to play five. But whilst he was yet
ill at the Gatehouse, after Lady Castlewood had visited him there, and
before his trial, there came one in an orange-tawny coat and blue lace,
the livery which the Esmonds always wore, and brought a sealed packet
for Mr. Esmond, which contained twenty guineas, and a note saying that
a counsel had been appointed for him, and that more money would be
forthcoming whenever he needed it.

'Twas a queer letter from the scholar as she was, or as she called
herself: the Dowager Viscountess Castlewood, written in the strange
barbarous French which she and many other fine ladies of that
time--witness her Grace of Portsmouth--employed. Indeed, spelling was
not an article of general commodity in the world then, and my Lord
Marlborough's letters can show that he, for one, had but a little share
of this part of grammar:--


"MONG COUSSIN," my Lady Viscountess Dowager wrote, "je scay que vous
vous etes bravement batew et grievement blessay--du coste de feu M. le
Vicomte. M. le Compte de Varique ne se playt qua parlay de vous: M. de
Moon aucy. Il di que vous avay voulew vous bastre avecque luy--que vous
estes plus fort que luy fur l'ayscrimme--quil'y a surtout certaine Botte
que vous scavay quil n'a jammay sceu pariay: et que c'en eut ete fay de
luy si vouseluy vous vous fussiay battews ansamb. Aincy ce pauv Vicompte
est mort. Mort et pontayt--Mon coussin, mon coussin! jay dans la tayste
que vous n'estes quung pety Monst--angcy que les Esmonds ong tousjours
este. La veuve est chay moy. J'ay recuilly cet' pauve famme. Elle est
furieuse cont vous, allans tous les jours chercher ley Roy (d'icy)
demandant a gran cri revanche pour son Mary. Elle ne veux voyre ni
entende parlay de vous: pourtant elle ne fay qu'en parlay milfoy par
jour. Quand vous seray hor prison venay me voyre. J'auray soing de vous.
Si cette petite Prude veut se defaire de song pety Monste (Helas je
craing quil ne soy trotar!) je m'on chargeray. J'ay encor quelqu interay
et quelques escus de costay.

"La Veuve se raccommode avec Miladi Marlboro qui est tout puicante
avecque la Reine Anne. Cet dam senteraysent pour la petite prude; qui
pourctant a un fi du mesme asge que vous savay.

"En sortant de prisong venez icy. Je ne puy vous recevoir chaymoy a
cause des mechansetes du monde, may pre du moy vous aurez logement.

"ISABELLE VICOMTESSE D'ESMOND"


Marchioness of Esmond this lady sometimes called herself, in virtue
of that patent which had been given by the late King James to Harry
Esmond's father; and in this state she had her train carried by a
knight's wife, a cup and cover of assay to drink from, and fringed
cloth.

He who was of the same age as little Francis, whom we shall henceforth
call Viscount Castlewood here, was H. R. H. the Prince of Wales, born
in the same year and month with Frank, and just proclaimed at Saint
Germains, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland.




CHAPTER III.

I TAKE THE QUEEN'S PAY IN QUIN'S REGIMENT.


The fellow in the orange-tawny livery with blue lace and facings was
in waiting when Esmond came out of prison, and, taking the young
gentleman's slender baggage, led the way out of that odious Newgate, and
by Fleet Conduit, down to the Thames, where a pair of oars was called,
and they went up the river to Chelsey. Esmond thought the sun had never
shone so bright; nor the air felt so fresh and exhilarating. Temple
Garden, as they rowed by, looked like the garden of Eden to him, and
the aspect of the quays, wharves, and buildings by the river, Somerset
House, and Westminster (where the splendid new bridge was just
beginning), Lambeth tower and palace, and that busy shining scene of the
Thames swarming with boats and barges, filled his heart with pleasure
and cheerfulness--as well such a beautiful scene might to one who had
been a prisoner so long, and with so many dark thoughts deepening the
gloom of his captivity. They rowed up at length to the pretty village
of Chelsey, where the nobility have many handsome country-houses; and
so came to my Lady Viscountess's house, a cheerful new house in the
row facing the river, with a handsome garden behind it, and a pleasant
look-out both towards Surrey and Kensington, where stands the noble
ancient palace of the Lord Warwick, Harry's reconciled adversary.

Here in her ladyship's saloon, the young man saw again some of those
pictures which had been at Castlewood, and which she had removed thence
on the death of her lord, Harry's father. Specially, and in the place of
honor, was Sir Peter Lely's picture of the honorable Mistress Isabella
Esmond as Diana, in yellow satin, with a bow in her hand and a crescent
in her forehead; and dogs frisking about her. 'Twas painted about the
time when royal Endymions were said to find favor with this virgin
huntress; and, as goddesses have youth perpetual, this one believed to
the day of her death that she never grew older: and always persisted in
supposing the picture was still like her.

After he had been shown to her room by the groom of the chamber, who
filled many offices besides in her ladyship's modest household, and
after a proper interval, his elderly goddess Diana vouchsafed to appear
to the young man. A blackamoor in a Turkish habit, with red boots and a
silver collar, on which the Viscountess's arms were engraven, preceded
her and bore her cushion; then came her gentlewoman; a little pack of
spaniels barking and frisking about preceded the austere huntress--then,
behold, the Viscountess herself "dropping odors." Esmond recollected
from his childhood that rich aroma of musk which his mother-in-law
(for she may be called so) exhaled. As the sky grows redder and redder
towards sunset, so, in the decline of her years, the cheeks of my Lady
Dowager blushed more deeply. Her face was illuminated with vermilion,
which appeared the brighter from the white paint employed to set it off.
She wore the ringlets which had been in fashion in King Charles's time;
whereas the ladies of King William's had head-dresses like the towers of
Cybele. Her eyes gleamed out from the midst of this queer structure of
paint, dyes, and pomatums. Such was my Lady Viscountess, Mr. Esmond's
father's widow.

He made her such a profound bow as her dignity and relationship merited,
and advanced with the greatest gravity, and once more kissed that
hand, upon the trembling knuckles of which glittered a score of
rings--remembering old times when that trembling hand made him tremble.
"Marchioness," says he, bowing, and on one knee, "is it only the hand I
may have the honor of saluting?" For, accompanying that inward laughter,
which the sight of such an astonishing old figure might well produce
in the young man, there was good will too, and the kindness of
consanguinity. She had been his father's wife, and was his grandfather's
daughter. She had suffered him in old days, and was kind to him now
after her fashion. And now that bar-sinister was removed from Esmond's
thought, and that secret opprobrium no longer cast upon his mind, he was
pleased to feel family ties and own them--perhaps secretly vain of the
sacrifice he had made, and to think that he, Esmond, was really the
chief of his house, and only prevented by his own magnanimity from
advancing his claim.

At least, ever since he had learned that secret from his poor patron
on his dying bed, actually as he was standing beside it, he had felt an
independency which he had never known before, and which since did not
desert him. So he called his old aunt Marchioness, but with an air as if
he was the Marquis of Esmond who so addressed her.

Did she read in the young gentleman's eyes, which had now no fear of
hers or their superannuated authority, that he knew or suspected the
truth about his birth? She gave a start of surprise at his altered
manner: indeed, it was quite a different bearing to that of the
Cambridge student who had paid her a visit two years since, and whom
she had dismissed with five pieces sent by the groom of the chamber. She
eyed him, then trembled a little more than was her wont, perhaps, and
said, "Welcome, cousin," in a frightened voice.

His resolution, as has been said before, had been quite different,
namely, so to bear himself through life as if the secret of his birth
was not known to him; but he suddenly and rightly determined on a
different course. He asked that her ladyship's attendants should be
dismissed, and when they were private--"Welcome, nephew, at least,
madam, it should be," he said. "A great wrong has been done to me and to
you, and to my poor mother, who is no more."

"I declare before heaven that I was guiltless of it," she cried out,
giving up her cause at once. "It was your wicked father who--"

"Who brought this dishonor on our family," says Mr. Esmond. "I know it
full well. I want to disturb no one. Those who are in present possession
have been my dearest benefactors, and are quite innocent of intentional
wrong to me. The late lord, my dear patron, knew not the truth until a
few months before his death, when Father Holt brought the news to him."

"The wretch! he had it in confession! he had it in confession!" cried
out the Dowager Lady.

"Not so. He learned it elsewhere as well as in confession," Mr. Esmond
answered. "My father, when wounded at the Boyne, told the truth to a
French priest, who was in hiding after the battle, as well as to the
priest there, at whose house he died. This gentleman did not think fit
to divulge the story till he met with Mr. Holt at Saint Omer's. And
the latter kept it back for his own purpose, and until he had learned
whether my mother was alive or no. She is dead years since, my poor
patron told me with his dying breath, and I doubt him not. I do not know
even whether I could prove a marriage. I would not if I could. I do
not care to bring shame on our name, or grief upon those whom I love,
however hardly they may use me. My father's son, madam, won't aggravate
the wrong my father did you. Continue to be his widow, and give me
your kindness. 'Tis all I ask from you; and I shall never speak of this
matter again."

"Mais vous etes un noble jeune homme!" breaks out my lady, speaking, as
usual with her when she was agitated, in the French language.

"Noblesse oblige," says Mr. Esmond, making her a low bow. "There are
those alive to whom, in return for their love to me, I often fondly said
I would give my life away. Shall I be their enemy now, and quarrel about
a title? What matters who has it? 'Tis with the family still."

"What can there be in that little prude of a woman that makes men so
raffoler about her?" cries out my Lady Dowager. "She was here for a
month petitioning the King. She is pretty, and well conserved; but she
has not the bel air. In his late Majesty's Court all the men pretended
to admire her, and she was no better than a little wax doll. She is
better now, and looks the sister of her daughter; but what mean you
all by bepraising her? Mr. Steele, who was in waiting on Prince George,
seeing her with her two children going to Kensington, writ a poem about
her, and says he shall wear her colors, and dress in black for the
future. Mr. Congreve says he will write a 'Mourning Widow,' that shall
be better than his 'Mourning Bride.' Though their husbands quarrelled
and fought when that wretch Churchill deserted the King (for which he
deserved to be hung), Lady Marlborough has again gone wild about the
little widow; insulted me in my own drawing-room, by saying 'twas not
the OLD widow, but the young Viscountess, she had come to see. Little
Castlewood and little Lord Churchill are to be sworn friends, and have
boxed each other twice or thrice like brothers already. 'Twas that
wicked young Mohun who, coming back from the provinces last year, where
he had disinterred her, raved about her all the winter; said she was a
pearl set before swine; and killed poor stupid Frank. The quarrel was
all about his wife. I know 'twas all about her. Was there anything
between her and Mohun, nephew? Tell me now--was there anything? About
yourself, I do not ask you to answer questions."

Mr. Esmond blushed up. "My lady's virtue is like that of a saint in
heaven, madam," he cried out.

"Eh!--mon neveu. Many saints get to heaven after having a deal to repent
of. I believe you are like all the rest of the fools, and madly in love
with her."

"Indeed, I loved and honored her before all the world," Esmond answered.
"I take no shame in that."

"And she has shut her door on you--given the living to that horrid young
cub, son of that horrid old bear, Tusher, and says she will never see
you more. Monsieur mon neveu--we are all like that. When I was a young
woman, I'm positive that a thousand duels were fought about me. And when
poor Monsieur de Souchy drowned himself in the canal at Bruges because I
danced with Count Springbock, I couldn't squeeze out a single tear, but
danced till five o'clock the next morning. 'Twas the Count--no, 'twas my
Lord Ormond that played the fiddles, and his Majesty did me the honor of
dancing all night with me.--How you are grown! You have got the bel air.
You are a black man. Our Esmonds are all black. The little prude's son
is fair; so was his father--fair and stupid. You were an ugly little
wretch when you came to Castlewood--you were all eyes, like a young
crow. We intended you should be a priest. That awful Father Holt--how
he used to frighten me when I was ill! I have a comfortable director
now--the Abbe Douillette--a dear man. We make meagre on Fridays always.
My cook is a devout pious man. You, of course, are of the right way of
thinking. They say the Prince of Orange is very ill indeed."

In this way the old Dowager rattled on remorselessly to Mr. Esmond, who
was quite astounded with her present volubility, contrasting it with her
former haughty behavior to him. But she had taken him into favor for the
moment, and chose not only to like him, as far as her nature permitted,
but to be afraid of him; and he found himself to be as familiar with her
now as a young man, as, when a boy, he had been timorous and silent.
She was as good as her word respecting him. She introduced him to her
company, of which she entertained a good deal--of the adherents of King
James of course--and a great deal of loud intriguing took place over her
card-tables. She presented Mr. Esmond as her kinsman to many persons
of honor; she supplied him not illiberally with money, which he had no
scruple in accepting from her, considering the relationship which he
bore to her, and the sacrifices which he himself was making in behalf
of the family. But he had made up his mind to continue at no woman's
apron-strings longer; and perhaps had cast about how he should
distinguish himself, and make himself a name, which his singular
fortune had denied him. A discontent with his former bookish life and
quietude,--a bitter feeling of revolt at that slavery in which he had
chosen to confine himself for the sake of those whose hardness
towards him make his heart bleed,--a restless wish to see men and the
world,--led him to think of the military profession: at any rate,
to desire to see a few campaigns, and accordingly he pressed his new
patroness to get him a pair of colors; and one day had the honor of
finding himself appointed an ensign in Colonel Quin's regiment of
Fusileers on the Irish establishment.

Mr. Esmond's commission was scarce three weeks old when that accident
befell King William which ended the life of the greatest, the wisest,
the bravest, and most clement sovereign whom England ever knew.
'Twas the fashion of the hostile party to assail this great prince's
reputation during his life; but the joy which they and all his enemies
in Europe showed at his death, is a proof of the terror in which they
held him. Young as Esmond was, he was wise enough (and generous enough
too, let it be said) to scorn that indecency of gratulation which broke
out amongst the followers of King James in London, upon the death of
this illustrious prince, this invincible warrior, this wise and moderate
statesman. Loyalty to the exiled king's family was traditional, as has
been said, in that house to which Mr. Esmond belonged. His father's
widow had all her hopes, sympathies, recollections, prejudices, engaged
on King James's side; and was certainly as noisy a conspirator as ever
asserted the King's rights, or abused his opponent's, over a
quadrille table or a dish of bohea. Her ladyship's house swarmed with
ecclesiastics, in disguise and out; with tale-bearers from St. Germains;
and quidnuncs that knew the last news from Versailles; nay, the exact
force and number of the next expedition which the French king was to
send from Dunkirk, and which was to swallow up the Prince of Orange, his
army and his court. She had received the Duke of Berwick when he landed
here in '96. She kept the glass he drank from, vowing she never would
use it till she drank King James the Third's health in it on his
