his bride by giving more gifts than any other; for he thought that no
one of all the heroes would surpass him in possessions and gifts.

(ll. 50-51) There came also by ship from Crete to the house of the son
of Oebalus strong Lycomedes for rich-haired Helen's sake.

Berlin Papyri, No. 10560: (ll. 52-54)...sought her to wife. And after
golden-haired Menelaus he offered the greatest gifts of all the suitors,
and very much he desired in his heart to be the husband of Argive Helen
with the rich hair.

(ll. 55-62) And from Salamis Aias, blameless warrior, sought her to
wife, and offered fitting gifts, even wonderful deeds; for he said that
he would drive together and give the shambling oxen and strong sheep of
all those who lived in Troezen and Epidaurus near the sea, and in the
island of Aegina and in Mases, sons of the Achaeans, and shadowy Megara
and frowning Corinthus, and Hermione and Asine which lie along the sea;
for he was famous with the long spear.

(ll. 63-66) But from Euboea Elephenor, leader of men, the son of
Chalcodon, prince of the bold Abantes, sought her to wife. And he
offered very many gifts, and greatly he desired in his heart to be the
husband of rich-haired Helen.

(ll. 67-74) And from Crete the mighty Idomeneus sought her to wife,
Deucalion's son, offspring of renowned Minos. He sent no one to woo her
in his place, but came himself in his black ship of many thwarts over
the Ogygian sea across the dark wave to the home of wise Tyndareus, to
see Argive Helen and that no one else should bring back for him the girl
whose renown spread all over the holy earth.

(l. 75) And at the prompting of Zeus the all-wise came.

((LACUNA--Thirteen lines lost.))

(ll. 89-100) But of all who came for the maid's sake, the lord Tyndareus
sent none away, nor yet received the gift of any, but asked of all the
suitors sure oaths, and bade them swear and vow with unmixed libations
that no one else henceforth should do aught apart from him as touching
the marriage of the maid with shapely arms; but if any man should cast
off fear and reverence and take her by force, he bade all the others
together follow after and make him pay the penalty. And they, each of
them hoping to accomplish his marriage, obeyed him without wavering.
But warlike Menelaus, the son of Atreus, prevailed against them all
together, because he gave the greatest gifts.

(ll. 100-106) But Chiron was tending the son of Peleus, swift-footed
Achilles, pre-eminent among men, on woody Pelion; for he was still a
boy. For neither warlike Menelaus nor any other of men on earth would
have prevailed in suit for Helen, if fleet Achilles had found her unwed.
But, as it was, warlike Menelaus won her before.

II. [1745]

(ll. 1-2) And she (Helen) bare neat-ankled Hermione in the palace, a
child unlooked for.

(ll. 2-13) Now all the gods were divided through strife; for at that
very time Zeus who thunders on high was meditating marvellous deeds,
even to mingle storm and tempest over the boundless earth, and already
he was hastening to make an utter end of the race of mortal men,
declaring that he would destroy the lives of the demi-gods, that the
children of the gods should not mate with wretched mortals, seeing their
fate with their own eyes; but that the blessed gods henceforth even as
aforetime should have their living and their habitations apart from men.
But on those who were born of immortals and of mankind verily Zeus laid
toil and sorrow upon sorrow.

((LACUNA--Two lines missing.))

(ll. 16-30)....nor any one of men.... ....should go upon black ships....
....to be strongest in the might of his hands.... ....of mortal men
declaring to all those things that were, and those that are, and those
that shall be, he brings to pass and glorifies the counsels of his
father Zeus who drives the clouds. For no one, either of the blessed
gods or of mortal men, knew surely that he would contrive through the
sword to send to Hades full many a one of heroes fallen in strife. But
at that time he knew not as yet the intent of his father's mind, and how
men delight in protecting their children from doom. And he delighted in
the desire of his mighty father's heart who rules powerfully over men.

(ll. 31-43) From stately trees the fair leaves fell in abundance
fluttering down to the ground, and the fruit fell to the ground because
Boreas blew very fiercely at the behest of Zeus; the deep seethed and
all things trembled at his blast: the strength of mankind consumed away
and the fruit failed in the season of spring, at that time when the
Hairless One [1746] in a secret place in the mountains gets three young
every three years. In spring he dwells upon the mountain among tangled
thickets and brushwood, keeping afar from and hating the path of men,
in the glens and wooded glades. But when winter comes on, he lies in a
close cave beneath the earth and covers himself with piles of luxuriant
leaves, a dread serpent whose back is speckled with awful spots.

(ll. 44-50) But when he becomes violent and fierce unspeakably, the
arrows of Zeus lay him low.... Only his soul is left on the holy
earth, and that fits gibbering about a small unformed den. And it
comes enfeebled to sacrifices beneath the broad-pathed earth.... and it
lies....'

((LACUNA--Traces of 37 following lines.))


Fragment #69--Tzetzes [1747], Exeg. Iliad. 68. 19H: Agamemnon and
Menelaus likewise according to Hesiod and Aeschylus are regarded as the
sons of Pleisthenes, Atreus' son. And according to Hesiod, Pleisthenes
was a son of Atreus and Aerope, and Agamemnon, Menelaus and Anaxibia
were the children of Pleisthenes and Cleolla the daughter of Dias.


Fragment #70--Laurentian Scholiast on Sophocles' Electra, 539: 'And
she (Helen) bare to Menelaus, famous with the spear, Hermione and her
youngest-born, Nicostratus, a scion of Ares.'


Fragment #71--Pausanias, i. 43. 1: I know that Hesiod in the "Catalogue
of Women" represented that Iphigeneia was not killed but, by the will of
Artemis, became Hecate [1748].


Fragment #72--Eustathius, Hom. 13. 44. sq: Butes, it is said, was a son
of Poseidon: so Hesiod in the "Catalogue".


Fragment #73--Pausanias, ii. 6. 5: Hesiod represented Sicyon as the son
of Erechtheus.


Fragment #74--Plato, Minos, p. 320. D: '(Minos) who was most kingly of
mortal kings and reigned over very many people dwelling round about,
holding the sceptre of Zeus wherewith he ruled many.'


Fragment #75--Hesychius [1749]: The athletic contest in memory of
Eurygyes Melesagorus says that Androgeos the son of Minos was called
Eurygyes, and that a contest in his honour is held near his tomb at
Athens in the Ceramicus. And Hesiod writes: 'And Eurygyes [1750], while
yet a lad in holy Athens...'


Fragment #76--Plutarch, Theseus 20: There are many tales.... about
Ariadne...., how that she was deserted by Theseua for love of another
woman: 'For strong love for Aegle the daughter of Panopeus overpowered
him.' For Hereas of Megara says that Peisistratus removed this verse
from the works of Hesiod.

Athenaeus [1751], xiii. 557 A: But Hesiod says that Theseus wedded both
Hippe and Aegle lawfully.


Fragment #77--Strabo, ix. p. 393: The snake of Cychreus: Hesiod says
that it was brought up by Cychreus, and was driven out by Eurylochus as
defiling the island, but that Demeter received it into Eleusis, and that
it became her attendant.


Fragment #78--Argument I. to the Shield of Heracles: But Apollonius of
Rhodes says that it (the "Shield of Heracles") is Hesiod's both from the
general character of the work and from the fact that in the "Catalogue"
we again find Iolaus as charioteer of Heracles.


Fragment #79--Scholiast on Soph. Trach., 266: (ll. 1-6) 'And
fair-girdled Stratonica conceived and bare in the palace Eurytus her
well-loved son. Of him sprang sons, Didaeon and Clytius and god-like
Toxeus and Iphitus, a scion of Ares. And after these Antiope the
queen, daughter of the aged son of Nauboius, bare her youngest child,
golden-haired Iolea.'


Fragment #80--Herodian in Etymologicum Magnum: 'Who bare Autolycus and
Philammon, famous in speech.... All things that he (Autolyeus) took in
his hands, he made to disappear.'


Fragment #81--Apollonius, Hom. Lexicon: 'Aepytus again, begot Tlesenor
and Peirithous.'


Fragment #82--Strabo, vii. p. 322: 'For Locrus truly was leader of the
Lelegian people, whom Zeus the Son of Cronos, whose wisdom is unfailing,
gave to Deucalion, stones gathered out of the earth. So out of stones
mortal men were made, and they were called people.' [1752]


Fragment #83--Tzetzes, Schol. in Exeg. Iliad. 126: '...Ileus whom the
lord Apollo, son of Zeus, loved. And he named him by his name, because
he found a nymph complaisant [1753] and was joined with her in sweet
love, on that day when Poseidon and Apollo raised high the wall of the
well-built city.'


Fragment #84--Scholiast on Homer, Od. xi. 326: Clymene the daughter of
Minyas the son of Poseidon and of Euryanassa, Hyperphas' daughter, was
wedded to Phylacus the son of Deion, and bare Iphiclus, a boy fleet of
foot. It is said of him that through his power of running he could race
the winds and could move along upon the ears of corn [1754].... The tale
is in Hesiod: 'He would run over the fruit of the asphodel and not break
it; nay, he would run with his feet upon wheaten ears and not hurt the
fruit.'


Fragment #85--Choeroboscus [1755], i. 123, 22H: 'And she bare a son
Thoas.'


Fragment #86--Eustathius, Hom. 1623. 44: Maro [1756], whose father, it
is said, Hesiod relates to have been Euanthes the son of Oenopion, the
son of Dionysus.


Fragment #87--Athenaeus, x. 428 B, C: 'Such gifts as Dionysus gave to
men, a joy and a sorrow both. Who ever drinks to fullness, in him wine
becomes violent and binds together his hands and feet, his tongue also
and his wits with fetters unspeakable: and soft sleep embraces him.'


Fragment #88--Strabo, ix. p. 442: 'Or like her (Coronis) who lived by
the holy Twin Hills in the plain of Dotium over against Amyrus rich in
grapes, and washed her feet in the Boebian lake, a maid unwed.'


Fragment #89--Scholiast on Pindar, Pyth. iii. 48: 'To him, then, there
came a messenger from the sacred feast to goodly Pytho, a crow [1757],
and he told unshorn Phoebus of secret deeds, that Ischys son of Elatus
had wedded Coronis the daughter of Phlegyas of birth divine.


Fragment #90--Athenagoras [1758], Petition for the Christians, 29:
Concerning Asclepius Hesiod says: 'And the father of men and gods
was wrath, and from Olympus he smote the son of Leto with a lurid
thunderbolt and killed him, arousing the anger of Phoebus.'


Fragment #91--Philodemus, On Piety, 34: But Hesiod (says that Apollo)
would have been cast by Zeus into Tartarus [1759]; but Leto interceded
for him, and he became bondman to a mortal.


Fragment #92--Scholiast on Pindar, Pyth. ix. 6: 'Or like her, beautiful
Cyrene, who dwelt in Phthia by the water of Peneus and had the beauty of
the Graces.'


Fragment #93--Servius on Vergil, Georg. i. 14: He invoked Aristaeus,
that is, the son of Apollo and Cyrene, whom Hesiod calls 'the shepherd
Apollo.' [1760]


Fragment #94--Scholiast on Vergil, Georg. iv. 361: 'But the water stood
all round him, bowed into the semblance of a mountain.' This verse he
has taken over from Hesiod's "Catalogue of Women".


Fragment #95--Scholiast on Homer, Iliad ii. 469: 'Or like her (Antiope)
whom Boeotian Hyria nurtured as a maid.'


Fragment #96--Palaephatus [1761], c. 42: Of Zethus and Amphion. Hesiod
and some others relate that they built the walls of Thebes by playing on
the lyre.


Fragment #97--Scholiast on Soph. Trach., 1167: (ll. 1-11) 'There is a
land Ellopia with much glebe and rich meadows, and rich in flocks and
shambling kine. There dwell men who have many sheep and many oxen, and
they are in number past telling, tribes of mortal men. And there
upon its border is built a city, Dodona [1762]; and Zeus loved it and
(appointed) it to be his oracle, reverenced by men........And they (the
doves) lived in the hollow of an oak. From them men of earth carry away
all kinds of prophecy,--whosoever fares to that spot and questions the
deathless god, and comes bringing gifts with good omens.'


Fragment #98--Berlin Papyri, No. 9777: [1763] (ll. 1-22) '....strife....
Of mortals who would have dared to fight him with the spear and charge
against him, save only Heracles, the great-hearted offspring of Alcaeus?
Such an one was (?) strong Meleager loved of Ares, the golden-haired,
dear son of Oeneus and Althaea. From his fierce eyes there shone forth
portentous fire: and once in high Calydon he slew the destroying beast,
the fierce wild boar with gleaming tusks. In war and in dread strife no
man of the heroes dared to face him and to approach and fight with him
when he appeared in the forefront. But he was slain by the hands and
arrows of Apollo [1764], while he was fighting with the Curetes for
pleasant Calydon. And these others (Althaea) bare to Oeneus, Porthaon's
son; horse-taming Pheres, and Agelaus surpassing all others, Toxeus and
Clymenus and godlike Periphas, and rich-haired Gorga and wise Deianeira,
who was subject in love to mighty Heracles and bare him Hyllus and
Glenus and Ctesippus and Odites. These she bare and in ignorance she did
a fearful thing: when (she had received).... the poisoned robe that held
black doom....'


Fragment #99A--Scholiast on Homer, Iliad. xxiii. 679: And yet Hesiod
says that after he had died in Thebes, Argeia the daughter of Adrastus
together with others (cp. frag. 99) came to the lamentation over
Oedipus.


Fragment #99--[1765] Papyri greci e latine, No. 131 (2nd-3rd century):
[1766] (ll. 1-10) 'And (Eriphyle) bare in the palace Alcmaon [1767],
shepherd of the people, to Amphiaraus. Him (Amphiaraus) did the Cadmean
(Theban) women with trailing robes admire when they saw face to face
his eyes and well-grown frame, as he was busied about the burying of
Oedipus, the man of many woes. ....Once the Danai, servants of Ares,
followed him to Thebes, to win renown........for Polynices. But,
though well he knew from Zeus all things ordained, the earth yawned
and swallowed him up with his horses and jointed chariot, far from
deep-eddying Alpheus.

(ll. 11-20) But Electyron married the all-beauteous daughter of Pelops
and, going up into one bed with her, the son of Perses begat........and
Phylonomus and Celaeneus and Amphimachus and........and Eurybius and
famous.... All these the Taphians, famous shipmen, slew in fight for
oxen with shambling hoofs,.... ....in ships across the sea's wide back.
So Alcmena alone was left to delight her parents........and the daughter
of Electryon....

((LACUNA))

(l. 21)....who was subject in love to the dark-clouded son of Cronos and
bare (famous Heracles).'


Fragment #100--Argument to the Shield of Heracles, i: The beginning
of the "Shield" as far as the 56th verse is current in the fourth
"Catalogue".


Fragment #101 (UNCERTAIN POSITION)--Oxyrhynchus Papyri 1359 fr. 1 (early
3rd cent. A.D.): ((LACUNA--Slight remains of 3 lines))

(ll. 4-17) '...if indeed he (Teuthras) delayed, and if he feared to obey
the word of the immortals who then appeared plainly to them. But her
(Auge) he received and brought up well, and cherished in the palace,
honouring her even as his own daughters.

And Auge bare Telephus of the stock of Areas, king of the Mysians, being
joined in love with the mighty Heracles when he was journeying in quest
of the horses of proud Laomedon--horses the fleetest of foot that
the Asian land nourished,--and destroyed in battle the tribe of the
dauntless Amazons and drove them forth from all that land. But Telephus
routed the spearmen of the bronze-clad Achaeans and made them embark
upon their black ships. Yet when he had brought down many to the ground
which nourishes men, his own might and deadliness were brought low....'


Fragment #102 (UNCERTAIN POSITION)--Oxyrhynchus Papyri 1359 fr. 2 (early
3rd cent. A.D.): ((LACUNA--Remains of 4 lines))
