
There was a murmur; almost a groan. "Whose baby's hurt?" asked Master
Joseph in a softened tone.

"Mine, sir," said an indignant voice; "Mary Church."

"Oh! Mary Church, is it!" said the malicious imp, "then I'll put Mary
Church down for half a pound of best arrow-root; that's the finest thing
in the world for babbies, and will cure you of bringing your cussed
monkeys here, as if you all thought our shop was a hinfant school.

"Where's your book, Susan Travers! Left at home! Then you may go and
fetch it. No books, no tommy. You are Jones's wife, are you? Ticket for
three and sixpence out of eighteen shillings wages. Is this the only
ticket you have brought? There's your money; and you may tell your
husband he need not take his coat off again to go down our shaft. He
must think us cussed fools! Tell him I hope he has got plenty of money
to travel into Wales, for he won't have no work in England again, or my
name ayn't Diggs. Who's pushing there? I'll be among you; I'll close the
shop. If I do get hold of some of you cussed women, you shan't forget
it. If anybody will tell me who is pushing there, they shall have their
bacon for seven-pence. Will nobody have bacon for seven-pence? Leagued
together, eh! Then everybody shall have their bacon for ten-pence.
Two can play at that. Push again, and I'll be among you," said the
infuriated little tyrant. But the waving of the multitude, impatient,
and annoyed by the weather, was not to be stilled; the movement could
not be regulated; the shop was in commotion; and Master Joseph Diggs,
losing all patience, jumped on the counter, and amid the shrieks of the
women, sprang into the crowd. Two women fainted; others cried for their
bonnets; others bemoaned their aprons; nothing however deterred Diggs,
who kicked and cuffed and cursed in every quarter, and gave none. At
last there was a general scream of horror, and a cry of "a boy killed."

The senior Diggs, who, from his eminence, had hitherto viewed the scene
with unruffled complacency; who, in fact, derived from these not unusual
exhibitions the same agreeable excitement which a Roman emperor might
have received from the combats of the circus; began to think that
affairs were growing serious, and rose to counsel order and enforce
amiable dispositions. Even Master Joseph was quelled by that mild voice
which would have become Augustus. It appeared to be quite true that
a boy was dead. It was the little boy who, sent to get a loaf for
his mother, had complained before the shop was opened of his fainting
energies. He had fallen in the fray, and it was thought, to use the
phrase of the comely dame who tried to rescue him, "that he was quite
smothered."

They carried him out of the shop; the perspiration poured off him; he
had no pulse. He had no friends there. "I'll stand by the body," said
the comely dame, "though I lose my turn."

At this moment, Stephen Morley, for the reader has doubtless discovered
that the stranger who held colloquy with the colliers was the friend
of Walter Gerard, arrived at the tommy-shop, which was about half-way
between the house where he had passed the night and Wodgate. He stopped,
inquired, and being a man of science and some skill, decided, after
examining the poor boy, that life was not extinct. Taking the elder
Diggs aside, he said, "I am the editor of the Mowbray Phalanx; I will
not speak to you before these people; but I tell you fairly you and your
son have been represented to me as oppressors of the people. Will it be
my lot to report this death and comment on it? I trust not. There is yet
time and hope."

"What is to be done, sir," inquired the alarmed Mr Diggs; "a
fellow-creature in this condition--"

"Don't talk but act," said Morley. "There is no time to be lost. The boy
must be taken up stairs and put to bed; a warm bed, in one of your best
rooms, with every comfort. I am pressed for business, but I will wait
and watch over him till the crisis is passed. Come, let you and I take
him in our arms, and carry him up stairs through your private door.
Every minute is precious." And so saying, Morley and the elder Diggs
entered the house.




Book 3 Chapter 4



Wodgate, or Wogate, as it was called on the map, was a district that
in old days had been consecrated to Woden, and which appeared destined
through successive ages to retain its heathen character. At the
beginning of the revolutionary war, Wodgate was a sort of squatting
district of the great mining region to which it was contiguous, a place
where adventurers in the industry which was rapidly developing, settled
themselves; for though the great veins of coal and ironstone cropped up,
as they phrase it, before they reached this bare and barren land, and
it was thus deficient in those mineral and metallic treasures which had
enriched its neighbourhood, Wodgate had advantages of its own, and of a
kind which touch the fancy of the lawless. It was land without an owner;
no one claimed any manorial right over it; they could build cottages
without paying rent. It was a district recognized by no parish; so there
were no tithes, and no meddlesome supervision. It abounded in fuel which
cost nothing, for though the veins were not worth working as a source
of mining profit, the soil of Wodgate was similar in its superficial
character to that of the country around. So a population gathered, and
rapidly increased, in the ugliest spot in England, to which neither
Nature nor art had contributed a single charm; where a tree could not be
seen, a flower was unknown, where there was neither belfry nor steeple,
nor a single sight or sound that could soften the heart or humanise the
mind.

Whatever may have been the cause, whether, as not unlikely, the original
squatters brought with them some traditionary skill, or whether their
isolated and unchequered existence concentrated their energies on
their craft, the fact is certain, that the inhabitants of Wodgate
early acquired a celebrity as skilful workmen. This reputation so much
increased, and in time spread so far, that for more than a quarter of a
century, both in their skill and the economy of their labour, they have
been unmatched throughout the country. As manufacturers of ironmongery,
they carry the palm from the whole district; as founders of brass and
workers of steel, they fear none; while as nailers and locksmiths, their
fame has spread even to the European markets, whither their most skilful
workmen have frequently been invited.

Invited in vain! No wages can tempt the Wodgate man from his native
home, that squatters' seat which soon assumed the form of a large
village, and then in turn soon expanded into a town, and at the present
moment numbers its population by swarming thousands, lodged in the most
miserable tenements in the most hideous burgh in the ugliest country in
the world.

But it has its enduring spell. Notwithstanding the spread of its civic
prosperity, it has lost none of the characteristics of its original
society; on the contrary it has zealously preserved them. There are no
landlords, head-lessees, main-masters, or butties in Wodgate. No church
there has yet raised its spire; and as if the jealous spirit of Woden
still haunted his ancient temple, even the conventicle scarcely dares
show its humble front in some obscure corner. There is no municipality,
no magistrate, no local acts, no vestries, no schools of any kind. The
streets are never cleaned; every man lights his own house; nor does any
one know anything except his business.

More than this, at Wodgate a factory or large establishment of any kind
is unknown. Here Labour reigns supreme. Its division indeed is favoured
by their manners, but the interference or influence of mere capital
is instantly resisted. The business of Wodgate is carried on by master
workmen in their own houses, each of whom possesses an unlimited number
of what they call apprentices, by whom their affairs are principally
conducted, and whom they treat as the Mamlouks treated the Egyptians.

These master workmen indeed form a powerful aristocracy, nor is it
possible to conceive one apparently more oppressive. They are ruthless
tyrants; they habitually inflict upon their subjects punishments more
grievous than the slave population of our colonies were ever visited
with; not content with beating them with sticks or flogging them with
knotted ropes, they are in the habit of felling them with hammers, or
cutting their heads open with a file or lock. The most usual punishment
however, or rather stimulus to increase exertion, is to pull an
apprentice's ears till they run with blood. These youths too are worked
for sixteen and even twenty hours a day; they are often sold by one
master to another; they are fed on carrion, and they sleep in lofts
or cellars: yet whether it be that they are hardened by brutality,
and really unconscious of their degradation and unusual sufferings, or
whether they are supported by the belief that their day to be masters
and oppressors will surely arrive, the aristocracy of Wodgate is by no
means so unpopular as the aristocracy of most other places.

In the first place it is a real aristocracy; it is privileged, but it
does something for its privileges. It is distinguished from the main
body not merely by name. It is the most knowing class at Wodgate; it
possesses indeed in its way complete knowledge; and it imparts in its
manner a certain quantity of it to those whom it guides. Thus it is an
aristocracy that leads, and therefore a fact. Moreover the social system
of Wodgate is not an unvarying course of infinite toil. Their plan is to
work hard, but not always. They seldom exceed four days of labour in the
week. On Sunday the masters begin to drink; for the apprentices there
is dog-fighting without any stint. On Monday and Tuesday the whole
population of Wodgate is drunk; of all stations, ages, and sexes; even
babes, who should be at the breast; for they are drammed with Godfrey's
cordial. Here is relaxation, excitement; if less vice otherwise than
might be at first anticipated, we must remember that excesses are
checked by poverty of blood and constant exhaustion. Scanty food and
hard labour are in their way, if not exactly moralists, a tolerably good
police.

There are no others at Wodgate to preach or to control. It is not that
the people are immoral, for immorality implies some forethought; or
ignorant, for ignorance is relative; but they are animals; unconscious;
their minds a blank; and their worst actions only the impulse of a gross
or savage instinct. There are many in this town who are ignorant of
their very names; very few who can spell them. It is rare that you meet
with a young person who knows his own age; rarer to find the boy who
has seen a book, or the girl who has seen a flower. Ask them the name of
their sovereign, and they will give you an unmeaning stare; ask them the
name of their religion, and they will laugh: who rules them on earth, or
who can save them in heaven, are alike mysteries to them.

Such was the population with whom Morley was about to mingle. Wodgate
had the appearance of a vast squalid suburb. As you advanced, leaving
behind you long lines of little dingy tenements, with infants lying
about the road, you expected every moment to emerge into some streets
and encounter buildings bearing some correspondence in their size and
comfort to the considerable population swarming and busied around you.
Nothing of the kind. There were no public buildings of any sort; no
churches, chapels, town-hall, institute, theatre; and the principal
streets in the heart of the town in which were situate the coarse and
grimy shops, though formed by houses of a greater elevation than the
preceding, were equally narrow and if possible more dirty. At every
fourth or fifth house, alleys seldom above a yard wide and streaming
with filth, opened out of the street. These were crowded with dwellings
of various size, while from the principal court often branched out a
number of smaller alleys or rather narrow passages, than which nothing
can be conceived more close and squalid and obscure. Here during the
days of business, the sound of the hammer and the file never ceased,
amid gutters of abomination and piles of foulness and stagnant pools
of filth; reservoirs of leprosy and plague, whose exhalations were
sufficient to taint the atmosphere of the whole kingdom and fill the
country with fever and pestilence.

A lank and haggard youth, ricketty and smoke-dried, and black with his
craft, was sitting on the threshold of a miserable hovel and working at
the file. Behind him stood a stunted and meagre girl, with a back like
a grasshopper; a deformity occasioned by the displacement of the
bladebone, and prevalent among the girls of Wodgate from the cramping
posture of their usual toil. Her long melancholy visage and vacant stare
at Morley as he passed, attracted his notice, and it occurring to
him that the opportunity was convenient to enquire something of the
individual of whom he was in search, he stopped and addressed the
workman:

"Do you happen to know friend a person here or hereabouts by name
Hatton?"

"Hatton!" said the youth looking up with a grin, yet still continuing
his labour, "I should think I did!"

"Well, that's fortunate; you can tell me something about him?"

"Do you see this here?" said the youth still grinning, and letting the
file drop from his distorted and knotty hand, he pointed to a deep scar
that crossed his forehead, "he did that."

"An accident?"

"Very like. An accident that often happened. I should like to have a
crown for every time he has cut my head open. He cut it open once with a
key and twice with a lock; he knocked the corner of a lock into my head
twice, once with a bolt and once with a shut; you know what that is;
the thing what runs into the staple. He hit me on the head with a hammer
once. That was a blow! I fell away that time. When I came to, master had
stopped the blood with some fur off his hat. I had to go on with my work
immediately; master said I should do my stint if I worked till twelve
o'clock at night. Many's the ash stick he has broken on my body;
sometimes the weals remained on me for a-week; he cut my eyelid open
once with a nutstick; cut a regular hole in it, and it bled all over the
files I was working at. He has pulled my ears sometimes that I thought
they must come off in his hand. But all this was a mere nothin to this
here cut; that was serous; and if I hadn't got thro' that they do say
there must have been a crowner's quest; though I think that gammon, tor
old Tugsford did for one of his prentices, and the body was never found.
And now you ask me if I know Hatton? I should think I did!" And the
lank, haggard youth laughed merrily, as if he had been recounting a
series of the happiest adventures.

"But is there no redress for such iniquitous oppression," said Morley,
who had listened with astonishment to this complacent statement. "Is
there no magistrate to apply to?"

"No no," said the filer with an air of obvious pride, "we don't have no
magistrates at Wodgate. We've got a constable, and there was a prentice
who coz his master laid it on, only with a seat rod, went over to
Ramborough and got a warrant. He fetched the summons himself and giv
it to the constable, but he never served it. That's why they has a
constable here."

"I am sorry," said Morley, "that I have affairs with such a wretch as
this Hatton."

"You'll find him a wery hearty sort of man," said the filer, "if he
don't hap to be in drink. He's a little robustious then, but take him
all in all for a master, you may go further and fare worse.

"What! this monster!"

"Lord bless you, it's his way, that's all, we be a queer set here; but
he has his pints. Give him a lock to make, and you won't have your box
picked; he's wery lib'ral too in the wittals. Never had horse-flesh the
whole time I was with him; they has nothin' else at Tugsford's; never
had no sick cow except when meat was very dear. He always put his face
agin still-born calves; he used to say he liked his boys to have meat
what was born alive and killed alive. By which token there never was any
sheep what had bust in the head sold in our court. And then sometimes
he would give us a treat of fish, when it had been four or five days in
town and not sold. No, give the devil his due, say I. There never was no
want for anything at meals with the Bishop, except time to eat them in."

"And why do you call him the Bishop?"

"That's his name and authority; for he's the governor here over all
of us. And it has always been so that Wodgate has been governed by a
bishop; because as we have no church, we will have as good. And by this
token that this day sen'night, the day my time was up, he married me to
this here young lady. She is of the Baptist school religion, and wanted
us to be tied by her clergyman, but all the lads that served their time
with me were married by the Bishop, and many a more, and I saw no call
to do no otherwise. So he sprinkled some salt over a gridiron, read 'Our
Father' backwards, and wrote our name in a book: and we were spliced;
but I didn't do it rashly, did I, Suky, by the token that we had kept
company for two years, and there isn't a gal in all Wodgate what handles
a file, like Sue."

"And what is your name, my good fellow?"

"They call me Tummas, but I ayn't got no second name; but now I am
married I mean to take my wife's, for she has been baptised, and so has
got two."

"Yes sir," said the girl with the vacant face and the back like a
grasshopper; "I be a reg'lar born Christian and my mother afore me, and
that's what few gals in the Yard can say. Thomas will take to it himself
when work is slack; and he believes now in our Lord and Saviour Pontius
Pilate who was crucified to save our sins; and in Moses, Goliath, and
the rest of the Apostles."

"Ah! me," thought Morley, "and could not they spare one Missionary from
Tahiti for their fellow countrymen at Wodgate!"




Book 3 Chapter 5



The summer twilight had faded into sweet night; the young and
star-attended moon glittered like a sickle in the deep purple sky; of
all the luminous host, Hesperus alone was visible; and a breeze, that
bore the last embrace of the flowers by the sun, moved languidly and
fitfully over the still and odorous earth.

The moonbeam fell upon the roof and garden of Gerard. It suffused the
cottage with its brilliant light, except where the dark depth of the
embowered porch defied its entry. All around the beds of flowers and
herbs spread sparkling and defined. You could trace the minutest walk;
almost distinguish every leaf. Now and then there came a breath, and
the sweet-peas murmured in their sleep; or the roses rustled, as if they
were afraid they were about to be roused from their lightsome dreams.
Farther on the fruit-trees caught the splendour of the night; and looked
like a troop of sultanas taking their gardened air, when the eye of man
could not profane them, and laden with jewels. There were apples that
rivalled rubies; pears of topaz tint: a whole paraphernalia of plums,
some purple as the amethyst, others blue and brilliant as the sapphire;
an emerald here, and now a golden drop that gleamed like the yellow
diamond of Gengis Khan.

Within--was the scene less fair? A single lamp shed over the chamber
a soft and sufficient light. The library of Stephen Morley had been
removed, but the place of his volumes had been partly supplied, for the
shelves were far from being empty. Their contents were of no ordinary
character: many volumes of devotion, some of church history, one or two
on ecclesiastical art, several works of our elder dramatists, some good
reprints of our chronicles, and many folios of church music, which
last indeed amounted to a remarkable collection. There was no musical
instrument however in the room of any kind, and the only change in its
furniture, since we last visited the room of Gerard, was the presence of
a long-backed chair of antique form, most beautifully embroidered, and a
portrait of a female saint over the mantel-piece. As for Gerard himself
he sat with his head leaning on his arm, which rested on the table,
while he listened with great interest to a book which was read to him by
his daughter, at whose feet lay the fiery and faithful bloodhound.

"So you see, my father," said Sybil with animation, and dropping her
book which however her hand did not relinquish, "even then all was not
lost. The stout earl retired beyond the Trent, and years and reigns
elapsed before this part of the island accepted their laws and customs."

"I see," said her father, "and yet I cannot help wishing that Harold--"
Here the hound, hearing his name, suddenly rose and looked at Gerard,
who smiling, patted him and said, "We were not talking of thee, good
sir, but of thy great namesake; but ne'er mind, a live dog they say is
worth a dead king."

"Ah! why have we not such a man now," said Sybil, "to protect the
people! Were I a prince I know no career that I should deem so great."

"But Stephen says no," said Gerard: "he says that these great men have
never made use of us but as tools; and that the people never can have
their rights until they produce competent champions from their own
order."

"But then Stephen does not want to recall the past," said Sybil with a
kind of sigh; "he wishes to create the future."

"The past is a dream," said Gerard.

"And what is the future?" enquired Sybil.

"Alack! I know not; but I often wish the battle of Hastings were to be
fought over again and I was going to have a hand in it."

"Ah! my father," said Sybil with a mournful smile, "there is ever your
fatal specific of physical force. Even Stephen is against physical
force, with all his odd fancies."

"All very true," said Gerard smiling with good nature; "but all the same
when I was coming home a few days ago, and stopped awhile on the bridge
and chanced to see myself in the stream, I could not help fancying that
my Maker had fashioned these limbs rather to hold a lance or draw a bow,
than to supervise a shuttle or a spindle."

"Yet with the shuttle and the spindle we may redeem our race," said
Sybil with animation, "if we could only form the minds that move those
peaceful weapons. Oh! my father, I will believe that moral power is
irresistible, or where are we to look for hope?"

Gerard shook his head with his habitual sweet good-tempered smile. "Ah!"
said he, "what can we do; they have got the land, and the land governs
the people. The Norman knew that, Sybil, as you just read. If indeed we
had our rights, one might do something; but I don't know; I dare say if
I had our land again, I should be as bad as the rest."

"Oh! no, my father," exclaimed Sybil with energy, "never, never! Your
thoughts would be as princely as your lot. What a leader of the people
you would make!"

Harold sprang up suddenly and growled.

"Hush!" said Gerard; "some one knocks:" and he rose and left the room.
Sybil heard voices and broken sentences: "You'll excuse me"--"I take it
kindly"--"So we are neighbours." And then her father returned, ushering
in a person and saying, "Here is my friend Mr Franklin that I was
speaking of, Sybil, who is going to be our neighbour; down Harold,
down!" and he presented to his daughter the companion of Mr St Lys in
that visit to the Hand-loom weaver when she had herself met the vicar of
Mowbray.

Sybil rose, and letting her book drop gently on the table, received
Egremont with composure and native grace. It is civilization that makes
us awkward, for it gives us an uncertain position. Perplexed, we take
refuge in pretence; and embarrassed, we seek a resource in affectation.
The Bedouin and the Red Indian never lose their presence of mind; and
the wife of a peasant, when you enter her cottage, often greets you with
a propriety of mien which favourably contrasts with your reception by
some grand dame in some grand assembly, meeting her guests alternately
with a caricature of courtesy or an exaggeradon of supercilious
self-control.

"I dare say," said Egremont bowing to Sybil, "you have seen our poor
friend the weaver since we met there."

"The day I quitted Mowbray," said Sybil. "They are not without friends."

"Ah! you have met my daughter before."

"On a mission of grace," said Egremont.

"And I suppose you found the town not very pleasant, Mr Franklin,"
continued Gerard.

"No; I could not stand it, the nights were so close. Besides I have a
great accumulation of notes, and I fancied I could reduce them into a
report more efficiently in comparative seclusion. So I have got a room
near here, with a little garden, not so pretty as yours; but still a
garden is something; and if I want any additional information, why,
after all, Mowbray is only a walk."

"You say well and have done wisely. Besides you have such late hours in
London, and hard work. Some country air will do you all the good in the
world. That gallery must be tiresome. Do you use shorthand?"

"A sort of shorthand of my own," said Egremont. "I trust a good deal to
my memory."

"Ah! you are young. My daughter also has a wonderful memory. For my own
part, there are many things which I am not sorry to forget."

"You see I took you at your word, neighbour," said Egremont. "When one
has been at work the whole day one feels a little lonely towards night."

"Very true; and I dare say you find desk work sometimes very dull; I
never could make anything of it myself. I can manage a book well enough,
if it be well written, and on points I care for; but I would sooner
listen than read any time," said Gerard. "Indeed I should be right glad
to see the minstrel and the storyteller going their rounds again. It
would be easy after a day's work, when one has not, as I have now, a
good child to read to me."

"This volume?" said Egremont drawing his chair to the table and looking
at Sybil, who intimated assent by a nod.

"Ah! it's a fine book," said Gerard, "though on a sad subject."

"The History of the Conquest of England by the Normans," said Egremont,
reading the title page on which also was written "Ursula Trafford to
Sybil Gerard."

"You know it?" said Sybil.

"Only by fame."

"Perhaps the subject may not interest you so much as it does us," said
Sybil.

"It must interest all and all alike," said her father; "for we are
divided between the conquerors and the conquered."

"But do not you think," said Egremont, "that such a distinction has long
ceased to exist?"

"In what degree?" asked Gerard. "Many circumstances of oppression have
doubtless gradually disappeared: but that has arisen from the change of
manners, not from any political recognition of their injustice. The same
course of time which has removed many enormities, more shocking however
to our modern feelings than to those who devised and endured them,
has simultaneously removed many alleviating circumstances. If the mere
baron's grasp be not so ruthless, the champion we found in the church
is no longer so ready. The spirit of Conquest has adapted itself to the
changing circumstances of ages, and however its results vary in form, in
degree they are much the same."

"But how do they show themselves?"

"In many circumstances, which concern many classes; but I speak of
those which touch my own order; and therefore I say at once--in the
degradation of the people."

"But are the people so degraded?"

"There is more serfdom in England now than at any time since the
Conquest. I speak of what passes under my daily eyes when I say that
those who labour can as little choose or change their masters now,
as when they were born thralls. There are great bodies of the working
classes of this country nearer the condition of brutes, than they have
been at any time since the Conquest. Indeed I see nothing to distinguish
them from brutes, except that their morals are inferior. Incest and
infanticide are as common among them as among the lower animals. The
domestic principle waxes weaker and weaker every year in England: nor
can we wonder at it, when there is no comfort to cheer and no sentiment
to hallow the Home."

"I was reading a work the other day," said Egremont, "that statistically
proved that the general condition of the people was much better at this
moment than it had been at any known period of history."

"Ah! yes, I know that style of speculation," said Gerard; "your
gentleman who reminds you that a working man now has a pair of cotton
stockings, and that Harry the Eighth himself was not as well off. At
any rate, the condition of classes must be judged of by the age, and by
their relation with each other. One need not dwell on that. I deny the
premises. I deny that the condition of the main body is better now than
at any other period of our history; that it is as good as it has been
at several. I say, for instance, the people were better clothed, better
lodged, and better fed just before the war of the Roses than they are at
this moment. We know how an English peasant lived in those times: he eat
flesh every day, he never drank water, was well housed, and clothed in
stout woollens. Nor are the Chronicles necessary to tell us this. The
acts of Parliament from the Plantagenets to the Tudors teach us alike
the price of provisions and the rate of wages; and we see in a moment
that the wages of those days brought as much sustenance and comfort as a
reasonable man could desire."

"I know how deeply you feel upon this subject," said Egremont turning to
Sybil.

"Indeed it is the only subject that ever engages my thought," she
replied, "except one."

"And that one?"

"Is to see the people once more kneel before our blessed Lady," replied
Sybil.

"Look at the average term of life," said Gerard, coming unintentionally
to the relief of Egremont, who was a little embarrassed. "The average
term of life in this district among the working classes is seventeen.
What think you of that? Of the infants born in Mowbray, more than a
moiety die before the age of five."

"And yet," said Egremont, "in old days they had terrible pestilences."

"But they touched all alike," said Gerard. "We have more pestilence now
in England than we ever had, but it only reaches the poor. You never
hear of it. Why Typhus alone takes every year from the dwellings of the
artisan and peasant a population equal to that of the whole county of
Westmoreland. This goes on every year, but the representatives of the
conquerors are not touched: it is the descendants of the conquered alone
who are the victims."

"It sometimes seems to me," said Sybil despondingly, "that nothing short
of the descent of angels can save the people of this kingdom."

"I sometimes think I hear a little bird," said Gerard, "who sings that
the long frost may yet break up. I have a friend, him of whom I was
speaking to you the other day, who has his remedies."

"But Stephen Morley does not believe in angels," said Sybil with a sigh;
"and I have no faith in his plan."

"He believes that God will help those who help themselves," said Gerard.

"And I believe," said Sybil, "that those only can help themselves whom
God helps."

All this time Egremont was sitting at the table, with the book in his
hand, gazing fitfully and occasionally with an air of absence on its
title-page, whereon was written the name of its owner. Suddenly he said
"Sybil."

"Yes," said the daughter of Gerard, with an air of some astonishment.

"I beg your pardon," said Egremont blushing; "I was reading your name. I
thought I was reading it to myself. Sybil Gerard! What a beautiful name
is Sybil!"

"My mother's name," said Gerard; "and my grandame's name, and a name I
believe that has been about our hearth as long as our race; and that's a
very long time indeed," he added smiling, "for we were tall men in King
