Handmaids and Attendants come from the Palace, bearing torches, with which
they kindle incense on the altars. Among them comes_ CLYTEMNESTRA, _who
throws herself on her knees at the central Altar in an agony of prayer._

_Presently from the further side of the open space appear the_ CHORUS _of_
ELDERS _and move gradually into position in front of the Palace.
The day begins to dawn._

CHORUS.

Ten years since Ilion's righteous foes,
  The Atreidae strong,
Menelaues and eke Agamemnon arose,
Two thrones, two sceptres, yoked of God;
And a thousand galleys of Argos trod
  The seas for the righting of wrong;
And wrath of battle about them cried,
    As vultures cry,
Whose nest is plundered, and up they fly
In anguish lonely, eddying wide,
Great wings like oars in the waste of sky,
Their task gone from them, no more to keep
Watch o'er the vulture babes asleep.
But One there is who heareth on high
Some Pan or Zeus, some lost Apollo--
That keen bird-throated suffering cry
Of the stranger wronged in God's own sky;
And sendeth down, for the law transgressed,
  The Wrath of the Feet that follow.

  So Zeus the Watcher of Friend and Friend,
Zeus who Prevaileth, in after quest
For One Beloved by Many Men
On Paris sent the Atreidae twain;
Yea, sent him dances before the end
    For his bridal cheer,
Wrestlings heavy and limbs forespent
For Greek and Trojan, the knee earth-bent,
The bloody dust and the broken spear.
He knoweth, that which is here is here,
And that which Shall Be followeth near;
He seeketh God with a great desire,
He heaps his gifts, he essays his pyre
With torch below and with oil above,
With tears, but never the wrath shall move
Of the Altar cold that rejects his fire.

  We saw the Avengers go that day,
And they left us here; for our flesh is old
And serveth not; and these staves uphold
A strength like the strength of a child at play.
For the sap that springs in the young man's hand
And the valour of age, they have left the land.
And the passing old, while the dead leaf blows
And the old staff gropeth his three-foot way,
Weak as a babe and alone he goes,
A dream left wandering in the day.

  [_Coming near the Central Altar they see_ CLYTEMNESTRA, _who is still
rapt in prayer_.

But thou, O daughter of Tyndareus,
Queen Clytemnestra, what need? What news?
What tale or tiding hath stirred thy mood
To send forth word upon all our ways
For incensed worship? Of every god
That guards the city, the deep, the high,
Gods of the mart, gods of the sky,
    The altars blaze.
    One here, one there,
To the skyey night the firebrands flare,
Drunk with the soft and guileless spell
Of balm of kings from the inmost cell.
Tell, O Queen, and reject us not,
All that can or that may be told,
And healer be to this aching thought,
Which one time hovereth, evil-cold,
And then from the fires thou kindlest
Will Hope be kindled, and hungry Care
Fall back for a little while, nor tear
The heart that beateth below my breast.

  [CLYTEMNESTRA _rises silently, as though unconscious of their presence,
and goes into the House. The_ CHORUS _take position and begin their first
Stasimon, or Standing-song,_

CHORUS.

(_The sign seen on the way; Eagles tearing a hare with young_.)

It is ours to tell of the Sign of the War-way given,
    To men more strong,
(For a life that is kin unto ours yet breathes from heaven
    A spell, a Strength of Song:)
How the twin-throned Might of Achaia, one Crown divided
    Above all Greeks that are,
With avenging hand and spear upon Troy was guided
    By the Bird of War.
'Twas a King among birds to each of the Kings of the Sea,
    One Eagle black, one black but of fire-white tail,
By the House, on the Spear-hand, in station that all might see;
And they tore a hare, and the life in her womb that grew,
Yea, the life unlived and the races unrun they slew.
    _Sorrow, sing sorrow: but good prevail, prevail_!

(_How Calchas read the sign; his Vision of the Future_.)

And the War-seer wise, as he looked on the Atreid Yoke
    Twain-tempered, knew
Those fierce hare-renders the lords of his host; and spoke,
    Reading the omen true.
"At the last, the last, this Hunt hunteth Ilion down,
      Yea, and before the wall
Violent division the fulness of land and town
      Shall waste withal;
If only God's eye gloom not against our gates,
  And the great War-curb of Troy, fore-smitten, fail.
For Pity lives, and those winged Hounds she hates,
  Which tore in the Trembler's body the unborn beast.
And Artemis abhorreth the eagles' feast."
    _Sorrow, sing sorrow: but good prevail, prevail_!

 (_He prays to Artemis to grant the fulfilment of the Sign, but, as his
vision increases, he is afraid and calls on Paian, the Healer, to hold her
back_.)

   "Thou beautiful One, thou tender lover
      Of the dewy breath of the Lion's child;
    Thou the delight, through den and cover,
      Of the young life at the breast of the wild,
Yet, oh, fulfill, fulfill The sign of the Eagles' Kill!
Be the vision accepted, albeit horrible....
But I-e, I-e! Stay her, O Paian, stay!
For lo, upon other evil her heart she setteth,
  Long wastes of wind, held ship and unventured sea,
On, on, till another Shedding of Blood be wrought:
They kill but feast not; they pray not; the law is broken;
Strife in the flesh, and the bride she obeyeth not,
And beyond, beyond, there abideth in wrath reawoken--
It plotteth, it haunteth the house, yea, it never forgetteth--
      Wrath for a child to be."
So Calchas, reading the wayside eagles' sign,
  Spake to the Kings, blessings and words of bale;
      And like his song be thine,
_Sorrow, sing sorrow: but good prevail, prevail_!

(_Such religion belongs to old and barbarous gods, and brings no peace.
I turn to Zeus, who has shown man how to Learn by Suffering_.)

Zeus! Zeus, whate'er He be,
If this name He love to hear
This He shall be called of me.
Searching earth and sea and air

Refuge nowhere can I find
Save Him only, if my mind
Will cast off before it die
The burden of this vanity.

One there was who reigned of old,
Big with wrath to brave and blast,
Lo, his name is no more told!
And who followed met at last
His Third-thrower, and is gone.
Only they whose hearts have known
Zeus, the Conqueror and the Friend,
They shall win their vision's end;

Zeus the Guide, who made man turn
Thought-ward, Zeus, who did ordain
Man by Suffering shall Learn.
So the heart of him, again
Aching with remembered pain,
Bleeds and sleepeth not, until
Wisdom comes against his will.
'Tis the gift of One by strife
Lifted to the throne of life.

(AGAMEMNON _accepted the sign. Then came long delay, and storm while the
fleet lay at Aulis._)

So that day the Elder Lord,
Marshal of the Achaian ships,
Strove not with the prophet's word,
Bowed him to his fate's eclipse,
When with empty jars and lips
Parched and seas impassable
Fate on that Greek army fell,
Fronting Chalcis as it lay,
By Aulis in the swirling bay.

(_Till at last Calchas answered that Artemis was wroth and demanded the
death of_ AGAMEMNON'S _daughter. The King's doubt and grief_.)

And winds, winds blew from Strymon River,
Unharboured, starving, winds of waste endeavour,
Man-blinding, pitiless to cord and bulwark,
  And the waste of days was made long, more long,
Till the flower of Argos was aghast and withered;
  Then through the storm rose the War-seer's song,
And told of medicine that should tame the tempest,
  But bow the Princes to a direr wrong.
Then "Artemis" he whispered, he named the name;
And the brother Kings they shook in the hearts of them,
And smote on the earth their staves, and the tears came.

But the King, the elder, hath found voice and spoken:
"A heavy doom, sure, if God's will were broken;
But to slay mine own child, who my house delighteth,
  Is that not heavy? That her blood should flow
On her father's hand, hard beside an altar?
  My path is sorrow wheresoe'er I go.
Shall Agamemnon fail his ships and people,
  And the hosts of Hellas melt as melts the snow?
They cry, they thirst, for a death that shall break the spell,
For a Virgin's blood: 'tis a rite of old, men tell.
And they burn with longing.--O God may the end be well!"

(_But ambition drove him, till he consented to the sin of slaying his
daughter, Iphigenia, as a sacrifice._)

To the yoke of Must-Be he bowed him slowly,
  And a strange wind within his bosom tossed,
A wind of dark thought, unclean, unholy;
  And he rose up, daring to the uttermost.
For men are boldened by a Blindness, straying
  Toward base desire, which brings grief hereafter,
    Yea, and itself is grief;
So this man hardened to his own child's slaying,
  As help to avenge him for a woman's laughter
    And bring his ships relief!

Her "Father, Father," her sad cry that lingered,
  Her virgin heart's breath they held all as naught,
Those bronze-clad witnesses and battle-hungered;
  And there they prayed, and when the prayer was wrought
He charged the young men to uplift and bind her,
  As ye lift a wild kid, high above the altar,
    Fierce-huddling forward, fallen, clinging sore
To the robe that wrapt her; yea, he bids them hinder
  The sweet mouth's utterance, the cries that falter,
    --His curse for evermore!--

With violence and a curb's voiceless wrath.
  Her stole of saffron then to the ground she threw,
And her eye with an arrow of pity found its path
    To each man's heart that slew:
A face in a picture, striving amazedly;
  The little maid who danced at her father's board,
The innocent voice man's love came never nigh,
Who joined to his her little paean-cry
    When the third cup was poured....

What came thereafter I saw not neither tell.
  But the craft of Calchas failed not.--'Tis written, He
Who Suffereth Shall Learn; the law holdeth well.
    And that which is to be,
Ye will know at last; why weep before the hour?
  For come it shall, as out of darkness dawn.
Only may good from all this evil flower;
So prays this Heart of Argos, this frail tower
    Guarding the land alone.

  [_As they cease,_ CLYTEMNESTRA _comes from the Palace with Attendants.
She has finished her prayer and sacrifice, and is now wrought up to face
the meeting with her husband. The Leader approaches her_.

LEADER.

Before thy state, O Queen, I bow mine eyes.
'Tis written, when the man's throne empty lies,
The woman shall be honoured.--Hast thou heard
Some tiding sure?  Or is it Hope, hath stirred
To fire these altars?  Dearly though we seek
To learn, 'tis thine to speak or not to speak.

CLYTEMNESTRA.

Glad-voiced, the old saw telleth, comes this morn,
The Star-child of a dancing midnight born,
And beareth to thine ear a word of joy
Beyond all hope: the Greek hath taken Troy.

LEADER.

How?
Thy word flies past me, being incredible.

CLYTEMNESTRA.

Ilion is ours. No riddling tale I tell.

LEADER.

Such joy comes knocking at the gate of tears.

CLYTEMNESTRA.

Aye, 'tis a faithful heart that eye declares.

LEADER.

What warrant hast thou? Is there proof of this?

CLYTEMNESTRA.

There is; unless a God hath lied there is.

LEADER.

Some dream-shape came to thee in speaking guise?

CLYTEMNESTRA.

Who deemeth me a dupe of drowsing eyes?

LEADER.

Some word within that hovereth without wings?

CLYTEMNESTRA.

Am I a child to hearken to such things?

LEADER.

Troy fallen?--But how long? When fell she, say?

CLYTEMNESTRA.

The very night that mothered this new day.

LEADER.

And who of heralds with such fury came?

CLYTEMNESTRA.

A Fire-god, from Mount Ida scattering flame.
Whence starting, beacon after beacon burst
In flaming message hitherward. Ida first
Told Hermes' Lemnian Rock, whose answering sign
Was caught by towering Athos, the divine,
With pines immense--yea, fishes of the night
Swam skyward, drunken with that leaping light,
Which swelled like some strange sun, till dim and far
Makistos' watchmen marked a glimmering star;
They, nowise loath nor idly slumber-won,
Spring up to hurl the fiery message on,
And a far light beyond the Euripus tells
That word hath reached Messapion's sentinels.
They beaconed back, then onward with a high
Heap of dead heather flaming to the sky.
And onward still, not failing nor aswoon,
Across the Asopus like a beaming moon
The great word leapt, and on Kithairon's height
Uproused a new relay of racing light.
His watchers knew the wandering flame, nor hid
Their welcome, burning higher than was bid.
Out over Lake Gorgopis then it floats,
To Aigiplanctos, waking the wild goats,
Crying for "Fire, more Fire!" And fire was reared,
Stintless and high, a stormy streaming beard,
That waved in flame beyond the promontory
Rock-ridged, that watches the Saronian sea,
Kindling the night: then one short swoop to catch
The Spider's Crag, our city's tower of watch;
Whence hither to the Atreidae's roof it came,
A light true-fathered of Idaean flame.
Torch-bearer after torch-bearer, behold
The tale thereof in stations manifold,
Each one by each made perfect ere it passed,
And Victory in the first as in the last.
These be my proofs and tokens that my lord
From Troy hath spoke to me a burning word.

LEADER.

Woman, speak on. Hereafter shall my prayer
