
'You are right, since go you must, or rather, since go you will. I will
take Flora's pony and ride with you as far as Bally-Brough. Callum Beg,
see that our horses are ready, with a pony for yourself, to attend and
carry Mr. Waverley's baggage as far as--(naming a small town), where he
can have a horse and guide to Edinburgh. Put on a Lowland dress,
Callum, and see you keep your tongue close, if you would not have me
cut it out. Mr. Waverley rides Dermid.' Then turning to Edward, 'You
will take leave of my sister?'

'Surely--that is, if Miss Mac-Ivor will honour me so far.'

'Cathleen, let my sister know Mr. Waverley wishes to bid her farewell
before he leaves us. But Rose Bradwardine, her situation must be
thought of; I wish she were here. And why should she not? There are but
four red-coats at Tully-Veolan, and their muskets would be very useful
to us.'

To these broken remarks Edward made no answer; his ear indeed received
them, but his soul was intent upon the expected entrance of Flora. The
door opened. It was but Cathleen, with her lady's excuse, and wishes
for Captain Waverley's health and happiness.





CHAPTER XXIX

WAVERLEY'S RECEPTION IN THE LOWLANDS AFTER HIS HIGHLAND TOUR


It was noon when the two friends stood at the top of the pass of
Bally-Brough. 'I must go no farther,' said Fergus Mac-Ivor, who during
the journey had in vain endeavoured to raise his friend's spirits. 'If
my cross-grained sister has any share in your dejection, trust me she
thinks highly of you, though her present anxiety about the public cause
prevents her listening to any other subject. Confide your interest to
me; I will not betray it, providing you do not again assume that vile
cockade.'

'No fear of that, considering the manner in which it has been recalled.
Adieu, Fergus; do not permit your sister to forget me.'

'And adieu, Waverley; you may soon hear of her with a prouder title.
Get home, write letters, and make friends as many and as fast as you
can; there will speedily be unexpected guests on the coast of Suffolk,
or my news from France has deceived me.' [Footnote: The sanguine
Jacobites, during the eventful years 1745-46, kept up the spirits of
their party by the rumour of descents from France on behalf of the
Chevalier St. George.]

Thus parted the friends; Fergus returning back to his castle, while
Edward, followed by Callum Beg, the latter transformed from point to
point into a Low-Country groom, proceeded to the little town of--.

Edward paced on under the painful and yet not altogether embittered
feelings which separation and uncertainty produce in the mind of a
youthful lover. I am not sure if the ladies understand the full value
of the influence of absence, nor do I think it wise to teach it them,
lest, like the Clelias and Mandanes of yore, they should resume the
humour of sending their lovers into banishment. Distance, in truth,
produces in idea the same effect as in real perspective. Objects are
softened, and rounded, and rendered doubly graceful; the harsher and
more ordinary points of character are mellowed down, and those by which
it is remembered are the more striking outlines that mark sublimity,
grace, or beauty. There are mists too in the mental as well as the
natural horizon, to conceal what is less pleasing in distant objects,
and there are happy lights, to stream in full glory upon those points
which can profit by brilliant illumination.

Waverley forgot Flora Mac-Ivor's prejudices in her magnanimity, and
almost pardoned her indifference towards his affection when he
recollected the grand and decisive object which seemed to fill her
whole soul. She, whose sense of duty so wholly engrossed her in the
cause of a benefactor, what would be her feelings in favour of the
happy individual who should be so fortunate as to awaken them? Then
came the doubtful question, whether he might not be that happy man,--a
question which fancy endeavoured to answer in the affirmative, by
conjuring up all she had said in his praise, with the addition of a
comment much more flattering than the text warranted. All that was
commonplace, all that belonged to the every-day world, was melted away
and obliterated in those dreams of imagination, which only remembered
with advantage the points of grace and dignity that distinguished Flora
from the generality of her sex, not the particulars which she held in
common with them. Edward was, in short, in the fair way of creating a
goddess out of a high-spirited, accomplished, and beautiful young
woman; and the time was wasted in castle-building until, at the descent
of a steep hill, he saw beneath him the market-town of ----.

The Highland politeness of Callum Beg--there are few nations, by the
way, who can boast of so much natural politeness as the Highlanders
[Footnote: The Highlander, in former times, had always a high idea of
his own gentility, and was anxious to impress the same upon those with
whom he conversed. His language abounded in the phrases of courtesy and
compliment; and the habit of carrying arms, and mixing with those who
did so, made it particularly desirable they should use cautious
politeness in their intercourse with each other.]--the Highland
civility of his attendant had not permitted him to disturb the reveries
of our hero. But observing him rouse himself at the sight of the
village, Callum pressed closer to his side, and hoped 'when they cam to
the public, his honour wad not say nothing about Vich Ian Vohr, for ta
people were bitter Whigs, deil burst tem.'

Waverley assured the prudent page that he would be cautious; and as he
now distinguished, not indeed the ringing of bells, but the tinkling of
something like a hammer against the side of an old mossy, green,
inverted porridge-pot that hung in an open booth, of the size and shape
of a parrot's cage, erected to grace the east end of a building
resembling an old barn, he asked Callum Beg if it were Sunday.

'Could na say just preceesely; Sunday seldom cam aboon the pass of
Bally-Brough.'

On entering the town, however, and advancing towards the most apparent
public-house which presented itself, the numbers of old women, in
tartan screens and red cloaks, who streamed from the barn-resembling
building, debating as they went the comparative merits of the blessed
youth Jabesh Rentowel and that chosen vessel Maister Goukthrapple,
induced Callum to assure his temporary master 'that it was either ta
muckle Sunday hersell, or ta little government Sunday that they ca'd ta
fast.'

On alighting at the sign of the Seven-branched Golden Candlestick,
which, for the further delectation of the guests, was graced with a
short Hebrew motto, they were received by mine host, a tall thin
puritanical figure, who seemed to debate with himself whether he ought
to give shelter to those who travelled on such a day. Reflecting,
however, in all probability, that he possessed the power of mulcting
them for this irregularity, a penalty which they might escape by
passing into Gregor Duncanson's, at the sign of the Highlander and the
Hawick Gill, Mr. Ebenezer Cruickshanks condescended to admit them into
his dwelling.

To this sanctified person Waverley addressed his request that he would
procure him a guide, with a saddle-horse, to carry his portmanteau to
Edinburgh.

'And whar may ye be coming from?' demanded mine host of the Candlestick.

'I have told you where I wish to go; I do not conceive any further
information necessary either for the guide or his saddle-horse.'

'Hem! Ahem!' returned he of the Candlestick, somewhat disconcerted at
this rebuff. 'It's the general fast, sir, and I cannot enter into ony
carnal transactions on sic a day, when the people should be humbled and
the backsliders should return, as worthy Mr. Goukthrapple said; and
moreover when, as the precious Mr. Jabesh Rentowel did weel observe,
the land was mourning for covenants burnt, broken, and buried.'

'My good friend,' said Waverley, 'if you cannot let me have a horse and
guide, my servant shall seek them elsewhere.'

'Aweel! Your servant? and what for gangs he not forward wi' you
himsell?'

Waverley had but very little of a captain of horse's spirit within
him--I mean of that sort of spirit which I have been obliged to when I
happened, in a mail coach or diligence, to meet some military man who
has kindly taken upon him the disciplining of the waiters and the
taxing of reckonings. Some of this useful talent our hero had, however,
acquired during his military service, and on this gross provocation it
began seriously to arise. 'Look ye, sir; I came here for my own
accommodation, and not to answer impertinent questions. Either say you
can, or cannot, get me what I want; I shall pursue my course in either
case.'

Mr. Ebenezer Cruickshanks left the room with some indistinct
mutterings; but whether negative or acquiescent, Edward could not well
distinguish. The hostess, a civil, quiet, laborious drudge, came to
take his orders for dinner, but declined to make answer on the subject
of the horse and guide; for the Salique law, it seems, extended to the
stables of the Golden Candlestick.

From a window which overlooked the dark and narrow court in which
Callum Beg rubbed down the horses after their journey, Waverley heard
the following dialogue betwixt the subtle foot-page of Vich Ian Vohr
and his landlord:--

'Ye'll be frae the north, young man?' began the latter.

'And ye may say that,' answered Callum.

'And ye'll hae ridden a lang way the day, it may weel be?'

'Sae lang, that I could weel tak a dram.'

'Gudewife, bring the gill stoup.'

Here some compliments passed fitting the occasion, when my host of the
Golden Candlestick, having, as he thought, opened his guest's heart by
this hospitable propitiation, resumed his scrutiny.

'Ye'll no hae mickle better whisky than that aboon the Pass?'

'I am nae frae aboon the Pass.'

'Ye're a Highlandman by your tongue?'

'Na; I am but just Aberdeen-a-way.'

'And did your master come frae Aberdeen wi' you?'

'Ay; that's when I left it mysell,' answered the cool and impenetrable
Callum Beg.

'And what kind of a gentleman is he?'

'I believe he is ane o' King George's state officers; at least he's aye
for ganging on to the south, and he has a hantle siller, and never
grudges onything till a poor body, or in the way of a lawing.'

'He wants a guide and a horse frae hence to Edinburgh?'

'Ay, and ye maun find it him forthwith.'

'Ahem! It will be chargeable.'

'He cares na for that a bodle.'

'Aweel, Duncan--did ye say your name was Duncan, or Donald?'

'Na, man--Jamie--Jamie Steenson--I telt ye before.'

This last undaunted parry altogether foiled Mr. Cruickshanks, who,
though not quite satisfied either with the reserve of the master or the
extreme readiness of the man, was contented to lay a tax on the
reckoning and horse-hire that might compound for his ungratified
curiosity. The circumstance of its being the fast day was not forgotten
in the charge, which, on the whole, did not, however, amount to much
more than double what in fairness it should have been.

Callum Beg soon after announced in person the ratification of this
treaty, adding, 'Ta auld deevil was ganging to ride wi' ta
duinhe-wassel hersell.'

'That will not be very pleasant, Callum, nor altogether safe, for our
host seems a person of great curiosity; but a traveller must submit to
these inconveniences. Meanwhile, my good lad, here is a trifle for you
to drink Vich Ian Vohr's health.'

The hawk's eye of Callum flashed delight upon a golden guinea, with
which these last words were accompanied. He hastened, not without a
curse on the intricacies of a Saxon breeches pocket, or spleuchan, as
he called it, to deposit the treasure in his fob; and then, as if he
conceived the benevolence called for some requital on his part, he
gathered close up to Edward, with an expression of countenance
peculiarly knowing, and spoke in an undertone, 'If his honour thought
ta auld deevil Whig carle was a bit dangerous, she could easily provide
for him, and teil ane ta wiser.'

'How, and in what manner?'

'Her ain sell,' replied Callum, 'could wait for him a wee bit frae the
toun, and kittle his quarters wi'her skene-occle.'

'Skene-occle! what's that?'

Callum unbuttoned his coat, raised his left arm, and, with an emphatic
nod, pointed to the hilt of a small dirk, snugly deposited under it, in
the lining of his jacket. Waverley thought he had misunderstood his
meaning; he gazed in his face, and discovered in Callum's very handsome
though embrowned features just the degree of roguish malice with which
a lad of the same age in England would have brought forward a plan for
robbing an orchard.

'Good God, Callum, would you take the man's life?'

'Indeed,' answered the young desperado, 'and I think he has had just a
lang enough lease o 't, when he's for betraying honest folk that come
to spend siller at his public.'

Edward saw nothing was to be gained by argument, and therefore
contented himself with enjoining Callum to lay aside all practices
against the person of Mr. Ebenezer Cruickshanks; in which injunction
the page seemed to acquiesce with an air of great indifference.

'Ta duinhe-wassel might please himsell; ta auld rudas loon had never
done Callum nae ill. But here's a bit line frae ta Tighearna, tat he
bade me gie your honour ere I came back.'

The letter from the Chief contained Flora's lines on the fate of
Captain Wogan, whose enterprising character is so well drawn by
Clarendon. He had originally engaged in the service of the Parliament,
but had abjured that party upon the execution of Charles I; and upon
hearing that the royal standard was set up by the Earl of Glencairn and
General Middleton in the Highlands of Scotland, took leave of Charles
II, who was then at Paris, passed into England, assembled a body of
Cavaliers in the neighbourhood of London, and traversed the kingdom,
which had been so long under domination of the usurper, by marches
conducted with such skill, dexterity, and spirit that he safely united
his handful of horsemen with the body of Highlanders then in arms.
After several months of desultory warfare, in which Wogan's skill and
courage gained him the highest reputation, he had the misfortune to be
wounded in a dangerous manner, and no surgical assistance being within
reach he terminated his short but glorious career.

There were obvious reasons why the politic Chieftain was desirous to
place the example of this young hero under the eye of Waverley, with
whose romantic disposition it coincided so peculiarly. But his letter
turned chiefly upon some trifling commissions which Waverley had
promised to execute for him in England, and it was only toward the
conclusion that Edward found these words: 'I owe Flora a grudge for
refusing us her company yesterday; and, as I am giving you the trouble
of reading these lines, in order to keep in your memory your promise to
procure me the fishing-tackle and cross-bow from London, I will enclose
her verses on the Grave of Wogan. This I know will tease her; for, to
tell you the truth, I think her more in love with the memory of that
dead hero than she is likely to be with any living one, unless he shall
tread a similar path. But English squires of our day keep their
oak-trees to shelter their deer parks, or repair the losses of an
evening at White's, and neither invoke them to wreathe their brows nor
shelter their graves. Let me hope for one brilliant exception in a dear
friend, to whom I would most gladly give a dearer title.'

The verses were inscribed,

    To an Oak Tree

    In the Church-Yard of ----, in the Highlands of Scotland,
    said to mark the Grave of Captain Wogan, killed in 1649.

    Emblem of England's ancient faith,
      Full proudly may thy branches wave,
    Where loyalty lies low in death,
      And valour fills a timeless grave.

    And thou, brave tenant of the tomb!
      Repine not if our clime deny,
    Above thine honour'd sod to bloom
      The flowerets of a milder sky.

    These owe their birth to genial May;
      Beneath a fiercer sun they pine,
    Before the winter storm decay;
      And can their worth be type of thine?

    No! for, 'mid storms of Fate opposing,
      Still higher swell'd thy dauntless heart,
    And, while Despair the scene was closing,
      Commenced thy brief but brilliant part.

    'T was then thou sought'st on Albyn's hill,
      (When England's sons the strife resign'd)
    A rugged race resisting still,
      And unsubdued though unrefined.

    Thy death's hour heard no kindred wail,
      No holy knell thy requiem rung;
    Thy mourners were the plaided Gael,
      Thy dirge the clamourous pibroch sung.

    Yet who, in Fortune's summer-shine
      To waste life's longest term away,
    Would change that glorious dawn of thine,
      Though darken'd ere its noontide day!

    Be thine the tree whose dauntless boughs
      Brave summer's drought and winter's gloom.
    Rome bound with oak her patriots' brows,
      As Albyn shadows Wogan's tomb.

Whatever might be the real merit of Flora Mac-Ivor's poetry, the
enthusiasm which it intimated was well calculated to make a
corresponding impression upon her lover. The lines were read--read
again, then deposited in Waverley's bosom, then again drawn out, and
read line by line, in a low and smothered voice, and with frequent
pauses which prolonged the mental treat, as an epicure protracts, by
sipping slowly, the enjoyment of a delicious beverage. The entrance of
Mrs. Cruickshanks with the sublunary articles of dinner and wine hardly
interrupted this pantomime of affectionate enthusiasm.

At length the tall ungainly figure and ungracious visage of Ebenezer
presented themselves. The upper part of his form, notwithstanding the
season required no such defence, was shrouded in a large great-coat,
belted over his under habiliments, and crested with a huge cowl of the
same stuff, which, when drawn over the head and hat, completely
overshadowed both, and, being buttoned beneath the chin, was called a
trot-cozy. His hand grasped a huge jockey-whip, garnished with
brassmounting. His thin legs tenanted a pair of gambadoes, fastened at
the sides with rusty clasps. Thus accoutred, he stalked into the midst
of the apartment, and announced his errand in brief phrase: 'Yer horses
are ready.'

'You go with me yourself then, landlord?'

'I do, as far as Perth; where ye may be supplied with a guide to
Embro', as your occasions shall require.'

Thus saying, he placed under Waverley's eye the bill which he held in
his hand; and at the same time, self-invited, filled a glass of wine
and drank devoutly to a blessing on their journey. Waverley stared at
the man's impudence, but, as their connection was to be short and
promised to be convenient, he made no observation upon it; and, having
paid his reckoning, expressed his intention to depart immediately. He
mounted Dermid accordingly and sallied forth from the Golden
Candlestick, followed by the puritanical figure we have described,
after he had, at the expense of some time and difficulty, and by the
assistance of a 'louping-on-stane,' or structure of masonry erected for
the traveller's convenience in front of the house, elevated his person
to the back of a long-backed, raw-boned, thin-gutted phantom of a
broken-down blood-horse, on which Waverley's portmanteau was deposited.
Our hero, though not in a very gay humour, could hardly help laughing
at the appearance of his new squire, and at imagining the astonishment
which his person and equipage would have excited at Waverley-Honour.

Edward's tendency to mirth did not escape mine host of the Candlestick,
who, conscious of the cause, infused a double portion of souring into
the pharisaical leaven of his countenance, and resolved internally
that, in one way or other, the young 'Englisher' should pay dearly for
the contempt with which he seemed to regard him. Callum also stood at
the gate and enjoyed, with undissembled glee, the ridiculous figure of
Mr. Cruickshanks. As Waverley passed him he pulled off his hat
respectfully, and, approaching his stirrup, bade him 'Tak heed the auld
whig deevil played him nae cantrip.'

Waverley once more thanked and bade him farewell, and then rode briskly
onward, not sorry to be out of hearing of the shouts of the children,
as they beheld old Ebenezer rise and sink in his stirrups to avoid the
concussions occasioned by a hard trot upon a half-paved street. The
village of--was soon several miles behind him.





CHAPTER XXX

SHOWS THAT THE LOSS OF A HORSE'S SHOE MAY BE A SERIOUS INCONVENIENCE


The manner and air of Waverley, but, above all, the glittering contents
of his purse, and the indifference with which he seemed to regard them,
somewhat overawed his companion, and deterred him from making any
attempts to enter upon conversation. His own reflections were moreover
agitated by various surmises, and by plans of self-interest with which
these were intimately connected. The travellers journeyed, therefore,
in silence, until it was interrupted by the annunciation, on the part
of the guide, that his 'naig had lost a fore-foot shoe, which,
doubtless, his honour would consider it was his part to replace.'

This was what lawyers call a fishing question, calculated to ascertain
how far Waverley was disposed to submit to petty imposition. 'My part
to replace your horse's shoe, you rascal!' said Waverley, mistaking the
purport of the intimation.

'Indubitably,' answered Mr. Cruickshanks; 'though there was no preceese
clause to that effect, it canna be expected that I am to pay for the
casualties whilk may befall the puir naig while in your honour's
service. Nathless, if your honour--'

'O, you mean I am to pay the farrier; but where shall we find one?'

Rejoiced at discerning there would be no objection made on the part of
his temporary master, Mr. Cruickshanks assured him that Cairnvreckan, a
village which they were about to enter, was happy in an excellent
blacksmith; 'but as he was a professor, he would drive a nail for no
man on the Sabbath or kirk-fast, unless it were in a case of absolute
necessity, for which he always charged sixpence each shoe.' The most
important part of this communication, in the opinion of the speaker,
made a very slight impression on the hearer, who only internally
wondered what college this veterinary professor belonged to, not aware
that the word was used to denote any person who pretended to uncommon
sanctity of faith and manner.

As they entered the village of Cairnvreckan, they speedily
distinguished the smith's house. Being also a public, it was two
stories high, and proudly reared its crest, covered with grey slate,
above the thatched hovels by which it was surrounded. The adjoining
smithy betokened none of the Sabbatical silence and repose which
Ebenezer had augured from the sanctity of his friend. On the contrary,
hammer clashed and anvil rang, the bellows groaned, and the whole
apparatus of Vulcan appeared to be in full activity. Nor was the labour
of a rural and pacific nature. The master smith, benempt, as his sign
intimated, John Mucklewrath, with two assistants, toiled busily in
arranging, repairing, and furbishing old muskets, pistols, and swords,
which lay scattered around his workshop in military confusion. The open
shed, containing the forge, was crowded with persons who came and went
as if receiving and communicating important news, and a single glance
at the aspect of the people who traversed the street in haste, or stood
assembled in groups, with eyes elevated and hands uplifted, announced
that some extraordinary intelligence was agitating the public mind of
the municipality of Cairnvreckan. 'There is some news,' said mine host
of the Candlestick, pushing his lantern-jawed visage and bare-boned nag
rudely forward into the crowd--'there is some news; and, if it please
my Creator, I will forthwith obtain speirings thereof.'

Waverley, with better regulated curiosity than his attendant's,
dismounted and gave his horse to a boy who stood idling near. It arose,
perhaps, from the shyness of his character in early youth, that he felt
dislike at applying to a stranger even for casual information, without
previously glancing at his physiognomy and appearance. While he looked
about in order to select the person with whom he would most willingly
hold communication, the buzz around saved him in some degree the
trouble of interrogatories. The names of Lochiel, Clanronald,
Glengarry, and other distinguished Highland Chiefs, among whom Vich Ian
Vohr was repeatedly mentioned, were as familiar in men's mouths as
household words; and from the alarm generally expressed, he easily
conceived that their descent into the Lowlands, at the head of their
armed tribes, had either already taken place or was instantly
apprehended.

Ere Waverley could ask particulars, a strong, large-boned,
hard-featured woman, about forty, dressed as if her clothes had been
flung on with a pitchfork, her cheeks flushed with a scarlet red where
they were not smutted with soot and lamp-black, jostled through the
crowd, and, brandishing high a child of two years old, which she danced
in her arms without regard to its screams of terror, sang forth with
all her might,--

    Charlie is my darling, my darling, my darling,
    Charlie is my darling,
    The young Chevalier!

'D' ye hear what's come ower ye now,' continued the virago, 'ye
whingeing Whig carles? D'ye hear wha's coming to cow yer cracks?

    Little wot ye wha's coming,
    Little wot ye wha's coming,
    A' the wild Macraws are coming.'

The Vulcan of Cairnvreckan, who acknowledged his Venus in this exulting
Bacchante, regarded her with a grim and ire-foreboding countenance,
while some of the senators of the village hastened to interpose.
'Whisht, gudewife; is this a time or is this a day to be singing your
ranting fule sangs in?--a time when the wine of wrath is poured out
without mixture in the cup of indignation, and a day when the land
should give testimony against popery, and prelacy, and quakerism, and
independency, and supremacy, and erastianism, and antinomianism, and a'
the errors of the church?'

'And that's a' your Whiggery,' reechoed the Jacobite heroine; 'that's
a' your Whiggery, and your presbytery, ye cut-lugged, graning carles!
What! d' ye think the lads wi' the kilts will care for yer synods and
yer presbyteries, and yer buttock-mail, and yer stool o' repentance?
Vengeance on the black face o't! mony an honester woman's been set upon
it than streeks doon beside ony Whig in the country. I mysell--'

Here John Mucklewrath, who dreaded her entering upon a detail of
personal experience, interposed his matrimonial authority. 'Gae hame,
and be d--(that I should say sae), and put on the sowens for supper.'

'And you, ye doil'd dotard,' replied his gentle helpmate, her wrath,
which had hitherto wandered abroad over the whole assembly, being at
once and violently impelled into its natural channel, 'YE stand there
hammering dog-heads for fules that will never snap them at a
Highlandman, instead of earning bread for your family and shoeing this
winsome young gentleman's horse that's just come frae the north! I'se
warrant him nane of your whingeing King George folk, but a gallant
Gordon, at the least o' him.'

The eyes of the assembly were now turned upon Waverley, who took the
opportunity to beg the smith to shoe his guide's horse with all speed,
as he wished to proceed on his journey; for he had heard enough to make
him sensible that there would be danger in delaying long in this place.
The smith's eyes rested on him with a look of displeasure and
suspicion, not lessened by the eagerness with which his wife enforced
Waverley's mandate. 'D'ye hear what the weel-favoured young gentleman
says, ye drunken ne'er-do-good?'

'And what may your name be, sir?' quoth Mucklewrath.

'It is of no consequence to you, my friend, provided I pay your labour.'

'But it may be of consequence to the state, sir,' replied an old
farmer, smelling strongly of whisky and peat-smoke; 'and I doubt we
maun delay your journey till you have seen the Laird.'

'You certainly,' said Waverley, haughtily, 'will find it both difficult
and dangerous to detain me, unless you can produce some proper
authority.'

There was a pause and a whisper among the crowd--'Secretary
Murray'--'Lord Lewis Gordon'--'Maybe the Chevalier himsell!' Such were
the surmises that passed hurriedly among them, and there was obviously
an increased disposition to resist Waverley's departure. He attempted
to argue mildly with them, but his voluntary ally, Mrs. Mucklewrath,
broke in upon and drowned his expostulations, taking his part with an
abusive violence which was all set down to Edward's account by those on
whom it was bestowed. 'YE'LL stop ony gentleman that's the Prince's
freend?' for she too, though with other feelings, had adopted the
general opinion respecting Waverley. 'I daur ye to touch him,'
spreading abroad her long and muscular fingers, garnished with claws
which a vulture might have envied. 'I'll set my ten commandments in the
face o' the first loon that lays a finger on him.'

'Gae hame, gudewife,' quoth the farmer aforesaid; 'it wad better set
you to be nursing the gudeman's bairns than to be deaving us here.'

'HIS bairns?' retorted the Amazon, regarding her husband with a grin of
ineffable contempt--'HIS bairns!

    O gin ye were dead, gudeman,
      And a green turf on your head, gudeman!
    Then I wad ware my widowhood
      Upon a ranting Highlandman'

This canticle, which excited a suppressed titter among the younger part
of the audience, totally overcame the patience of the taunted man of
the anvil. 'Deil be in me but I'll put this het gad down her throat!'
cried he in an ecstasy of wrath, snatching a bar from the forge; and he
might have executed his threat, had he not been withheld by a part of
the mob, while the rest endeavoured to force the termagant out of his
presence.

Waverley meditated a retreat in the confusion, but his horse was
nowhere to be seen. At length he observed at some distance his faithful
attendant, Ebenezer, who, as soon as he had perceived the turn matters
were likely to take, had withdrawn both horses from the press, and,
mounted on the one and holding the other, answered the loud and
repeated calls of Waverley for his horse. 'Na, na! if ye are nae friend
to kirk and the king, and are detained as siccan a person, ye maun
answer to honest men of the country for breach of contract; and I maun
keep the naig and the walise for damage and expense, in respect my
horse and mysell will lose to-morrow's day's wark, besides the
afternoon preaching.'

Edward, out of patience, hemmed in and hustled by the rabble on every
side, and every moment expecting personal violence, resolved to try
measures of intimidation, and at length drew a pocket-pistol,
threatening, on the one hand, to shoot whomsoever dared to stop him,
and, on the other, menacing Ebenezer with a similar doom if he stirred
a foot with the horses. The sapient Partridge says that one man with a
pistol is equal to a hundred unarmed, because, though he can shoot but
one of the multitude, yet no one knows but that he himself may be that
luckless individual. The levy en masse of Cairnvreckan would therefore
probably have given way, nor would Ebenezer, whose natural paleness had
waxed three shades more cadaverous, have ventured to dispute a mandate
so enforced, had not the Vulcan of the village, eager to discharge upon
some more worthy object the fury which his helpmate had provoked, and
not ill satisfied to find such an object in Waverley, rushed at him
with the red-hot bar of iron with such determination as made the
discharge of his pistol an act of self-defence. The unfortunate man
fell; and while Edward, thrilled with a natural horror at the incident,
neither had presence of mind to unsheathe his sword nor to draw his
remaining pistol, the populace threw themselves upon him, disarmed him,
and were about to use him with great violence, when the appearance of a
venerable clergyman, the pastor of the parish, put a curb on their fury.

This worthy man (none of the Goukthrapples or Rentowels) maintained his
character with the common people, although he preached the practical
fruits of Christian faith as well as its abstract tenets, and was
respected by the higher orders, notwithstanding he declined soothing
their speculative errors by converting the pulpit of the gospel into a
school of heathen morality. Perhaps it is owing to this mixture of
faith and practice in his doctrine that, although his memory has formed
a sort of era in the annals of Cairnvreckan, so that the parishioners,
to denote what befell Sixty Years Since, still say it happened 'in good
Mr. Morton's time,' I have never been able to discover which he
belonged to, the evangelical or the moderate party in the kirk. Nor do
I hold the circumstance of much moment, since, in my own remembrance,
the one was headed by an Erskine, the other by a Robertson.

[Footnote: The Reverend John Erskine, D. D, an eminent Scottish divine
and a most excellent man, headed the Evangelical party in the Church of
Scotland at the time when the celebrated Doctor Robertson, the
historian, was the leader of the Moderate party. These two
distinguished persons were colleagues in the Old Grey Friars' Church,
Edinburgh; and, however much they differed in church politics,
preserved the most perfect harmony as private friends and as clergymen
serving the same cure]

Mr. Morton had been alarmed by the discharge of the pistol and the
increasing hubbub around the smithy. His first attention, after he had
directed the bystanders to detain Waverley, but to abstain from
injuring him, was turned to the body of Mucklewrath, over which his
wife, in a revulsion of feeling, was weeping, howling, and tearing her
elf-locks in a state little short of distraction. On raising up the
smith, the first discovery was that he was alive; and the next that he
was likely to live as long as if he had never heard the report of a
pistol in his life. He had made a narrow escape, however; the bullet
had grazed his head and stunned him for a moment or two, which trance
terror and confusion of spirit had prolonged somewhat longer. He now
arose to demand vengeance on the person of Waverley, and with
difficulty acquiesced in the proposal of Mr. Morton that he should be
carried before the Laird, as a justice of peace, and placed at his
disposal. The rest of the assistants unanimously agreed to the measure
recommended; even Mrs. Mucklewrath, who had begun to recover from her
hysterics, whimpered forth, 'She wadna say naething against what the
minister proposed; he was e'en ower gude for his trade, and she hoped
to see him wi' a dainty decent bishop's gown on his back; a comelier
sight than your Geneva cloaks and bands, I wis.'

All controversy being thus laid aside, Waverley, escorted by the whole
inhabitants of the village who were not bed-ridden, was conducted to
the house of Cairnvreckan, which was about half a mile distant.





CHAPTER XXXI

AN EXAMINATION


Major Melville of Cairnvreckan, an elderly gentleman, who had spent his
youth in the military service, received Mr. Morton with great kindness,
and our hero with civility, which the equivocal circumstances wherein
Edward was placed rendered constrained and distant.

The nature of the smith's hurt was inquired into, and, as the actual
injury was likely to prove trifling, and the circumstances in which it
was received rendered the infliction on Edward's part a natural act of
self-defence, the Major conceived he might dismiss that matter on
Waverley's depositing in his hands a small sum for the benefit of the
wounded person.

'I could wish, sir,' continued the Major, 'that my duty terminated
here; but it is necessary that we should have some further inquiry into
the cause of your journey through the country at this unfortunate and
distracted time.'

Mr. Ebenezer Cruickshanks now stood forth, and communicated to the
magistrate all he knew or suspected from the reserve of Waverley and
the evasions of Callum Beg. The horse upon which Edward rode, he said,
he knew to belong to Vich Ian Vohr, though he dared not tax Edward's
former attendant with the fact, lest he should have his house and
stables burnt over his head some night by that godless gang, the
Mac-Ivors. He concluded by exaggerating his own services to kirk and
state, as having been the means, under God (as he modestly qualified
the assertion), of attaching this suspicious and formidable delinquent.
He intimated hopes of future reward, and of instant reimbursement for
loss of time, and even of character, by travelling on the state
business on the fast-day.

To this Major Melville answered, with great composure, that so far from
claiming any merit in this affair, Mr. Cruickshanks ought to deprecate
the imposition of a very heavy fine for neglecting to lodge, in terms
of the recent proclamation, an account with the nearest magistrate of
any stranger who came to his inn; that, as Mr. Cruickshanks boasted so
much of religion and loyalty, he should not impute this conduct to
disaffection, but only suppose that his zeal for kirk and state had
been lulled asleep by the opportunity of charging a stranger with
double horse-hire; that, however, feeling himself incompetent to decide
singly upon the conduct of a person of such importance, he should
reserve it for consideration of the next quarter-sessions. Now our
history for the present saith no more of him of the Candlestick, who
wended dolorous and malcontent back to his own dwelling.

Major Melville then commanded the villagers to return to their homes,
excepting two, who officiated as constables, and whom he directed to
wait below. The apartment was thus cleared of every person but Mr.
Morton, whom the Major invited to remain; a sort of factor, who acted
as clerk; and Waverley himself. There ensued a painful and embarrassed
pause, till Major Melville, looking upon Waverley with much compassion,
and often consulting a paper or memorandum which he held in his hand,
requested to know his name.

'Edward Waverley.'

'I thought so; late of the--dragoons, and nephew of Sir Everard
Waverley of Waverley-Honour?'

