you and she are strangers still, and as you are so rarely to be seen in
church...."

"She naturally takes us for the ungodly. Tell her that she is mistaken,
and if you are Paula's friend and you come to see her--but prettily,
through the gate, and not through the hedge, for it will be closely
twined again by to-morrow morning--if you come here, I say, you will
find that we have a great deal to do and a great many creatures to nurse
and care for--poor human creatures some of them, and some with fur or
feathers, just as it comes; and man serves his Maker if he only makes
life easier to the beings that come in his way; for He loves them all.
Tell that to your mother, little wagtail, and come again very often."

"Thank you very much. But let me ask you, if I may, where you heard that
odious nickname? I hate it."

"From the same person who told you the secret that my Pulcheria is
called Pul!" said Rufinus; he laughed and bowed and left the two girls
together.

"What a dear old man!" cried Katharina. "Oh, I know quite well how he
spends his Days! And his pretty wife and Pul--I know them all. How often
I have watched them--I will show you the place one day! I can see over
the whole garden, only not what goes on near the convent on the other
side of the house, or beyond those trees. You know my mother; if she
once dislikes any one.... But Pul, you understand, would be such a
friend for me!"

"Of course she would," replied Paula. "And a girl of your age must chose
older companions than little Mary."

"Oh, you shall not say a word against her!" cried Katharina eagerly.
"She is only ten years old, but many a grown-up person is not so upright
or so capable as I have found her during these last few miserable days."

"Poor child!" said Paula stroking her hair.

At this a bitter sob broke suddenly and passionately from Katharina; she
tried with all her might to suppress it, but could not succeed. Her fit
of weeping was so violent that she could not utter a word, till Paula
had led her to a bench under a spreading sycamore, had induced her with
gentle force to sit down by her side, clasping her in her arms like a
suffering child, and speaking to her words of comfort and encouragement.

Birds without number were going to rest in the dense branches overhead,
owls and bats had begun their nocturnal raids, the sky put on its
spangled glory of gold and silver stars, from the western end of the
town came the jackals' bark as they left their lurking-places among the
ruined houses and stole out in search of prey, the heavy dew, falling
through the mild air silently covered the leaves, the grass, and the
flowers; the garden was more powerfully fragrant now than during the
day-time, and Paula felt that it was high time to take refuge from the
mists that came up from the shallow stream. But still she lingered while
the little maiden poured out all that weighed upon her, all she repented
of, believing she could never atone for it; and then all she had gone
through, thinking it must break her heart, and all she still had to live
down and drive out of her mind.

She told Paula how Orion had wooed her, how much she loved him, how
her heart had been tortured by jealousy of her, Paula, and how she had
allowed herself to be led away into bearing false witness before the
judges. And then she went on to say it was Mary who had first opened her
eyes to the abyss by which she was standing. In the afternoon after the
death of the Mukaukas she had gone with her mother to the governor's
house to join in her friends' lamentations. She had at once asked after
Mary, but had not been allowed to see her, for she was still in bed and
very feverish. She was then on her way to the cool hall when she heard
her mother's voice--not in grief, but angry and vehement--so, thinking
it would be more becoming to keep out of the way, she wandered off
into the pillared vestibule opening towards the Nile. She would not for
worlds have met Orion, and was terribly afraid she might do so, but as
she went out, for it was still quite light, there she found him--and in
what a state! He was sitting all in a heap, dressed in black, with his
head buried in his hands. He had not observed her presence; but she
pitied him deeply, for though it was very hot he was trembling in every
limb, and his strong frame shuddered repeatedly. She had therefore
spoken to him, begging him to be comforted, at which he had started to
his feet in dismay, and had pushed his unkempt hair back from his face,
looking so pale, so desperate, that she had been quite terrified and
could not manage to bring out the consoling words she had ready. For
some time neither of them had uttered a syllable, but at length he
had pulled himself together as if for some great deed, he came slowly
towards her and laid his hands on her shoulders with a solemn dignity
which no one certainly had ever before seen in him. He stood gazing into
her face--his eyes were red with much weeping--and he sighed from his
very heart the two words: "Unhappy Child!"--She could hear them still
sounding in her ears.

And he was altered: from head to foot quite different, like a stranger.
His voice, even, sounded changed and deeper than usual as he went on:

"Child, child! Perhaps I have given much pain in my life without knowing
it; but you have certainly suffered most through me, for I have made
you, an innocent, trusting creature, my accomplice in crime. The great
sin we both committed has been visited on me alone, but the punishment
is a hundred--a thousand times too heavy!"

"And with this," Katharina went on, "he covered his face with his hands,
threw himself on the couch again, and groaned and sighed. Then he sprang
up once more, crying out so loud and passionately that I felt as if I
must die of grief and pity: 'Forgive me if you can! Forgive me, wholly,
freely. I want it--you must, you must! I was going to run up to him
and throw my arms round him and forgive him everything, his trouble
distressed me so much; but he gravely pushed me away--not roughly
or sternly, and he said that there was an end of all love-making and
betrothal between us--that I was young, and that I should be able to
forget him. He would still be a true friend to me and to my mother, and
the more we required of him the more gladly would he serve us.

"I was about to answer him, but he hastily interrupted me and said
firmly and decisively: 'Lovable as you are, I cannot love you as you
deserve; for it is my duty to tell you, I have another and a greater
love in my heart--my first and my last; and though once in my life I
have proved myself a wretch, still, it was but once; and I would rather
endure your anger, and hurt both you and myself now, than continue
this unrighteous tie and cheat you and others.'--At this I was greatly
startled, and asked: 'Paula?' However, he did not answer, but bent over
me and touched my forehead with his lips, just as my father often kissed
me, and then went quickly out into the garden.

"Just then my mother came up, as red as a poppy and panting for breath:
she took me by the hand without a word, dragged me into the chariot
after her, and then cried out quite beside herself--she could not even
shed a tear for rage: 'What insolence! what unheard-of behavior--How can
I find the heart to tell you, poor sacrificed lamb...'"

"And she would have gone on, but that I would not let her finish; I told
her at once that I knew all, and happily I was able to keep quite calm.
I had some bad hours at home; and when Nilus came to us yesterday, after
the opening of the will, and brought me the pretty little gold box with
turquoises and pearls that I have always admired, and told me that the
good Mukaukas had written with his own hand, in his last will, that
it was to be given to me I his bright little 'Katharina,' my mother
insisted on my not taking it and sent it back to Neforis, though I
begged and prayed to keep it. And of course I shall never go to that
house again; indeed my mother talks of quitting Memphis altogether and
settling in Constantinople or some other city under Christian rule.
'Then our nice, pretty house must be given up, and our dear, lovely
garden be sold to the peasant folk, my mother says. It was just the same
a year and a half ago with Memnon's palace. His garden was turned into a
corn-field, and the splendid ground-floor rooms, with their mosaics and
pictures, are now dirty stables for cows and sheep, and pigs are fed in
the rooms that belonged to Hathor and Dorothea. Good Heavens! And they
were my clearest friends! And I am never to play with Mary any more; and
mother has not a kind word for any living soul, hardly even for me, and
my old nurse is as deaf as a mole! Am I not a really miserable, lonely
creature? And if you, even you, will have nothing to say to me, who is
there in all Memphis whom I can trust in? But you will not be so cruel,
will you? And it will not be for long, for my mother really means to go
away. You are older than I am, of course, and much graver and wiser...."

"I will be kind to you, child; but try to make friends with Pulcheria!"

"Gladly, gladly. But then my mother! I should get on very well by myself
if it were not... Well, you yourself heard what Orion said to me, that
time in the avenue. He surely loved me a little! What sweet, tender
names he gave me then. Oh God! no man can speak like that to any one
he is not fond of!--And he is rich himself; it cannot have been only my
fortune that bewitched him. And does he look like a man who would allow
himself to be parted from a girl by his mother, whether he would or no?"

"He was always fond of me I think; but then, afterwards, he remembered
what a high position he had to fill and regarded me as too little and
too childish. Oh, how many tears I have shed over being so absurdly
little! A Water-wagtail--that is what I shall always be. Your old host
called me so; and if a man like Orion feels that he must have a stately
wife I can hardly blame him. That other one whom he thinks he loves
better than he does me is tall and beautiful and majestic--like you; and
I have always told myself that his future wife ought to look like you.
It is all over between him and me, and I will submit humbly; but at the
same time I cannot help thinking that when he came home he thought me
pretty and attractive, and had a real fancy and liking for me. Yes,
it was so, it certainly was so!--But then he saw that other one, and
I cannot compare with her. She is indeed the woman he wants,--and that
other, Paula, is yourself. Yes, indeed, you yourself; an inner voice
tells me so. And I tell you truly, you may quite believe me: it is a
pain no doubt, but I can be glad of it too. I should hate any mere girl
to whom he held out his hand--but, if you are that other--and if you are
his wife..."

"Nonsense," exclaimed Paula decidedly. "Consider what you are saying.
When Orion tempted you to perjure yourself, did he behave as my friend
or as my foe, my bitterest and most implacable enemy?"

"Before the judges, to be sure..." replied the girl looking down
thoughtfully. But she soon looked up again, fixed her eyes on Paula's
face with a sparkling, determined glance, and frankly and unhesitatingly
exclaimed: "And you?--In spite of it all he is so handsome, so clever,
so manly. You can hardly help it--you love him!"

Paula withdrew her arm, which had been round Katharina, and answered
candidly.

"Until to-day, at the funeral, I hated and abominated him; but there,
by his father's tomb, he struck me as a new man, and I found it easy to
forgive him in my heart."

"Then you mean to say that you do not love him?" urged Katharina,
clasping her friend's round arm with her slender fingers.

Paula started to feel how icy cold her hand was. The moon was up, the
stars rose higher and higher, so, simply saying: "Come away," she rose.
"It must be within an hour of midnight," she added. "Your mother will be
anxious about you."

"Only an hour of midnight!" repeated the girl in alarm. "Good Heavens, I
shall have a scolding! She is still playing draughts with the Bishop,
no doubt, as she does every evening. Good-bye then for the present. The
shortest way is through the hedge again."

"No," said Paula firmly, "you are no longer a child; you are grown up,
and must feel it and show it. You are not to creep through the bushes,
but to go home by the gate. Rufinus and I will go with you and explain
to your mother..."

"No, no!" cried Katharina in terror. "She is as angry with you as she is
with them. Only yesterday she forbid..."

"Forbid you to come to me?" asked Paula. "Does she believe..."

"That it was for your sake that Orion.... Yes, she is only too glad to
lay all the blame on you. But now that I have talked to you I.... Look,
do you see that light? It is in her sitting-room."

And, before Paula could prevent her, she ran to the hedge and slipped
through the gap as nimbly as a weasel.

Paula looked after her with mingled feelings, and then went back to the
house, and to bed. Katharina's story kept her awake for a long time, and
the suspicion--nay almost the conviction--that it was herself, indeed,
who had aroused that "great love" in Orion's heart gave her no rest. If
it were she? There, under her hand was the instrument of revenge on the
miscreant; she could make him taste of all the bitterness he had brewed
for her aching spirit. But which of them would the punishment hurt most
sorely: him or herself? Had not the little girl's confidences revealed
a world of rapture to her and her longing heart? No, no. It would be too
humiliating to allow the same hand that had smitten her so ruthlessly to
uplift her to heaven; it would be treason against herself.

Slumber overtook her in the midst of these conflicting feelings and
thoughts, and towards morning she had a dream which, even by daylight,
haunted her and made her shudder.

She saw Orion coming towards her, as pale as death, robed in mourning,
pacing slowly on a coal-black horse; she had not the strength to fly,
and without speaking to her or looking at her, he lifted her high in the
air like a child, and placed her in front of him on the horse. She put
forth all her strength to get free and dismount, but he clasped her with
both arms like iron clamps and quelled her efforts. Life itself would
not have seemed too great a price for escape from this constraint; but,
the more wildly she fought, the more closely she was held by the silent
and pitiless horseman. At their feet flowed the swirling river, but
Orion did not seem to notice it, and without moving his lips, he coolly
guided the steed towards the water. Beside herself now with horror and
dread, she implored him to turn away; but he did not heed her, and went
on unmoved into the midst of the stream. Her terror increased to an
agonizing pitch as the horse bore her deeper and deeper into the water;
of her own free will she threw her arms round the rider's neck; his
paleness vanished, his cheeks gained a ruddy hue, his lips sought hers
in a kiss; and, in the midst of the very anguish of death, she felt a
thrill of rapture that she had never known before. She could have gone
on thus for ever, even to destruction; and, in fact, they were still
sinking--she felt the water rising breast high, but she cared not. Not
a word had either of them spoken. Suddenly she felt urged to break the
silence, and as if she could not help it she asked: "Am I the other?" At
this the waves surged down on them from all sides; a whirlpool dragged
away the horse, spinning him round, and with him Orion and herself, a
shrill blast swept past them, and then the current and the waves, the
roaring of the whirlpool, the howling of the storm--all at once and
together, as with one voice, louder than all else and filling her ears,
shouted: "Thou!"--Only Orion remained speechless. An eddy caught the
horse and sucked him under, a wave carried her away from him, she was
sinking, sinking, and stretched out her arms with longing.--A cold
dew stood on her brow as she slept, and the nurse, waking her from her
uneasy dream, shook her head as she said:

"Why, child? What ails you? You have been calling Orion again and again,
at first in terror and then so tenderly.--Yes, believe me, tenderly."




CHAPTER XX.

In the neat rooms which Rufinus' wife had made ready for her sick guests
perfect peace reigned, and it was noon. A soft twilight fell through the
thick green curtains which mitigated the sunshine, and the nurses had
lately cleared away after the morning meal. Paula was moistening the
bandage on the Masdakite's head, and Pulcheria was busy in the adjoining
room with Mandane, who obeyed the physician's instructions with
intelligent submission and showed no signs of insanity.

Paula was still spellbound by her past dream. She was possessed by such
unrest that, quite against her wont, she could not long remain quiet,
and when Pulcheria came to her to tell her this or that, she listened
with so little attention and sympathy that the humble-minded girl,
fearing to disturb her, withdrew to her patient's bed-side and waited
quietly till her new divinity called her.

In fact, it was not without reason that Paula gave herself up to a
certain anxiety; for, if she was not mistaken, Orion must necessarily
present himself to hand over to her the remainder of her fortune; and
though even yesterday, on her way from the cemetery, she had said to
herself that she must and would refuse to meet him, the excitement
produced by Katharina's story and her subsequent dream had confirmed her
in her determination.

Perpetua awaited Orion's visit on the ground-floor, charged to announce
him to Rufinus and not to her mistress. The old man had willingly
undertaken to receive the money as her representative; for Philippus had
not concealed from her that he had acquainted him with the circumstances
under which Paula had quitted the governor's house, describing Orion as
a man whom she had good reason for desiring to avoid.

By about two hours after noon Paula's restlessness had increased so much
that now and then she wandered out of the sick-room, which looked over
the garden, to watch the Nile-quay from the window of the anteroom; for
he might arrive by either way. She never thought of the security of her
property; but the question arose in her mind as to whether it were not
actually a breach of duty to avoid the agitation it would cost her to
meet her cousin face to face. On this point no one could advise her,
not even Perpetua; her own mother could hardly have understood all her
feelings on such an occasion. She scarcely knew herself indeed; for
hitherto she had never failed, even in the most difficult cases, to know
at once and without long reflection, what to do and to leave undone,
what under special circumstances was right or wrong. But now she felt
herself a yielding reed, a leaf tossed hither and thither; and every
time she set her teeth and clenched her hands, determined to think
calmly and to reason out the "for" and "against," her mind wandered
away again, while the memory of her dream, of Orion as he stood by his
father's grave--of Katharina's tale of "the other," and the fearful
punishment which he had to suffer, nay indeed, certainly had
suffered--came and went in her mind like the flocks of birds over the
Nile, whose dipping and soaring had often passed like a fluttering veil
between her eye and some object on the further shore.

It was three hours past noon, and she had returned to the sick-room,
when she thought that she heard hoofs in the garden and hurried to the
window once more. Her heart had not beat more wildly when the dog
had flown at her and Hiram that fateful night, than it did now as she
hearkened to the approach of a horseman, still hidden from her gaze by
the shrubs. It must be Orion--but why did he not dismount? No, it could
not be he; his tall figure would have overtopped the shrubbery which was
of low growth.

She did not know her host's friends; it was one of them very likely. Now
the horse had turned the corner; now it was coming up the path from the
front gate; now Rufinus had gone forth to meet the visitor--and it was
not Orion, but his secretary, a much smaller man, who slipped off a mule
that she at once recognized, threw the reins to a lad, handed something
to the old man, and then dropped on to a bench to yawn and stretch his
legs.

Then she saw Rufinus come towards the house. Had Orion charged this
messenger to bring her her possessions? She thought this somewhat
insulting, and her blood boiled with wrath. But there could be no
question here of a surrender of property; for what her host was holding
in his hand was nothing heavy, but a quite small object; probably, nay,
certainly a roll of papyrus. He was coming up the narrow stairs, so she
ran out to meet him, blushing as though she were doing something wrong.
The old man observed this and said, as he handed her the scroll:

"You need not be frightened, daughter of a hero. The young lord is not
here himself, he prefers, it would seem, to treat with you by letter;
and it is best so for both parties."

Paula nodded agreement; she took the roll, and then, while she tore the
silken tie from the seal, she turned her back on the old man; for
she felt that the blood had faded from her face, and her hands were
trembling.

"The messenger awaits an answer," remarked Rufinus, before she began to
read it. "I shall be below and at your service." He left; Paula returned
to the sick-room, and leaning against the frame of the casement, read as
follows, with eager agitation:

"Orion, the son of George the Mukaukas who sleeps in the Lord, to his
cousin the daughter of the noble Thomas of Damascus, greeting.

"I have destroyed several letters that I had written to you before this
one." Paula shrugged her shoulders incredulously. "I hope I may succeed
better this time in saying what I feel to be indispensable for your
welfare and my own. I have both to crave a favor and offer counsel."

"Counsel! he!" thought the girl with a scornful curl of the lips, as she
went on. "May the memory of the man who loved you as his daughter, and
who on his death-bed wished for nothing so much as to see you--averse as
he was to your creed--and bless you as his daughter indeed, as his son's
wife,--may the remembrance of that just man so far prevail over your
indignant and outraged soul that these words from the most wretched man
on earth, for that am I, Paula, may not be left unread. Grant me the
last favor I have to ask of you--I demand it in my father's name."

"Demand!" repeated the damsel; her cheeks flamed, her eye sparkled
angrily, and her hands clutched the opposite sides of the letter as
though to tear it across. But the next words: "Do not fear," checked
her hasty impulse--she smoothed out the papyrus and read on with growing
excitement:

"Do not fear that I shall address you as a lover--as the man for whom
there is but one woman on earth. And that one can only be she whom I
have so deeply injured, whom I fought with as frantic, relentless, and
cruel weapons as ever I used against a foe of my own sex."

"But one," murmured the girl; she passed her hand across her brow, and a
faint smile of happy pride dwelt on her lips as she went on:

"I shall love you as long as breath animates this crushed and wretched
heart."

Again the letter was in danger of destruction, but again it escaped
unharmed, and Paula's expression became one of calm and tender pleasure
as she read to the end of Orion's clearly written epistle:

"I am fully conscious that I have forfeited your esteem, nay even all
good feeling towards me, by my own fault; and that, unless divine love
works some miracle in your heart, I have sacrificed all joy on earth.
You are revenged; for it was for your sake--understand that--for your
sake alone, that my beloved and dying father withdrew the blessings he
had heaped on my remorseful head, and in wrath that was only too just
at the recreant who had desecrated the judgment-seat of his ancestors,
turned that blessing to a curse."

Paula turned pale as she read. This then was what Katharina had meant.
This was what had so changed his appearance, and perhaps, too, his whole
inward being. And this, this bore the stamp of truth, this could not be
a lie--it was for her sake that a father's curse had blighted his only
son! How had it all happened? Had Philippus failed to observe it, or had
he held his peace out of respect for the secrets of another?--Poor man,
poor young man! She must see him, must speak to him. She could not
have a moment's ease till she knew how it was that her uncle, a tender
father.--But she must go on, quickly to the end:

"I come to you only as what I am: a heart-broken man, too young to give
myself over for lost, and at the same time determined to make use of
all that remains to me of the steadfast will, the talents, and the
self-respect of my forefathers to render me worthy of them, and I
implore you to grant me a brief interview. Not a word, not a look shall
betray the passion within and which threatens to destroy me.

"You must on no account fail to read what follows, since it is of no
small real importance even to you. In the first place restitution must
be made to you of all of your inheritance which the deceased was able
to rescue and to add to by his fatherly stewardship. In these agitated
times it will be a matter of some difficulty to invest this capital
safely and to good advantage. Consider: just as the Arabs drove out the
Byzantines, the Byzantines might drive them out again in their turn. The
Persians, though stricken to the earth, the Avars, or some other people
whose very name is as yet unknown to history, may succeed our present
rulers, who, only ten years since, were regarded as a mere handful
of unsettled camel-drivers, caravan-leaders, and poverty-stricken
desert-tribes. The safety of your fortune would be less difficult to
provide for if, as was formerly the case here, we could entrust it to
the merchants of Alexandria. But one great house after another is being
ruined there, and all security is at an end. As to hiding or burying
your possessions, as most Egyptians do in these hard times, it is
impossible, for the same reason as prevents our depositing it on
interest in the state land-register. You must be able to get it at the
shortest notice; since you might at some time wish to quit Egypt in
haste with all your possessions.

"These are matters with which a woman cannot be familiar. I would
therefore propose that you should leave the arrangement of them to
us men; to Philippus, the physician, Rufinus, your host--who is, I am
assured, an honest man--and to our experienced and trustworthy treasurer
Nilus, whom you know as an incorruptible judge.

"I propose that the business should be settled tomorrow in the house of
Rufinus. You can be present or not, as you please. If we men agree in
our ideas I beg you--I beseech you to grant me an interview apart. It
will last but a few minutes, and the only subject of discussion will be
a matter--an exchange by which you will recover something you value and
have lost, and grant me I hope, if not your esteem, at any rate a
word of forgiveness. I need it sorely, believe me, Paula; it is as
indispensable to me as the breath of life, if I am to succeed in the
work I have begun on myself. If you have prevailed on yourself to read
through this letter, simply answer 'Yes' by my messenger, to relieve me
from torturing uncertainty. If you do not--which God forefend for both
our sakes, Nilus shall this very day carry to you all that belongs
to you. But, if you have read these lines, I will make my appearance
to-morrow, at two hours after noon, with Nilus to explain to the others
the arrangement of which I have spoken. God be with you and infuse some
ruth into your proud and noble soul!"

Paula drew a deep breath as the hand holding this momentous epistle
dropped by her side; she stood for some time by the window, lost in
grave meditation. Then calling Pulcheria, she begged her to tend her
patient, too, for a short time. The girl looked up at her with rapt
admiration in her clear eyes, and asked sympathetically why she was so
pale; Paula kissed her lips and eyes, and saying affectionately: "Good,
happy child!" she retired to her own room on the opposite side of the
house. There she once more read through the letter.

Oh yes; this was Orion as she had known him after his return till the
evening of that never-to-be-forgotten water-party. He was, indeed, a
poet; nature herself had made it so easy to him to seduce unguarded
souls into a belief in him! And yet no! This letter was honestly meant.
Philippus knew men well; Orion really had a heart, a warm heart. Not the
most reckless of criminals could mock at the curse hurled at him by
a beloved father in his last moments. And, as she once more read the
sentence in which he told her that it was his crime as an unjust judge
towards her that had turned the dying man's blessing to a curse, she
shuddered and reflected that their relative attitude was now reversed,
and that he had suffered more and worse through her than she had through
him. His pale face, as she had seen it in the Necropolis, came back
vividly to her mind, and if he could have stood before her at this
moment she would have flown to him, have offered him a compassionate
hand, and have assured him that the woes she had brought upon him filled
her with the deepest and sincerest pity.

That morning she had asked the Masdakite whether he had besought Heaven
to grant him a speedy recovery, and the man replied that Persians never
prayed for any particular blessing, but only for "that which was good;"
for that none but the Omnipotent knew what was good for mortals. How
wise! For in this instance might not the most terrible blow that could
fall on a son--his father's curse--prove a blessing? It was undoubtedly
that curse which had led him to look into his soul and to start on
this new path. She saw him treading it, she longed to believe in his
conversion--and she did believe in it. In this letter he spoke of his
love; he even asked her hand. Only yesterday this would have roused her
wrath; to-day she could forgive him; for she could forgive anything to
this unhappy soul--to the man on whom she had brought such deep anguish.
Her heart could now beat high in the hope of seeing him again; nay, it
even seemed to her that the youth, whose return had been hailed with
such welcome and who had so powerfully attracted her, had only now grown
and ripened to full and perfect manhood through his sin, his penitence,
and his suffering.

And how noble a task it would be to assist him in seeking the right way,
and in becoming what he aspired to be!

The prudent care he had given to her worldly welfare merited her
gratitude. What could he mean by the "exchange" he proposed? The "great
love" of which he had spoken to Katharina was legible in every line of
his letter, and any woman can forgive any man--were he a sinner, and a
scarecrow into the bargain--for his audacity in loving her. Oh! that he
might but set his heart on her--for hers, it was vain to deny it, was
strongly drawn to him. Still she would not call it Love that stirred
within her; it could only be the holy impulse to point out to him the
highest goal of life and smooth the path for him. The pale horseman who
had clutched her in her dream should not drag her away; no, she would
joyfully lift him up to the highest pinnacle attainable by a brave and
noble man.

So her thoughts ran, and her cheeks flushed as, with swift decision, she
opened her trunk, took out papyrus, writing implements and a seal, and
seated herself at a little desk which Rufinus had placed for her in the
window, to write her answer.

At this a sudden fervent longing for Orion came over her. She made a
great effort to shake it off; still, she felt that in writing to him it
was impossible that she should find the right words, and as she replaced
the papyrus in the chest and looked at the seal a strange thing happened
to her; for the device on her father's well-known ring: a star above two
crossed swords--perchance the star of Orion--caught her eye, with
the motto in Greek: "The immortal gods have set sweat before virtue,"
meaning that the man who aims at being virtuous must grudge neither
sweat nor toil.

She closed her trunk with a pleased smile, for the motto round the star
was, she felt, of good augury. At the same time she resolved to speak
to Orion, taking these words, which her forefathers had adopted from
old Hesiod, as her text. She hastened down stairs, crossed the garden,
passing by Rufinus, his wife and the physician, awoke the secretary who
had long since dropped asleep, and enjoined him to say: "Yes" to his
master, as he expected. However, before the messenger had mounted his
mule, she begged him to wait yet a few minutes and returned to the two
men; for she had forgotten in her eagerness to speak to them of Orion's
plans. They were both willing to meet him at the hour proposed and,
while Philippus went to tell the messenger that they would expect his
master on the next day, the old man looked at Paula with undisguised
satisfaction and said:

"We were fearing lest the news from the governor's house should have
spoilt your happy mood, but, thank God, you look as if you had just come
from a refreshing bath.--What do you say, Joanna? Twenty years ago such
an inmate here would have made you jealous? Or was there never a place
for such evil passions in your dove-like soul?"

"Nonsense!" laughed the matron. "How can I tell how many fair beings you
have gazed after, wanderer that you are in all the wide world far away?"

"Well, old woman, but as sure as man is the standard of all things,
nowhere that I have carried my staff, have I met with a goddess like
this!"

"I certainly have not either, living here like a snail in its shell,"
said Dame Joanna, fixing her bright eyes on Paula with fervent
admiration.




CHAPTER XXI.

That evening Rufinus was sitting in the garden with his wife and
daughter and their friend Philippus. Paula, too, was there, and from
time to time she stroked Pulcheria's silky golden hair, for the girl had
seated herself at her feet, leaning her head against Paula's knee.

The moon was full, and it was so light out of doors that they could see
each other plainly, so Rufinus' proposition that they should remain to
watch an eclipse which was to take place an hour before midnight found
all the more ready acceptance because the air was pleasant. The men
had been discussing the expected phenomenon, lamenting that the Church
should still lend itself to the superstitions of the populace by
regarding it as of evil omen, and organizing a penitential procession
for the occasion to implore God to avert all ill. Rufinus declared that
it was blasphemy against the Almighty to interpret events happening in
the course of eternal law and calculable beforehand, as a threatening
sign from Him; as though man's deserts had any connection with the
courses of the sun and moon. The Bishop and all the priests of the
province were to head the procession, and thus a simple natural
phenomenon was forced in the minds of the people into a significance it
did not possess.

"And if the little comet which my old foster father discovered last week
continues to increase," added the physician, "so that its tail spreads
over a portion of the sky, the panic will reach its highest pitch; I can
see already that they will behave like mad creatures."

"But a comet really does portend war, drought, plague, and famine," said
Pulcheria, with full conviction; and Paula added:

"So I have always believed."

"But very wrongly," replied the leech. "There are a thousand reasons
to the contrary; and it is a crime to confirm the mob in such a
superstition. It fills them with grief and alarms; and, would you
believe it--such anguish of mind, especially when the Nile is so low
and there is more sickness than usual, gives rise to numberless forms of
disease? We shall have our hands full, Rufinus."

"I am yours to command," replied the old man. "But at the same time,
if the tailed wanderer must do some mischief, I would rather it should
break folks' arms and legs than turn their brains."

"What a wish!" exclaimed Paula. "But you often say things--and I see
things about you too--which seem to me extraordinary. Yesterday you
promised...."

"To explain to you why I gather about me so many of God's creatures who
have to struggle under the burden of life as cripples, or with injured
limbs."

"Just so," replied Paula. "Nothing can be more truly merciful than to
render life bearable to such hapless beings...."

"But still, you think," interrupted the eager old man, "that this noble
motive alone would hardly account for the old oddity's riding his hobby
so hard.--Well, you are right. From my earliest youth the structure of
the bones in man and beast has captivated me exceedingly; and just as
collectors of horns, when once they have a complete series of every
variety of stag, roe, and gazelle, set to work with fresh zeal to find
deformed or monstrous growths, so I have found pleasure in studying
every kind of malformation and injury in the bones of men and beasts."

"And to remedy them," added Philippus. "It has been his passion from
childhood.

"And the passion has grown upon me since I broke my own hip bone
and know what it means," the old man went on. "With the help of my
fellow-student there, from a mere dilettante I became a practised
surgeon; and, what is more, I am one of those who serve Esculapius at
my own expense. However, there are accessory reasons for which I have
chosen such strange companions: deformed slaves are cheap and besides
that, certain investigations afford me inestimable and peculiar
satisfaction. But this cannot interest a young girl."

"Indeed it does!" cried Paula. "So far as I have understood Philippus
when he explains some details of natural history...."

"Stay," laughed Rufinus, "our friend will take good care not to explain
this. He regards it as folly, and all he will admit is that no surgeon
or student could wish for better, more willing, or more amusing
house-mates than my cripples."

"They are grateful to you," cried Paula.

"Grateful?" asked the old man. "That is true sometimes, no doubt; still,
gratitude is a tribute on which no wise man ever reckons. Now I have
told you enough; for the sake of Philippus we will let the rest pass."

"No, no," said Paula putting up entreating hands, and Rufinus answered
gaily:

"Who can refuse you anything? I will cut it short, but you must pay good
heed.--Well then Man is the standard of all things. Do you understand
that?"

"Yes, I often hear you say so. Things you mean are only what they seem
to us."

"To us, you say, because we--you and I and the rest of us here--are
sound in body and mind. And we must regard all things--being God's
handiwork--as by nature sound and normal. Thus we are justified in
requiring that man, who gives the standard for them shall, first and
foremost, himself be sound and normal. Can a carpenter measure straight
planks properly with a crooked or sloping rod?"

"Certainly not."

"Then you will understand how I came to ask myself: 'Do sickly,
crippled, and deformed men measure things by a different standard to
that of sound men? And might it not be a useful task to investigate how
their estimates differ from ours?'"

"And have your researches among your cripples led to any results?"

"To many important ones," the old man declared; but Philippus
interrupted him with a loud: "Oho!" adding that his friend was in
too great a hurry to deduce laws from individual cases. Many of his
observations were, no doubt, of considerable interest.... Here Rufinus
broke in with some vehemence, and the discussion would have become a
dispute if Paula had not intervened by requesting her zealous host to
give her the results, at any rate, of his studies.

"I find," said Rufinus very confidently, as he stroked down his long
beard, "that they are not merely shrewd because their faculties are
early sharpened to make up by mental qualifications for what they lack
in physical advantages; they are also witty, like AEesop the fabulist
and Besa the Egyptian god, who, as I have been told by our old friend
Horus, from whom we derive all our Egyptian lore, presided among those
heathen over festivity, jesting, and wit, and also over the toilet
of women. This shows the subtle observation of the ancients; for the
hunchback whose body is bent, applies a crooked standard to things
in general. His keen insight often enables him to measure life as
the majority of men do, that is by a straight rule; but in some happy
moments when he yields to natural impulse he makes the straight crooked
and the crooked straight; and this gives rise to wit, which only
consists in looking at things obliquely and--setting them askew as it
were. You have only to talk to my hump-backed gardener Gibbus, or listen
to what he says. When he is sitting with the rest of our people in an
evening, they all laugh as soon as he opens his mouth.--And why? Because
his conformation makes him utter nothing but paradoxes.--You know what
they are?"

"Certainly."

"And you, Pul?"

"No, Father."

"You are too straight-nay, and so is your simple soul, to know what the
thing is! Well, listen then: It would be a paradox, for instance, if
I were to say to the Bishop as he marches past in procession: 'You are
godless out of sheer piety;' or if I were to say to Paula, by way of
excuse for all the flattery which I and your mother offered her just
now: 'Our incense was nauseous for very sweetness.'--These paradoxes,
when examined, are truths in a crooked form, and so they best suit the
deformed. Do you understand?"

"Certainly," said Paula.

"And you, Pul?"

"I am not quite sure. I should be better pleased to be simply told: 'We
