Christian youth, and tempt him into the path of sin.

This had closed the interview. Herse had found her husband and son
waiting for her at the door of Mary's house and had at once returned
with them to the ship. There an unpleasant surprise awaited them; they
had found no one on board but the Egyptian slave, who told them that
Dada had sent her on shore to procure her some sandals; on her return
the girl had vanished. The woman at the same time declared that she had
seen Agne and her brother leave the garden and make for the high-road.

So far as the Christian girl was concerned Herse declared there would
be no difficulty; but Dada, her own niece, had always clung to them
faithfully, and though Alexandria was full of sorcerers and Magians
they could hardly succeed in making away with a fullgrown, rational, and
healthy girl. In her inexperience she had, no doubt, gone at the bidding
of some perfidious wretch, and the Egyptian witch, the brown slave had,
of course, had a finger in the trick. She would accuse no one, but she
knew some people who would be only too glad if Dada and that baby-faced
young Christian got into trouble and disgrace together. She delivered
herself of this long story with tears of rage and regret, angrily
refusing to admit any qualifying parentheses from her husband, to whose
natural delicacy her rough and vociferous complaints were offensive in
the presence of the high-bred ladies of the house. Old Damia, however,
had listened attentively to her indignant torrent of words, and had only
shrugged her shoulders with a scornful smile at the implied accusation
of herself.

Porphyrius, to whom the whole business was simply revolting, questioned
Herse closely and when the facts were clearly established, and it also
was plainly proved that Agne had escaped from the garden, he desired
the slave-woman to tell her story of all that had occurred during the
absence of Karnis, promising her half a dozen stripes from the cane on
the soles of her feet for every false word she might utter. The threat
was enough to raise a howl from the Egyptian; but this Porphyries soon
put a stop to, and Sachepris, with perfect veracity, told her tale of
all that had happened till Herse's return to the vessel. The beginning
of the narrative was of no special interest, but when she was pressed to
go faster to the point she went on to say:

"And then--then my lord Constantine came to us on the ship, and the
pretty mistress laughed with him and asked him to take off his helmet,
because the pretty mistress wanted to see the cut, the great sword-cut
above his eyes, and my lord Constantine took it off."

"It is a lie!" exclaimed Gorgo.

"No, no; it is true. Sachepris does not want her feet flayed, mistress,"
cried the slave. "Ask my lord Constantine himself."

"Yes, I went on board," said Constantine. "Just as I was crossing the
ship-yard a young girl dropped her fan into the lake. I fished it out at
her request, and carried it back to her."

"Yes, that was it," cried Sachepris. "And the pretty mistress laughed
with my lord Constantine--is it not true?--and she took his helmet out
of his hand and weighed it in hers..."

"And you could stop on your way here to trifle with that child?" cried
Gorgo wrathfully. "Pah! what men will do!"

These words portended rage and intense disgust to Constantine. "Gorgo!"
he cried with a reproachful accent, but she could not control her
indignation and went on more vehemently than ever:

"You stopped--with that little hussy--on your way to me--stopped to
trifle and flirt with her! Shame! Yes, I say shame! Men are thought
lucky in being light-hearted, but, for my part, may the gods preserve me
from such luck! Trifling, whispering, caressing--a tender squeeze of the
hand--solemnly, passionately earnest!--And what next? Who dares warrant
that it will not all be repeated before the shadows are an ell long on
the shore!"

She laughed, a sharp, bitter laugh; but it was a short one. She ceased
and turned pale, for her lover's face had undergone a change that
terrified her. The scar on his forehead was purple, and his voice was
strange, harsh and hoarse as he leaned forward to bring his face on a
level with hers, and said:

"Even if you had seen me with your own eyes you ought not to have
believed them! And if you dare to say that you do believe it, I can say
Shame! as well as you. My life may be at stake but I say: Shame!"

As he spoke he clutched the back of a chair with convulsive fury and
stood facing the girl like an avenging god of war, his eyes flashing to
meet hers. This was too much for old Damia; she could contain herself no
longer, and striking her crutch on the floor she broke out:

"What next shall we hear! You threaten and storm at the daughter of
this house as if she were a soldier in your camp! Listen to me, my
fine gentleman, and mind what I say: In the house of a free Alexandrian
citizen no one has any right to give his orders--be he Caesar, Consul or
Comes; he has only to observe the laws of good manners." Then turning to
Gorgo she shook her head with pathetic emphasis; "This, my love, is the
consequence of too much familiar condescension. Come, an end of this!
Greeting and parting often go hand in hand."

The prefect turned on his heel and went towards the steps leading to the
garden; but Gorgo flew after him and seized his hand, calling out to the
old woman:

"No, no, grandmother; he is in the right, I am certain he is in the
right. Stop, Constantine--wait, stay, and forgive my folly! If you love
me, mother, say no more--he will explain it all presently."

The soldier heaved a sigh of relief and assented in silence, while the
slave went on with her story: "And when my lord Constantine was gone, my
lord Demetrius came and he--but what should poor Sachepris say--ask my
lord Demetrius himself to tell you."

"That is soon done," replied Demetrius, who had failed to understand
a great deal of all that had been going forward. "My brother Marcus
is over head and ears in love with the little puss--she is a pretty
creature--and to save that simple soul from mischief I thought I would
take the business on my own shoulders which are broader and stronger
than his. I went boldly to work and offered the girl--more shame for me,
I must say--the treasures of Midas; however, offering is one thing and
accepting is another, and the child snapped me up and sent me to the
right about--by Castor and Pollux! packed me off with my tail between my
legs! My only comfort was that Constantine had just quitted the pretty
little hussy. By the side of the god of war, thought I, a country Pan
makes but a poor figure; but this Ares was dismissed by Venus, and so,
if only to keep up my self-respect, I was forced to conclude that the
girl, with all her pertness, was of a better sort than we had supposed.
My presents, which would have tempted any other girl in Alexandria to
follow a cripple to Hades, she took as an insult; she positively cried
with indignation, and I really respect pretty little Dada!"

"She is my very own sister's child," Herse threw in, honestly angered
by the cheap estimation in which every one seemed to hold her adopted
child. "My own sister's," she insisted, with an emphasis which seemed to
imply that she had a whole family of half-sisters. "Though we now earn
our bread as singers, we have seen better days; and in these hard
times Croesus to-day may be Irus to-morrow. As for us, Karnis did not
dissipate his money in riotous living. It was foolish perhaps but it
was splendid--I believe we should do the same again; he spent all his
inheritance in trying to reinstate Art. However, what is the use of
looking after money when it is gone! If you can win it, or keep it you
will be held of some account, but if you are poor the dogs will snap at
you!--The girl, Dada--we have taken as much care of her as if she were
our own, and divided our last mouthful with her before now. Karnis used
to tease her about training her voice--and now, when she could really do
something to satisfy even good judges--now, when she might have helped
us to earn a living-now..."

The good woman broke down and burst into tears, while Karnis tried to
soothe and comfort her.

"We shall get on without them somehow," he said. "'Nil desperandum' says
Horace the Roman. And after all they are not lizards that can hide in
the cracks of the walls; I know every corner of Alexandria and I will go
and hunt them up at once."

"And I will help you, my friend," said Demetrius, "We will go to the
Hippodrome--the gentry you will meet with there are capital blood-hounds
after such game as the daughter of your 'own sister,' my good woman. As
to the black-haired Christian girl--I have seen her many a time on board
ship..."

"Oh! she will take refuge with some fellow-Christians," remarked
Porphyrius. "Olympius told me all about her. I know plenty of the same
sort in the Church. They fling away life and happiness as if they were
apple-peelings to snatch at something which they believe to constitute
salvation. It is folly, madness! pure unmitigated madness! To have sung
in the temple of the she-devil Isis with Gorgo and the other worshippers
would have cost her her seat in Paradise. That, as I believe, is the
cause of her flight."

"That and nothing else!" cried Karnis. "How vexed the noble Olympius
will be. Indeed, Apollo be my witness! I have not been so disturbed
about anything for many a day. Do you happen to recollect," he went on,
turning to Demetrius, "our conversation on board ship about a dirge for
Pytho? Well, we had transposed the lament of Isis into the Lydian mode,
and when this young lady's wonderful voice gave it out, in harmony with
Agne's and with Orpheus' flute, it was quite exquisite! My old heart
floated on wings as I listened! And only the day after to-morrow the
whole crowd of worshippers in the temple of Isis were to enjoy that
treat!--It would have roused them to unheard-of enthusiasm. Yesterday
the girl was in it, heart and soul; nay, only this morning she and the
noble Gorgo sang it through from beginning to end. One more rehearsal
to-morrow, and then the two voices would have given such a performance
as perhaps was never before heard within the temple walls."

Constantine had listened to this rhapsody with growing agitation; he was
standing close to Gorgo, and while the rest of the party held anxious
consultation as to what could be done to follow up and capture the
fugitives, he asked Gorgo in a low voice, but with gloomy looks:

"You intended to sing in the temple of Isis? Before the crowd, and with
a girl of this stamp?"

"Yes," she said firmly.

"And you knew yesterday that I had come home?" She nodded.

"And yet, this morning even, while you were actually expecting me, you
could practise the hymn with such a creature?"

"Agne is not such another as the girl who played tricks with your
helmet," replied Gorgo, and the black arches of her eyebrows knit into
something very like a scowl. "I told you just now that I was not yours
today, nor to-morrow. We still serve different gods."

"Indeed we do!" he exclaimed, so vehemently that the others looked
round, and old Damia again began to fidget in her chair.

Then with a strong effort he recovered himself and, after standing for
some minutes gazing in silence at the ground, he said in a low tone:

"I have borne enough for to-day. Gorgo, pause, reflect. God preserve me
from despair!"

He bowed, hastily explained that his duties called him away, and left
the spot.




CHAPTER XIII.

The amateurs of horse-racing who assembled in the Hippodrome could
afford no clue to Dada's hiding-place, because she had not, in fact,
run away with any gay young gallant. Within a few minutes of her sending
Sachepris to fetch her a pair of shoes, Medius had hailed her from the
shore; he wanted to speak with Karnis, and having come on an ass it was
not in vain that the incensed damsel entreated him to take her with him.
He had in fact only come to try to persuade Karnis and his wife to spare
Dada for a few performances, such as he had described, in the house of
Posidonius. His hopes of success had been but slender; and now the whole
thing had settled itself, and Dada's wish that her people should not,
for a while, know where to find her was most opportune for his plans.

In the days when Karnis was the manager of the theatre at Tauromenium
Medius had led the chorus, and had received much kindness at the hands
of the girl's uncle. All this, he thought, he could now repay, for
certainly his old patron was poor enough, and he intended honestly to
share with his former benefactor the profits he expected to realize
with so fair a prodigy as Dada. No harm could come to the girl,
and gold--said he to himself--glitters as brightly and is just as
serviceable, even when it has been earned for us against our will.

Medius, being a cautious man, made the girl bring her new dress away
with her, and the girdle and jewels belonging to it, and his neat hands
packed everything into the smallest compass. He filled up the basket
which he took for the purpose with sweetmeats, oranges and pomegranates
"for the children at home," and easily consoled Dada for the loss of her
shoes. He would lead the ass and she should ride. She covered her face
with a veil, and her little feet could be hidden under her dress. When
they reached his house he would at once have "a sweet little pair of
sandals" made for her by the shoemaker who worked for the wife of the
Comes and the daughters of the Alabarch--[The chief of the Jewish
colony in Alexandria.]--These preparations and the start only took a few
minutes; and their rapid search and broken conversation caused so much
absurd confusion that Dada had quite recovered her spirits and laughed
merrily as she tripped bare-foot across the strand. She sprang gaily
on to the little donkey and as they made their way along the road, the
basket containing her small wardrobe placed in front of her on the ass's
shoulders, she remarked that she should be mistaken for the young
wife of a shabby old husband, returning from market with a load of
provisions.

She was delighted to think of what Herse's face would be when, on her
return home, she should discover that the prisoner could make her escape
even without shoes.

"Let her have a good hunt for me!" she cried quite enchanted. "Why
should I always be supposed to be ready for folly and wickedness! But
one thing I warn you: If I am not comfortable and happy with you, and
if I do not like the parts you want me to fill, we part as quickly as
we have come together.--Why are you taking me through all these dirty
alleys? I want to ride through the main streets and see what is going
on." But Medius would not agree to this, for in the great arteries
of the town there were excitement and tumult, and they might think
themselves fortunate if they reached his house unmolested.

He lived in a little square, between the Greek quarter and Rhacotis
where the Egyptians lived, and his house, which was exactly opposite the
church of St. Marcus, accommodated Medius himself, his wife, his widowed
daughter and her five children, besides being crammed from top to bottom
with all sorts of strange properties, standing or hanging in every
available space. Dada's curiosity had no rest, and by the time she had
spent a few hours in the house her host's pretty little grandchildren
were clinging to her with devoted affection.

Agne had not been so fortunate as to find a refuge so easily. With no
escort, unveiled, and left entirely to her own guidance, leading the
little boy, she hurried forward, not knowing whither. All she thought
was to get away--far away from these men who were trying to imperil her
immortal soul.

She knew that Karnis had actually bought her, and that she was,
therefore, his property and chattel. Even Christian doctrine taught
her that the slave must obey his master; but she could not feel like a
slave, and if indeed she were one her owner might destroy and kill her
body, but not her soul. The law, however, was on the side of Karnis, and
it allowed him to pursue her and cast her into prison. This idea
haunted her, and for fear of being caught she avoided all the chief
thoroughfares and kept close to the houses as she stole through the side
streets and alleys. Once, in Antioch, she had seen a runaway slave, who,
having succeeded in reaching a statue of the Emperor and laying his hand
on it, was by that act safe from his pursuers. There must surely be
such a statue somewhere in Alexandria--but where? A woman, of whom she
enquired, directed her down a wider street that would take her into the
Canopic Way. If she crossed that and went down the first turning to the
left she would reach a large open square in the Bruchium, and there, in
front of the Prefect's residence and by the side of the Bishop's house,
stood the new statue of Theodosius.

This information, and the mention of the Bishop, gave a new course to
her proceedings. It was wrong to defy and desert her master, but to obey
him would be deadly sin. Which must she choose and which avoid? Only one
person could advise in such a case--only one could relieve her mind of
its difficulties and terrors: The Shepherd of souls in the city--the
Bishop himself. She too was a lamb of his flock; to him and to no one
else could she turn.

This thought fell on her heart like a ray of light dispersing the clouds
of uncertainty and alarm. With a deep breath of relief she took the
child in her arms and told him--for he was whimpering to know where she
was taking him, and why he might not go back to Dada--that they were
going to see a good, kind man who would tell them the way home to their
father and mother. Papias, however, still wailed to go to Dada and not
to the man.

Half insisting and half coaxing him with promises, she dragged him along
as far as the main street. This was full of an excited throng; soldiers
on foot and on horseback were doing what they could to keep the peace,
and the bustle amused the little boy's curiosity so that he soon forgot
his homesickness. When, at length, Ague found the street that led to
the Prefect's house she was fairly carried along by the surging, rushing
mob. To turn was quite impossible; the utmost she could do was to keep
her wits about her, and concentrate her strength so as not to be parted
from the child. Pushed, pulled, squeezed, scolded, and abused by other
women for her folly in bringing a child out into such a crowd, she at
last found herself in the great square. A hideous hubbub of coarse, loud
voices pierced her unaccustomed ears; she could have sunk on the earth
and cried; but she kept up her courage and collected all her energies,
for she saw in the distance a large gilt cross over a lofty doorway.
It was like a greeting and welcome home. Under its protection she would
certainly, find rest, consolation and safety.

But how was she to reach it? The space before her was packed with men
as a quiver is packed with arrows; there was not room for a pin
between. The only chance of getting forward was by forcing her way, and
nine-tenths of the crowd were men--angry and storming men, whose wild
and strange demeanor filled her with terror and disgust. Most of
them were monks who had flocked in at the Bishop's appeal from the
monasteries of the desert, or from the Lauras and hermitages of Kolzum
by the Red Sea, or even from Tabenna in Upper Egypt, and whose hoarse
voices rent the air with vehement cries of: "Down with the idols! Down
with Serapis! Death to the heathen!"

This army of the Saviour whose very essence was gentleness and whose
spirit was love, seemed indeed to have deserted from his standard of
light and grace to the blood-stained banner of murderous hatred. Their
matted locks and beards fringed savage faces with glowing eyes; their
haggard or paunchy nakedness was scarcely covered by undressed hides of
sheep and goats; their parched skins were scarred and striped by the use
of the scourges that hung at their girdles. One--a "crown bearer"--had
a face streaming with blood, from the crown of thorns which he had
vowed to wear day and night in memory and imitation of the Redeemer's
sufferings, and which on this great occasion he pressed hard into the
flesh with ostentatious martyrdom. One, who, in his monastery, had
earned the name of the "oil-jar," supported himself on his neighbors'
arms, for his emaciated legs could hardly carry his dropsical carcass
which, for the last ten years, he had fed exclusively on gourds, snails,
locusts and Nile water. Another was chained inseparably to a comrade,
and the couple dwelt together in a cave in the limestone hills near
Lycopolis. These two had vowed never to let each other sleep, that so
their time for repentance might be doubled, and their bliss in the next
world enhanced in proportion to their mortifications in this.

One and all, they were allies in a great fight, and the same hopes,
ideas, and wishes fired them all. The Abominable Thing--which imperilled
hundreds of thousands of souls, which invited Satan to assert his
dominion in this world--should fall this day and be annihilated forever!
To them the whole heathen world was the "great whore;" and though the
gems she wore were beautiful to see and rejoiced the mind and heart of
fools, they must be snatched from her painted brow; they would scourge
her from off the face of the redeemed earth and destroy the seducer of
souls forever. "Down with the idols! Down with Serapis! Down with the
heathen!" Their shouts thundered and bellowed all about Agne; but, just
as the uproar and crush were at the worst, a tall and majestic figure
appeared on a balcony above the cross and extended his hand in calm
and dignified benediction towards the seething mass of humanity. As he
