were too meek-spirited to be troublesome; but during Clorinda's infancy
Mistress Margery Wimpole watched her rapid growth with fear and qualms.
She dare not reprove the servants who were ruining her by their
treatment, and whose manners were forming her own.  Sir Jeoffry's
servants were no more moral than their master, and being brought up as
she was among them, their young mistress became strangely familiar with
many sights and sounds it is not the fortune of most young misses of
breeding to see and hear.  The cooks and kitchen-wenches were flighty
with the grooms and men-servants, and little Mistress Clorinda, having a
passion for horses and dogs, spent many an hour in the stables with the
women who, for reasons of their own, were pleased enough to take her
there as an excuse for seeking amusement for themselves.  She played in
the kennels and among the horses' heels, and learned to use oaths as
roundly as any Giles or Tom whose work was to wield the curry comb.  It
was indeed a curious thing to hear her red baby mouth pour forth curses
and unseemly words as she would at any one who crossed her.  Her temper
and hot-headedness carried all before them, and the grooms and stable-
boys found great sport in the language my young lady used in her innocent
furies.  But balk her in a whim, and she would pour forth the eloquence
of a fish-wife or a lady of easy virtue in a pot-house quarrel.  There
was no human creature near her who had mind or heart enough to see the
awfulness of her condition, or to strive to teach her to check her
passions; and in the midst of these perilous surroundings the little
virago grew handsomer and of finer carriage every hour, as if on the rank
diet that fed her she throve and flourished.

There came a day at last when she had reached six years old, when by a
trick of chance a turn was given to the wheel of her fate.

She had not reached three when a groom first set her on a horse's back
and led her about the stable-yard, and she had so delighted in her
exalted position, and had so shouted for pleasure and clutched her
steed's rein and clucked at him, that her audience had looked on with
roars of laughter.  From that time she would be put up every day, and as
time went on showed such unchildish courage and spirit that she furnished
to her servant companions a new pastime.  Soon she would not be held on,
but riding astride like a boy, would sit up as straight as a man and
swear at her horse, beating him with her heels and little fists if his
pace did not suit her.  She knew no fear, and would have used a whip so
readily that the men did not dare to trust her with one, and knew they
must not mount her on a steed too mettlesome.  By the time she passed her
sixth birthday she could ride as well as a grown man, and was as familiar
with her father's horses as he himself, though he knew nothing of the
matter, it being always contrived that she should be out of sight when he
visited his hunters.

It so chanced that the horse he rode the oftenest was her favourite, and
many were the tempests of rage she fell into when she went to the stable
to play with the animal and did not find him in his stall, because his
master had ordered him out.  At such times she would storm at the men in
the stable-yard and call them ill names for their impudence in letting
the beast go, which would cause them great merriment, as she knew nothing
of who the man was who had balked her, since she was, in truth, not so
much as conscious of her father's existence, never having seen or even
heard more of him than his name, which she in no manner connected with
herself.

"Could Sir Jeoffry himself but once see and hear her when she storms at
us and him, because he dares to ride his own beast," one of the older men
said once, in the midst of their laughter, "I swear he would burst forth
laughing and be taken with her impudent spirit, her temper is so like his
own.  She is his own flesh and blood, and as full of hell-fire as he."

Upon this morning which proved eventful to her, she had gone to the
stables, as was her daily custom, and going into the stall where the big
black horse was wont to stand, she found it empty.  Her spirit rose hot
within her in the moment.  She clenched her fists, and began to stamp and
swear in such a manner as it would be scarce fitting to record.

"Where is he now?" she cried.  "He is my own horse, and shall not be
ridden.  Who is the man who takes him?  Who?  Who?"

"'Tis a fellow who hath no manners," said the man she stormed at,
grinning and thrusting his tongue in his cheek.  "He says 'tis his beast,
and not yours, and he will have him when he chooses."

"'Tis not his--'tis mine!" shrieked Miss, her little face inflamed with
passion.  "I will kill him!  'Tis my horse.  He _shall_ be mine!"

For a while the men tormented her, to hear her rave and see her passion,
for, in truth, the greater tempest she was in, the better she was worth
beholding, having a colour so rich, and eyes so great and black and
flaming.  At such times there was naught of the feminine in her, and
indeed always she looked more like a handsome boy than a girl, her growth
being for her age extraordinary.  At length a lad who was a helper said
to mock her--

"The man hath him at the door before the great steps now.  I saw him
stand there waiting but a moment ago.  The man hath gone in the house."

She turned and ran to find him.  The front part of the house she barely
knew the outside of, as she was kept safely in the west wing and below
stairs, and when taken out for the air was always led privately by a side
way--never passing through the great hall, where her father might chance
to encounter her.

She knew best this side-entrance, and made her way to it, meaning to
search until she found the front.  She got into the house, and her spirit
being roused, marched boldly through corridors and into rooms she had
never seen before, and being so mere a child, notwithstanding her strange
wilfulness and daring, the novelty of the things she saw so far
distracted her mind from the cause of her anger that she stopped more
than once to stare up at a portrait on a wall, or to take in her hand
something she was curious concerning.

When she at last reached the entrance-hall, coming into it through a door
she pushed open, using all her childish strength, she stood in the midst
of it and gazed about her with a new curiosity and pleasure.  It was a
fine place, with antlers, and arms, and foxes' brushes hung upon the
walls, and with carved panels of black oak, and oaken floor and
furnishings.  All in it was disorderly and showed rough usage; but once
it had been a notable feature of the house, and well worth better care
than had been bestowed upon it.  She discovered on the walls many
trophies that attracted her, but these she could not reach, and could
only gaze and wonder at; but on an old oaken settle she found some things
she could lay hands on, and forthwith seized and sat down upon the floor
to play with them.  One of them was a hunting-crop, which she brandished
grandly, until she was more taken with a powder-flask which it so
happened her father, Sir Jeoffry, had lain down but a few minutes before,
in passing through.  He was going forth coursing, and had stepped into
the dining-hall to toss off a bumper of brandy.

When he had helped himself from the buffet, and came back in haste, the
first thing he clapped eyes on was his offspring pouring forth the powder
from his flask upon the oaken floor.  He had never seen her since that
first occasion after the unfortunate incident of her birth, and beholding
a child wasting his good powder at the moment he most wanted it and had
no time to spare, and also not having had it recalled to his mind for
years that he was a parent, except when he found himself forced
reluctantly to pay for some small need, he beheld in the young offender
only some impudent servant's brat, who had strayed into his domain and
applied itself at once to mischief.

He sprang upon her, and seizing her by the arm, whirled her to her feet
with no little violence, snatching the powder-flask from her, and dealing
her a sound box on the ear.

"Blood and damnation on thee, thou impudent little baggage!" he shouted.
"I'll break thy neck for thee, little scurvy beast;" and pulled the bell
as he were like to break the wire.

But he had reckoned falsely on what he dealt with.  Miss uttered a shriek
of rage which rang through the roof like a clarion.  She snatched the
crop from the floor, rushed at him, and fell upon him like a thousand
little devils, beating his big legs with all the strength of her passion,
and pouring forth oaths such as would have done credit to Doll Lightfoot
herself.

"Damn _thee_!--damn _thee_!"--she roared and screamed, flogging him.
"I'll tear thy eyes out!  I'll cut thy liver from thee!  Damn thy soul to
hell!"

And this choice volley was with such spirit and fury poured forth, that
Sir Jeoffry let his hand drop from the bell, fell into a great burst of
laughter, and stood thus roaring while she beat him and shrieked and
stormed.

The servants, hearing the jangled bell, attracted by the tumult, and of a
sudden missing Mistress Clorinda, ran in consternation to the hall, and
there beheld this truly pretty sight--Miss beating her father's legs, and
tearing at him tooth and nail, while he stood shouting with laughter as
if he would split his sides.

"Who is the little cockatrice?" he cried, the tears streaming down his
florid cheeks.  "Who is the young she-devil?  Ods bodikins, who is she?"

For a second or so the servants stared at each other aghast, not knowing
what to say, or venturing to utter a word; and then the nurse, who had
come up panting, dared to gasp forth the truth.

"'Tis Mistress Clorinda, Sir Jeoffry," she stammered--"my lady's last
infant--the one of whom she died in childbed."

His big laugh broke in two, as one might say.  He looked down at the
young fury and stared.  She was out of breath with beating him, and had
ceased and fallen back apace, and was staring up at him also, breathing
defiance and hatred.  Her big black eyes were flames, her head was thrown
up and back, her cheeks were blood scarlet, and her great crop of crow-
black hair stood out about her beauteous, wicked little virago face, as
if it might change into Medusa's snakes.

"Damn thee!" she shrieked at him again.  "I'll kill thee, devil!"

Sir Jeoffry broke into his big laugh afresh.

"Clorinda do they call thee, wench?" he said.  "Jeoffry thou shouldst
have been but for thy mother's folly.  A fiercer little devil for thy
size I never saw--nor a handsomer one."

And he seized her from where she stood, and held her at his big arms'
length, gazing at her uncanny beauty with looks that took her in from
head to foot.




CHAPTER III--Wherein Sir Jeoffry's boon companions drink a toast


Her beauty of face, her fine body, her strength of limb, and great growth
for her age, would have pleased him if she had possessed no other
attraction, but the daring of her fury and her stable-boy breeding so
amused him and suited his roystering tastes that he took to her as the
finest plaything in the world.

He set her on the floor, forgetting his coursing, and would have made
friends with her, but at first she would have none of him, and scowled at
him in spite of all he did.  The brandy by this time had mounted to his
head and put him in the mood for frolic, liquor oftenest making him
gamesome.  He felt as if he were playing with a young dog or marking the
spirit of a little fighting cock.  He ordered the servants back to their
kitchen, who stole away, the women amazed, and the men concealing grins
which burst forth into guffaws of laughter when they came into their hall
below.

"'Tis as we said," they chuckled.  "He had but to see her beauty and find
her a bigger devil than he, and 'twas done.  The mettle of her--damning
and flogging him!  Never was there a finer sight!  She feared him no more
than if he had been a spaniel--and he roaring and laughing till he was
like to burst."

"Dost know who I am?" Sir Jeoffry was asking the child, grinning himself
as he stood before her where she sat on the oaken settle on which he had
lifted her.

"No," quoth little Mistress, her black brows drawn down, her handsome
owl's eyes verily seeming to look him through and through in search of
somewhat; for, in sooth, her rage abating before his jovial humour, the
big burly laugher attracted her attention, though she was not disposed to
show him that she leaned towards any favour or yielding.

"I am thy Dad," he said.  "'Twas thy Dad thou gavest such a trouncing.
And thou hast an arm, too.  Let's cast an eye on it."

He took her wrist and pushed up her sleeve, but she dragged back.

"Will not be mauled," she cried.  "Get away from me!"

He shouted with laughter again.  He had seen that the little arm was as
white and hard as marble, and had such muscles as a great boy might have
been a braggart about.

"By Gad!" he said, elated.  "What a wench of six years old.  Wilt have my
crop and trounce thy Dad again!"

He picked up the crop from the place where she had thrown it, and
forthwith gave it in her hand.  She took it, but was no more in the
humour to beat him, and as she looked still frowning from him to the
whip, the latter brought back to her mind the horse she had set out in
search of.

"Where is my horse?" she said, and 'twas in the tone of an imperial
demand.  "Where is he?"

"Thy horse!" he echoed.  "Which is thy horse then?"

"Rake is my horse," she answered--"the big black one.  The man took him
again;" and she ripped out a few more oaths and unchaste expressions,
threatening what she would do for the man in question; the which
delighted him more than ever.  "Rake is my horse," she ended.  "None else
shall ride him."

"None else?" cried he.  "Thou canst not ride him, baggage!"

She looked at him with scornful majesty.

"Where is he?" she demanded.  And the next instant hearing the beast's
restless feet grinding into the gravel outside as he fretted at having
been kept waiting so long, she remembered what the stable-boy had said of
having seen her favourite standing before the door, and struggling and
dropping from the settle, she ran to look out; whereupon having done so,
she shouted in triumph.

"He is here!" she said.  "I see him;" and went pell-mell down the stone
steps to his side.

Sir Jeoffry followed her in haste.  'Twould not have been to his humour
now to have her brains kicked out.

"Hey!" he called, as he hurried.  "Keep away from his heels, thou little
devil."

But she had run to the big beast's head with another shout, and caught
him round his foreleg, laughing, and Rake bent his head down and nosed
her in a fumbling caress, on which, the bridle coming within her reach,
she seized it and held his head that she might pat him, to which
familiarity the beast was plainly well accustomed.

"He is my horse," quoth she grandly when her father reached her.  "He
will not let Giles play so."

Sir Jeoffry gazed and swelled with pleasure in her.

"Would have said 'twas a lie if I had not seen it," he said to himself.
"'Tis no girl this, I swear.  I thought 'twas my horse," he said to her,
"but 'tis plain enough he is thine."

"Put me up!" said his new-found offspring.

"Hast rid him before?" Sir Jeoffry asked, with some lingering misgiving.
"Tell thy Dad if thou hast rid him."

She gave him a look askance under her long fringed lids--a surly yet half-
slyly relenting look, because she wanted to get her way of him, and had
the cunning wit and shrewdness of a child witch.

"Ay!" quoth she.  "Put me up--Dad!"

He was not a man of quick mind, his brain having been too many years
bemuddled with drink, but he had a rough instinct which showed him all
the wondrous shrewdness of her casting that last word at him to wheedle
him, even though she looked sullen in the saying it.  It made him roar
again for very exultation.

"Put me up, Dad!" he cried.  "That will I--and see what thou wilt do."

He lifted her, she springing as he set his hands beneath her arms, and
flinging her legs over astride across the saddle when she reached it.  She
was all fire and excitement, and caught the reins like an old huntsman,
and with such a grasp as was amazing.  She sat up with a straight, strong
back, her whole face glowing and sparkling with exultant joy.  Rake
seemed to answer to her excited little laugh almost as much as to her
hand.  It seemed to wake his spirit and put him in good-humour.  He
started off with her down the avenue at a light, spirited trot, while
she, clinging with her little legs and sitting firm and fearless, made
him change into canter and gallop, having actually learned all his paces
like a lesson, and knowing his mouth as did his groom, who was her
familiar and slave.  Had she been of the build ordinary with children of
her age, she could not have stayed upon his back; but she sat him like a
child jockey, and Sir Jeoffry, watching and following her, clapped his
hands boisterously and hallooed for joy.

"Lord, Lord!" he said.  "There's not a man in the shire has such another
little devil--and Rake, 'her horse,'" grinning--"and she to ride him so.
I love thee, wench--hang me if I do not!"

She made him play with her and with Rake for a good hour, and then took
him back to the stables, and there ordered him about finely among the
dogs and horses, perceiving that somehow this great man she had got hold
of was a creature who was in power and could be made use of.

When they returned to the house, he had her to eat her mid-day meal with
him, when she called for ale, and drank it, and did good trencher duty,
making him the while roar with laughter at her impudent child-talk.

"Never have I so split my sides since I was twenty," he said.  "It makes
me young again to roar so.  She shall not leave my sight, since by chance
I have found her.  'Tis too good a joke to lose, when times are dull, as
they get to be as a man's years go on."

He sent for her woman and laid strange new commands on her.

"Where hath she hitherto been kept?" he asked.

"In the west wing, where are the nurseries, and where Mistress Wimpole
abides with Mistress Barbara and Mistress Anne," the woman answered, with
a frightened curtsey.

"Henceforth she shall live in this part of the house where I do," he
said.  "Make ready the chambers that were my lady's, and prepare to stay
there with her."

From that hour the child's fate was sealed.  He made himself her
playfellow, and romped with and indulged her until she became fonder of
him than of any groom or stable-boy she had been companions with before.
But, indeed, she had never been given to bestowing much affection on
those around her, seeming to feel herself too high a personage to show
softness.  The ones she showed most favour to were those who served her
best; and even to them it was always _favour_ she showed, not tenderness.
Certain dogs and horses she was fond of, Rake coming nearest to her
heart, and the place her father won in her affections was somewhat like
to Rake's.  She made him her servant and tyrannised over him, but at the
same time followed and imitated him as if she had been a young spaniel he
was training.  The life the child led, it would have broken a motherly
woman's heart to hear about; but there was no good woman near her, her
mother's relatives, and even Sir Jeoffry's own, having cut themselves off
early from them--Wildairs Hall and its master being no great credit to
those having the misfortune to be connected with them.  The neighbouring
gentry had gradually ceased to visit the family some time before her
ladyship's death, and since then the only guests who frequented the place
were a circle of hunting, drinking, and guzzling boon companions of Sir
Jeoffry's own, who joined him in all his carousals and debaucheries.

To these he announced his discovery of his daughter with tumultuous
delight.  He told them, amid storms of laughter, of his first encounter
with her; of her flogging him with his own crop, and cursing him like a
trooper; of her claiming Rake as her own horse, and swearing at the man
who had dared to take him from the stable to ride; and of her sitting him
like an infant jockey, and seeming, by some strange power, to have
mastered him as no other had been able heretofore to do.  Then he had her
brought into the dining-room, where they sat over their bottles drinking
deep, and setting her on the table, he exhibited her to them, boasting of
her beauty, showing them her splendid arm and leg and thigh, measuring
her height, and exciting her to test the strength of the grip of her hand
and the power of her little fist.

"Saw you ever a wench like her?" he cried, as they all shouted with
laughter and made jokes not too polite, but such as were of the sole kind
they were given to.  "Has any man among you begot a boy as big and
handsome?  Hang me! if she would not knock down any lad of ten if she
were in a fury."

"We wild dogs are out of favour with the women," cried one of the best
pleased among them, a certain Lord Eldershawe, whose seat was a few miles
from Wildairs Hall--"women like nincompoops and chaplains.  Let us take
this one for our toast, and bring her up as girls should be brought up to
be companions for men.  I give you, Mistress Clorinda Wildairs--Mistress
Clorinda, the enslaver of six years old--bumpers, lads!--bumpers!"

And they set her in the very midst of the big table and drank her health,
standing, bursting into a jovial, ribald song; and the child, excited by
the noise and laughter, actually broke forth and joined them in a high,
strong treble, the song being one she was quite familiar with, having
heard it often enough in the stable to have learned the words pat.

* * * * *

Two weeks after his meeting with her, Sir Jeoffry was seized with the
whim to go up to London and set her forth with finery.  'Twas but rarely
he went up to town, having neither money to waste, nor finding great
attraction in the more civilised quarters of the world.  He brought her
back such clothes as for richness and odd, unsuitable fashion child never
wore before.  There were brocades that stood alone with splendour of
fabric, there was rich lace, fine linen, ribbands, farthingales,
swansdown tippets, and little slippers with high red heels.  He had a
wardrobe made for her such as the finest lady of fashion could scarcely
boast, and the tiny creature was decked out in it, and on great occasions
even strung with her dead mother's jewels.

Among these strange things, he had the fantastical notion to have made
for her several suits of boy's clothes: pink and blue satin coats, little
white, or amber, or blue satin breeches, ruffles of lace, and waistcoats
embroidered with colours and silver or gold.  There was also a small
scarlet-coated hunting costume and all the paraphernalia of the chase.  It
was Sir Jeoffry's finest joke to bid her woman dress her as a boy, and
then he would have her brought to the table where he and his fellows were
dining together, and she would toss off her little bumper with the best
of them, and rip out childish oaths, and sing them, to their delight,
songs she had learned from the stable-boys.  She cared more for dogs and
horses than for finery, and when she was not in the humour to be made a
puppet of, neither tirewoman nor devil could put her into her brocades;
but she liked the excitement of the dining-room, and, as time went on,
would be dressed in her flowered petticoats in a passion of eagerness to
go and show herself, and coquet in her lace and gewgaws with men old
enough to be her father, and loose enough to find her premature airs and
graces a fine joke indeed.  She ruled them all with her temper and her
shrewish will.  She would have her way in all things, or there should be
