probably be introduced more frequently in the future, recent experience
having demonstrated that they are in considerable measure earthquake
proof.

The city before the fire contained numerous handsome structures,
including the famous old Palace Hotel, built at a cost of $3,000,000 and
with accommodations for 1,200 guests; the nearly finished and splendid
Fairmount Hotel; the City Hall, with its lofty dome, on which $7,000,000
is said to have been spent, much of it, doubtless, political plunder;
a costly United States Mint and Post Office, an Academy of Science, and
many churches, colleges, libraries and other public edifices. The city
had 220 miles of paved streets, 180 miles of electric and 77 of cable
railway, 62 hotels, 16 theatres, 4 large libraries, 5 daily newspapers,
etc., together with 28 public parks.

Sitting, like Rome of old, on its seven hills, San Francisco has long
been noted for its beautiful site, clasped in, as it is, between the
Pacific Ocean and its own splendid bay, on a peninsula of some five
miles in width. Where this juts into the bay at its northernmost point
rises a great promontory known as Telegraph Hill, from whose height
homeless thousands have recently gazed on the smoke rising from their
ruined homes. In the early days of golden promise a watchman was
stationed on this hill to look out for coming ships entering the Golden
Gate from their long voyage around the Horn and signal the welcome news
to the town below. From this came its name.

Cliffs rise on either side of the Golden Gate, and on one is perched the
Cliff House, long a famous hostelry. This stands so low that in storms
the surf is flung over its lower porticos, though its force is broken
by the Seal Rocks. A chief attraction to this house was to see the seals
play on these rocks, their favorite place of resort. The Cliff House was
at first said to have been swept bodily by the earthquake into the sea,
but it proved to be very little injured, and stands erect in its old
picturesque location.

In the vicinity of Telegraph Hill are Russian and Nob Hills, the latter
getting its peculiar title from the fact that the wealthy "nobs," or
mining magnates, of bonanza days built their homes on its summit level.
Farther to the east are Mount Olympus and Strawberry Hill, and beyond
these the Twin Peaks, which really embrace three hills, the third being
named Bernal Heights. Farther to the south and east is Rincan Hill, the
last in the half moon crescent of hills, within which is a spread of
flat ground extending to the bay. Behind the hills on the Pacific side
stretches a vast sweep of sand, at some places level, but often gathered
into great round dunes. Part of this has been transformed into the
beautiful Golden Gate Park, a splendid expanse of green verdure which
has long been one of San Francisco's chief attractions.

Beneath the whole of San Francisco is a rock formation, but everywhere
on top of this extends the sand, the gift of the winds. This is of such
a character that a hole dug in the street anywhere, even if only to the
depth of a few feet, must be shored up with planking or it will fill as
fast as it is excavated, the sand running as dry as the contents of
an hour glass. When there is an earthquake--or a "temblor," to use the
Spanish name--it is the rock foundation that is disturbed, not the sand,
which, indeed, serves to lessen the effect of the earth tremor.


THE FOUNDATIONS OF THE CITY.


Leaving the region of the hills and descending from their
crescent-shaped expanse, we find a broad extent of low ground, sloping
gently toward the bay. On this low-lying flat was built all of San
Francisco's business houses, all its principal hotels and a large part
of its tenements and poorer dwellings. It was here that the earthquake
was felt most severely and that the fire started which laid waste the
city.

Rarely has a city been built on such doubtful foundations. The greater
part of the low ground was a bay in 1849, but it has since been filled
in by the drifting sands blown from the ocean side by the prevailing
west winds and by earth dumped into it. Much of this land was "made
ground." Forty-niners still alive say that when they first saw San
Francisco the waters of the bay came up to Montgomery Street. The Palace
Hotel was in Montgomery Street, and from there to the ferry docks--a
long walk for any man--the water had been driven back by a "filling-in"
process.

This is the district that especially suffered, that south of Market
and east of Montgomery Streets. Nearly all the large buildings in this
section are either built on piles driven into the sand and mud or were
raised upon wooden foundations. It is on such ground as this that the
costly Post Office building was erected, despite the protests of nearly
the entire community, who asserted that the ground was nothing but a
filled-in bog.

In none of the earthquakes that San Francisco has had was any serious
damage except to houses in this filled-in territory, and to houses built
along the line of some of the many streams which ran from the hills down
to the bay, and which were filled in as the town grew--for instance,
the Grand Opera House was built over the bed of St. Anne's Creek. A bog,
slough and marsh, known as the Pipeville Slough, was the ground on which
the City Hall was built, and which was originally a burying ground. Sand
from the western shore had blown over and drifted into the marsh and
hardened its surface.

When the final grading scheme of the city was adopted in 1853, and
work went on, the water front of the city was where Clay Street now is,
between Montgomery and Sansome Streets. The present level area of San
Francisco of about three thousand acres is an average of nine feet
above or below the natural surface of the ground and the changes made
necessitated the transfer of 21,000,000 cubic yards from hills to
hollows. Houses to the number of thousands were raised or lowered,
street floors became subcellars or third stories and the whole natural
face of the ground was altered.

Through this infirm material all the pipes of the water and sewer system
of San Francisco in its business districts and in most of the region
south of Market street were laid. When the earthquake came, the
filled-in ground shook like the jelly it is. The only firm and rigid
material in its millions of cubic yards of surface area and depth were
the iron pipes. Naturally they broke, as they would not bend, and San
Francisco's water system was therefore instantly disabled, with the
result that the fire became complete master of the situation and raged
uncontrolled for three days and nights.

Although the earthquake wrecked the business and residential portions
of the city alike, on the hills the land did not sink. All "made ground"
sank in consequence of the quaking, but on the high ground the upper
parts of the buildings were about the only portions of the structures
wrecked. Most of the damage on the hills was done by falling chimneys.
On Montgomery Street, half a block from the main office of the Western
Union Company, the middle of the street was cracked and blown up, but
during the shocks which struck the Western Union building only the
top stories were cracked. Similar phenomena were experienced in other
localities, and the bulk of the disaster, so far as the earthquake was
concerned, was confined to the low-lying region above described.


THE BANE OF THE EARTHQUAKE.


From the origin of San Francisco the earthquake has been its bane.
During the past fifty years fully 250 shocks have been recorded, while
all California has been subject to them. But frequency rather than
violence of shocks has been the characteristic of the seismic history of
the State, there having been few shocks that caused serious damage, and
none since 1872 that led to loss of life.

There was a violent shock in 1856, when the city was only a mining town
of small frame buildings. Several shanties were overthrown and a few
persons killed by falling walls and chimneys. There was a severe shock
also in 1865, in which many buildings were shattered. Next in violence
was the shock of 1872, which cracked the walls of some of the public
buildings and caused a panic. There was no great loss of life. In April,
1898, just before midnight, there was a lively shakeup which caused
the tall buildings to shake like the snapping of a whip and drove the
tourists out of the hotels into the streets in their nightclothes. Three
or four old houses fell, and the Benicia Navy Yard, which is on made
ground across the bay, was damaged to the extent of about $100,000. The
last severe shock was in January, 1900, when the St. Nicholas Hotel was
badly damaged.

These were the heaviest shocks. On the other hand, light shocks, as
above said, have been frequent. Probably the sensible quakes have
averaged three or four a year. These are usually tremblings lasting from
ten seconds to a minute and just heavy enough to wake light sleepers
or to shake dishes about on the shelves. Tourists and newcomers are
generally alarmed by these phenomena, but old Californians have
learned to take them philosophically. To one who is not afraid of them,
the sensation of one of these little tremblers is rather pleasant than
otherwise, and the inhabitants grew so accustomed to them as rarely to
let them disturb their equanimity.

After 1900 the forces beneath the earth seemed to fall asleep. As it
proved, they were only biding their time. The era was at hand when they
were to declare themselves in all their mighty power and fall upon the
devoted city with ruin in their grasp. But all this lay hidden in the
secret casket of time, and the city kept up to its record as one of the
liveliest and in many respects the most reckless and pleasure-loving
on the continent, its people squandering their money with thoughtless
improvidence and enjoying to the full all the good that life held out to
them.

On the 17th of April, 1906, the city was, as usual, gay, careless, busy,
its people attending to business or pleasure with their ordinary vim as
inclination led them, and not a soul dreaming of the horrors that lay in
wait. They were as heedless of coming peril and death as the inhabitants
of Sodom and Gomorrah before the rain of fire from heaven descended upon
their devoted heads. This is not to say that they were doomed by God to
destruction like these "cities of the plains." We should more wisely
say that the forces of ruin within the earth take no heed of persons or
places. They come and go as the conditions of nature demand, and if man
has built one of his cities across their destined track, its doom comes
from its situation, not from the moral state of its inhabitants.


THE GREAT DISASTER OF 1906.


That night the people went, with their wonted equanimity, to their beds,
rich and poor, sick and well alike. Did any of them dream of disaster in
the air? It may be so, for often, as the poet tells us, "Coming events
cast their shadows before." But, forewarned by dreams or not, doubtless
not a soul in the great city was prepared for the terrible event so
near at hand, when, at thirteen minutes past five o'clock on the dread
morning of the 18th, they felt their beds lifted beneath them as if by
a Titan hand, heard the crash of falling walls and ceilings, and saw
everything in their rooms tossed madly about, while through their
windows came the roar of an awful disaster from the city without.

It was a matter not of minutes, but of seconds, yet on all that coast,
long the prey of the earthquake, no shock like it had ever been felt,
no such sudden terror awakened, no such terrible loss occasioned as in
those few fearful seconds. Again and again the trembling of the earth
passed by, three quickly repeated shocks, and the work of the demon of
ruin was done. People woke with a start to find themselves flung from
their beds to the floor, many of them covered with the fragments of
broken ceilings, many lost among the ruins of falling floors and walls,
many pinned in agonizing suffering under the ruins of their houses,
which had been utterly wrecked in those fatal seconds. Many there were,
indeed, who had been flung to quick if not to instant death under their
ruined homes.

Those seconds of the reign of the elemental forces had turned the
gayest, most careless city on the continent into a wreck which no words
can fitly describe. Those able to move stumbled in wild panic across the
floors of their heaving houses, regardless of clothing, of treasures, of
everything but the mad instinct for safety, and rushed headlong into the
streets, to find that the earth itself had yielded to the energy of its
frightful interior forces and had in places been torn and rent like the
houses themselves. New terrors assailed the fugitives as fresh tremors
shook the solid ground, some of them strong enough to bring down
shattered walls and chimneys, and bring back much of the mad terror of
the first fearful quake. The heaviest of these came at eight o'clock.
While less forcible than that which had caused the work of destruction,
it added immensely to the panic and dread of the people and put many of
the wanderers to flight, some toward the ferry, the great mass in the
direction of the sand dunes and Golden Gate Park.

The spectacle of the entire population of a great city thus roused
suddenly from slumber by a fierce earthquake shock and sent flying into
the streets in utter panic, where not buried under falling walls or
tumbling debris, is one that can scarcely be pictured in words, and can
be given in any approach to exact realization only in the narratives of
those who passed through its horrors and experienced the sensations to
which it gave rise. Some of the more vivid of these personal accounts
will be presented later, but at present we must confine ourselves to a
general statement of the succession of events.

The earthquake proved but the beginning and much the least destructive
part of the disaster. In many of the buildings there were fires, banked
for the night, but ready to kindle the inflammable material hurled down
upon them by the shock. In others were live electric wires which the
shock brought in contact with woodwork. The terror-stricken fugitives
saw, here and there, in all directions around them, the alarming vision
of red flames curling upward and outward, in gleaming contrast to the
white light of dawn just showing in the eastern sky. Those lurid gleams
climbed upward in devouring haste, and before the sun had fairly risen
a dozen or more conflagrations were visible in all sections of the
business part of the city, and in places great buildings broke with
startling suddenness into flame, which shot hotly high into the air.

While the mass of the people were stunned by the awful suddenness of the
disaster and stood rooted to the ground or wandered helplessly about in
blank dismay, there were many alert and self-possessed among them who
roused themselves quickly from their dismay and put their energies
to useful work. Some of these gave themselves to the work of rescue,
seeking to save the injured from their perilous situation and draw
the bodies of the dead from the ruins under which they lay. Those base
wretches to whom plunder is always the first thought were as quickly
engaged in seeking for spoil in edifices laid open to their plundering
hands by the shock. Meanwhile the glare of the flames brought the
fire-fighters out in hot haste with their engines, and up from the
military station at the Presidio, on the Golden Gate side of the city,
came at double quick a force of soldiers, under the efficient command of
General Funston, of Cuban and Philippine fame. These trained troops were
at once put on guard over the city, with directions to keep the best
order possible, and with strict command to shoot all looters at sight.
Funston recognized at the start the necessity of keeping the lawless
element under control in such an exigency as that which he had to face.
Later in the day the First Regiment of California National Guards was
called out and put on duty, with similar orders.


RESCUERS AND FIRE-FIGHTERS.


The work of fighting the fire was the first and greatest duty to be
performed, but from the start it proved a very difficult, almost a
hopeless, task. With fierce fires burning at once in a dozen or more
separate places, the fire department of the city would have been
inadequate to cope with the demon of flame even under the best of
circumstances. As it was, they found themselves handicapped at the start
by a nearly total lack of water. The earthquake had disarranged and
broken the water mains and there was scarcely a drop of water to be had,
so that the engines proved next to useless. Water might be drawn from
the bay, but the centre of the conflagration was a mile or more away,
and this great body of water was rendered useless in the stringent
exigency.

The only hope that remained to the authorities was to endeavor to check
the progress of the flames by the use of dynamite, blowing up buildings
in the line of progress of the conflagration. This was put in practice
without loss of time, and soon the thunder-like roar of the explosions
began, blasts being heard every few minutes, each signifying that some
building had been blown to atoms. But over the gaps thus made the flames
leaped, and though the brave fellows worked with a desperation and
energy of the most heroic type, it seemed as if all their labors were
to be without avail, the terrible fire marching on as steadily as if a
colony of ants had sought to stay its devastating progress.


THE HORROR OF THE PEOPLE.


It was with grief and horror that the mass of the people gazed on this
steady march of the army of ruin. They were seemingly half dazed by the
magnitude of the disaster, strangely passive in the face of the ruin
that surrounded them, as if stunned by despair and not yet awakened to
a realization of the horrors of the situation. Among these was the
possibility of famine. No city at any time carries more than a few days'
supply of provisions, and with the wholesale districts and warehouse
regions invaded by the flames the shortage of food made itself apparent
from the start. Water was even more difficult to obtain, the supply
being nearly all cut off. Those who possessed supplies of food and
liquids of any kind in many cases took advantage of the opportunity to
advance their prices. Thus an Associated Press man was obliged to pay
twenty-five cents for a small glass of mineral water, the only kind of
drink that at first was to be had, while food went up at the same rate,
bakers frequently charging as much as a dollar for a loaf. As for the
expressmen and cabmen, their charges were often practically prohibitory,
as much as fifty dollars being asked for the conveyance of a passenger
to the ferry. Policemen were early stationed at some of the retail
shops, regulating the sale and the price of food, and permitting only
a small portion to be sold to each purchaser, so as to prevent a few
persons from exhausting the supply.

The fire, the swaying and tottering walls, the frequent dynamite
explosions, each followed by a crashing shower of stones and bricks,
rendered the streets very unsafe for pedestrians, and all day long
the flight of residents from the city went on, growing quickly to the
dimensions of a panic. The ferryboats were crowded with those who wished
to leave the city, and a constant stream of the homeless, carrying such
articles as they had rescued from their homes, was kept up all day
long, seeking the sand dunes, the parks and every place uninvaded by
the flames. Before night Golden Gate Park and the unbuilt districts
adjoining on the ocean side presented the appearance of a tented city,
shelter of many kinds being improvised from bedding and blankets, and
the people settling into such sparse comfort as these inadequate means
provided.

A strange feature of the disaster was a rush to the banks by people who
wished to get their money and flee from the seemingly doomed city. The
fire front was yet distant from these institutions, which were destined
to fall a prey to the flames, and all that morning lines of dishevelled
and half-frantic men stood before the banks on Montgomery and Sansome
Streets, braving in their thirst for money the smoke and falling embers
and beating in wild anxiety upon the doors. Their effort was vain; the
doors remained closed; finally the police drove these people away, and
the banks went on with the work of saving their valuables. As for the
people who wildly fled toward the ferries, in spite of the fact that
ten blocks of fire, as the day went on, stopped all egress in that
direction, it became necessary for them to be driven back by the police
and the troops, and they were finally forced to seek safety in the
sands. And thus, with incident manifold, went on that fatal Wednesday,
the first day of the dread disaster.


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE EARTHQUAKE.


It is important here to give the official record of the earthquake
shocks, as given by the scientists. Professor George Davidson, of the
University of California, says of them:

"The earthquake came from north to south, and the only description I am
able to give of its effect is that it seemed like a terrier shaking a
rat. I was in bed, but was awakened by the first shock. I began to count
the seconds as I went towards the table where my watch was, being able
through much practice closely to approximate the time in that manner.
The shock came at 5.12 o'clock. The first sixty seconds were the most
severe. From that time on it decreased gradually for about thirty
seconds. There was then the slightest perceptible lull. Then the shock
continued for sixty seconds longer, being slighter in degree in this
minute than in any part of the preceding minute and a half. There were
two slight shocks afterwards which I did not time. At 8.14 o'clock
I recorded a shock of five seconds' duration, and one at 4.15 of two
seconds. There were slight shocks which I did not record at 5.17 and at
5.27. At 6.50 P. M. there was a sharp shock of several seconds."

Professor A. O. Louschner, of the students' observatory of the
University of California, thus records his observations:

"The principal part of the earthquake came in two sections, the first
series of vibrations lasting about forty seconds. The vibrations
diminished gradually during the following ten seconds, and then occurred
with renewed vigor for about twenty-five seconds more. But even at
noon the disturbance had not subsided, as slight shocks are recorded
at frequent intervals on the seismograph. The motion was from
south-southeast to north-northwest.

"The remarkable feature of this earthquake, aside from its intensity,
was its rotary motion. As seen from the print, the sum total of all
displacements represents a very regular ellipse, and some of the
lines representing the earth's motion can be traced along the whole
circumference. The result of observation indicates that our heaviest
shocks are in the direction south-southeast to north-northwest. In that
respect the records of the three heaviest earthquakes agree entirely.
But they have several other features in common. One of these is
that while the displacements are very large the vibration period is
comparatively slow, amounting to about one second in the last two big
earthquakes."

If we seek to discover the actual damage done by the earthquake, the
fact stands out that the fire followed so close upon it that the traces
of its ravages were in many cases obliterated. So many buildings in the
territory of the severest shock fell a prey to the flames or to dynamite
that the actual work of the earth forces was made difficult and in
many places impossible to discover. This fact is likely to lead to
considerable dispute and delay when the question of insurance adjustment
comes up, many of the insurance companies confining their risk to fire
damage and claiming exemption from liability in the case of damage due
to earthquake.

Among the chief victims of the earth-shake was the costly and showy City
Hall, with its picturesque dome standing loftily above the structure.
This dome was left still erect, but only as a skeleton might stand, with
its flesh gone and its bare ribs exposed to the searching air. Its roof,
its smaller towers came tumbling down in frightful disarray, and the
once proud edifice is to-day a miserable wreck, fire having aided
earthquake in its ruin. The new Post Office, a handsome government
building, also suffered severely from the shock, its walls being badly
cracked and injury done by earthquake and fire that it is estimated will
need half a million dollars to repair.


FREAKS OF THE EARTHQUAKE.


One observer states that the earthquake appeared to be very irregular in
its course. He tells us that "there are gas reservoirs with frames all
twisted and big factories thrown to the ground, while a few yards away
are miserable shanties with not a board out of place. Wooden, steel and
brick structures hardly felt the earthquake in some parts of the city,
while in other places all were wrecked.

"Skirting the shore northwest from the big ferry building--which was
so seriously injured that it will have to be rebuilt--the first thing
observed was the extraordinary irregularity of the earthquake's course.
Pier No. 5, for instance, is nothing but a mass of ruins, while Pier No.
3, on one side of it and Pier No. 7, on the other side, similar in size
and construction, are undamaged. Farther on, the Kosmos Line pier is a
complete wreck."

The big forts at the entrance to the Golden Gate also suffered seriously
from the great shake-up, and the emplacements of the big guns were
cracked and damaged. The same is the case with the fortifications
back of Old Fort Point, the great guns in these being for the present
