
"Poor Elsa," muttered Foy, then added, with a return of hopefulness,
"perhaps he is mistaken, he may escape after all."

Lysbeth shook her head as she answered,

"Hendrik Brant is not the man to write like that if there was any hope
for him, nor would he part with his daughter unless he knew that the end
must be near at hand."

"Why, then, does he not fly?" asked Foy.

"Because the moment he stirred the Inquisition would pounce upon him, as
a cat pounces upon a mouse that tries to run from its corner," replied
his father. "While the mouse sits still the cat sits also and purrs;
when it moves----"

There was a silence in which Dirk, having fetched the will of Hendrik
Brant from a safe hiding place, where it had lain since it reached his
hands some months before, opened the seals and read it aloud.

It proved to be a very short document, under the terms of which Dirk van
Goorl and his heirs inherited all the property, real and personal, of
Hendrik Brant, upon trust, (1) to make such ample provision for his
daughter Elsa as might be needful or expedient; (2) to apply the
remainder of the money "for the defence of our country, the freedom of
religious Faith, and the destruction of the Spaniards in such fashion
and at such time or times as God should reveal to them, which," added
the will, "assuredly He will do."

Enclosed in this document was an inventory of the property that
constituted the treasure. At the head came an almost endless list of
jewels, all of them carefully scheduled. These were the first three
items:

"Item: The necklace of great pearls that I exchanged with the Emperor
Charles when he took a love for sapphires, enclosed in a watertight
copper box.

"Item: A coronet and stomacher of rubies mounted in my own gold work,
the best that ever I did, which three queens have coveted, and none was
rich enough to buy.

"Item: The great emerald that my father left me, the biggest known,
having magic signs of ancients engraved upon the back of it, and
enclosed in a chased case of gold."

Then came other long lists of precious stones, too numerous to mention,
but of less individual value, and after them this entry:

"Item: Four casks filled with gold coin (I know not the exact weight or
number)."

At the bottom of this schedule was written, "A very great treasure, the
greatest of all the Netherlands, a fruit of three generations of honest
trading and saving, converted by me for the most part into jewels, that
it may be easier to move. This is the prayer of me, Hendrik Brant, who
owns it for his life; that this gold may prove the earthly doom of any
Spaniard who tries to steal it, and as I write it comes into my mind
that God will grant this my petition. Amen. Amen. Amen! So say I,
Hendrik Brant, who stand at the Gate of Death."

All of this inventory Dirk read aloud, and when he had finished Lysbeth
gasped with amazement.

"Surely," she said, "this little cousin of ours is richer than many
princes. Yes, with such a dowry princes would be glad to take her in
marriage."

"The fortune is large enough," answered Dirk. "But, oh! what a burden
has Hendrik Brant laid upon our backs, for under this will the wealth is
left, not straight to the lawful heiress, Elsa, but to me and my heirs
on the trusts started, and they are heavy. Look you, wife, the Spaniards
know of this vast hoard, and the priests know of it, and no stone on
earth or hell will they leave unturned to win that money. I say that,
for his own sake, my cousin Hendrik would have done better to accept the
offer of the Spanish thief Ramiro and give him three-fourths and escape
to England with the rest. But that is not his nature, who was ever
stubborn, and who would die ten times over rather than enrich the men
he hates. Moreover, he, who is no miser, has saved this fortune that
the bulk of it may be spent for his country in the hour of her need,
and alas! of that need we are made the judges, since he is called away.
Wife, I foresee that these gems and gold will breed bloodshed and misery
to all our house. But the trust is laid upon us and it must be borne.
Foy, to-morrow at dawn you and Martin will start for The Hague to carry
out the command of your cousin Brant."

"Why should my son's life be risked on this mad errand?" asked Lysbeth.

"Because it is a duty, mother," answered Foy cheerfully, although he
tried to look depressed. He was young and enterprising; moreover, the
adventure promised to be full of novelty.

In spite of himself Dirk smiled and bade him summon Martin.

A minute later Foy was in the great man's den and kicking at his
prostrate form. "Wake up, you snoring bull," he said, "awake!"

Martin sat up, his red beard showing like a fire in the shine of the
taper. "What is it now, Master Foy?" he asked yawning. "Are they after
us about those two dead soldiers?"

"No, you sleepy lump, it's treasure."

"I don't care about treasure," replied Martin, indifferently.

"It's Spaniards."

"That sounds better," said Martin, shutting his mouth. "Tell me about
it, Master Foy, while I pull on my jerkin."

So Foy told him as much as he could in two minutes.

"Yes, it sounds well," commented Martin, critically. "If I know anything
of those Spaniards, we shan't get back to Leyden without something
happening. But I don't like that bit about the women; as likely as not
they will spoil everything."

Then he accompanied Foy to the upper room, and there received his
instructions from Dirk with a solemn and unmoved countenance.

"Are you listening?" asked Dirk, sharply. "Do you understand?"

"I think so, master," replied Martin. "Hear;" and he repeated sentence
by sentence every word that had fallen from Dirk's lips, for when
he chose to use it Martin's memory was good. "One or two questions,
master," he said. "This stuff must be brought through at all hazards?"

"At all hazards?" answered Dirk.

"And if we cannot bring it through, it must be hidden in the best way
possible?"

"Yes."

"And if people should try to interfere with us, I understand that we
must fight?"

"Of course."

"And if in the fighting we chance to kill anybody I shall not be
reproached and called a murderer by the pastor or others?"

"I think not," replied Dirk.

"And if anything should happen to my young master here, his blood will
not be laid upon my head?"

Lysbeth groaned. Then she stood up and spoke.

"Martin, why do you ask such foolish questions? Your peril my son must
share, and if harm should come to him as may chance, we shall know
well that it is no fault of yours. You are not a coward or a traitor,
Martin."

"Well, I think not, mistress, at least not often; but you see here are
two duties: the first, to get this money through, the second, to protect
the Heer Foy. I wish to know which of these is the more important."

It was Dirk who answered.

"You go to carry out the wishes of my cousin Brant; they must be
attended to before anything else."

"Very good," replied Martin; "you quite understand, Heer Foy?"

"Oh! perfectly," replied that young man, grinning.

"Then go to bed for an hour or two, as you may have to keep awake
to-morrow night; I will call you at dawn. Your servant, master and
mistress, I hope to report myself to you within sixty hours, but if I do
not come within eighty, or let us say a hundred, it may be well to make
inquiries," and he shuffled back to his den.



Youth sleeps well whatever may be behind or before it, and it was not
until Martin had called to him thrice next morning that Foy opened his
eyes in the grey light, and, remembering, sprang from his bed.

"There's no hurry," said Martin, "but it will be as well to get out of
Leyden before many people are about."

As he spoke Lysbeth entered the room fully dressed, for she had not
slept that night, carrying in her hand a little leathern bag.

"How is Adrian, mother?" asked Foy, as she stooped down to kiss him.

"He sleeps, and the doctor, who is still with him, says that he does
well," she answered. "But see here, Foy, you are about to start upon
your first adventure, and this is my present to you--this and my
blessing." Then she untied the neck of the bag and poured from it
something that lay upon the table in a shining heap no larger than
Martin's fist. Foy took hold of the thing and held it up, whereon the
little heap stretched itself out marvellously, till it was as large
indeed as the body garment of a man.

"Steel shirt!" exclaimed Martin, nodding his head in approval, and
adding, "good wear for those who mix with Spaniards."

"Yes," said Lysbeth, "my father brought this from the East on one of his
voyages. I remember he told me that he paid for it its weight in gold
and silver, and that even then it was sold to him only by the special
favour of the king of that country. The shirt, they said, was ancient,
and of such work as cannot now be made. It had been worn from father to
son in one family for three hundred years, but no man that wore it ever
died by body-cut or thrust, since sword or dagger cannot pierce that
steel. At least, son, this is the story, and, strangely enough, when I
lost all the rest of my heritage--" and she sighed, "this shirt was left
to me, for it lay in its bag in the old oak chest, and none noticed it
or thought it worth the taking. So make the most of it, Foy; it is all
that remains of your grandfather's fortune, since this house is now your
father's."

Beyond kissing his mother in thanks, Foy made no answer; he was too
much engaged in examining the wonders of the shirt, which as a worker in
metals he could well appreciate. But Martin said again:

"Better than money, much better than money. God knew that and made them
leave the mail."

"I never saw the like of it," broke in Foy; "look, it runs together like
quicksilver and is light as leather. See, too, it has stood sword and
dagger stroke before to-day," and holding it in a sunbeam they perceived
in many directions faint lines and spots upon the links caused in past
years by the cutting edge of swords and the points of daggers. Yet never
a one of those links was severed or broken.

"I pray that it may stand them again if your body be inside of it," said
Lysbeth. "Yet, son, remember always that there is One who can guard you
better than any human mail however perfect," and she left the room.

Then Foy drew on the coat over his woollen jersey, and it fitted him
well, though not so well as in after years, when he had grown thicker.
Indeed, when his linen shirt and his doublet were over it none could
have guessed that he was clothed in armour of proof.

"It isn't fair, Martin," he said, "that I should be wrapped in steel and
you in nothing."

Martin smiled. "Do you take me for a fool, master," he said, "who have
seen some fighting in my day, private and public? Look here," and,
opening his leathern jerkin, he showed that he was clothed beneath in a
strange garment of thick but supple hide.

"Bullskin," said Martin, "tanned as we know how up in Friesland. Not as
good as yours, but will turn most cuts or arrows. I sat up last night
making one for you, it was almost finished before, but the steel is
cooler and better for those who can afford it. Come, let us go and eat;
we should be at the gates at eight when they open."



CHAPTER XIII

MOTHER'S GIFTS ARE GOOD GIFTS

At a few minutes to eight that morning a small crowd of people had
gathered in front of the Witte Poort at Leyden waiting for the gate to
be opened. They were of all sorts, but country folk for the most part,
returning to their villages, leading mules and donkeys slung with
empty panniers, and shouting greetings through the bars of the gate
to acquaintances who led in other mules laden with vegetables and
provisions. Among these stood some priests, saturnine and silent, bent,
doubtless, upon dark business of their own. A squad of Spanish soldiers
waited also, the insolence of the master in their eyes; they were
marching to some neighbouring city. There, too, appeared Foy van Goorl
and Red Martin, who led a pack mule; Foy dressed in the grey jerkin of
a merchant, but armed with a sword and mounted on a good mare; Martin
riding a Flemish gelding that nowadays would only have been thought fit
for the plough, since no lighter-boned beast could carry his weight.
Among these moved a dapper little man, with sandy whiskers and sly face,
asking their business and destination of the various travellers, and
under pretence of guarding against the smuggling of forbidden goods,
taking count upon his tablets of their merchandise and baggage.

Presently he came to Foy.

"Name?" he said, shortly, although he knew him well enough.

"Foy van Goorl and Martin, his father's servant, travelling to The Hague
with specimens of brassware, consigned to the correspondents of our
firm," answered Foy, indifferently.

"You are very glib," sneered the sandy-whiskered man; "what is the mule
laden with? It may be Bibles for all I know."

"Nothing half so valuable, master," replied Foy; "it is a church
chandelier in pieces."

"Unpack it and show me the pieces," said the officer.

Foy flushed with anger and set his teeth, but Martin, administering to
him a warning nudge in the ribs, submitted with prompt obedience.

It was a long business, for each arm of the chandelier had been
carefully wrapped in hay bands, and the official would not pass them
until every one was undone, after which they must be done up again.
While the pair of them were engaged upon this tedious and unnecessary
task, two fresh travellers arrived at the gate, a long, bony person,
clothed in a priest-like garb with a hood that hid the head, and a
fierce, dissolute-looking individual of military appearance and armed to
the teeth. Catching sight of young van Goorl and his servant, the long
person, who seemed to ride very awkwardly with legs thrust forward,
whispered something to the soldier man, and they passed on without
question through the gate.

When Foy and Martin followed them twenty minutes later, they were out of
sight, for the pair were well mounted and rode hard.

"Did you recognise them?" asked Martin so soon as they were clear of the
crowd.

"No," said Foy; "who are they?"

"The papist witch, Black Meg, dressed like a man, and the fellow who
came here from The Hague yesterday, whither they are going to report
that the Heer Adrian routed them, and that the Broekhovens with the
Jufvrouw Elsa got through unsearched."

"What does it all mean, Martin?"

"It means, master, that we shall have a warm welcome yonder; it means
that some one guesses we know about this treasure, and that we shan't
get the stuff away without trouble."

"Will they waylay us?"

Martin shrugged his shoulders as he answered, "It is always well to be
ready, but I think not. Coming back they may waylay us, not going. Our
lives are of little use without the money; also they cannot be had for
the asking."

Martin was right, for travelling slowly they reached the city without
molestation, and, riding to the house of Dirk's correspondent, put
up their horses; ate, rested, delivered the sample chandelier, and
generally transacted the business which appeared to be the object of
their journey. In the course of conversation they learned from their
host that things were going very ill here at The Hague for all who were
supposed to favour the New Religion. Tortures, burnings, abductions, and
murders were of daily occurrence, nor were any brought to judgment
for these crimes. Indeed, soldiers, spies, and government agents were
quartered on the citizens, doing what they would, and none dared to lift
a hand against them. Hendrik Brant, they heard also, was still at large
and carrying on business as usual in his shop, though rumour said that
he was a marked man whose time would be short.

Foy announced that they would stay the night, and a little after sunset
called to Martin to accompany him, as he wished to walk in the Broad
Street to see the sights of the town.

"Be careful, Mynheer Foy," said their host in warning, "for there are
many strange characters about, men and women. Oh! yes, this mere is full
of pike, and fresh bait is snapped up sharply."

"We will be wary," replied Foy, with the cheerful air of a young man
eager for excitement. "Hague pike don't like Leyden perch, you know;
they stick in their throats."

"I hope so, I hope so," said the host, "still I pray you be careful. You
will remember where to find the horses if you want them; they are fed
and I will keep them saddled. Your arrival here is known, and for some
reason this house is being watched."

Foy nodded and they started out; Foy going first, and Red Martin,
staring round him like a bewildered bumpkin, following at his heel, with
his great sword, which was called Silence, girt about his middle, and
hidden as much as possible beneath his jerkin.

"I wish you wouldn't look so big, Martin," Foy whispered over his
shoulder; "everybody is staring at you and that red beard of yours,
which glows like a kitchen fire."

"I can't help it, master," said Martin, "my back aches with stooping as
it is, and, as for the beard, well, God made it so."

"At least you might dye it," answered Foy; "if it were black you would
be less like a beacon on a church tower."

"Another day, master; it is a long business dyeing a beard like mine; I
think it would be quicker to cut it off." Then he stopped, for they were
in the Broad Street.

Here they found many people moving to and fro, but although the company
were so numerous it was difficult to distinguish them, for no moon
shone, and the place was lighted by lanterns set up on poles at long
distances from each other. Foy could see, however, that they were for
the most part folk of bad character, disreputable women, soldiers of the
garrison, half-drunk sailors from every country, and gliding in and out
among them all, priests and other observers of events. Before they had
been long in the crowd a man stumbled against Foy rudely, at the same
time telling him to get out of the path. But although his blood leapt at
the insult and his hand went to his sword hilt, Foy took no notice, for
he understood at once that it was sought to involve him in a quarrel.
Next a woman accosted him, a gaily-dressed woman, but she had no bow
upon her shoulder, so Foy merely shook his head and smiled. For the rest
of that walk, however, he was aware that this woman was watching him,
and with her a man whose figure he could not distinguish, for he was
wrapped in a black cloak.

Thrice did Foy, followed by Martin, thus promenade the right side of the
Broad Street, till he was heartily weary of the game indeed, and began
to wonder if his cousin Brant's plans had not miscarried.

As he turned for the fourth time his doubts were answered, for he found
himself face to face with a small woman who wore upon her shoulder a
large red bow, and was followed by another woman, a buxom person dressed
in a peasant's cap. The lady with the red bow, making pretence to
stumble, precipitated herself with an affected scream right into
his arms, and as he caught her, whispered, "Are you from Leyden,
sweetheart?" "Yes." "Then treat me as I treat you, and follow always
where I lead. First make pretence to be rid of me."

As she finished whispering Foy heard a warning stamp from Martin,
followed by the footsteps of the pair who he knew were watching them,
which he could distinguish easily, for here at the end of the street
there were fewer people. So he began to act as best he could--it was not
very well, but his awkwardness gave him a certain air of sincerity.

"No, no," he said, "why should I pay for your supper? Come, be going, my
good girl, and leave me and my servant to see the town in peace."

"Oh! Mynheer, let me be your guide, I beg you," answered she of the red
bow clasping her hands and looking up into his face. Just then he heard
the first woman who had accosted him speaking to her companion in a loud
voice.

"Look," she said, "Red Bow is trying her best. Ah! my dear, do you think
that you'll get a supper out of a holy Leyden ranter, or a skin off an
eel for the asking?"

"Oh! he isn't such a selfish fish as he looks," answered Red Bow over
her shoulder, while her eyes told Foy that it was his turn to play.

So he played to the best of his ability, with the result that ten
minutes later any for whom the sight had interest might have observed a
yellow-haired young gallant and a black-haired young woman walking down
the Broad Street with their arms affectionately disposed around each
other's middles. Following them was a huge and lumbering serving man
with a beard like fire, who, in a loyal effort to imitate the actions
of his master, had hooked a great limb about the neck of Red Bow's stout
little attendant, and held her thus in a chancery which, if flattering,
must have been uncomfortable. As Martin explained to the poor woman
afterwards, it was no fault of his, since in order to reach her waist he
must have carried her under his arm.

Foy and his companion chatted merrily enough, if in a somewhat jerky
fashion, but Martin attempted no talk. Only as he proceeded he was heard
to mutter between his teeth, "Lucky the Pastor Arentz can't see us now.
He would never understand, he is so one-sided." So at least Foy declared
subsequently in Leyden.

Presently, at a hint from his lady, Foy turned down a side street,
unobserved, as he thought, till he heard a mocking voice calling after
them, "Good-night, Red Bow, hope you will have a fine supper with your
Leyden shopboy."

"Quick," whispered Red Bow, and they turned another corner, then
another, and another. Now they walked down narrow streets, ill-kept and
unsavoury, with sharp pitched roofs, gabled and overhanging so much
that here and there they seemed almost to meet, leaving but a ribbon
of star-specked sky winding above their heads. Evidently it was a low
quarter of the town and a malodourous quarter, for the canals, spanned
by picturesque and high-arched bridges, were everywhere, and at this
summer season the water in them was low, rotten, and almost stirless.

At length Red Bow halted and knocked upon a small recessed door, which
instantly was opened by a man who bore no light.

"Come in," he whispered, and all four of them passed into a darksome
passage. "Quick, quick!" said the man, "I hear footsteps."

Foy heard them also echoing down the empty street, and as the door
closed it seemed to him that they stopped in the deep shadow of the
houses. Then, holding each other by the hand, they crept along black
passages and down stairs till at length they saw light shining through
the crevices of an ill-fitting door. It opened mysteriously at their
approach, and when they had all entered, shut behind them.

Foy uttered a sigh of relief for he was weary of this long flight,
and looked round him to discover that they were in a large windowless
cellar, well furnished after a fashion by oak benches and a table set
out with cold meats and flagons of wine. At the foot of this table stood
a middle-aged man, prematurely grey, and with a face worn as though by
constant care.

"Welcome, Foy van Goorl," said the man in a gentle voice. "Many years
have passed since last we met; still I should have known you anywhere,
though I think you would not have known me."

Foy looked at him and shook his head.

"I thought so," went on the man with a smile. "Well, I am Hendrik Brant,
your cousin, once the burgomaster of The Hague and its richest citizen,
but to-day a hunted rat who must receive his guests in secret cellars.
Tell me now, did my daughter, Elsa, reach your good father's house in
safety, and is she well?"

So Foy told him all that story.

"As I thought, as I thought," said Hendrik. "Ramiro knew of her journey
and guessed that she might carry some letter. Oh!" he went on, shaking
his fist in a kind of frenzy, and addressing the two women who had
played the parts of Red Bow and her servant, "who among you is the
traitor? Can it be that you, whom my bounty has fed, betray me? Nay,
girls, do not weep, I know that it is not so, and yet, in this city, the
very walls have ears, yes, even this deep vault gives up its secrets.
Well, if only I can save my fortune from those wolves, what do I care?
Then they may take my carcase and tear it. At least, my daughter is
safe--for a while, and now I have but one desire left on earth--to rob
them of my wealth also."

Then he turned to the girl decked out in the gay clothes, who, now that
the chase was over, sat upon a bench with her face hidden in her hand,
and said, "Tell me your story, Gretchen," whereon she lifted her head
and repeated all that happened.

"They press us hard," muttered Brant, "but, friends, we will beat them
yet. Eat now, and drink while you may."

So they sat down and ate and drank while Hendrik watched them, and the
man who had led them to the vault listened without the door.

When they had finished, Brant bade the two women, Red Bow and the other,
leave the cellar and send in the sentry, replacing him as guards. He
entered, a hard-faced, grizzled man, and, taking a seat at the table,
began to fill himself with food and wine.

"Hearken, my cousin Foy," said Brant presently, "this is the plan. A
league away, near to the mouth of the great canal, lie certain boats,
a score or over of them, laden with trading goods and timber, in the
charge of honest men who know nothing of their cargo, but who have
orders to fire them if they should be boarded. Among these boats is one
called the _Swallow_, small, but the swiftest on this coast, and handy
in a sea. Her cargo is salt, and beneath it eight kegs of powder, and
between the powder and the salt certain barrels, which barrels are
filled with treasure. Now, presently, if you have the heart for it--and
if you have not, say so, and I will go myself--this man here, Hans,
under cover of the darkness, will row you down to the boat _Swallow_.
Then you must board her, and at the first break of dawn hoist her sail
and stand out to sea, and away with her where the wind drives, tying
the skiff behind. Like enough you will find foes waiting for you at
the mouth of the canal, or elsewhere. Then I can give you only one
counsel--get out with the _Swallow_ if you can, and if you cannot,
escape in the skiff or by swimming, but before you leave her fire the
slow-matches that are ready at the bow and the stern, and let the powder
do its work and blow my wealth to the waters and the winds. Will you do
it? Think, think well before you answer."

"Did we not come from Leyden to be at your command, cousin?" said
Foy smiling. Then he added, "But why do you not accompany us on this
adventure? You are in danger here, and even if we get clear with the
treasure, what use is money without life?"

"To me none, any way," answered Brant; "but you do not understand. I
live in the midst of spies, I am watched day and night; although I came
here disguised and secretly, it is probable that even my presence in
this house is known. More, there is an order out that if I attempt to
leave the town by land or water, I am to be seized, whereon my house
will be searched instantly, and it will be found that my bullion is
gone. Think, lad, how great is this wealth, and you will understand why
the crows are hungry. It is talked of throughout the Netherlands, it has
been reported to the King in Spain, and I learn that orders have come
from him concerning its seizure. But there is another band who would get
hold of it first, Ramiro and his crew, and that is why I have been left
safe so long, because the thieves strive one against the other and watch
each other. Most of all, however, they watch me and everything that is
mine. For though they do not believe that I should send the treasure
away and stay behind, yet they are not sure."

"You think that they will pursue us, then?" asked Foy.

"For certain. Messengers arrived from Leyden to announce your coming two
hours before you set foot in the town, and it will be wonderful indeed
if you leave it without a band of cut-throats at your heels. Be not
deceived, lad, this business is no light one."
