fret; and they stood once more among fetishes and forms so foreign,
fabulous and fantastical, that it was difficult to pass from the land
of love, and all its pure delights, into their atmosphere.

It would have been harder but for Madame Jacobus. She understood; and
she sympathized; and there was a kindly element in her nature which
disposed her to side with the lovers. Her smile,--quick and short as a
flash of the eyes--revealed to Hyde her intention of favour, and
without one spoken word, these two knew themselves to be of the same
mind. And, in parting, she held his hand while she talked, saying at
last the very words he longed to hear--

"We shall expect you again on Thursday, Lieutenant. Everything is yet
undecided, and the work you have begun, it is right that you should
finish."

He answered only, "Thank you, madame!" but he accompanied the words
with a look which asked so much, and confessed so much, that madame
felt herself to be a silent confidante and a not unwilling accomplice.
And when she had closed the door on her guests, she acknowledged it.
"But then," she whispered, "I always did dearly love a lover; and this
promises to be a love affair that will need my help--plenty of good
honest hatred for it to combat--and wealth and rank and all sorts of
conflicting conditions to get the better of--Well, then, my help is
ready. In plain truth, I don't like such perfection as Doctor John; and
my nephew Rem is not interesting. He is sulky, and Hyde is
good-tempered, just like his father, too; and there never was a more
fascinating man than Dick Hyde. HE-HO! I remember!--I remember!--and
yet I dare say Dick has forgotten my very name--this is a marriage that
will exactly suit me--I don't care who is against it!" Then she said
softly to herself--

"REM went to Cornelia as they were about to leave, and he reminded her
that, by her permission, he had come to walk home with her.

"CORNELIA turned to Hyde, excused herself, and, cool and silent, took
her place by Rem's side.

"HYDE accepted the position with a smile, and a gracious bow, and then
joined Arenta.

"ARENTA was far less agreeable than she ought to have been; for both
she and her brother had a kind of divination. They knew, in spite of
appearances, that Rem had not got the best of Joris Hyde. I am quick in
my observations, and I know this is so. Well then, it is a very
interesting affair as it stands--and it is like to grow far more
interesting. I am not opposed to that. I shall enjoy it. Hyde and
Cornelia ought to marry--and they have my good wishes."

As for Hyde, no thought that could mar the sweetness and joy of this
fortunate hour came into his mind. Neither Rem's evident hatred, nor
Arenta's disapproval, nor yet Cornelia's silence, troubled him. He had
within his heart a talisman that made everything propitious. And he was
so joyous that the people whom he passed on the street caught happiness
from him. Men and women alike turned to look after the youth, for they
felt the virtue of his passing presence, and wondered what it might
mean. Even the necessary parting from Cornelia was only a phase of this
wonderful gladness; for Love never fails of his token, and, though
Arenta's sharp eyes could not discover it, Hyde received the silent
message that was meant for him, and for him only. That one thought made
his heart bound and falter with its exquisite delight--for him
only--for him only, was that swift but certain assurance; that
instantaneous bright flash of love that held in it all heaven and
earth, and left him, as he told himself again and again, the happiest
man in all the world.

He was hardly responsible for his actions at this hour; for when a
swift gallop brought him to the Van Heemskirk house, he quite
unconsciously struck the door some rapid, forceful blows, with his
riding whip. His grandfather opened it with an angry face.

"I thought it was thee," he said. "Now, then, in such lordly fashion,
whom didst thou summon? dog or slave, was it?"

"Oh, grandfather, I intended no harm. Did I strike so hard? Upon my
word, I meant it not."

At this moment Madame Van Heemskirk came quickly forward. She turned a
face of disapproval on her husband, and asked sharply, "Why dost thou
complain?"

"I like not my house-door struck so rudely, Lysbet. No man in all
America, but Joris Hyde, would dare to do it."

At these words Joris flung himself from his horse and clasped his
grandfather's hand. "I did wrong," he said warmly; "but I am beside
myself with happiness; and I thought of nothing but telling you. My
heart was in such a hurry that my hands forgot how to behave
themselves."

"So happy as that, art thou? Good! Come in, and tell us what has
happened to thee."

But Lysbet divined the joy in her grandson's face; and she said softly
as he seated himself at the open window where his grandfather's chair
was placed--

"It is Cornelia?"

"Yes, it is Cornelia. She loves me! The most charming girl the sun ever
shone upon loves me. It is incredible! It is amazing! I cannot believe
in my good fortune. Will you assure me it is possible? I want to hear
some one say so--and who is there but my grandfather and you? I do not
like to tell my mother, just yet. What do you say?"

"I say that thou hast chosen a good girl for a wife. God bless thee,"
answered Lysbet with great emotion.

Van Heemskirk smiled, but was silent; and Hyde stooped forward, gently
moved his long pipe away from his lips, and said, "Grandfather, speak,
You know Cornelia Moran?"

"I have seen her. With thee I saw her--walking with thee--dancing with
thee. A great beauty I thought her. Thy grandmother says she is good.
Well, then, the love of a good, beautiful girl, is something to be glad
over. Not twice in a lifetime comes such great fortune. But make up thy
mind to expect much opposition. Doctor John and thy father were ever
unfriends. Thy father has other plans for thee; Cornelia's father has
doubtless other plans for her. Few men can stand against Doctor John;
he has the word, and the way, to carry all before him. I know not how
the little Cornelia can dare to disobey him."

"She has said 'yes' to me; and, before heaven and earth, she will stand
by it."

"Say that much. And of thyself, art thou sure?"

"Why art thou throwing cold water on such sweet hopes?" said Lysbet to
her husband.

"Because, when love flames beyond duty and honour and all expediences,
Lysbet, some one a little cold water ought to throw. And THOU will not
do it. No! Rather, would thou add fuel to the flame."

"I know not what you mean, sir," said Hyde, vaguely troubled by his
grandfather's words.

"I think thou knowest well what I mean. Thy father has told thee that
thy duty and thy honour are pledged to Annie Hyde."

"I never pledged! Never!"

"But, as in thy baptism thy father made vows for thee, so also for thy
marriage he made promises. Noble birth has responsibility, as well as
privilege. For thyself alone it is not permitted thee to live, from
both the past and the future there are demands on thee."

"Grandfather, this living for the future is the curse of the English
land-owners. They enjoy not the present, for they are busy taking care
of the years they will never see. Their sons are in their way; it is
their grandsons and their great-grandsons that interest them. Why
should my father plan for my marriage? He may be Earl Hyde for twenty
years--and I hope he will. For twenty years Cornelia and I can be happy
here in America; and twenty years is a great opportunity. Everything
can happen in twenty years. Of one thing I am sure--I will marry
Cornelia Moran, even if I run away with her to the ends of the earth."

"'Run away with her.' To be sure! That is in the blood;" and the old
man looked sternly back to the days when Hyde's father ran away with
his own little daughter.

With some anger Lysbet answered his thoughts. "What art thou talking
about? What art thou thinking of? Many good men have run away with
their wives. This almighty Doctor John ran away with his wife. Did not
Ava Willing leave her father's house and her friends and her faith for
him? And did not the Quakers read her out of their Meeting for her
marriage?--and I blame them not. Doctor John was no match for Ava
Willing. More, too, if thou must look back; remember one May night,
when thou and I sat by the Collect in the moonlight, and thou gave me
this ring. What did thou say to me that night?"

"'Tis years ago, Lysbet, and If I have forgotten--"

"Forgotten! Well, then, men do forget; but they may be thankful that
God has so made women that they do NOT forget. The words thou said that
night have been singing in my heart for fifty years; and yet, if thou
must be told, some of those words were about RUNNING AWAY WITH
THEE;--for, at the first, my father liked thee not."

"Lysbet! My sweet Lysbet! I have not forgotten. For thy dear sake I
will stand by Joris, though in doing so I am sure I shall make some
unfriends."

"Good, my husband. I take leave to say that thou art doing right."

"Well, then," said Hyde, "if my grandmother stand by me, and you also,
sir; and also Madame Jacobus--"

"Madame Jacobus!" cried Lysbet.

"Yes, indeed!" answered Hyde. "'Tis to her understanding and kindness I
owe my opportunity; and she gave me, also, one look which I cannot
pretend to misunderstand--a look of clear sympathy--a look that
promised help."

"She is a clever woman," said Van Heemskirk. "If Joris has her good
will it is not to be thrown away."

"I like her not," said Lysbet. "With my grandson, with my affairs, why
should she meddle? Pray, now, what took thee, Joris, to her house? It
is full of idolatries and graven images. Doctor Kunz once wrote to her
a letter about them. He said she ought to remember the Second
Commandment. And she wrote to him a letter, and told him to trouble
himself with his own business. Much anger and shame there might have
been out of this, but Angelica Jacobus is rich, and she is generous to
the church, and to the poor; and Doctor Kunz said to the elders, 'Let
her alone, for there is a savour of righteousness in her;' and when she
heard of that, she was pleased with the Doctor, and sent him one
hundred dollars for the Indian Mission. But, Joris, she is no good to
thee. I hear many queer stories of her."

"Downright lies, all of them," replied Hyde. Then he rose, saying, "I
must ride onward. My mother will not sleep until she sees me."

"It is nearly dark," said Van Heemskirk, "and to-night thou art in the
clouds. The land and the water will be alike to thee. Rest until the
morning."

"I fear not the dark. I know the road by night or by day."

"Yet, even so, mind what I tell thee--if thou ride in the dark, be not
wiser than thy beast."

Then they walked with him to the door, and watched him leap to his
saddle and ride into the twilight trembling over the misty meadows,
trickling with dews. And a great melancholy fell over them, and they
could not resume the conversation. Joris re-lit his pipe, and Lysbet
went softly and thoughtfully about her household duties. It was one of
those hours in which Life distills for us her vague melancholy wine;
and Joris and Lysbet drank deeply of it.

The moon was in its third day, and the silent crescent has no calmer
and sweeter time; yet Joris it inclined to a sad presentiment. "In my
heart there is a fear, Lysbet," he said softly. "I think our boy has
gone a road he will dearly rue. I foresee disputing, and wounded
hearts, and lives made barren by many disappointed hopes."

"Nothing of the kind," answered Lysbet cheerfully. "Our little Joris is
so happy to-night, why wilt thou think evil for him? To think evil is
to bring evil. Out of foolishness or perchance such a great love has
not come. No, indeed! That it comes from heaven I am sure; and to
heaven I will leave its good fortune."

"Pleasant are thy hopes, Lysbet; but, too often, vain and foolish."

"Thy reasoning, is it any wiser? No. Often I have found it wrong. One
thing the years have said to me, it is this--'Lysbet put not thy
judgment in the place of Providence. If thou trust Providence, thou
hast the easy heart of a child of God; if thou trust to thine own
judgment, thou hast the troubled heart of an anxious woman.'"




CHAPTER VII

ARENTA'S MARRIAGE


For a few weeks, Hyde's belief that the very stars would connive with a
true lover seemed a reliable one. Madame Jacobus, attracted at their
first meeting to the youth, soon gave him an astonishing affection. And
yet this warm love of an old woman for youth and beauty was a very
natural one--a late development of the maternal instinct leading her
even to what seemed an abnormal preference. For she put aside her
nephew's claims with hardly a thought, and pleased herself day by day
in so managing and arranging events that Hyde and Cornelia met, as a
matter of course. Arenta was not, however, deceived; she understood
every maneuvre, but the success of her own affairs depended very much
on her aunt's cooperation and generosity, and so she could not afford,
at this time, to interfere for her brother.

"But I shall alter things a little as soon as I am married," she told
herself. "I will take care of that. At this time I must see, and hear,
and say nothing. I must act politely--for I am always polite--and
Athanase also is in favour of politeness--but I take leave to say that
Joris Hyde shall not carry so much sail when a few weeks are gone by.
So happy he looks! So pleased with himself! So sure of all he says and
does! I am angry at him all the time. Well, then, it will be a
satisfaction to abate a little the confidence of this cock-sure young
man."

Arenta's feelings were in kind and measure shared by several other
people; Doctor Moran held them in a far bitterer mood; but he,
also,--environed by circumstances he could neither alter nor
command,--was compelled to satisfy his disapproval with promises of a
future change. For the wedding of Arenta Van Ariens had assumed a great
social importance. Arenta herself had talked about the affair until all
classes were on the tiptoe of expectation. The wealthy Dutch families,
the exclusive American set, the home and foreign diplomatic circles,
were alike looking forward to the splendid ceremony, and to the great
breakfast at Peter Van Ariens' house, and to the ball which Madame
Jacobus was to give in the evening. None of the younger people had ever
been in madame's fantastic ballroom, and they were eager for this entry
into her wonderful house. For their mothers--seeing things through the
mists of Time--had, innocently enough, exaggerated the marvels of the
Chinese lanterns, the feather flowers and gorgeously plumed birds, the
cases of tropical butterflies and beetles, and the fascination of the
pagan deities, until they were ready to listen to any tale about Madame
Jacobus and to swallow it like cream.

So Doctor Moran, being physician and family friend to most of the
invited guests, had to listen to such reminiscences and anticipations
wherever he went. He knew that he could not talk against the great
public current, and that in the excited state of social feeling it
would be a kind of treason even to hint disapproval of Arenta, or of
any of her friends or doings. But he suffered. He was questioned by
some, he was enlightened by others; his opinion was asked about dresses
