stream of blood which continued to flow from the ghastly head of
Cressingham, as he held it exultingly in the air.

"If that be your chief," cried Montgomery, "I have mistaken him much--I
cannot yield my sword to him."

Murray understood him: "If cruelty be an evil spirit," returned he, "it
has fled every breast in this army to shelter with Sir Roger
Kirkpatrick; and its name is Legion!  That is my chief!" added he,
pointing to Wallace, with an evident consciousness of deriving honor
from his command.  The chief rose from the ground dyed in the same
ensanguined hue which had excited the abhorrence of Montgomery, though
it had been drawn from his own veins, and those of his horse.  All,
indeed, of blood about him seemed to be on his garment; none was in his
eyes, none in his heart but what warmed it to mercy and to benevolence
for all mankind.  His eyes momentarily fell on the approaching figure
of Kirkpatrick, who, waving the head in the air, blew from his bugle
the triumphal notes of the Pryse, and then cried to his chief: "I have
slain the wolf of Scotland!  My brave clansmen are now casing my target
with his skin,** which, when I strike its bossy sides, will cry aloud.
So, perishes thy dishonor!  So perish all the enemies of Scotland!"

**It is recorded that the memory of Cressingham was so odious to the
Scots, they did indeed flay his dead body, and made saddles and girths
and other things of his skin.-(1809.)

"And with the extinction of that breath, Kirkpatrick," cried Wallace,
looking serenely from the head to him, "let your fell revenge perish
also.  For your own honor commit no indignities on the body you have
slain."

"'Tis for you to conquer like a god!" cried Kirkpatrick; "I have felt
as a man, and like a man I revenge.  This head shall destroy in death;
it shall vanquish its friends for me; for I will wear it like a Gorgon
on my sword, to turn to stone every Southron who looks on it."  While
speaking, he disappeared amongst the thickening ranks; and as the
victorious Scots hailed him in passing, Montgomery, thinking of his
perishing men, suffered Murray to lead him to the scene of his humility.

The ever-comprehensive eye of Wallace perceived him as he advanced; and
guessing by his armor and dignified demeanor who he was, with a noble
grace he raised his helmed bonnet from his head when the earl
approached him.  Montgomery looked on him; he felt his soul, even more
than his arms, subdued; but still there was something about a soldier's
heart that shrunk from yielding his power of resistance.  The blood
mounted into his before pale cheeks; he held out his sword in silence
to the victor; for he could not bring his tongue to pronounce the word
"surrender."

Wallace understood the sign, and holding up his hand to a herald, the
trumpet of peace was raised.  It sounded--and where, the moment before,
were the horrid clashing of arms, the yell of savage conquest, and
direful cries for mercy, all was hushed as death.  Not that death which
had passed, but that which is approaching.--None spoke, not a sound was
heard, but the low groans of the dying, who lay, overwhelmed and
perishing, beneath the bodies of the slain, and the feet of the living.

The voice of Wallace rose from this awful pause.  Its sound was ever
the harbinger of glory, or of "good will to men."  "Soldiers!" cried
he, "God has given victory--let us show our gratitude by moderation and
mercy.  Gather the wounded into quarters and bury the dead."

Wallace then turned to the extended sword of the earl; he put it gently
back with his hand: "Ever wear what you honor," said he; "but, gallant
Montgomery, when you draw it next, let it be in a better cause.  Learn,
brave earl, to discriminate between a warrior's glory and his shame;
between the defender of his country, and the unprovoked ravager of
other lands."

Montgomery blushed scarlet at these words; but it was not with
resentment.  He looked down for a moment: "Ah!" thought he, "perhaps I
ought never to have drawn it here!"  Then raising his eyes to Wallace,
he said: "Were you not the enemy of my king, who, though a conqueror,
sanctions none of the cruelties that have been committed in his name, I
would give you my hand, before the remnant of his brave troops, whose
lives you grant.  But you have my heart: a heart that knows no
difference between friend or foe, when the bonds of virtue would unite
what only civil dissensions hold separate."

"Had your king possessed the virtues you believe he does," replied
Wallace, "my sword might have now been a pruning-hook.  But that is
past!  We are in arms for injuries received, and to drive out a tyrant.
For believe me, noble Montgomery, that monarch has little pretensions
to virtue, who suffers the oppressors of his people, or of his
conquests, to go unpunished.  To connive at cruelty, is to practice it.
And has Edward ever frowned on one of those despots, who, in his name,
have for these two years past laid Scotland in blood and ashes?"

The appeal was too strong for Montgomery to answer; he felt its truth,
and bowed, with an expression in his face that told more than, as a
subject of England, he dared declare.

The late respectful silence was turned into the clamorous activity of
eager obedience.  The prisoners were conducted to the rear of Stirling;
while the major part of the Scots (leaving a detachment to unburden the
earth of its bleeding load), returned in front to the gates, just as De
Warenne's division appeared on the horizon, like a moving cloud gilded
by the now setting sun.  At this sight Wallace sent Edwin into the town
with Lord Montgomery, and marshaling his line, prepared to bear down
upon the approaching earl.

But the lord warden had received information which fought better for
the Scots than a host of swords.  When advanced a very little onward on
the Carse of Stirling, one of his scouts brought intelligence that
having approached the south side of the Forth, he had seen that river
floating with dead bodies; and soon after met Southron horns blowing
the notes of victory.  From what he learned from the fugitives, he also
informed his lord, "that not only the town and citadel of Stirling were
in the possession of Sir William Wallace, but the two detachments under
Montgomery and Hilton had both been discomfited, and their leaders
slain or taken."

At this intelligence, Earl de Warenne stood aghast; and while he was
still doubting that such disgrace to King Edward's arms could be
possible, two or three fugitives came up, and witnessed to its truth.
One had seen Kirkpatrick, with the bloody head of the Governor of
Stirling on his sword.  Another had been near Cressingham in the wood,
when he told Montgomery of the capture of De Valence; and concluding
that he meant the leader of the third division, he corroborated the
scout's information of the two defeats, adding (for terror magnified
the objects of fear), that the Scots army was incalculable; but was so
disposed by Sir William Wallace, as to appear inconsiderable, that he
might ensnare his enemies, by filling them with hopes of an easy
conquest.

These accounts persuaded De Warenne to make a retreat; and intimidated
by the exaggerated representations of those who had fled, his men, with
no little precipitation, turned to obey.

Wallace perceived the retrograde motion of his enemy's lines; and while
a stream of arrows from his archers poured upon them like hail, he bore
down upon the rear-guard with his cavalry and men-at-arms, and sent
Graham round by the wood, to surprise the flanks.

All was executed with promptitude; and the tremendous slogan sounding
from side to side, the terrified Southrons, before in confusion, now
threw away their arms, to lighten themselves for escape.  Sensible that
it was not the number of the dead, but the terror of the living, which
gives the finishing stroke to conquest, De Warenne saw the effects of
this panic, in the total disregard of his orders; and dreadful would
have been the carnage of his troops had he not sounded a parley.

The bugle of Wallace instantly answered it.  De Warenne sent forward
his herald.  He offered to lay down his arms, provided he might be
exempted from relinquishing the royal standard, and that he and his men
might be permitted to return without delay to England.

Wallace accepted the first article; granted the second; but with regard
to the third, it must be on condition that he, the Lord de Warenne, and
the officers taken in his army, or in other engagements lately fought
in Scotland, should be immediately exchanged for the like number of
noble Scots Wallace should name, who were prisoners in England; and
that the common men of the army, now about to surrender their arms,
should take an oath never to serve again against Scotland.

These preliminaries being agreed to (their very boldness arguing the
conscious advantage which seemed to compel the assent), the lord warden
advanced at the head of his thirty thousand troops; and first laying
down his sword, which Wallace immediately returned to him, the officers
and soldiers marched by with their heads uncovered, throwing down their
weapons as they approached their conqueror.  Wallace extended his line
while the procession moved, for he had too much policy to show his
enemies that thirty thousand men had yielded, almost without a blow, to
scarce five thousand.  The oath was afterward administered to each
regiment by heralds, sent for that purpose into the strath of Monteith,
whither Wallace had directed the captured legions to assemble and
refresh themselves, previous to their departure next morning for
England.  The privates thus disposed of, to release himself from the
commanders also, Wallace told De Warenne that duty called him away, but
every respect would be paid to them by the Scottish officers.

He then gave directions to Sir Alexander Ramsay to escort De Warenne
and the rest of the noble prisoners to Stirling.  Wallace himself
turned with his veteran band to give a conqueror's greeting to the
Baron of Hilton, and so ended the famous battles of Cambus-Kenneth and
the Carse of Stirling.




Chapter XXXIV.

Stirling Castle.


The prisoners who had been taken with Montgomery were lodged behind the
town, and the wounded carried into the Abbey of Cambus-Kenneth; but
when Edwin came to move that earl himself, he found him too faint with
loss of blood to sit a horse to Snawdoun.  He therefore ordered a
litter; and so conveyed his brave prisoner to that palace of the kings
of Scotland in Stirling.

The priests in Wallace's army not only exercised the Levitical but the
good Samaritan's functions, and they soon obeyed the young knight's
summons to dress the wounds of Montgomery.

Messengers, meanwhile, arrived from Wallace, acquainting his chieftains
in Stirling with the surrender of De Warenne's army.  Hence no surprise
was created in the breast of the wounded earl when he saw his commander
enter the palace as the prisoner of the illustrious Scot.

Montgomery held out his hand to the lord warden in silence, and with a
flushed cheek.

"Blush not, my noble friend!" cried De Warenne; "these wounds speak
more eloquently than a thousand tongues, the gallantry with which you
maintained the sword that fate compelled you to surrender.  But I,
without a scratch, how can I meet the unconquered Edward?  And yet it
was not for myself I feared: my brave and confiding soldiers were in
all my thoughts; for I saw it was not to meet an army I led them, but
against a whirlwind, a storm of war, with which no strength that I
commanded could contend."

While the English generals thus conversed,  Edwin's impatient heart
yearned to be again at the side of Wallace; and gladly resigning the
charge of his noble prisoner to Sir Alexander Ramsay, as soon as he
observed a cessation in the conversation of the two earls, he drew near
Montgomery to take his leave.

"Farewell, till we meet again!" said the young earl, pressing his hand;
"you have been a young brother rather than an enemy, to me."

"Because," returned Edwin, "I follow the example of my general, who
would willingly be the friend of all mankind."

Warenne looked at him with surprise: "And who are you, who, in that
stripling form, utters gallant sentiments which might grace the
maturest years?"

With a sweet dignity, Edwin replied, "I am Edwin Ruthven, the adopted
brother of Sir William Wallace."

"And the son of him," asked De Warenne, "who, with Sir William Wallace,
was the first to mount Dumbarton walls?"

At these words the cheeks of Edwin were suffused with a more animated
bloom.  At the moment when his courage was distinguished on the heights
of Dumbarton, by the vowed friendship of Wallace, he had found himself
beloved by the bravest and most amiable of beings; and in his light he
felt both warmth and brightness; but this question of De Warenne,
conveyed to him that he had found fame himself; that he was there
publicly acknowledged to be an object not unworthy of being called the
brother of Sir William Wallace!-and, casting down his eyes, beaming
with exultation, from the fixed gaze of De Warenne, he answered, "I am
that happy Ruthven, who had the honor to mount Dumbarton Rock by the
side of my general; and from his hand there received the stroke of
knighthood."

De Warenne rose, much agitated: "If such be the boys of Scotland need
we wonder, when the spirit of resistance is roused in the nation, that
our strength should wither before its men?"

"At least," said Montgomery, whose admiration of what passed seemed to
reanimate his languid faculties, "it deprives defeat of its sting, when
we are conscious we yielded to power that was irresistible.  But, my
lord," added he, "if the courage of this youth amazes you, what will
you say ought to be the fate of this country? what to be the crown of
Sir William Wallace's career, when you know the chain of brave hearts
by which he is surrounded?  Even tender woman loses the weakness of her
sex when she belongs to him."  Earl de Warenne, surprised at the energy
with which he spoke, looked at him with an expression that told him so.
"Yes," continued he, "I witnessed the heroism of Lady Wallace, when
she defended the character of her husband in the midst of an armed
host, and preserved the secret of his retreat inviolate.  I saw that
loveliest of women, whom the dastard Heselrigge slew."

"Disgrace to knighthood!" cried Edwin, with indignant vehemence; "if
you were a spectator of that bloody deed, retire from this house; go to
Cambus-Kenneth--anywhere; but leave this city before the injured
Wallace arrives; blast not his eyes with a second sight of one who
could have beheld his wife murdered."

Every eye was now fixed on the commanding figure of the young Edwin,
who stood with the determination of being obeyed breathing in every
look.  De Warenne then at once saw the possibility of so gentle a
creature being transformed into the soul of enterprise, into the
fearless and effective soldier.

Lord Montgomery held out his hand to Edwin.  "By this right arm, I
swear, noble youth, that had I been on the spot when Heselrigge, lifted
his sword against the breast of Lady Wallace, I would have sheathed my
sword in his.  It was before then that I saw that matchless woman; and
offended with my want of severity in the scrutiny I had made at
Ellerslie for its chief.  Heselrigge sent me back to Ayr.  Arnuf
quarreled with me there, on the same subject; and I immediately retired
in disgust to England."

"Then how? you ought to be Sir Gilbert Hambledon?" replied Edwin; "but
whoever you are, as you were kind to the Lady Marion, I cannot but
regret my late hasty charge; and for which I beseech your pardon."

Montgomery took his hand, and pressed it.  "Generous Ruthven, your
warmth is too honorable to need forgiveness.  I am that Sir Gilbert
Hambledon; and had I remained so, I should not now be in Scotland.  But
in my first interview with the Prince of Wales, after my accession to
the Earldom of Montgomery, his highness told me, it had been rumored
from Scotland that I was disloyal in my heart to my king.  'And to
prove the falsehood of such calumniators,' continued the prince, 'I
appoint you second in command there to the Earl de Warenne.'  To have
refused to fight against Sir William Wallace, would have been to have
accused myself of treason.  And while I respected the husband of the
murdered Lady Marion, I yet condemned him as an insurgent; and with the
same spirit you follow him in the field, I obeyed the commands of my
sovereign."

"Lord Montgomery," returned Edwin, "I am rejoiced to see one who proves
to me what my general, wronged as he has been, yet always
inculcates--that all the Southrons are not base and cruel!  When he
knows who is indeed his prisoner, what recollections will it awaken!
But till you and he again meet, I shall not intimate to him the
melancholy satisfaction he is to enjoy, for, with the remembrances it
will arouse, your presence must bring the antidote."

The brave youth then telling Ramsay in what parts of the palace the
rest of the lords were to be lodged, with recovered composure descended
to the courtyard, to take horse for Tor Wood.  He was galloping along,
under the bright light of the moon, when he heard a squadron on full
speed approaching, and presently Murray appeared at its head.  "Hurrah,
Edwin!" cried he; "well met!  We are come to demand the instant
surrender of the citadel.  Hilton's division has surrendered!"

The two barons had indeed come up about half an hour after Earl de
Warenne's division was discomfited.  Sir William Wallace had sent
forward to the advancing enemy two heralds, bearing the colors De
Valence and Montgomery, with the captive banner of De Warenne, and
requiring the present division to lay down its army also.  The sight of
these standards was sufficient to assure Hilton there was no deceit in
the embassy.  The nature of his position precluded retreat; and not
seeing any reason for ten thousand men disputing the day with a power
to whom fifty thousand had just surrendered, he and his compeer, with
the reluctance of veterans, embraced the terms of surrender.

The instant Hilton put his argent banner** into the victor's hand,
Wallace knew that the castle must now be his; he had discomfited all
who could have maintained it against him.  Impatient to apprise Lord
Mar and his family of their safety, he dispatched Murray with a
considerable escort to demand its surrender.

**The arms of Hilton are, argent, two bars azure.  The charge on those
of Blenkinsopp are three wheat-sheaves; crest, a lion rampant, grasping
a rose.  The ruins of the patrimonial castles of these two ancient
barons are still to be seen in the north of England.  The author's
revered mother was a descendant from the latter venerable name, united
with that of the brave and erudite race of Adamson, of further north.

Murray gladly obeyed, and now, accompanied by Edwin, with the standards
of Cressingham and De Warenne trailing in the dust, he arrived before
the castle, and summoned the lieutenant to the walls.  But that
officer, well aware of what was going to happen, feared to appear.
From the battlements of the keep he had seen the dreadful conflict on
the banks of the Forth--he had seen the thousands of De Warenne pass
before the conqueror.  To punish his treachery, in not only having
suffered Cressingham to steal out under the armistice, but upholding
also the breaking of his word to surrender at sunset, the terrified
officer believed that Wallace was now come to put the whole garrison to
the sword.

At the first sight of Murray's approaching squadron, the lieutenant
hurried to Lord Mar, to offer him immediate liberty if he would go
forth to Wallace and treat with him to spare the lives of the garrison.
Closed up in a solitary dungeon, the earl knew naught of what was
occurring without; and when the Southron entered, he expected it was to
lead him again to the death which had been twice averted.  But the pale
and trembling lieutenant had no sooner spoken the first word than Mar
discerned it was a suppliant, not an executioner, he saw before him,
and he was even promising that clemency from Wallace, which he knew
dwelt in his heart, when Murray's trumpet sounded.

The lieutenant started, horror-struck.  "It is now too late!  We have
not made the first overture, and there sounds the death-bell of this
garrison!  I saved your life, earl!" cried he, imploringly, to Lord
Mar; "when the enraged Cressingham commanded me to pull the cord which
would have launched you into eternity.  I disobeyed him!  For my sake,
then, preserve this garrison, and accompany me to the ramparts."

The chains were immediately knocked off the limbs of Lord Mar, and the
lieutenant presenting him with a sword, they appeared together on the
battlements.  As the declining moon shone on their backs, Murray did
not discern that it was his uncle who mounted the walls; but calling to
him in a voice which declared there was no appeal, pointed to the
humbled colors of Edward, and demanded the instant surrender of the
citadel.

"Let it be, then with the pledge of Sir William Wallace's mercy?" cried
the venerable earl.

"With every pledge, Lord Mar," returned Murray, now joyfully
recognizing his uncle, "which you think safe to give."

"Then the keys of the citadel are yours," cried the lieutenant; "I only
ask the lives of my garrison."

This was granted, and immediately preparations were made for the
admission of the Scots.  As the enraptured Edwin heard the heavy chains
of the portcullis drawn up, and the massy bolts of the huge doors
grating in their guards, he thought of his mother's liberty, of his
father's joy, in pressing her again in his arms; and hastening to the
tower where Lord Ruthven held watch over the now sleeping De Valance,
he told him all that had happened.  "Go, my father," added he; "enter
with Murray, and be the first to open the prison doors of my mother."

Lord Ruthven embraced his son.  "My dear Edwin! this sacrifice to my
feelings is worthy of you.  But I have a duty to perform, superior even
to the tenderest private ones.  I am planted hereby my commander; and
shall I quit my station, for any gratification, till he gives me leave?
No, my son!  Be you my representative to your mother; and while my
example teaches you, above all earthly considerations, to obey your
honor, those tender embraces will show her what I sacrifice to duty."

Edwin no longer urged his father, and leaving his apartment, flew to
the gate of the inner ballium.  It was open; and Murray already stood
on the platform before the keep, receiving the keys to the garrison.

"Blessed sight!" cried the earl, to his nephew.  "When I put the banner
of Mar into your unpracticed hand, little could I expect that, in the
course of four months, I should see my brave Andrew receive the keys of
proud Stirling from its commander!"

Murray smiled, while his plumed head bowed gratefully to his uncle, and
turning to the lieutenant, "Now," said he, "lead me to the Ladies Mar
and Ruthven that I may assure them they are free."

The gates of the keep were now unclosed, and the lieutenant conducted
his victors along a gloomy passage, to a low door, studded with knobs
of iron.  As he drew the bolt, he whispered to Lord Mar, "These
severities are the hard policy of Governor Cressingham."

He pushed the door slowly open, and discovered a small, miserable
cell--its walls, of rugged stone, having no other covering than the
incrustations which time, and many a dripping winter, had strewn over
their vaulted service.  On the ground, on a pallet of straw, lay a
female figure in a profound sleep.  But the light which the lieutenant
held, streaming full upon the uncurtained slumberer, she started, and,
with a shriek of terror at the sight of so many armed men, discovered
the pallid features of the Countess of Mar.  With an anguish which
hardly the freedom he was going to bestow could ameliorate, the earl
rushed forward, and, throwing himself beside her, caught her in his
arms.

"Are we, then, to die?" cried she, in a voice of horror.  "Has Wallace
abandoned us?  Are we to perish?  Heartless-heartless man!"

Overcome by his emotions, the earl could only strain her to his breast
in speechless agitation.  Edwin saw a picture of his mother's
sufferings, in the present distraction of the countess; and he felt his
powers of utterance locked up; but Lord Andrew, whose ever-light heart
was gay the moment he was no longer unhappy, jocosely answered, "My
fair aunt, there are many hearts to die by your eyes before that day!
and, meanwhile, I come from Sir William Wallace--to set you free!"

The name of Wallace, and the intimation that he had sent to set her
free, drove every former thought of death and misery from her mind;
again the ambrosial gales of love seemed to breathe around her--she saw
not her prison walls; she felt herself again in his presence; and in a
blissful trance, rather endured than participated in the warm
congratulations of her husband on their mutual safety.

Edwin and Murray turned to follow the lieutenant, who, preceding them,
stopped at the end of the gallery.  "Here," said he, "is Lady Ruthven's
habitation; and--alas! not better than the countess'."  While he spoke,
he threw open the door, and discovered its sad inmate also asleep.  But
when the glad voice of her son pierced her ear--when his fond embraces
clung to her bosom, her surprise and emotions were almost
insupportable.  Hardly crediting her senses, that he whom she had
believed was safe in the cloisters of St. Colomba, could be within the
dangerous walls of Stirling; that it was his mailed breast that pressed
against her bosom; that it was his voice she heard exclaiming, "Mother,
we come to give you freedom!" all appeared to her like a dream of
madness.

She listened, she felt him, she found her cheek wet with his rapturous
tears.  "Am I in my right mind?" cried she, looking at him with a
fearful, yet overjoyed countenance; "am I not mad?  Oh! tell me," cried
she, turning to Murray, and the lieutenant, "is this my son that I see,
or has terror turned my brain?"

"It is indeed your son, your Edwin, my very self," returned he, alarmed
at the expression of her voice and countenance.  Murray gently
advanced, and kneeling down by her, respectfully took her hand.  "He
speaks truth, my dear madam.  It is your son Edwin.  He left his
convent, to be a volunteer with Sir William Wallace.  He has covered
himself with honor on the walls of Dumbarton; and here also a sharer in
his leader's victories, he is come to set you free."

At this explanation, which, being given in the sober language of
reason, Lady Ruthven believed, she gave way to the full happiness of
her soul, and falling on the neck of her son, embraced him with a flood
of tears: "And thy father, Edwin, where is he?  Did not the noble
Wallace rescue him from Ayr?"

"He did, and he is here."  Edwin then repeated to his mother the
affectionate message of his father, and the particulars of his release.
Perceiving how happily they were engaged, Murray, now with a flutter
in his own bosom, rose from his knees, and requested the lieutenant to
conduct him to Lady Helen Mar.

His guide led the way by a winding staircase into a stone gallery,
where letting Lord Andrew into a spacious apartment, divided in the
midst by a vast screen of carved cedar-wood, he pointed to a curtained
entrance.  "In that chamber," said he, "lodges the Lady Helen."

"Ah, my poor cousin," exclaimed Murray; "though she seems not to have
tasted the hardships of her parents, she has shared their misery, I do
not doubt."  While he spoke, the lieutenant bowed in silence, and
Murray entered alone.  The chamber was magnificent, and illumined by a
lamp which hung from the ceiling.  He cautiously approached the bed,
fearing too hastily to disturb her, and gently pulling aside the
curtains, beheld vacancy.  An exclamation of alarm had almost escaped
him, when observing a half-open door at the other side of the
apartment, he drew toward it, and there beheld his cousin, with her
back to him, kneeling before a crucifix.  She spoke not, but the fervor
of her action manifested how earnestly she prayed.  He moved behind
her, but she heard him not; her whole soul was absorbed in the success
of her petition; and at last raising her clasped hands in a paroxysm of
emotion, she exclaimed,-"If that trumpet sounded the victory of the
Scots, then, Power of Goodness! receive thy servant's thanks.  But if
De Warenne have conquered, where De Valence has failed; if all whom I
love be lost to me here, take me then to thyself, and let my freed
spirit fly to their embraces in heaven!"

"Ay, and on earth too, thou blessed angel!" cried Murray, throwing
himself toward her.  She started from her knees, and with such a cry as
the widow of Sarepta uttered when she embraced her son from the dead,
Helen threw herself on the bosom of her cousin, and closed her eyes in
a blissful swoon--for even while every outward sense seemed fled, the
impression of joy played about her heart; and the animated throbbings
of Murray's breast, while he pressed her in his arms, at last aroused
her to recollection.  Her glistening and uplifted eyes told all the
happiness, all the gratitude of her soul.

"My father?  All are safe?" demanded she.

"All, my best beloved!" answered Murray, forgetting in his powerful
emotions of his heart, that what he felt, and what he uttered, were
beyond even a cousin's limits: "My uncle, the countess, Lord and Lady
Ruthven--all are safe."

"And Sir William Wallace?" cried she; "you do not mention him.  I hope
no ill-"

"He is conqueror here!" interrupted Murray.  "He has subdued every
obstacle between Berwick and Stirling; and he has sent me hither to set
you and the rest of the dear prisoners free."

Helen's heart throbbed with a new tumult as he spoke.  She longed to
ask whether the unknown knight from whom she had parted in the hermit's
cell, had ever joined Sir William Wallace.  She yearned to know that he
yet lived.  At the thought of the probability of his having fallen in
some of these desperate conflicts, her soul seemed to gasp for
existence; and dropping her head on her cousin's shoulder, "Tell me,
Andrew," said she, and there she paused, with an emotion for which she
could not account to herself.

"Of what would my sweet cousin inquire?" asked Murray, partaking her
agitation.

"Nothing particular," said she, covered with blushes; "but did you
fight alone in these battles?  Did no other knight but Sir William
Wallace?"

"Many, dearest Helen," returned Murray, enraptured at a solicitude
which he appropriated to himself.  "Many knights joined our arms.  All
fought in a manner worthy of their leader, and thanks to Heaven, none
have fallen."

"Thanks, indeed," cried Helen; and with a hope she dared hardly whisper
to herself, of seeing the unknown knight in the gallant train of the
conqueror, she falteringly said, "Now, Andrew, lead me to my father."

Murray would perhaps have required a second bidding, had not Lord Mar,
impatient to see his daughter, appeared with the countess at the door
of the apartment.  Hastening toward them, she fell on the bosom of her
father; and while she bathed his face and hands with her glad tears,
he, too, wept, and mingled blessings with his caresses.  No coldness
here met his paternal heart: no distracting confusions tore her from
his arms; no averted looks, by turns, alarmed and chilled the bosom of
tenderness.  All was innocence and duty in Helen's breast; and every
ingenuous action showed its affection and its joy.  The estranged heart
of Lady Mar had closed against him; and though he suspected not its
wanderings, he felt the unutterable difference between the warm
transports of his daughter and the frigid gratulations forced from the
lips of his wife.

Lady Mar gazed with a weird frown on the lovely form of Helen, as she
wound her exquisitely turned arms round the earl in filial tenderness.
Her bosom, heaving in the snowy whiteness of virgin purity; her face,
radiant with the softest blooms of youth; all seemed to frame an object
which malignant fiends had conjured up to blast her stepdame's hope.
"Wallace will behold these charms!" cried her distracted spirit to
herself, "and then, where am I?"

While her thoughts thus followed each other, she unconsciously darted
looks on Helen, which, if an evil eye had any bewitching power, would
have withered all her beauties.  At one of these portentous moments,
the glad eyes of Helen met her glance.  She started with horror.  It
made her remember how she had been betrayed, and all that she had
suffered from Soulis.  But she could not forget that she had also been
rescued; and with that blessed recollection, the image of her preserver
rose before her.  At this gentle idea, her alarmed countenance took a
softer expression; and, tenderly sighing, she turned to her father's
question of "How she came to be with Lady Ruthven, when he had been
taught by Lord Andrew to believe her safe at St. Fillan's?"

"Yes," cried Murray, throwing herself on a seat beside her, "I found in
your letter to Sir William Wallace, that you had been betrayed from
your asylum by some traitor Scot; and but for the fullness of my joy at
our present meeting, I should have inquired the name of the villian!"

Lady Mar felt a deadly sickness at her heart, on hearing that Sir
William Wallace was already so far acquainted with her daughter as to
have received a letter from her; and in amazed despair, she prepared to
listen to what she expected would bring a death-stroke to her hopes.
They had met--but how?--where?  They wrote to each other.  Then, far
indeed had proceeded that communication of hearts, which was now the
aim of her life--and she was undone!  Helen glanced at the face of Lady
mar, and observing its changes, regarded them as corroborations of her
having been the betrayer.  "If conscience disturbs you thus," thought
Helen, "let it rend your heart, and perhaps remorse may follow!"

As the tide of success seemed so full for the patriot Scots, Helen no
longer feared that her cousin would rashly seek a precarious vengeance
on the traitor Soulis, when he might probably soon have an opportunity
of making it certain at the head of an army.  She therefore commenced
her narrative from the time of Murray's leaving her at the priory, and
continued it to the hour in which she had met her father, a prisoner in
the streets of Stirling.  As she proceeded, the indignation of the earl
and of Murray against Soulis became vehement.  The nephew was full of
immediate personal revenge.  But the father, with arguments similar to
those which had suggested themselves to his daughter, calmed the
lover's rage, for Murray now felt that fire as well as a kinsman's; and
reseated himself with repressed, though burning resentment, to listen
to the remainder of her relation.

The quaking conscience of Lady mar did indeed vary her cheeks with a
thousand dyes, when, as Helen repeated part of her conversation with
Macgregor's wife, Murray abruptly said, "Surely that woman could name
the traitor who betrayed us into the hands of our enemies!  Did she not
hint it?"

Helen cast down her eyes, that even a glance might not overwhelm with
insupportable shame the already trembling countess.  Lady Mar saw that
she was acquainted with her guilt, and expecting no more mercy than she
knew she would show to Helen in the like circumstances, she hastily
rose from her chair, internally vowing vengeance against her triumphant
daughter and hatred of all mankind.  But Helen thought she might have
so erred, from a wife's alarm for the safety of the husband she
professed to doat on; and this dutiful daughter determined never to
accuse her.

While all the furies raged in the breast of the guilty woman, Helen
simply answered, "Lord Soulis would be weak as he is vile, to trust a
secret of that kind with a servant;" then hurried on to the relation of
subsequent events.  The countess breathed again; and almost deceiving
herself with the idea that Helen was indeed ignorant of her treachery,
listened with emotions of another kind, when she heard of the rescue of
her daughter-in-law.  She saw Wallace in that brave act!  But as Helen,
undesignedly to herself, passed over the parts in their conversation
which had most interested her, and never named the graces of his
person, Lady mar thought, that to have viewed Wallace with so little
notice would have been impossible; and therefore was glad of such a
double conviction, that he and her daughter had never met, which seemed
verified when Helen said that the unknown chief had promised to join
his arms with those of Wallace.

Murray had observed Helen while she spoke, with an impression at his
heart that made it pause.  Something in this interview had whispered to
him what he had never dreamed before--that she was dearer to him than
fifty thousand cousins.  And while the blood flushed and retreated in
the complexion of Helen, and her downcast eyes refused to show what was
passing there, while she hastily ran over the circumstances of her
acquaintance with the stranger knight, Murray's own emotions declared
the secret of hers; and with a lip as pale as her own, he said, "But
where is this brave man?  He cannot have yet joined us, for surely he
would have told Wallace or myself that he came from you?"

"I warned him not to do so," replied she, "for fear that your
indignation against my enemies, my dear cousin, might have precipitated
you into dangers to be incurred for our country only."

"Then, if he had joined us," replied Murray, rising from his seat, "you
will probably soon known who he is.  To-morrow morning Sir William
Wallace will enter the citadel, attended by his principal knights; and
in that gallant company you must doubtless discover the man who had
laid such obligations on us all by your preservation."

Murray's feelings told him that glad should he be, if the utterance of
that obligation would repay it!

Helen herself knew not how to account for the agitation which shook her
whenever she adverted to her unknown preserver.  At the time of the
hermit's friend (the good lay brother), having brought her to Alloa,
when she explained to Lady Ruthven the cause of her strange arrival,
she had then told her story with composure, till she mentioned her
deliverer; but in that moment, for the first time she felt a confusion
which disordered the animation with which she described his patriotism
and his bravery.  But it was natural, she thought, that gratitude for a
recent benefit should make her heart beat high.  It was something like
the enthusiasm she had felt for Wallace on the rescue of her father,
and she was satisfied.  But a few days of quiet at Alloa had recovered
her health from the shock it had received in the recent scenes, and she
proposed to her aunt to send some trusty messenger to inform the
imprisoned earl at Dumbarton of her happy refuge; and Lady Ruthven in
return had urged the probability that the messenger would be
intercepted, and so her asylum be discovered, saying, "Let it alone,
till this knight of yours, by performing his word, calls you to declare
his honorable deeds.  Till then, Lord Mar, ignorant of your danger,
needs no assurance of your safety."

This casual reference to the knight had then made the tranquilized
heart of Helen renew its throbbings, and turning from her aunt with an
acquiescing reply, she retired to her own apartment to quell the
unusual and painful blushes she felt burning on her cheeks.  Why she
should feel thus she could not account, "unless," said she to herself,
"I fear that my suspicion may be guessed at; and should my words or
looks betray the royal Bruce to any harm, that moment of undesigned
ingratitude would be the last of my life."

This explanation seemed ample to herself.  And henceforth avoiding all
mention of her preserver in her conversations with Lady Ruthven, she
had confined the subject to her own breast; and thinking that she
thought of him more by her intention to speak of him less, she wondered
not that whenever she was alone his image immediately rose in her mind,
his voice seemed to sound in her ears, and even as the summer air
wafted its soft fragrance over her cheek, she would turn as if she felt
that breath which had so gently brushed her to repose.  She would then
start and sigh, and repeat his words to herself, but all was serene in
her bosom.  For it seemed as if the contemplation of so much loveliness
of soul in so noble a form, soothed instead of agitated her heart.
"What a king will he be?" thought she; "with what transport would the
virtuous Wallace set the Scottish crown on so noble a brow."

Such were her meditations and feelings, when she was brought a prisoner
to Stirling.  And when she heard of the victories of Wallace, she could
not but think that the brave arm of her knight was there, and that he,
with the renowned champion of Scotland, would fly, on the receipt of
her letter, to Stirling, there to repeat the valiant deeds of
Dumbarton.  The first blast of the Scottish trumpet under the walls
found her, as she had said, upon her knees, and kept her there, for
hardly with any intermission, with fast and prayer did she kneel before
the altar of Heaven--till the voice of Andrew Murray at midnight called
her to freedom and to happiness.

Wallace, and perhaps her nameless hero with him, had again conquered!
His idea dwelt in her heart and faltered on her tongue; and yet, in
reciting the narrative of her late sufferings to her father, when she
came to the mentioning of the stranger's conduct to her--with an
apprehensive embarrassment she felt her growing emotions as she drew
near the subject; and, hurrying over the event, she could only excuse
herself for such new perturbations by supposing that the former treason
of Lady Mar now excited her alarm, with fear she should fix it on a new
object.  Turning cold at an idea so pregnant with horror, she hastily
passed from the agitating theme to speak of De Valence and the respect
with which he had treated her during her imprisonment.  His courtesy
had professed to deny nothing to her wishes except her personal liberty
and any conference with her parents or aunt.  Her father's life, he
declared it was altogether out of his power to grant.  He might suspend
the sentence, but he could not abrogate it.

"Yes," cried the earl, "though false and inflexible, I must not accuse
him of having been so barbarous in his tyranny as Cressingham.  For it
was not until De Valence was taken prisoner that Joanna and I were
divided.  Till then we were lodged in decent apartments, but on that
event Cressingham tore us from each other, and threw us into different
dungeons.  My sister Janet I never saw since the hour we were separated
in the street of Stirling until the awful moment in which we met on the
roof of this castle--the moment when I expected to behold her and my
wife die before my eyes!"

Helen now learned, for the first time, the base cruelties which had
been exercised on her father and his family since the capture of De
Valence.  She had been exempted from sharing them by the fears of
Cressingham, who, knowing that the English earl had particular views
with regard to her, durst not risk offending him by outraging one whom
he had declared himself determined to protect.

During part of this conversation, Murray withdrew to bring Lady Ruthven
and her son to share the general joy of full domestic reunion.  The
happy Edwin and his mother having embraced these dear relatives with
yet more tender affections yearning in their bosoms, accompanied Murray
to the door of the barbican, which contained Lord Ruthven.  They
entered on the wings of conjugal and filial love; but the for once
pensive Lord Andrew, with a slow and musing step, returned into the
castle to see that all was safely disposed for the remainder of the
night.




Chapter XXXV.

Stirling Citadel.


At noon next day Murray received a message from Wallace, desiring him
to acquaint the Earl of Mar that he was coming to the citadel to offer
the palace of Snawdoun to the ladies of Mar, and to request the earl to
take charge of the illustrous prisoners he was bringing to the castle.

Each member of the family hastened to prepare for an interview which
excited different expectations in each different breast.  Lady Mar,
well satisfied that Helen and Wallace had never met, and clinging to
the vague words of Murray, that he had sent to give her liberty, called
forth every art of the tiringroom to embellish her still fine person.
Lady Ruthven, with the respectable eagerness of a chaste matron, in
prospect of seeing the man who had so often been the preserver of her
brother, and who had so lately delivered her husband from a loathsome
dungeon, was the first who joined the earl in the great gallery.  Lady
Mar soon after entered like Juno, in all her plumage of majesty and
beauty.

But the trumpet of Wallace had sounded in the gates before the
trembling Helen could leave her apartment.  It was the herald of his
approach, and she sunk breathless into a seat.  She was now going to
see for the first time the man for whose woes she had so often wept;
the man who had incurred them all for objects dear to her.  He whom she
had mourned as one stricken in sorrows, and feared for, as an outlaw
doomed to suffering and to death, was now to appear before her, not in
the garb of woe, which excuses the sympathy its wearer excites, but
arrayed as a conqueror, as the champion of Scotland, giving laws to her
oppressors, and entering in triumph, over fields of their slain!

Awful as this picture was to the timidity of her gentle nature, it
alone did not occasion that inexpressible sensation which seemed to
check the pulses of her heart.  Was she, or was she not, to recognize
in his train the young and noble Bruce?  Was she to be assured that he
still existed?  Or, by seeking him everywhere in vain, ascertain that
he, who could not break his word, had perished, lonely and unknown?

While these ideas thronged into her mind, the platform below was
filling with the triumphant Scots; and, her door suddenly opening,
Edwin entered in delighted haste.  "Come, cousin!" cried he, "Sir
William Wallace has almost finished his business in the great hall.  He
has made my uncle governor of this place, and has committed nearly a
thousand prisoners of rank to his care.  If you be not expeditious, you
will allow him to enter the gallery before you."

Hardly observing her face, from the happy emotions which dazzled his
own eyes, he seized her hand, and hurried her to the gallery.

Only her aunt and step-mother were yet there.  Lady Ruthven sat
composedly, on a tapestried bench, awaiting the arrival of the company.
But Lady Mar was near the door, listening impatiently to the voices
beneath.  At sight of Helen, she drew back; but she smiled exultingly
when she saw that all the splendour of beauty she had so lately beheld
and dreaded was flown.  Her unadorned garments gave no particular
attraction to the simple lines of her form; the effulgence of her
complexion was gone; her cheek was pale, and the tremulous motion of
her step deprived her of the elastic grace which was usually the charm
of her nymph-like figure.

Triumph now sat in the eyes of the countess; and, with an air of
authority, she waved Helen to take a seat beside Lady Ruthven.  But
Helen, fearful of what might be her emotion when the train should
enter, had just placed herself behind her aunt, when the steps of many
a mailed foot sounded upon the oaken floor of the outward gallery.  The
next moment the great doors of the huge screen opened, and a crowd of
knights in armor flashed upon her eyes.  A strange dimness overspread
her faculties, and nothing appeared to her but an indistinct throng
approaching.  She would have given worlds to have been removed from the
spot, but was unable to stir; and on recovering her senses, she beheld
Lady Mar (who, exclaiming, "Ever my preserver!" had hastened forward),
now leaning on the bosom of one of the chiefs: his head was bent as if
answering her in a low voice.  By the golden locks, which hung down
upon the jeweled tresses of the countess, and obscured his face, she
judged it must indeed be the deliverer of her father, the knight of her
dream.  But where was he, who had delivered herself from a worse fate
than death?  Where was the dweller of her daily thoughts, the bright
apparition of her unslumbering pillow?

Helen's sight, now clearing to as keen a vision as before it had been
dulled and indistinct, with a timid and anxious gaze glanced from face
to face of the chieftains around; but all were strange.  Then
withdrawing her eyes with a sad conviction that their search was indeed
in vain; in the very moment of that despair, they were arrested by a
glimpse of the features of Wallace.  He had raised his head; he shook
back his clustering hair, and her secret was revealed.  In that
god-like countenance she recognized the object of her devoted wishes!
and with a gasp of overwhelming surprise, she must have fallen from her
seat, had not Lady Ruthven, hearing a sound like the sigh of death,
turned round, and caught her in her arms.  The cry of her aunt drew
every eye to the spot.  Wallace immediately relinquished the countess
to her husband, and moved toward the beautiful and senseless form that
lay on the bosom of Lady Ruthven.  The earl and his agitated wife
followed.

"What ails my Helen?" asked the affectionate father.

"I know not," replied his sister; "she sat behind me, and I knew
nothing of her disorder till she fell as you see."

Murray instantly supposed that she had discovered the unknown knight;
and looking from countenance to countenance, amongst the train, to try
if he could discern the envied cause of such emotions, he read in no
face an answering feeling with that of Helen's; and turning away from
his unavailing scrutiny, on hearing her draw a deep sigh, his eyes
fixed themselves on her, as if they would have read her soul.  Wallace,
who, in the pale form before him, saw, not only the woman whom he had
preserved with a brother's care, but the compassionate saint, who had
given a hallowed grave to the remains of an angel, pure as herself, now
hung over her with anxiety so eloquent in every feature that the
countess would willingly at that moment have stabbed her in every vein.

Lady Ruthven had sprinkled her niece with water; and as she began to
revive, Wallace motioned to his chieftains to withdraw; her eyes opened
slowly; but recollection returning with every reawakened sense, she
dimly perceived a press of people around her, and fearful of again
encountering that face, which declared the Bruce of her secret
meditations and the Wallace of her declared veneration were one, she
buried her blushes in the bosom of her father.  In that short point of
time, images of past, present, and to come, rushed before her; and
without confessing to herself why she thought it necessary to make the
vow, her soul seemed to swear on the sacred altar of a parent's heart,
never more to think on either idea.  Separate, it was sweet to muse on
her own deliverer; it was delightful to dwell on the virtues of her
father's preserver.  But when she saw both characters blended in one,
her feelings seemed sacrilege; and she wished even to bury her
gratitude, where no eye but Heaven's could see its depth and fervor.

Trembling at what might be the consequences of this scene, Lady mar
determined to hint to Wallace that Helen loved some unknown knight; and
bending to her daughter, said in a low voice, yet loud enough for him
to hear, "Retire, my child; you will be better in your own room,
whether pleasure or disappointment about the person you wished to
discover in Sir William's train have occasioned these emotions."

Helen recovered herself at this indelicate remark; and raising her head
with that modest dignity which only belongs to the purest mind, gently
but firmly said, "I obey you, madam; and he whom I have seen will be
too generous, not to pardon the effects of so unexpected a weight of
gratitude."  As she spoke, her turning eye met the fixed gaze of
Wallace.  His countenance became agitated, and dropping on his knee
beside her; "Gracious lady;" cried he, "mine is the right of gratitude;
but it is dear land precious to me; a debt that my life will not be
able to repay.  I was ignorant of all your goodness, when we parted in
the hermit's cave.  But the spirit of an angel like yourself, Lady
Helen, will whisper to you all her widowed husband's thanks."  He
pressed her hand fervently between his, and rising, left the room.

Helen looked on with an immovable eye, in which the heroic vow of her
soul spoke in every beam; but as he arose, even then she felt its
frailty, for her spirit seemed leaving her; and as he disappeared from
the door, her world seemed shut from her eyes.  Not to think of him was
impossible; how to think of him was in her own power.  Her heart felt
as if suddenly made a desert.  But heroism was there.  She had looked
upon the Heaven-dedicated Wallace; on the widowed mourner of Marion;
the saint and the hero; the being of another world! and as such she
would regard him, till in the realms of purity she might acknowledge
the brother of her soul!

A sacred inspiration seemed to illuminate her features, and to brace
with the vigor of immortality those limbs which before had sunk under
her.  She forgot she was still of earth, while a holy love, like that
of the dove in Paradise, sat brooding on her heart.

Lady Mar gazed on her without understanding the ethereal meaning of
those looks.  Judging from her own impassioned feelings, she could only
resolve the resplendent beauty which shone from the now animated face
and form of Helen into the rapture of finding herself beloved.  Had she
not heard Wallace declare himself to be the unknown knight who had
rescued Helen?  She had heard him devote his life to her, and was not
his heart included in that dedication?  She had then heard that love
vowed to another, which she would have sacrificed her soul to win!

Murray too was confounded; but his reflections were far different from
those of Lady Mar.  He saw his newly self-discerned passion smothered
in its first breath.  At the moment in which he found that he loved his
cousin above all of women's mold, an unappealable voice in his bosom
made him crush every fond desire.  That heart which, with the chaste
transports of a sister, had throbbed so entrancingly against his, was
then another's! was become the captive of Wallace's virtues; of the
only man who, his judgment would have said, deserves Helen Mar!  But
when he clasped her glowing beauties in his arms only the night before,
his enraptured soul then believed that the tender smile he saw on her
lips was meant as the sweet earnest of the happier moment, when he
might hold her there forever!  That dream was now past.  "Well! be it
so!" said he to himself, "if this too daring passion must be clipped on
the wing, I have at least the consolation that it soared like the bird
of Jove!  But, loveliest of created beings," thought he, looking on
Helen with an expression which, had she met it, would have told her all
that was passing in his soul, "if I am not to be thy love, I will be
thy friend--and live for thee and Wallace!"

Believing that she had read her sentence in what she thought the
triumphant glances of a happy passion, Lady Mar turned from her
daughter-in-law with such a hatred kindling in her heart, she durst not
trust her eyes to the inspection of the bystanders; but her tongue
could not be restrained beyond the moment in which the object of her
jealousy left the room.  As the door closed upon Helen, who retired
leaning on the arms of her aunt and Edwin, the countess turned to her
lord; his eyes were looking with doting fondness toward the point where
she withdrew.  This sight augmented the angry tumults in the breast of
his wife; and with a bitter smile she said, "So, my lord, you find the
icy bosom of your Helen can be thawed!"

