       *       *       *       *       *

In the preparation of these thumb-nail sketches, the present writer
makes no pretense of original investigation. He has taken his material
wherever he could find it, making sure only that it was accurate, and
his sole purpose has been to give, in as few words as possible, a
correct impression of the man and what he did. From the facts as given,
however, he has drawn his own conclusions, with some of which, no doubt,
many people will disagree. But he has tried to paint the men truly, in a
few strokes, as they appeared to him, without seeking to conceal their
weaknesses, but at the same time without magnifying them--remembering
always that they were men, subject to mistakes and errors, to be honored
for such true vision as they possessed; remarkable, many of them, for
heroism and high devotion, and worthy a lasting place in the grateful
memory of their country.

The passage of years has a way of diminishing the stature of men thought
great, and often of increasing that of men thought little. Few American
statesmen, for example, loom as large to-day as they appeared to their
contemporaries. Looking back at them, we perceive that, for the most
part, they wasted their days in fighting wind-mills, or in doing things
which had afterwards to be undone. Only through the vista of the years
do we get a true perspective, just as only from a distance can we see
which peaks of the mountain-range loom highest. But even the mist of
years cannot dim essential heroism and nobility of achievement. Indeed,
it enhances them; the voyage of Columbus seems to us a far greater thing
than his contemporaries thought it; Washington is for us a more
venerable figure than he was for the new-born Union; and Lincoln is just
coming into his own as a leader among men.

Every boy and girl ought to try to gain as true and clear an idea as
possible of their country's history, and of the men who made that
history. It is a pleasant study, and grows more and more fascinating as
one proceeds with it. The great pleasure in reading is to understand
every word, and so to catch the writer's thought completely. Knowledge
always gives pleasure in just that way--by a wider understanding.
Indeed, that is the principal aim of education: to enable the individual
to get the most out of life by broadening his horizon, so that he sees
more and understands more than he could do if he remained ignorant. And
since you are an American, you will need especially to understand your
country. You will be quite unable to grasp the meaning of the references
to her story which are made every day in conversation, in newspapers, in
books and magazines, unless you know that story; and you will also be
unable properly to fulfil your duties as a citizen of this Republic
unless you know it.

For the earliest years, and, more especially, for the story of the
deadly struggle between French and English for the possession of the
continent, the books to read above all others are those of Francis
Parkman. He has clothed history with romantic fascination, and no one
who has not read him can have any adequate idea of the glowing and
life-like way in which those Frenchmen and Spaniards and Englishmen work
out their destinies in his pages. The story of Columbus and of the early
explorers will be found in John Fiske's "Discovery of America," a book
written simply and interestingly, but without Parkman's insight and
wizardry of style--which, indeed, no other American historian can equal.
A little book by Charles F. Lummis, called "The Spanish Pioneers," also
gives a vivid picture of those early explorers. The story of John Smith
and William Bradford and Peter Stuyvesant and William Penn will also be
found in Fiske's histories dealing with Virginia and New England and the
Dutch and Quaker colonies. Almost any boy or girl will find them
interesting, for they are written with care, in simple language, and not
without an engaging humor.

There are so many biographies of Washington that it is difficult to
choose among them. Perhaps the most interesting are those by Woodrow
Wilson, Horace E. Scudder, Paul Leicester Ford, and Henry Cabot
Lodge--all well-written and with an effort to give a true impression of
the man. Of the other Presidents, no better biographies exist than those
in the "American Statesmen" series, where, of course, the lives of the
principal statesmen are also to be found. Not all of them, nor, perhaps,
even most of them are worth reading by the average boy or girl. There is
no especial reason why the life of any man should be studied in detail
after he has ceased to be a factor in history. Of the Presidents,
Washington, Jefferson, Jackson and Lincoln are still vital to the life
of to-day, and of the statesmen there are a few, like Franklin,
Hamilton, Webster, Calhoun and Clay, whose influence is still felt in
our national life, but the remainder are negligible, except that you
must, of course, be familiar in a broad way with their characters and
achievements to understand your country's story.

History is the best place to learn the stories of the pioneers, soldiers
and sailors. Archer Butler Hulburt has a little book, "Pilots of the
Republic," which tells about some of the pioneers; John Fiske wrote a
short history of "The War of Independence," which will tell you all you
need know about the soldiers of the Revolution, with the exception of
Washington; and you can learn about the battles of the Civil War from
any good history of the United States. There is a series called the
"Great Commanders Series," which tells the story, in detail, of the
lives of American commanders on land and sea, but there is no reason why
you should read any of them, with the exception of Lee, Farragut, and
possibly Grant, though you will find the lives of Taylor and "Stonewall"
Jackson interesting in themselves. For the sailors, with the exception
of Farragut, Barnes's "Yankee Ships and Yankee Sailors" will suffice;
though every boy will enjoy reading Maclay's "History of the American
Navy," where the story of our great sea-fights is told better than it
has ever been told before.

These books may be found in almost any public library, and on the
shelves there, too, you will probably find Elbert Hubbard's "Little
Journeys," which give flashlight portraits of statesmen and soldiers and
many other people, vivid and interesting, but sometimes distorted, as
flashlights have a way of being.

Perhaps the librarian will permit you to look over the shelves where the
biographies and works dealing with American history are kept. Don't be
over-awed by the number of volumes, because there are scores and scores
which are of no importance to you. Theodore Parker had a wrong idea
about reading, for once upon a time he undertook to read all the books
in a library, beginning at the first one and proceeding along shelf
after shelf. He never finished the task, of course, because he found
out, after a while, that there are many books which are not worth
reading, and many more which are of value only to specialists in certain
departments of knowledge. No man can "know it all." But every man should
know one thing well, and have a general knowledge of the rest.

For instance, none but an astronomer need know the mathematics of the
science, but all of us should know the principal facts concerning the
universe and the solar system, and it is a pleasure to us to recognize
the different constellations as we gaze up at the heavens on a cloudless
night. None but a lawyer need spend his time reading law-books, but most
of us want to know the broad principles upon which justice is
administered. No one but an economist need bother with the abstract
theories of political economy, but if we are to be good citizens, we
must have a knowledge of its foundations, so that we may weigh
intelligently the solutions of public problems which different parties
offer.

So if you are permitted to look along the shelves of the public library,
you will have no concern with the great majority of the books you see
there; but here and there one will catch your eye which interests you,
and these are the ones for you to read. You have no idea how the habit
of right reading will grow upon you, and what a delightful and valuable
habit it will prove to be. Like any other good habit, it takes pains at
first to establish, an effort of will and self-control. But that very
effort helps in the forming of character, and the habit of right reading
is perhaps the best and most far-reaching in its effects that any boy or
girl can form. I hope that this little volume, and the other books which
I have mentioned, will help you to form it.


       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER II

THE BEGINNERS


Nearly five hundred years ago, there lived, in the beautiful old Italian
city of Genoa, a poor wool-comber named Dominico Colombo, and about
1446, a son was born to him and to his wife, Susanna, and in due time
christened Christoforo.

The world into which the child was born was very different to the one in
which we live. Europe was known, and northern Africa, and western Asia;
but to the east stretched the fabulous country of the Grand Khan,
Cathay, Cipango, and farthest Ind; while to the west rolled the Sea of
Darkness, peopled with unimaginable terrors.

Of the youth of Christopher Columbus, as we call him, little is known.
No doubt it was much like other boyhoods, and one likes to picture him,
in such hours of leisure as he had, strolling about the streets of
Genoa, listening to the talk, staring in at the shop-windows, or
watching the busy life in the harbor. That the latter had a strong
attraction for him there can be no doubt, for though he followed his
father's trade till early manhood, he finally found his real vocation as
a seaman. It was on the ocean that true romance dwelt, for it led to
strange lands and peoples, and no one knew what wonders and mysteries
lay behind each horizon. It was there, too, high courage was developed
and endurance, for it was there that men did battle hand to hand with
nature's mightiest forces. It was the one career of the age which called
to the bold and adventurous spirit. What training Columbus received or
what voyages he made we know not; but when, at about the age of thirty,
he steps into the light of history, it is as a man with a wide and
thorough knowledge of both the theory and practice of seamanship; a man,
too, of keen mind and indomitable will, and with a mighty purpose
brooding in his heart.

It was natural enough that his eyes should turn to Portugal, for
Portugal was the greatest sea-faring nation of the age. Her sailors had
discovered the Madeira Islands, and crept little by little down the
coast of Africa, rounding this headland and that, searching always for a
passage to India, which they knew lay somewhere to the east, until, at
last, they had sailed triumphantly around the Cape of Good Hope. It is
worth remarking that Columbus's brother, Bartholomew, of whom we hear so
little, but who did so much for his brother's fame, was a member of that
expedition, and Columbus himself must have gathered no little
inspiration from it.

So to Lisbon Columbus went, and his ardent spirit found a great stimulus
in the adventurous atmosphere of that bustling city. He went to work as
a map-maker, marrying the daughter of one of the captains of Prince
Henry the Navigator, from whom he secured a great variety of maps,
charts and memoranda. His business kept him in close touch with both
mariners and astronomers, so that he was acquainted with every
development of both discovery and theory. In more than one mind the
conviction was growing up that the eastern shore of Asia could be
reached by sailing westward from Europe--a conviction springing
naturally enough from the belief that the earth was round, which was
steadily gaining wider and wider acceptance. In fact, a Florentine
astronomer named Toscanelli furnished Columbus with a map showing how
this voyage could be accomplished, and Columbus afterwards used this map
in determining his route.

That the idea was not original with Columbus takes nothing from his
fame; his greatness lies in being the first fully to grasp its meaning,
fully to believe it, fully to devote his life to it. For the last
measure of a man's devotion to an idea is his willingness to stake his
life upon it, as Columbus staked his. The idea possessed him; there was
room in him only for a dogged determination to realize it, to trample
down such obstacles as might arise to keep him from his goal. And
obstacles enough there were, for many years of waiting and
disappointment lay before him--years during which, a shabby and
melancholy figure, laughed at and scorned, mocked by the very children
in the streets, he "begged his way from court to court, to offer to
princes the discovery of a world." And here again was his true
greatness--that he did not despair, that his spirit remained unbroken
and his high heart still capable of hope.

Yet let us not idealize him too much. The eagerness to reach the Indies
was wholly because of the riches which they possessed. The spice trade
was especially coveted, and tradition told of golden cities of fabulous
wealth and beauty which lay in the country to the east. The great motive
behind all the early voyages was hope of gain, and Columbus had his full
share of it. Yet there grew up within him, in time, something more than
this--a love of the project for its own sake--though to the very last, a
little overbalanced, perhaps, by his great idea, he insisted upon the
rewards and honors which must be his in case of success.

With his route well-outlined and his plans carefully matured, Columbus
turned naturally to the King of Portugal, John II., as a man interested
in all nautical enterprise, and especially interested in finding a route
to the Indies. That crafty monarch listened to Columbus attentively and
was evidently impressed, for he took possession of the maps and plans
which Columbus had prepared, under pretense of examining them while
considering the project, placed them in the hands of one of his own
captains and dispatched him secretly to try the route. That captain,
whose name has been lost to history, must afterwards have been chagrined
enough at the manner in which he missed immortal fame, for, after
sailing a few days to the westward, he turned back and reported to his
royal master that the thing could not be done. His was not the heart
for such an enterprise.

Columbus, learning of the king's treachery, left the court in disgust,
and sending his brother, Bartholomew, to lay the plan before the King of
England, himself proceeded to Spain, whose rulers, Ferdinand and
Isabella, were perhaps the most enlightened of the age. Of Bartholomew's
adventures in England little is known. One thing alone is
certain--England missed the great opportunity just as Portugal had. And
for long years it seemed that, in Spain, Columbus would have no better
fortune. The Spanish monarchs listened to him with interest--as who
would not?--and appointed a council of astronomers and map-makers to
examine the project and to pass upon its feasibility. This council, not
without the connivance of the king and queen, who were absorbed in war
with the Moors, and who, at the same time, did not wish the plan to be
taken elsewhere, kept Columbus waiting for six years, alternating
between hope and despair, and finally reported that the project was
"vain and impossible of execution."

Indignant at thought of the years he had wasted, Columbus determined to
proceed to Paris, to seek an audience of the King of France. His wife
was dead, and he started for Palos, with his little son, Diego,
intending to leave the boy with his wife's sister there, while he
himself journeyed on to Paris. Trudging wearily across the country, they
came one night to the convent of La Rabida, and Columbus stopped to ask
for a crust of bread and cup of water for the child. The prior, Juan
Perez de Marchena, struck by his noble bearing, entered into
conversation with him and was soon so interested that he invited the
travellers in.

Marchena had been Isabella's confessor, and still had great influence
with her. After carefully considering the project which Columbus laid
before him, he went to the queen in person and implored her to
reconsider it. His plea was successful, and Columbus was again summoned
to appear at court, a small sum of money being sent him so that he need
not appear in rags. The Spanish monarchs received him well, but when
they found that he demanded the title of admiral at once, and, in case
of success, the title of viceroy, together with a tenth part of all
profits resulting from either trade or conquest, they abruptly broke off
the negotiations, and Columbus, mounting a mule which had been given
him, started a second time for Paris. He had proceeded four or five
miles, in what sadness and turmoil of spirit may be imagined, when a
royal messenger, riding furiously, overtook him and bade him return. His
terms had been accepted.

This is what had happened: In despair at the departure of Columbus, Luis
de Santangel, receiver of the revenues of Aragon, and one of the few
converts to his theories, had obtained an audience of the queen, and
pointed out to her, with impassioned eloquence, the glory which Spain
would win should Columbus be successful. The queen's patriotic ardor
was enkindled, and when Ferdinand still hesitated, she cried, "I
undertake the enterprise for my own crown of Castile. I will pledge my
jewels to raise the money that is needed!" Santangel assured her that he
himself was ready to provide the money, and advanced seventeen thousand
florins from the coffers of Aragon, so that Ferdinand paid for the
expedition, after all.

It is in no way strange that the demands of Columbus should have been
thought excessive; indeed, the wonderful thing is that they should,
under any circumstances, have been agreed to. Here was a man, to all
appearances a penniless adventurer, asking for honors, dignities and
rewards which any grandee of Spain might have envied him. That they
should have been granted was due to the impulsive sympathy of Isabella
and the indifference of her royal consort, who said neither yes nor no;
though, in the light of subsequent events, it is not improbable that the
thought may have crossed his mind that royal favor may always be
withdrawn, and that the hand which gives may also take away.

But though Columbus had triumphed in this particular, his trials were by
no means at an end. The little port of Palos was commanded by royal
order to furnish the new Admiral with two small vessels known as
caravels. This was soon done, but no sailors were willing to embark on
such a voyage, the maddest in all history. Only by the most extreme
measures, by impressment and the release of criminals willing to
accompany the expedition in order to get out of jail, were crews
finally provided. A third small vessel was secured, and on the morning
of Friday, August 3, 1492, this tiny fleet of three boats, the Santa
Maria, the Pinta and the Nina, whose combined crews numbered less than
ninety men, sailed out from Palos on the grandest voyage the world has
ever known.

The shore was lined with people weeping and wringing their hands for the
relatives and friends whom they were sure they should never see again,
and most of the sailors were certain that they were bidding farewell
forever to their native land. Even at the present day, few men would
care to undertake such a voyage in such ships. The two little caravels,
Nina and Pinta, were decked only at stern and prow. The Santa Maria was
but little larger, her length being only about sixty feet, and all three
of the vessels were old, leaky, and in need of frequent repairs.

The map which Toscanelli had given Columbus years before showed Japan
lying directly west of the Canaries, so to the Canaries Columbus steered
his fleet, and then set forth westward into the unknown. By a fortunate
chance, it was the very best route he could have chosen, for he came at
once into the region of the trade winds, which, blowing steadily from
the east, drove the vessels westward day after day over a smooth sea.
But this very thing, favorable as it was, added greatly to the terror of
the men. How were they to get back to Spain, with the wind always
against them? What was the meaning of a sea as smooth as their own
Guadalquiver? They implored Columbus to turn back; but to turn back was
the last thing in his thoughts. An opportune storm helped to reassure
his men by proving that the wind did not always blow from the east and
that the sea was not always calm.

But there were soon other causes of alarm. The compass varied strangely,
and what hope for them was there if this, their only guide, proved
faithless? They ran into vast meadows of floating seaweed, the Sargasso
Sea, and it seemed certain that the ships would soon be so entangled
