it was not until the 12th of July that they sailed from the Bay of
Ferrol, where they had collected after the storm.

Never was there known a season so boisterous as the summer of
1588, and when off Ushant, in a southwest gale, four galleys were
wrecked on the French coast, and the Santa Anna, a galleon of 800
tons, went down, carrying with her ninety seamen, three hundred
soldiers, and 50,000 ducats in gold.

After two days the storm abated, and the fleet again proceeded.
At daybreak on the 20th the Lizard was in sight, and an English
fishing boat was seen running along their line. Chase was given, but
she soon out sailed her pursuers, and carried the news to Plymouth.
The Armada had already been made out from the coast the night before,
and beacon lights had flashed the news all over England. In every
village and town men were arming and saddling and marching away to
the rendezvous of the various corps.

In Plymouth the news was received with the greatest rejoicing.
Thanks to the care with which the provisions had been husbanded,
and to the manner in which the officers and volunteers had from
their private means supplemented the scanty stores, there was
still a week's provisions on board, and this, it was hoped, would
suffice for their needs. The scanty supply of ammunition was a
greater source of anxiety; but they hoped that fresh supplies would
be forthcoming, now that even the queen could no longer close her
eyes to the urgent necessity of the case.

As soon as the news arrived all the gentlemen in the town flocked
on board the ships, and on the night of the 19th the queen's
ships and some of the privateers went to moorings behind Ram Head,
so that they could make clear to sea; and on the morning when the
Spaniards sighted the Lizard, forty sail were lying ready for action
under the headland.

At three o'clock in the afternoon the lookout men on the hill
reported a line of sails on the western horizon. Two wings were at
first visible, which were gradually united as the topsails of those
in the centre rose above the line of sea. As they arose it could
be seen that the great fleet was sailing, in the form of a huge
crescent, before a gentle wind. A hundred and fifty ships, large
and small, were counted, as a few store ships bound for Flanders
had joined the Armada for protection.

The Active was one of the privateers that had late the evening before
gone out to Ram Head, and just as it was growing dusk the anchors
were got up, and the little fleet sailed out from the shelter of
the land as the Armada swept along.

The Spanish admiral at once ordered the fleet to lie to for the
night, and to prepare for a general action at daybreak, as he knew
from a fisherman he had captured that the English fleet were at
Plymouth. The wind was on shore, but all through the night Howard's
and Drake's ships beat out from the Sound until they took their
places behind the Spanish fleet, whose position they could perfectly
make out by the light of the half moon that rose at two in the
morning.

On board the English fleet all was confidence and hilarity. The
sufferings of the last three months were forgotten. The numbers and
magnitude of the Spanish ships counted as nothing. The sailors of
the west country had met the Spaniards on the Indian seas and proved
their masters, and doubted not for a moment that they should do so
again.

There was scarce a breath of air when day broke, but at eight
o'clock a breeze sprang up from the west, and the Armada made sail
and attempted to close with the English; but the low, sharp English
ships sailed two feet to the one of the floating castles of Spain,
and could sail close to the wind, while the Spanish ships, if they
attempted to close haul their sails, drifted bodily to leeward.
Howard's flagship, the Ark Raleigh, with three other English ships,
opened the engagement by running down along their rear line, firing
into each galleon as they passed, then wearing round and repeating
the manoeuvre. The great San Mateo luffed out from the rest of the
fleet and challenged them to board, but they simply poured their
second broadside into her and passed on.

The excellence of the manoeuvring of the English ships, and the
rapidity and accuracy of their fire, astonished the Spaniards.
Throughout the whole forenoon the action continued; the Spaniards
making efforts to close, but in vain, the English ships keeping
the weather gage and sailing continually backwards and forwards,
pouring in their broadsides. The height and size of the Spanish ships
were against them; and being to leeward they heeled over directly
they came up to the wind to fire a broadside, and their shots for
the most part went far over their assailants, while they themselves
suffered severely from the English fire. Miquel de Oquendo, who
commanded one of the six Spanish squadrons, distinguished himself
by his attempts to close with the English, and by maintaining his
position in the rear of the fleet engaged in constant conflict with
them.

He was a young nobleman of great promise, distinguished alike for
his bravery and chivalrous disposition; but he could do little
while the wind remained in the west and the English held the weather
gage. So far only the ships that had been anchored out under Ram
Head had taken part in the fight, those lying higher up in the
Sound being unable to make their way out. At noon the exertions of
their crews, who had from the preceding evening worked incessantly,
prevailed, and they were now seen coming out from behind the headland
to take part in the struggle. Medina Sidonia signalled to his fleet
to make sail up Channel, Martinez de Ricaldo covering the rear
with the squadron of Biscay. He was vice admiral of the fleet, and
considered to be the best seaman Spain possessed now that Santa
Cruz was dead.

The wind was now rising. Lord Howard sent off a fast boat with
letters to Lord Henry Seymour, telling him how things had gone so
far, and bidding him be prepared for the arrival of the Spanish
fleet in the Downs. As the afternoon went on the wind rose, and a
rolling sea came in from the west. Howard still hung upon the Spanish
rear, firing but seldom in order to save his powder. As evening
fell, the Spanish vessels, huddled closely together, frequently came
into collision with one another, and in one of these the Capitana,
the flagship of the Andalusian division, commanded by Admiral
Pedro de Valdez, had her bowsprit carried away, the foremast fell
overboard, and the ship dropped out of her place.

Two of the galleasses came to her assistance and tried to take her
in tow, but the waves were running so high that the cable broke.
Pedro de Valdez had been commander of the Spanish fleet on the coast
of Holland, and knew the English Channel and the northern shores
of France and Holland well.

The duke therefore despatched boats to bring him off with his
crew, but he refused to leave his charge. Howard, as with his ships
he passed her, believed her to be deserted and went on after the
fleet; but a London vessel kept close to her and exchanged shots
with her all night, until Drake, who had turned aside to chase what
he believed to be a portion of the Spanish fleet that had separated
itself from the rest, but which turned out to be the merchant ships
that had joined it for protection, came up, and the Capitana struck
her flag. Drake took her into Torbay, and there left her in the
care of the Brixham fishermen, and taking with him Valdez and the
other officers sailed away to join Lord Howard. The fishermen, on
searching the ship, found some tons of gunpowder on board her.

Knowing the scarcity of ammunition in the fleet they placed this
on board the Roebuck, the fastest trawler in the harbour, and she
started at once in pursuit of the fleet.

The misfortune to the Capitana was not the only one that befell
the Spaniards. While Oquendo was absent from his galleon a quarrel
arose among the officers, who were furious at the ill result of the
day's fighting. The captain struck the master gunner with a stick;
the latter, a German, rushed below in a rage, thrust a burning fuse
into a powder barrel, and sprang through a porthole into the sea.
The whole of the deck was blown up, with two hundred sailors and
soldiers; but the ship was so strongly built that she survived the
shock, and her mast still stood.

The duke sent boats to learn what had happened. These carried
off the few who remained unhurt, but there was no means of taking
off the wounded. These, however, were treated kindly and sent on
shore when the ship was picked up at daylight by the English, who,
on rifling her, found to their delight that there were still many
powder barrels on board that had escaped the explosion.

The morning broke calm, and the wind, when it came, was from the
east, which gave the Spaniards the advantage of position. The two
fleets lay idle all day three or four miles apart, and the next
morning, as the wind was still from the east, the Spaniards bore
down upon Howard to offer battle.

The English, however, headed out to sea. Encouraged by seeing
their assailants avoid a pitched battle the Spaniards gave chase.
The San Marcos, the fastest sailer in the fleet, left the rest
behind, and when the breeze headed round at noon she was several
miles to windward of her consorts, and the English at once set upon
her. She fought with extreme courage, and defended herself single
handed for an hour and a half, when Oquendo came up to the rescue,
and as the action off Plymouth had almost exhausted his stock
of powder, and the Brixham sloop had not yet come up, Howard was
obliged to draw off.

The action of this day was fought off Portland. During the three
days the British fleet had been to sea they had received almost
hourly reinforcements. From every harbour and fishing port along
the coast from Plymouth to the Isle of Wight vessels of all sizes,
smacks, and boats put off, crowded with noblemen and gentlemen
anxious to take part in the action, and their enthusiasm added to
that of the weary and ill fed sailors. At the end of the third day
the English fleet had increased to a hundred sail, many of which,
however, were of very small burden.



CHAPTER IX

THE ROUT OF THE ARMADA


The fight between the fleets had begun on Sunday morning, and at the
end of the third day the strength of the Armada remained unbroken.
The moral effect had no doubt been great, but the loss of two or
three ships was a trifle to so large a force, and the spirit of
the Spaniards had been raised by the gallant and successful defence
the San Marcos had made on the Tuesday afternoon. Wednesday was
again calm. The magazines of the English ships were empty. Though
express after express had been sent off praying that ammunition
might be sent, none had arrived, and the two fleets lay six miles
apart without action, save that the galleasses came out and skirmished
for a while with the English ships.

That evening, however, a supply of ammunition sufficient for another
day's fighting arrived, and soon after daybreak the English fleet
moved down towards the Armada, and for the first time engaged them
at close quarters. The Ark Raleigh, the Bear, the Elizabeth Jones,
the Lion, and the Victory bore on straight into the centre of the
Spanish galleons, exchanging broadsides with each as they passed.
Oquendo with his vessel was right in the course of the English
flagship, and a collision took place, in which the Ark Raleigh's
rudder was unshipped, and she became unmanageable.

The enemy's vessels closed round her, but she lowered her boats,
and these, in spite of the fire of the enemy, brought her head round
before the wind, and she made her way through her antagonists and
got clear. For several hours the battle continued. The Spanish fire
was so slow, and their ships so unwieldy, that it was rarely they
succeeded in firing a shot into their active foes, while the English
shot tore their way through the massive timbers of the Spanish
vessels, scattering the splinters thickly among the soldiers, who
had been sent below to be out of harm's way; but beyond this, and
inflicting much damage upon masts and spars, the day's fighting
had no actual results. No captures were made by the English.

The Spaniards suffered, but made no sign; nevertheless their
confidence in their powers was shaken. Their ammunition was also
running short, and they had no hope of refilling their magazines
until they effected a junction with Parma. Their admiral that night
wrote to him asking that two shiploads of shot and powder might
be sent to him immediately. "The enemy pursue me," he said; "they
fire upon me most days from morning till nightfall, but they will
not close and grapple. I have given them every opportunity. I
have purposely left ships exposed to tempt them to board, but they
decline to do it; and there is no remedy, for they are swift and we
are slow. They have men and ammunition in abundance." The Spanish
admiral was unaware that the English magazines were even more empty
than his own.

On Friday morning Howard sailed for Dover to take in the supplies
that were so sorely needed. The Earl of Sussex, who was in command
of the castle, gave him all that he had, and the stores taken from
the prizes came up in light vessels and were divided among the
fleet, and in the evening the English fleet again sailed out and
took up its place in the rear of the Armada. On Saturday morning
the weather changed. After six days of calm and sunshine it began
to blow hard from the west, with driving showers. The Spaniards,
having no pilots who knew the coasts, anchored off Calais. The
English fleet, closely watching their movements, brought up two
miles astern.

The Spanish admiral sent off another urgent letter to Parma
at Dunkirk, begging him to send immediately thirty or forty fast
gunboats to keep the English at bay. Parma had received the admiral's
letters, and was perfectly ready to embark his troops, but could
not do this as the admiral expected he would, until the fleet came
up to protect him. The lighters and barges he had constructed for
the passage were only fit to keep the sea in calm weather, and
would have been wholly at the mercy of even a single English ship
of war. He could not, therefore, embark his troops until the duke
arrived. As to the gunboats asked for, he had none with him.

But while the Spanish admiral had grave cause for uneasiness in
the situation in which he found himself, Lord Howard had no greater
reason for satisfaction. In spite of his efforts the enemy's
fleet had arrived at their destination with their strength still
unimpaired, and were in communication with the Duke of Parma's
army. Lord Seymour had come up with a squadron from the mouth of
the Thames, but his ships had but one day's provisions on board,
while Drake and Howard's divisions had all but exhausted their
supplies. The previous day's fighting had used up the ammunition
obtained at Dover. Starvation would drive every English ship from
the sea in another week at the latest. The Channel would then be
open for the passage of Parma's army.

At five o'clock on Sunday evening a council of war was held in Lord
Howard's cabin, and it was determined, that as it was impossible
to attack the Spanish Fleet where they lay at the edge of shallow
water, an attempt must be made to drive them out into the Channel
with fireships. Eight of the private vessels were accordingly taken,
and such combustibles as could be found--pitch, tar, old sails,
empty casks, and other materials--were piled into them. At
midnight the tide set directly from the English fleet towards the
Spaniards, and the fireships, manned by their respective crews,
hoisted sail and drove down towards them.

When near the Armada the crews set fire to the combustibles, and
taking to their boats rowed back to the fleet. At the sight of the
flames bursting up from the eight ships bearing down upon them,
the Spaniards were seized with a panic. The admiral fired a gun as
a signal, and all cut their cables and hoisted sail, and succeeded
in getting out to sea before the fireships arrived. They lay to six
miles from shore, intending to return in the morning and recover
their anchors; but Drake with his division of the fleet, and Seymour
with the squadron from the Thames, weighed their anchors and stood
off after them, while Howard with his division remained off Calais,
where, in the morning, the largest of the four galleasses was seen
aground on Calais Bar. Lord Howard wasted many precious hours in
capturing her before he set off to join Drake and Seymour, who were
thundering against the Spanish fleet. The wind had got up during
the night, and the Spaniards had drifted farther than they expected,
and when morning dawned were scattered over the sea off Gravelines.
Signals were made for them to collect, but before they could do so
Drake and Seymour came up and opened fire within pistol shot. The
English admiral saw at once that, with the wind rising from the
south, if he could drive the unwieldy galleons north they would
be cut off from Dunkirk, and would not be able to beat back again
until there was a change of wind.

All through the morning the English ships poured a continuous
shower of shot into the Spanish vessels, which, huddled together
in a confused mass, were unable to make any return whatever. The
duke and Oquendo, with some of the best sailors among the Fleet,
tried to beat out from the crowd and get room to manoeuvre, but
Drake's ships were too weatherly and too well handled to permit
of this, and they were driven back again into the confused mass,
which was being slowly forced towards the shoals and banks of the
coasts.

Howard came up at noon with his division, and until sunset the fire
was maintained, by which time almost the last cartridge was spent,
and the crews worn our by their incessant labour. They took no
prizes, for they never attempted to board. They saw three great
galleons go down, and three more drift away towards the sands of
Ostend, where they were captured either by the English garrisoned
there or by three vessels sent by Lord Willoughby from Flushing,
under the command of Francis Vere. Had the English ammunition lasted
but a few more hours the whole of the Armada would have been either
driven ashore or sunk; but when the last cartridge had been burned
the assailants drew off to take on board the stores which had,
while the fighting was going on, been brought up by some provision
ships from the Thames.

But the Spaniards were in no condition to benefit by the cessation
of the attack. In spite of the terrible disadvantages under which
they laboured, they had fought with splendid courage. The sides of
the galleons had been riddled with shot, and the splinters caused by
the rending of the massive timbers had done even greater execution
than the iron hail. Being always to leeward, and heeling over
with the wind, the ships had been struck again and again below the
waterline, and many were only kept from sinking by nailing sheets
of lead over the shot holes.

Their guns were, for the most part, dismounted or knocked to pieces.
Several had lost masts, the carnage among the crews was frightful,
and yet not a single ship hauled down her colours. The San Mateo,
which was one of those that grounded between Ostend and Sluys,
fought to the last, and kept Francis Vere's three ships at bay for
two hours, until she was at last carried by boarding.

Left to themselves at the end of the day, the Spaniards gathered
in what order they could, and made sail for the north. On counting
the losses they found that four thousand men had been killed or
drowned, and the number of wounded must have been far greater. The
crews were utterly worn out and exhausted. They had the day before
been kept at work cleaning and refitting, and the fireships had
disturbed them early in the night. During the engagement there had
been no time to serve out food, and the labours of the long struggle
had completely exhausted them. Worst of all, they were utterly
disheartened by the day's fighting. They had been pounded by their
active foes, who fired five shots to their one, and whose vessels
sailed round and round them, while they themselves had inflicted
no damage that they could perceive upon their assailants.

The English admirals had no idea of the extent of the victory they
had won. Howard, who had only come up in the middle of the fight,
believed that they "were still wonderful great and strong," while
even Drake, who saw more clearly how much they had suffered,
only ventured to hope that some days at least would elapse before
they could join hands with Parma. In spite of the small store of
ammunition that had arrived the night before, the English magazines
were almost empty; but they determined to show a good front, and
"give chase as though they wanted nothing."

When the morning dawned the English fleet were still to windward
of the Armada, while to leeward were lines of white foam, where
the sea was breaking on the shoals of Holland. It seemed that the
Armada was lost. At this critical moment the wind suddenly shifted
to the east. This threw the English fleet to leeward, and enabled
the Spaniards to head out from the coast and make for the North
Sea. The Spanish admiral held a council. The sea had gone down,
and they had now a fair wind for Calais; and the question was put
to the sailing masters and captains whether they should return into
the Channel or sail north round Scotland and Ireland, and so return
to Spain. The former was the courageous course, but the spirit of the
Spaniards was broken, and the vote was in favour of what appeared
a way of escape. Therefore, the shattered Fleet bore on its way
north. On board the English fleet a similar council was being held,
and it was determined that Lord Seymour's squadron should return to
guard the Channel, lest Parma should take advantage of the absence
of the fleet to cross from Dunkirk to England, and that Howard and
Drake with their ninety ships should pursue the Spaniards; for it
was not for a moment supposed that the latter had entirely abandoned
their enterprise, and intended to return to Spain without making
another effort to rejoin Parma.

During the week's fighting Geoffrey and Lionel Vickars had taken
such part as they could in the contest; but as there had been
no hand to hand fighting, the position of the volunteers on board
the fleet had been little more than that of spectators. The crews
worked the guns and manoeuvred the sails, and the most the lads
could do was to relieve the ship boys in carrying up powder and
shot, and to take round drink to men serving the guns. When not
otherwise engaged they had watched with intense excitement the
manoeuvres of their own ship and of those near them, as they swept
down towards the great hulls, delivered their broadsides, and then
shot off again before the Spaniards had had time to discharge more
than a gun or two. The sails had been pierced in several places,
but not a single shot had struck the hull of the vessel. In the
last day's fighting, however, the Active became entangled among
several of the Spanish galleons, and being almost becalmed by their
lofty hulls, one of them ran full at her, and rolling heavily in
the sea, seemed as if she would overwhelm her puny antagonist.

Geoffrey was standing at the end of the poop when the mizzen rigging
became entangled in the stern gallery of the Spaniard, and a moment
later the mast snapped off, and as it fell carried him overboard.
For a moment he was half stunned, but caught hold of a piece of
timber shot away from one of the enemy's ships, and clung to it
mechanically. When he recovered and looked round, the Active had
drawn out from between the Spaniards, and the great galleon which
had so nearly sunk her was close beside him.

The sea was in a turmoil; the waves as they set in from the west
being broken up by the rolling of the great ships, and torn by the
hail of shot. The noise was prodigious, from the incessant cannonade
kept up by the English ships and the return of the artillery on
board the Armada, the rending of timber, the heavy crashes as the
great galleons rolled against one another, the shouting on board
the Spanish ships, the creaking of the masts and yards, and the
flapping of the sails.
