utmost influence to procure you satisfaction from his Majesty. But you
must distinctly understand, that I can only treat with supplicants, not
with rebels; and, as a preliminary to every act of favour on my side, I
must insist upon your followers laying down their arms and dispersing
themselves."

"To do so, my Lord Duke," replied Morton, undauntedly, "were to
acknowledge ourselves the rebels that our enemies term us. Our swords are
drawn for recovery of a birthright wrested from us; your Grace's
moderation and good sense has admitted the general justice of our
demand,--a demand which would never have been listened to had it not been
accompanied with the sound of the trumpet. We cannot, therefore, and dare
not, lay down our arms, even on your Grace's assurance of indemnity,
unless it were accompanied with some reasonable prospect of the redress
of the wrongs which we complain of."

"Mr Morton," replied the Duke, "you are young, but you must have seen
enough of the world to perceive, that requests, by no means dangerous or
unreasonable in themselves, may become so by the way in which they are
pressed and supported."

"We may reply, my lord," answered Morton, "that this disagreeable mode
has not been resorted to until all others have failed."

"Mr Morton," said the Duke, "I must break this conference short. We are
in readiness to commence the attack; yet I will suspend it for an hour,
until you can communicate my answer to the insurgents. If they please to
disperse their followers, lay down their arms, and send a peaceful
deputation to me, I will consider myself bound in honour to do all I can
to procure redress of their grievances; if not, let them stand on their
guard and expect the consequences.--I think, gentlemen," he added,
turning to his two colleagues, "this is the utmost length to which I can
stretch my instructions in favour of these misguided persons?"

"By my faith," answered Dalzell, suddenly, "and it is a length to which
my poor judgment durst not have stretched them, considering I had both
the King and my conscience to answer to! But, doubtless, your Grace knows
more of the King's private mind than we, who have only the letter of our
instructions to look to."

Monmouth blushed deeply. "You hear," he said, addressing Morton, "General
Dalzell blames me for the length which I am disposed to go in your
favour."

"General Dalzell's sentiments, my lord," replied Morton, "are such as we
expected from him; your Grace's such as we were prepared to hope you
might please to entertain. Indeed I cannot help adding, that, in the case
of the absolute submission upon which you are pleased to insist, it might
still remain something less than doubtful how far, with such counsellors
around the King, even your Grace's intercession might procure us
effectual relief. But I will communicate to our leaders your Grace's
answer to our supplication; and, since we cannot obtain peace, we must
bid war welcome as well as we may."

"Good morning, sir," said the Duke; "I suspend the movements of attack
for one hour, and for one hour only. If you have an answer to return
within that space of time, I will receive it here, and earnestly entreat
it may be such as to save the effusion of blood."

At this moment another smile of deep meaning passed between Dalzell and
Claverhouse. The Duke observed it, and repeated his words with great
dignity.

"Yes, gentlemen, I said I trusted the answer might be such as would save
the effusion of blood. I hope the sentiment neither needs your scorn, nor
incurs your displeasure."

Dalzell returned the Duke's frown with a stern glance, but made no
answer. Claverhouse, his lip just curled with an ironical smile, bowed,
and said, "It was not for him to judge the propriety of his Grace's
sentiments."

The Duke made a signal to Morton to withdraw. He obeyed; and, accompanied
by his former escort, rode slowly through the army to return to the camp
of the non-conformists. As he passed the fine corps of Life-Guards, he
found Claverhouse was already at their head. That officer no sooner saw
Morton, than he advanced and addressed him with perfect politeness of
manner.

"I think this is not the first time I have seen Mr Morton of Milnwood?"

"It is not Colonel Grahame's fault," said Morton, smiling sternly, "that
he or any one else should be now incommoded by my presence."

"Allow me at least to say," replied Claverhouse, "that Mr Morton's
present situation authorizes the opinion I have entertained of him, and
that my proceedings at our last meeting only squared to my duty."

"To reconcile your actions to your duty, and your duty to your
conscience, is your business, Colonel Grahame, not mine," said Morton,
justly offended at being thus, in a manner, required to approve of the
sentence under which he had so nearly suffered.

"Nay, but stay an instant," said Claverhouse; "Evandale insists that I
have some wrongs to acquit myself of in your instance. I trust I shall
always make some difference between a high-minded gentleman, who, though
misguided, acts upon generous principles, and the crazy fanatical clowns
yonder, with the bloodthirsty assassins who head them. Therefore, if they
do not disperse upon your return, let me pray you instantly come over to
our army and surrender yourself, for, be assured, they cannot stand our
assault for half an hour. If you will be ruled and do this, be sure to
enquire for me. Monmouth, strange as it may seem, cannot protect
you--Dalzell will not--I both can and will; and I have promised to
Evandale to do so if you will give me an opportunity."

"I should owe Lord Evandale my thanks," answered Morton, coldly, "did not
his scheme imply an opinion that I might be prevailed on to desert those
with whom I am engaged. For you, Colonel Grahame, if you will honour me
with a different species of satisfaction, it is probable, that, in an
hour's time, you will find me at the west end of Bothwell Bridge with my
sword in my hand."

"I shall be happy to meet you there," said Claverhouse, "but still more
so should you think better on my first proposal."

They then saluted and parted.

"That is a pretty lad, Lumley," said Claverhouse, addressing himself to
the other officer; "but he is a lost man--his blood be upon his head."

So saying, he addressed himself to the task of preparation for instant
battle.





CHAPTER X.

               But, hark! the tent has changed its voice,
               There's peace and rest nae langer.
                                                  Burns.

               The Lowdien Mallisha they
               Came with their coats of blew;
               Five hundred men from London came,
               Claid in a reddish hue.
                                        Bothwell Lines.

When Morton had left the well-ordered outposts of the regular army, and
arrived at those which were maintained by his own party, he could not but
be peculiarly sensible of the difference of discipline, and entertain a
proportional degree of fear for the consequences. The same discords which
agitated the counsels of the insurgents, raged even among their meanest
followers; and their picquets and patrols were more interested and
occupied in disputing the true occasion and causes of wrath, and defining
the limits of Erastian heresy, than in looking out for and observing the
motions of their enemies, though within hearing of the royal drums and
trumpets.

There was a guard, however, of the insurgent army, posted at the long and
narrow bridge of Bothwell, over which the enemy must necessarily advance
to the attack; but, like the others, they were divided and disheartened;
and, entertaining the idea that they were posted on a desperate service,
they even meditated withdrawing themselves to the main body. This would
have been utter ruin; for, on the defence or loss of this pass the
fortune of the day was most likely to depend. All beyond the bridge was a
plain open field, excepting a few thickets of no great depth, and,
consequently, was ground on which the undisciplined forces of the
insurgents, deficient as they were in cavalry, and totally unprovided
with artillery, were altogether unlikely to withstand the shock of
regular troops.

Morton, therefore, viewed the pass carefully, and formed the hope, that
by occupying two or three houses on the left bank of the river, with the
copse and thickets of alders and hazels that lined its side, and by
blockading the passage itself, and shutting the gates of a portal, which,
according to the old fashion, was built on the central arch of the bridge
of Bothwell, it might be easily defended against a very superior force.
He issued directions accordingly, and commanded the parapets of the
bridge, on the farther side of the portal, to be thrown down, that they
might afford no protection to the enemy when they should attempt the
passage. Morton then conjured the party at this important post to be
watchful and upon their guard, and promised them a speedy and strong
reinforcement. He caused them to advance videttes beyond the river to
watch the progress of the enemy, which outposts he directed should be
withdrawn to the left bank as soon as they approached; finally, he
charged them to send regular information to the main body of all that
they should observe. Men under arms, and in a situation of danger, are
usually sufficiently alert in appreciating the merit of their officers.
Morton's intelligence and activity gained the confidence of these men,
and with better hope and heart than before, they began to fortify their
position in the manner he recommended, and saw him depart with three loud
cheers.

Morton now galloped hastily towards the main body of the insurgents, but
was surprised and shocked at the scene of confusion and clamour which it
exhibited, at the moment when good order and concord were of such
essential consequence. Instead of being drawn up in line of battle, and
listening to the commands of their officers, they were crowding together
in a confused mass, that rolled and agitated itself like the waves of the
sea, while a thousand tongues spoke, or rather vociferated, and not a
single ear was found to listen. Scandalized at a scene so extraordinary,
Morton endeavoured to make his way through the press to learn, and, if
possible, to remove, the cause of this so untimely disorder. While he is
thus engaged, we shall make the reader acquainted with that which he was
some time in discovering.

The insurgents had proceeded to hold their day of humiliation, which,
agreeably to the practice of the puritans during the earlier civil war,
they considered as the most effectual mode of solving all difficulties,
and waiving all discussions. It was usual to name an ordinary week-day
for this purpose, but on this occasion the Sabbath itself was adopted,
owing to the pressure of the time and the vicinity of the enemy. A
temporary pulpit, or tent, was erected in the middle of the encampment;
which, according to the fixed arrangement, was first to be occupied by
the Reverend Peter Poundtext, to whom the post of honour was assigned, as
the eldest clergyman present. But as the worthy divine, with slow and
stately steps, was advancing towards the rostrum which had been prepared
for him, he was prevented by the unexpected apparition of Habakkuk
Mucklewrath, the insane preacher, whose appearance had so much startled
Morton at the first council of the insurgents after their victory at
Loudon-hill. It is not known whether he was acting under the influence
and instigation of the Cameronians, or whether he was merely compelled by
his own agitated imagination, and the temptation of a vacant pulpit
before him, to seize the opportunity of exhorting so respectable a
congregation. It is only certain that he took occasion by the forelock,
sprung into the pulpit, cast his eyes wildly round him, and, undismayed
by the murmurs of many of the audience, opened the Bible, read forth as
his text from the thirteenth chapter of Deuteronomy, "Certain men, the
children of Belial, are gone out from among you, and have withdrawn the
inhabitants of their city, saying, let us go and serve other gods, which
you have not known;" and then rushed at once into the midst of his
subject.

The harangue of Mucklewrath was as wild and extravagant as his intrusion
was unauthorized and untimely; but it was provokingly coherent, in so far
as it turned entirely upon the very subjects of discord, of which it had
been agreed to adjourn the consideration until some more suitable
opportunity. Not a single topic did he omit which had offence in it; and,
after charging the moderate party with heresy, with crouching to tyranny,
with seeking to be at peace with God's enemies, he applied to Morton, by
name, the charge that he had been one of those men of Belial, who, in the
words of his text, had gone out from amongst them, to withdraw the
inhabitants of his city, and to go astray after false gods. To him, and
all who followed him, or approved of his conduct, Mucklewrath denounced
fury and vengeance, and exhorted those who would hold themselves pure and
undefiled to come up from the midst of them.

"Fear not," he said, "because of the neighing of horses, or the
glittering of breastplates. Seek not aid of the Egyptians, because of the
enemy, though they may be numerous as locusts, and fierce as dragons.
Their trust is not as our trust, nor their rock as our rock; how else
shall a thousand fly before one, and two put ten thousand to the flight!
I dreamed it in the visions of the night, and the voice said, 'Habakkuk,
take thy fan and purge the wheat from the chaff, that they be not both
consumed with the fire of indignation and the lightning of fury.'
Wherefore, I say, take this Henry Morton--this wretched Achan, who hath
brought the accursed thing among ye, and made himself brethren in the
camp of the enemy--take him and stone him with stones, and thereafter
burn him with fire, that the wrath may depart from the children of the
Covenant. He hath not taken a Babylonish garment, but he hath sold the
garment of righteousness to the woman of Babylon--he hath not taken two
hundred shekels of fine silver, but he hath bartered the truth, which is
more precious than shekels of silver or wedges of gold."

At this furious charge, brought so unexpectedly against one of their most
active commanders, the audience broke out into open tumult, some
demanding that there should instantly be a new election of officers, into
which office none should hereafter be admitted who had, in their phrase,
touched of that which was accursed, or temporized more or less with the
heresies and corruptions of the times. While such was the demand of the
Cameronians, they vociferated loudly, that those who were not with them
were against them,--that it was no time to relinquish the substantial
part of the covenanted testimony of the Church, if they expected a
blessing on their arms and their cause; and that, in their eyes, a
lukewarm Presbyterian was little better than a Prelatist, an
Anti-Covenanter, and a Nullifidian.

The parties accused repelled the charge of criminal compliance and
defection from the truth with scorn and indignation, and charged their
accusers with breach of faith, as well as with wrong-headed and
extravagant zeal in introducing such divisions into an army, the joint
strength of which could not, by the most sanguine, be judged more than
sufficient to face their enemies. Poundtext, and one or two others, made
some faint efforts to stem the increasing fury of the factious,
exclaiming to those of the other party, in the words of the
Patriarch,--"Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and thee,
and between thy herdsmen and my herdsmen, for we be brethren." No
pacific overture could possibly obtain audience. It was in vain that
even Burley himself, when he saw the dissension proceed to such ruinous
lengths, exerted his stern and deep voice, commanding silence and
obedience to discipline. The spirit of insubordination had gone forth,
and it seemed as if the exhortation of Habakkuk Mucklewrath had
communicated a part of his frenzy to all who heard him. The wiser, or
more timid part of the assembly, were already withdrawing themselves
from the field, and giving up their cause as lost. Others were
moderating a harmonious call, as they somewhat improperly termed it, to
new officers, and dismissing those formerly chosen, and that with a
tumult and clamour worthy of the deficiency of good sense and good order
implied in the whole transaction. It was at this moment when Morton
arrived in the field and joined the army, in total confusion, and on the
point of dissolving itself. His arrival occasioned loud exclamations of
applause on the one side, and of imprecation on the other.

"What means this ruinous disorder at such a moment?" he exclaimed to
Burley, who, exhausted with his vain exertions to restore order, was now
leaning on his sword, and regarding the confusion with an eye of resolute
despair.

"It means," he replied, "that God has delivered us into the hands of our
enemies."

"Not so," answered Morton, with a voice and gesture which compelled many
to listen; "it is not God who deserts us, it is we who desert him, and
dishonour ourselves by disgracing and betraying the cause of freedom and
religion.--Hear me," he exclaimed, springing to the pulpit which
Mucklewrath had been compelled to evacuate by actual exhaustion--"I bring
from the enemy an offer to treat, if you incline to lay down your arms. I
can assure you the means of making an honourable defence, if you are of
more manly tempers. The time flies fast on. Let us resolve either for
peace or war; and let it not be said of us in future days, that six
thousand Scottish men in arms had neither courage to stand their ground
and fight it out, nor prudence to treat for peace, nor even the coward's
wisdom to retreat in good time and with safety. What signifies
quarrelling on minute points of church-discipline, when the whole edifice
