
"Oh I couldn't bear to have him do it," interrupted Desire. "Poor Uncle!
I'd rather go out to the mob myself than have Uncle Jahleel. It would
kill him. He is so proud."

The doctor walked across the room two or three times with knitted brow
and then paused and looked with a certain critical admiration at the
face of the girl to which excitement had lent an unusual brilliance.

"I will tell you," he said, "the only way I see of securing a quiet
night to your aunt. Just go yourself and see this Hamlin who is the
captain of the mob, and make your petition to him. I had words with him
this morning. He is a well seeming fellow enough, and has a bold way of
speech that liked me well i' faith, though no doubt he's a great rascal
and well deserves a hanging."

He paused, for Desire was confronting him, with a look that was a
peremptory interruption. Her eyes were flashing, her cheeks mantled with
indignant color, and the delicate nostrils were distended with scorn.

"Me, Desire Edwards, sue for favors of this low fellow! You forget
yourself strangely, Dr. Partridge."

The doctor took his hat from the table and bowed low. "I beg your
pardon, Miss Desire. Possibly your aunt may live through the night,
after all," and he went out of the house shrugging his shoulders.

Desire was still standing in the same attitude when a faint voice caught
her ear, and stepping to a door she opened it, and asked gently, "What
is it, Aunty?"

"Your uncle hasn't gone out, has he?" asked Mrs. Woodbridge, feebly.

"No, Aunty, he's in his study walking to and fro as he's been all day,
you know."

"He musn't go out. I was afraid he'd gone out. Tell him I beg he will
not go out. The mob will kill him."

"I don't think he will go, Aunty."

"Do you think they will make that terrible noise again tonight."

"I--I don't know. I'm afraid so, Aunt Lucy."

"Oh dear," sighed the invalid, with a moan of exhaustion, "it don't
seem as if I could live through it again, I'm so weak, and so tired. You
can't think, dear, how tired I am."

Desire went in and shook up the pillows, and soothed the sick woman with
some little cares and then came out and shut the door. Her wide brimmed
hat of fine leghorn straw with a blue ostrich plume curled around the
crown, and a light cashmere shawl lay on the table. Perching the one a
trifle sideways on her dark brown curls, which were gathered simply in
a ribbon behind, according to the style of the day, she threw the shawl
about her shoulders, and knocked at the door of her Uncle Jahleel's
study, which also opened into the living-room, and was the apartment in
which he held court, when acting as magistrate. In response to the
knock the Squire opened the door. He looked as if he had had a fit
of sickness, so deeply had the marks of chagrin and despite impressed
itself on his face in the past two days.

"I'm going out for a little while," said Desire, "and you will go to
Aunty, if she calls, won't you?"

Her uncle nodded and resumed his walking to and fro, and Desire,
stepping out of the house by a back way, went by a path across the
fields, toward Elnathan Hamlin's house.

The Hamlin house, like the houses of most of the poorer class of people,
had but two rooms on the ground floor, a small bedroom and a great
kitchen, in which the family lived, worked, cooked, ate and received
company. There were two doors opening into the kitchen from without, the
front door and the back door. On the former of these, there came a
light tap. Now callers upon the Hamlins, in general, just pulled
the latchstring and came in. Nobody tapped except the sheriff, the
constable, the tax-collector and the parson, and the latter's calls had
been rare since the family fortunes, never other than humble, had been
going from bad to worse. So that it was not without some trepidation,
which was shared by the family, that old Elnathan now rose from his seat
by the chimney corner and went and opened the door. A clear, soft voice,
with the effect of distinctness without preciseness, which betrays the
cultured class, was heard by those within, asking, "Is Captain Hamlin in
the house?"

"Do ye mean Perez?" parleyed Elnathan.

"Yes."

"I b'leve he's somewheres raound. He's aout doin up the chores, I
callate. Did ye wanter see him?"

"If you please."

"Wal, come in won't ye, an sid down, an I'll go aout arter him," said
Elnathan, backing in and making way for the guest to enter.

"It's the Edwards gal," he continued, in a feebly introductory manner,
as Desire entered.

Mrs. Hamlin hastily let down her sleeves, and glanced, a little
shamefacedly, at her linsey-woolsey short gown and coarse petticoat, and
then about the room, which was a good deal cluttered up, and small blame
to her, considering the sudden increase of her household cares. But it
was, nevertheless, with native dignity that she greeted her guest
and set her a chair, not allowing herself to be put out by the rather
fastidious way in which Desire held up her skirts.

"Sid down," said Elnathan "an be kinder neighborly. She wants to see
Perez, mother. I dunno what baout, I'm sure. Ef he's a milkin naow I
s'pose I kin spell him so's he kin come in an see what she's a wantin of
him," and the old man shuffled out the back door.

Desire sat down, calm and composed outwardly, but tingling in every
particle of her body with a revulsion of taste at the vulgarity of the
atmosphere, which almost amounted to nausea. But it may be doubted if
her dainty attire, her air of distinction, and the refined delicacy of
her flower-like face, had ever appeared to more advantage than as she
sat, inwardly fuming, on that rude chair, in that rude room, amid its
more or less clownish inmates. Prudence was very red in the face, and
confused. As housemaid in Mr. Woodbridge's family, she knew Desire well,
and felt a certain sort of responsibility for her on that account. She
did not know whether she ought to go and speak to her now, though Desire
took no notice of her. Reuben also had risen from his chair as she came
in, and still stood awkwardly leaning on the back of it, not seeming
sure if he ought to sit down again or not. Fennell, too sick to care,
was the only self-possessed person in the room. It was a relief to all
when the noise of feet at the door indicated the return of Elnathan
with Perez, but the running explanations of the former which his senile
treble made quite audible through the door, were less reassuring.

"Can't make aout what in time she wants on ye. Mebbe she's tuk a shine
to ye, he, he, I dunno. Ye uster be allers arter her when ye wuz a young
un."

"Hush father, she'll hear," said Perez, and opening the door came into
the kitchen.

Desire arose to her feet as he did so, and their eyes met. He would have
known her anywhere, in spite of the nine years since he had seen her.
The small oval of the sparkling gypsy face, the fine features, so
mobile and piquant, he instantly recognized from the portrait painted in
undying colors upon his youthful imagination.

"Are you Captain Hamlin?" she said.

"I hope you remember Perez Hamlin," he answered.

"I remember the name," she replied coldly. "I am told that you command
the--the men"--she was going to say mob--"in the village."

"I believe so," he answered. He was thinking that those red lips of hers
had once kissed his, that August morning when he stood on the green,
ready to march with the minute men.

"My Aunt Woodbridge is very sick. If your men make a noise again in
front of my uncle's house, she will die. I came to--to ask"--she had to
say it--"you to prevent it."

"I will prevent it," said Perez.

Desire dropped an almost imperceptible curtsey, raised the latch of the
door and went out.

All through the interview, even when she had overheard Elnathan's
confidences to Perez, at the door, her cheeks had not betrayed her by a
trace of unusual color, but now as she hurried home across the fields,
they burned with shame, and she fairly choked to think of the vulgar
familiarity to which she had submitted, and the abject attitude she had
assumed to this farmer's son. She remembered well enough that childish
kiss, and saw in his eyes that he remembered it. This perception had
added the last touch to her humiliation.

But Perez went out and wandered into the wood-lot and sat down on a
fallen tree, and stared a long time into vacancy with glowing eyes.
He had dreamed of Desire a thousand times during his long absence
from home, but since his return, so vehement had been the pressure of
domestic troubles, so rapid the rush of events, that he had not had time
to once think of her existence, up to the moment when she had confronted
him there in the kitchen, in a beauty at once the same, and so much more
rare, and rich and perfect, than that which had ruled his boyish dreams.

Presently he went down to the tavern. The crowd of men and boys on the
green received him with quite an ovation. Shaking hands right and left
with the men, he went on to the tavern, and finding Abner smoking on the
bench outside the door, drew him aside and asked him to see that there
was no demonstration in front of Woodbridge's that evening. Abner
grumbled a little.

"O' course I'm sorry for the woman, if she's sick, but they never showed
no considerashun fer our feelin's, an I don' see wy we sh'd be so durn
tender o' theirn. I shouldn't be naow, arter they'd treated a brother o'
mine ez they hev Reub. But ye be cap'n, Perez, an it shel be ez ye say.
The boys kin try ther fiddles on Squire Edwards instid."

"No. Not there, Abner," said Perez, quickly.

"Wy not, I sh'd like ter know. His wife ain't sick, be she?"

"No, that is I don't know," said Perez, his face flushing a little with
the difficulty of at once thinking of any plausible reason. "You
see," he finally found words to say, "the store is so near Squire
Woodbridge's, that the noise might disturb Madam Woodbridge."

"She muss hev dum sharp ears, ef she kin hear much at that distance,"
observed Abner, "but it shell be as ye say, Cap'n. I s'pose ye've nothin
agin our givin Sheriff Seymour a little mewsick."

"As much as you please, Abner."




CHAPTER THIRTEENTH

A PRAISE MEETING


As a fever awakes to virulent activity the germs of disease in the body,
so revolution in the political system develops the latent elements of
anarchy. It is a test of the condition of the system. The same political
shock which throws an ill-constituted and unsound government into a
condition of chaos, is felt in a politically vigorous and healthful
commonwealth, as only a slight disturbance of the ordinary functions.
The promptness with which the village of Stockbridge relapsed into its
ordinary mode of life after the revolt and revolution of Tuesday, was
striking testimony to the soundness and vitality which a democratic form
of government and a popular sense of responsibility impart to a body
politic. On Tuesday the armed uprising of the people had taken place;
on Wednesday there was considerable effervescence of spirits, though
no violence; on Thursday there was still a number of loutish fellows
loafing about the streets, wearing, however, an appearance of being
disappointed that there was no more excitement, and no prospect of
anything special turning up. Friday and Saturday, apparently disgusted
at finding rebellion such a failure in elements of recreation, these had
gone back to their farm-work and chores, and the village had returned to
its normal quiet without even any more serenades to the silk stockings,
to enliven the evenings.

A foreigner, who had chanced to be passing through Southern Berkshire
at this time, would have deemed an informant practicing on his credulity
who should have assured him that everywhere throughout these quiet
and industrious communities, the entire governmental machinery was
prostrate, that not a local magistrate undertook to sit, not a constable
ventured to attempt an arrest, not a sheriff dared to serve a process or
make an execution, or a tax-collector distrain for taxes. And yet
such was the sober truth, for Stockbridge was in no respect peculiarly
situated, and in many of the towns around, especially in Sheffield,
Egremont, Great Barrington, and Sandisfield, an even larger proportion
of the people were open sympathizers with the rebellion than in the
former village.

In these modern days, restaurants, barrooms, and saloons, and similar
places of resort, are chiefly thronged on Saturday evening, when the
labors of the week being ended, the worker, in whatever field, finds
himself at once in need of convivial relaxation, and disposed thereto
by the exhilaration of a prospective holiday. Necessarily, however,
Saturday evening could not be thus celebrated in a community which
regarded it in the light of holy time, and, accordingly in Stockbridge,
as elsewhere in New England at that day, Friday and Sunday evenings
were by way of eminence the convivial occasions of the week. One of the
consequences of this arrangement was that a "blue Saturday" as well as
the modern "blue Monday," found place in the workingman's calendar. But
the voice of the temperance lecturer was not yet heard in the land, and
headaches were still looked upon as Providential mysteries.

The Friday following the "goings on at Barrington," the tavern was
filled by about the same crowd which had been present the Friday evening
preceding, and of whose conversation on that occasion, some account was
given. But the temper of the gathering a week before had been gloomy,
foreboding, hopeless and well-nigh desperate; to-night, it was jubilant.

"It's the Lord's doin's, an marvellous in our eyes, an that's all I
kin say about it," declared Israel Goodrich, his rosy face beaming with
benevolent satisfaction, beneath its crown of white hair. "Jess think
whar we wuz a week ago, an whar we be naow. By gosh who'd a thought it?
If one on ye had a tole me las' Friday night, what was a comin raound
inside of a week, I should a said he wuz stark starin mad."

"We mout a knowed somethin wuz a gonter happin," said Abner. "It's
allers darkest jess afore dawn, an 'twas dark nuff tew cut las' Friday."

"I declar for't," said Peleg Bidwell, "seem's though I never did feel
quite so down-hearted like ez I did las' Friday night, wen we wuz a
talkin it over. I'd hed a bad day on't. Sol Gleason'd been a sassin of
me, an I dassn't say a word, fer fear he'd send me to jail, fer owin
him, an wen I got home She wuz a cryin, fer Gleason'd been thar, an I
dunno what he'd said tew her, and then Klector Williams he told me
he'd hev tew sell the furnicher fer taxes, an by gosh, takin the hull
together seemed 's though thar warn't no place fer a poor man in this
ere world, and I didn' keer ef I lived much longer or not. An naow!
Wal thay ain't no use o' tellin ye what ye know. I seen Gleason on the
street yisday, an he looked like a whipped cur. He hed his tail atween
his legs, I tell yew. I reckon he thort I wuz gonter lick him. It wuz
'Good mornin, Peleg,' ez sweet's sugar, an he didn't hev nothing tew say
baout what I wuz a owin him, no; nor he didn't ass me nothin baout wy I
hedn't been tew work fer him sence Tewsday."

After the haw-haw over Peleg's description had subsided, he added, with
a grin,

"Klector Williams he hain't thort tew call baout them taxes, sence
Tewsday, nuther. Hev any on ye seen nothin on him?"

"He hain't skurcely been outer his haouse," said Obadiah Weeks. "I on'y
see him onct. It was arter dark, an he wuz a slippin over't the store
arter his tod."

"I guess it muss be considabul like a funeral over't the store, nights,"
observed Abner, grinning. "Gosh I sh'd like ter peek in an see em a
talkin on it over. Wal, turn about's fair play. They don' feel no wuss
nor we did."

"Won't thar be no more klectin taxes?" inquired Laban Jones.

"I guess thar won't be much more klectin roun' here 'nless the klector
hez a couple o' rigiments o' melishy tew help him dew it," replied
Abner.

"I dunno, baout that," said Ezra Phelps. "Thar's more'n one way ter skin
a cat."

"Thar ain't no way o' skinnin this ere cat 'cept with bagonets," said
Abner, decidedly, and a general murmur expressed the opinion that so far
as the present company was concerned government would have to practice
some preliminary phlebotomy on their persons before they would submit
to any further bleeding of their purses by the tax-collector. Nothing
pleased Ezra more than to get placed thus argumentatively at bay, with
the entire company against him, and then discomfit them all at a stroke.
The general expression of dissent with which his previous remark was
received, seemed actually to please him. He stood looking at Abner for a
moment, without speaking, a complacent smile just curving his lips,
and the sparkle of the intellectual combatant in his eye. To persons of
Ezra's disputatious and speculative temper, such moments, in which they
gloat over their victim as he stands within the very jaws of the logic
trap which they are about to spring, are no doubt, the most delightful
of life.

"Don't yew be in sech a hurry, Abner," he finally ejaculated. "Would ye
mind payin yer taxes ef govment giv ye the money ter pay em with?"

"No. In course I wouldn't."

"Ezzackly. Course ye wouldn't. Ye'd be dum unreas'nable ef ye did. Wal,
naow I callate that air's jess what govment's gonter dew, ez soon ez it
gits the news from Northampton and Barrington. It's gonter print a
stack o' bills, an git em inter cirk'lashun, an then we'll all on us
hev suthin tew pay fer taxes, an not mind it a bit; yis, an pay all the
debts that's a owin, tew."

"I hain't no objeckshun ter that," admitted Abner, frankly.

"Of course ye hain't," said Ezra. "Nobody hain't. Ye see ye spoke tew
quick, Abner. All the kentry wants is bills, a hull slew on em, lots
on em, an then the courts kin go on, an debts an taxes kin be paid,
an everything'll be all right. I ain't one o' them ez goes agin' payin
debts an taxes. I says let em be paid, ev'ry shillin, on'y let govment
print nuff bills fer folks tew pay em with."

"I callate a couple o' wagon loads o' new bills would pay orf
ev'ry morgidge, an mos' o' the debts, in Berkshire," said Israel,
reflectively.

"Sartinly, sartinly," exclaimed Ezra. "That would be plenty. It don'
cost nothin tew print em, an they'd pacify this ere caounty a dum sight
quicker nor no two rigiments, nor no ten, nuther."

"That air's what I believe in," said Israel, beamingly, "peaceable ways
o' settlin the trouble; bills instid o' bagonets. The beauty on't so fer
is that thar hain't been no sheddin o' blood, nor no vi'lence tew speak
of, ceppin a leetle shovin daown tew Barrington, an I hope thar won't
be."

"I don't know about that," said Paul Hubbard. "Not that I want to see
any killing, but there are some silk stockings in this here town that
would look mighty well sticking through the stocks, an there are some
white skins that ought to know how a whip feels, jist so the men that
own em might see how the medicine tastes they've been giving us so many
years."

