
The marshal hastened to obey. "Ventrebleu!" quoth the Bastard, when
extricated from the weight of his steed, "I cannot hold by the clouds,
but though my horse failed me, surely I will not fail my companions;"
and as he spoke, he placed himself in so gallant and superb a posture,
that he silenced the inhospitable yell which had rejoiced in the
foreigner's discomfiture. Then, observing that the gentle Anthony
had dismounted, and was leaning gracefully against his destrier, the
Burgundian called forth,--

"Sir Knight, thou hast conquered the steed, not the rider. We are now
foot to foot. The pole-axe, or the sword,--which? Speak!"

"I pray thee, noble sieur," quoth the Woodville, mildly, "to let the
strife close for this day, and when rest bath--"

"Talk of rest to striplings,--I demand my rights!"

"Heaven forefend," said Anthony Woodville, lifting his hand on high,
"that I, favoured so highly by the fair dames of England, should demand
repose on their behalf. But bear witness," he said (with the generosity
of the last true chevalier of his age, and lifting his vizor, so as
to be heard by the king, and even through the foremost ranks of the
crowd)--"bear witness, that in this encounter, my cause hath befriended
me, not mine arm. The Count de la Roche speaketh truly; and his steed
alone be blamed for his mischance."

"It is but a blind beast!" muttered the Burgundian.

"And," added Anthony, bowing towards the tiers rich with the beauty of
the court--"and the count himself assureth me that the blaze of yonder
eyes blinded his goodly steed." Having delivered himself of this
gallant conceit, so much in accordance with the taste of the day, the
Englishman, approaching the king's balcony, craved permission to finish
the encounter with the axe or brand.

"The former, rather please you, my liege; for the warriors of Burgundy
have ever been deemed unconquered in that martial weapon."

Edward, whose brave blood was up and warm at the clash of steel, bowed
his gracious assent, and two pole-axes were brought into the ring.

The crowd now evinced a more earnest and respectful attention than they
had hitherto shown, for the pole-axe, in such stalwart hands, was no
child's toy. "Hum," quoth Master Stokton, "there may be some merriment
now,--not like those silly poles! Your axe lops off a limb mighty
cleanly." The knights themselves seemed aware of the greater gravity of
the present encounter. Each looked well to the bracing of his vizor;
and poising their weapons with method and care, they stood apart some
moments, eying each other steadfastly,--as adroit fencers with the small
sword do in our schools at this day.

At length the Burgundian, darting forward, launched a mighty stroke at
the Lord Scales, which, though rapidly parried, broke down the guard,
and descended with such weight on the shoulder that but for the
thrice-proven steel of Milan, the benevolent expectation of Master
Stokton had been happily fulfilled. Even as it was, the Lord Scales
uttered a slight cry,--which might be either of anger or of pain,--and
lifting his axe with both hands, levelled a blow on the Burgundian's
helmet that well nigh brought him to his knee. And now for the space
of some ten minutes, the crowd with charmed suspense beheld the almost
breathless rapidity with which stroke on stroke was given and parried;
the axe shifted to and fro, wielded now with both hands, now the left,
now the right, and the combat reeling, as it were, to and fro,--so that
one moment it raged at one extreme of the lists, the next at the other;
and so well inured, from their very infancy, to the weight of mail were
these redoubted champions, that the very wrestlers on the village green,
nay, the naked gladiators of old, might have envied their lithe agility
and supple quickness.

At last, by a most dexterous stroke, Anthony Woodville forced the point
of his axe into the vizor of the Burgundian, and there so firmly did
it stick, that he was enabled to pull his antagonist to and fro at his
will, while the Bastard, rendered as blind as his horse by the stoppage
of the eye-hole, dealt his own blows about at random, and was placed
completely at the mercy of the Englishman. And gracious as the gentle
Sir Anthony was, he was still so smarting under many a bruise felt
through his dinted mail, that small mercy, perchance, would the Bastard
have found, for the gripe of the Woodville's left hand was on his foe's
throat, and the right seemed about to force the point deliberately
forward into the brain, when Edward, roused from his delight at that
pleasing spectacle by a loud shriek from his sister Margaret, echoed by
the Duchess of Bedford, who was by no means anxious that her son's axe
should be laid at the root of all her schemes, rose, and crying, "Hold!"
with that loud voice which had so often thrilled a mightier field, cast
down his warderer.

Instantly the lists opened; the marshals advanced, severed the
champions, and unbraced the count's helmet. But the Bastard's martial
spirit, exceedingly dissatisfied at the unfriendly interruption,
rewarded the attention of the marshals by an oath worthy his
relationship to Charles the Bold; and hurrying straight to the king, his
face flushed with wrath and his eyes sparkling with fire,--

"Noble sire and king," he cried, "do me not this wrong! I am not
overthrown nor scathed nor subdued,--I yield not. By every knightly law
till one champion yields he can call upon the other to lay on and do his
worst."

Edward paused, much perplexed and surprised at finding his intercession
so displeasing. He glanced first at the Lord Rivers, who sat a little
below him, and whose cheek grew pale at the prospect of his son's
renewed encounter with one so determined, then at the immovable aspect
of the gentle and apathetic Elizabeth, then at the agitated countenance
of the duchess, then at the imploring eyes of Margaret, who, with an
effort, preserved herself from swooning; and finally beckoning to him
the Duke of Clarence, as high constable, and the Duke of Norfolk, as
earl marshal, he said, "Tarry a moment, Sir Count, till we take
counsel in this grave affair." The count bowed sullenly; the spectators
maintained an anxious silence; the curtain before the king's gallery was
closed while the council conferred. At the end of some three minutes,
however, the drapery was drawn aside by the Duke of Norfolk; and Edward,
fixing his bright blue eye upon the fiery Burgundian, said gravely,
"Count de la Roche, your demand is just. According to the laws of the
list, you may fairly claim that the encounter go on."

"Oh, knightly prince, well said! My thanks. We lose time.--Squires, my
bassinet!"

"Yea," renewed Edward, "bring hither the count's bassinet. By the laws,
the combat may go on at thine asking,--I retract my warderer. But, Count
de la Roche, by those laws you appeal to, the said combat must go on
precisely at the point at which it was broken off. Wherefore brace on
thy bassinet, Count de la Roche; and thou, Anthony Lord Scales, fix the
pike of thine axe, which I now perceive was inserted exactly where the
right eye giveth easy access to the brain, precisely in the same place.
So renew the contest, and the Lord have mercy on thy soul, Count de la
Roche!"

At this startling sentence, wholly unexpected, and yet wholly according
to those laws of which Edward was so learned a judge, the Bastard's
visage fell. With open mouth and astounded eyes, he stood gazing at the
king, who, majestically reseating himself, motioned to the heralds.

"Is that the law, sire?" at length faltered forth the Bastard.

"Can you dispute it? Can any knight or gentleman gainsay it?"

"Then," quoth the Bastard, gruffly, and throwing his axe to the ground,
"by all the saints in the calendar, I have had enough! I came hither to
dare all that beseems a chevalier, but to stand still while Sir Anthony
Woodville deliberately pokes out my right eye were a feat to show that
very few brains would follow. And so, my Lord Scales, I give thee my
right hand, and wish thee joy of thy triumph, and the golden collar."
[The prize was a collar of gold, enamelled with the flower of the
souvenance.]

"No triumph," replied the Woodville, modestly, "for thou art only, as
brave knights should be, subdued by the charms of the ladies, which no
breast, however valiant, can with impunity dispute."

So saying, the Lord Scales led the count to a seat of honour near
the Lord Rivers; and the actor was contented, perforce, to become a
spectator of the ensuing contests. These were carried on till late at
noon between the Burgundians and the English, the last maintaining the
superiority of their principal champion; and among those in the
melee, to which squires were admitted, not the least distinguished and
conspicuous was our youthful friend, Master Marmaduke Nevile.




CHAPTER VIII. HOW THE BASTARD OF BURGUNDY PROSPERED MORE IN HIS POLICY
THAN WITH THE POLE-AXE.-AND HOW KING EDWARD HOLDS HIS SUMMER CHASE IN
THE FAIR GROVES OF SHENE.

It was some days after the celebrated encounter between the Bastard and
Lord Scales, and the court had removed to the Palace of Shene. The Count
de la Roche's favour with the Duchess of Bedford and the young princess
had not rested upon his reputation for skill with the pole-axe, and it
had now increased to a height that might well recompense the diplomatist
for his discomfiture in the lists.

In the mean while, the arts of Warwick's enemies had been attended with
signal success. The final preparations for the alliance now virtually
concluded with Louis's brother still detained the earl at Rouen, and
fresh accounts of the French king's intimacy with the ambassador were
carefully forwarded to Rivers, and transmitted to Edward. Now, we have
Edward's own authority for stating that his first grudge against Warwick
originated in this displeasing intimacy, but the English king was too
clear-sighted to interpret such courtesies into the gloss given them by
Rivers. He did not for a moment conceive that Lord Warwick was led
into any absolute connection with Louis which could link him to the
Lancastrians, for this was against common-sense; but Edward, with all
his good humour, was implacable and vindictive, and he could not endure
the thought that Warwick should gain the friendship of the man he
deemed his foe. Putting aside his causes of hatred to Louis in the
encouragement which that king had formerly given to the Lancastrian
exiles, Edward's pride as sovereign felt acutely the slighting disdain
with which the French king had hitherto treated his royalty and his
birth. The customary nickname with which he was maligned in Paris was
"the Son of the Archer," a taunt upon the fair fame of his mother, whom
scandal accused of no rigid fidelity to the Duke of York. Besides this,
Edward felt somewhat of the jealousy natural to a king, himself so
spirited and able, of the reputation for profound policy and statecraft
which Louis XI. was rapidly widening and increasing throughout the
courts of Europe. And, what with the resentment and what with the
jealousy, there had sprung up in his warlike heart a secret desire to
advance the claims of England to the throne of France, and retrieve the
conquests won by the Fifth Henry to be lost under the Sixth. Possessing
these feelings and these views, Edward necessarily saw in the alliance
with Burgundy all that could gratify both his hate and his ambition. The
Count of Charolois had sworn to Louis the most deadly enmity, and would
have every motive, whether of vengeance or of interest, to associate
himself heart in hand with the arms of England in any invasion of
France; and to these warlike objects Edward added, as we have so often
had cause to remark, the more peaceful aims and interests of commerce.
And, therefore, although he could not so far emancipate himself from
that influence, which both awe and gratitude invested in the Earl of
Warwick, as to resist his great minister's embassy to Louis; and though,
despite all these reasons in favour of connection with Burgundy, he
could not but reluctantly allow that Warwick urged those of a still
larger and wiser policy, when showing that the infant dynasty of York
could only be made secure by effectually depriving Margaret of the sole
ally that could venture to assist her cause,--yet no sooner had Warwick
fairly departed than he inly chafed at the concession he had made, and
his mind was open to all the impressions which the earl's enemies sought
to stamp upon it. As the wisdom of every man, however able, can but run
through those channels which are formed by the soil of the character, so
Edward with all his talents never possessed the prudence which fear
of consequences inspires. He was so eminently fearless, so scornful
of danger, that he absolutely forgot the arguments on which
the affectionate zeal of Warwick had based the alliance with
Louis,--arguments as to the unceasing peril, whether to his person
or his throne, so long as the unprincipled and plotting genius of the
French king had an interest against both; and thus he became only alive
to the representations of his passions, his pride, and his mercantile
interests. The Duchess of Bedford, the queen, and all the family of
Woodville, who had but one object at heart,--the downfall of Warwick and
his House,--knew enough of the earl's haughty nature to be aware that
he would throw up the reins of government the moment he knew that Edward
had discredited and dishonoured his embassy; and, despite the suspicions
they sought to instil into their king's mind, they calculated upon
the earl's love and near relationship to Edward, upon his utter and
seemingly irreconcilable breach with the House of Lancaster, to render
his wrath impotent, and to leave him only the fallen minister, not the
mighty rebel.

Edward had been thus easily induced to permit the visit of the Count de
la Roche, although he had by no means then resolved upon the course he
should pursue. At all events, even if the alliance with Louis was to
take place, the friendship of Burgundy was worth much to maintain. But
De la Roche soon made aware by the Duchess of Bedford of the ground on
which he stood, and instructed by his brother to spare no pains and to
scruple no promise that might serve to alienate Edward from Louis and
win the hand and dower of Margaret, found it a more facile matter than
his most sanguine hopes had deemed to work upon the passions and the
motives which inclined the king to the pretensions of the heir of
Burgundy. And what more than all else favoured the envoy's mission was
the very circumstance that should most have defeated it,--namely, the
recollection of the Earl of Warwick; for in the absence of that powerful
baron and master-minister, the king had seemed to breathe more freely.
In his absence, he forgot his power. The machine of government, to his
own surprise, seemed to go on as well; the Commons were as submissive,
the mobs as noisy in their shouts, as if the earl were by. There was no
longer any one to share with Edward the joys of popularity, the sweets
of power.

Though Edward was not Diogenes, he loved the popular sunshine, and
no Alexander now stood between him and its beams. Deceived by the
representations of his courtiers, hearing nothing but abuse of Warwick
and sneers at his greatness, he began to think the hour had come when he
might reign alone, and he entered, though tacitly, and not acknowledging
it even to himself, into the very object of the womankind about
him,--namely, the dismissal of his minister.

The natural carelessness and luxurious indolence of Edward's temper did
not however permit him to see all the ingratitude of the course he was
about to adopt. The egotism a king too often acquires, and no king so
easily as one like Edward IV., not born to a throne, made him consider
that he alone was entitled to the prerogatives of pride. As sovereign
and as brother, might he not give the hand of Margaret as he listed?
If Warwick was offended, pest on his disloyalty and presumption! And so
saying to himself, he dismissed the very thought of the absent earl,
and glided unconsciously down the current of the hour. And yet,
notwithstanding all these prepossessions and dispositions, Edward might
no doubt have deferred at least the meditated breach with his great
minister until the return of the latter, and then have acted with the
delicacy and precaution that became a king bound by ties of
gratitude and blood to the statesman he desired to discard, but for
a habit,--which, while history mentions, it seems to forget, in
the consequences it ever engenders,--the habit of intemperance.
Unquestionably to that habit many of the imprudences and levities of a
king possessed of so much ability are to be ascribed; and over his cups
with the wary and watchful De la Roche Edward had contrived to entangle
himself far more than in his cooler moments he would have been disposed
to do.

Having thus admitted our readers into those recesses of that cor
inscrutabile,--the heart of kings,--we summon them to a scene peculiar
to the pastimes of the magnificent Edward. Amidst the shades of the
vast park, or chase, which then appertained to the Palace of Shene, the
noonday sun shone upon such a spot as Armida might have dressed for the
subdued Rinaldo. A space had been cleared of trees and underwood, and
made level as a bowling-green. Around this space the huge oak and
the broad beech were hung with trellis-work, wreathed with jasmine,
honeysuckle, and the white rose, trained in arches. Ever and anon
through these arches extended long alleys, or vistas, gradually lost
in the cool depth of foliage; amidst these alleys and around this space
numberless arbours, quaint with all the flowers then known in England,
were constructed. In the centre of the sward was a small artificial
lake, long since dried up, and adorned then with a profusion of
fountains, that seemed to scatter coolness around the glowing air.
Pitched in various and appropriate sites were tents of silk and the
white cloth of Rennes, each tent so placed as to command one of the
alleys; and at the opening of each stood cavalier or dame, with the bow
or crossbow, as it pleased the fancy or suited best the skill, looking
for the quarry, which horn and hound drove fast and frequent across the
alleys. Such was the luxurious "summer-chase" of the Sardanapalus of the
North. Nor could any spectacle more thoroughly represent that poetical
yet effeminate taste, which, borrowed from the Italians, made a short
interval between the chivalric and the modern age. The exceeding beauty
of the day, the richness of the foliage in the first suns of bright
July, the bay of the dogs, the sound of the mellow horn, the fragrance
of the air, heavy with noontide flowers, the gay tents, the rich dresses
and fair faces and merry laughter of dame and donzell,--combined to
take captive every sense, and to reconcile ambition itself, that eternal
traveller through the future, to the enjoyment of the voluptuous hour.
But there were illustrious exceptions to the contentment of the general
company.

A courier had arrived that morning to apprise Edward of the unexpected
debarkation of the Earl of Warwick, with the Archbishop of Narbonne and
the Bastard of Bourbon,--the ambassadors commissioned by Louis to settle
the preliminaries of the marriage between Margaret and his brother. This
unwelcome intelligence reached Edward at the very moment he was sallying
from his palace gates to his pleasant pastime. He took aside Lord
Hastings, and communicated the news to his able favourite. "Put spurs to
thy horse, Hastings, and hie thee fast to Baynard's Castle. Bring back
Gloucester. In these difficult matters that boy's head is better than a
council."

"Your Highness," said Hastings, tightening his girdle with one hand,
while with the other he shortened his stirrups, "shall be obeyed. I
foresaw, sire, that this coming would occasion much that my Lords Rivers
and Worcester have overlooked. I rejoice that you summon the Prince
Richard, who hath wisely forborne all countenance to the Burgundian
envoy. But is this all, sire? Is it not well to assemble also your
trustiest lords and most learned prelates, if not to overawe Lord
Warwick's anger, at least to confer on the fitting excuses to be made to
King Louis's ambassadors?"

"And so lose the fairest day this summer hath bestowed upon us?
Tush!--the more need for pleasaunce to-day since business must come
to-morrow. Away with you, dear Will!"

Hastings looked grave; but he saw all further remonstrance would be in
vain, and hoping much from the intercession of Gloucester, put spurs to
his steed and vanished. Edward mused a moment; and Elizabeth, who knew
every expression and change of his countenance, rode from the circle of
her ladies, and approached him timidly. Casting down her eyes, which she
always affected in speaking to her lord, the queen said softly,--

"Something hath disturbed my liege and my life's life."

"Marry, yes, sweet Bessee. Last night, to pleasure thee and thy kin (and
sooth to say, small gratitude ye owe me, for it also pleased myself), I
promised Margaret's hand, through De la Roche, to the heir of Burgundy."

"O princely heart!" exclaimed Elizabeth, her whole face lighted up with
triumph, "ever seeking to make happy those it cherishes. But is it that
which disturbs thee, that which thou repentest?"

"No, sweetheart,--no. Yet had it not been for the strength of the clary,
I should have kept the Bastard longer in suspense. But what is done
is done. Let not thy roses wither when thou hearest Warwick is in
England,--nay, nay, child, look not so appalled; thine Edward is no
infant, whom ogre and goblin scare; and"--glancing his eye proudly round
as he spoke, and saw the goodly cavalcade of his peers and knights, with
his body-guard, tall and chosen veterans, filling up the palace-yard,
with the show of casque and pike--"and if the struggle is to come
between Edward of England and his subject, never an hour more ripe
than this; my throne assured, the new nobility I have raised around it,
London true, marrow and heart true, the provinces at peace, the ships
and the steel of Burgundy mine allies! Let the white Bear growl as he
list, the Lion of March is lord of the forest. And now, my Bessee,"
added the king, changing his haughty tone into a gay, careless laugh,
"now let the lion enjoy his chase."

He kissed the gloved hand of his queen, gallantly bending over his
saddle-bow, and the next moment he was by the side of a younger if not
a fairer lady, to whom he was devoting the momentary worship of his
inconstant heart. Elizabeth's eyes shot an angry gleam as she beheld her
faithless lord thus engaged; but so accustomed to conceal and control
the natural jealousy that it never betrayed itself to the court or to
her husband, she soon composed her countenance to its ordinary smooth
and artificial smile, and rejoining her mother she revealed what had
passed. The proud and masculine spirit of the duchess felt only joy at
the intelligence. In the anticipated humiliation of Warwick, she forgot
all cause for fear. Not so her husband and son, the Lords Rivers and
Scales, to whom the news soon travelled.

"Anthony," whispered the father, "in this game we have staked our
heads."

"But our right hands can guard them well, sir," answered Anthony; "and
so God and the ladies for our rights!"

Yet this bold reply did not satisfy the more thoughtful judgment of the
lord treasurer, and even the brave Anthony's arrows that day wandered
wide of their quarry.

Amidst this gay scene, then, there were anxious and thoughtful bosoms.
Lord Rivers was silent and abstracted; his son's laugh was hollow and
constrained; the queen, from her pavilion, cast, ever and anon, down the
green alleys more restless and prying looks than the hare or the deer
could call forth; her mother's brow was knit and flushed. And keenly
were those illustrious persons watched by one deeply interested in the
coming events. Affecting to discharge the pleasant duty assigned him
by the king, the Lord Montagu glided from tent to tent, inquiring
courteously into the accommodation of each group, lingering, smiling,
complimenting, watching, heeding, studying, those whom he addressed. For
the first time since the Bastard's visit he had joined in the diversions
in its honour; and yet so well had Montagu played his part at the court
that he did not excite amongst the queen's relatives any of the hostile
feelings entertained towards his brother. No man, except Hastings,
was so "entirely loved" by Edward; and Montagu, worldly as he was, and
indignant against the king as he could not fail to be, so far repaid
the affection, that his chief fear at that moment sincerely was not for
Warwick but Edward. He alone of those present was aware of the cause of
Warwick's hasty return, for he had privately despatched to him the news
of the Bastard's visit, its real object, and the inevitable success of
the intrigues afloat, unless the earl could return at once, his mission
accomplished, and the ambassadors of France in his train; and even
before the courier despatched to the king had arrived at Shene, a
private hand had conveyed to Montagu the information that Warwick,
justly roused and alarmed, had left the state procession behind at
Dover, and was hurrying, fast as relays of steeds and his own fiery
spirit could bear him, to the presence of the ungrateful king.

Meanwhile the noon had now declined, the sport relaxed, and the sound
of the trumpet from the king's pavilion proclaimed that the lazy pastime
was to give place to the luxurious banquet.

At this moment, Montagu approached a tent remote from the royal
pavilions, and, as his noiseless footstep crushed the grass, he heard
the sound of voices in which there was little in unison with the worldly
thoughts that filled his breast.

"Nay, sweet mistress, nay," said a young man's voice, earnest with
emotion, "do not misthink me, do not deem me bold and overweening. I
have sought to smother my love, and to rate it, and bring pride to my
aid, but in vain; and, now, whether you will scorn my suit or not,
I remember, Sibyll--O Sibyll! I remember the days when we conversed
together; and as a brother, if nothing else--nothing dearer--I pray you
to pause well, and consider what manner of man this Lord Hastings is
said to be!"

"Master Nevile, is this generous? Why afflict me thus; why couple my
name with so great a lord's?"

"Because--beware--the young gallants already so couple it, and their
prophecies are not to thine honour, Sibyll. Nay, do not frown on me. I
know thou art fair and winsome, and deftly gifted, and thy father may,
for aught I know, be able to coin thee a queen's dower out of his awsome
engines. But Hastings will not wed thee, and his wooing, therefore, but
stains thy fair repute; while I--"

"You!" said Montagu, entering suddenly--"you, kinsman, may look to
higher fortunes than the Duchess of Bedford's waiting-damsel can bring
to thy honest love. How now, mistress, say, wilt thou take this young
gentleman for loving fere and plighted spouse? If so, he shall give thee
a manor for jointure, and thou shalt wear velvet robe and gold chain, as
a knight's wife."

This unexpected interference, which was perfectly in character with the
great lords, who frequently wooed in very peremptory tones for their
clients and kinsmen, [See, in Miss Strickland's "Life of Elizabeth
Woodville," the curious letters which the Duke of York and the Earl
of Warwick addressed to her, then a simple maiden, in favour of their
protege, Sir R. Johnes.] completed the displeasure which the blunt
Marmaduke had already called forth in Sibyll's gentle but proud nature.
"Speak, maiden,--ay or no?" continued Montagu, surprised and angered at
the haughty silence of one whom he just knew by sight and name, though
he had never before addressed her.

"No, my lord," answered Sibyll, keeping down her indignation at this
tone, though it burned in her cheek, flashed in her eye, and swelled in
the heave of her breast. "No! and your kinsman might have spared this
affront to one whom--but it matters not." She swept from the tent as she
said this, and passed up the alley into that of the queen's mother.

"Best so; thou art too young for marriage, Marmaduke," said Montagu,
coldly. "We will find thee a richer bride ere long. There is Mary of
Winstown, the archbishop's ward, with two castles and seven knight's
fees."

"But so marvellously ill-featured, my lord," said poor Marmaduke,
sighing.

Montagu looked at him in surprise. "Wives, sir," he said, "are not made
to look at,--unless, indeed, they be the wives of other men. But dismiss
these follies for the nonce. Back to thy post by the king's pavilion;
and by the way ask Lord Fauconberg and Aymer Nevile, whom thou wilt pass
by yonder arbour, ask them, in my name, to be near the pavilion while
the king banquets. A word in thine ear,--ere yon sun gilds the top of
those green oaks, the Earl of Warwick will be with Edward IV.; and come
what may, some brave hearts should be by to welcome him. Go!"

Without tarrying for an answer, Montagu turned into one of the tents,
wherein Raoul de Fulke and the Lord St. John, heedless of hind and
hart, conferred; and Marmaduke, much bewildered, and bitterly wroth with
Sibyll, went his way.




CHAPTER IX. THE GREAT ACTOR RETURNS TO FILL THE STAGE.

And now in various groups these summer foresters were at rest in their
afternoon banquet,--some lying on the smooth sward around the lake, some
in the tents, some again in the arbours; here and there the forms of
dame and cavalier might be seen, stealing apart from the rest, and
gliding down the alleys till lost in the shade, for under that reign
gallantry was universal. Before the king's pavilion a band of those
merry jongleurs, into whom the ancient and honoured minstrels were fast
degenerating, stood waiting for the signal to commence their sports,
and listening to the laughter that came in frequent peals from the royal
tent. Within feasted Edward, the Count de la Roche, the Lord Rivers;
while in a larger and more splendid pavilion at some little distance,
the queen, her mother, and the great dames of the court held their own
slighter and less noisy repast.

"And here, then," said Edward, as he put his lips to a gold goblet,
wrought with gems, and passed it to Anthony the Bastard,--"here, count,
we take the first wassail to the loves of Charolois and Margaret!"

The count drained the goblet, and the wine gave him new fire.

"And with those loves, king," said he, "we bind forever Burgundy and
England. Woe to France!"

"Ay, woe to France!" exclaimed Edward, his face lighting up with that
martial joy which it ever took at the thoughts of war,--"for we will
wrench her lands from this huckster Louis. By Heaven! I shall not rest
in peace till York hath regained what Lancaster hath lost! and out of
the parings of the realm which I will add to England thy brother of
Burgundy shall have eno' to change his duke's diadem for a king's. How
now, Rivers? Thou gloomest, father mine."

"My liege," said Rivers, wakening himself, "I did but think that if the
Earl of Warwick--"

"Ah, I had forgotten," interrupted Edward; "and, sooth to say, Count
Anthony, I think if the earl were by, he would not much mend our
boon-fellowship!"

"Yet a good subject," said De la Roche, sneeringly, "usually dresses his
face by that of his king."

"A subject! Ay, but Warwick is much such a subject to England as William
of Normandy or Duke Rollo was to France. Howbeit, let him come,--our
realm is at peace, we want no more his battle-axe; and in our new
designs on France, thy brother, bold count, is an ally that might
compensate for a greater loss than a sullen minister. Let him come!"

As the king spoke, there was heard gently upon the smooth turf the sound
of the hoofs of steeds. A moment more, and from the outskirts of the
scene of revel, where the king's guards were stationed, there arose a
long, loud shout. Nearer and nearer came the hoofs of the steeds; they
paused. Doubtless Richard of Gloucester by that shout! "The soldiers
love that brave boy," said the king.

Marmaduke Nevile, as gentleman in waiting, drew aside the curtain of
the pavilion; and as he uttered a name that paled the cheeks of all who
heard, the Earl of Warwick entered the royal presence.

The earl's dress was disordered and soiled by travel; the black plume on
his cap was broken, and hung darkly over his face; his horseman's boots,
coming half way up the thigh, were sullied with the dust of the journey;
and yet as he entered, before the majesty of his mien, the grandeur
of his stature, suddenly De Roche, Rivers, even the gorgeous Edward
himself, seemed dwarfed into common men! About the man--his air, his
eye, his form, his attitude--there was THAT which, in the earlier
times, made kings by the acclamation of the crowd,--an unmistakable
sovereignty, as of one whom Nature herself had shaped and stamped for
power and for rule. All three had risen as he entered; and to a deep
silence succeeded an exclamation from Edward, and then again all was
still.

The earl stood a second or two calmly gazing on the effect he had
produced; and turning his dark eye from one to the other, till it rested
full upon De la Roche, who, after vainly striving not to quail beneath
the gaze, finally smiled with affected disdain, and, resting his hand on
his dagger, sank back into his seat.

"My liege," then said Warwick, doffing his cap, and approaching the king
with slow and grave respect, "I crave pardon for presenting myself to
your Highness thus travel-worn and disordered; but I announce that news
which insures my welcome. The solemn embassy of trust committed to me
by your Grace has prospered with God's blessing; and the Fils de Bourbon
and the Archbishop of Narbonne are on their way to your metropolis.
Alliance between the two great monarchies of Europe is concluded on
terms that insure the weal of England and augment the lustre of your
crown. Your claims on Normandy and Guienne King Louis consents to submit
to the arbitrement of the Roman Pontiff, [The Pope, moreover, was to
be engaged to decide the question within four years. A more brilliant
treaty for England, Edward's ambassador could not have effected.] and to
pay to your treasury annual tribute; these advantages, greater than your
Highness even empowered me to demand, thus obtained, the royal brother
of your new ally joyfully awaits the hand of the Lady Margaret."

"Cousin," said Edward, who had thoroughly recovered himself, motioning
the earl to a seat, "you are ever welcome, no matter what your news; but
I marvel much that so deft a statesman should broach these matters
of council in the unseasonable hour and before the gay comrades of a
revel."

"I speak, sire," said Warwick, calmly, though the veins in his forehead
swelled, and his dark countenance was much flushed--"I speak openly of
that which hath been done nobly; and this truth has ceased to be matter
of council, since the meanest citizen who has ears and eyes ere this
must know for what purpose the ambassadors of King Louis arrive in
England with your Highness's representative."

Edward, more embarrassed at this tone than he could have foreseen,
remained silent; but De la Roche, impatient to humble his brother's foe,
and judging it also discreet to arouse the king, said carelessly,--

"It were a pity, Sir Earl, that the citizens, whom you thus deem privy
to the thoughts of kings, had not prevised the Archbishop of Narbonne
that if he desire to see a fairer show than even the palaces of
Westminster and the Tower, he will hasten back to behold the banners of
Burgundy and England waving from the spires of Notre Dame."

Ere the Bastard had concluded, Rivers, leaning back, whispered the king,
"For Christ's sake, sire, select some fitter scene for what must follow!
Silence your guest!"

But Edward, on the contrary, pleased to think that De la Roche was
breaking the ice, and hopeful that some burst from Warwick would give
him more excuse than he felt at present for a rupture, said sternly,
"Hush, my lord, and meddle not!"

"Unless I mistake," said Warwick, coldly, "he who now accosts me is the
Count de la Roche,--a foreigner."

"And the brother of the heir of Burgundy," interrupted De la
Roche,--"brother to the betrothed and princely spouse of Margaret of
England."

"Doth this man lie, sire?" said Warwick, who had seated himself a
moment, and who now rose again.

The Bastard sprung also to his feet; but Edward, waving him back, and
reassuming the external dignity which rarely forsook him, replied,
"Cousin, thy question lacketh courtesy to our noble guest: since thy
departure, reasons of state, which we will impart to thee at a meeter
season, have changed our purpose, and we will now that our sister
Margaret shall wed with the Count of Charolois."

"And this to me, king!" exclaimed the earl; all his passions at once
released--"this to me! Nay, frown not, Edward,--I am of the race of
those who, greater than kings, have built thrones and toppled them! I
tell thee, thou hast misused mine honour, and belied thine own; thou
hast debased thyself in juggling me, delegated as the representative of
thy royalty!--Lord Rivers, stand back,--there are barriers eno' between
truth and a king!"

"By Saint George and my father's head!" cried Edward, with a rage no
less fierce than Warwick's,--"thou abusest, false lord, my mercy and
our kindred blood. Another word, and thou leavest this pavilion for the
Tower!"

"King," replied Warwick, scornfully, and folding his arms on his broad
breast, "there is not a hair on this head which thy whole house, thy
guards, and thine armies could dare to touch. ME to the Tower! Send
me,--and when the third sun reddens the roof of prison-house and palace,
look round broad England, and miss a throne!"

"What, ho there!" exclaimed Edward, stamping his foot; and at that
instant the curtain of the pavilion was hastily torn aside, and Richard
of Gloucester entered, followed by Lord Hastings, the Duke of Clarence,
and Anthony Woodville.

"Ah," continued the king, "ye come in time. George of Clarence, Lord
High Constable of England, arrest yon haughty man, who dares to menace
his liege and suzerain!"

Gliding between Clarence, who stood dumb and thunder-stricken, and the
Earl of Warwick, Prince Richard said, in a voice which, though even
softer than usual, had in it more command over those who heard than when
it rolled in thunder along the ranks of Barnet or of Bosworth, "Edward,
my brother, remember Towton, and forbear! Warwick, my cousin, forget not
thy king nor his dead father!"

At these last words the earl's face fell, for to that father he had
sworn to succour and defend the sons; his sense, recovering from his
pride, showed him how much his intemperate anger had thrown away his
advantages in the foul wrong he had sustained from Edward. Meanwhile the
king himself, with flashing eyes and a crest as high as Warwick's, was
about perhaps to overthrow his throne by the attempt to enforce his
threat, when Anthony Woodville, who followed Clarence, whispered to him,
"Beware, sire! a countless crowd that seem to have followed the earl's
steps have already pierced the chase, and can scarcely be kept from the
spot, so great is their desire to behold him. Beware!"--and Richard's
quick ear catching these whispered words, the duke suddenly backed them
by again drawing aside the curtain of the tent. Along the sward, the
guard of the king, summoned from their unseen but neighbouring
post within the wood, were drawn up as if to keep back an immense
multitude,--men, women, children, who swayed and rustled and murmured
in the rear. But no sooner was the curtain drawn aside, and the guards
themselves caught sight of the royal princes and the great earl towering
amidst them, than supposing in their ignorance the scene thus given to
them was intended for their gratification, from that old soldiery or
Towton rose a loud and long "Hurrah! Warwick and the king!"--"The king
and the stout earl!" The multitude behind caught the cry; they rushed
forward, mingling with the soldiery, who no longer sought to keep them
back.

"A Warwick! a Warwick!" they shouted. "God bless the people's friend!"

Edward, startled and aghast, drew sullenly into the rear of the tent.

De la Roche grew pale; but with the promptness of a practised statesman,
he hastily advanced, and drew the curtain. "Shall varlets," he said to
Richard, in French, "gloat over the quarrels of their lords?"

"You are right, Sir Count," murmured Richard, meekly; his purpose was
effected, and leaning on his riding staff, he awaited what was to ensue.

A softer shade had fallen over the earl's face, at the proof of the love
in which his name was held; it almost seemed to his noble though haughty
and impatient nature, as if the affection of the people had reconciled
him to the ingratitude of the king. A tear started to his proud eye;
but he twinkled it away, and approaching Edward (who remained erect, and
with all a sovereign's wrath, though silent on his lip, lowering on his
brow), he said, in a tone of suppressed emotion,--

"Sire, it is not for me to crave pardon of living man, but the grievous
affront put upon my state and mine honour hath led my words to an excess
which my heart repents. I grieve that your Grace's highness hath chosen
this alliance; hereafter you may find at need what faith is to be placed
in Burgundy."

"Darest thou gainsay it?" exclaimed De la Roche.

"Interrupt me not, sir!" continued Warwick, with a disdainful gesture.
"My liege, I lay down mine offices, and I leave it to your Grace to
account as it lists you to the ambassadors of France,--I shall vindicate
myself to their king. And now, ere I depart for my hall of Middleham, I
alone here, unarmed and unattended, save at least by a single squire,
I, Richard Nevile, say, that if any man, peer or knight, can be found
to execute your Grace's threat, and arrest me, I will obey your royal
pleasure, and attend him to the Tower." Haughtily he bowed his head
as he spoke, and raising it again, gazed around--"I await your Grace's
pleasure."

"Begone where thou wilt, earl. From this day Edward IV. reigns alone,"
said the king. Warwick turned.

"My Lord Scales," said he, "lift the curtain; nay, sir, it misdemeans
you not. You are still the son of the Woodville, I still the descendant
of John of Gaunt."

"Not for the dead ancestor, but for the living warrior," said the Lord
Scales, lifting the curtain, and bowing with knightly grace as the earl
passed. And scarcely was Warwick in the open space than the crowd fairly
broke through all restraint, and the clamour of their joy filled with
its hateful thunders the royal tent.

"Edward," said Richard, whisperingly, and laying his finger on his
brother's arm, "forgive me if I offended; but had you at such a time
resolved on violence--"

"I see it all,--you were right. But is this to be endured forever?"

"Sire," returned Richard, with his dark smile, "rest calm; for the age
is your best ally, and the age is outgrowing the steel and hauberk. A
little while, and--"

"And what--"

"And--ah, sire, I will answer that question when our brother George
(mark him!) either refrains from listening, or is married to Isabel
Nevile, and hath quarrel with her father about the dowry. What, he,
there!--let the jongleurs perform."

"The jongleurs!" exclaimed the king; "why, Richard, thou hast more
levity than myself!"

"Pardon me! Let the jongleurs perform, and bid the crowd stay. It is by
laughing at the mountebanks that your Grace can best lead the people to
forget their Warwick!"




CHAPTER X. HOW THE GREAT LORDS COME TO THE KING-MAKER, AND WITH WHAT
PROFFERS.

Mastering the emotions that swelled within him, Lord Warwick returned
with his wonted cheerful courtesy the welcome of the crowd and the
enthusiastic salutation of the king's guard; but as, at length, he
mounted his steed, and attended but by the squire who had followed him
from Dover, penetrated into the solitudes of the chase, the recollection
of the indignity he had suffered smote his proud heart so sorely that
he groaned aloud. His squire, fearing the fatigue he had undergone might
have affected even that iron health, rode up at the sound of the groan,
and Warwick's face was hueless as he said, with a forced smile, "It is
nothing, Walter. But these heats are oppressive, and we have forgotten
our morning draught, friend. Hark! I hear the brawl of a rivulet, and
a drink of fresh water were more grateful now than the daintiest
hippocras." So saying, he flung himself from his steed; following the
sound of the rivulet, he gained its banks, and after quenching his
thirst in the hollow of his hand, laid himself down upon the long grass,
waving coolly over the margin, and fell into profound thought. From this
revery he was aroused by a quick footstep, and as he lifted his gloomy
gaze, he beheld Marmaduke Nevile by his side.

"Well, young man," said he, sternly, "with what messages art thou
charged?"

"With none, my lord earl. I await now no commands but thine."

"Thou knowest not, poor youth, that I can serve thee no more. Go back to
the court."

"Oh, Warwick," said Marmaduke, with simple eloquence, "send me not from
thy side! This day I have been rejected by the maid I loved. I loved her
well, and my heart chafed sorely, and bled within! but now, methinks,
it consoles me to have been so cast off,--to have no faith, no love,
but that which is best of all, to a brave man,--love and faith for a
hero-chief! Where thy fortunes, there be my humble fate,--to rise or
fall with thee!"

Warwick looked intently upon his young kinsman's face, and said, as to
himself, "Why, this is strange! I gave no throne to this man, and he
deserts me not! My friend," he added aloud, "have they told thee already
that I am disgraced?"

"I heard the Lord Scales say to the young Lovell that thou wert
dismissed from all thine offices; and I came hither; for I will serve no
more the king who forgets the arm and heart to which he owes a kingdom."

"Man, I accept thy loyalty!" exclaimed Warwick, starting to his feet;
"and know that thou hast done more to melt and yet to nerve my spirit
than--But complaints in one are idle, and praise were no reward to
thee."

"But see, my lord, if the first to join thee, I am not the sole one.
See, brave Raoul de Fulke, the Lords of St. John, Bergavenny, and
Fitzhugh, ay, and fifty others of the best blood of England, are on thy
track."

And as he spoke, plumes and tunics were seen gleaming up the forest
path, and in another moment a troop of knights and gentlemen, comprising
the flower of such of the ancient nobility as yet lingered round the
court, came up to Warwick, bareheaded.

"Is it possible," cried Raoul de Fulke, "that we have heard aright,
noble earl? And has Edward IV. suffered the base Woodvilles to triumph
over the bulwark of his realm?"

"Knights and gentles!" said Warwick, with a bitter smile, "is it so
uncommon a thing that men in peace should leave the battle-axe and brand
to rust? I am but a useless weapon, to be suspended at rest amongst the
trophies of Towton in my hall of Middleham."

"Return with us," said the Lord of St. John, "and we will make Edward do
thee justice, or, one and all, we will abandon a court where knaves and
varlets have become mightier than English valour and nobler than Norman
birth."

"My friends," said the earl, laying his hand on St. John's shoulder,
"not even in my just wrath will I wrong my king. He is punished eno'
in the choice he hath made. Poor Edward and poor England! What woes and
wars await ye both, from the gold and the craft and the unsparing hate
of Louis XI! No; if I leave Edward, he hath more need of you. Of mine
own free will I have resigned mine offices."

"Warwick," interrupted Raoul de Fulke, "this deceives us not; and in
disgrace to you the ancient barons of England behold the first blow at
their own state. We have wrongs we endured in silence while thou wert
the shield and sword of yon merchant-king. We have seen the ancient
peers of England set aside for men of yesterday; we have seen
our daughters, sisters,--nay, our very mothers, if widowed and
dowered,--forced into disreputable and base wedlock with creatures
dressed in titles, and gilded with wealth stolen from ourselves.
Merchants and artificers tread upon our knightly heels, and the avarice
of trade eats up our chivalry as a rust. We nobles, in our greater day,
have had the crown at our disposal, and William the Norman dared not
think what Edward Earl of March hath been permitted with impunity to do.
We, Sir Earl--we knights and barons--would a king simple in his manhood
and princely in his truth. Richard Earl of Warwick, thou art of royal
blood, the descendant of old John of Gaunt. In thee we behold the true,
the living likeness of the Third Edward, and the Hero-Prince of Cressy.
Speak but the word, and we make thee king!"

The descendant of the Norman, the representative of the mighty faction
that no English monarch had ever braved in vain, looked round as he said
these last words, and a choral murmur was heard through the whole of
that august nobility, "We make thee king!"

"Richard, descendant of the Plantagenet, [By the female side, through
Joan Beaufort, or Plantagenet, Warwick was third in descent from John
of Gaunt, as Henry VII., through the male line, was fourth in descent.]
speak the word," repeated Raoul de Fulke.

"I speak it not," interrupted Warwick; "nor shalt thou continue, brave
Raoul de Fulke. What, my lords and gentlemen," he added, drawing himself
up, and with his countenance animated with feelings it is scarcely
possible in our times to sympathize with or make clear--"what! think you
that Ambition limits itself to the narrow circlet of a crown Greater,
and more in the spirit of our mighty fathers, is the condition of men
like us, THE BARONS who make and unmake kings. What! who of us would not
rather descend from the chiefs of Runnymede than from the royal craven
whom they controlled and chid? By Heaven, my lords, Richard Nevile has
too proud a soul to be a king! A king--a puppet of state and form; a
king--a holiday show for the crowd, to hiss or hurrah, as the humour
seizes; a king--a beggar to the nation, wrangling with his parliament
for gold! A king!--Richard II. was a king, and Lancaster dethroned him.
Ye would debase me to a Henry of Lancaster. Mort Dieu! I thank ye. The
Commons and the Lords raised him, forsooth,--for what? To hold him as
the creature they had made, to rate him, to chafe him, to pry into his
