An assistant steward lost his mind upon seeing one of the Titanic's
rescued firemen expire after being lifted to the deck of the Carpathia.

An Episcopal bishop and a Catholic priest from Montreal read services of
their respective churches over the dead.

The bodies were sewed up in sacks, heavily weighted at the feet, and
taken to an opening in the side of the ship on the lower deck not far
above the water line. A long plank tilted at one end served as the
incline down which the weighted sacks slid into the sea.

"After we got the Titanic's passengers on board our ship," said one of
the Carpathia's officers, "it was a question as to where we should take
them. Some said the Olympic would come out and meet us and take them on
to New York, but others said they would die if they had to be lowered
again into small boats to be taken up by another, so we finally turned
toward New York, delaying the Carpathia's passengers eight days in
reaching Gibraltar."


SURVIVORS WATCH NEW BOATS

There were several children on board, who had lost their parents--one
baby of eleven months with a nurse who, coming on board the Carpathia
with the first boat, watched with eagerness and sorrow for each incoming
boat, but to no avail. The parents had gone down.

There was a woman in the second cabin who lost seven children out of
ten, and there were many other losses quite as horrible.


MR. ISMY "PITIABLE SIGHT"

Among the rescued ones who came on board the Carpathia was the president
of the White Star Line.

"Mr. Ismay reached the Carpathia in about the tenth life-boat," said an
officer. "I didn't know who he was, but afterward heard the others of
the crew discussing his desire to get something to eat the minute he put
his foot on deck. The steward who waited on him, McGuire, from London,
says Mr. Ismay came dashing into the dining room, and throwing himself
in a chair, said: 'Hurry, for God's sake, and get me something to eat;
I'm starved. I don't care what it costs or what it is; bring it to me.'

"McGuire brought Mr. Ismay a load of stuff and when he had finished
it, he handed McGuire a two dollar bill. 'Your money is no good on this
ship,' McGuire told him. 'Take it.'


{illust. caption = DIAGRAM OF THE TITANIC'S ARRANGEMENT AND EQUIPMENT

The Titanic was far and away the largest and finest vessel ever built,
excepting only her sister-ship, the Olympic. Her dimensions were:
Length, 882 1/2 feet; Beam, 92 feet, Depth (from keel to tops of
funnels), 175 feet Tonnage, 45,000. Her huge hull, divided into thirty
watertight compartments, contained nine steel decks, and provided
accommodation for 2,500 passengers, besides a crew of 890.}

{illust. caption = UPPER DECK OF THE TITANIC, LOOKING FORWARD}


insisted Mr. Ismay, shoving the bill in McGuire's hand. I am well able
to afford it. I will see to it that the boys of the Carpathia are well
rewarded for this night's work.' This promise started McGuire making
inquiries as to the identity of the man he had waited on. Then we
learned that he was Mr. Ismay. I did not see Mr. Ismay after the first
few hours. He must have kept to his cabin."

A passenger on the Carpathia said there was no wonder that none of the
wireless telegrams addressed to Mr. Ismay were answered until the one
that he sent yesterday afternoon to his line, the White Star.

"Mr. Ismay was beside himself," said this woman passenger, "and on
most of the voyage after we had picked him up he was being quieted with
opiates on orders of the ship's doctor.


FIVE DOGS AND ONE PIG SAVED

"Five women saved their pet dogs, carrying them in their arms. Another
woman saved a little pig, which she said was her mascot. Though her
husband is an Englishman and she lives in England she is an American and
was on her way to visit her folks here. How she cared for the pig aboard
ship I do not know, but she carried it up the side of the ship in a big
bag. I did not mind the dogs so much, but it seemed to me to be too much
when a pig was saved and human beings went to death.

"It was not until noon on Monday that we cleared the last of the ice,
and Monday night a dense fog came up and continued until the following
morning, then a strong wind, a heavy sea, a thunderstorm and a dense fog
Tuesday night, caused some uneasiness among the more unnerved, the fog
continuing all of Tuesday.

"A number of whales were sighted as the Carpathia was clearing the last
of the ice, one large one being close by, and all were spouting like
geysers."


VOTE OF THANKS TO CARPATHIA

"On Tuesday afternoon a meeting of the uninjured survivors was called in
the main saloon for the purpose of devising means of assisting the more
unfortunate, many of whom had lost relatives and all their personal
belongings, and thanking Divine Providence for their deliverance.
The meeting was called to order and Mr. Samuel Goldenberg was elected
chairman. Resolutions were then passed thanking the officers, surgeons,
passengers and crew of the Carpathia for their splendid services in
aiding the rescued and like resolutions for the admirable work done by
the officers, surgeons and crew of the Titanic.

"A committee was then appointed to raise funds on board the Carpathia to
relieve the immediate wants of the destitute and assist them in reaching
their destinations and also to present a loving cup to the officers of
the Carpathia and also a loving cup to the surviving officers of the
Titanic.

"Mr. T. G. Frauenthal, of New York, was made chairman of the Committee
on Subscriptions.

"A committee, consisting of Mrs. J. J. Brown, Mrs William Bucknell and
Mrs. George Stone, was appointed to look after the destitute. There
was a subscription taken up and up to Wednesday the amount contributed
totaled $15,000.

"The work of the crew on board the Carpathia in rescuing was most noble
and remarkable, and these four days that the ship has been overcrowded
with its 710 extra passengers could not have been better handled. The
stewards have worked with undying strength--although one was overcome
with so much work and died and was put to his grave at sea.

"I have never seen or felt the benefits of such royal treatment. I have
heard the captain criticised because he did not answer telegrams, but
all that I can say is that he showed us every possible courtesy, and if
we had been on our own boats, having paid our fares there, we could not
have had better food or better accommodations.

"Men who had paid for the best staterooms on the Carpathia left their
rooms so that we might have them. They fixed up beds in the smoking
rooms, and mattresses everywhere. All the women who were rescued
were given the best staterooms, which were surrendered by the regular
passengers. None of the regular passengers grumbled because their trip
to Europe was interrupted, nor did they complain that they were put to
the inconvenience of receiving hundreds of strangers.

"The women on board the Carpathia were particularly kind. It shows that
for every cruelty of nature there is a kindness, for every misfortune
there is some goodness. The men and women took up collections on board
for the rescued steerage passengers. Mrs. Astor, I believe, contributed
$2000, her check being cashed by the Carpathia. Altogether something
like $15,000 was collected and all the women were provided with
sufficient money to reach their destination after they were landed in
New York."

Under any other circumstances the suffering would have been intolerable.
But the Good Samaritans on the Carpathia gave many women heart's-ease.

The spectacle on board the Carpathia on the return trip to New York at
times was heartrending, while at other times those on board were quite
cheerful.



CHAPTER XI. PREPARATIONS ON LAND TO RECEIVE THE SUFFERERS

POLICE ARRANGEMENTS--DONATIONS OF MONEY AND SUPPLIES--HOSPITALS AND
AMBULANCES MADE READY--PRIVATE HOUSES THROWN OPEN--WAITING FOR THE
CARPATHIA TO ARRIVE--THE SHIP SIGHTED!

NEW YORK CITY, touched to the heart by the great ocean calamity and
desiring to do what it could to lighten the woes and relieve the
sufferings of the pitiful little band of men and women rescued from the
Titanic, opened both its heart and its purse.

The most careful and systematic plans were made for the reception and
transfer to homes, hotels or institutions of the Titanic's survivors.
Mayor Gaynor, with Police Commissioner Waldo, arranged to go down the
bay on the police boat Patrol, to come up with the Carpathia and take
charge of the police arrangements at the pier.

In anticipation of the enormous number that would, for a variety of
reasons, creditable or otherwise, surge about the Cunard pier at the
coming of the Carpathia, Mayor Gaynor and the police commissioner had
seen to it that the streets should be rigidly sentineled by continuous
lines of policemen Under Inspector George McClusky, the man of most
experience, perhaps, in handling large crowds, there were 200 men,
including twelve mounted men and a number in citizens' clothes. For two
blocks to the north, south and east of the docks lines were established
through which none save those bearing passes from the Government and the
Cunard Line could penetrate.

With all arrangements made that experience or information could suggest,
the authorities settled down to await the docking of the Carpathia. No
word had come to either the White Star Line or the Cunard Line, they
said, that any of the Titanic's people had died on that ship or that
bodies had been recovered from the sea, but in the afternoon Mayor
Gaynor sent word to the Board of Coroners that it might be well for
some of that body to meet the incoming ship. Coroners Feinberg and
Holtzhauser with Coroner's Physician Weston arranged to go down the
bay on the Patrol, while Coroner Hellenstein waited at the pier. An
undertaker was notified to be ready if needed. Fortunately there was no
such need.


EVERY POSSIBLE MEASURE THOUGHT OF

Every possible measure of relief for the survivors that could be thought
of by officials of the city, of the Federal Government, by the heads of
hospitals and the Red Cross and relief societies was arranged for.
The Municipal Lodging House, which has accommodations for 700 persons,
agreed to throw open its doors and furnish lodging and food to any of
the survivors as long as they should need it. Commissioner of Charities
Drummond did not know, of course, just how great the call would be for
the services of his department. He went to the Cunard pier to direct his
part of the work in person. Meanwhile he had twenty ambulances ready
for instant movement on the city's pier at the foot of East Twenty-sixth
Street. They were ready to take patients to the reception hospital
connected with Bellevue or the Metropolitan Hospital on Blackwell's
Island. Ambulances from the Kings County Hospital in Brooklyn were also
there to do their share. All the other hospitals in the city stood ready
to take the Titanic's people and those that had ambulances promised to
send them. The Charities ferryboat, Thomas S. Brennan, equipped as a
hospital craft, lay off the department pier with nurses and physicians
ready to be called to the Cunard pier on the other side of the city.
St. Vincent's Hospital had 120 beds ready, New York Hospital twelve,
Bellevue and the reception hospital 120 and Flower Hospital twelve.

The House of Shelter maintained by the Hebrew Sheltering and Immigrant
Aid Society announced that it was able to care for at least fifty
persons as long as might be necessary. The German Society of New York,
the Irish Immigrant Society, the Italian Society, the Swedish Immigrant
Society and the Young Men's Christian Association were among the
organizations that also offered to see that no needy survivor would go
without shelter.

Mrs. W. A. Bastede, whose husband is a member of the staff of St. Luke's
Hospital, offered to the White Star Line the use of the newly opened
ward at St. Luke's, which will accommodate from thirty to sixty persons.
She said the hospital would send four ambulances with nurses and doctors
and that she had collected clothing enough for fifty persons. The line
accepted her offer and said that the hospital would be kept informed as
to what was needed. A trustee of Bellevue also called at the White Star
offices to offer ambulances. He said that five or six, with two or three
doctors and nurses on each, would be sent to the pier if required.

Many other hospitals as well as individuals called at the mayor's
office, expressing willingness to take in anybody that should be sent to
them. A woman living in Fiftieth Street just off Fifth Avenue wished
to put her home at the disposal of the survivors. D. H. Knott, of 102
Waverley Place, told the mayor that he could take care of 100 and give
them both food and lodging at the Arlington, Holly and Earl Hotels.
Commissioner Drummond visited the City Hall and arranged with the
mayor the plans for the relief to be extended directly by the city. Mr.
Drummond said that omnibuses would be provided to transfer passengers
from the ship to the Municipal Lodging House.


MRS. VANDERBILT'S EFFORTS

Mrs. W. K. Vanderbilt, Jr., spent the day telephoning to her friends,
asking them to let their automobiles be used to meet the Carpathia and
take away those who needed surgical care. It was announced that as a
result of Mrs. Vanderbilt's efforts 100 limousine automobiles and all
the Fifth Avenue and Riverside Drive automobile buses would be at the
Cunard pier.

Immigration Commissioner Williams said that he would be at the pier when
the Carpathia came in. There was to be no inspection of immigrants at
Ellis Island. Instead, the commissioner sent seven or eight inspectors
to the pier to do their work there and he asked them to do it with the
greatest possible speed and the least possible bother to the shipwrecked
aliens. The immigrants who had no friends to meet them were to be
provided for until their cases could be disposed of. Mr. Williams
thought that some of them who had lost everything might have to be sent
back to their homes. Those who were to be admitted to the United States
were to be cared for by the Women's Relief Committee.


RED CROSS RELIEF

Robert W. de Forest, chairman of the Red Cross Relief Committee of the
Charity Organization Society, after conferring with Mayor Gaynor, said
that in addition to an arrangement that all funds received by the
mayor should be paid to Jacob H. Schiff, the New York treasurer of the
American Red Cross, the committee had decided that it could turn over
all the immediate relief work to the Women's Relief Committee.

The Red Cross Committee announced that careful plans had been made to
provide for every possible emergency.

The emergency committee received a telegram that Ernest P. Bicknell,
director of the American Red Cross, was coming from Washington. The Red
Cross Emergency Relief Committee was to have several representatives at
the pier to look out for the passengers on the Carpathia. Mr. Persons
and Dr. Devine were to be there and it was planned to have others.

The Salvation Army offered, through the mayor's office, accommodation
for thirty single men at the Industrial Home, 533 West Forty-eighth
Street, and for twenty others at its hotel, 18 Chatham Square. The
army's training school at 124 West Fourteenth Street was ready to take
twenty or thirty survivors. R. H. Farley, head of the White Star Line's
third class department, said that the line would give all the steerage
passengers railroad tickets to their destination.

Mayor Gaynor estimated that more than 5000 persons could be accommodated
in quarters offered through his orders. Most of these offers of course
would have to be rejected. The mayor also said that Colonel Conley of
the Sixty-ninth Regiment offered to turn out his regiment to police the
pier, but it was thought that such service would be unnecessary.


CROWDS AT THE DOCKS

Long before dark on Thursday night a few people passed the police lines
and with a yellow card were allowed to go on the dock; but reports had
been published that the Carpathia would not be in till midnight, and by
8 o'clock there were not more than two hundred people on the pier. In
the next hour the crowd with passes trebled in number. By 9 o'clock the
pier held half as many as it could comfortably contain. The early crowd
did not contain many women relatives of the survivors. Few nervous
people could be seen, but here and there was a woman, usually supported
by two male escorts, weeping softly to herself.

On the whole it was a frantic, grief-crazed crowd. Laborers rubbed
shoulders with millionaires.

The relatives of the rich had taxicabs waiting outside the docks. The
relatives of the poor went there on foot in the rain, ready to take
their loved ones.

A special train was awaiting Mrs. Charles M. Hays, widow of the
president of the Grand Trunk Railroad. A private car also waited Mrs.
George D. Widener.
