"I will see the Prince. I have a right to see him. What's this?--Where
am I?--What's the matter?" cries Madame Bernstein, waking up from her
sleep. She had been dreaming of old days, no doubt. The old lady shook
in all her limbs--her face was very much flushed. She stared about
wildly a moment, and then tottered forward on her tortoiseshell cane.
"What--what's the matter?" she asked again. "Have you killed her, sir?"

"Some sudden qualm must have come over her ladyship. Shall I cut her
laces, madam? or send for a doctor?" cries the chaplain, with every look
of innocence and alarm.

"What has passed between you, sir?" asked the old lady, fiercely.

"I give you my honour, madam, I have done I don't know what. I but
mentioned that Mr. Warrington had lost a pocket-book containing letters,
and my lady swooned, as you see."

Madame Bernstein dashed water on her niece's face. A feeble moan told
presently that the lady was coming to herself.

The Baroness looked sternly after Mr. Sampson, as she sent him away on
his errand for the doctor. Her aunt's grim countenance was of little
comfort to poor Maria when she saw it on waking up from her swoon.

"What has happened?" asked the younger lady, bewildered and gasping.

"H'm! You know best what has happened, madam, I suppose. What hath
happened before in our family?" cried the old Baroness, glaring at her
niece with savage eyes.

"Ah, yes! the letters have been lost--ach lieber Himmel!" And Maria, as
she would sometimes do, when much moved, began to speak in the language
of her mother.

"Yes! the seal has been broken, and the letters have been lost, 'tis the
old story of the Esmonds," cried the elder, bitterly.

"Seal broken, letters lost? What do you mean,--aunt?" asked Maria,
faintly.

"I mean that my mother was the only honest woman that ever entered the
family!" cried the Baroness, stamping her foot. "And she was a parson's
daughter of no family in particular, or she would have gone wrong, too.
Good heavens! is it decreed that we are all to be...?"

"To be what, madam?" cried Maria.

"To be what my Lady Queensberry said we were last night. To be what we
are! You know the word for it!" cried the indignant old woman. "I say,
what has come to the whole race? Your father's mother was an honest
woman, Maria. Why did I leave her? Why couldn't you remain so?"

"Madam!" exclaims Maria, "I declare, before Heaven, I am as----"

"Bah! Don't madam me! Don't call heaven to witness--there's nobody by!
And if you swore to your innocence till the rest of your teeth dropped
out of your mouth, my Lady Maria Esmond, I would not believe you!"

"Ah! it was you told him!" gasped Maria. She recognised an arrow out of
her aunt's quiver.

"I saw some folly going on between you and the boy, and I told him that
you were as old as his mother. Yes, I did! Do you suppose I am going
to let Henry Esmond's boy fling himself and his wealth away upon such
a battered old rock as you? The boy shan't be robbed and cheated in our
family. Not a shilling of mine shall any of you have if he comes to any
harm amongst you.

"Ah! you told him!" cried Maria, with a sudden burst of rebellion.
"Well, then! I'd have you to know that I don't care a penny, madam,
for your paltry money! I have Mr. Harry Warrington's word--yes, and his
letters--and I know he will die rather than break it."

"He will die if he keeps it!" (Maria shrugged her shoulders.)

"But you don't care for that--you've no more heart----"

"Than my father's sister, madam!" cries Maria again. The younger woman,
ordinarily submissive, had turned upon here persecutor.

"Ah! Why did not I marry an honest man?" said the of lady, shaking her
head sadly. "Henry Esmond was noble and good, and perhaps might have
made me so. But no, no--we have all got the taint in us--all! You don't
mean to sacrifice this boy, Maria?"

"Madame ma tante, do you take me for a fool at my age?" asks Maria.

"Set him free! I'll give you five thousand pounds--in my--in my will,
Maria. I will, on my honour!"

"When you were young, and you liked Colonel Esmond, you threw him aside
for an earl, and the earl for a duke?"

"Yes."

"Eh! Bon sang ne peut mentir! I have no money, I have no friends.
My father was a spendthrift, my brother is a beggar. I have Mr.
Warrington's word, and I know, madam, he will keep it. And that's what I
tell your ladyship!" cries Lady Maria with a wave of her hand. "Suppose
my letters are published to all the world to-morrow? Apres? I know they
contain things I would as lieve not tell. Things not about me alone.
Comment! Do you suppose there are no stories but mine in the family?
It is not my letters that I am afraid of, so long as I have his, madam.
Yes, his and his word, and I trust them both."

"I will send to my merchant, and give you the money now, Maria," pleaded
the old lady.

"No, I shall have my pretty Harry, and ten times five thousand pounds!"
cries Maria.

"Not till his mother's death, madam, who is just your age!"

"We can afford to wait, aunt. At my age, as you say, I am not so eager
as young chits for a husband."

"But to wait my sister's death, at least, is a drawback?"

"Offer me ten thousand pounds, Madam Tusher, and then we will see!"
cries Maria.

"I have not so much money in the world, Maria," said the old lady.

"Then, madam, let me make what I can for myself!" says Maria.

"Ah, if he heard you?"

"Apres? I have his word. I know he will keep it. I can afford to wait,
madam," and she flung out of the room, just as the chaplain returned.
It was Madame Bernstein who wanted cordials now. She was immensely moved
and shocked by the news which had been thus suddenly brought to her.




CHAPTER XXXVI. Which seems to mean Mischief


Though she had clearly had the worst of the battle described in the last
chapter, the Baroness Bernstein, when she next met her niece showed
no rancour or anger. "Of course, my Lady Maria," she said, "you can't
suppose that I, as Harry Warrington's near relative, can be pleased at
the idea of his marrying a woman who is as old as his mother, and has
not a penny to her fortune; but if he chooses to do so silly a thing,
the affair is none of mine; and I doubt whether I should have been
much inclined to be taken au serieux with regard to that offer of five
thousand pounds which I made in the heat of our talk. So it was already
at Castlewood that this pretty affair was arranged? Had I known how far
it had gone, my dear, I should have spared some needless opposition.
When a pitcher is broken, what railing can mend it?"

"Madam!" here interposed Maria.

"Pardon me--I mean nothing against your ladyship's honour or character,
which, no doubt, are quite safe. Harry says so, and you say so--what
more can one ask?"

"You have talked to Mr. Warrington, madam?"

"And he has owned that he made you a promise at Castlewood: that you
have it in his writing."

"Certainly I have, madam!" says Lady Maria.

"Ah!" (the elder lady did not wince at this). "And I own, too, that at
first I put a wrong construction upon the tenor of your letters to him.
They implicate other members of the family----"

"Who have spoken most wickedly of me, and endeavoured to prejudice me
in every way in my dear Mr. Warrington's eyes. Yes, madam, I own I have
written against them, to justify myself."

"But, of course, are pained to think that any wretch should get
possession of stories to the disadvantage of our family, and make them
public scandal. Hence your disquiet just now."

"Exactly so," said Lady Maria. "From Mr. Warrington I could have nothing
concealed henceforth, and spoke freely to him. But that is a very
different thing from wishing all the world to know the disputes of a
noble family."

"Upon my word, Maria, I admire you, and have done you injustice.
These--these twenty years, let us say."

"I am very glad, madam, that you end by doing me justice at all," said
the niece.

"When I saw you last night, opening the ball with my nephew, can you
guess what I thought of, my dear?"

"I really have no idea what the Baroness de Bernstein thought of," said
Lady Maria, haughtily.

"I remembered that you had performed to that very tune with the
dancing-master at Kensington, my dear!"

"Madam, it was an infamous calumny."

"By which the poor dancing-master got a cudgelling for nothing!"

"It is cruel and unkind, madam, to recall that calumny--and I shall
beg to decline living any longer with any one who utters it," continued
Maria, with great spirit.

"You wish to go home? I can fancy you won't like Tunbridge. It will be
very hot for you if those letters are found."

"There was not a word against you in them, madam: about that I can make
your mind easy."

"So Harry said, and did your ladyship justice. Well, my dear, we are
tired of one another, and shall be better apart for a while."

"That is precisely my own opinion," said Lady Maria, dropping a curtsey.

"Mr. Sampson can escort you to Castlewood. You and your maid can take a
postchaise."

"We can take a postchaise, and Mr. Sampson can escort me," echoed the
younger lady. "You see, madam, I act like a dutiful niece."

"Do you know, my dear, I have a notion that Sampson has got the
letters?" said the Baroness, frankly.

"I confess that such a notion has passed through my own mind."

"And you want to go home in the chaise, and coax the letters from him!
Delilah! Well, they can be no good to me, and I trust you may get them.
When will you go? The sooner the better, you say? We are women of the
world, Maria. We only call names when we are in a passion. We don't want
each other's company; and we part on good terms. Shall we go to my Lady
Yarmouth's? 'Tis her night. There is nothing like a change of scene
after one of those little nervous attacks you have had, and cards drive
away unpleasant thoughts better than any doctor."

Lady Maria agreed to go to Lady Yarmouth's cards, and was dressed and
ready first, awaiting her aunt in the drawing-room. Madame Bernstein, as
she came down, remarked Maria's door was left open. "She has the
letters upon her," thought the old lady. And the pair went off to their
entertainment in their respective chairs, and exhibited towards each
other that charming cordiality and respect which women can show after,
and even during, the bitterest quarrels.

That night, on their return from the Countess's drum, Mrs. Brett, Madame
Bernstein's maid, presented herself to my Lady Maria's call, when that
lady rang her hand-bell upon retiring to her room. Betty, Mrs. Brett was
ashamed to say, was not in a fit state to come before my lady. Betty had
been a-junketing and merry-making with Mr. Warrington's black gentleman,
with my Lord Bamborough's valet, and several more ladies and gentlemen
of that station, and the liquor--Mrs. Brett was shocked to own it--had
proved too much for Mrs. Betty. Should Mrs. Brett undress my lady? My
lady said she would undress without a maid, and gave Mrs. Brett leave to
withdraw. "She has the letters in her stays," thought Madame Bernstein.
They had bidden each other an amicable good-night on the stairs.

Mrs. Betty had a scolding the next morning, when she came to wait on
her mistress, from the closet adjoining Lady Maria's apartment, in which
Betty lay. She owned, with contrition, her partiality for rum-punch,
which Mr. Gumbo had the knack of brewing most delicate. She took her
scolding with meekness, and, having performed her usual duties about her
lady's person, retired.

Now Betty was one of the Castlewood girls who had been so fascinated by
Gumbo, and was a very good-looking, blue-eyed lass, upon whom Mr.
Case, Madame Bernstein's confidential man, had also cast the eyes
of affection. Hence, between Messrs. Gumbo and Case, there had been
jealousies and even quarrels; which had caused Gumbo, who was of a
peaceful disposition, to be rather shy of the Baroness's gentlemen, the
chief of whom vowed he would break the bones, or have the life of Gumbo,
if he persisted in his attentions to Mrs. Betty.

But on the night of the rum-punch, though Mr. Case found Gumbo and Mrs.
Betty whispering in the doorway, in the cool breeze, and Gumbo would
have turned pale with fear had he been able so to do, no one could be
more gracious than Mr. Case. It was he who proposed the bowl of punch,
which was brewed and drunk in Mrs. Betty's room, and which Gumbo
concocted with exquisite skill. He complimented Gumbo on his music.
Though a sober man ordinarily, he insisted upon more and more drinking,
until poor Mrs. Betty was reduced to the state which occasioned her
ladyship's just censure.

As for Mr. Case himself, who lay out of the house, he was so ill with
the punch, that he kept his bed the whole of the next day, and did
not get strength to make his appearance, and wait on his ladies, until
supper-time; when his mistress good-naturedly rebuked him, saying that
it was not often he sinned in that way.

"Why, Case, I could have made oath it was you I saw on horseback this
morning galloping on the London road," said Mr. Warrington, who was
supping with his relatives.

"Me! law bless you, sir! I was a-bed, and I thought my head would come
off with the aching. I ate a bit at six o'clock, and drunk a deal of
small beer, and I am almost my own man again now. But that Gumbo, saving
your honour's presence, I won't taste none of his punch again." And the
honest major-domo went on with his duties among the bottles and glasses.

As they sate after their meal, Madame Bernstein was friendly enough. She
prescribed strong fortifying drinks for Maria, against the recurrence of
her fainting fits. The lady had such attacks not unfrequently. She urged
her to consult her London physician, and to send up an account of her
case by Harry. By Harry! asked the lady. Yes. Harry was going for two
days on an errand for his aunt to London. "I do not care to tell you, my
dear, that it is on business which will do him good. I wish Mr. Draper
to put him into my will, and as I am going travelling upon a round
of visits when you and I part, I think, for security, I shall ask Mr.
Warrington to take my trinket-box in his postchaise to London with him,
for there have been robberies of late, and I have no fancy for being
stopped by highwaymen."

Maria looked blank at the notion of the young gentleman's departure,
but hoped that she might have his escort back to Castlewood, whither her
elder brother had now returned. "Nay," says his aunt, "the lad hath been
tied to our apron-strings long enough. A day in London will do him no
harm. He can perform my errand for me and be back with you by Saturday."

"I would offer to accompany Mr. Warrington, but I preach on Friday
before her ladyship," says Mr. Sampson. He was anxious that my Lady
Yarmouth should judge of his powers as a preacher; and Madame Bernstein
had exerted her influence with the king's favourite to induce her to
hear the chaplain.

Harry relished the notion of a rattling journey to London, and a day or
two of sport there. He promised that his pistols were good, and that
he would hand the diamonds over in safety to the banker's strong-room.
Would he occupy his aunt's London house? No, that would be a dreary
lodging with only a housemaid and a groom in charge of it. He would go
to the Star and Garter in Pall Mall, or to an inn in Covent Garden.
"Ah! I have often talked over that journey," said Harry, his countenance
saddening.

"And with whom, sir?" asked Lady Maria.

"With one who promised to make it with me," said the young man,
thinking, as he always did, with an extreme tenderness of the lost
brother.

"He has more heart, my good Maria, than some of us!" says Harry's
aunt, witnessing his emotion. Uncontrollable gusts of grief would,
not unfrequently, still pass over our young man. The parting from his
brother; the scene and circumstances of George's fall last year; the
recollection of his words, or of some excursion at home which they had
planned together; would recur to him and overcome him. "I doubt, madam,"
whispered the chaplain, demurely, to Madame Bernstein, after one of
these bursts of sorrow, "whether some folks in England would suffer
quite so much at the death of their elder brother."

But, of course, this sorrow was not to be perpetual; and we can fancy
Mr. Warrington setting out on his London journey eagerly enough, and
very gay and happy, if it must be owned, to be rid of his elderly
attachment. Yes. There was no help for it. At Castlewood, on one unlucky
evening, he had made an offer of his heart and himself to his mature
cousin, and she had accepted the foolish lad's offer. But the marriage
now was out of the question. He must consult his mother. She was the
mistress for life of the Virginian property. Of course she would refuse
her consent to such a union. The thought of it was deferred to a late
period. Meanwhile, it hung like a weight round the young man's neck, and
caused him no small remorse and disquiet.

No wonder that his spirits rose more gaily as he came near London, and
that he looked with delight from his postchaise windows upon the city
as he advanced towards it. No highwayman stopped our traveller on
Blackheath. Yonder are the gleaming domes of Greenwich, canopied with
woods. There is the famous Thames, with its countless shipping; there
actually is the Tower of London. "Look, Gumbo! There is the Tower!"
"Yes, master," says Gumbo, who has never heard of the Tower; but Harry
has, and remembers how he has read about it in Howell's Medulla, and how
he and his brother used to play at the Tower, and he thinks with delight
now, how he is actually going to see the armour and the jewels and the
lions. They pass through Southwark and over that famous London Bridge,
which was all covered with houses like a street two years ago. Now there
is only a single gate left, and that is coming down. Then the chaise
rolls through the city; and, "Look, Gumbo, that is Saint Paul's!" "Yes,
master; Saint Paul's," says Gumbo, obsequiously, but little struck by
the beauties of the architecture. And so by the well-known course we
reach the Temple, and Gumbo and his master look up with awe at the rebel
heads on Temple Bar.

The chaise drives to Mr. Draper's chambers in Middle Temple Lane, where
Harry handed the precious box over to Mr. Draper, and a letter from
his aunt, which the gentleman read with some interest seemingly, and
carefully put away. He then consigned the trinket-box to his strong
closet, went into the adjoining room, taking his clerk with him, and
then was at Mr. Warrington's service to take him to an hotel. An hotel
in Covent Garden was fixed upon as the best place for his residence.
"I shall have to keep you for two or three days, Mr. Warrington," the
lawyer said. "I don't think the papers which the Baroness wants can be
ready until then. Meanwhile, I am at your service to see the town. I
live out of it myself, and have a little box at Camberwell, where I
shall be proud to have the honour of entertaining Mr. Warrington; but a
young man, I suppose, will like his inn and his liberty best, sir?"

Harry said yes, he thought the inn would be best; and the postchaise,
and a clerk of Mr. Draper's inside, was despatched to the Bedford,
whither the two gentlemen agreed to walk on foot.

Mr. Draper and Mr. Warrington sat and talked for a while. The Drapers,
father and son, had been lawyers time out of mind to the Esmond family,
and the attorney related to the young gentleman numerous stories
regarding his ancestors of Castlewood. Of the present Earl Mr.
Draper was no longer the agent: his father and his lordship had had
differences, and his lordship's business had been taken elsewhere: but
the Baroness was still their honoured client, and very happy indeed was
Mr. Draper to think that her ladyship was so well disposed towards her
nephew.

As they were taking their hats to go out, a young clerk of the house
stopped his principal in the passage, and said: "If you please, sir,
them papers of the Baroness was given to her ladyship's man, Mr. Case,
two days ago."

"Just please to mind your own business, Mr. Brown," said the lawyer,
rather sharply. "This way, Mr. Warrington. Our Temple stairs are rather
dark. Allow me to show you the way."

Harry saw Mr. Draper darting a Parthian look of anger at Mr. Brown. "So
it was Case I saw on the London Road two days ago," he thought. "What
business brought the old fox to London?" Wherewith, not choosing to be
inquisitive about other folks' affairs, he dismissed the subject from
his mind.

Whither should they go first? First, Harry was for going to see the
place where his grandfather and Lord Castlewood had fought a duel
fifty-six years ago, in Leicester Field. Mr. Draper knew the place well,
and all about the story. They might take Covent Garden on their way to
Leicester Field, and see that Mr. Warrington was comfortably lodged.
"And order dinner," says Mr. Warrington. No, Mr. Draper could not
consent to that. Mr. Warrington must be so obliging as to honour him on
that day. In fact, he had made so bold as to order a collation from the
Cock. Mr. Warrington could not decline an invitation so pressing, and
walked away gaily with his friend, passing under that arch where
the heads were, and taking off his hat to them, much to the lawyer's
astonishment.

"They were gentlemen who died for their king, sir. My dear brother
George and I always said we would salute 'em when we saw 'em," Mr.
Warrington said.

"You'll have a mob at your heels if you do, sir," said the alarmed
lawyer.

"Confound the mob, sir," said Mr. Harry, loftily, but the passers-by,
thinking about their own affairs, did not take any notice of Mr.
Warrington's conduct; and he walked up the thronging Strand, gazing
with delight upon all he saw, remembering, I dare say, for all his
life after, the sights and impressions there presented to him, but
maintaining a discreet reserve; for he did not care to let the lawyer
know how much he was moved, or the public perceive that he was a
stranger. He did not hear much of his companion's talk, though the
latter chattered ceaselessly on the way. Nor was Mr. Draper displeased
by the young Virginian's silent and haughty demeanour. A hundred years
ago a gentleman was a gentleman, and his attorney his very humble
servant.

The chamberlain at the Bedford showed Mr. Warrington to his rooms,
bowing before him with delightful obsequiousness, for Gumbo had already
trumpeted his master's greatness, and Mr. Draper's clerk announced that
the new-comer was a "high fellar." Then, the rooms surveyed, the two
gentlemen went to Leicester Field, Mr. Gumbo strutting behind his
master: and, having looked at the scene of his grandsire's wound, and
poor Lord Castlewood's tragedy, they returned to the Temple to Mr.
Draper's chambers.

Who was that shabby-looking big man Mr. Warrington bowed to as they went
out after dinner for a walk in the gardens? That was Mr. Johnson, an
author, whom he had met at Tunbridge Wells. "Take the advice of a man of
the world, sir," says Mr. Draper, eyeing the shabby man of letters very
superciliously; "the less you have to do with that kind of person, the
better. The business we have into our office about them literary men is
not very pleasant, I can tell you." "Indeed!" says Mr. Warrington. He
did not like his new friend the more as the latter grew more familiar.
The theatres were shut. Should they go to Sadler's Wells? or Marybone
Gardens? or Ranelagh? or how? "Not Ranelagh," says Mr. Draper, "because
there's none of the nobility in town;" but, seeing in the newspaper that
at the entertainment at Sadler's Wells, Islington, there would be the
most singular kind of diversion on eight hand-bells by Mr. Franklyn, as
well as the surprising performances of Signora Catherina, Harry wisely
determined that he would go to Marybone Gardens, where they had a
concert of music, a choice of tea, coffee, and all sorts of wines,
and the benefit of Mr. Draper's ceaseless conversation. The lawyer's
obsequiousness only ended at Harry's bedroom door, where, with haughty
grandeur, the young gentleman bade his talkative host good night.

The next morning Mr. Warrington, arrayed in his brocade bedgown, took
his breakfast, read the newspaper, and enjoyed his ease in his inn. He
read in the paper news from his own country. And when he saw the words,
Williamsburg, Virginia, June 7th, his eyes grew dim somehow. He had
just had letters by that packet of June 7th, but his mother did not
tell how--"A great number of the principal gentry of the colony have
associated themselves under the command of the Honourable Peyton
Randolph, Esquire, to march to the relief of their distressed
fellow-subjects, and revenge the cruelties of the French and their
barbarous allies. They are in a uniform: viz., a plain blue frock,
nanquin or brown waistcoats and breeches, and plain hats. They are armed
each with a light firelock, a brace of pistols, and a cutting sword."

"Ah, why ain't we there, Gumbo?" cried out Harry.

"Why ain't we dar?" shouted Gumbo.

"Why am I here, dangling at women's trains?" continued the Virginian.

"Think dangling at women's trains very pleasant, Master Harry!" says the
materialistic Gumbo, who was also very little affected by some further
home news which his master read, viz., that The Lovely Sally, Virginia
ship, had been taken in sight of port by a French privateer.

And now, reading that the finest mare in England, and a pair of very
genteel bay geldings, were to be sold at the Bull Inn, the lower end
of Hatton Garden, Harry determined to go and look at the animals, and
inquired his way to the place. He then and there bought the genteel bay
geldings, and paid for them with easy generosity. He never said what
he did on that day, being shy of appearing like a stranger; but it is
believed that he took a coach and went to Westminster Abbey, from which
he bade the coachman drive him to the Tower, then to Mrs. Salmon's
Waxwork, then to Hyde Park and Kensington Palace; then he had given
orders to go to the Royal Exchange, but catching a glimpse of Covent
Garden, on his way to the Exchange, he bade Jehu take him to his
inn, and cut short his enumeration of places to which he had been, by
flinging the fellow a guinea.

Mr. Draper had called in his absence, and said he would come again; but
Mr. Warrington, having dined sumptuously by himself, went off nimbly to
Marybone Gardens again, in the same noble company.

As he issued forth the next day, the bells of St. Paul's, Covent Garden,
were ringing for morning prayers, and reminded him that friend Sampson
was going to preach his sermon. Harry smiled. He had begun to have a
shrewd and just opinion of the value of Mr. Sampson's sermons.




CHAPTER XXXVII. In which various Matches are fought


Reading in the London Advertiser, which was served to his worship with
his breakfast, an invitation to all lovers of manly British sport to
come and witness a trial of skill between the great champions Sutton and
Figg, Mr. Warrington determined upon attending these performances, and
accordingly proceeded to the Wooden House, in Marybone Fields, driving
thither the pair of horses which he had purchased on the previous day.
The young charioteer did not know the road very well, and veered and
tacked very much more than was needful upon his journey from Covent
Garden, losing himself in the green lanes behind Mr. Whitfield's round
Tabernacle of Tottenham Road, and the fields in the midst of which
Middlesex Hospital stood. He reached his destination at length,
however, and found no small company assembled to witness the valorous
achievements of the two champions.

A crowd of London blackguards was gathered round the doors of this
temple of British valour; together with the horses and equipages of a
few persons of fashion, who came, like Mr. Warrington, to patronise
the sport. A variety of beggars and cripples hustled round the young
gentleman, and whined to him for charity. Shoeblack-boys tumbled
over each other for the privilege of blacking his honour's boots;
nosegay-women and flying fruiterers plied Mr. Gumbo with their wares;
piemen, pads, tramps, strollers of every variety, hung round the
battle-ground. A flag was flying upon the building; and, on to the
stage in front, accompanied by a drummer and a horn-blower, a manager
repeatedly issued to announce to the crowd that the noble English sports
were just about to begin.

Mr. Warrington paid his money, and was accommodated with a seat in a
gallery commanding a perfect view of the platform whereon the sports
were performed; Mr. Gumbo took his seat in the amphitheatre below; or,
when tired, issued forth into the outer world to drink a pot of beer,
or play a game at cards with his brother-lacqueys, and the gentlemen's
coachmen on the boxes of the carriages waiting without. Lacqueys,
liveries, footmen--the old society was encumbered with a prodigious
quantity of these. Gentlemen or women could scarce move without one,
sometimes two or three, vassals in attendance. Every theatre had its
footman's gallery: an army of the liveried race hustled around every
chapel-door: they swarmed in anterooms: they sprawled in halls and on
landings: they guzzled, devoured, debauched, cheated, played cards,
bullied visitors for vails:--that noble old race of footmen is well-nigh
gone. A few thousand of them may still be left among us. Grand, tall,
beautiful, melancholy, we still behold them on levee days, with their
nosegays and their buckles, their plush and their powder. So have I seen
in America specimens, nay camps and villages, of Red Indians. But the
race is doomed. The fatal decree has gone forth, and Uncas with his
tomahawk and eagle's plume, and Jeames with his cocked hat and long
cane, are passing out of the world where they once walked in glory.

Before the principal combatants made their appearance, minor warriors
and exercises were exhibited. A boxing-match came off, but neither of
the men were very game or severely punished, so that Mr. Warrington
and the rest of the spectators had but little pleasure out of that
encounter. Then ensued some cudgel-playing; but the heads broken were
of so little note, and the wounds given so trifling and unsatisfactory,
that no wonder the company began to hiss, grumble, and show other signs
of discontent. "The masters, the masters!" shouted the people, whereupon
those famous champions at length thought fit to appear.

The first who walked up the steps to the stage was the intrepid Sutton,
sword in hand, who saluted the company with his warlike weapon, making
an especial bow and salute to a private box or gallery in which sate a
stout gentleman, who was seemingly a person of importance. Sutton was
speedily followed by the famous Figg, to whom the stout gentleman waved
a hand of approbation. Both men were in their shirts, their heads were
shaven clean, but bore the cracks and scars of many former glorious
battles. On his burly sword-arm, each intrepid champion wore an
"armiger," or ribbon of his colour. And now the gladiators shook
hands, and, as a contemporary poet says: "The word it was bilboe."
[The antiquarian reader knows the pleasant poem in the sixth volume of
Dodsley's Collection, in which the above combat is described.]

At the commencement of the combat the great Figg dealt a blow so
tremendous at his opponent, that had it encountered the other's honest
head, that comely noddle would have been shorn off as clean as the
carving-knife chops the carrot. But Sutton received his adversary's
blade on his own sword, whilst Figg's blow was delivered so mightily
that the weapon brake in his hands, less constant than the heart of
him who wielded it. Other sword were now delivered to the warriors. The
first blood drawn spouted from the panting side of Figg amidst a yell
of delight from Sutton's supporters; but the veteran appealing to his
audience, and especially, as it seemed, to the stout individual in the
private gallery, showed that his sword broken in the previous encounter
had caused the wound.

Whilst the parley occasioned by this incident was going on, Mr.
Warrington saw a gentleman in a riding-frock and plain scratch-wig enter
the box devoted to the stout personage, and recognised with pleasure his
Tunbridge Wells friend, my Lord of March and Ruglen. Lord March, who was
by no means prodigal of politeness seemed to show singular deference to
the stout gentleman, and Harry remarked how his lordship received,
with a profound bow, some bank-bills which the other took out from a
pocket-book and handed to him. Whilst thus engaged, Lord March spied out
our Virginian, and, his interview with the stout personage finished, my
lord came over to Harry's gallery and warmly greeted his young friend.
They sat and beheld the combat waging with various success, but
with immense skill and valour on both sides. After the warriors had
sufficiently fought with swords, they fell to with the quarter-staff,
and the result of this long and delightful battle was, that victory
remained with her ancient champion Figg.

Whilst the warriors were at battle, a thunderstorm had broken over the
building, and Mr. Warrington gladly enough accepted a seat in my Lord
March's chariot, leaving his own phaeton to be driven home by his groom.
Harry was in great delectation with the noble sight he had witnessed:
be pronounced this indeed to be something like sport, and of the best
he had seen since his arrival in England: and, as usual, associating any
pleasure which he enjoyed with the desire that the dear companion of
his boyhood should share the amusement in common with him, he began by
sighing out, "I wish..." then he stopped. "No, I don't," says he.

"What do you wish and what don't you wish?" asks Lord March.

"I was thinking, my lord, of my elder brother, and wished he had been
with me. We had promised to have our sport together at home, you see;
and many's the time we talked of it. But he wouldn't have liked this
rough sort of sport, and didn't care for fighting, though he was the
bravest lad alive."

"Oh! he was the bravest lad alive, was he?" asks my lord, lolling on his
cushion, and eyeing his Virginian friend with some curiosity.

"You should have seen him in a quarrel with a very gallant officer,
our friend--an absurd affair, but it was hard to keep George off him. I
never saw a fellow so cool, nor more savage and determined, God help me.
Ah! I wish for the honour of the country, you know, that he could have
come here instead of me, and shown you a real Virginian gentleman."

"Nay, sir, you'll do very well. What is this I hear of Lady Yarmouth
taking you into favour?" said the amused nobleman.

"I will do as well as another. I can ride, and, I think, I can shoot
better than George; but then my brother had the head, sir, the head!"
says Harry, tapping his own honest skull. "Why, I give you my word, my
lord, that he had read almost every book that was ever written; could
play both on the fiddle and harpsichord, could compose poetry and
sermons most elegant. What can I do? I am only good to ride and play at
cards, and drink Burgundy." And the penitent hung down his head. "But
them I can do as well as most fellows, you see. In fact, my lord, I'll
back myself," he resumed, to the other's great amusement.

Lord March relished the young man's naivete, as the jaded voluptuary
still to the end always can relish the juicy wholesome mutton-chop. "By
Gad, Mr. Warrington," says he, "you ought to be taken to Exeter 'Change,
and put in a show."

"And for why?"

"A gentleman from Virginia who has lost his elder brother and absolutely
regrets him. The breed ain't known in this country. Upon my honour and
conscience, I believe that you would like to have him back again."

"Believe!" cries the Virginian, growing red in the face.

"That is, you believe you believe you would like him back again. But
depend on it you wouldn't. 'Tis not in human nature, sir; not as I read
it, at least. Here are some fine houses we are coming to. That at the
corner is Sir Richard Littleton's, that great one was my Lord Bingley's.
'Tis a pity they do nothing better with this great empty space of
Cavendish Square than fence it with these unsightly boards. By George!
I don't know where the town's running. There's Montagu House made into
a confounded Don Saltero's museum, with books and stuffed birds and
rhinoceroses. They have actually run a cursed cut--New Road they call
it--at the back of Bedford House Gardens, and spoilt the Duke's comfort,
though, I guess, they will console him in the pocket. I don't know
where the town will stop. Shall we go down Tyburn Road and the Park, or
through Swallow Street, and into the habitable quarter of the town? We
can dine at Pall Mall, or, if you like, with you; and we can spend the
evening as you like--with the Queen of Spades, or..."

"With the Queen of Spades, if your lordship pleases," says Mr.
Warrington, blushing. So the equipage drove to his hotel in Covent
Garden, where the landlord came forward with his usual obsequiousness,
and recognising my Lord of March and Ruglen, bowed his wig on to my
lord's shoes in his humble welcomes to his lordship. A rich young
English peer in the reign of George the Second; a wealthy patrician
in the reign of Augustus; which would you rather have been? There is a
question for any young gentlemen's debating-clubs of the present day.

The best English dinner which could be produced, of course, was at the
service of the young Virginian and his noble friend. After dinner came
wine in plenty, and of quality good enough even for the epicurean earl.
Over the wine there was talk of going to see the fireworks at Vauxhall,
or else of cards. Harry, who had never seen a firework beyond an
exhibition of a dozen squibs at Williamsburg on the fifth of November
(which he thought a sublime display), would have liked the Vauxhall, but
yielded to his guest's preference for piquet; and they were very soon
absorbed in that game.

Harry began by winning as usual; but, in the course of a half-hour, the
luck turned and favoured my Lord March, who was at first very surly when
Mr. Draper, Mr. Warrington's man of business, came bowing into the room,
where he accepted Harry's invitation to sit and drink. Mr. Warrington
always asked everybody to sit and drink, and partake of his best. Had he
a crust, he would divide it; had he a haunch, he would share it; had
he a jug of water, he would drink about with a kindly spirit; had he a
bottle of Burgundy, it was gaily drunk with a thirsty friend. And don't
fancy the virtue is common. You read of it in books, my dear sir, and
fancy that you have it yourself because you give six dinners of twenty
people and pay your acquaintance all round; but the welcome, the
friendly spirit, the kindly heart? Believe me, these are rare qualities
in our selfish world. We may bring them with us from the country when we
are young, but they mostly wither after transplantation, and droop and
perish in the stifling London air.

Draper did not care for wine very much, but it delighted the lawyer to
be in the company of a great man. He protested that he liked nothing
better than to see piquet played by two consummate players and men of
fashion; and, taking a seat, undismayed by the sidelong scowls of his
lordship, surveyed the game between the gentlemen. Harry was not near
a match for the experienced player of the London clubs. To-night, too,
Lord March held better cards to aid his skill.

What their stakes were was no business of Mr. Draper's. The gentlemen
said they would play for shillings, and afterwards counted up their
gains and losses, with scarce any talking, and that in an undertone. A
bow on both sides, a perfectly grave and polite manner on the part of
each, and the game went on.

But it was destined to a second interruption, which brought an
execration from Lord March's lips. First was heard a scuffling
without--then a whispering--then an outcry as of a woman in tears,
and then, finally, a female rushed into the room, and produced that
explosion of naughty language from Lord March.

"I wish your women would take some other time for coming, confound 'em,"
says my lord, laying his cards down in a pet.

"What, Mrs. Betty!" cried Harry.

Indeed it was no other than Mrs. Betty, Lady Maria's maid; and Gumbo
stood behind her, his fine countenance beslobbered with tears.

"What has happened?" asks Mr. Warrington, in no little perturbation of
spirit. "The Baroness is well?"

"Help! help! sir, your honour!" ejaculates Mrs. Betty, and proceeds to
fall on her knees.

"Help whom?"

A howl ensues from Gumbo.

"Gumbo! you scoundrel! has anything happened between Mrs. Betty and
you?" asks the black's master.

Mr. Gumbo steps back with great dignity, laying his hand on his heart,
and saying, "No, sir; nothing hab happened 'twix' this lady and me."

"It's my mistress, sir," cries Betty. "Help! help! here's the letter she
have wrote, sir! They have gone and took her, sir!"

"Is it only that old Molly Esmond? She's known to be over head and heels
in debt! Dry your eyes in the next room, Mrs. Betty, and let me and Mr.
Warrington go on with our game," says my lord, taking up his cards.

"Help! help her!" cries Betty again. "Oh, Mr. Harry! you won't be
a-going on with your cards, when my lady calls out to you to come and
help her! Your honour used to come quick enough when my lady used to
send me to fetch you at Castlewood!"

"Confound you! can't you hold your tongue?" says my lord, with more
choice words and oaths.

But Betty would not cease weeping, and it was decreed that Lord March
was to cease winning for that night. Mr. Warrington rose from his seat,
and made for the bell, saying:

"My dear lord, the game must be over for to-night. My relative writes to
me in great distress, and I am bound to go to her."

"Curse her! Why couldn't she wait till to-morrow?" cries my lord,
testily.

Mr. Warrington ordered a postchaise instantly. His own horses would take
him to Bromley.

"Bet you, you don't do it within the hour! bet you, you don't do it
within five quarters of an hour! bet you four to one--or I'll take your
bet, which you please--that you're not robbed on Blackheath! Bet you,
you are not at Tunbridge Wells before midnight!" cries Lord March.

"Done!" says Mr. Warrington. And my lord carefully notes down the terms
of the four wagers in his pocket-book.

Lady Maria's letter ran as follows:--


"MY DEAR COUSIN--I am fell into a trapp, which I perceive the
machinations of villians. I am a prisner. Betty will tell you all. Ah,
my Henrico! come to the resque of your MOLLY."


In half an hour after the receipt of this missive, Mr. Warrington was
in his postchaise and galloping over Westminster Bridge on the road to
succour his kinswoman.




CHAPTER XXXVIII. Sampson and the Philistines


My happy chance in early life led me to become intimate with a
respectable person who was born in a certain island, which is pronounced
to be the first gem of the ocean by, no doubt, impartial judges of
maritime jewellery. The stories which that person imparted to me
regarding his relatives who inhabited the gem above-mentioned, were such
as used to make my young blood curdle with horror to think there should
be so much wickedness in the world. Every crime which you can think of;
the entire Ten Commandments broken in a general smash; such rogueries
and knaveries as no storyteller could invent; such murders and robberies
as Thurtell or Turpin scarce ever perpetrated;--were by my informant
accurately remembered, and freely related, respecting his nearest
kindred, to any one who chose to hear him. It was a wonder how any of
the family still lived out of the hulks. Me brother Tim had brought
his fawther's gree hairs with sorrow to the greeve; me brother Mick had
robbed the par'sh church repaytedly; me sisther Annamaroia had jilted
the Captain and run off with the Ensign, forged her grandmother's will,
and stole the spoons, which Larry the knife-boy was hanged for.
The family of Atreus was as nothing compared to the race of
O'What-d'ye-call-'em, from which my friend sprung; but no power on earth
would, of course, induce me to name the country whence he came.

How great then used to be my naif astonishment to find these murderers,
rogues, parricides, habitual forgers of bills of exchange, and so forth,
every now and then writing to each other as "my dearest brother," "my
dearest sister," and for months at a time living on the most amicable
terms! With hands reeking with the blood of his murdered parents, Tim
would mix a screeching tumbler, and give Maria a glass from it. With
lips black with the perjuries he had sworn in court respecting his
grandmother's abstracted testament, or the murder of his poor brother
Thady's helpless orphans, Mick would kiss his sister Julia's bonny
cheek, and they would have a jolly night, and cry as they talked about
old times, and the dear old Castle What-d'ye-call-'em, where they were
born, and the fighting Onetyoneth being quarthered there, and the Major
proposing for Cyaroloine, and the tomb of their seented mother (who had
chayted them out of the propertee). Heaven bless her soul! They used to
weep and kiss so profusely at meeting and parting, that it was touching
to behold them. At the sight of their embraces one forgot those painful
little stories, and those repeated previous assurances that, did they
tell all, they could hang each other all round.

What can there be finer than forgiveness? What more rational than, after
calling a man by every bad name under the sun, to apologise, regret
hasty expressions, and so forth, withdraw the decanter (say) which you
have flung at your enemy's head, and be friends as before? Some folks
possess this admirable, this angellike gift of forgiveness. It was
beautiful, for instance, to see our two ladies at Tunbridge Wells
forgiving one another, smiling, joking, fondling almost in spite of
the hard words of yesterday--yes, and forgetting bygones, though they
couldn't help remembering them perfectly well. I wonder, can you and I
do as much? Let us strive, my friend, to acquire this pacable, Christian
spirit. My belief is that you may learn to forgive bad language employed
to you; but, then, you must have a deal of practice, and be accustomed
to hear and use it. You embrace after a quarrel and mutual bad language.
Heaven bless us! Bad words are nothing when one is accustomed to them,
and scarce need ruffle the temper on either side.

So the aunt and niece played cards very amicably together, and drank to
each other's health, and each took a wing of the chicken, and pulled
a bone of the merry-thought, and (in conversation) scratched their
neighbours', not each other's, eyes out. Thus we have read how the
Peninsular warriors, when the bugles sang truce, fraternised and
exchanged tobacco-pouches and wine, ready to seize their firelocks and
knock each other's heads off when the truce was over; and thus our old
soldiers, skilful in war, but knowing the charms of a quiet life, laid
their weapons down for the nonce, and hob-and-nobbed gaily together. Of
course, whilst drinking with Jack Frenchman, you have your piece handy
to blow his brains out if he makes a hostile move: but, meanwhile, it is
A votre sante, mon camarade! Here's to you, mounseer! and everything is
as pleasant as possible. Regarding Aunt Bernstein's threatened gout? The
twinges had gone off. Maria was so glad! Maria's fainting fits? She had
no return of them. A slight recurrence last night. The Baroness was so
sorry! Her niece must see the best doctor, take everything to fortify
her, continue to take the steel, even after she left Tunbridge. How kind
of Aunt Bernstein to offer to send some of the bottled waters after her!
Suppose Madame Bernstein says in confidence to her own woman, "Fainting
fits!--pooh!--epilepsy! inherited from that horrible scrofulous German
mother!" What means have we of knowing the private conversation of the
old lady and her attendant? Suppose Lady Maria orders Mrs. Betty,
her ladyship's maid, to taste every glass of medicinal water, first
declaring that her aunt is capable of poisoning her? Very likely such
conversations take place. These are but precautions--these are the
firelocks which our old soldiers have at their sides, loaded and cocked,
but at present lying quiet on the grass.

Having Harry's bond in her pocket, the veteran Maria did not choose to
press for payment. She knew the world too well for that. He was bound
to her, but she gave him plenty of day-rule, and leave of absence on
parole. It was not her object needlessly to chafe and anger her young
slave. She knew the difference of ages, and that Harry must have his
pleasures and diversions. "Take your ease and amusement, cousin," says
Lady Maria. "Frisk about, pretty little mousekin," says grey Grimalkin,
purring in the corner, and keeping watch with her green eyes. About all
that Harry was to see and do on his first visit to London, his female
relatives had of course talked and joked. Both of the ladies knew
perfectly what were a young gentleman's ordinary amusements in those
days, and spoke of them with the frankness which characterised those
easy times.

Our wily Calypso consoled herself, then, perfectly, in the absence of
her young wanderer, and took any diversion which came to hand. Mr. Jack
Morris, the gentleman whom we have mentioned as rejoicing in the company
of Lord March and Mr. Warrington, was one of these diversions. To live
with titled personages was the delight of Jack Morris's life; and to
lose money at cards to an earl's daughter was almost a pleasure to him.
Now, the Lady Maria Esmond was an earl's daughter who was very glad to
win money. She obtained permission to take Mr. Morris to the Countess
of Yarmouth's assembly, and played cards with him--and so everybody was
pleased.

Thus the first eight-and-forty hours after Mr. Warrington's departure
passed pretty cheerily at Tunbridge Wells, and Friday arrived, when the
sermon was to be delivered which we have seen Mr. Sampson preparing. The
company at the Wells were ready enough to listen to it. Sampson had a
reputation for being a most amusing and eloquent preacher; and if there
were no breakfast, conjurer, dancing bears, concert going on, the good
Wells folk would put up with a sermon. He knew Lady Yarmouth was coming,
and what a power she had in the giving of livings and the dispensing of
bishoprics, the Defender of the Faith of that day having a remarkable
confidence in her ladyship's opinion upon these matters;--and so we
may be sure that Mr. Sampson prepared his very best discourse for her
hearing. When the Great Man is at home at the Castle, and walks over to
the little country church, in the park, bringing the Duke, the Marquis,
and a couple of Cabinet Ministers with him, has it ever been your lot
to sit among the congregation, and watch Mr. Trotter the curate and his
sermon? He looks anxiously at the Great Pew; he falters as he gives out
his text, and thinks, "Ah! perhaps his lordship may give me a living!"
Mrs. Trotter and the girls look anxiously at the Great Pew too,
and watch the effects of papa's discourse--the well-known favourite
discourse--upon the big-wigs assembled. Papa's first nervousness is
over: his noble voice clears, warms to his sermon: he kindles: he takes
his pocket-handkerchief out: he is coming to that exquisite passage
which has made them all cry at the parsonage: he has begun it! Ah! What
is that humming noise, which fills the edifice, and causes hob-nailed
Melibaeus to grin at smock-frocked Tityrus? It is the Right Honourable
Lord Naseby snoring in the pew by the fire! And poor Trotter's visionary
mitre disappears with the music.

Sampson was the domestic chaplain of Madame Bernstein's nephew. The two
ladies of the Esmond family patronised the preacher. On the day of the
sermon, the Baroness had a little breakfast in his honour, at which
Sampson made his appearance, rosy and handsome, with a fresh-flowered
wig, and a smart, rustling, new cassock, which he had on credit
from some church-admiring mercer at the Wells. By the side of his
patronesses, their ladyships' lacqueys walking behind them with their
great gilt prayer-books, Mr. Sampson marched from breakfast to church.
Every one remarked how well the Baroness Bernstein looked; she laughed,
and was particularly friendly with her niece; she had a bow and a
stately smile for all, as she moved on, with her tortoiseshell cane. At
the door there was a dazzling conflux of rank and fashion--all the
fine company of the Wells trooping in; and her ladyship of Yarmouth,
conspicuous with vermilion cheeks, and a robe of flame-coloured taffeta.
There were shabby people present, besides the fine company, though these
latter were by far the most numerous. What an odd-looking pair, for
instance, were those in ragged coats, one of them with his carroty hair
appearing under his scratch-wig, and who entered the church just as
the organ stopped! Nay, he could not have been a Protestant, for he
mechanically crossed himself as he entered the place, saying to
his comrade, "Bedad, Tim, I forgawt!" by which I conclude that
the individual came from an island which has been mentioned at the
commencement of this chapter. Wherever they go a rich fragrance of
whisky spreads itself. A man may be a heretic, but possess genius: these
Catholic gentlemen have come to pay homage to Mr. Sampson.

Nay, there are not only members of the old religion present, but
disciples of a creed still older. Who are those two individuals with
hooked noses and sallow countenances, who worked into the church in
spite of some little opposition on the part of the beadle? Seeing the
greasy appearance of these Hebrew strangers, Mr. Beadle was for
denying them admission. But one whispered into his ear, "We wants to
be conwerted, gov'nor!" another slips money into his hand,--Mr. Beadle
lifts up the mace with which he was barring the doorway, and the Hebrew
gentlemen enter. There goes the organ! the doors have closed. Shall we
go in, and listen to Mr. Sampson's sermon, or lie on the grass without?

Preceded by that beadle in gold lace, Sampson walked up to the pulpit,
as rosy and jolly a man as you could wish to see. Presently, when he
surged up out of his plump pulpit cushion, why did his Reverence turn as
pale as death? He looked to the western church-door--there, on each
side of it, were those horrible Hebrew caryatides. He then looked to the
vestry-door, which was hard by the rector's pew, in which Sampson
had been sitting during the service, alongside of their ladyships his
patronesses. Suddenly a couple of perfumed Hibernian gentlemen slipped
out of an adjacent seat, and placed themselves on a bench close by that
vestry-door and rector's pew, and so sate till the conclusion of the
sermon, with eyes meekly cast down to the ground. How can we describe
that sermon, if the preacher himself never knew how it came to an end?

Nevertheless, it was considered an excellent sermon. When it was over,
the fine ladies buzzed into one another's ears over their pews, and
uttered their praise and comments. Madame Walmoden, who was in the next
pew to our friends, said it was bewdiful, and made her dremble all over.
Madame Bernstein said it was excellent. Lady Maria was pleased to think
that the family chaplain should so distinguish himself. She looked up
at him, and strove to catch his reverence's eye, as he still sate in his
pulpit; she greeted him with a little wave of the hand and flutter of
her handkerchief. He scarcely seemed to note the compliment; his face
was pale, his eyes were looking yonder, towards the font, where those
Hebrews still remained. The stream of people passed by them--in a rush,
when they were lost to sight,--in a throng--in a march of twos and
threes--in a dribble of one at a time. Everybody was gone. The two
Hebrews were still there by the door.

The Baroness de Bernstein and her niece still lingered in the rector's
pew, where the old lady was deep in conversation with that gentleman.

"Who are those horrible men at the door? and what a smell of spirits
there is!" cries Lady Maria, to Mrs. Brett, her aunt's woman, who had
attended the two ladies.

"Farewell, doctor; you have a darling little boy: is he to be a
clergyman, too?" asks Madame de Bernstein. "Are you ready, my dear?" And
the pew is thrown open, and Madame Bernstein, whose father was only
a viscount, insists that her niece, Lady Maria, who was an earl's
daughter, should go first out of the pew.

As she steps forward, those individuals whom her ladyship designated as
two horrible men, advance. One of them pulls a long strip of paper out
of his pocket, and her ladyship starts and turns pale. She makes for the
vestry, in a vague hope that she can clear the door and close it behind
her. The two whiskified gentlemen are up with her, however; one of them
actually lays his hand on her shoulder, and says:

"At the shuit of Misthress Pincott, of Kinsington, mercer, I have the
honour of arresting your leedyship. Me neem is Costigan, madam, a poor
gentleman of Oireland, binding to circumstances and forced to follow a
disagrayable profession. Will your leedyship walk, or shall me man go
fetch a cheer?"

For reply Lady Maria Esmond gives three shrieks, and falls swooning to
the ground. "Keep the door, Mick!" shouts Mr. Costigan. "Best let in no
one else, madam," he says, very politely, to Madame de Bernstein. "Her
ladyship has fallen in a feenting fit, and will recover here, at her
aise."

"Unlace her, Brett!" cries the old lady, whose eyes twinkle oddly; and
as soon as that operation is performed, Madame Bernstein seizes a little
bag suspended by a hair chain, which Lady Maria wears round her neck,
and snips the necklace in twain. "Dash some cold water over her face, it
always recovers her!" says the Baroness. "You stay with her, Brett. How
much is your suit gentlemen?"

Mr. Costigan says, "The deem we have against her leedyship for one
hundred and thirty-two pounds, in which she is indebted to Misthress
Eliza Pincott"

Meanwhile, where is the Reverend Mr. Sampson? Like the fabled opossum we
have read of, who, when he spied the unerring gunner from his gum-tree,
said: "It's no use Major, I will come down," so Sampson gave himself up
to his pursuers. "At whose suit, Simons?" he sadly asked. Sampson knew
Simons: they had met many a time before.

"Buckleby Cordwainer," says Mr. Simons.

"Forty-eight pound and charges, I know," says Mr. Sampson, with a sigh.
"I haven't got the money. What officer is there here?" Mr. Simons's
companion, Mr. Lyons, here stepped forward, and said his house was most
convenient, and often used by gentlemen, and he should be most happy and
proud to accommodate his reverence.

Two chairs happened to be in waiting outside the chapel. In those two
chairs my Lady Maria Esmond and Mr. Sampson placed themselves, and went
to Mr. Lyons's residence, escorted by the gentlemen to whom we have just
been introduced.

Very soon after the capture the Baroness Bernstein sent Mr. Case, her
confidential servant, with a note to her niece, full of expressions of
the most ardent affection: but regretting that her heavy losses at cards
rendered the payment of such a sum as that in which Lady Maria stood
indebted quite impossible. She had written off to Mrs. Pincott, by that
very post, however, to entreat her to grant time, and as soon as ever
she had an answer, would not fail to acquaint her dear unhappy niece.

Mrs. Betty came over to console her mistress: and the two poor women
cast about for money enough to provide a horse and chaise for Mrs.
Betty, who had very nearly come to misfortune, too. Both my Lady Maria
and her maid had been unlucky at cards, and could not muster more than
eighteen shillings between them: so it was agreed that Betty should sell
a gold chain belonging to her lady, and with the money travel to London.
Now, Betty took the chain to the very toy-shop man who had sold it to
Mr. Warrington, who had given it to his cousin; and the toy-shop man,
supposing that she had stolen the chain, was for bringing in a constable
to Betty. Hence, she had to make explanations, and to say how her
mistress was in durance; and, ere the night closed, all Tunbridge Wells
knew that my Lady Maria Esmond was in the hands of bailiffs. Meanwhile,
however, the money was found, and Mrs. Betty whisked up to London in
search of the champion in whom the poor prisoner confided.

"Don't say anything about that paper being gone! Oh, the wretch, the
wretch! She shall pay it me!" I presume that Lady Maria meant her aunt
by the word "wretch." Mr. Sampson read a sermon to her ladyship, and
they passed the evening over revenge and backgammon; with well-grounded
hopes that Harry Warrington would rush to their rescue as soon as ever
he heard of their mishap.

Though, ere the evening was over, every soul at the Wells knew what had
happened to Lady Maria, and a great deal more; though they knew she was
taken in execution, the house where she lay, the amount--nay, ten times
the amount--for which she was captured, and that she was obliged to pawn
her trinkets to get a little money to keep her in jail; though everybody
said that old fiend of a Bernstein was at the bottom of the business,
of course they were all civil and bland in society; and, at my Lady
Trumpington's cards that night, where Madame Bernstein appeared, and
as long as she was within hearing, not a word was said regarding the
morning's transactions. Lady Yarmouth asked the Baroness news of her
breddy nephew, and heard Mr. Warrington was in London. My Lady Maria
was not coming to Lady Trumpington's that evening? My Lady Maria was
indisposed, had fainted at church that morning, and was obliged to keep
her room. The cards were dealt, the fiddles sang, the wine went round,
the gentlefolks talked, laughed, yawned, chattered, the footmen waylaid
the supper, the chairmen drank and swore, the stars climbed the sky,
just as though no Lady Maria was imprisoned, and no poor Sampson
arrested. 'Tis certain, dearly beloved brethren, that the little griefs,
stings, annoyances, which you and I feel acutely in our own persons,
don't prevent our neighbours from sleeping; and that when we slip out of
the world the world does not miss us. Is this humiliating to our vanity?
So much the better. But, on the other hand, is it not a comfortable and
consoling truth? And mayn't we be thankful for our humble condition? If
we were not selfish--passez-moi le mot, s.v.p.--and if we had to care
for other people's griefs as much as our own, how intolerable human life
would be! If my neighbour's tight boot pinched my corn; if the calumny
uttered against Jones set Brown into fury; if Mrs. A's death plunged
Messrs. B, C, D, E, F, into distraction, would there be any bearing of
the world's burthen? Do not let us be in the least angry or surprised if
all the company played on, and were happy, although Lady Maria had come
to grief. Countess, the deal is with you! Are you going to Stubblefield
to shoot as usual, Sir John? Captain, we shall have you running off to
the Bath after the widow! So the clatter goes on; the lights burns; the
beaux and the ladies flirt, laugh, ogle; the prisoner rages in his cell;
the sick man tosses on his bed.

Perhaps Madame de Bernstein stayed at the assembly until the very last,
not willing to allow the company the chance of speaking of her as soon
as her back should be turned. Ah, what a comfort it is, I say again,
that we have backs, and that our ears don't grow on them! He that has
ears to hear, let him stuff them with cotton. Madame Bernstein might
have heard folks say it was heartless of her to come abroad, and play
at cards, and make merry when her niece was in trouble. As if she could
help Maria by staying at home, indeed! At her age, it is dangerous to
disturb an old lady's tranquillity. "Don't tell me!" says Lady Yarmouth.
"The Bernstein would play at cards over her niece's coffin. Talk about
her heart! who ever said she had one? That old spy lost it to the
Chevalier a thousand years ago, and has lived ever since perfectly well
without one. For how much is the Maria put in prison? If it were only a
small sum we would pay it, it would vex her aunt so. Find out, Fuchs, in
the morning, for how much Lady Maria Esmond is put in prison." And the
faithful Fuchs bowed, and promised to do her Excellency's will.

Meanwhile, about midnight, Madame de Bernstein went home, and presently
