
V.  The choice of Paris, and her charms disdained,
    The hateful race, the lawless honours ta'en
    By ravished Ganymede--these wrongs remained.
    So fired with rage, the Trojans' scanty train
    By fierce Achilles and the Greeks unslain
    She barred from Latium, and in evil strait
    For many a year, on many a distant main
    They wandered, homeless outcasts, tost by Fate;
So huge, so hard the task to found the Roman state.

VI. Scarce out of sight of Sicily, they set
    Their sails to sea, and merrily ploughed the main,
    With brazen beaks, when Juno, harbouring yet
    Within her breast the ever-rankling pain,
    Mused thus: "Must I then from the work refrain,
    Nor keep this Trojan from the Latin throne,
    Baffled, forsooth, because the Fates constrain?
    Could Pallas burn the Grecian fleet, and drown
Their crews, for one man's crime, Oileus' frenzied son?

VII. "She, hurling Jove's winged lightning, stirred the deep
    And strewed the ships. Him, from his riven breast
    The flames outgasping, with a whirlwind's sweep
    She caught and fixed upon a rock's sharp crest.
    But I, who walk the Queen of Heaven confessed,
    Jove's sister-spouse, shall I forevermore
    With one poor tribe keep warring without rest?
    Who then henceforth shall Juno's power adore?
Who then her fanes frequent, her deity implore?"

VIII. Such thoughts revolving in her fiery mind,
    Straightway the Goddess to AEolia passed,
    The storm-clouds' birthplace, big with blustering wind.
    Here AEolus within a dungeon vast
    The sounding tempest and the struggling blast
    Bends to his sway and bridles them with chains.
    They, in the rock reverberant held fast,
    Moan at the doors. Here, throned aloft, he reigns;
His sceptre calms their rage, their violence restrains:

IX. Else earth and sea and all the firmament
    The winds together through the void would sweep.
    But, fearing this, the Sire omnipotent
    Hath buried them in caverns dark and deep,
    And o'er them piled huge mountains in a heap,
    And set withal a monarch, there to reign,
    By compact taught at his command to keep
    Strict watch, and tighten or relax the rein.
Him now Saturnia sought, and thus in lowly strain:

X.  "O AEolus, for Jove, of human kind
    And Gods the sovran Sire, hath given to thee
    To lull the waves and lift them with the wind,
    A hateful people, enemies to me,
    Their ships are steering o'er the Tuscan sea,
    Bearing their Troy and vanquished gods away
    To Italy. Go, set the storm-winds free,
    And sink their ships or scatter them astray,
And strew their corpses forth, to weltering waves a prey.

XI. "Twice seven nymphs have I, beautiful to see;
    One, Deiopeia, fairest of the fair,
    In lasting wedlock will I link to thee,
    Thy life-long years for such deserts to share,
    And make thee parent of an offspring fair."--
    "Speak, Queen," he answered, "to obey is mine.
    To thee I owe this sceptre and whate'er
    Of realm is here; thou makest Jove benign,
Thou giv'st to rule the storms and sit at feasts divine."

XII. So spake the God and with her hest complied,
    And turned the massive sceptre in his hand
    And pushed the hollow mountain on its side.
    Out rushed the winds, like soldiers in a band,
    In wedged array, and, whirling, scour the land.
    East, West and squally South-west, with a roar,
    Swoop down on Ocean, and the surf and sand
    Mix in dark eddies, and the watery floor
Heave from its depths, and roll huge billows to the shore.

XIII. Then come the creak of cables and the cries
    Of seamen. Clouds the darkened heavens have drowned,
    And snatched the daylight from the Trojans' eyes.
    Black night broods on the waters; all around
    From pole to pole the rattling peals resound
    And frequent flashes light the lurid air.
    All nature, big with instant ruin, frowned
    Destruction. Then AEneas' limbs with fear
Were loosened, and he groaned and stretched his hands in prayer:

XIV. "Thrice, four times blest, who, in their fathers' face
    Fell by the walls of Ilion far away!
    O son of Tydeus, bravest of the race,
    Why could not I have perished, too, that day
    Beneath thine arm, and breathed this soul away
    Far on the plains of Troy, where Hector brave
    Lay, pierced by fierce AEacides, where lay
    Giant Sarpedon, and swift Simois' wave
Rolls heroes, helms and shields, whelmed in one watery grave?"

XV. E'en as he cried, the hurricane from the North
    Struck with a roar against the sail. Up leap
    The waves to heaven; the shattered oars start forth;
    Round swings the prow, and lets the waters sweep
    The broadside. Onward comes a mountain heap
    Of billows, gaunt, abrupt. These, horsed astride
    A surge's crest, rock pendent o'er the deep;
    To those the wave's huge hollow, yawning wide,
Lays bare the ground below; dark swells the sandy tide.

XVI. Three ships the South-wind catching hurls away
    On hidden rocks, which (Latins from of yore
    Have called them "Altars") in mid ocean lay,
    A huge ridge level with the tide. Three more
    Fierce Eurus from the deep sea dashed ashore
    On quicks and shallows, pitiful to view,
    And round them heaped the sandbanks. One, that bore
    The brave Orontes and his Lycian crew,
Full in AEneas' sight a toppling wave o'erthrew.

XVII. Dashed from the tiller, down the pilot rolled.
    Thrice round the billow whirled her, as she lay,
    Then whelmed below. Strewn here and there behold
    Arms, planks, lone swimmers in the surges grey,
    And treasures snatched from Trojan homes away.
    Now fail the ships wherein Achates ride
    And Abas; old Aletes' bark gives way,
    And brave Ilioneus'. Each loosened side
Through many a gaping seam lets in the baleful tide.

XVIII. Meanwhile great Neptune, sore amazed, perceived
    The storm let loose, the turmoil of the sky,
    And ocean from its lowest depths upheaved.
    With calm brow lifted o'er the sea, his eye
    Beholds Troy's navy scattered far and nigh,
    And by the waves and ruining heaven oppressed
    The Trojan crews. Nor failed he to espy
    His sister's wiles and hatred. East and West
He summoned to his throne, and thus his wrath expressed.

XIX. "What pride of birth possessed you, Earth and air
    Without my leave to mingle in affray,
    And raise such hubbub in my realm? Beware--
    Yet first 'twere best these billows to allay.
    Far other coin hereafter ye shall pay
    For crimes like these. Presumptuous winds, begone,
    And take your king this message, that the sway
    Of Ocean and the sceptre and the throne
Fate gave to me, not him; the trident is my own.

XX. "He holds huge rocks; these, Eurus, are for thee,
    There let him glory in his hall and reign,
    But keep his winds close prisoners." Thus he,
    And, ere his speech was ended, smoothed the main,
    And chased the clouds and brought the sun again.
    Triton, Cymothoe from the rock's sharp brow
    Push off the vessels. Neptune plies amain
    His trident-lever, lays the sandbanks low,
On light wheels shaves the deep, and calms the billowy flow.

XXI. As when in mighty multitudes bursts out
    Sedition, and the wrathful rabble rave;
    Rage finds them arms; stones, firebrands fly about,
    Then if some statesman reverend and grave,
    Stand forth conspicuous, and the tumult brave
    All, hushed, attend; his guiding words restrain
    Their angry wills; so sank the furious wave,
    When through the clear sky looking o'er the main,
The sea-king lashed his steeds and slacked the favouring rein.

XXII. Tired out, the Trojans seek the nearest land
    And turn to Libya.--In a far retreat
    There lies a haven; towards the deep doth stand
    An island, on whose jutting headlands beat
    The broken billows, shivered into sleet.
    Two towering crags, twin giants, guard the cove,
    And threat the skies. The waters at their feet
    Sleep hushed, and, like a curtain, frowns above,
Mixt with the glancing green, the darkness of the grove.

XXIII. Beneath a precipice, that fronts the wave,
    With limpid springs inside, and many a seat
    Of living marble, lies a sheltered cave,
    Home of the Sea-Nymphs. In this haven sweet
    Cable nor biting anchor moors the fleet.
    Here with seven ships, the remnant of his band,
    AEneas enters. Glad at length to greet
    The welcome earth, the Trojans leap to land,
And lay their weary limbs still dripping on the sand.

XXIV. First from a flint a spark Achates drew,
    And lit the leaves and dry wood heaped with care
    And set the fuel flaming, as he blew.
    Then, tired of toiling, from the ships they bear
    The sea-spoiled corn, and Ceres' tools prepare,
    And 'twixt the millstones grind the rescued grain
    And roast the pounded morsels for their fare:
    While up the crag AEneas climbs, to gain
Full prospect far and wide, and scan the distant main.

XXV. If aught of Phrygian biremes he discern
    Antheus or Capys, tost upon the seas,
    Or arms of brave Caicus high astern.
    No sail, but wandering on the shore he sees
    Three stags, and, grazing up the vale at ease,
    The whole herd troops behind them in a row.
    He stops, and from Achates hastes to seize
    His chance-brought arms, the arrows and the bow,
The branching antlers smites, and lays the leader low.

XXVI. Next fall the herd; and through the leafy glade
    In mingled rout he drives the scattered train,
    Plying his shafts, nor stays his conquering raid
    Till seven huge bodies on the ground lie slain,
    The number of his vessels; then again
    He seeks the crews, and gives a deer to each,
    Then opes the casks, which good Acestes, fain
    At parting, filled on the Trinacrian beach,
And shares the wine, and soothes their drooping hearts with speech.

XXVII. "Comrades! of ills not ignorant; far more
    Than these ye suffered, and to these as well
    Will Jove give ending, as he gave before.
    Ye know mad Scylla, and her monsters' yell,
    And the dark caverns where the Cyclops dwell.
    Fear not; take heart; hereafter, it may be
    These too will yield a pleasant tale to tell.
    Through shifting hazards, by the Fates' decree,
To Latin shores we steer, our promised land to see.

XXVIII. "There quiet settlements the Fates display,
    There Troy her ruined fortunes shall repair.
    Bear up; reserve you for a happier day."
    He spake, and heart-sick with a load of care,
    Suppressed his grief, and feigned a cheerful air.
    All straightway gird them to the feast. These flay
    The ribs and thighs, and lay the entrails bare.
    Those slice the flesh, and split the quivering prey,
And tend the fires and set the cauldrons in array.

XXIX. So wine and venison, to their hearts' desire,
    Refreshed their strength. And when the feast was sped,
    Their missing friends in converse they require,
    Doubtful to deem them, betwixt hope and dread,
    Alive or out of hearing with the dead.
    All mourned, but good AEneas mourned the most,
    And bitter tears for Amycus he shed,
    Gyas, Cloanthus, bravest of his host,
Lycus, Orontes bold, all counted with the lost.

XXX. Now came an end of mourning and of woe,
    When Jove, surveying from his prospect high
    Shore, sail-winged sea, and peopled earth below,
    Stood, musing, on the summit of the sky,
    And on the Libyan kingdom fixed his eye,
    To him, such cares revolving in his breast,
    Her shining eyes suffused with tears, came nigh
    Fair Venus, for her darling son distrest,
And thus in sorrowing tones the Sire of heaven addressed;

XXXI. "O Thou, whose nod and awful bolts attest
    O'er Gods and men thine everlasting reign,
    Wherein hath my AEneas so transgressed,
    Wherein his Trojans, thus to mourn their slain,
    Barred from the world, lest Italy they gain?
    Surely from them the rolling years should see
    New sons of ancient Teucer rise again,
    The Romans, rulers of the land and sea.
So swar'st thou; Father, say, why changed is thy decree?

XXXII. "That word consoled me, weighing fate with fate,
    For Troy's sad fall. Now Fortune, as before,
    Pursues the woe-worn victims of her hate.
    O when, great Monarch, shall their toil be o'er?
    Safe could Antenor pass th' Illyrian shore
    Through Danaan hosts, and realms Liburnian gain,
    And climb Timavus and her springs explore,
    Where through nine mouths, with roaring surge, the main
Bursts from the sounding rocks and deluges the plain.

XXXIII. "Yet there he built Patavium, yea, and named
    The nation, and the Trojan arms laid down,
    And now rests happy in the town he framed.
    But we, thy progeny, to whom alone
    Thy nod hath promised a celestial throne,
    Our vessels lost, from Italy are barred,
    O shame! and ruined for the wrath of one.
    Thus, thus dost thou thy plighted word regard,
Our sceptred realms restore, our piety reward?"

XXXIV. Then Jove, soft-smiling with the look that clears
    The storms, and gently kissing her, replies;
    "Firm are thy fates, sweet daughter; spare thy fears.
    Thou yet shalt see Lavinium's walls arise,
    And bear thy brave AEneas to the skies.
    My purpose shifts not. Now, to ease thy woes,
    Since sorrow for his sake hath dimmed thine eyes,
    More will I tell, and hidden fates disclose.
He in Italia long shall battle with his foes,

XXXV. "And crush fierce tribes, and milder ways ordain,
    And cities build and wield the Latin sway,
    Till the third summer shall have seen him reign,
    And three long winter-seasons passed away
    Since fierce Rutulia did his arms obey.
    Then, too, the boy Ascanius, named of late
    Iulus--Ilus was he in the day
    When firm by royalty stood Ilium's state--
Shall rule till thirty years complete the destined date.

XXXVI. "He from Lavinium shall remove his seat,
    And gird Long Alba for defence; and there
    'Neath Hector's kin three hundred years complete
    The kingdom shall endure, till Ilia fair,
    Queen-priestess, twins by Mars' embrace shall bear.
    Then Romulus the nation's charge shall claim,
    Wolf-nursed and proud her tawny hide to wear,
    And build a city of Mavortian fame,
And make the Roman race remembered by his name.

XXXVII. "To these no period nor appointed date,
    Nor bounds to their dominion I assign;
    An endless empire shall the race await.
    Nay, Juno, too, who now, in mood malign,
    Earth, sea and sky is harrying, shall incline
    To better counsels, and unite with me
    To cherish and uphold the imperial line,
    The Romans, rulers of the land and sea,
Lords of the flowing gown. So standeth my decree.

XXXVIII. "In rolling ages there shall come the day
    When heirs of old Assaracus shall tame
    Phthia and proud Mycene to obey,
    And terms of peace to conquered Greeks proclaim.
    Caesar, a Trojan,--Julius his name,
    Drawn from the great Iulus--shall arise,
    And compass earth with conquest, heaven with fame,
    Him, crowned with vows and many an Eastern prize,
Thou, freed at length from care, shalt welcome to the skies.

XXXIX. "Then wars shall cease and savage times grow mild,
    And Remus and Quirinus, brethren twain,
    With hoary Faith and Vesta undefiled,
    Shall give the law. With iron bolt and chain
    Firm-closed the gates of Janus shall remain.
    Within, the Fiend of Discord, high reclined
    On horrid arms, unheeded in the fane,
    Bound with a hundred brazen knots behind,
And grim with gory jaws, his grisly teeth shall grind."

XL. So saying, the son of Maia down he sent,
    To open Carthage and the Libyan state,
    Lest Dido, weetless of the Fates' intent,
    Should drive the Trojan wanderers from her gate.
    With feathered oars he cleaves the skies, and straight
    On Libya's shores alighting, speeds his hest.
    The Tyrians, yielding to the god, abate
    Their fierceness. Dido, more than all the rest,
Warms to her Phrygian friends, and wears a kindly breast.

XLI. But good AEneas, pondering through the night
    Distracting thoughts and many an anxious care,
    Resolved, when daybreak brought the gladsome light,
    To search the coast, and back sure tidings bear,
    What land was this, what habitants were there,
    If man or beast, for, far as the eye could rove,
    A wilderness the region seemed, and bare.
    His ships he hides within a sheltering cove,
Screened by the caverned rock, and shadowed by the grove,

XLII. Then wielding in his hand two broad-tipt spears,
    Alone with brave Achates forth he strayed,
    When lo, before him in the wood appears
    His mother, in a virgin's arms arrayed,
    In form and habit of a Spartan maid,
    Or like Harpalyce, the pride of Thrace,
    Who tires swift steeds, and scours the woodland glade,
    And outstrips rapid Hebrus in the race.
So fair the goddess seemed, apparelled for the chase.

XLIII. Bare were her knees, and from her shoulders hung
    The wonted bow, kept handy for the prey
    Her flowing raiment in a knot she strung,
    And loosed her tresses with the winds to play.
    "Ho, Sirs!" she hails them, "saw ye here astray
    Ought of my sisters, girt in huntress wise
    With quiver and a spotted lynx-skin gay,
    Or following on the foaming boar with cries?"
Thus Venus spake, and thus fair Venus' son replies;

XLIV. "Nought of thy sisters have I heard or seen.
    What name, O maiden, shall I give to thee,
    For mortal never had thy voice or mien?
    O Goddess surely, whether Nymph I see,
    Or Phoebus' sister; whosoe'er thou be,
    Be kind, for strangers and in evil case
    We roam, tost hither by the stormy sea.
    Say, who the people, what the clime and place,
And many a victim's blood thy hallowed shrine shall grace."

XLV. "Nay, nay, to no such honour I aspire."
    Said Venus, "But a simple maid am I,
    And 'tis the manner of the maids of Tyre
    To wear, like me, the quiver, and to tie
    The purple buskin round the ankles high.
    The realm thou see'st is Punic; Tyrians are
    The folk, the town Agenor's. Round them lie
    The Libyan plains, a people rough in war.
Queen Dido rules the land, who came from Tyre afar,

XLVI. "Flying her brother. Dark the tale of crime,
    And long, but briefly be the sum supplied.
    Sychaeus was her lord, in happier time
    The richest of Phoenicians far and wide
    In land, and worshipped by his hapless bride.
    Her, in the bloom of maidenhood, her sire
    Had given him, and with virgin rites allied.
    But soon her brother filled the throne of Tyre,
Pygmalion, swoln with sin; 'twixt whom a feud took fire.

XLVII. "He, reckless of a sister's love, and blind
    With lust of gold, Sychaeus unaware
    Slew by the altar, and with impious mind
    Long hid the deed, and flattering hopes and fair
    Devised, to cheat the lover of her care.
    But, lifting features marvellously pale,
    The ghost unburied in her dreams laid bare
    His breast, and showed the altar and the bale
Wrought by the ruthless steel, and solved the crime's dark tale.

XLVIII. "Then bade her fly the country, and revealed,
    To aid her flight, an old and unknown weight
    Of gold and silver, in the ground concealed.
    Thus roused, her friends she gathers. All await
    Her summons, who the tyrant fear or hate.
    Some ships at hand, chance-anchored in the bay,
    They seize and load them with the costly freight,
    And far off o'er the deep is borne away
Pygmalion's hoarded pelf. A woman leads the way.

XLIX. "Hither, where now the walls and fortress high,
    Of Carthage, and her rising homes are found,
    They came, and there full cheaply did they buy,
    Such space--called Byrsa from the deed--of ground
    As one bull's-hide could compass and surround.
    But who are ye, pray answer? on what quest
    Come ye? and whence and whither are ye bound?"
    Her then AEneas, from his inmost breast
Heaving a deep-drawn sigh, with labouring speech addressed:

L.  "O Goddess, should I from the first unfold,
    Or could'st thou hear, the annals of our woe,
    Eve's star were shining, ere the tale were told.
    From ancient Troy--if thou the name dost know--
    A chance-met storm hath driven us to and fro,
    And tost us on the Libyan shores. My name
    Is good AEneas; from the flames and foe
    I bear Troy's rescued deities. My fame
Outsoars the stars of heaven; a Jove-born race, we claim

LI. "A home in fair Italia far away.
    With twice ten ships I climbed the Phrygian main,
    My goddess-mother pointing out the way,
    As Fate commanded. Now scarce seven remain,
    Wave-worn and shattered by the tempest's strain.
    Myself, a stranger, friendless and unknown,
    From Europe driven and Asia, roam in vain
    The wilds of Libya"--Then his plaintive tone
No more could Venus bear, but interrupts her son;

LII. "Stranger," she answered, "whosoe'er thou be;
    Not unbeloved of heavenly powers, I ween,
    Thou breath'st the vital air, whom Fate's decree
    Permits a Tyrian city to have seen.
    But hence, and seek the palace of the queen.
    Glad news I bear thee, of thy comrades brought,
    The North-wind shifted and the skies serene;
    Thy ships have gained the harbour which they sought,
Else vain my parents' lore the augury they taught.

LIII. "See yon twelve swans, in jubilant array,
    Whom late Jove's eagle scattered through the sky;
    Now these alight, now those the pitch survey.
    As they, returning, sport with joyous cry,
    And flap their wings and circle in the sky,
    E'en so thy vessels and each late-lost crew
    Safe now and scatheless in the harbour lie,
    Or, crowding canvas, hold the port in view.
But hence, where leads the path, thy forward steps pursue."

LIV. So saying, she turned, and all refulgent showed
    Her roseate neck, and heavenly fragrance sweet
    Was breathed from her ambrosial hair. Down flowed
    Her loosened raiment, streaming to her feet,
    And by her walk the Goddess shone complete.
    "Ah, mother mine!" he chides her, as she flies,
    "Art thou, then, also cruel? Wherefore cheat
    Thy son so oft with images and lies?
Why may I not clasp hands, and talk without disguise?"

LV. Thus he, reproaching. Towards the town they fare
    In haste. But Venus round them on the way
