When John Fry finished his story at last, after many exclamations from
Annie, and from Lizzie, and much praise of his gallantry, yet some
little disappointment that he had not stayed there a little longer,
while he was about it, so as to be able to tell us more, I said to him
very sternly,--

'Now, John, you have dreamed half this, my man. I firmly believe that
you fell asleep at the top of the black combe, after drinking all your
whisky, and never went on the moor at all. You know what a liar you are,
John.'

The girls were exceedingly angry at this, and laid their hands before
my mouth; but I waited for John to answer, with my eyes fixed upon him
steadfastly.

'Bain't for me to denai,' said John, looking at me very honestly, 'but
what a maight tull a lai, now and awhiles, zame as other men doth, and
most of arl them as spaks again it; but this here be no lai, Maister
Jan. I wush to God it wor, boy: a maight slape this naight the better.'

'I believe you speak the truth, John; and I ask your pardon. Now not a
word to any one, about this strange affair. There is mischief brewing, I
can see; and it is my place to attend to it. Several things come across
me now--only I will not tell you.'


They were not at all contented with this; but I would give them no
better; except to say, when they plagued me greatly, and vowed to sleep
at my door all night,--

'Now, my dears, this is foolish of you. Too much of this matter is known
already. It is for your own dear sakes that I am bound to be cautious.
I have an opinion of my own; but it may be a very wrong one; I will not
ask you to share it with me; neither will I make you inquisitive.'

Annie pouted, and Lizzie frowned, and Ruth looked at me with her eyes
wide open, but no other mark of regarding me. And I saw that if any one
of the three (for John Fry was gone home with the trembles) could be
trusted to keep a secret, that one was Ruth Huckaback.



CHAPTER XXXII

FEEDING OF THE PIGS

The story told by John Fry that night, and my conviction of its truth,
made me very uneasy, especially as following upon the warning of Judge
Jeffreys, and the hints received from Jeremy Stickles, and the outburst
of the tanner at Dunster, as well as sundry tales and rumours, and signs
of secret understanding, seen and heard on market-days, and at places of
entertainment. We knew for certain that at Taunton, Bridgwater, and even
Dulverton, there was much disaffection towards the King, and regret for
the days of the Puritans. Albeit I had told the truth, and the pure and
simple truth, when, upon my examination, I had assured his lordship,
that to the best of my knowledge there was nothing of the sort with us.

But now I was beginning to doubt whether I might not have been mistaken;
especially when we heard, as we did, of arms being landed at Lynmouth,
in the dead of the night, and of the tramp of men having reached some
one's ears, from a hill where a famous echo was. For it must be plain to
any conspirator (without the example of the Doones) that for the secret
muster of men and the stowing of unlawful arms, and communication by
beacon lights, scarcely a fitter place could be found than the wilds
of Exmoor, with deep ravines running far inland from an unwatched and
mostly a sheltered sea. For the Channel from Countisbury Foreland up
to Minehead, or even farther, though rocky, and gusty, and full of
currents, is safe from great rollers and the sweeping power of the
south-west storms, which prevail with us more than all the others, and
make sad work on the opposite coast.

But even supposing it probable that something against King Charles
the Second (or rather against his Roman advisers, and especially his
brother) were now in preparation amongst us, was it likely that Master
Huckaback, a wealthy man, and a careful one, known moreover to the Lord
Chief Justice, would have anything to do with it? To this I could
make no answer; Uncle Ben was so close a man, so avaricious, and so
revengeful, that it was quite impossible to say what course he
might pursue, without knowing all the chances of gain, or rise, or
satisfaction to him. That he hated the Papists I knew full well, though
he never spoke much about them; also that he had followed the march of
Oliver Cromwell's army, but more as a suttler (people said) than as a
real soldier; and that he would go a long way, and risk a great deal
of money, to have his revenge on the Doones; although their name never
passed his lips during the present visit.

But how was it likely to be as to the Doones themselves? Which side
would they probably take in the coming movement, if movement indeed it
would be? So far as they had any religion at all, by birth they were
Roman Catholics--so much I knew from Lorna; and indeed it was well known
all around, that a priest had been fetched more than once to the valley,
to soothe some poor outlaw's departure. On the other hand, they were
not likely to entertain much affection for the son of the man who had
banished them and confiscated their property. And it was not at all
impossible that desperate men, such as they were, having nothing to
lose, but estates to recover, and not being held by religion much,
should cast away all regard for the birth from which they had been cast
out, and make common cause with a Protestant rising, for the chance of
revenge and replacement.

However I do not mean to say that all these things occurred to me as
clearly as I have set them down; only that I was in general doubt, and
very sad perplexity. For mother was so warm, and innocent, and kind
so to every one, that knowing some little by this time of the English
constitution, I feared very greatly lest she should be punished for
harbouring malcontents. As well as possible I knew, that if any poor man
came to our door, and cried, 'Officers are after me; for God's sake take
and hide me,' mother would take him in at once, and conceal, and feed
him, even though he had been very violent; and, to tell the truth, so
would both my sisters, and so indeed would I do. Whence it will be clear
that we were not the sort of people to be safe among disturbances.

Before I could quite make up my mind how to act in this difficulty, and
how to get at the rights of it (for I would not spy after Uncle Reuben,
though I felt no great fear of the Wizard's Slough, and none of the man
with the white night-cap), a difference came again upon it, and a change
of chances. For Uncle Ben went away as suddenly as he first had come to
us, giving no reason for his departure, neither claiming the pony, and
indeed leaving something behind him of great value to my mother. For
he begged her to see to his young grand-daughter, until he could find
opportunity of fetching her safely to Dulverton. Mother was overjoyed
at this, as she could not help displaying; and Ruth was quite as much
delighted, although she durst not show it. For at Dulverton she had
to watch and keep such ward on the victuals, and the in and out of the
shopmen, that it went entirely against her heart, and she never could
enjoy herself. Truly she was an altered girl from the day she came to
us; catching our unsuspicious manners, and our free goodwill, and hearty
noise of laughing.

By this time, the harvest being done, and the thatching of the ricks
made sure against south-western tempests, and all the reapers being
gone, with good money and thankfulness, I began to burn in spirit for
the sight of Lorna. I had begged my sister Annie to let Sally Snowe
know, once for all, that it was not in my power to have any thing more
to do with her. Of course our Annie was not to grieve Sally, neither to
let it appear for a moment that I suspected her kind views upon me, and
her strong regard for our dairy: only I thought it right upon our part
not to waste Sally's time any longer, being a handsome wench as she was,
and many young fellows glad to marry her.

And Annie did this uncommonly well, as she herself told me afterwards,
having taken Sally in the sweetest manner into her pure confidence, and
opened half her bosom to her, about my very sad love affair. Not that
she let Sally know, of course, who it was, or what it was; only that she
made her understand, without hinting at any desire of it, that there was
no chance now of having me. Sally changed colour a little at this, and
then went on about a red cow which had passed seven needles at milking
time.

Inasmuch as there are two sorts of month well recognised by the
calendar, to wit the lunar and the solar, I made bold to regard both
my months, in the absence of any provision, as intended to be strictly
lunar. Therefore upon the very day when the eight weeks were expiring
forth I went in search of Lorna, taking the pearl ring hopefully, and
all the new-laid eggs I could find, and a dozen and a half of small
trout from our brook. And the pleasure it gave me to catch those trout,
thinking as every one came forth and danced upon the grass, how much
she would enjoy him, is more than I can now describe, although I well
remember it. And it struck me that after accepting my ring, and saying
how much she loved me, it was possible that my Queen might invite
me even to stay and sup with her: and so I arranged with dear Annie
beforehand, who was now the greatest comfort to me, to account for my
absence if I should be late.

But alas, I was utterly disappointed; for although I waited and waited
for hours, with an equal amount both of patience and peril, no Lorna
ever appeared at all, nor even the faintest sign of her. And another
thing occurred as well, which vexed me more than it need have done, for
so small a matter. And this was that my little offering of the trout
and the new-laid eggs was carried off in the coolest manner by that vile
Carver Doone. For thinking to keep them the fresher and nicer, away from
so much handling, I laid them in a little bed of reeds by the side of
the water, and placed some dog-leaves over them. And when I had quite
forgotten about them, and was watching from my hiding-place beneath
the willow-tree (for I liked not to enter Lorna's bower, without her
permission; except just to peep that she was not there), and while I was
turning the ring in my pocket, having just seen the new moon, I
became aware of a great man coming eisurely down the valley. He had a
broad-brimmed hat, and a leather jerkin, and heavy jack-boots to his
middle thigh, and what was worst of all for me, on his shoulder he bore
a long carbine. Having nothing to meet him withal but my staff, and
desiring to avoid disturbance, I retired promptly into the chasm,
keeping the tree betwixt us that he might not descry me, and watching
from behind the jut of a rock, where now I had scraped myself a neat
little hole for the purpose.

Presently the great man reappeared, being now within fifty yards of me,
and the light still good enough, as he drew nearer for me to descry
his features: and though I am not a judge of men's faces, there was
something in his which turned me cold, as though with a kind of horror.
Not that it was an ugly face; nay, rather it seemed a handsome one, so
far as mere form and line might go, full of strength, and vigour, and
will, and steadfast resolution. From the short black hair above the
broad forehead, to the long black beard descending below the curt, bold
chin, there was not any curve or glimpse of weakness or of afterthought.
Nothing playful, nothing pleasant, nothing with a track of smiles;
nothing which a friend could like, and laugh at him for having. And
yet he might have been a good man (for I have known very good men so
fortified by their own strange ideas of God): I say that he might
have seemed a good man, but for the cold and cruel hankering of his
steel-blue eyes.

Now let no one suppose for a minute that I saw all this in a moment; for
I am very slow, and take a long time to digest things; only I like to
set down, and have done with it, all the results of my knowledge, though
they be not manifold. But what I said to myself, just then, was no more
than this: 'What a fellow to have Lorna!' Having my sense of right so
outraged (although, of course, I would never allow her to go so far as
that), I almost longed that he might thrust his head in to look after
me. For there I was, with my ash staff clubbed, ready to have at him,
and not ill inclined to do so; if only he would come where strength, not
firearms, must decide it. However, he suspected nothing of my dangerous
neighbourhood, but walked his round like a sentinel, and turned at the
brink of the water.

Then as he marched back again, along the margin of the stream, he espied
my little hoard, covered up with dog-leaves. He saw that the leaves were
upside down, and this of course drew his attention. I saw him stoop,
and lay bare the fish, and the eggs set a little way from them and in
my simple heart, I thought that now he knew all about me. But to my
surprise, he seemed well-pleased; and his harsh short laughter came to
me without echo,--

'Ha, ha! Charlie boy! Fisherman Charlie, have I caught thee setting
bait for Lorna? Now, I understand thy fishings, and the robbing of
Counsellor's hen roost. May I never have good roasting, if I have it not
to-night and roast thee, Charlie, afterwards!'

With this he calmly packed up my fish, and all the best of dear Annie's
eggs; and went away chuckling steadfastly, to his home, if one may
call it so. But I was so thoroughly grieved and mortified by this most
impudent robbery, that I started forth from my rocky screen with the
intention of pursuing him, until my better sense arrested me, barely
in time to escape his eyes. For I said to myself, that even supposing
I could contend unarmed with him, it would be the greatest folly in the
world to have my secret access known, and perhaps a fatal barrier placed
between Lorna and myself, and I knew not what trouble brought upon her,
all for the sake of a few eggs and fishes. It was better to bear this
trifling loss, however ignominious and goading to the spirit, than to
risk my love and Lorna's welfare, and perhaps be shot into the bargain.
And I think that all will agree with me, that I acted for the wisest, in
withdrawing to my shelter, though deprived of eggs and fishes.

Having waited (as I said) until there was no chance whatever of my love
appearing, I hastened homeward very sadly; and the wind of early autumn
moaned across the moorland. All the beauty of the harvest, all the
gaiety was gone, and the early fall of dusk was like a weight upon
me. Nevertheless, I went every evening thenceforward for a fortnight;
hoping, every time in vain to find my hope and comfort. And meanwhile,
what perplexed me most was that the signals were replaced, in order as
agreed upon, so that Lorna could scarcely be restrained by any rigour.

One time I had a narrow chance of being shot and settled with; and
it befell me thus. I was waiting very carelessly, being now a little
desperate, at the entrance to the glen, instead of watching through my
sight-hole, as the proper practice was. Suddenly a ball went by me, with
a whizz and whistle, passing through my hat and sweeping it away all
folded up. My soft hat fluttered far down the stream, before I had time
to go after it, and with the help of both wind and water, was fifty
yards gone in a moment. At this I had just enough mind left to shrink
back very suddenly, and lurk very still and closely; for I knew what
a narrow escape it had been, as I heard the bullet, hard set by the
powder, sing mournfully down the chasm, like a drone banished out of the
hive. And as I peered through my little cranny, I saw a wreath of smoke
still floating where the thickness was of the withy-bed; and presently
Carver Doone came forth, having stopped to reload his piece perhaps, and
ran very swiftly to the entrance to see what he had shot.

Sore trouble had I to keep close quarters, from the slipperiness of the
stone beneath me with the water sliding over it. My foe came quite to
the verge of the fall, where the river began to comb over; and there he
stopped for a minute or two, on the utmost edge of dry land, upon the
very spot indeed where I had fallen senseless when I clomb it in my
boyhood. I could hear him breathing hard and grunting, as in doubt and
discontent, for he stood within a yard of me, and I kept my right
fist ready for him, if he should discover me. Then at the foot of the
waterslide, my black hat suddenly appeared, tossing in white foam, and
fluttering like a raven wounded. Now I had doubted which hat to take,
when I left home that day; till I thought that the black became me best,
and might seem kinder to Lorna.

'Have I killed thee, old bird, at last?' my enemy cried in triumph;
''tis the third time I have shot at thee, and thou wast beginning to
mock me. No more of thy cursed croaking now, to wake me in the morning.
Ha, ha! there are not many who get three chances from Carver Doone; and
none ever go beyond it.'

I laughed within myself at this, as he strode away in his triumph; for
was not this his third chance of me, and he no whit the wiser? And then
I thought that perhaps the chance might some day be on the other side.

For to tell the truth, I was heartily tired of lurking and playing
bo-peep so long; to which nothing could have reconciled me, except
my fear for Lorna. And here I saw was a man of strength fit for me to
encounter, such as I had never met, but would be glad to meet with;
having found no man of late who needed not my mercy at wrestling, or at
single-stick. And growing more and more uneasy, as I found no Lorna, I
would have tried to force the Doone Glen from the upper end, and take my
chance of getting back, but for Annie and her prayers.

Now that same night I think it was, or at any rate the next one, that I
noticed Betty Muxworthy going on most strangely. She made the queerest
signs to me, when nobody was looking, and laid her fingers on her lips,
and pointed over her shoulder. But I took little heed of her, being in
a kind of dudgeon, and oppressed with evil luck; believing too that all
she wanted was to have some little grumble about some petty grievance.

But presently she poked me with the heel of a fire-bundle, and passing
close to my ear whispered, so that none else could hear her, 'Larna
Doo-un.'

By these words I was so startled, that I turned round and stared at her;
but she pretended not to know it, and began with all her might to scour
an empty crock with a besom.

'Oh, Betty, let me help you! That work is much too hard for you,' I
cried with a sudden chivalry, which only won rude answer.

'Zeed me adooing of thic, every naight last ten year, Jan, wiout vindin'
out how hard it wor. But if zo bee thee wants to help, carr peg's bucket
for me. Massy, if I ain't forgotten to fade the pegs till now.'

Favouring me with another wink, to which I now paid the keenest heed,
Betty went and fetched the lanthorn from the hook inside the door. Then
when she had kindled it, not allowing me any time to ask what she was
after, she went outside, and pointed to the great bock of wash, and
riddlings, and brown hulkage (for we ground our own corn always), and
though she knew that Bill Dadds and Jem Slocombe had full work to carry
it on a pole (with another to help to sling it), she said to me as
quietly as a maiden might ask one to carry a glove, 'Jan Ridd, carr thic
thing for me.'

So I carried it for her, without any words; wondering what she was up
to next, and whether she had ever heard of being too hard on the willing
horse. And when we came to hog-pound, she turned upon me suddenly, with
the lanthorn she was bearing, and saw that I had the bock by one hand
very easily.

'Jan Ridd,' she said, 'there be no other man in England cud a' dood it.
Now thee shalt have Larna.'

While I was wondering how my chance of having Lorna could depend upon
my power to carry pig's wash, and how Betty could have any voice in the
matter (which seemed to depend upon her decision), and in short, while
I was all abroad as to her knowledge and everything, the pigs, who had
been fast asleep and dreaming in their emptiness, awoke with one accord
at the goodness of the smell around them. They had resigned themselves,
as even pigs do, to a kind of fast, hoping to break their fast more
sweetly on the morrow morning. But now they tumbled out all headlong,
pigs below and pigs above, pigs point-blank and pigs across, pigs
courant and pigs rampant, but all alike prepared to eat, and all in good
cadence squeaking.

'Tak smarl boocket, and bale un out; wad 'e waste sich stoof as thic
here be?' So Betty set me to feed the pigs, while she held the lanthorn;
and knowing what she was, I saw that she would not tell me another word
until all the pigs were served. And in truth no man could well look at
them, and delay to serve them, they were all expressing appetite in so
forcible a manner; some running to and fro, and rubbing, and squealing
as if from starvation, some rushing down to the oaken troughs, and
poking each other away from them; and the kindest of all putting up
their fore-feet on the top-rail on the hog-pound, and blinking their
little eyes, and grunting prettily to coax us; as who would say, 'I
trust you now; you will be kind, I know, and give me the first and the
very best of it.'

'Oppen ge-at now, wull 'e, Jan? Maind, young sow wi' the baible back
arlway hath first toorn of it, 'cos I brought her up on my lap, I did.
Zuck, zuck, zuck! How her stickth her tail up; do me good to zee un! Now
thiccy trough, thee zany, and tak thee girt legs out o' the wai. Wish
they wud gie thee a good baite, mak thee hop a bit vaster, I reckon. Hit
that there girt ozebird over's back wi' the broomstick, he be robbing
of my young zow. Choog, choog, choog! and a drap more left in the
dripping-pail.'

'Come now, Betty,' I said, when all the pigs were at it sucking,
swilling, munching, guzzling, thrusting, and ousting, and spilling
the food upon the backs of their brethren (as great men do with their
charity), 'come now, Betty, how much longer am I to wait for your
message? Surely I am as good as a pig.'

'Dunno as thee be, Jan. No straikiness in thy bakkon. And now I come to
think of it, Jan, thee zed, a wake agone last Vriday, as how I had got a
girt be-ard. Wull 'e stick to that now, Maister Jan?'

'No, no, Betty, certainly not; I made a mistake about it. I should have
said a becoming mustachio, such as you may well be proud of.'

'Then thee be a laiar, Jan Ridd. Zay so, laike a man, lad.'

'Not exactly that, Betty; but I made a great mistake; and I humbly ask
your pardon; and if such a thing as a crown-piece, Betty'--

'No fai, no fai!' said Betty, however she put it into her pocket; 'now
tak my advice, Jan; thee marry Zally Snowe.'

'Not with all England for her dowry. Oh, Betty, you know better.'

'Ah's me! I know much worse, Jan. Break thy poor mother's heart it will.
And to think of arl the danger! Dost love Larna now so much?'

'With all the strength of my heart and soul. I will have her, or I will
die, Betty.'

'Wull. Thee will die in either case. But it baint for me to argify. And
do her love thee too, Jan?'

'I hope she does, Betty I hope she does. What do you think about it?'

'Ah, then I may hold my tongue to it. Knaw what boys and maidens be, as
well as I knew young pegs. I myzell been o' that zort one taime every
bit so well as you be.' And Betty held the lanthorn up, and defied me to
deny it; and the light through the horn showed a gleam in her eyes, such
as I had never seer there before. 'No odds, no odds about that,'
she continued; 'mak a fool of myzell to spake of it. Arl gone into
churchyard. But it be a lucky foolery for thee, my boy, I can tull 'ee.
For I love to see the love in thee. Coom'th over me as the spring do,
though I be naigh three score. Now, Jan, I will tell thee one thing,
can't abear to zee thee vretting so. Hould thee head down, same as they
pegs do.'

So I bent my head quite close to her; and she whispered in my ear, 'Goo
of a marning, thee girt soft. Her can't get out of an avening now, her
hath zent word to me, to tull 'ee.'

In the glory of my delight at this, I bestowed upon Betty a chaste
salute, with all the pigs for witnesses; and she took it not amiss,
considering how long she had been out of practice. But then she fell
back, like a broom on its handle, and stared at me, feigning anger.

'Oh fai, oh fai! Lunnon impudence, I doubt. I vear thee hast gone on
zadly, Jan.'



CHAPTER XXXIII

AN EARLY MORNING CALL

Of course I was up the very next morning before the October sunrise, and
away through the wild and the woodland towards the Bagworthy water, at
the foot of the long cascade. The rising of the sun was noble in the
cold and warmth of it; peeping down the spread of light, he raised his
shoulder heavily over the edge of grey mountain, and wavering length of
upland. Beneath his gaze the dew-fogs dipped, and crept to the hollow
places; then stole away in line and column, holding skirts, and clinging
subtly at the sheltering corners, where rock hung over grass-land; while
the brave lines of the hills came forth, one beyond other gliding.

Then the woods arose in folds, like drapery of awakened mountains,
stately with a depth of awe, and memory of the tempests. Autumn's mellow
hand was on them, as they owned already, touched with gold, and red,
and olive; and their joy towards the sun was less to a bridegroom than a
father.

Yet before the floating impress of the woods could clear itself,
suddenly the gladsome light leaped over hill and valley, casting amber,
blue, and purple, and a tint of rich red rose; according to the scene
they lit on, and the curtain flung around; yet all alike dispelling fear
and the cloven hoof of darkness, all on the wings of hope advancing,
and proclaiming, 'God is here.' Then life and joy sprang reassured
from every crouching hollow; every flower, and bud, and bird, had a
fluttering sense of them; and all the flashing of God's gaze merged into
soft beneficence.

So perhaps shall break upon us that eternal morning, when crag and chasm
shall be no more, neither hill and valley, nor great unvintaged ocean;
when glory shall not scare happiness, neither happiness envy glory;
but all things shall arise and shine in the light of the Father's
countenance, because itself is risen.

Who maketh His sun to rise upon both the just and the unjust. And surely
but for the saving clause, Doone Glen had been in darkness. Now, as I
stood with scanty breath--for few men could have won that climb--at
the top of the long defile, and the bottom of the mountain gorge all of
myself, and the pain of it, and the cark of my discontent fell away
into wonder and rapture. For I cannot help seeing things now and then,
slow-witted as I have a right to be; and perhaps because it comes so
rarely, the sight dwells with me like a picture.

The bar of rock, with the water-cleft breaking steeply through it, stood
bold and bare, and dark in shadow, grey with red gullies down it. But
the sun was beginning to glisten over the comb of the eastern highland,
and through an archway of the wood hung with old nests and ivy. The
lines of many a leaning tree were thrown, from the cliffs of the
foreland, down upon the sparkling grass at the foot of the western
crags. And through the dewy meadow's breast, fringed with shade, but
touched on one side with the sun-smile, ran the crystal water, curving
in its brightness like diverted hope.

On either bank, the blades of grass, making their last autumn growth,
pricked their spears and crisped their tuftings with the pearly purity.
The tenderness of their green appeared under the glaucous mantle; while
that grey suffusion, which is the blush of green life, spread its damask
chastity. Even then my soul was lifted, worried though my mind was: who
can see such large kind doings, and not be ashamed of human grief?

Not only unashamed of grief, but much abashed with joy, was I, when
I saw my Lorna coming, purer than the morning dew, than the sun more
bright and clear. That which made me love her so, that which lifted my
heart to her, as the Spring wind lifts the clouds, was the gayness of
her nature, and its inborn playfulness. And yet all this with maiden
shame, a conscious dream of things unknown, and a sense of fate about
them.

Down the valley still she came, not witting that I looked at her, having
ceased (through my own misprison) to expect me yet awhile; or at least
she told herself so. In the joy of awakened life and brightness of
the morning, she had cast all care away, and seemed to float upon the
sunrise, like a buoyant silver wave. Suddenly at sight of me, for I
leaped forth at once, in fear of seeming to watch her unawares, the
bloom upon her cheeks was deepened, and the radiance of her eyes; and
she came to meet me gladly.

'At last then, you are come, John. I thought you had forgotten me. I
could not make you understand--they have kept me prisoner every evening:
but come into my house; you are in danger here.'

Meanwhile I could not answer, being overcome with joy, but followed
to her little grotto, where I had been twice before. I knew that the
crowning moment of my life was coming--that Lorna would own her love for
me.

She made for awhile as if she dreamed not of the meaning of my gaze,
but tried to speak of other things, faltering now and then, and mantling
with a richer damask below her long eyelashes.

'This is not what I came to know,' I whispered very softly, 'you know
what I am come to ask.'

'If you are come on purpose to ask anything, why do you delay so?' She
turned away very bravely, but I saw that her lips were trembling.

'I delay so long, because I fear; because my whole life hangs in balance
on a single word; because what I have near me now may never more be near
me after, though more than all the world, or than a thousand worlds,
to me.' As I spoke these words of passion in a low soft voice, Lorna
trembled more and more; but she made no answer, neither yet looked up at
me.

'I have loved you long and long,' I pursued, being reckless now, 'when
you were a little child, as a boy I worshipped you: then when I saw
you a comely girl, as a stripling I adored you: now that you are a
full-grown maiden all the rest I do, and more--I love you more than
tongue can tell, or heart can hold in silence. I have waited long and
long; and though I am so far below you I can wait no longer; but must
have my answer.'

'You have been very faithful, John,' she murmured to the fern and moss;
'I suppose I must reward you.'

'That will not do for me,' I said; 'I will not have reluctant liking,
nor assent for pity's sake; which only means endurance. I must have all
love, or none, I must have your heart of hearts; even as you have mine,
Lorna.'

While I spoke, she glanced up shyly through her fluttering lashes,
to prolong my doubt one moment, for her own delicious pride. Then she
opened wide upon me all the glorious depth and softness of her loving
eyes, and flung both arms around my neck, and answered with her heart on
mine,--

'Darling, you have won it all. I shall never be my own again. I am
yours, my own one, for ever and for ever.'

I am sure I know not what I did, or what I said thereafter, being
overcome with transport by her words and at her gaze. Only one thing I
remember, when she raised her bright lips to me, like a child, for me to
kiss, such a smile of sweet temptation met me through her flowing hair,
that I almost forgot my manners, giving her no time to breathe.

'That will do,' said Lorna gently, but violently blushing; 'for the
present that will do, John. And now remember one thing, dear. All the
kindness is to be on my side; and you are to be very distant, as behoves
to a young maiden; except when I invite you. But you may kiss my hand,
John; oh, yes, you may kiss my hand, you know. Ah to be sure! I had
forgotten; how very stupid of me!'

For by this time I had taken one sweet hand and gazed on it, with the
pride of all the world to think that such a lovely thing was mine; and
then I slipped my little ring upon the wedding finger; and this time
Lorna kept it, and looked with fondness on its beauty, and clung to me
with a flood of tears.

'Every time you cry,' said I, drawing her closer to me 'I shall consider
it an invitation not to be too distant. There now, none shall make you
weep. Darling, you shall sigh no more, but live in peace and happiness,
with me to guard and cherish you: and who shall dare to vex you?' But
she drew a long sad sigh, and looked at the ground with the great tears
rolling, and pressed one hand upon the trouble of her pure young breast.

'It can never, never be,' she murmured to herself alone: 'Who am I, to
dream of it? Something in my heart tells me it can be so never, never.'



CHAPTER XXXIV

TWO NEGATIVES MAKE AN AFFIRMATIVE

There was, however, no possibility of depressing me at such a time. To
be loved by Lorna, the sweet, the pure, the playful one, the fairest
creature on God's earth and the most enchanting, the lady of high birth
and mind; that I, a mere clumsy, blundering yeoman, without wit, or
wealth, or lineage, should have won that loving heart to be my own for
ever, was a thought no fears could lessen, and no chance could steal
from me.

Therefore at her own entreaty taking a very quick adieu, and by her own
invitation an exceeding kind one, I hurried home with deep exulting, yet
some sad misgivings, for Lorna had made me promise now to tell my mother
everything; as indeed I always meant to do, when my suit should be gone
too far to stop. I knew, of course, that my dear mother would be greatly
moved and vexed, the heirship of Glen Doone not being a very desirable
dower, but in spite of that, and all disappointment as to little Ruth
Huckaback, feeling my mother's tenderness and deep affection to me, and
forgiving nature, I doubted not that before very long she would view the
matter as I did. Moreover, I felt that if once I could get her only to
look at Lorna, she would so love and glory in her, that I should obtain
all praise and thanks, perchance without deserving them.

Unluckily for my designs, who should be sitting down at breakfast with
my mother and the rest but Squire Faggus, as everybody now began to
entitle him. I noticed something odd about him, something uncomfortable
in his manner, and a lack of that ease and humour which had been wont to
distinguish him. He took his breakfast as it came, without a single
joke about it, or preference of this to that; but with sly soft looks
at Annie, who seemed unable to sit quiet, or to look at any one
steadfastly. I feared in my heart what was coming on, and felt truly
sorry for poor mother. After breakfast it became my duty to see to the
ploughing of a barley-stubble ready for the sowing of a French grass,
and I asked Tom Faggus to come with me, but he refused, and I knew the
reason. Being resolved to allow him fair field to himself, though with
great displeasure that a man of such illegal repute should marry into
our family, which had always been counted so honest, I carried my dinner
upon my back, and spent the whole day with the furrows.

When I returned, Squire Faggus was gone; which appeared to me but
a sorry sign, inasmuch as if mother had taken kindly to him and his
intentions, she would surely have made him remain awhile to celebrate
the occasion. And presently no doubt was left: for Lizzie came running
to meet me, at the bottom of the woodrick, and cried,--

'Oh, John, there is such a business. Mother is in such a state of mind,
and Annie crying her eyes out. What do you think? You would never guess,
though I have suspected it, ever so long.'

'No need for me to guess,' I replied, as though with some indifference,
because of her self-important air; 'I knew all about it long ago. You
have not been crying much, I see. I should like you better if you had.'

'Why should I cry? I like Tom Faggus. He is the only one I ever see with
the spirit of a man.'

This was a cut, of course, at me. Mr. Faggus had won the goodwill of
Lizzie by his hatred of the Doones, and vows that if he could get a
dozen men of any courage to join him, he would pull their stronghold
about their ears without any more ado. This malice of his seemed strange
to me, as he had never suffered at their hands, so far at least as I
knew; was it to be attributed to his jealousy of outlaws who excelled
him in his business? Not being good at repartee, I made no answer to
Lizzie, having found this course more irksome to her than the very best
invective: and so we entered the house together; and mother sent at once
for me, while I was trying to console my darling sister Annie.

'Oh, John! speak one good word for me,' she cried with both hands laid
in mine, and her tearful eyes looking up at me.

'Not one, my pet, but a hundred,' I answered, kindly embracing her:
'have no fear, little sister: I am going to make your case so bright, by
comparison, I mean, that mother will send for you in five minutes, and
call you her best, her most dutiful child, and praise Cousin Tom to the
skies, and send a man on horseback after him; and then you will have a
harder task to intercede for me, my dear.'

'Oh, John, dear John, you won't tell her about Lorna--oh, not to-day,
dear.'

'Yes, to-day, and at once, Annie. I want to have it over, and be done
with it.'

'Oh, but think of her, dear. I am sure she could not bear it, after this
great shock already.'

'She will bear it all the better,' said I; 'the one will drive the other
out. I know exactly what mother is. She will be desperately savage first
with you, and then with me, and then for a very little while with both
of us together; and then she will put one against the other (in her mind
I mean) and consider which was most to blame; and in doing that she will
be compelled to find the best in either's case, that it may beat the
other; and so as the pleas come before her mind, they will gain upon the
charges, both of us being her children, you know: and before very long
(particularly if we both keep out of the way) she will begin to think
that after all she has been a little too hasty, and then she will
remember how good we have always been to her; and how like our father.
Upon that, she will think of her own love-time, and sigh a good bit,
and cry a little, and then smile, and send for both of us, and beg our
pardon, and call us her two darlings.'

'Now, John, how on earth can you know all that?' exclaimed my sister,
wiping her eyes, and gazing at me with a soft bright smile. 'Who on
earth can have told you, John? People to call you stupid indeed! Why,
I feel that all you say is quite true, because you describe so exactly
what I should do myself; I mean--I mean if I had two children, who had
behaved as we have done. But tell me, darling John, how you learned all
this.'

'Never you mind,' I replied, with a nod of some conceit, I fear: 'I must
be a fool if I did not know what mother is by this time.'

Now inasmuch as the thing befell according to my prediction, what need
for me to dwell upon it, after saying how it would be? Moreover, I would
regret to write down what mother said about Lorna, in her first surprise
and tribulation; not only because I was grieved by the gross injustice
of it, and frightened mother with her own words (repeated deeply after
her); but rather because it is not well, when people repent of hasty
speech, to enter it against them.

That is said to be the angels' business; and I doubt if they can attend
to it much, without doing injury to themselves.

However, by the afternoon, when the sun began to go down upon us, our
mother sat on the garden bench, with her head on my great otter-skin
waistcoat (which was waterproof), and her right arm round our Annie's
waist, and scarcely knowing which of us she ought to make the most of,
or which deserved most pity. Not that she had forgiven yet the rivals to
her love--Tom Faggus, I mean, and Lorna--but that she was beginning to
think a tattle better of them now, and a vast deal better of her own
children.

And it helped her much in this regard, that she was not thinking half
so well as usual of herself, or rather of her own judgment; for in good
truth she had no self, only as it came home to her, by no very distant
road, but by way of her children. A better mother never lived; and can
I, after searching all things, add another word to that?

And indeed poor Lizzie was not so very bad; but behaved (on the whole)
very well for her. She was much to be pitied, poor thing, and great
allowances made for her, as belonging to a well-grown family, and a very
comely one; and feeling her own shortcomings. This made her leap to the
other extreme, and reassert herself too much, endeavouring to exalt the
mind at the expense of the body; because she had the invisible one (so
far as can be decided) in better share than the visible. Not but what
she had her points, and very comely points of body; lovely eyes to wit,
and very beautiful hands and feet (almost as good as Lorna's), and a
neck as white as snow; but Lizzie was not gifted with our gait and port,
and bounding health.

Now, while we sat on the garden bench, under the great ash-tree, we left
dear mother to take her own way, and talk at her own pleasure. Children
almost always are more wide-awake than their parents. The fathers and
the mothers laugh; but the young ones have the best of them. And now
both Annie knew, and I, that we had gotten the best of mother; and
therefore we let her lay down the law, as if we had been two dollies.

'Darling John,' my mother said, 'your case is a very hard one. A young
and very romantic girl--God send that I be right in my charitable
view of her--has met an equally simple boy, among great dangers and
difficulties, from which my son has saved her, at the risk of his life
at every step. Of course, she became attached to him, and looked up to
him in every way, as a superior being'--

'Come now, mother,' I said; 'if you only saw Lorna, you would look upon
me as the lowest dirt'--

'No doubt I should,' my mother answered; 'and the king and queen, and
all the royal family. Well, this poor angel, having made up her mind to
take compassion upon my son, when he had saved her life so many times,
persuades him to marry her out of pure pity, and throw his poor mother
overboard. And the saddest part of it all is this--'

'That my mother will never, never, never understand the truth,' said I.

'That is all I wish,' she answered; 'just to get at the simple truth
from my own perception of it. John, you are very wise in kissing me;
but perhaps you would not be so wise in bringing Lorna for an afternoon,
just to see what she thinks of me. There is a good saddle of mutton now;
and there are some very good sausages left, on the blue dish with the
anchor, Annie, from the last little sow we killed.'

'As if Lorna would eat sausages!' said I, with appearance of high
contempt, though rejoicing all the while that mother seemed to have her
name so pat; and she pronounced it in a manner which made my heart leap
to my ears: 'Lorna to eat sausages!'

'I don't see why she shouldn't,' my mother answered smiling, 'if she
means to be a farmer's wife, she must take to farmer's ways, I think.
What do you say, Annie?'

'She will eat whatever John desires, I should hope,' said Annie gravely;
'particularly as I made them.'

'Oh that I could only get the chance of trying her!' I answered, 'if you
could once behold her, mother, you would never let her go again. And she
would love you with all her heart, she is so good and gentle.'

'That is a lucky thing for me'; saying this my mother wept, as she had
been doing off and on, when no one seemed to look at her; 'otherwise I
suppose, John, she would very soon turn me out of the farm, having you
so completely under her thumb, as she seems to have. I see now that my
time is over. Lizzie and I will seek our fortunes. It is wiser so.'

'Now, mother,' I cried; 'will you have the kindness not to talk any
nonsense? Everything belongs to you; and so, I hope, your children do.
And you, in turn, belong to us; as you have proved ever since--oh, ever
since we can remember. Why do you make Annie cry so? You ought to know
better than that.'

Mother upon this went over all the things she had done before; how many
times I know not; neither does it matter. Only she seemed to enjoy it
more, every time of doing it. And then she said she was an old fool; and
Annie (like a thorough girl) pulled her one grey hair out.



CHAPTER XXXV

RUTH IS NOT LIKE LORNA

Although by our mother's reluctant consent a large part of the obstacles
between Annie and her lover appeared to be removed, on the other hand
Lorna and myself gained little, except as regarded comfort of mind, and
some ease to the conscience. Moreover, our chance of frequent meetings
and delightful converse was much impaired, at least for the present;
because though mother was not aware of my narrow escape from Carver
Doone, she made me promise never to risk my life by needless visits.
And upon this point, that is to say, the necessity of the visit, she was
well content, as she said, to leave me to my own good sense and honour;
only begging me always to tell her of my intention beforehand. This
pledge, however, for her own sake, I declined to give; knowing how
wretched she would be during all the time of my absence; and, on that
account, I promised instead, that I would always give her a full account
of my adventure upon returning.

Now my mother, as might be expected, began at once to cast about for
some means of relieving me from all further peril, and herself from
great anxiety. She was full of plans for fetching Lorna, in some
wonderful manner, out of the power of the Doones entirely, and into her
own hands, where she was to remain for at least a twelve-month, learning
all mother and Annie could teach her of dairy business, and farm-house
life, and the best mode of packing butter. And all this arose from my
happening to say, without meaning anything, how the poor dear had longed
for quiet, and a life of simplicity, and a rest away from violence!
Bless thee, mother--now long in heaven, there is no need to bless thee;
but it often makes a dimness now in my well-worn eyes, when I think of
thy loving-kindness, warmth, and romantic innocence.

As to stealing my beloved from that vile Glen Doone, the deed itself was
not impossible, nor beyond my daring; but in the first place would she
come, leaving her old grandfather to die without her tendence? And
even if, through fear of Carver and that wicked Counsellor, she should
consent to fly, would it be possible to keep her without a regiment of
soldiers? Would not the Doones at once ride forth to scour the country
for their queen, and finding her (as they must do), burn our house, and
murder us, and carry her back triumphantly?

All this I laid before my mother, and to such effect that she
acknowledged, with a sigh that nothing else remained for me (in the
present state of matters) except to keep a careful watch upon Lorna from
safe distance, observe the policy of the Doones, and wait for a tide in
their affairs. Meanwhile I might even fall in love (as mother unwisely
hinted) with a certain more peaceful heiress, although of inferior
blood, who would be daily at my elbow. I am not sure but what dear
mother herself would have been disappointed, had I proved myself so
fickle; and my disdain and indignation at the mere suggestion did not so
much displease her; for she only smiled and answered,--

'Well, it is not for me to say; God knows what is good for us. Likings
will not come to order; otherwise I should not be where I am this day.
