orders were received that I should be treated with especial strictness,
and I was given the choice between irons and one of the cells below
the level. Choosing the latter, I was left to reflect upon many things;
among others, on the queer and uncertain nature of the Cardinal, who
loved, I knew, to play with a man as a cat with a mouse; and on the ill
effects which sometimes attend a high chest-thrust however carefully
delivered. I only rescued myself at last from these and other unpleasant
reflections by obtaining the loan of a pair of dice; and the light being
just enough to enable me to reckon the throws, I amused myself for hours
by casting them on certain principles of my own. But a long run
again and again upset my calculations; and at last brought me to the
conclusion that a run of bad luck may be so persistent as to see out the
most sagacious player. This was not a reflection very welcome to me at
the moment.

Nevertheless, for three days it was all the company I had. At the end
of that time, the knave of a jailor who attended me, and who had never
grown tired of telling me, after the fashion of his kind, that I should
be hanged, came to me with a less assured air.

'Perhaps you would like a little water?' he said civilly.

'Why, rascal?' I asked.

'To wash with,' he answered.

'I asked for some yesterday, and you would not bring it,' I grumbled.
'However, better late than never. Bring it now. If I must hang, I will
hang like a gentleman. But depend upon it, the Cardinal will not serve
an old friend so scurvy a trick.'

'You are to go to him,' he announced, when he came back with the water.

'What? To the Cardinal?' I cried.

'Yes,' he answered.

'Good!' I exclaimed; and in my joy and relief I sprang up at once, and
began to refresh my dress. 'So all this time I have been doing him an
injustice,' I continued. 'VIVE MONSEIGNEUR! Long live the little Bishop
of Luchon! I might have known it, too.'

'Don't make too sure!' the man answered spitefully. Then he went on, 'I
have something else for you. A friend of yours left it at the gate,' and
he handed me a packet.

'Quite so!' I said, leading his rascally face aright. 'And you kept it
as long as you dared--as long as you thought I should hang, you knave!
Was not that so? But there, do not lie to me. Tell me instead which
of my friends left it.' For, to confess the truth, I had not so many
friends at this time and ten good crowns--the packet contained no less
a sum--argued a pretty staunch friend, and one of whom a man might
reasonably be proud.

The knave sniggered maliciously. 'A crooked dwarfish man left it,' he
said. 'I doubt I might call him a tailor and not be far out.'

'Chut!' I answered--but I was a little out of countenance, nevertheless.
'I understand. An honest fellow enough, and in debt to me! I am glad he
remembered. But when am I to go, friend?'

'In an hour,' he answered sullenly. Doubtless he had looked to get one
of the crowns; but I was too old a hand for that. If I came back I could
buy his services; and if I did not I should have wasted my money.

Nevertheless, a little later, when I found myself on my way to the Hotel
Richelieu under so close a guard that I could see nothing in the street
except the figures that immediately surrounded me, I wished that I had
given him the money. At such times, when all hangs in the balance and
the sky is overcast, the mind runs on luck and old superstitions, and
is prone to think a crown given here may avail there--though THERE be a
hundred leagues away.

The Palais Richelieu was at this time in building, and we were required
to wait in a long, bare gallery, where the masons were at work. I was
kept a full hour here, pondering uncomfortably on the strange whims
and fancies of the great man who then ruled France as the King's
Lieutenant-General, with all the King's powers, and whose life I
had once been the means of saving by a little timely information. On
occasion he had done something to wipe out the debt; and at other times
he had permitted me to be free with him, and so far we were not unknown
to one another.

Nevertheless, when the doors were at last thrown open, and I was led
into his presence, my confidence underwent a shock. His cold glance,
that, roving over me, regarded me not as a man but an item, the steely
glitter of his southern eyes, chilled me to the bone. The room was bare,
the floor without carpet or covering. Some of the woodwork lay about,
unfinished and in pieces. But the man--this man, needed no surroundings.
His keen pale face, his brilliant eyes, even his presence--though he was
of no great height, and began already to stoop at the shoulders--were
enough to awe the boldest. I recalled, as I looked at him, a hundred
tales of his iron will, his cold heart, his unerring craft. He had
humbled the King's brother, the splendid Duke of Orleans, in the dust.
He had curbed the Queen-mother. A dozen heads, the noblest in France,
had come to the block through him. Only two years before he had quelled
Rochelle; only a few months before he had crushed the great insurrection
in Languedoc: and though the south, stripped of its old privileges,
still seethed with discontent, no one in this year 1630 dared lift
a hand against him--openly, at any rate. Under the surface a hundred
plots, a thousand intrigues, sought his life or his power; but these, I
suppose, are the hap of every great man.

No wonder, then, that the courage on which I plumed myself sank low at
sight of him; or that it was as much as I could do to mingle with
the humility of my salute some touch of the SANG FROID of old
acquaintanceship.

And perhaps that had been better left out. For it seemed that this
man was without bowels. For a moment, while he stood looking at me, and
before he spoke to me, I gave myself up for lost. There was a glint
of cruel satisfaction in his eyes that warned me, before he opened his
mouth, what he was going to say to me.

'I could not have made a better catch, M. de Berault,' he said, smiling
villainously, while he gently smoothed the fur of a cat that had sprung
on the table beside him. 'An old offender, and an excellent example. I
doubt it will not stop with you. But later, we will make you the warrant
for flying at higher game.'

'Monseigneur has handled a sword himself,' I blurted out. The very room
seemed to be growing darker, the air colder. I was never nearer fear in
my life.

'Yes?' he said, smiling delicately. 'And so--?'

'Will not be too hard on the failings of a poor gentleman.'

'He shall suffer no more than a rich one,' he replied suavely as he
stroked the cat. 'Enjoy that satisfaction, M. de Berault. Is that all?'

'Once I was of service to your Eminence,' I said desperately.

'Payment has been made,' he answered, 'more than once. But for that I
should not have seen you.'

'The King's face!' I cried, snatching at the straw he seemed to hold
out.

He laughed cynically, smoothly. His thin face, his dark moustache, and
whitening hair, gave him an air of indescribable keenness.

'I am not the King,' he said. 'Besides, I am told that you have killed
as many as six men in duels. You owe the King, therefore, one life at
least. You must pay it. There is no more to be said, M. de Berault,'
he continued coldly, turning away and beginning to collect some papers.
'The law must take its course.'

I thought that he was about to nod to the lieutenant to withdraw me, and
a chilling sweat broke out down my back. I saw the scaffold, I felt the
cords. A moment, and it would be too late!

'I have a favour to ask,' I stammered desperately, 'if your Eminence
will give me a moment alone.'

'To what end?' he answered, turning and eyeing me with cold disfavour.
'I know you--your past--all. It can do no good, my friend.'

'No harm!' I cried. 'And I am a dying man, Monseigneur!'

'That is true,' he said thoughtfully. Still he seemed to hesitate; and
my heart beat fast. At last he looked at the lieutenant. 'You may
leave us,' he said shortly. 'Now,' he continued, when the officer had
withdrawn and left us alone, 'what is it? Say what you have to say
quickly. And, above all, do not try to fool me, M. de Berault.'

But his piercing eyes so disconcerted me now that I had my chance,
and was alone with him, that I could not find a word to say, and stood
before him mute. I think this pleased him, for his face relaxed.

'Well?' he said at last. 'Is that all?'

'The man is not dead,' I muttered.

He shrugged his shoulders contemptuously.

'What of that?' he said. 'That was not what you wanted to say to me.'

'Once I saved your Eminence's life,' I faltered miserably.

'Admitted,' he answered, in his thin, incisive voice. 'You mentioned the
fact before. On the other hand, you have taken six to my knowledge,
M. de Berault. You have lived the life of a bully, a common bravo, a
gamester. You, a man of family! For shame! Do you wonder that it has
brought you to this! Yet on that one point I am willing to hear more,'
he added abruptly.

'I might save your Eminence's life again,' I cried. It was a sudden
inspiration.

'You know something?' he said quickly, fixing me with his eyes. 'But
no,' he continued, shaking his head gently. 'Pshaw! The trick is old. I
have better spies than you, M. de Berault.'

'But no better sword,' I cried hoarsely. 'No, not in all your guard!'

'That is true,' he said slowly. 'That is true.' To my surprise, he spoke
in a tone of consideration; and he looked down at the floor. 'Let me
think, my friend,' he continued.

He walked two or three times up and down the room, while I stood
trembling. I confess it, trembling. The man whose pulses danger has no
power to quicken, is seldom proof against suspense; and the sudden hope
his words awakened in me so shook me that his figure as he trod lightly
to and fro with the cat rubbing against his robe and turning time for
time with him, wavered before my eyes. I grasped the table to steady
myself. I had not admitted even in my own mind how darkly the shadow of
Montfaucon and the gallows had fallen across me.

I had leisure to recover myself, for it was some time before he spoke.
When he did, it was in a voice harsh, changed, imperative. 'You have the
reputation of a man faithful, at least, to his employer,' he said. 'Do
not answer me. I say it is so. Well, I will trust you. I will give you
one more chance--though it is a desperate one. Woe to you if you fail
me! Do you know Cocheforet in Bearn? It is not far from Auch.'

'No, your Eminence.'

'Nor M. de Cocheforet?'

'No, your Eminence.'

'So much the better,' he replied. 'But you have heard of him. He has
been engaged in every Gascon plot since the late King's death, and gave
more trouble last year in the Vivarais than any man twice his years.
At present he is at Bosost in Spain, with other refugees, but I have
learned that at frequent intervals he visits his wife at Cocheforet
which is six leagues within the border. On one of these visits he must
be arrested.'

'That should be easy,' I said.

The Cardinal looked at me. 'Chut, man! what do you know about it?' he
answered bluntly. 'It is whispered at Cocheforet if a soldier crosses
the street at Auch. In the house are only two or three servants, but
they have the countryside with them to a man, and they are a dangerous
breed. A spark might kindle a fresh rising. The arrest, therefore, must
be made secretly.'

I bowed.

'One resolute man inside the house,' the Cardinal continued,
thoughtfully glancing at a paper which lay on the table, 'with the help
of two or three servants whom he could summon to his aid at will, might
effect it. The question is, Will you be the man, my friend?'

I hesitated; then I bowed. What choice had I?

'Nay, nay, speak out!' he said sharply. 'Yes or no, M. de Berault?'

'Yes, your Eminence,' I said reluctantly. Again, I say, what choice had
I?

'You will bring him to Paris, and alive. He knows things, and that is
why I want him. You understand?'

'I understand, Monseigneur,' I answered.

'You will get into the house as you can,' he continued with energy. 'For
that you will need strategy, and good strategy. They suspect everybody.
You must deceive them. If you fail to deceive them, or, deceiving them,
are found out later, I do not think that you will trouble me again, or
break the edict a second time. On the other hand, should you deceive
me'--he smiled still more subtly, but his voice sank to a purring
note--'I will break you on the wheel like the ruined gamester you are!'

I met his look without quailing. 'So be it!' I said recklessly. 'If I
do not bring M. de Cocheforet to Paris, you may do that to me, and more
also!'

'It is a bargain!' he answered slowly. 'I think that you will be
faithful. For money, here are a hundred crowns. That sum should suffice;
but if you succeed you shall have twice as much more. That is all, I
think. You understand?'

'Yes, Monseigneur.'

'Then why do you wait?'

'The lieutenant?' I said modestly.

The Cardinal laughed to himself, and sitting down wrote a word or two on
a slip of paper. 'Give him that,' he said in high good-humour. 'I fear,
M. de Berault, you will never get your deserts--in this world!'



CHAPTER II. AT THE GREEN PILLAR

Cocheforet lies in a billowy land of oak and beech and chestnuts--a land
of deep, leafy bottoms and hills clothed with forest. Ridge and valley,
glen and knoll, the woodland, sparsely peopled and more sparsely tilled,
stretches away to the great snow mountains that here limit France. It
swarms with game--with wolves and bears, deer and boars. To the end of
his life I have heard that the great king loved this district, and would
sigh, when years and State fell heavily on him, for the beech groves and
box-covered hills of South Bearn. From the terraced steps of Auch you
can see the forest roll away in light and shadow, vale and upland, to
the base of the snow peaks; and, though I come from Brittany and love
the smell of the salt wind, I have seen few sights that outdo this.

It was the second week of October, when I came to Cocheforet, and,
dropping down from the last wooded brow, rode quietly into the place at
evening. I was alone, and had ridden all day in a glory of ruddy beech
leaves, through the silence of forest roads, across clear brooks and
glades still green. I had seen more of the quiet and peace of the
country than had been my share since boyhood, and for that reason, or
because I had no great taste for the task before me--the task now
so imminent--I felt a little hipped. In good faith, it was not a
gentleman's work that I was come to do, look at it how you might.

But beggars must not be choosers, and I knew that this feeling would
not last. At the inn, in the presence of others, under the spur of
necessity, or in the excitement of the chase, were that once begun, I
should lose the feeling. When a man is young he seeks solitude, when he
is middle-aged, he flies it and his thoughts. I made therefore for the
'Green Pillar,' a little inn in the village street, to which I had been
directed at Auch, and, thundering on the door with the knob of my riding
switch, railed at the man for keeping me waiting.

Here and there at hovel doors in the street--which was a mean,
poor place, not worthy of the name--men and women looked out at me
suspiciously. But I affected to ignore them; and at last the host came.
He was a fair-haired man, half-Basque, half-Frenchman, and had scanned
me well, I was sure, through some window or peephole; for when he came
out he betrayed no surprise at the sight of a well-dressed stranger--a
portent in that out-of-the-way village--but eyed me with a kind of
sullen reserve.

'I can lie here to-night, I suppose?' I said, dropping the reins on the
sorrel's neck. The horse hung its head.

'I don't know,' he answered stupidly.

I pointed to the green bough which topped a post that stood opposite the
door.

'This is an inn, is it not?' I said.

'Yes,' he answered slowly. 'It is an inn. But--'

'But you are full, or you are out of food, or your wife is ill, or
something else is amiss,' I answered peevishly. 'All the same, I am
going to lie here. So you must make the best of it, and your wife
too--if you have one.'

He scratched his head, looking at me with an ugly glitter in his eyes.
But he said nothing, and I dismounted.

'Where can I stable my horse?' I asked.

'I'll put it up,' he answered sullenly, stepping forward and taking the
reins in his hand.

'Very well,' I said. 'But I go with you. A merciful man is merciful to
his beast, and wherever I go I see my horse fed.'

'It will be fed,' he said shortly. And then he waited for me to go
into the house. 'The wife is in there,' he continued, looking at me
stubbornly.

'IMPRIMIS--if you understand Latin, my friend,' I answered, 'the horse
in the stall.'

He saw that it was no good, turned the sorrel slowly round, and began
to lead it across the village street. There was a shed behind the inn,
which I had already marked, and taken for the stable, I was surprised
when I found that he was not going there, but I made no remark, and in
a few minutes saw the horse made comfortable in a hovel which seemed to
belong to a neighbour.

This done, the man led the way back to the inn, carrying my valise.

'You have no other guests?' I said, with a casual air. I knew that he
