to pay any attention to the appearance of the heavens, no one made
himself uneasy about it, and the promenade, in obedience to the orders
which had been given by the queen, took its course in the direction of
Apremont. The courtiers who followed were merry and full of spirits; it
was evident that every one tried to forget, and to make others forget,
the bitter discussions of the previous evening. Madame, particularly,
was delightful; in fact, seeing the king at the door of her carriage, as
she did not suppose he would be there for the queen's sake, she hoped
that her prince had returned to her. Hardly, however, had they proceeded
a quarter of a mile on the road, when the king, with a gracious smile,
saluted them and drew up his horse, leaving the queen's carriage to pass
on, then that of the principal ladies of honor, and then all the others
in succession, who, seeing the king stop, wished in their turn to stop
too; but the king made a sign to them to continue their progress. When
La Valliere's carriage passed, the king approached it, saluted the
ladies who were inside, and was preparing to accompany the carriage
containing the maids of honor, in the same way he had followed that in
which Madame was, when suddenly the whole file of carriages stopped. It
was probable that Madame, uneasy at the king having left her, had just
given directions for the performance of this maneuver, the direction in
which the promenade was to take place having been left to her. The king
having sent to inquire what her object was in stopping the carriages,
was informed in reply that she wished to walk. She very likely hoped
that the king, who was following the carriages of the maids of honor on
horseback, would not venture to follow the maids of honor themselves on
foot. They had arrived in the middle of the forest. The promenade, in
fact, was not ill-timed, especially for those who were dreamers or
lovers. From the little open space where the halt had taken place, three
beautiful long walks, shady and undulating, stretched out before them.
These walks were covered with moss, with leaves lying scattered idly
about; and each walk had its horizon in the distance, consisting of
about a handbreadth of sky, apparent through the interlacing of the
branches of the trees. At the end of the walks, evidently in great
tribulation and uneasiness, the startled deer were seen hurrying to and
fro, first stopping for a moment in the middle of the path, and then
raising their heads, they fled with the speed of an arrow, or bounded
into the depths of the forest, where they disappeared from view; now and
then a rabbit of philosophical mien could be noticed quietly sitting
upright, rubbing his muzzle with his fore-paws, and looking about
inquiringly, as though wondering whether all these people, who were
approaching in his direction, and who had just disturbed him in his
meditations and his meal, were not followed by their dogs, or had not
their guns under their arms. All alighted from their carriages as soon
as they observed that the queen was doing so. Maria Theresa took the arm
of one of her ladies of honor, and, with a side-glance toward the king,
who did not perceive that he was in the slightest degree the object of
the queen's attention, entered the forest by the first path before her.
Two of the out-riders preceded her majesty with long poles, which they
used for the purpose of putting the branches of the trees aside, or
removing the bushes which might impede her progress. As soon as Madame
alighted, she found the Comte de Guiche at her side, who bowed and
placed himself at her disposal. Monsieur, delighted with his bath of the
two previous days, had announced his preference for the river, and,
having given De Guiche leave of absence, remained at the chateau with
the Chevalier de Lorraine and Manicamp. He was not in the slightest
degree jealous. He had been looked for to no purpose among those
present; but as Monsieur was a man who thought a great deal of himself,
and usually added very little to the general pleasure, his absence had
rather been a subject of satisfaction than of regret. Every one had
followed the example which the queen and Madame had set, doing just as
they pleased, according as chance or fancy influenced them. The king,
we have already observed, remained near Valliere, and, throwing himself
off his horse at the moment the door of her carriage was opened, he
offered her his hand to alight. Montalais and Tonnay-Charente
immediately drew back and kept at a distance; the former from
calculated, the latter from prudent, motives. There was this difference,
however, between the two, that the one had withdrawn from a wish to
please the king, the other for a very opposite reason. During the last
half hour the weather also had undergone a change; the veil which had
been spread over the sky, as if driven by a blast of heated air, had
become massed together in the western part of the heavens; and afterward
as if driven back by a current of air from the opposite direction, was
now advancing slowly and heavily toward them. The approach of the storm
could be felt, but as the king did not perceive it, no one thought it
was right to do so. The promenade was therefore continued; some of the
company, with minds ill at ease on the subject, raised their eyes from
time to time toward the sky; others, even more timid still, walked about
without wandering too far from the carriages, where they relied upon
taking shelter in case the storm burst. The greater number of these,
however, observing that the king fearlessly entered the wood with La
Valliere, followed his majesty. The king, noticing this, took La
Valliere's hand, and led her away by a side-path, where no one this time
ventured to follow him.




CHAPTER IV.

THE SHOWER OF RAIN.


At this moment, and in the same direction, too, that the king and La
Valliere were proceeding, except that they were walking in the wood
itself instead of following the path, two men were walking together,
utterly indifferent to the appearance of the heavens. Their heads were
bent down in the manner of people occupied with matters of great
moment. They had not observed either De Guiche or Madame, or the king
or La Valliere. Suddenly something passed through the air like a stream
of fire, followed by a loud but distant rumbling noise.

"Ah!" said one of them, raising his head, "here is the storm. Let us
reach our carriages, my dear D'Herblay."

Aramis looked inquiringly at the heavens. "There is no occasion to hurry
yet," he said; and then, resuming the conversation where it had
doubtlessly been interrupted, he said, "You were observing that the
letter we wrote last evening must by this time have reached its
destination?"

"I was saying that she certainly has it."

"Whom did you send it by?"

"By my own servant, as I have already told you."

"Did he bring back an answer?"

"I have not seen him since; the young girl was probably in attendance on
Madame, or was in her own room dressing, and he may have had to wait.
Our time for leaving arrived, and we set off, of course: I cannot,
therefore, know what is going on yonder."

"Did you see the king before leaving?"

"Yes."

"How did he seem?"

"Nothing could be better, or worse; according as he be sincere or
hypocritical."

"And the _fete_?"

"Will take place in a month."

"He invited himself, you say?"

"With a pertinacity in which I detected Colbert's influence. But has not
last night removed your illusions?"

"What illusions?"

"With respect to the assistance you may be able to give me in this
circumstance."

"No; I have passed the night writing, and all my orders are given."

"Do not conceal it from yourself, D'Herblay, but the _fete_ will cost
some millions."

"I will give six, do you on your side get two or three."

"You are a wonderful man, my dear D'Herblay."

Aramis smiled.

"But," inquired Fouquet, with some remaining uneasiness, "how is it
that, while now you are squandering millions in this manner, a few days
ago you did not pay the fifty thousand francs to Baisemeaux out of your
own pocket?"

"Because a few days ago I was as poor as Job."

"And to-day?"

"To-day I am wealthier than the king himself."

"Very well," said Fouquet; "I understand men pretty well; I know you
are incapable of forfeiting your word; I do not wish to wrest your
secret from you, and so let us talk no more about it."

At this moment a dull, heavy rumbling was heard, which suddenly burst
forth in a violent clap of thunder.

"Oh, oh!" said Fouquet, "I was quite right in what I said."

"Come," said Aramis, "let us rejoin the carriages."

"We shall not have time," said Fouquet, "for here comes the rain."

In fact, as he spoke, and as if the heavens were opened, a shower of
large drops of rain was suddenly heard falling on the trees about them.

"We shall have time," said Aramis, "to reach the carriages before the
foliage becomes saturated."

"It will be better," said Fouquet, "to take shelter somewhere--in a
grotto, for instance."

"Yes, but where are we to find a grotto?" inquired Aramis.

"I know one," said Fouquet, smiling, "not ten paces from here." Then
looking round about him, he added: "Yes, we are quite right."

"You are very fortunate to have so good a memory said Aramis," smiling in
his turn; "but are you not afraid that your coachman, finding we do not
return, will suppose we have taken another road back, and that he will
not follow the carriages belonging to the court?"

"Oh, there is no fear of that," said Fouquet; "whenever I place my
coachman and my carriage in any particular spot, nothing but an express
order from the king could stir them; and more than that, too, it seems
that we are not the only ones who have come so far, for I hear footsteps
and the sound of voices."

As he spoke, Fouquet, turning round, opened with his cane a mass of
foliage which hid the path from his view. Aramis' glance as well as his
own plunged at the same moment through the opening he had made.

"A woman," said Aramis.

"And a man," said Fouquet.

"It is La Valliere and the king," they both exclaimed together.

"Oh, oh!" said Aramis, "is his majesty aware of your cavern as well? I
should not be astonished if he were, for he seems to be on very good
terms with the nymphs of Fontainebleau."

"It matters little," said Fouquet; "let us get there; if he is not aware
of it we shall see what he will do; if he should know it, as it has two
entrances, while he enters by one, we can leave by the other."

"Is it far?" asked Aramis, "for the rain is beginning to penetrate."

"We are there now," said Fouquet, as he put aside a few branches, and an
excavation of the rock could be observed, which had been entirely
concealed by heaths, ivy, and a thick covert of small shrubs.

Fouquet led the way, followed by Aramis; but as the latter entered the
grotto, he turned round, saying: "Yes, they are now entering the wood;
and, see, they are bending their steps this way."

"Very well; let us make room for them," said Fouquet, smiling and
pulling Aramis by his cloak; "but I do not think the king knows of my
grotto."

"Yes," said Aramis, "they are looking about them, but it is only for a
thicker tree."

Aramis was not mistaken, the king's looks were directed upward, and not
around him. He held La Valliere's arm within his own, and held her hand
in his. La Valliere's feet began to slip on the damp grass. Louis again
looked round him with greater attention than before, and perceiving an
enormous oak with wide-spreading branches, he hurriedly drew La
Valliere beneath its protecting shelter. The poor girl looked round her
on all sides, and seemed half afraid, half desirous, of being followed.
The king made her lean her back against the trunk of the tree, whose
vast circumference, protected by the thickness of the foliage, was as
dry as if at that moment the rain had not been falling in torrents. He
himself remained standing before her with his head uncovered. After a
few minutes, however, some drops of rain penetrated through the branches
of the tree and fell on the king's forehead, who did not pay any
attention to it.

"Oh, sire!" murmured La Valliere, pushing the king's hat toward him. But
the king simply bowed, and determinedly refused to cover his head.

"Now or never is the time to offer your place," said Fouquet in Aramis'
ear.

"Now or never is the time to listen, and not lose a syllable of what
they may have to say to each other," replied Aramis in Fouquet's ear.

In fact, they both remained perfectly silent, and the king's voice
reached them where they were.

"Believe me," said the king, "I perceive, or rather I can imagine your
uneasiness; believe how sincerely I regret to have isolated you from the
rest of the company, and to have brought you, also, to a spot where you
will be inconvenienced by the rain. You are wet already, and perhaps are
cold, too?"

"No, sire."

"And yet you tremble?"

"I am afraid, sire, that my absence may be misinterpreted; at a moment,
too, when all the others are reunited."

"I would not hesitate to propose returning to the carriages,
Mademoiselle de la Valliere, but pray look and listen, and tell me if it
be possible to attempt to make the slightest progress at the present?"

In fact the thunder was still rolling, and the rain continued to fall in
torrents.

"Besides," continued the king, "no possible interpretation can be made
which would be to your discredit. Are you not with the king of France;
in other words, with the first gentleman of the kingdom?"

"Certainly, sire," replied La Valliere, "and it is a very distinguished
honor for me; it is not, therefore, for myself that I fear the
interpretations that may be made."

"For whom, then?"

"For yourself, sire."

"For me?" said the king, smiling; "I do not understand you."

"Has your majesty already forgotten what took place yesterday evening in
her highness's apartments?"

"Oh! forget that, I beg, or allow me to remember it for no other purpose
than to thank you once more for your letter, and--"

"Sire," interrupted La Valliere, "the rain is falling, and your
majesty's head is uncovered."

"I entreat you not to think of anything but yourself."

"Oh! I," said La Valliere, smiling, "I am a country girl, accustomed to
roaming through the meadows of the Loire and the gardens of Blois,
whatever the weather may be. And, as for my clothes," she added, looking
at her simple muslin dress, "your majesty sees they do not run much
risk."

"Indeed, I have already noticed, more than once, that you owed nearly
everything to yourself and nothing to your toilet. Your freedom from
coquetry is one of your greatest charms in my eyes."

"Sire, do not make me out better than I am, and say merely, 'You cannot
be a coquette.'"

"Why so?"

"Because," said La Valliere, smiling, "I am not rich."

"You admit, then," said the king, quickly, "that you have a love for
beautiful things?"

"Sire, I only regard those things as beautiful which are within my
reach. Everything which is too highly placed for me--"

"You are indifferent to?"

"Is foreign to me, as being prohibited."

"And I," said the king, "do not find that you are at my court on the
footing you should be. The services of your family have not been
sufficiently brought under my notice. The advancement of your family has
been cruelly neglected by my uncle."

"On the contrary, sire. His royal highness, the Duke of Orleans, had
always been exceedingly kind toward M. de Saint-Remy, my father-in-law.
The services rendered were humble, and, properly speaking, our services
have been adequately recognized. It is not every one who is happy enough
to find opportunities of serving his sovereign with distinction. I have
no doubt at all, that, if ever opportunities had been met with, my
family's actions would; but that happiness has never been ours."

"In that case, Mademoiselle de la Valliere, it belongs to kings to
repair the want of opportunity, and most delightedly do I undertake to
repair, in your instance, and with the least possible delay, the wrongs
of fortune toward you."

"Nay, sire," cried La Valliere, eagerly; "leave things, I beg, as they
now are."

"Is it possible! you refuse what I ought, and what I wish to do for
you?"

"All I desired has been granted me, when the honor was conferred upon me
of forming one of Madame's household."

"But if you refuse for yourself, at least accept for your family."

"Your generous intention, sire, bewilders and makes me apprehensive,
for, in doing for my family what your kindness urges you to do, your
majesty will raise up enemies for us, and enemies for yourself too.
Leave me in my mediocrity, sire; of all the feelings and sentiments I
experience, leave me to enjoy that pleasing delicacy of
disinterestedness."

"The sentiments you express," said the king, "are indeed admirable."

"Quite true," murmured Aramis in Fouquet's ear, "and he cannot be
accustomed to them."

"But," replied Fouquet, "suppose she were to make a similar reply to my
letter."

"True!" said Aramis, "let us not anticipate, but wait the conclusion."

"And then, dear Monsieur d'Herblay," added the surintendant, hardly able
to appreciate the sentiments which La Valliere had just expressed, "it
is very often a sound calculation to seem disinterested with monarchs."

"Exactly what I was thinking this very minute," said Aramis. "Let us
listen."

The king approached nearer to La Valliere, and as the rain dripped more
and more through the foliage of the oak, he held his hat over the head
of the young girl, who raised her beautiful blue eyes toward the royal
hat which sheltered her, and shook her head, sighing deeply as she did
so.

"What melancholy thought," said the king, "can possibly reach your heart
when I place mine as a rampart before it?"

"I will tell you, sire. I had already once before broached this
question, which is so difficult for a young girl of my age to discuss,
but your majesty imposed silence on me. Your majesty belongs not to
yourself alone, you are married; and every sentiment which would
separate your majesty from the queen, in leading your majesty to take
notice of me, will be a source of the profoundest sorrow for the queen."
The king endeavored to interrupt the young girl, but she continued with
a suppliant gesture. "The Queen Maria, with an attachment which can be
so well understood, follows with her eyes every step of your majesty
which separates you from her. Happy enough in having had her fate united
to your own, she weepingly implores Heaven to preserve you to her, and
is jealous of the faintest throb of your heart bestowed elsewhere." The
king again seemed anxious to speak, but again did La Valliere venture to
prevent him.--"Would it not, therefore, be a most blameable action," she
continued, "if your majesty, a witness of this anxious and disinterested
affection, gave the queen any cause for her jealousy? Forgive me, sire,
for the expression I have used. I well know it is impossible, or rather
that it would be impossible, that the greatest queen of the whole world
could be jealous of a poor girl like myself. But, though a queen, she is
still a woman, and her heart, like that of any of her sex, cannot close
itself against the suspicions which such as are evilly disposed
insinuate. For Heaven's sake, sire, think no more of me, I am unworthy
of your regard."

"Do you know that in speaking as you have done you change my esteem for
you into admiration?"

"Sire, you assume my words to be contrary to the truth; you suppose me
to be better than I really am, and attach a greater merit to me than God
ever intended should be the case. Spare me, sire; for, did I not know
that your majesty was the most generous man in your kingdom, I should
believe you were jesting."

"You do not, I know, fear such a thing; I am quite sure of that,"
exclaimed Louis.

"I shall be obliged to believe it, if your majesty continues to hold
such language toward me."

"I am most unhappy, then," said the king, in a tone of regret which was
not assumed: "I am the unhappiest prince in the whole Christian world,
since I am powerless to induce belief in my words in one whom I love the
best in the wide world, and who almost breaks my heart by refusing to
credit my regard for her."

"Oh, sire!" said La Valliere, gently putting the king aside, who had
approached nearer to her, "I think the storm has passed away now, and
the rain has ceased." At the very moment, however, as the poor girl,
fleeing, as it were, from her own heart, which doubtlessly throbbed too
much in unison with the king's, uttered these words, the storm undertook
to contradict her. A bluish flash of lightning illumined the forest with
a wild, weird-like glare, and a peal of thunder, like a discharge of
artillery, burst over their very heads, as if the height of the oak
which sheltered them had attracted the storm. The young girl could not
repress a cry of terror. The king with one hand drew her toward his
heart, and stretched the other above her head, as though to shield her
from the lightning. A moment's silence ensued, as the group, delightful
as everything young and loving is delightful, remained motionless, while
Fouquet and Aramis contemplated it in attitudes as motionless as La
Valliere and the king. "Oh, sire, sire!" murmured La Valliere, "do you
hear?" and her head fell upon his shoulder.

"Yes," said the king. "You see the storm has not passed away."

"It is a warning, sire." The king smiled. "Sire, it is the voice of
Heaven in anger."

"Be it so," said the king. "I agree to accept that peal of thunder as a
warning, and even as a menace, if, in five minutes from the present
moment, it is renewed with equal violence; but if not, permit me to
think that the storm is a storm simply, and nothing more." And the king,
at the same moment, raised his head, as if to interrogate the heavens.
But, as if the remark had been heard and accepted, during the five
minutes which elapsed after the burst of thunder which had alarmed them
no renewed repeal was heard; and when the thunder was again heard, it
was passing away in so audible a manner, as if, during those same five
minutes, the storm, put to flight, had traversed the heavens with the
speed of the wings of the wind. "Well, Louise," said the king, in a low
tone of voice, "will you still threaten me with the anger of Heaven?
and, since you wished to regard the storm as a presentiment, will you
still believe that presentiment to be one of misfortune?"

The young girl looked up, and saw that while they had been talking the
rain had penetrated the foliage above them, and was trickling down the
king's face. "Oh, sire, sire!" she exclaimed, in accents of eager
apprehension, which greatly agitated the king. "It is for me," she
murmured, "that the king remains thus uncovered, and exposed to the
rain. What am I, then?"

"You are, you perceive," said the king, "the divinity who dissipates the
storm, and brings back fine weather." In fact, a ray of sunlight
streamed through the forest, and caused the rain-drops which rested upon
the leaves, or fell vertically among the openings in the branches of the
trees, to glisten like diamonds.

"Sire," said La Valliere, almost overcome, but making a powerful effort
over herself, "think of the anxieties your majesty will have to submit
to on my account. At this very moment they are seeking you in every
direction. The queen must be full of uneasiness; and Madame--oh,
Madame!" the young girl exclaimed, with an expression which almost
resembled terror.

This name had a certain effect upon the king. He started, and disengaged
himself from La Valliere, whom he had, till that moment, held pressed
against his heart. He then advanced toward the path, in order to look
round, and returned, somewhat thoughtfully, to La Valliere. "Madame, did
you say?" he remarked.

"Yes, Madame; she, too, is jealous," said La Valliere, with a marked
tone of voice; and her eyes, so timorous in their expression, and so
modestly fugitive in their glance, for a moment ventured to look
inquiringly in the king's eyes.

"Still," returned Louis, making an effort over himself, "it seems to me
that Madame has no reason, no right to be jealous of me."

"Alas!" murmured La Valliere.

"Are you, too," said the king, almost in a tone of reproach, "are you
among those who think the sister has a right to be jealous of the
brother?"

"It is not for me, sire, to penetrate your majesty's secrets."

"You do believe it, then?" exclaimed the king.

"I do believe Madame is jealous, sire," La Valliere replied, firmly.

"Is it possible," said the king, with some anxiety, "that you have
perceived it, then, from her conduct toward you? Have her manners in any
way been such toward you that you can attribute them to the jealousy you
speak of?"

"Not at all, sire; I am of so little importance."

"Oh! if it were really the case--" exclaimed Louis, violently.

"Sire," interrupted the young girl, "it has ceased raining; some one is
coming, I think." And, forgetful of all etiquette, she had seized the
king by the arm.

"Well," replied the king, "let them come. Who is there who would venture
to think I had done wrong in remaining alone with Mademoiselle de la
Valliere?"

"For pity's sake, sire! they will think it strange to see you wet
through in this manner, and that you should have run such risk for me."

"I have simply done my duty as a gentleman," said Louis; "and woe to him
who may fail in his, in criticising his sovereign's conduct." In fact,
at this moment, a few eager and curious faces were seen in the walk, as
if engaged in a search, and who, observing the king and La Valliere,
seemed to have found what they were seeking. They were some of the
courtiers who had been sent by the queen and Madame, and who immediately
uncovered themselves, in token of having perceived his majesty. But
Louis, notwithstanding La Valliere's confusion, did not quit his
respectful and tender attitude. Then, when all the courtiers were
assembled in the walk--when every one had been able to perceive the mark
of deference with which he had treated the young girl, by remaining
standing and bareheaded during the storm--he offered her his arm, led
her toward the group who were waiting, recognized by an inclination of
the head the respectful salutations which were paid him on all sides;
and, still holding his hat in his hand, he conducted her to her
carriage. And, as the rain still continued to fall--a last adieu of the
disappearing storm--the other ladies, whom respect had prevented getting
into their carriages before the king, remained, and altogether
unprotected by hood and cloak, exposed to the rain from which the king,
with his hat over her, was protecting, as much as he was able, the
humblest among them. The queen and Madame must, like the others, have
witnessed this exaggerated courtesy of the king. Madame was so
disconcerted at it that she touched the queen with her elbow, saying at
the same time, "Look there, look there!"

The queen closed her eyes, as if she had been suddenly seized with a
fainting attack. She lifted her hand to her face and entered her
carriage, Madame following her. The king again mounted his horse, and
without showing a preference for any particular carriage-door, he
returned to Fontainebleau, the reins hanging over his horse's neck,
absorbed in thought. As soon as the crowd had disappeared, and the sound
of the horses and carriages grew fainter in the distance, and when they
were certain, in fact, that no one could see them, Aramis and Fouquet
came out of their grotto, and both of them in silence passed slowly on
toward the walk. Aramis looked most narrowly not only at the whole
extent of the open space stretching out before and behind him, but even
into the very depths of the wood.

"Monsieur Fouquet," he said, when he had quite satisfied himself that
they were alone, "we must get back, at any cost, the letter you wrote to
La Valliere."

"That will be easy enough," said Fouquet, "if my servant has not given
it to her."

"In any case, it must be done; do you understand?"

"Yes; the king is in love with this girl, you mean?"

"Exceedingly so; and what is worse is that, on her side, the girl is
passionately attached to the king."

"As much as to say that we must change our tactics, I suppose?"

"Not a doubt of it; you have no time to lose. You must see La Valliere,
and, without thinking any more of becoming her lover, which is out of
the question, must declare yourself her dearest friend and her most
humble servant."

"I will do so," replied Fouquet, "and without the slightest feeling of
disinclination, for she seems a good-hearted girl."

"Or a clever one," said Aramis; "but in that case the greater reason."
Then he added, after a moment's pause, "If I am not mistaken, that girl
will become the strongest passion of the king. Let us return to our
carriage, and, as fast as possible, to the chateau."




CHAPTER V.

TOBY.


Two hours after the surintendant's cortege had set off by Aramis'
directions, conveying them both toward Fontainebleau with the fleetness
of the clouds, which the last breath of the tempest was hurrying across
the face of the heavens, La Valliere was closeted in her own apartment,
with a simple muslin wrapper round her, having just finished a slight
repast, which was placed upon a small marble table. Suddenly the door
was opened, and a servant entered to announce M. Fouquet, who had called
to request permission to pay his respects to her. She made him repeat
the message twice over, for the poor girl only knew M. Fouquet by name,
and could not conceive what she could possibly have to do with a
surintendant of finances. However, as he might possibly come from the
king--and, after the conversation we have recorded, it was very
likely--she glanced at her mirror, drew out still more the long ringlets
of her hair, and desired him to be admitted. La Valliere could not,
however, refrain from a certain feeling of uneasiness. A visit from the
surintendant was not an ordinary event in the life of any woman attached
to the court. Fouquet, so notorious for his generosity, his gallantry,
and his sensitive delicacy of feeling with regard to women generally,
had received more invitations than he had requested audiences. In many
houses the presence of the surintendant had been significant of fortune;
in many hearts, of love. Fouquet entered the apartment with a manner
full of respect, presenting himself with that ease and gracefulness of
manner which was the distinctive characteristic of the men of eminence
of that period, and which at the present day seems no longer to be
understood, even in the portraits of the period in which the painter
has endeavored to recall them into being. La Valliere acknowledged the
ceremonious salutation which Fouquet addressed to her by a gentle
inclination of the head and motioned him to a seat. But Fouquet, with a
bow, said, "I will not sit down until you have pardoned me."

"I?" asked La Valliere; "pardoned what?"

Fouquet fixed a most piercing look upon the young girl, and fancied he
could perceive in her face nothing but the most unaffected surprise. "I
observe," he said, "that you have as much generosity as intelligence,
and I read in your eyes the forgiveness I solicit. A pardon pronounced
by your lips is insufficient for me, and I need the forgiveness of your
heart and mind."

"Upon my honor, monsieur," said La Valliere, "I assure you most
positively I do not understand your meaning."

"Again, that is a delicacy on your part which charms me," replied
Fouquet, "and I see you do not wish me to blush before you."

"Blush! blush before me? Why should you blush?"

"Can I have deceived myself?" said Fouquet; "and can I have been happy
enough not to have offended you by my conduct toward you?"

"Really, monsieur," said La Valliere, shrugging her shoulders, "you
speak in enigmas, and I suppose I am too ignorant to understand you."

"Be it so," said Fouquet, "I will not insist. Tell me only, I entreat
you, that I may rely upon your full and complete forgiveness."

"I have but one reply to make to you, monsieur," said La Valliere,
somewhat impatiently, "and I hope that will satisfy you. If I knew the
wrong you have done me, I would forgive you, and I would do so with
still greater reason since I am ignorant of the wrong you allude to."

Fouquet bit his lips, as Aramis would have done. "In that case," he
said, "I may hope that, notwithstanding what has happened, our good
understanding will remain undisturbed, and that you will kindly confer
the favor upon me of believing in my respectful friendship."

La Valliere fancied that she now began to understand, and said to
herself, "I should not have believed M. Fouquet so eager to seek the
source of a favor so very recent," and then added aloud, "Your
friendship, monsieur! you offer me your friendship! The honor, on the
contrary, is mine, and I feel overpowered by it."

"I am aware," replied Fouquet, "that the friendship of the master may
appear more brilliant and desirable than that of the servant, but I
assure you the latter will be quite as devoted, quite as faithful, and
altogether disinterested."

La Valliere bowed, for, in fact, the voice of the surintendant seemed to
convey both conviction and real devotion in its tone, and she held out
her hand to him, saying, "I believe you."

Fouquet eagerly look hold of the young girl's hand. "You see no
difficulty, therefore," he added, "in restoring me that unhappy letter?"

"What letter?" inquired La Valliere.

Fouquet interrogated her with his most searching gaze, as he had already
done before, but the same innocent expression, the same candid look, met
his. "I am obliged to confess," he said, after this denial, "that your
system is the most delicate in the world, and I should not feel I was a
man of honor and uprightness if I were to suspect anything from a woman
so generous as yourself."

"Really, Monsieur Fouquet," replied La Valliere, "it is with profound
regret I am obliged to repeat that I absolutely understand nothing of
what you refer to."

"In fact, then, upon your honor, mademoiselle, you have not received any
letter from me?"

"Upon my honor, none," replied La Valliere, firmly.

"Very well, that is quite sufficient; permit me, then, to renew the
assurance of my utmost esteem and respect," said Fouquet. Then, bowing,
he left the room to seek Aramis, who was waiting for him in his own
apartment, and leaving La Valliere to ask herself whether the
surintendant had not lost his senses.

"Well!" inquired Aramis, who was impatiently waiting Fouquet's return,
"are you satisfied with the favorite?"

"Enchanted," replied Fouquet; "she is a woman full of intelligence and
fine feeling."

"She did not get angry, then?"

"Far from that, she did not even seem to understand."

"To understand what?"

"To understand that I had written to her."

"She must, however, have understood you sufficiently to give the letter
back to you, for I presume she returned it."

"Not at all."

"At least, you satisfied yourself that she had burned it."

"My dear Monsieur d'Herblay, I have been playing at cross purposes for
more than an hour, and, however amusing it may be, I begin to have had
enough of this game. So understand me thoroughly: the girl pretended not
to understand what I was saying to her: she denied having received any
letter; therefore, having positively denied its receipt, she was unable
either to return or burn it."

"Oh! oh!" said Aramis, with uneasiness, "what is that you say?"

"I say that she swore most positively she had not received any letter."

"That is too much. And you not insist?"

"On the contrary, I did insist, almost impertinently so, even."

"And she persisted in her denial?"

"Unhesitatingly."

"And she did not contradict herself once?"

"Not once."

"But, in that case, then, you have left our letter in her hands?"

"How could I do otherwise?"

"Oh! it was a great mistake."

"What the deuce would you have done in my place?"

"One could not force her, certainly, but it is very embarrassing; such a
letter ought not remain in existence against us."

"Oh! the young girl's disposition is generosity itself; I looked at her
eyes, and I can read eyes well."

"You think she can be relied upon?"

"From my heart I do."

"Well, I think we are mistaken."

"In what way?"

"I think that, in point of fact, as she herself told you, she did not
receive the letter."

"What! do you suppose--?"

"I suppose that, from some motive, of which we know nothing, your man
did not deliver the letter to her."

Fouquet rang the bell. A servant appeared. "Send Toby here," he said. A
moment afterward a man made his appearance, with an anxious restless
look, shrewd expression of the mouth, with short arms, and his back
somewhat bent. Aramis fixed a penetrating look upon him.

"Will you allow me to interrogate him myself?" inquired Aramis.

"Do so," said Fouquet.

Aramis was about to say something to the lackey, when he paused.

"No," he said; "he would see that we attach too much importance to his
answer, question him yourself; I will pretend to write." Aramis
accordingly placed himself at a table, his back turned toward the old
attendant, whose every gesture and look he watched in a looking-glass
opposite to him.

"Come here, Toby," said Fouquet to the valet, who approached with a
tolerably firm step. "How did you execute my commission?" inquired
Fouquet.

"In the usual way, monseigneur," replied the man.

"But how, tell me?"

"I succeeded in penetrating as far as Mademoiselle de la Valliere's
apartment; but she was at mass, and so I placed the note on her
toilet-table. Is not that what you told me to do?"

"Precisely; and is that all?"

"Absolutely all, monseigneur."

"No one was there?"

"No one."

"Did you conceal yourself as I told you?"

"Yes."

"And she returned?"

"Ten minutes afterward."

"And no one could have taken the letter?"

"No one; for no one entered the room."

"From the outside, but from the interior?"

"From the place where I was secreted I could see to the very end of the
room."

"Now, listen to me," said Fouquet, looking fixedly at the lackey; "if
this letter did not reach its proper destination, confess it; for, if a
mistake has been made, your head shall be the forfeit."

Toby started, but immediately recovered himself. "Monseigneur," he said,
"I placed the letter on the very place I told you; and I ask only half
an hour to prove to you that the letter is in Mademoiselle de la
Valliere's hands, or to bring you back the letter itself."

Aramis looked at the valet scrutinizingly. Fouquet was ready in placing
confidence in people, and for twenty years this man had served him
faithfully. "Go," he said; "but bring me the proof you speak of." The
lackey quitted the room.

"Well, what do you think of it?" inquired Fouquet of Aramis.

"I think that you must, by some means or another, assure yourself of the
truth, either that the letter has or has not reached La Valliere; that,
in the first case, La Valliere must return it to you, or satisfy you by
burning it in your presence; that, in the second, you must have the
letter back again, even were it to cost you a million. Come, is not that
your opinion?"

"Yes; but still, my dear bishop, I believe you are exaggerating the
position of affairs."

"Blind, how blind you are!" murmured Aramis.

"La Valliere," returned Fouquet, "whom we assume to be a politician of
the greatest ability, is simply nothing more than a coquette, who hopes
that I shall pay my court to her, because I have already done so, and
who, now that she has received a confirmation of the king's regard,
hopes to keep me in leading strings with the letter. It is natural
enough!"

Aramis shook his head.

"Is not that your opinion?" said Fouquet.

"She is not a coquette," he replied.

"Allow me to tell you--"

"Oh! I am well enough acquainted with women who are coquettes," said
Aramis.

"My dear friend!"

"It is a long time ago since I finished my studies, you mean. But women
do not change."

"True; but men change, and you at the present day are far more
suspicious than you formerly were." And then, beginning to laugh, he
added, "Come, if La Valliere is willing to love me only to the extent of
a third and the king two-thirds, do you think the condition acceptable?"

Aramis rose impatiently. "La Valliere," he said, "has never loved, and
will never love any one but the king."

"At all events," said Fouquet, "what would you do?"

"Ask me rather what I would have done?"

"Well, what would you have done?"

"In the first place, I should not have allowed that man to go."

"Toby!"

"Yes; Toby is a traitor. Nay, I am sure of it, and I would not have let
him go until he had told me the truth."

"There is still time. I will recall him, and do you question him in your
turn."

"Agreed."

"But I assure you it is quite useless. He has been with me for the last
twenty years, and has never made the slightest mistake, and yet," added
Fouquet, laughing, "it has been easy enough."

"Still, call him back. This morning I fancy I saw that face in earnest
conversation with one of M. Colbert's men."

"Where was that?"

"Opposite the stables."

"Bah! all my people are at daggers drawn with that fellow."

"I saw him, I tell you, and his face, which I ought not to have
recognized when he entered just now, struck me in a disagreeable
manner."

"Why did you not say something, then, while he was here?"

"Because it is only at this very minute that my memory is clear upon the
subject."

"Really," said Fouquet, "you alarm me." And he again rang the bell.

"Provided that it is not already too late," said Aramis.

Fouquet once more rang impatiently. The valet usually in attendance
appeared. "Toby!" said Fouquet, "send Toby." The valet again shut the
door.

"You leave me at perfect liberty, I suppose?"

"Entirely so."

"I may employ all means, then, to ascertain the truth."

"All."

"Intimidation, even?"

"I constitute you public prosecutor in my place."

They waited ten minutes longer, but uselessly, and Fouquet, thoroughly
out of patience, again rang loudly. "Toby!" he exclaimed.

"Monseigneur," said the valet, "they are looking for him."

"He cannot be far distant, I have not given him any commission to
execute."

"I will go and see, monseigneur," replied the valet, as he closed the
door. Aramis, during this interval, walked impatiently but silently up
and down the cabinet. Again they waited another ten minutes. Fouquet
rang in a manner to awaken the very dead. The valet again presented
himself, trembling in a way to induce a belief that he was the bearer of
bad news.

"Monseigneur is mistaken," he said, before even Fouquet could
interrogate him; "you must have given Toby some commission, for he has
been to the stables and taken your lordship's swiftest horse, and
saddled it himself."

"Well?"

"And he has gone off."

"Gone!" exclaimed Fouquet. "Let him be pursued, let him be captured."

"Nay, nay," said Aramis, taking him by the hand, "be calm, the evil is
done now."

"The evil is done, you say?"

"No doubt; I was sure of it. And now, let us give no cause for
suspicion; we must calculate the result of the blow, and ward it off, if
possible."

"After all," said Fouquet, "the evil is not great."

"You think so," said Aramis.

"Of course. Surely a man is allowed to write a love-letter to a woman."

"A man, certainly; a subject, no; especially, too, when the woman in
question is one with whom the king is in love."

"But the king was not in love with La Valliere a week ago! he was not in
love with her yesterday, and the letter is dated yesterday; I could not
guess the king was in love, when the king's affection was not even yet
in existence."

"As you please," replied Aramis; "but unfortunately the letter is not
dated, and it is that circumstance particularly which annoys me. If it
had only been dated yesterday, I should not have the slightest shadow of
uneasiness on your account." Fouquet shrugged his shoulders.

"Am I not my own master," he said, "and is the king, then, king of my
brain and of my flesh?"

"You are right," replied Aramis; "do not let us give more importance to
matters than is necessary; and besides ... Well, if we are menaced, we
have means of defense."

"Oh! menaced!" said Fouquet; "you do not place this gnat bite, as it
were, among the number of menaces which may compromise my fortunes and
my life, do you?"

"Do not forget, Monsieur Fouquet, that the bite of an insect can kill a
giant, if the insect be venomous."

"But has this sovereign power you were speaking of already vanished?"

"I am all-powerful, it is true, but I am not immortal."

"Come, then, the most pressing matter is to find Toby again, I suppose.
Is not that your opinion?"

"Oh! as for that, you will not find him again," said Aramis, "and if he
were of any great value to you, you must give him up for lost."

"At all events he is somewhere or another in the world," said Fouquet.

"You're right, let me act," replied Aramis.




CHAPTER VI.

MADAME'S FOUR CHANCES.


Anne of Austria had begged the young queen to pay her a visit. For some
time past suffering most acutely, and losing both her youth and beauty
with that rapidity which signalizes the decline of women for whom life
has been a long contest, Anne of Austria had, in addition to her
physical sufferings, to experience the bitterness of being no longer
held in any esteem, except as a living remembrance of the past, amid the
youthful beauties, wits, and influences of her court. Her physician's
opinions, her mirror also, grieved her far less than the inexorable
warnings which the society of the courtiers afforded, who, like the rats
in a ship, abandon the hold in which the water is on the point of
penetrating, owing to the ravages of decay. Anne of Austria did not feel
satisfied with the time her eldest son devoted to her. The king, a good
son, more from affectation than from affection, had at first been in the
habit of passing an hour in the morning and one in the evening with his
mother; but, since he had himself undertaken the conduct of state
affairs, the duration of the morning and evening's visit had been
reduced to half; and then, by degrees, the morning visit had been
suppressed altogether. They met at mass; the evening visit was replaced
by a meeting, either at the king's assembly, or at Madame's, which the
queen attended obligingly enough, out of regard to her two sons. The
result was that Madame had acquired an immense influence over the court,
which made her apartments the true royal place of meeting. This, Anne of
Austria had perceived; feeling herself to be suffering, and condemned by
her sufferings to frequent retirement, she was distressed at the idea
that the greater part of her future days and evenings would pass away
solitary, useless, and in despondency. She recalled with terror the
isolation in which Cardinal Richelieu had formerly left her, those
dreaded and insupportable evenings during which, however, she had her
youth and beauty, which are always accompanied by hope, to console her.
She next formed the project of transporting the court to her own
apartments, and of attracting Madame, with her brilliant escort, to her
gloomy and already sorrowful abode, where the widow of a king of France,
and the mother of a king of France, was reduced to console, in her
anticipated widowhood, the always weeping wife of a king of France.

Anne began to reflect. She had intrigued a good deal in her life. In the
good times past, when her youthful mind nursed projects which were
invariably successful, she then had by her side to stimulate her
ambition and her love, a friend of her own sex, more eager, more
ambitious, than herself--a friend who had loved her, a rare circumstance
at court, and whom some petty considerations had removed from her
forever. But for many years past--except Madame de Motteville, and
except La Molena, her Spanish nurse, a confidante in her character of
countrywoman and woman too--who could boast of having given good advice
to the queen? Who, too, among all the youthful heads there, could recall
the past for her--that past in which alone she lived? Anne of Austria
remembered Madame de Chevreuse, in the first place exiled rather by her
wish than the king's, and then dying in exile, the wife of a gentleman
of obscure birth and position. She asked herself what Madame de
Chevreuse would formerly have advised her in a similar circumstance, in
their mutual difficulties arising from their intrigues; and, after
serious reflection, it seemed as if the clever, subtle mind of her
friend, full of experience and sound judgment, answered her in her
ironical tone of voice: "All these insignificant young people are poor
and greedy of gain. They require gold and incomes to keep alive their
means of amusement; it is by interest you must gain them over." And Anne
of Austria adopted this plan. Her purse was well filled, and she had at
her disposal a considerable sum of money, which had been amassed by
Mazarin for her, and lodged in a place of safety. She possessed the most
magnificent jewels in France, and especially pearls of a size so large,
that they made the king sigh every time he saw them, because the pearls
of his crown were like millet-seed compared to them. Anne of Austria had
neither beauty nor charms any longer at her disposal. She gave out,
therefore, that her wealth was great, and as an inducement for others to
visit her apartments, she let it be known that there were good gold
crowns to be won at play, or that handsome presents were likely to be
made on days when all went well with her: or windfalls, in the shape of
annuities which she had wrung from the king by entreaty, and which she
determined to do to maintain her credit. And, in the first place, she
tried these means upon Madame, because, to gain her consent was of more
importance than anything else. Madame, notwithstanding the bold
confidence with which her wit and beauty inspired her, blindly ran head
foremost into the net which had been stretched out to catch her.
Enriched by degrees by these presents and transfers of property, she
took a fancy to these inheritances by anticipation. Anne of Austria
adopted the same means toward Monsieur, and even toward the king
himself. She instituted lotteries in her apartments. The day on which
the present chapter opens, invitations had been issued for a late supper
in the queen-mother's apartments, as she intended that two beautiful
diamond bracelets of exquisite workmanship should be put into lottery.
The medallions were antique cameos of the greatest value; the diamonds,
in point of intrinsic value, did not represent a very considerable
amount, but the originality and rarity of the workmanship were such,
that every one at court not only wished to possess the bracelets, but
even to see the queen herself wear them; for, on the days she wore
them, it was considered as a favor to be admitted to admire them in
kissing her hands. The courtiers had, even with regard to this subject,
adopted various expressions of gallantry to establish the aphorism, that
the bracelets would have been priceless in value if they had not been
unfortunate enough to be placed in contact with arms as beautiful as the
queen's. This compliment had been honored by a translation into all the
languages of Europe, and numerous were the verses in Latin and French
which had been circulated on the subject. The day that Anne of Austria
had selected for the lottery was a decisive moment; the king had not
been near his mother for a couple of days; Madame, after the great scene
of the Dryads and Naiads, was sulking by herself. The king's fit of
sulkiness was over, but his mind was absorbingly occupied by a
circumstance which raised him above the stormy disputes and the giddy
pleasures of the court.

Anne of Austria effected a diversion by the announcement of the famous
lottery to take place in her apartments on the following evening. With
this object in view, she saw the young queen, whom, as we have already
seen, she had invited to pay her a visit in the morning. "I have good
news to tell you," she said to her, "the king has been saying the most
tender things about you. He is young, you know, and easily drawn away;
but so long as you keep near me, he will not venture to keep away from
you, to whom, besides, he is most warmly and affectionately attached. I
intend to have a lottery this evening, and shall expect to see you."

"I have heard," said the young queen, with a sort of timid reproach,
"that your majesty intends to put in lottery those beautiful bracelets
whose rarity is so great that we ought not to allow them to pass out of
the custody of the crown, even were there no other reason than that they
had once belonged to you."

"My daughter," said Anne of Austria, who read the young queen's
thoughts, and wished to console her for not having received the
bracelets as a present, "it is positively necessary that I should induce
Madame to pass her time always in my apartments."

"Madame!" said the young-queen, blushing.

"Of course; would you not prefer to have a rival near you, whom you
could watch and rule over, than to know that the king is with her,
always as ready to flirt with, as to be flirted with by her. The lottery
I have proposed is my means of attraction for that purpose: do you blame
me?"

"Oh, no!" returned Maria-Theresa, clapping her hands with a childlike
expression of delight.

"And you no longer regret, then, that I did not give you these
bracelets, as I had at first intended to do?"

"Oh, no, no!"

"Very well; make yourself look as beautiful as possible, that our supper
may be very brilliant; the gayer you seem, the more charming you appear,
and you will eclipse all the ladies present as much by your brilliancy
as by your rank."

Maria-Theresa left full of delight. An hour afterward, Anne of Austria
received a visit from Madame, whom she covered with caresses, saying,
"Excellent news! the king is charmed with my lottery."

"But I," replied Madame, "am not quite so charmed; to see such beautiful
bracelets on any one's arms but yours or mine, is what I cannot
reconcile myself to do."

"Well, well," said Anne of Austria, concealing by a smile a violent pang
which she had just experienced, "do not alarm yourself, young lady, and
do not look at things in the worst light immediately."

"Ah, madame, fortune is blind, and I am told there are two hundred
tickets."

"Quite as many as that; but you cannot surely forget that there can only
be one winner."

"No doubt. But who will that be? can you tell?" said Madame, in despair.

"You remind me that I had a dream last night; my dreams are always
good--I sleep so little."

"What was your dream?--But are you suffering?"

"No," said the queen, stifling with wonderful command the torture of a
renewed attack of shooting pains in her bosom; "I dreamed that the king
won the bracelets."

"The king?"

"You are going to ask me, I think, what the king could possibly do with
the bracelets?"

"Yes."

"And you would not add, perhaps, that it would be very fortunate if the
king were really to win, for he would be obliged to give the bracelets
to some one else."

"To restore them to you, for instance."

"In which case I should immediately give them away; for you do not
think, I suppose," said the queen, laughing, "that I have put these
bracelets up to a lottery from necessity. My object was to give them
without arousing any one's jealousy; but if fortune will not get me out
of my difficulty--well, I will teach fortune a lesson--and I know very
well to whom I intend to offer the bracelets." These words were
accompanied by so expressive a smile, that Madame could not resist
paying her by a grateful kiss.

"But," added Anne of Austria, "do you not know as well as I do, that if
the king were to win the bracelets he would not restore them to me?"

"You mean he would give them to the queen?"

"No; and for the very same reason that he would not give them back again
to me; since, if I had wished to make the queen a present of them, I had
no need of him for that purpose."

Madame cast a side-glance upon the bracelets, which, in their casket,
were dazzlingly exposed to view upon a table close beside her.

"How beautiful they are," she said, sighing. "But stay," Madame
continued, "we are quite forgetting that your majesty's dream is nothing
but a dream."

"I should be very much surprised," returned Anne of Austria, "if my
dream were to deceive me; that has happened to me very seldom."

"We may look upon you as a prophetess, then."

"I have already said, that I dream but very rarely; but the coincidence
of my dream about this matter, with my own ideas, is extraordinary! it
agrees so wonderfully with my own views and arrangements."

"What arrangements do you allude to?"

"That you will win the bracelets, for instance."

"In that case, it will not be the king."

"Oh!" said Anne of Austria, "there is not such a very great distance
between his majesty's heart and your own; for, are not you his sister,
for whom he has a great regard? There is not, I repeat, so very wide a
distance, that my dream can be pronounced false on that account. Come,
let us reckon up the chances in its favor."

"I will count them."

"In the first place, we will begin with the dream. If the king wins, he
is sure to give you the bracelets."

"I admit that is one."

"If you win them, they are yours."

"Naturally! that may be admitted also."

"Lastly;--if Monsieur were to win them!"

"Oh!" said Madame, laughing heartily, "he would give them to the
Chevalier de Lorraine."

Anne of Austria laughed as heartily as her daughter-in-law; so much so,
indeed, that her sufferings again returned, and made her turn suddenly
pale in the very midst of her enjoyment.

"What is the matter?" inquired Madame, almost terrified.

"Nothing, nothing; a pain in my side. I have been laughing too much. We
were at the fourth chance, I think."

"I cannot see a fourth."

"I beg your pardon; I am not excluded from the chance of winning, and if
I be the winner, you are sure of me."

"Oh! thank you, thank you!" exclaimed Madame.

"I hope you look upon yourself as one whose chances are good, and that
my dream now begins to assume the solid form of reality."

"Yes, indeed; you give me both hope and confidence," said Madame, "and
the bracelets won in this manner, will be a hundred times more precious
to me."

"Well! then, good-by, until this evening." And the two princesses
separated. Anne of Austria, after her daughter-in-law had left her, said
to herself, as she examined the bracelets, "They are, indeed, precious;
since, by their means, this evening, I shall have won over a heart to my
side, and, at the same time, shall have guessed a secret."

Then, turning toward the deserted recess in her room, she said,
addressing vacancy--"Is it not thus that you would have acted, my poor
Chevreuse? Yes, yes; I know it is."

And, like a perfume of days gone by, her youth, her imagination, and her
happiness, seemed to return to her with the echo of this invocation.




CHAPTER VII.

THE LOTTERY.


At eight o'clock in the evening, every one had assembled in the
queen-mother's apartments. Anne of Austria, in full dress, beautiful
still, from former loveliness, and from all the resources which coquetry
can command at the hands of clever assistants, concealed, or rather
pretended to conceal, from the crowd of young courtiers who surrounded
her, and who still admired her, thanks to the combination of
circumstances which we have indicated in the preceding chapter, the
ravages, which were already visible, of the acute suffering to which she
finally yielded a few years later. Madame, almost as great a coquette as
Anne of Austria, and the queen, simple and natural as usual, were seated
beside her, each contending for her good graces. The ladies of honor,
united in a body, in order to resist with greater effect, and
consequently with more success, the witty and lively conversations which
the young men held about them, were enabled like a battalion formed in
square, to offer each other the means of attack and defense which were
thus at their command. Montalais, learned in that species of warfare
which consists of a skirmishing character, protected the whole line by
the sort of rolling-fire which she directed against the enemy.
Saint-Aignan, in utter despair at the rigor, which became insulting
almost, from the very fact of her persisting in it, which Mademoiselle
de Tonnay-Charente displayed, tried to turn his back upon her; but,
overcome by the irresistible brilliancy of her large eyes, he, every
moment, returned to consecrate his defeat by new submissions, to which
Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente did not fail to reply by fresh acts of
impertinence. Saint Aignan did not know which way to turn. La Valliere
had about her, not exactly a court, but sprinklings of courtiers.
Saint-Aignan, hoping by this maneuver to attract Athenais's attention
toward him, had approached the young girl, and saluted her with a
respect which induced some to believe that he wished to balance Athenais
by Louise. But these were persons who had neither been witnesses of the
scene during the shower, nor had heard it spoken of. But, as the
majority was already informed, and well informed, too, on the matter,
the acknowledged favor with which she was regarded, had attracted to her
side some of the most astute, as well as the least sensible, members of
the court. The former, because they said with Montainge, "What can we
tell?" and the latter, who said with Rabelais, "It is likely." The
greatest number had followed in the wake of the latter, just as in
hunting five or six of the best hounds alone follow the scent of the
animal hunted, while the remainder of the pack follow only the scent of
the hounds. The two queens and Madame examined with particular attention
the toilets of their ladies and maids of honor; and they condescended
to forget they were queens in recollecting that they were women. In
other words, they pitilessly tore in pieces every person there who wore
a petticoat. The looks of both princesses simultaneously fell upon La
Valliere, who, as we have just said, was completely surrounded at that
moment. Madame knew not what pity was, and said to the queen-mother, as
she turned toward her, "If fortune were just, she would favor that poor
La Valliere."

"That is not possible," said the queen-mother, smiling.

"Why not?"

"There are only two hundred tickets, so that it was not possible to
inscribe every one's name on the list."

"And hers is not there, then?"

"No!"

"What a pity! she might have won them, and then sold them."

"Sold them!" exclaimed the queen.

"Yes; it would have been a dowry for her, and she would not have been
obliged to marry without her trousseau, as will probably be the case."

"Really," answered the queen-mother, "poor little thing, has she no
dresses, then?"

And she pronounced these words like a woman who has never been able to
understand the inconveniences of a slenderly filled purse.

"Stay, look at her. Heaven forgive me, if she is not wearing the very
same petticoat this evening that she had on this morning during the
promenade, and which she managed to keep clean, thanks to the care the
king took of her, in sheltering her from the rain."

At the very moment Madame uttered these words the king entered the room.
The two queens would not perhaps have observed his arrival, so
completely were they occupied in their ill-natured remarks, had not
Madame noticed that, all at once, La Valliere, who was standing up
facing the gallery, exhibited certain signs of confusion, and then said
a few words to the courtiers who surrounded her, who immediately
dispersed. This movement induced Madame to look toward the door, and at
that moment the captain of the guards announced the king. At this
moment, La Valliere, who had hitherto kept her eyes fixed upon the
gallery, suddenly cast them down as the king entered. His majesty was
dressed magnificently and in the most perfect taste; he was conversing
with Monsieur and the Duc de Roquelaure, Monsieur on his right and the
Duc de Roquelaure on his left. The king advanced, in the first place,
toward the queens, to whom he bowed with an air full of graceful
respect. He took his mother's hand and kissed it, addressed a few
compliments to Madame upon the beauty of her toilet, and then began to
make the round of the assembly. La Valliere was saluted in the same
manner as the others, but with neither more nor less attention. His
majesty then returned to his mother and his wife. When the courtiers
noticed that the king had only addressed some ordinary remark to the
young girl who had been so particularly noticed in the morning, they
immediately drew their own conclusion to account for this coldness of
manner; this conclusion being, that although the king may have taken a
sudden fancy to her, that fancy had already disappeared. One thing,
however, must be remarked, that close beside La Valliere, among the
number of the courtiers, M. Fouquet was to be seen; and his respectfully
attentive manner served to sustain the young girl in the midst of the
varied emotions which visibly agitated her.

M. Fouquet was just on the point, moreover, of speaking in a more
friendly manner with Mademoiselle de la Valliere, when M. de Colbert
approached, and after having bowed to Fouquet with a formality which the
rules of the most respectful politeness could require, he seemed to take
up a post beside La Valliere, for the purpose of entering into
conversation with her. Fouquet immediately quitted his place. These
proceedings were eagerly devoured by the eyes of Montalais and
Malicorne, who mutually exchanged their several observations on the
subject. De Guiche, standing within the embrasure of one of the
windows, saw no one but Madame. But as Madame, on her side, frequently
glanced at La Valliere, De Guiche's eyes following Madame's, were from
time to time cast upon the young girl. La Valliere instinctively felt
herself sinking beneath the weight of all the different looks, inspired,
some by interest, others by envy. She had nothing to compensate her for
her sufferings, not a kind word from her companions, nor a look of
affection from the king. No one could possibly express the misery the
poor girl was suffering. The queen-mother next directed the small table
to be brought forward, on which the lottery-tickets were placed, two
hundred in number, and begged Madame de Motteville to read the list of
the names. It was a matter of course that this list had been drawn out
in strict accordance with the laws of etiquette; the king's name was
first on the list, next the queen-mother, then the queen, Monsieur,
Madame, and so on. All hearts throbbed anxiously as the list was read
out; more than three hundred persons had been invited, and each of them
was anxious to learn whether his or her name was likely to be found
among the number of privileged names. The king listened with as much
attention as the others, and when the last name had been pronounced, he
noticed that La Valliere had been omitted from the list. Every one, of
course, could remark this omission. The king flushed as if he had been
much annoyed; but La Valliere, gentle and resigned, as usual, exhibited
nothing of the sort. While the list was being read, the king had not
taken his eyes off the young girl, who seemed to expand, as it were,
beneath the happy influence she felt was shed around her, and who was
delighted and too pure in spirit for any other thought than that of love
to find an entrance either in her mind or her heart. Acknowledging this
touching self-denial by the fixedness of his attention, the king showed
La Valliere how much he appreciated its delicacy. When the list was
finished, the different faces of those who had been omitted or forgotten
fully expressed their disappointment. Malicorne also was forgotten
among the number of men; and the grimace he made plainly said to
Montalais, who was also forgotten, "Cannot we contrive to arrange
matters with fortune in such a manner that she shall not forget us?" to
which a smile full of intelligence from Mademoiselle Aure, replied,
"Certainly we can."

The tickets were distributed to each person according to the number
held. The king received his first, next the queen-mother, then Monsieur,
then the queen and Madame, and so on. After this, Anne of Austria opened
a small Spanish leather bag, containing two hundred numbers engraved
upon small balls of mother-of-pearl, and presented the open sack to the
youngest of her maids of honor, for the purpose of taking one of the
balls out of it. The eager expectation, amid all these tediously slow
preparations, was rather that of avidity than of curiosity. Saint-Aignan
bent toward Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente to whisper to her, "Since we
have each a number, let us unite our two chances. The bracelet shall be
yours if I win, and if you are successful, deign to give me but one look
of your beautiful eyes."

"No," said Athenais, "if you win the bracelet, keep it; every one for
himself."

"You are without any pity," said Saint-Aignan, "and I will punish you
by a quatrain:--

  "'Beautiful Iris, to my vow
  You are too opposed--'"

"Silence," said Athenais, "you will prevent me hearing the winning
number."

"Number one," said the young girl who had drawn the mother-of-pearl from
the Spanish leather bag.

"The king!" exclaimed the queen-mother.

"The king has won!" repeated the queen, delightedly.

"Oh! the king! your dream!" said Madame, joyously, in the ear of Anne of
Austria.

The king was the only one who did not exhibit any satisfaction. He
merely thanked Fortune for what she had done for him, in addressing a
slight salutation to the young girl who had been chosen as her proxy.
Then, receiving from the hands of Anne of Austria, amid the eager desire
of the whole assembly, the casket inclosing the bracelets, he said, "Are
these bracelets really beautiful, then?"

"Look at them," said Anne of Austria, "and judge for yourself."

The king looked at them, and said, "Yes, indeed, an admirable medallion.
What perfect finish!"

"What perfect finish!" repeated Madame.

Queen Maria-Theresa easily saw, and that, too, at the very first glance,
that the king would not offer the bracelets to her; but, as he did not
seem either the least degree in the world disposed to offer them to
Madame, she felt almost satisfied, or nearly so. The king sat down. The
most intimate among the courtiers approached, one by one, for the
purpose of admiring more closely the beautiful piece of workmanship,
which soon, with the king's permission, was handed about from person to
person. Immediately, every one, connoisseurs or not, uttered various
exclamations of surprise, and overwhelmed the king with congratulations.
There was, in fact, something for everybody to admire--the brilliants
for some, and the cutting for others. The ladies present visibly
displayed their impatience to see such a treasure monopolized by the
gentlemen.

"Gentlemen, gentlemen," said the king, whom nothing escaped, "one would
almost think that you wore bracelets as the Sabines used to do; hand
them for a little while for the inspection of the ladies, who seem to me
to have, and with far greater right, some excuse for understanding such
matters better than you."

These words appeared to Madame the commencement of a decision she
expected. She gathered, besides, this happy belief from the glances of
the queen-mother. The courtier who held them at the moment the king made
this remark, amid the general agitation, hastened to place the bracelets
in the hands of the queen, Maria-Theresa, who, knowing too well, poor
woman, that they were not designed for her, hardly looked at them, and
almost immediately passed them on to Madame. The latter, and--even more
minutely than herself--Monsieur, gave the bracelets a long look of
anxious and almost covetous desire. She then handed the jewels to those
ladies who were near her, pronouncing this single word, but with an
accent which was worth a long phrase, "Magnificent!"

The ladies who had received the bracelets from Madame's hands looked at
them as long as they chose to examine them, and then made them circulate
by passing them on toward the right. During this time the king was
tranquilly conversing with De Guiche and Fouquet, rather letting them
talk than himself listening. Accustomed to the set form of ordinary
phrases, his ear, like that of all men who exercise an incontestable
superiority over others, merely selected from the conversations held in
various directions the indispensable word which requires reply. His
attention, however, was now elsewhere, for it wandered as his eyes did.

Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente was the last of the ladies inscribed for
tickets; and, as if she had ranked according to her name upon the list,
she only had Montalais and La Valliere after her. When the bracelets
reached these two latter, no one appeared to take any further notice of
them. The humble hands which for a moment touched these jewels, deprived
them of all their importance--a circumstance which did not, however,
prevent Montalais from starting with joy, envy, and covetous desire, at
the sight of the beautiful stones still more than at their magnificent
workmanship. It is evident that if she were compelled to decide between
the pecuniary value and the artistic beauty, Montalais would
unhesitatingly have preferred diamonds to cameos, and her
disinclination, therefore, to pass them to her companion, La Valliere,
was very great. La Valliere fixed a look almost of indifference upon the
