wrong. But here comes a cavalier who is indeed in haste. Perchance it
would be well that we should ask him whither he rides, for it may be
that he is one who desires to advance himself in chivalry."

The bleak, hard, wind-swept road dipped down in front of them into a
little valley, and then, writhing up the heathy slope upon the other
side, lost itself among the gaunt pine-trees. Far away between the black
lines of trunks the quick glitter of steel marked where the Company
pursued its way. To the north stretched the tree country, but to the
south, between two swelling downs, a glimpse might be caught of the cold
gray shimmer of the sea, with the white fleck of a galley sail upon the
distant sky-line. Just in front of the travellers a horseman was urging
his steed up the slope, driving it on with whip and spur as one who
rides for a set purpose. As he clattered up, Alleyne could see that the
roan horse was gray with dust and flecked with foam, as though it had
left many a mile behind it. The rider was a stern-faced man, hard of
mouth and dry of eye, with a heavy sword clanking at his side, and a
stiff white bundle swathed in linen balanced across the pommel of his
saddle.

"The king's messenger," he bawled as he came up to them. "The messenger
of the king. Clear the causeway for the king's own man."

"Not so loudly, friend," quoth the little knight, reining his horse half
round to bar the path. "I have myself been the king's man for thirty
years or more, but I have not been wont to halloo about it on a peaceful
highway."

"I ride in his service," cried the other, "and I carry that which
belongs to him. You bar my path at your peril."

"Yet I have known the king's enemies claim to ride in his same," said
Sir Nigel. "The foul fiend may lurk beneath a garment of light. We must
have some sign or warrant of your mission."

"Then must I hew a passage," cried the stranger, with his shoulder
braced round and his hand upon his hilt. "I am not to be stopped on the
king's service by every gadabout."

"Should you be a gentleman of quarterings and coat-armor," lisped Sir
Nigel, "I shall be very blithe to go further into the matter with you.
If not, I have three very worthy squires, any one of whom would take the
thing upon himself, and debate it with you in a very honorable way."

The man scowled from one to the other, and his hand stole away from his
sword.

"You ask me for a sign," he said. "Here is a sign for you, since you
must have one." As he spoke he whirled the covering from the object
in front of him and showed to their horror that it was a newly-severed
human leg. "By God's tooth!" he continued, with a brutal laugh, "you ask
me if I am a man of quarterings, and it is even so, for I am officer
to the verderer's court at Lyndhurst. This thievish leg is to hang at
Milton, and the other is already at Brockenhurst, as a sign to all men
of what comes of being over-fond of venison pasty."

"Faugh!" cried Sir Nigel. "Pass on the other side of the road, fellow,
and let us have the wind of you. We shall trot our horses, my friends,
across this pleasant valley, for, by Our Lady! a breath of God's fresh
air is right welcome after such a sight."

"We hoped to snare a falcon," said he presently, "but we netted a
carrion-crow. Ma foi! but there are men whose hearts are tougher than a
boar's hide. For me, I have played the old game of war since ever I had
hair on my chin, and I have seen ten thousand brave men in one day with
their faces to the sky, but I swear by Him who made me that I cannot
abide the work of the butcher."

"And yet, my fair lord," said Edricson, "there has, from what I hear,
been much of such devil's work in France."

"Too much, too much," he answered. "But I have ever observed that the
foremost in the field are they who would scorn to mishandle a prisoner.
By St. Paul! it is not they who carry the breach who are wont to sack
the town, but the laggard knaves who come crowding in when a way has
been cleared for them. But what is this among the trees?"

"It is a shrine of Our Lady," said Terlake, "and a blind beggar who
lives by the alms of those who worship there."

"A shrine!" cried the knight. "Then let us put up an orison." Pulling
off his cap, and clasping his hands, he chanted in a shrill voice:
"Benedictus dominus Deus meus, qui docet manus meas ad proelium,
et digitos meos ad bellum." A strange figure he seemed to his three
squires, perched on his huge horse, with his eyes upturned and the
wintry sun shimmering upon his bald head. "It is a noble prayer," he
remarked, putting on his hat again, "and it was taught to me by the
noble Chandos himself. But how fares it with you, father? Methinks that
I should have ruth upon you, seeing that I am myself like one who looks
through a horn window while his neighbors have the clear crystal. Yet,
by St. Paul! there is a long stride between the man who hath a horn
casement and him who is walled in on every hand."

"Alas! fair sir," cried the blind old man, "I have not seen the blessed
blue of heaven this two-score years, since a levin flash burned the
sight out of my head."

"You have been blind to much that is goodly and fair," quoth Sir Nigel,
"but you have also been spared much that is sorry and foul. This very
hour our eyes have been shocked with that which would have left you
unmoved. But, by St. Paul! we must on, or our Company will think that
they have lost their captain somewhat early in the venture. Throw the
man my purse, Edricson, and let us go."

Alleyne, lingering behind, bethought him of the Lady Loring's counsel,
and reduced the noble gift which the knight had so freely bestowed to a
single penny, which the beggar with many mumbled blessings thrust away
into his wallet. Then, spurring his steed, the young squire rode at the
top of his speed after his companions, and overtook them just at the
spot where the trees fringe off into the moor and the straggling hamlet
of Hordle lies scattered on either side of the winding and deeply-rutted
track. The Company was already well-nigh through the village; but, as
the knight and his squires closed up upon them, they heard the clamor of
a strident voice, followed by a roar of deep-chested laughter from
the ranks of the archers. Another minute brought them up with the
rear-guard, where every man marched with his beard on his shoulder and a
face which was agrin with merriment. By the side of the column walked
a huge red-headed bowman, with his hands thrown out in argument and
expostulation, while close at his heels followed a little wrinkled
woman who poured forth a shrill volley of abuse, varied by an occasional
thwack from her stick, given with all the force of her body, though she
might have been beating one of the forest trees for all the effect that
she seemed likely to produce.

"I trust, Aylward," said Sir Nigel gravely, as he rode up, "that this
doth not mean that any violence hath been offered to women. If such a
thing happened, I tell you that the man shall hang, though he were the
best archer that ever wore brassart."

"Nay, my fair lord," Aylward answered with a grin, "it is violence which
is offered to a man. He comes from Hordle, and this is his mother who
hath come forth to welcome him."

"You rammucky lurden," she was howling, with a blow between each catch
of her breath, "you shammocking, yaping, over-long good-for-nought. I
will teach thee! I will baste thee! Aye, by my faith!"

"Whist, mother," said John, looking back at her from the tail of his
eye, "I go to France as an archer to give blows and to take them."

"To France, quotha?" cried the old dame. "Bide here with me, and I shall
warrant you more blows than you are like to get in France. If blows be
what you seek, you need not go further than Hordle."

"By my hilt! the good dame speaks truth," said Aylward. "It seems to be
the very home of them."

"What have you to say, you clean-shaved galley-beggar?" cried the fiery
dame, turning upon the archer. "Can I not speak with my own son but you
must let your tongue clack? A soldier, quotha, and never a hair on
his face. I have seen a better soldier with pap for food and swaddling
clothes for harness."

"Stand to it, Aylward," cried the archers, amid a fresh burst of
laughter.

"Do not thwart her, comrade," said big John. "She hath a proper spirit
for her years and cannot abide to be thwarted. It is kindly and homely
to me to hear her voice and to feel that she is behind me. But I must
leave you now, mother, for the way is over-rough for your feet; but I
will bring you back a silken gown, if there be one in France or Spain,
and I will bring Jinny a silver penny; so good-bye to you, and God have
you in His keeping!" Whipping up the little woman, he lifted her lightly
to his lips, and then, taking his place in the ranks again, marched on
with the laughing Company.

"That was ever his way," she cried, appealing to Sir Nigel, who reined
up his horse and listened with the greatest courtesy. "He would jog on
his own road for all that I could do to change him. First he must be a
monk forsooth, and all because a wench was wise enough to turn her back
on him. Then he joins a rascally crew and must needs trapse off to the
wars, and me with no one to bait the fire if I be out, or tend the cow
if I be home. Yet I have been a good mother to him. Three hazel switches
a day have I broke across his shoulders, and he takes no more notice
than you have seen him to-day."

"Doubt not that he will come back to you both safe and prosperous, my
fair dame," quoth Sir Nigel. "Meanwhile it grieves me that as I have
already given my purse to a beggar up the road I----"

"Nay, my lord," said Alleyne, "I still have some moneys remaining."

"Then I pray you to give them to this very worthy woman." He cantered
on as he spoke, while Alleyne, having dispensed two more pence, left
the old dame standing by the furthest cottage of Hordle, with her shrill
voice raised in blessings instead of revilings.

There were two cross-roads before they reached the Lymington Ford, and
at each of then Sir Nigel pulled up his horse, and waited with many a
curvet and gambade, craning his neck this way and that to see if fortune
would send him a venture. Crossroads had, as he explained, been rare
places for knightly spear-runnings, and in his youth it was no uncommon
thing for a cavalier to abide for weeks at such a point, holding gentle
debate with all comers, to his own advancement and the great honor of
his lady. The times were changed, however, and the forest tracks wound
away from them deserted and silent, with no trample of war-horse or
clang of armor which might herald the approach of an adversary--so that
Sir Nigel rode on his way disconsolate. At the Lymington River they
splashed through the ford, and lay in the meadows on the further side to
eat the bread and salt meat which they carried upon the sumpter horses.
Then, ere the sun was on the slope of the heavens, they had deftly
trussed up again, and were swinging merrily upon their way, two hundred
feet moving like two.

There is a third cross-road where the track from Boldre runs down to the
old fishing village of Pitt's Deep. Down this, as they came abreast of
it, there walked two men, the one a pace or two behind the other. The
cavaliers could not but pull up their horses to look at them, for a
stranger pair were never seen journeying together. The first was a
misshapen, squalid man with cruel, cunning eyes and a shock of tangled
red hair, bearing in his hands a small unpainted cross, which he held
high so that all men might see it. He seemed to be in the last extremity
of fright, with a face the color of clay and his limbs all ashake as one
who hath an ague. Behind him, with his toe ever rasping upon the other's
heels, there walked a very stern, black-bearded man with a hard eye and
a set mouth. He bore over his shoulder a great knotted stick with three
jagged nails stuck in the head of it, and from time to time he whirled
it up in the air with a quivering arm, as though he could scarce hold
back from dashing his companion's brains out. So in silence they walked
under the spread of the branches on the grass-grown path from Boldre.

"By St. Paul!" quoth the knight, "but this is a passing strange sight,
and perchance some very perilous and honorable venture may arise from
it. I pray you, Edricson, to ride up to them and to ask them the cause
of it."

There was no need, however, for him to move, for the twain came swiftly
towards them until they were within a spear's length, when the man
with the cross sat himself down sullenly upon a tussock of grass by the
wayside, while the other stood beside him with his great cudgel still
hanging over his head. So intent was he that he raised his eyes neither
to knight nor squires, but kept them ever fixed with a savage glare upon
his comrade.

"I pray you, friend," said Sir Nigel, "to tell us truthfully who you
are, and why you follow this man with such bitter enmity?"

"So long as I am within the pale of the king's law," the stranger
answered, "I cannot see why I should render account to every passing
wayfarer."

"You are no very shrewd reasoner, fellow," quoth the knight; "for if
it be within the law for you to threaten him with your club, then it is
also lawful for me to threaten you with my sword."

The man with the cross was down in an instant on his knees upon the
ground, with hands clasped above him and his face shining with hope.
"For dear Christ's sake, my fair lord," he cried in a crackling voice,
"I have at my belt a bag with a hundred rose nobles, and I will give it
to you freely if you will but pass your sword through this man's body."

"How, you foul knave?" exclaimed Sir Nigel hotly. "Do you think that
a cavalier's arm is to be bought like a packman's ware. By St. Paul! I
have little doubt that this fellow hath some very good cause to hold you
in hatred."

"Indeed, my fair sir, you speak sooth," quoth he with the club, while
the other seated himself once more by the wayside. "For this man is
Peter Peterson, a very noted rieve, draw-latch, and murtherer, who has
wrought much evil for many years in the parts about Winchester. It was
but the other day, upon the feasts of the blessed Simon and Jude, that
he slew my younger brother William in Bere Forest--for which, by the
black thorn of Glastonbury! I shall have his heart's blood, though I
walk behind him to the further end of earth."

"But if this be indeed so," asked Sir Nigel, "why is it that you have
come with him so far through the forest?"

"Because I am an honest Englishman, and will take no more than the law
allows. For when the deed was done this foul and base wretch fled to
sanctuary at St. Cross, and I, as you may think, after him with all
the posse. The prior, however, hath so ordered that while he holds this
cross no man may lay hand upon him without the ban of church, which
heaven forfend from me or mine. Yet, if for an instant he lay the cross
aside, or if he fail to journey to Pitt's Deep, where it is ordered that
he shall take ship to outland parts, or if he take not the first ship,
or if until the ship be ready he walk not every day into the sea as far
as his loins, then he becomes outlaw, and I shall forthwith dash out his
brains."

At this the man on the ground snarled up at him like a rat, while the
other clenched his teeth, and shook his club, and looked down at him
with murder in his eyes. Knight and squire gazed from rogue to avenger,
but as it was a matter which none could mend they tarried no longer, but
rode upon their way. Alleyne, looking back, saw that the murderer had
drawn bread and cheese from his scrip, and was silently munching it,
with the protecting cross still hugged to his breast, while the other,
black and grim, stood in the sunlit road and threw his dark shadow
athwart him.



CHAPTER XV. HOW THE YELLOW COG SAILED FORTH FROM LEPE.


That night the Company slept at St. Leonard's, in the great monastic
barns and spicarium--ground well known both to Alleyne and to John, for
they were almost within sight of the Abbey of Beaulieu. A strange thrill
it gave to the young squire to see the well-remembered white dress once
more, and to hear the measured tolling of the deep vespers bell.
At early dawn they passed across the broad, sluggish, reed-girt
stream--men, horses, and baggage in the flat ferry barges--and so
journeyed on through the fresh morning air past Exbury to Lepe.
Topping the heathy down, they came of a sudden full in sight of the old
sea-port--a cluster of houses, a trail of blue smoke, and a bristle of
masts. To right and left the long blue curve of the Solent lapped in a
fringe of foam upon the yellow beach. Some way out from the town a line
of pessoners, creyers, and other small craft were rolling lazily on the
gentle swell. Further out still lay a great merchant-ship, high ended,
deep waisted, painted of a canary yellow, and towering above the
fishing-boats like a swan among ducklings.

"By St. Paul!" said the knight, "our good merchant of Southampton hath
not played us false, for methinks I can see our ship down yonder. He
said that she would be of great size and of a yellow shade."

"By my hilt, yes!" muttered Aylward; "she is yellow as a kite's claw,
and would carry as many men as there are pips in a pomegranate."

"It is as well," remarked Terlake; "for methinks, my fair lord, that
we are not the only ones who are waiting a passage to Gascony. Mine eye
catches at times a flash and sparkle among yonder houses which assuredly
never came from shipman's jacket or the gaberdine of a burgher."

"I can also see it," said Alleyne, shading his eyes with his hand. "And
I can see men-at-arms in yonder boats which ply betwixt the vessel and
the shore. But methinks that we are very welcome here, for already they
come forth to meet us."

A tumultuous crowd of fishermen, citizens, and women had indeed swarmed
out from the northern gate, and approached them up the side of the moor,
waving their hands and dancing with joy, as though a great fear had been
rolled back from their minds. At their head rode a very large and solemn
man with a long chin and a drooping lip. He wore a fur tippet round his
neck and a heavy gold chain over it, with a medallion which dangled in
front of him.

"Welcome, most puissant and noble lord," he cried, doffing his bonnet
to Black Simon. "I have heard of your lordship's valiant deeds, and in
sooth they might be expected from your lordship's face and bearing. Is
there any small matter in which I may oblige you?"

"Since you ask me," said the man-at-arms, "I would take it kindly if you
could spare a link or two of the chain which hangs round your neck."

"What, the corporation chain!" cried the other in horror. "The ancient
chain of the township of Lepe! This is but a sorry jest, Sir Nigel."

"What the plague did you ask me for then?" said Simon. "But if it is
Sir Nigel Loring with whom you would speak, that is he upon the black
horse."

The Mayor of Lepe gazed with amazement on the mild face and slender
frame of the famous warrior.

"Your pardon, my gracious lord," he cried. "You see in me the mayor and
chief magistrate of the ancient and powerful town of Lepe. I bid you
very heartily welcome, and the more so as you are come at a moment when
we are sore put to it for means of defence."

"Ha!" cried Sir Nigel, pricking up his ears.

"Yes, my lord, for the town being very ancient and the walls as old
as the town, it follows that they are very ancient too. But there is a
certain villainous and bloodthirsty Norman pirate hight Tete-noire, who,
with a Genoan called Tito Caracci, commonly known as Spade-beard, hath
been a mighty scourge upon these coasts. Indeed, my lord, they are very
cruel and black-hearted men, graceless and ruthless, and if they should
come to the ancient and powerful town of Lepe then--"

"Then good-bye to the ancient and powerful town of Lepe," quoth Ford,
whose lightness of tongue could at times rise above his awe of Sir
Nigel.

The knight, however, was too much intent upon the matter in hand to give
heed to the flippancy of his squire. "Have you then cause," he asked,
"to think that these men are about to venture an attempt upon you?"

"They have come in two great galleys," answered the mayor, "with two
bank of oars on either side, and great store of engines of war and
of men-at-arms. At Weymouth and at Portland they have murdered and
ravished. Yesterday morning they were at Cowes, and we saw the smoke
from the burning crofts. To-day they lie at their ease near Freshwater,
and we fear much lest they come upon us and do us a mischief."

"We cannot tarry," said Sir Nigel, riding towards the town, with the
mayor upon his left side; "the Prince awaits us at Bordeaux, and we may
not be behind the general muster. Yet I will promise you that on our way
we shall find time to pass Freshwater and to prevail upon these rovers
to leave you in peace."

"We are much beholden to you!" cried the mayor "But I cannot see, my
lord, how, without a war-ship, you may venture against these men. With
your archers, however, you might well hold the town and do them great
scath if they attempt to land."

"There is a very proper cog out yonder," said Sir Nigel, "it would be a
very strange thing if any ship were not a war-ship when it had such men
as these upon her decks. Certes, we shall do as I say, and that no later
than this very day."

"My lord," said a rough-haired, dark-faced man, who walked by the
knight's other stirrup, with his head sloped to catch all that he was
saying. "By your leave, I have no doubt that you are skilled in land
fighting and the marshalling of lances, but, by my soul! you will find
it another thing upon the sea. I am the master-shipman of this yellow
cog, and my name is Goodwin Hawtayne. I have sailed since I was as high
as this staff, and I have fought against these Normans and against the
Genoese, as well as the Scotch, the Bretons, the Spanish, and the Moors.
I tell you, sir, that my ship is over light and over frail for such
work, and it will but end in our having our throats cut, or being sold
as slaves to the Barbary heathen."

"I also have experienced one or two gentle and honorable ventures upon
the sea," quoth Sir Nigel, "and I am right blithe to have so fair a task
before us. I think, good master-shipman, that you and I may win great
honor in this matter, and I can see very readily that you are a brave
and stout man."

"I like it not," said the other sturdily. "In God's name, I like it not.
And yet Goodwin Hawtayne is not the man to stand back when his fellows
are for pressing forward. By my soul! be it sink or swim, I shall
turn her beak into Freshwater Bay, and if good Master Witherton, of
Southampton, like not my handling of his ship then he may find another
master-shipman."

They were close by the old north gate of the little town, and Alleyne,
half turning in his saddle, looked back at the motley crowd who
followed. The bowmen and men-at-arms had broken their ranks and were
intermingled with the fishermen and citizens, whose laughing faces
and hearty gestures bespoke the weight of care from which this welcome
arrival had relieved them. Here and there among the moving throng of
dark jerkins and of white surcoats were scattered dashes of scarlet and
blue, the whimples or shawls of the women. Aylward, with a fishing lass
on either arm, was vowing constancy alternately to her on the right and
her on the left, while big John towered in the rear with a little chubby
maiden enthroned upon his great shoulder, her soft white arm curled
round his shining headpiece. So the throng moved on, until at the very
gate it was brought to a stand by a wondrously fat man, who came darting
forth from the town with rage in every feature of his rubicund face.

"How now, Sir Mayor?" he roared, in a voice like a bull. "How now, Sir
Mayor? How of the clams and the scallops?"

"By Our Lady! my sweet Sir Oliver," cried the mayor. "I have had so much
to think of, with these wicked villains so close upon us, that it had
quite gone out of my head."

"Words, words!" shouted the other furiously. "Am I to be put off with
words? I say to you again, how of the clams and scallops?"

"My fair sir, you flatter me," cried the mayor. "I am a peaceful trader,
and I am not wont to be so shouted at upon so small a matter."

"Small!" shrieked the other. "Small! Clams and scallops! Ask me to your
table to partake of the dainty of the town, and when I come a barren
welcome and a bare board! Where is my spear-bearer?"

"Nay, Sir Oliver, Sir Oliver!" cried Sir Nigel, laughing.

"Let your anger be appeased, since instead of this dish you come upon an
old friend and comrade."

"By St. Martin of Tours!" shouted the fat knight, his wrath all changed
in an instant to joy, "if it is not my dear little game rooster of the
Garonne. Ah, my sweet coz, I am right glad to see you. What days we have
seen together!"

"Aye, by my faith," cried Sir Nigel, with sparkling eyes, "we have
seen some valiant men, and we have shown our pennons in some noble
skirmishes. By St. Paul! we have had great joys in France."

"And sorrows also," quoth the other. "I have some sad memories of the
land. Can you recall that which befell us at Libourne?"

"Nay, I cannot call to mind that we ever so much as drew sword at the
place."

"Man, man," cried Sir Oliver, "your mind still runs on nought but blades
and bassinets. Hast no space in thy frame for the softer joys. Ah,
even now I can scarce speak of it unmoved. So noble a pie, such tender
pigeons, and sugar in the gravy instead of salt! You were by my side
that day, as were Sir Claude Latour and the Lord of Pommers."

"I remember it," said Sir Nigel, laughing, "and how you harried the cook
down the street, and spoke of setting fire to the inn. By St. Paul! most
worthy mayor, my old friend is a perilous man, and I rede you that you
compose your difference with him on such terms as you may."

"The clams and scallops shall be ready within the hour," the mayor
answered. "I had asked Sir Oliver Buttesthorn to do my humble board
the honor to partake at it of the dainty upon which we take some little
pride, but in sooth this alarm of pirates hath cast such a shadow on my
wits that I am like one distrait. But I trust, Sir Nigel, that you will
also partake of none-meat with me?"

"I have overmuch to do," Sir Nigel answered, "for we must be aboard,
horse and man, as early as we may. How many do you muster, Sir Oliver?"

"Three and forty. The forty are drunk, and the three are but indifferent
sober. I have them all safe upon the ship."

"They had best find their wits again, for I shall have work for every
man of them ere the sun set. It is my intention, if it seems good to
you, to try a venture against these Norman and Genoese rovers."

"They carry caviare and certain very noble spices from the Levant aboard
of ships from Genoa," quoth Sir Oliver. "We may come to great profit
through the business. I pray you, master-shipman, that when you go on
board you pour a helmetful of sea-water over any of my rogues whom you
may see there."

Leaving the lusty knight and the Mayor of Lepe, Sir Nigel led the
Company straight down to the water's edge, where long lines of flat
lighters swiftly bore them to their vessel. Horse after horse was slung
by main force up from the barges, and after kicking and plunging in
empty air was dropped into the deep waist of the yellow cog, where rows
of stalls stood ready for their safe keeping. Englishmen in those days
were skilled and prompt in such matters, for it was so not long before
that Edward had embarked as many as fifty thousand men in the port
of Orwell, with their horses and their baggage, all in the space of
four-and-twenty hours. So urgent was Sir Nigel on the shore, and so
prompt was Goodwin Hawtayne on the cog, that Sir Oliver Buttesthorn had
scarce swallowed his last scallop ere the peal of the trumpet and clang
