"Well, well, we must not think of that," Diggory Beggs said,
hastily; "but, nevertheless, cousin, if the Swan sails for those
seas, I will see that she is well provided with ordnance and small
arms, so that she shall be able to hold her own with those who
would meddle with her."

"That is all I ask, Diggory. We shan't meddle with them, if they do
not meddle with us; but if they treat us as pirates, to be slain
without form of trial, they must not blame us if we act as pirates
when they come upon us. They hold that they are beyond the law,
when they are once beyond sight of land, going westward; and we
have only to take them at their word.

"As to piracy, if the things that are whispered as to their cruelty
to the natives be true, pirates are an innocent and kindly folk
compared to them. They openly proclaim that all found in these
seas, which they claim as their own, will be treated as enemies and
slain without mercy; and we shall be, therefore, fully justified in
treating as an enemy any Spanish ship that we may come across; and
holding her as a fair prize, if we are strong enough to take her."

"But you must not go out with that intent, Reuben. If I fit out the
Swan to go to the Indies, it is that she may trade honestly with
such natives as are ready to trade with her, and not that she may
wage war against the Spaniards."

"I quite understand that, Cousin Diggory," Reuben Hawkshaw said,
with a grim smile; "and that also is my intent, if the Spaniards
will but let me adhere to it; only if we are attacked, we must
defend ourselves. If they try to capture us, and we beat them, it
is but natural that we should capture them."

"Against that I have nothing to say, Reuben. I can find no
authority, in Scripture, for the Spaniards claiming a portion of
the seas as their right. The world is all, as it seems to me, open
to trade, and neither the pope nor anyone else has a right to
parcel it out, for the exclusive use of one or two nations. As we
all know, the seas within a mile or two of shore are held to
belong, naturally, to those who own the land; but that is a
different thing, altogether, to holding that more than half the
seas, inasmuch as we know of them, are to be held as private
property by Spaniards and Portugals.

"Well, we will say no more about it, at present. There is plenty of
time to think it over, while the Swan is unloading. I certainly do
not like to take so great a risk as this would be on my own
shoulders; but if I could get two or three others to join me, I
should be willing enough to embark upon it."

"I need not tell you, Diggory, that it behooves you to be right
careful as to those to whom you may broach it. Remember that an
incautious word might ruin the enterprise altogether. If so much as
a whisper of it reached the ear of the Spanish ambassador in
London, he would apply to the king to put a stop to it; and
whatever King Harry might think of it, he could hardly permit the
Swan to sail in the face of such a remonstrance, for to do so would
assuredly embroil him with Spain."

"I will be careful, Reuben; for I see this as well as you do, and
shall only speak to men who have, before now, worked with me in
joint adventures, and on whose discretion I can surely rely. I will
talk the matter over with them, Reuben, first; and if they appear
favorably disposed, you shall meet them here, show them your map,
and explain your intentions fully to them. If three others join me,
in equal shares, I shall propose that, as it is your idea, and as
you have obtained this map, you shall have an equal share with each
of us in the business; and shall, in addition to your pay as
master, take one-fifth of the profits, after payment of expenses.
Will that content you?"

"Right well, Cousin Diggory; and from this moment I shall, I can
tell you, regard myself as a rich man."

The unloading of the Swan occupied some time. There was no undue
haste, in those days. The bales were hoisted by whips from the
hold, and then carried up to Master Beggs' warehouse. The sailors
had earned a fair time for repose, after the hardships of the
voyage, and took matters easily, and it was more than a week before
the Swan's hold was empty.

During that time the merchant had not made any allusion, to Reuben,
as to their conversation on the evening after the Swan came into
port. But Reuben was neither surprised nor anxious at this silence.
He knew that his cousin although an enterprising was a cautious
man, and had hardly hoped to find his proposal so favorably
entertained. He had looked for absolute refusal at first, and
expected that he would only arrive at his end after long disputes
and discussion. Therefore he doubted not that Diggory was turning
the matter over and over in his mind, settling the details, and
perhaps broaching the matter to the merchants he had spoken of.

The Swan, once empty, was laid up on the shore; where she dried at
low tide, so that she could have her seams caulked, and a coat of
pitch laid on below the waterline, and be made tight and sound for
any voyage on which she might be dispatched. Reuben Hawkshaw had
lost his wife years before and, when in port at Plymouth, always
occupied lodgings in a house a short distance from that of his
cousin; spending his evenings mostly at Master Diggory's, but
refusing to take his breakfast or dinner there.

"I know what is what, cousin," he would say, when the merchant
pressed him and Roger to come to breakfast or dinner. "Women are
women and, as is only right, they hold to the nicety of things; and
nothing displeases them more than for people to come in late for
their meals. When I am at work I work, and if when the clock
strikes the hour for meals I am in the middle of a job, I see that
it is finished before the men knock off. Then there is the matter
of washing and cleaning up, for one gathers much dust and dirt in
the hold of a ship; so that, do what I would, Roger and I could
never reckon upon being punctual, and the matter would weigh on my
mind when I ought to be thinking of other things. No, no, Diggory,
we will be free men, taking our bite and sup on board, as we can
make shift to get them; and then, when work is over, coming with
clean hands and a clear mind, to supper with you. When the Swan's
hold is empty, it will be time enough to talk about amusement."

The evening after the unlading of the cargo was completed, Master
Diggory said to his wife:

"Get the table cleared as soon as you can, Mercy, and bring two
flasks of that last batch of Spanish wine out of the cellar, and
put them and some cups on the board. I have two or three friends
coming in, to talk over a matter of business with Reuben and me."

As soon as the table was cleared, Roger asked permission of his
aunt to take his cousins for a walk upon the Hoe. This was readily
granted, as there was no other room in which they could well be
bestowed; and having set the wine upon the table, Dame Mercy
retired to look after domestic matters, of which she always found
an abundance to occupy her.

In a short time Master Turnbull, Master Streatham, and Master
Winslow, three worshipful traders of Plymouth, arrived.

"Cousin Reuben," Master Diggory said, "I have spoken to these good
friends of mine in respect of that venture which you proposed to
me, and they would fain hear more of it, from your own lips. You
can speak with confidence before them; for, whether they agree to
cast in their lot with us or not, no word of this matter will pass
their lips."

Reuben addressed himself to his task, and that at much greater
detail than he had given, when first speaking of the matter to
Diggory. He told them what he had gathered from the sea captains,
and others, as to the articles with which the Dons traded with the
natives. That they were for the most part cheap and common, and
that the amount required for a sufficient stock of such merchandise
would be very small. Small hand mirrors, strings of colored glass
beads, brass rings and trinkets, colored handkerchiefs and bright
cloths, were the articles chiefly used in barter. Knives and axes
were greatly prized, the natives considering iron to be more
valuable than silver or gold. Small bells and brass vessels were
also valued, and iron spear and arrow heads were eagerly sought
for; but the Spaniards were chary of providing such goods, seeing
that they might be used in conflicts against themselves.

Then he produced a list of the stores that would be required for
the ship and crew.

"In this matter," he said, "you will think, perhaps, that my
demands are excessive; but I am of opinion that money in this way
would be well spent. As a rule--though I say it before men
accustomed to victualing ships--our crews are vilely provided for.
Salt meat they must eat, for no other can be obtained at sea; but
it should be of good quality, likewise the other provisions. I want
not biscuits that are alive with maggots, nor moldy flour, nor peas
or other things that cattle would turn up their noses at. I want
everything to be the very best of its kind, with cider good, and
sound, and in fair abundance.

"This is not an ordinary voyage. We shall be away for many months,
maybe for a year or two; and unless the men are well fed they will
assuredly lose their health, and likely enough become mutinous. If
we come upon a Spanish ship when three parts of the crew are weak
with scurvy, we shall make but a poor fight of it. Therefore, I
want to keep my men in good strength and in good heart, and to do
this they must be well fed. Such a voyage as this no English ship
has ever made before and, cooped up as we shall be in the Swan--for
we must carry a great crew--everything depends upon there being no
fair ground for grumbling. Many a ship has been lost from the crew
being weakened by scurvy, and if you are to bring this enterprise
to a good end, I say that there must be no stint in the matter of
provisions, and that all must be the very best of their kind.

"I trust that, once out there, we shall be able to obtain an
abundance of fruit and vegetables from the natives; for these are
things, above all, necessary to keep men's blood sweet on
shipboard.

"Then, as to arms. I think we should carry twelve pieces, six of a
side; of which four should be of good size, and yet not too large
to be quickly handled. In the matter of weight, the Spaniards are
sure to have the advantage of us; but if we can shoot much more
quickly than they can, it will equalize matters. Then, of course,
there will be bows and arrows. I do not hold greatly to the new
musketoons--a man can shoot six arrows while he can fire one of
them, and that with a straighter and truer aim, though it is true
they can carry somewhat farther. Then, of course, there will be
pikes, and boarding axes, and a good stock of powder and balls for
the cannon. These are the complete lists I have made out.

"Now I hold that we should carry from eighty to a hundred men.
These I should pay only the ordinary rate of wage, but each should
have an interest in the venture, according to his rank. As to the
profits, I would leave it to you, my masters, to reckon; but seeing
that in fair trade one can get gold, to say nothing of silver,
weight for weight for iron; and other things in proportion; you can
judge for yourselves what it will amount to--to say nothing of the
chance of our falling in with a Spanish treasure ship, which may be
rash enough, regarding us an easy prize, to fall foul of us."

"There is no doubt that the profits will be great, if you return
safely home, Master Hawkshaw," Nicholas Turnbull said; "but the
chances of that seem but small."

"I think that the chances are good enough to risk my life upon,
Master Turnbull," Reuben replied; "and no man can show greater
confidence than that. This is the map of which my Cousin Diggory
has no doubt spoken to you. You see that the islands are many, and
some of them great; and that the places at which the Spaniards have
ports are few, in comparison. We have to avoid these, but anywhere
else we can open trade with the natives. If we are chased, and find
the place too hot for us, we can make away to the mainland and,
cruising along there, may come upon places that the Spaniards have
never visited, and may there gather great store of gold and silver,
without danger. But I wish no one, and certainly not my Cousin
Diggory, to enter upon this affair unless with confidence and good
heart. I would far rather take a horse and travel to Bristol, and
lay my scheme before some of the traders there."

This idea was most distasteful to the traders, for Plymouth
regarded Bristol with great jealousy; and Diggory Beggs at once
said:

"No, no, Reuben. My friend Master Nicholas Turnbull did not mean
that he regarded your scheme as hopeless, only that the risks were
doubtless great. But we all know that to earn great profit one must
run such risk; and the venture, divided between four of us, would
not be a very heavy one--that is to say, not beyond what we are
justified in periling.

"Would you leave us for a while, Reuben? We will examine these
lists that you have made, and reckon up the total cost; and we
shall then see the better how much we shall each have to
contribute, to make up our venture."

Reuben nodded and, putting on his hat, left the room, saying, "In
an hour I will return;" and then strolled over to a tavern much
frequented by the masters of the ships in the port.



Chapter 2: Bound To Unknown Parts.


When Reuben Hawkshaw returned to the chamber where Diggory Beggs
was in conference with the other three traders, he found that these
had finished their calculations.

"The matter is settled, Reuben, as far as we are concerned. My
three friends and myself will go equal shares in the matter. The
value of the Swan is to be taken as part of my contribution, and if
she ever comes back again, as we hope she may do, that sum will be
deducted from my share of the profits, due allowance being made for
what damage or injury she may have suffered. You, it is understood,
will take a share of the profits equal to ours, and one-third share
will, in the first place, be set aside to be divided among the
other officers and crew. It will be left entirely to you to choose
your officers and men, and I need not tell you the sort of fellows
to pick out for such a business.

"I shall see that the Swan is provided with new rigging and gear,
and that there is a plentiful store of all things on board, to
repair any damage you may suffer from storm or foe. My good friends
here are willing that the purchasing of all the stores required
shall be in my hands, and you shall yourself test the quality of
all the provisions before the bargains are concluded, so as to see
that everything is sweet and wholesome. My friends here will not
appear in the affair at all, for if folks saw that four of us were
concerned in the venture, they would think that it was something
quite out of ordinary.

"All preparation will be made as quietly as possible, and it will
be given out that the Swan is going to make a voyage to the Levant,
and that she will carry a stronger battery of guns than usual to
beat off any Moorish pirates she may meet by the way. As it is
known that she had a sharp fight, coming homeward, it will seem
only natural that we should add to her armament. I shall write up
to my agent in London to purchase for me the articles required to
trade with the natives, and bid him send them round here by sea,
well packed in bales. If we were to purchase so many strange
articles, here, it would give rise to talk; for people would wonder
with whom we intended to trade such goods.

"Tomorrow morning you and I will make out a list of what you deem
advisable for the purpose."

For another hour the party sat and talked; for, now that the other
traders had fully determined to go into the venture, they were
quite excited over it.

"Truly if I could but be spared from my business, here, I would
gladly go with you myself," Master Streatham said. "I have always
had a longing to see strange climes, and as no Englishman has yet
set eyes on these countries you are about to visit, Friend Reuben,
I would gladly be by your side, and take share in your perils and
adventures."

"I doubt not your heart and courage, Master Jonas," Reuben replied,
"and would warrant that you would behave doughtily, in case of
fight with Spaniard or Indian; but I question whether you would
support the hardships of the voyage, as cheerfully as you would the
dangers. Although you may store the Swan with the best provisions
that money can buy, a diet of naught but biscuit and salt meat
palls after some weeks--to say nothing of some months--of it; and
this all the more in a hot climate, where the appetite weakens, and
one comes to pine for dainty cakes such as our Devonshire wives are
famous for."

"Yes, I fear I never should support that," Master Streatham, who
was a large corpulent man, mightily fond of the pleasures of the
table, agreed with a sigh.

"Besides, Friend Jonas," Diggory Beggs put in, "Mistress Tabitha
would have her voice in the matter; and however much your spirit
would lead you to such an adventure, I doubt whether she would let
you put foot on board."

"No, it is not for us to be running after adventure," Nicholas
Turnbull said. "In the first place, we are sober citizens, and have
our wives and families to think about, and our business and the
affairs of the town; and in the next place, even could we leave all
these, Master Reuben Hawkshaw would not thank us for our company.
Every foot of space is of value on the ship; and men who take up
space and consume food, and can neither set a sail nor work a
cannon, are but useless encumbrances."

"You have spoken truly, Master Nicholas," Reuben said bluntly. "In
the matter of a trip to London, or even as far as the Low
Countries, we could accommodate your worshipful honors well enough;
but on a journey like this, any man who cannot, if needs be, drink
bilge water and eat shoe leather, is best at home. I took a voyage
once--it is many years ago, now--to Amsterdam, and the owner, not
my good cousin here, but another, took a fancy to go with me; and
his wife must needs accompany him, and verily, before that voyage
was over, I wished I was dead.

"I was no longer captain of the ship. My owner was my captain, and
his wife was his. We were forever putting into port for fresh bread
and meat, milk and eggs, for she could eat none other. If the wind
got up but ever so little, we had to run into shelter and anchor
until the sea was smooth. The manners of the sailors shocked her.
She would scream at night when a rat ran across her, and would lose
her appetite if a living creature, of which, as usual, the ship was
full, fell from a beam onto her platter. I was tempted, more than
once, to run the ship on to a rock and make an end of us all.

"No, no: a day's sail out from Plymouth, in a freshly launched
ship, on a fine day, with a store of good victuals and a few flasks
of good wine, is a right merry business; but farther than that I
wish not to see a passenger, on board any ship which I command."

The others laughed.

"Well, Master Diggory, we must be going," Nicholas Turnbull said;
"it is getting late. Tomorrow I will come over in the forenoon, as
you suggest; and we will go through these lists more carefully, and
talk over prices and see what bulk they will occupy, and discuss
many other matters with the aid and advice of Master Hawkshaw.
There is no occasion for undue haste; and yet, if the thing is to
be done, the sooner it be done the better."

As the party went out, Reuben found his son waiting outside the
door.

"Well, father?" he asked anxiously, when the three merchants had
walked briskly off towards their homes.

"It is all settled, Roger. As soon as everything is prepared, the
Swan will sail for the Spanish main."

Roger threw his cap high in the air, with a lusty shout that
startled the better passers-by, hurrying towards their homes; for
it was now long after dark, and although the town watch patrolled
the streets regularly, prudent citizens did not care to be abroad
after nightfall.

"You silly boy;" Reuben said; "you have lost your cap."

"Nay, I heard it fall somewhere here," Roger said, searching;
"besides, a cap is a small matter, one way or other.

"Ah! Here it is, floating in a pool of mud; however, a bucket of
water will set it all right, in the morning.

"O father! I feel wild with joy, only to think that all we have
talked over together is going to be true, and that we are to be the
first Englishmen who ever saw the beautiful islands they talk
about, and the natives with their feathers and strange attire.
And--"

"And the Spaniards with their loaded guns, and their dungeons and
gibbets," Reuben Hawkshaw put in.

"Not for us, father. The bottom of the sea maybe, but not a Spanish
dungeon."

"I hope not, my lad. Still, no man can see the future. However, I
am right glad that we are to try this adventure. It is a glorious
one, and will bring us honor in the eyes of all Englishmen if we
succeed, to say nothing of wealth.

"But mind that you let not your spirits run away with your tongue.
No word of this must be spoken to a soul, nor must any mention be
made of it in the hearing of my Cousin Mercy, or the girls. The
four partners in the adventure have all taken a solemn promise to
each other, that they will not breathe a word of it even to their
wives, averring that women could never be trusted to keep a secret;
though as far as I have seen of them, methinks a woman can keep a
bridle on her tongue just as well as a man--and indeed, somewhat
better, since they do not loosen them with cider, or wine, or
strong waters. But I believe, myself, it was not so much that they
doubted whether their wives would keep the secret, as whether they
would approve of the enterprise; and that they made the contract
together, in order that each might, afterwards, be able to assure
his wife that, for his part, he would gladly have taken her into
his confidence, but that he was obliged to fall in with the wishes
of his partners.

"It is a strange thing, Roger, but methinks that, whereas most men
behave valiantly enough when it comes to blows with an enemy, a
great proportion are but cowards with their wives."

"But why should they be, father?"

"That is an easy question to ask, Roger, but a difficult one to
answer. Maybe you will understand the matter better, some day, when
you have taken a wife to yourself. In some matters there is no
doubt that women's wits outrun those of men, and that they have a
wonderful sharpness of tongue. Now a man, when things go wrong with
him, speaks out loudly and roundly; he storms and he rages, but
when it is over, there is an end of it. Now a woman is not like
that. She seems to ponder the matter over in her heart, and to
bring it out as it were piecemeal--throwing little darts at you
when you don't expect it; saying little things to which, from their
suddenness, you can find no reply; and pricking you furiously all
over, until you are ready to roar out with pain and vexation. You
see, Roger, a prick hurteth more than a great cut."

"I should not have thought that, father."

"That is because you have not thought the matter over, Roger. In
that fight with the Moors many of the men were sorely cut and
wounded, but you heard no cry from them; they only set their teeth
the harder, and smote more furiously upon their foes; but there was
no one of them all but, had he sat down suddenly on a small nail,
would have roared out like a bull, and have sworn lustily for a
good half hour. So it is in domestic matters: the man rages and
storms when things go wrong; and his wife, if she be a woman of
judgment, holds her peace until it is over, knowing well enough
that he will be at her mercy, afterwards. Then she sets to work,
like those gnats that came on board at Genoa, that they call
mosquitoes, and startles him with shrill buzzings in his ears, and
pricketh him in the tenderest spots she can find; drawing but the
smallest speck of blood, but causing an itching that makes him
ready to tear his flesh.

"Your mother, Roger, was one of the best of women. She was a good
housewife, and an affectionate. I do not know that I ever saw her
greatly ruffled in temper, but there were times when I would fly
from my house, and not come up from my work on board, until it was
time to go straight away to bed, so did she prick and sting me with
her tongue; and that not shrilly or with anger, but with little
things, let slip as it were unawares, and with an air of ignorance
that they in any way applied to me.

"No, Roger, if you will take my advice you will make your ship your
mistress. She will have her ways, but you will learn them, and will
know just how much helm she requires, and how the sail should be
trimmed; but with a woman no man attains to this knowledge, and if
you take my advice, you will give them a wide berth.

"I know," he went on, in answer to Roger's merry laugh, "that this
is a matter in which no man will trust to other experience than his
own. Every man who takes a woman to wife thinks that he can manage
her, and goes into the matter with a light heart, as if it were a
mere pleasure excursion on which he is embarking; whereas, in
truth, it is a voyage as full of dangers and perils as that upon
which we are about to adventure.

"Now let us turn back to our lodging, for I have nearly gone on my
face four times already, in these deep ruts and holes. I would that
the councilors of this town could see the streets of Genoa, or
Cadiz, or Amsterdam! They might then try to mend the ways of
Plymouth, and make them somewhat less perilous to passengers, after
dark."

Work began in earnest upon the following day. A number of
shipwrights were set upon the hull of the Swan, which was to be
thoroughly overhauled, caulked and pitched, within and without. The
masts and rigging were to be carefully looked to, and every defect
repaired. A new suit of sails was ordered, the old ones to be
patched where the Moorish shot had torn them, so as to be of use as
a second suit, did any misadventure happen to the others.

James Standing, the first mate, took charge of these matters;
Reuben Hawkshaw assisting Diggory Beggs in all things relating to
the stores. Greatly were the provision merchants of the town
surprised at the quality of the provisions that Master Beggs
ordered for the use of the Swan. Nothing but fine flour of the last
year's grinding; freshly killed beef and pork, to be carefully
salted down in barrels; and newly baked biscuits would satisfy
Reuben Hawkshaw. They could scarce believe that such articles could
be meant for use on shipboard; for, as a rule, the very cheapest
and worst quality of everything was considered as amply good enough
for the use of sailors.

Then, too, the cider and beer must be neither thin nor sour, but
sweet and of good body. Surely, Master Beggs must have gone off his
head, thus to furnish his ship! For never before had a vessel
sailed out of Plymouth harbor, provided after this fashion. An
ample store of ropes and cordage, and of all matters required for a
ship's equipage, were also laid in. To all questions as to the
surprising lavishness of cost, Diggory replied:

"I would have the ship well found in all matters. It was but the
other day that the Antelope returned from a voyage to the Levant.
She had lost a third of her crew from scurvy, and of the rest but
six were strong enough to pull at a rope when she came into port.
Did not the women follow Master Skimpole, her owner, through the
streets, and cry after him that he was the murderer of their
husbands, by reason of the foul victual that he had provided for
their use? No, no, it will cost more to start with, but it will be
