dragoons.

'See the mon wi' a face like a gerfalcon,' cried one, pointing to Saxon;
''tis he that slew the Philistine officer yestreen, an' brought the
faithful off victorious.'

'Mark ye yon other one,' cried an old dame, 'him wi' the white face an'
the clothes like a prince. He's one o' the Quality, what's come a' the
way froe Lunnon to testify to the Protestant creed. He's a main pious
gentleman, he is, an' if he had bided in the wicked city they'd ha' had
his head off, like they did the good Lord Roossell, or put him in chains
wi' the worthy Maister Baxter.'

'Marry come up, gossip,' cried a third. 'The girt mun on the grey horse
is the soldier for me. He has the smooth cheeks o' a wench, an' limbs
like Goliath o' Gath. I'll war'nt he could pick up my old gaffer Jones
an' awa' wi' him at his saddle-bow, as easy as Towser does a rotten! But
here's good Maister Tetheridge, the clerk, and on great business too,
for he's a mun that spares ne time ne trooble in the great cause.'

'Room, good people, room! 'cried the little clerk, bustling up with an
air of authority. 'Hinder not the high officials of the Corporation in
the discharge of their functions. Neither should ye hamper the flanks
of fighting men, seeing that you thereby prevent that deploying and
extending of the line which is now advocated by many high commanders.
I prythee, who commands this cohort, or legion rather, seeing that you
have auxiliary horse attached to it?'

''Tis a regiment, sirrah,' said Saxon sternly. 'Colonel Saxon's regiment
of Wiltshire foot, which I have the honour to command.'

'I beg your Colonelship's pardon, 'cried the clerk nervously, edging
away from the swarthy-faced soldier. 'I have heard speak of your
Colonelship, and of your doings in the German wars. I have myself
trailed a pike in my youth and have broken a head or two, aye, and a
heart or two also, when I wore buff and bandolier.'

'Discharge your message,' said our Colonel shortly.

''Tis from his most worshipful the Mayor, and is addressed to yourself
and to your captains, who are doubtless these tall cavaliers whom I see
on either side of me. Pretty fellows, by my faith! but you and I know
well, Colonel, that a little trick of fence will set the smallest of us
on a level with the brawniest. Now I warrant that you and I, being
old soldiers, could, back to back, make it good against these three
gallants.'

'Speak, fellow,' snarled Saxon, and reaching out a long sinewy arm he
seized the loquacious clerk by the lappet of his gown, and shook him
until his long sword clattered again.

'How, Colonel, how?' cried Master Tetheridge, while his vest seemed to
acquire a deeper tint from the sudden pallor of his face. 'Would you
lay an angry hand upon the Mayor's representative? I wear a bilbo by my
side, as you can see. I am also somewhat quick and choleric, and warn
you therefore not to do aught which I might perchance construe into a
personal slight. As to my message, it was that his most worshipful
the Mayor did desire to have word with you and your captains in the
town-hall.'

'We shall be there anon,' said Saxon, and turning to the regiment he set
himself to explain some of the simpler movements and exercises, teaching
his officers as well as his men, for though Sir Gervas knew something of
the manual, Lockarby and I brought little but our good-will to the task.
When the order to dismiss was at last given, our companies marched back
to their barracks in the wool warehouse, while we handed over our horses
to the grooms from the White Hart, and set off to pay our respects to
the Mayor.



Chapter XVIII. Of Master Stephen Timewell, Mayor of Taunton

Within the town-hall all was bustle and turmoil. At one side behind a
low table covered with green baize sat two scriveners with great rolls
of paper in front of them. A long line of citizens passed slowly before
them, each in turn putting down a roll or bag of coins which was duly
noted by the receivers. A square iron-bound chest stood by their side,
into which the money was thrown, and we noted as we passed that it was
half full of gold pieces. We could not but mark that many of the givers
were men whose threadbare doublets and pinched faces showed that the
wealth which they were dashing down so readily must have been hoarded up
for such a purpose, at the cost of scanty fare and hard living. Most of
them accompanied their gift by a few words of prayer, or by some pithy
text anent the treasure which rusteth not, or the lending to the Lord.
The town clerk stood by the table giving forth the vouchers for each
sum, and the constant clack of his tongue filled the hall, as he read
aloud the names and amounts, with his own remarks between.

'Abraham Willis,' he shouted as we entered; 'put him down twenty-six
pounds and ten shillings. You shall receive ten per centum upon this
earth, Master Willis, and I warrant that it shall not be forgotten
hereafter. John Standish, two pounds. William Simons, two guineas.
Stand-fast Healing, forty-five pounds. That is a rare blow which you
have struck into the ribs of Prelacy, good Master Healing. Solomon
Warren, five guineas. James White, five shillings--the widow's mite,
James! Thomas Bakewell, ten pounds. Nay, Master Bakewell, surely out of
three farms on the banks of Tone, and grazing land in the fattest part
of Athelney, you can spare more than this for the good cause. We shall
doubtless see you again. Alderman Smithson, ninety pounds. Aha! There is
a slap for the scarlet woman! A few more such and her throne shall be a
ducking-stool. We shall break her down, worthy Master Smithson, even as
Jehu, the son of Nimshi, broke down the house of Baal.' So he babbled on
with praise, precept, and rebuke, though the grave and solemn burghers
took little notice of his empty clamour.

At the other side of the hall were several long wooden drinking-troughs,
which were used for the storing of pikes and scythes. Special messengers
and tithing-men had been sent out to scour the country for arms, who,
as they returned, placed their prizes here under the care of the
armourer-general. Besides the common weapons of the peasants there was a
puncheon half full of pistols and petronels, together with a good number
of muskets, screw-guns, snaphances, birding-pieces, and carbines, with
a dozen bell-mouthed brass blunderbusses, and a few old-fashioned
wall-pieces, such as sakers and culverins taken from the manor-houses of
the county. From the walls and the lumber-rooms of these old dwellings
many other arms had been brought to light which were doubtless esteemed
as things of price by our forefathers, but which would seem strange to
your eyes in these days, when a musket may be fired once in every two
minutes, and will carry a ball to a distance of four hundred paces.
There were halberds, battle-axes, morning stars, brown bills, maces, and
ancient coats of chain mail, which might even now save a man from sword
stroke or pike thrust.

In the midst of the coming and the going stood Master Timewell, the
Mayor, ordering all things like a skilful and provident commander. I
could understand the trust and love which his townsmen had for him, as
I watched him labouring with all the wisdom of an old man and the
blithesomeness of a young one. He was hard at work as we approached in
trying the lock of a falconet; but perceiving us, he came forward and
saluted us with much kindliness.

'I have heard much of ye,' said he; 'how ye caused the faithful to
gather to a head, and so beat off the horsemen of the usurper. It will
not be the last time, I trust, that ye shall see their backs. I hear,
Colonel Saxon, that ye have seen much service abroad.'

'I have been the humble tool of Providence in much good work,'
said Saxon, with a bow. 'I have fought with the Swedes against the
Brandenburgers, and again with the Brandenburgers against the Swedes, my
time and conditions with the latter having been duly carried out. I
have afterwards in the Bavarian service fought against Swedes and
Brandenburgers combined, besides having undergone the great wars on the
Danube against the Turk, and two campaigns with the Messieurs in the
Palatinate, which latter might be better termed holiday-making than
fighting.'

'A soldierly record in very truth,' cried the Mayor, stroking his white
beard. 'I hear that you are also powerfully borne onwards in prayer and
song. You are, I perceive, one of the old breed of '44, Colonel--the men
who were in the saddle all day, and on their knees half the night. When
shall we see the like of them again? A few such broken wrecks as I are
left, with the fire of our youth all burned out and nought left but the
ashes of lethargy and lukewarmness.'

'Nay, nay,' said Saxon, 'your position and present business will scarce
jump with the modesty of your words. But here are young men who will
find the fire if their elders bring the brains. This is Captain Micah
Clarke, and Captain Lockarby, and Captain the Honourable Sir Gervas
Jerome, who have all come far to draw their swords for the downtrodden
faith.'

'Taunton welcomes ye, young sirs,' said the Mayor, looking a
trifle askance, as I thought, at the baronet, who had drawn out his
pocket-mirror, and was engaged in the brushing of his eyebrows. 'I trust
that during your stay in this town ye will all four take up your abode
with me. 'Tis a homely roof and simple fare, but a soldier's wants are
few. And now, Colonel, I would fain have your advice as to these three
drakes, whether if rehooped they may be deemed fit for service; and also
as to these demi-cannons, which were used in the old Parliamentary days,
and may yet have a word to say in the people's cause.'

The old soldier and the Puritan instantly plunged into a deep
and learned disquisition upon the merits of wall-pieces, drakes,
demi-culverins, sakers, minions, mortar-pieces, falcons, and
pattereroes, concerning all which pieces of ordnance Saxon had strong
opinions to offer, fortified by many personal hazards and experiences.
He then dwelt upon the merits of fire-arrows and fire-pikes in the
attack or defence of places of strength, and had finally begun to
descant upon sconces, 'directis lateribus,' and upon works, semilunar,
rectilineal, horizontal, or orbicular, with so many references to his
Imperial Majesty's lines at Gran, that it seemed that his discourse
would never find an end. We slipped away at last, leaving him still
discussing the effects produced by the Austrian grenadoes upon a
Bavarian brigade of pikes at the battle of Ober-Graustock.

'Curse me if I like accepting this old fellow's offer,' said Sir Gervas,
in an undertone. 'I have heard of these Puritan households. Much grace
to little sack, and texts flying about as hard and as jagged as flint
stones. To bed at sundown, and a sermon ready if ye do but look kindly
at the waiting-wench or hum the refrain of a ditty.'

'His home may be larger, but it could scarce be stricter than that of my
own father,' I remarked.

'I'll warrant that,' cried Reuben. 'When we have been a morris-dancing,
or having a Saturday night game of "kiss-in-the-ring," or
"parson-has-lost-his-coat," I have seen Ironside Joe stride past us, and
cast a glance at us which hath frozen the smile upon our lips. I warrant
that he would have aided Colonel Pride to shoot the bears and hack down
the maypoles.'

''Twere fratricide for such a man to shoot a bear,' quoth Sir Gervas,
'with all respect, friend Clarke, for your honoured progenitor.'

'No more than for you to shoot at a popinjay,' I answered, laughing;
'but as to the Mayor's offer, we can but go to meat with him now, and
should it prove irksome it will be easy for you to plead some excuse,
and so get honourably quit of it. But bear in mind, Sir Gervas, that
such households are in very truth different to any with which you are
acquainted, so curb your tongue or offence may come of it. Should I cry
"hem!" or cough, it will be a sign to you that you had best beware.'

'Agreed, young Solomon!' cried he. 'It is, indeed, well to have a pilot
like yourself who knows these godly waters. For my own part, I should
never know how near I was to the shoals. But our friends have finished
the battle of Ober what's its name, and are coming towards us. I trust,
worthy Mr. Mayor, that your difficulties have been resolved?'

'They are, sir,' replied the Puritan. 'I have been much edified by your
Colonel's discourse, and I have little doubt that by serving under him
ye will profit much by his ripe experience.'

'Very like, sir, very like,' said Sir Gervas carelessly.

'But it is nigh one o'clock,' the Mayor continued, 'our frail flesh
cries aloud for meat and drink. I beg that ye will do me the favour to
accompany me to my humble dwelling, where we shall find the household
board already dressed.'

With these words he led the way out of the hall and paced slowly down
Fore Street, the people falling back to right and to left as he passed,
and raising their caps to do him reverence. Here and there, as he
pointed out to us, arrangements had been made for barring the road with
strong chains to prevent any sudden rush of cavalry. In places, too, at
the corner of a house, a hole had been knocked in the masonry through
which peeped the dark muzzle of a carronade or wall-piece. These
precautions were the more necessary as several bodies of the Royal
Horse, besides the one which we had repulsed, were known to be within
the Deane, and the town, deprived of its ramparts, was open to an
incursion from any daring commander.

The chief magistrate's house was a squat square-faced stone building
within a court which opened on to East Street. The peaked oak door,
spangled with broad iron nails, had a gloomy and surly aspect, but
the hall within was lightful and airy, with a bright polished cedar
planking, and high panelling of some dark-grained wood which gave forth
a pleasant smell as of violets. A broad night of steps rose up from the
farther end of the hall, down which as we entered a young sweet-faced
maid came tripping, with an old dame behind her, who bore in her hands a
pile of fresh napery. At the sight of us the elder one retreated up the
stairs again, whilst the younger came flying down three steps at a
time, threw her arms round the old Mayor's neck, and kissed him fondly,
looking hard into his face the while, as a mother gazes into that of a
child with whom she fears that aught may have gone amiss.

'Weary again, daddy, weary again,' she said, shaking her head anxiously,
with a small white hand upon each of his shoulders. 'Indeed, and indeed,
thy spirit is greater than thy strength.'

'Nay, nay, lass,' said he, passing his hand fondly over her rich brown
hair. The workman must toil until the hour of rest is rung. This,
gentlemen, is my granddaughter Ruth, the sole relic of my family and the
light of mine old age. The whole grove hath been cut down, and only the
oldest oak and the youngest sapling left. These cavaliers, little one,
have come from afar to serve the cause, and they have done us the honour
to accept of our poor hospitality.'

'Ye are come in good time, gentlemen,' she answered, looking us straight
in the eyes with a kindly smile as a sister might greet her brothers.
'The household is gathered round the table and the meal is ready.'

'But not more ready than we,' cried the stout old burgher. 'Do thou
conduct our guests to their places, whilst I seek my room and doff these
robes of office, with my chain and tippet, ere I break my fast.'

Following our fair guide we passed into a very large and lofty room, the
walls of which were wainscoted with carved oak, and hung at either end
with tapestry. The floor was tesselated after the French fashion, and
plentifully strewn with skins and rugs. At one end of the apartment
stood a great white marble fireplace, like a small room in itself,
fitted up, as was the ancient custom, with an iron stand in the centre,
and with broad stone benches in the recess on either side. Lines of
hooks above the chimneypiece had been used, as I surmise, to support
arms, for the wealthy merchants of England were wont to keep enough in
their houses to at least equip their apprentices and craftsmen. They
had now, however, been removed, nor was there any token of the troublous
times save a single heap of pikes and halberds piled together in a
corner.

Down the centre of this room there ran a long and massive table, which
was surrounded by thirty or forty people, the greater part of whom were
men. They were on their feet as we entered, and a grave-faced man at the
farther end was drawling forth an interminable grace, which began as a
thanksgiving for food, but wandered away into questions of Church and
State, and finally ended in a supplication for Israel now in arms to do
battle for the Lord. While this was proceeding we stood in a group
by the door with our caps doffed, and spent our time in observing the
company more closely than we could have done with courtesy had their
eyes not been cast down and their thoughts elsewhere.

They were of all ages, from greybeards down to lads scarce out of their
teens, all with the same solemn and austere expression of countenance,
and clad in the same homely and sombre garb. Save their wide white
collars and cuffs, not a string of any colour lessened the sad severity
of their attire. Their black coats and doublets were cut straight and
close, and their cordovan leather shoes, which in the days of our youth
were usually the seat of some little ornament, were uniformly square
toed and tied with sad-coloured ribbon. Most of them wore plain
sword-belts of untanned hide, but the weapons themselves, with their
broad felt hats and black cloaks, were laid under the benches or placed
upon the settles which lined the walls. They stood with their hands
clasped and their heads bent, listening to the untimely address, and
occasionally by some groan or exclamation testifying that the preacher's
words had moved them.

The overgrown grace came at last to an end, when the company sat
silently down, and proceeded without pause or ceremony to attack the
great joints which smoked before them. Our young hostess led us to the
end of the table, where a high carded chair with a black cushion upon it
marked the position of the master of the house. Mistress Timewell seated
herself upon the right of the Mayor's place, with Sir Gervas beside her,
while the post of honour upon the left was assigned to Saxon. On my left
sat Lockarby, whose eyes I observed had been fixed in undisguised and
all-absorbing admiration upon the Puritan maiden from the first moment
that he had seen her. The table was of no great breadth, so that we
could talk across in spite of the clatter of plates and dishes, the
bustle of servants, and the deep murmur of voices.

'This is my father's household,' said our hostess, addressing herself to
Saxon. 'There is not one of them who is not in his employ. He hath many
apprentices in the wool trade. We sit down forty to meat every day in
the year.'

'And to right good fare, too,' quoth Saxon, glancing down the table.
'Salmon, ribs of beef, loin of mutton, veal, pasties--what could man
wish for more? Plenty of good home-brewed, too, to wash it down. If
worthy Master Timewell can arrange that the army be victualled after the
same fashion, I for one shell be beholden to him. A cup of dirty water
and a charred morsel cooked on a ramrod over the camp fire are like to
take the place of these toothsome dainties.'

'Is it not best to have faith?' said the Puritan maiden. 'Shall not the
Almighty feed His soldiers even as Elisha was fed in the wilderness and
Hagar in the desert?'

'Aye,' exclaimed a lanky-haired, swarthy young man who sat upon the
right of Sir Gervas, 'he will provide for us, even as the stream of
water gushed forth out of dry places, even as the quails and the manna
lay thick upon barren soil.'

'So I trust, young sir,' quoth Saxon, 'but we must none the less arrange
a victual-train, with a staff of wains, duly numbered, and an intendant
over each, after the German fashion. Such things should not be left to
chance.'

Pretty Mistress Timewell glanced up with a half startled look at this
remark, as though shocked at the want of faith implied in it. Her
thoughts might have taken the form of words had not her father entered
the room at the moment, the whole company rising and bowing to him as he
advanced to his seat.

'Be seated, friends,' said he, with a wave of his hand; 'we are a homely
folk, Colonel Saxon, and the old-time virtue of respect for our elders
has not entirely forsaken us. I trust, Ruth,' he continued, 'that thou
hast seen to the wants of our guests.'

We all protested that we had never received such attention and
hospitality.

''Tis well, 'tis well,' said the good wool-worker. 'But your plates are
clear and your glasses empty. William, look to it! A good workman
is ever a good trencherman. If a 'prentice of mine cannot clean his
platter, I know that I shall get little from him with carder and teazel.
Thew and sinew need building up. A slice from that round of beef,
William! Touching that same battle of Ober-Graustock, Colonel, what part
was played in the fray by that regiment of Pandour horse, in which, as I
understand, thou didst hold a commission?'

This was a question on which, as may be imagined, Saxon had much to say,
and the pair were soon involved in a heated discussion, in which the
experiences of Roundway Down and Marston Moor were balanced against the
results of a score of unpronounceable fights in the Styrian Alps and
along the Danube. Stephen Timewell in his lusty youth had led first
a troop and then a regiment through the wars of the Parliament, from
Chalgrove Field to the final battle at Worcester, so that his warlike
passages, though less varied and extensive than those of our companion,
were enough to enable him to form and hold strong opinions. These were
in the main the same as those of the soldier of fortune, but when their
ideas differed upon any point, there arose forthwith such a cross-fire
of military jargon, such speech of estacados and palisados, such
comparisons of light horse and heavy, of pikemen and musqueteers,
of Lanzknechte, Leaguers, and on-falls, that the unused ear became
bewildered with the babble. At last, on some question of fortification,
the Mayor drew his outworks with the spoons and knives, on which Saxon
opened his parallels with lines of bread, and pushing them rapidly
up with traverses and covered ways, he established himself upon the
re-entering angle of the Mayor's redoubt. This opened up a fresh
question as to counter-mines, with the result that the dispute raged
with renewed vigour.

Whilst this friendly strife was proceeding between the elders, Sir
Gervas Jerome and Mistress Ruth had fallen into conversation at the
other side of the table. I have seldom seen, my dear children, so
beautiful a face as that of this Puritan damsel; and it was beautiful
with that sort of modest and maidenly comeliness where the features
derive their sweetness from the sweet soul which shines through them.
The perfectly-moulded body appeared to be but the outer expression of
the perfect spirit within. Her dark-brown hair swept back from a broad
and white forehead, which surmounted a pair of well-marked eyebrows and
large blue thoughtful eyes. The whole cast of her features was gentle
and dove-like, yet there was a firmness in the mouth and delicate
prominence of the chin which might indicate that in times of trouble and
danger the little maid would prove to be no unworthy descendant of the
Roundhead soldier and Puritan magistrate. I doubt not that where more
loud-tongued and assertive dames might be cowed, the Mayor's soft-voiced
daughter would begin to cast off her gentler disposition, and to show
the stronger nature which underlay it. It amused me much to listen to
the efforts which Sir Gervas made to converse with her, for the damsel
and he lived so entirely in two different worlds, that it took all his
gallantry and ready wit to keep on ground which would be intelligible to
her.

'No doubt you spend much of your time in reading, Mistress Ruth,' he
remarked. 'It puzzles me to think what else you can do so far from
town?'

'Town!' said she in surprise. 'What is Taunton but a town?'

'Heaven forbid that I should deny it,' replied Sir Gervas, 'more
especially in the presence of so many worthy burghers, who have the name
of being somewhat jealous of the honour of their native city. Yet the
fact remains, fair mistress, that the town of London so far transcends
all other towns that it is called, even as I called it just now, _the_
town.'

'Is it so very large, then?' she cried, with pretty wonder. 'But new
louses are building in Taunton, outside the old walls, and beyond
Shuttern, and some even at the other side of the river. Perhaps in time
it may be as large.'

'If all the folks in Taunton were to be added to London,' said Sir
Gervas, 'no one there would observe that there had been any increase.'

'Nay, there you are laughing at me. That is against all reason,' cried
the country maiden.

'Your grandfather will bear out my words,' said Sir Gervas. 'But to
return to your reading, I'll warrant that there is not a page of
Scudery and her "Grand Cyrus" which you have not read. You are familiar,
doubtless, with every sentiment in Cowley, or Waller, or Dryden?'

'Who are these?' she asked. 'At what church do they preach?'

'Faith!' cried the baronet, with a laugh, 'honest John preaches at the
church of Will Unwin, commonly known as Will's, where many a time it
is two in the morning before he comes to the end of his sermon. But why
this question? Do you think that no one may put pen to paper unless they
have also a right to wear a gown and climb up to a pulpit? I had thought
that all of your sex had read Dryden. Pray, what are your own favourite
books?'

'There is Alleine's "Alarm to the Unconverted,"' said she. 'It is a
stirring work, and one which hath wrought much good. Hast thou not found
it to fructify within thee?'

'I have not read the book you name,' Sir Gervas confessed.

'Not read it?' she cried, with raised eyebrows. 'Truly I had thought
that every one had read the "Alarm." What dost thou think, then, of
"Faithful Contendings"?'

'I have not read it.'

'Or of Baxter's Sermons?' she asked.

'I have not read them.'

'Of Bull's "Spirit Cordial," then?'

'I have not read it.'

Mistress Ruth Timewell stared at him in undisguised wonder. 'You may
think me ill-bred to say it, sir,' she remarked, 'but I cannot but
marvel where you have been, or what you have done all your life. Why,
the very children in the street have read these books.'

'In truth, such works come little in our way in London,' Sir Gervas
answered. 'A play of George Etherege's, or a jingle of Sir John
Suckling's is lighter, though mayhap less wholesome food for the mind.
A man in London may keep pace with the world of letters without
much reading, for what with the gossip of the coffee-houses and the
news-letters that fall in his way, and the babble of poets or wits
at the assemblies, with mayhap an evening or two in the week at the
playhouse, with Vanbrugh or Farquhar, one can never part company for
long with the muses. Then, after the play, if a man is in no humour for
a turn of luck at the green table at the Groom Porter's, he may stroll
down to the Coca Tree if he be a Tory, or to St. James's if he be a
Whig, and it is ten to one if the talk turn not upon the turning of
alcaics, or the contest between blank verse or rhyme. Then one may,
after an arriere supper, drop into Will's or Slaughter's and find Old
John, with Tickell and Congreve and the rest of them, hard at work
on the dramatic unities, or poetical justice, or some such matter. I
confess that my own tastes lay little in that line, for about that hour
I was likely to be worse employed with wine-flask, dice-box, or--'

'Hem! hem!' cried I warningly, for several of the Puritans were
listening with faces which expressed anything but approval.

'What you say of London is of much interest to me,' said the Puritan
maiden, 'though these names and places have little meaning to my
ignorant ears. You did speak, however, of the playhouse. Surely no
worthy man goes near those sinks of iniquity, the baited traps of the
Evil One? Has not the good and sanctified Master Bull declared from
the pulpit that they are the gathering-place of the froward, the chosen
haunts of the perverse Assyrians, as dangerous to the soul as any
of those Papal steeple-houses wherein the creature is sacrilegiously
confounded with the Creator?'

'Well and truly spoken, Mistress Timewell,' cried the lean young
Puritan upon the right, who had been an attentive listener to the whole
conversation. 'There is more evil in such houses than even in the cities
of the plain. I doubt not that the wrath of the Lord will descend
upon them, and destroy them, and wreck them utterly, together with the
dissolute men and abandoned women who frequent them.'

'Your strong opinions, friend,' said Sir Gervas quietly, 'are borne out
doubtless by your full knowledge of the subject. How often, prythee,
have you been in these playhouses which you are so ready to decry?'

'I thank the Lord that I have never been so far tempted from the
straight path as to set foot within one,' the Puritan answered, 'nor
have I ever been in that great sewer which is called London. I trust,
however, that I with others of the faithful may find our way thither
with our tucks at our sides ere this business is finished, when we shall
not be content, I'll warrant, with shutting these homes of vice, as
Cromwell did, but we shall not leave one stone upon another, and shall
sow the spot with salt, that it may be a hissing and a byword amongst
the people.'

'You are right, John Derrick,' said the Mayor, who had overheard the
latter part of his remarks. 'Yet methinks that a lower tone and a more
backward manner would become you better when you are speaking with your
master's guests. Touching these same playhouses, Colonel, when we have
carried the upper hand this time, we shall not allow the old tares to
check the new wheat. We know what fruit these places have borne in the
days of Charles, the Gwynnes, the Palmers, and the whole base crew of
foul lecherous parasites. Have you ever been in London, Captain Clarke?'

'Nay, sir; I am country born and bred.'

'The better man you,' said our host. 'I have been there twice. The first
time was in the days of the Rump, when Lambert brought in his division
to overawe the Commons. I was then quartered at the sign of the Four
Crosses in Southwark, then kept by a worthy man, one John Dolman, with
whom I had much edifying speech concerning predestination. All was
quiet and sober then, I promise you, and you might have walked from
Westminster to the Tower in the dead of the night without hearing aught
save the murmur of prayer and the chanting of hymns. Not a ruffler or
a wench was in the streets after dark, nor any one save staid citizens
upon their business, or the halberdiers of the watch. The second visit
which I made was over this business of the levelling of the ramparts,
when I and neighbour Foster, the glover, were sent at the head of a
deputation from this town to the Privy Council of Charles. Who could
have credited that a few years would have made such a change? Every evil
thing that had been stamped underground had spawned and festered until
its vermin brood flooded the streets, and the godly wore themselves
driven to shun the light of day. Apollyon had indeed triumphed for a
while. A quiet man could not walk the highways without being elbowed
into the kennel by swaggering swashbucklers, or accosted by painted
hussies. Padders and michers, laced cloaks, jingling spurs, slashed
boots, tall plumes, bullies and pimps, oaths and blasphemies--I promise
you hell was waxing fat. Even in the solitude of one's coach one was not
free from the robber.'

'How that, sir?' asked Reuben.

'Why marry, in this wise. As I was the sufferer I have the best right
to tell the tale. Ye must know that after our reception--which was
cold enough, for we were about as welcome to the Privy Council as the
hearth-tax man is to the village housewife--we were asked, more as
I guess from derision than from courtesy, to the evening levee at
Buckingham Palace. We would both fain have been excused from going but
we feared that our refusal might give undue offence, and so hinder the
success of our mission. My homespun garments ware somewhat rough for
such an occasion, yet I determined to appear in them, with the addition
of a new black baize waistcoat faced with silk, and a good periwig, for
which I gave three pounds ten shillings in the Haymarket.'

The young Puritan opposite turned up his eyes and murmured something
about 'sacrificing to Dagon,' which fortunately for him was inaudible to
the high-spirited old man.

'It was but a worldly vanity,' quoth the Mayor; 'for, with all
deference, Sir Gervas Jerome, a man's own hair arranged with some taste,
and with perhaps a sprinkling of powder, is to my mind the fittest
