with a silk handkerchief.

Over the reedy marsh upon his right, where a windmill waved its lazy
arms, a score of larks were singing.  To his left the gulls mewed
across the cliffs and the remoter sandbanks that thrust up their
yellow ridges under the ebb-tide.  The hum of the little town sounded
drowsily behind him.

He gazed across the sandbanks upon the blue leagues of sea, and
rubbed his fingers softly up and down the unshaven side of his face.

"H'm," he said, and then "p'sh!" and then "p'sh!" again; and, as if
this settled it, readjusted his wig and hat and set off down the road
faster than ever.

A cluster of stunted poplars appeared in the distance, and a long
thatched house; then, between the trees, the eye caught sight of two
other buildings, exactly alike, but of a curious shape and colour.
Imagine two round towers, each about forty feet in height, daubed
with a bright blue wash and surmounted with a high-pitched, conical
roof of a somewhat darker tint.  Above each roof a gilt vane
glittered, and a flock of white pigeons circled overhead or,
alighting, dotted the tiles with patches of silver.

A bend of the road broke up this cluster of trees and buildings.
The long thatched house fell upon the left of the highway, and in
front of it a sign-post sprang into view, with a drinking-trough
below.  Directly opposite, the two blue roofs ranged themselves side
by side, with long strips of garden and a thick privet hedge between
them and the road.  And behind, in the direction of the marsh, the
poplars stretched in an irregular line.

Now the nearer of these blue pavilions was the home of Captain
Barker, who for more than two years had not crossed its threshold.
Yet he neither paused by its small blue gate nor glanced up the
gravelled path.  Nor, though thirsty, did he turn aside to the porch
of the Fish and Anchor Inn; but kept along the privet hedge until he
came to the second blue gate.  Here he drew up and stood for a moment
with his hand on the latch.

A trim lawn stretched before him to the door of the pavilion, and
here, on a rustic seat before an equally rustic table, sat a long
lean gentleman, in a suit of Lincoln green faced with scarlet, who
gazed into a pewter tankard.  His sword lay on the turf beside him,
and a hat of soft cloth edged with feathers hung on the arm of the
bench.

This long gentleman looked up as the gate clicked, stretched out his
legs, rose, and disappeared within the pavilion, returning after a
minute with a jug of beer and a fresh tankard.

"Paid off your crew already?"

The little hunchback took a pull, answered "No" as he set down the
tankard, and looked up at the weathercock overhead.

"Wind's in the south-east."

The long man looked at the little one and pursed up his mouth.
His face proclaimed him of a like age with Captain Barker.
It did not at all match his figure, being short as a bull-dog's; and
like a bull-dog he was heavily jowled.  Many weathers had tanned his
complexion to a rich corn-colour.  His name was Jeremy Runacles, and
for two years, that had ended on this very morning, he had commanded
the _Trident_ frigate.  As he climbed down her ladder into his gig he
had left on the deck behind him a reputation for possessing a shorter
temper than any three officers in his Majesty's service.  At present
his steel-blue eyes seemed gentle enough.

"You've something to tell," he said, after a minute's silence.

The hunchback kicked at a plantain in the turf for two minutes
longer, and asked--

"How's the little maid, Jemmy?"

"Grown.  She's having her morning nap."

"She want's a mother."

"She'll have to do with a nurse."

"You don't want to marry again?"

"No."

"That's a lie."

Before Captain Runacles could resent this, the little man turned his
back and took six paces to the party hedge and six paces back.

"I say, Jemmy, do you think we could fight?"

"Not decently."

"I was thinking that.  I don't see another way out of it, though."

He kicked the plantain out of the ground, and, looking up, said very
softly--"Meg's a widow."

Captain Jeremy Runacles sat down on the rustic bench.  A hot flush
had sprung into his face and a light leapt in his eyes; but he said
nothing.  Captain Barker cocked his head on one side and went on--

"Yes, you lied, Jemmy.  That fellow, as I guess, ran off and left
her, finding that the old man had the courage to die without coming
to reason.  He went back to his regiment, sailed, and was drowned in
a ditch.  She's back at the old house, and in want."

"You've seen her?"

"Look here, Jemmy.  You and I are a couple of tomfools; but we try to
play fair."

"Upon my soul, Jack," observed Captain Jemmy, rising to his feet
again, "we can't fight.  You're too good a fellow to kill."

"H'mph, I was thinking that."

As if by consent, the pair began to pace up and down the turf, one on
either side of the gravelled path.  At the end of three minutes
Captain Jack looked up.

"After all, you've been married once, whereas I--"

"That doesn't count," the other interrupted.  "I married in an
unguarded moment.  I was huffed with Meg."

"No, I suppose it doesn't count."

They resumed their walk.  Captain Jemmy was the next to speak.

"It seems to me Meg must decide."

"Yes, but we must start fair."

"The devil! we can't propose one in each ear.  And if we race for
it--"

"You must give me half a mile's start."

"But we can write."

"Yes; and deliver our letters together at the door."

"On the other hand, I've always heard that women look upon a written
proposal of marriage as rather tame."

"That objection would hardly apply to two in one day.  And, besides,
she knows about us."

"We'll write," said Captain Jemmy.

He went into the pavilion to search for pens and paper, while Captain
Barker stepped down to the Fish and Anchor to borrow a bottle of ink.

"There must be preliminaries," the little man observed, returning and
setting the ink down in the centre of the rustic table, on which
already lay a bundle of old quills and some quarto sheets of yellow
paper.

"As for instance?"

"_Imprimis_, a thick folio book for me to sit on.  The carpenter
built this table after your measure."

"I will fetch one."

"Also more beer."

"I will draw some."

"Thirdly, a time-keeper.  My stomach's empty, but it can hold out for
another hour.  We'll give ourselves an hour; start together and
finish together."

Captain Runacles fished a silver whistle from his waistcoat pocket
and blew on it shrilly.  The blue and white door of the pavilion was
opened, and a slight old man in a blue livery appeared on the step
and came ambling down the path.  The weight of an enormous head, on
the top of which his grey wig seemed to be balanced rather than
fitted, bowed him as he moved.  But he drew himself up to salute the
two captains.

"Glad to welcome ye, Captain John, along with master here.  Hey, but
you've aged--the pair o' ye."

"Simeon," said his master, "draw us some beer.  Aged, you say?"

"Aye--aged, aged: a trivial, remediless complaint, common to folk.
Valiant deeds ye'll do yet, my masters; but though I likes to be
hopeful, the door's closin' on ye both.  Ye be staid to the eye,
noticeably staid.  The first sign o't, to be marked at forty or so,
is when a woman's blush pales before wine held to the light; the
second, and that, too, ye've passed--"

"Hurry, you old fool!  As it happens you've been proving us a pair of
raw striplings."

"Hee-hee," tittered the old man sardonically, and catching up the
tankards trotted back to the house, with his master at his heels.
Captain Barker, left alone, rearranged his neckcloth, contemplated
his crooked legs for a moment with some disgust, and began to trot up
and down the grass-plot, whistling the while with great energy and no
regard for tune.

The pair reappeared in the doorway--Captain Runacles bearing an
hour-glass and a volume of "Purchas," and Simeon the tankards,
crowned with a creamy froth.

"Have you picked your quill?"

"Yes," answered the hunchback, settling himself on top of the brown
folio.  "No, 'tis a split one."

The pens were old, and had lain with the ink dry upon them ever since
the outbreak of the Dutch War.  The two men were half a minute in
finding a couple that would write.  Then Captain Runacles turned the
hour-glass abruptly; and for an hour there was no sound in the
pavilion garden but the scratching of quills, the murmur of pigeons
on the roof, and the creaking of the gilded vane above them.



CHAPTER II.


THE DICE-BOX.

That same afternoon, at four o'clock, Captain Barker and Captain
Runacles entered Harwich and advanced up the West Street side by
side.  Each had a bulky letter in his side-pocket, and the address
upon each letter was the same.  They talked but little.

On the right-hand side of West Street, as you enter the town, and a
hundred yards or more from the town gate, there stood at that time a
two-storeyed house of more pretensions than its fellows--from which
it drew back somewhat.  A line of railings, covered with ironwork of
a florid and intricate pattern, but greatly decayed, shut it off from
the roadway.  The visitor, on opening the broad iron gate over which
this pattern culminated in the figure of a Triton blowing a
conch-shell, found himself in a pebbled court and before a massive
front-door.

Neglect hung visibly over house and court alike as the two captains
entered by the iron gate and looked around them with more trepidation
than they had ever displayed in action.  Grass sprouted between the
pebbles and a greenish stain lay upon the flagstones.  The drab
frontage was similarly streaked; dust and rain together had set a
crust upon the windows, and tufts of dark mossy grass again
flourished in the gutter-pipes beneath the eaves.

Surveying this desolation, Captain Jemmy uttered a grunt and Captain
John a "p'sh!"  They fumbled in their pockets, drew out their two
letters, and moved to the blistered front-door.  A bell-pull, as
rusty as the railings outside, depended by the jamb.  Captain Jemmy
tugged at it.  It was noteworthy that whenever any effort had to be
put forth, however small, the tall man stepped forward and the
hunchback looked on.  It was Captain Jemmy, for instance, who had, a
moment before, pushed back the gate.

He had to tug thrice before a discordant bell sounded within the
house, and twice again before footsteps began to shuffle along the
passage.

A bolt was let down and the big door fell open, disclosing a small
serving-girl, who stared upon the visitors with round eyes.

"Is your mistress within?"

"Mistress Salt is within, sirs; but--"

"But what?"

"She--she can't see you!" The girl burst into tears.

"Who the devil asked her to see us?" rapped out Captain Barker.

"You are to take these two letters," interposed Captain Runacles.
Each captain held out his letter.  "You are to take these two--blow
your nose and dry your eyes--letters to your mistress at once--mind
you, _at once_--and together--_together_, you understand, and--what
in thunder are you whimpering about?"

"I c-c-can't, sirs."

"Can't!  Why, in the name of--don't drip on 'em, I tell you!  Why, in
the name of--"

The iron gate creaked behind them, and the two captains turned their
heads.  A portly, broad-shouldered gentleman, in a suit of snuff
colour, came slowly across the court, with both hands behind him, and
a cane rapping against his heels.

"Dr. Beckerleg."

"Hey?  Why--Captain Barker!  Captain Runacles!  Glad to see you
both--glad to see you both home again!  Also I'd be glad to know what
you're both doing here, at such a time."

The captains looked at each other and coughed.  They turned towards
the doorway.  The serving-girl had disappeared, taking their letters
with her.  Captain Barker faced round upon the Doctor.
