Now, as it chanced by bad luck, or in the course of Providence,
something had drawn her attention elsewhere.  She was unconscious of
his regard.  Her own eyes were fixed in a far-away gaze.  Her colour
was high, her lips were parted, her bosom heaved gently.

The shadow deepened on the Vidame's face.  Slowly he took his eyes from
hers, and looked northwards also.

Caylus Castle stands on a rock in the middle of the narrow valley of
that name.  The town clusters about the ledges of the rock so closely
that when I was a boy I could fling a stone clear of the houses.  The
hills are scarcely five hundred yards distant on either side, rising in
tamer colours from the green fields about the brook.  It is possible
from the terrace to see the whole valley, and the road which passes
through it lengthwise. Catherine's eyes were on the northern extremity
of the defile, where the highway from Cahors descends from the uplands.
She had been sitting with her face turned that way all the afternoon.

I looked that way too.  A solitary horseman was descending the steep
track from the hills.

"Mademoiselle!"  cried the Vidame suddenly.  We all looked up. His tone
was such that the colour fled from Kit's face.  There was something in
his voice she had never heard in any voice before--something that to a
woman was like a blow. "Mademoiselle," he snarled, "is expecting news
from Cahors, from her lover.  I have the honour to congratulate M. de
Pavannes on his conquest."

Ah!  he had guessed it!  As the words fell on the sleepy silence, an
insult in themselves, I sprang to my feet, amazed and angry, yet
astounded by his quickness of sight and wit.  He must have recognized
the Pavannes badge at that distance.  "M. le Vidame," I said
indignantly--Catherine was white and voiceless--"M. le Vidame--" but
there I stopped and faltered stammering.  For behind him I could see
Croisette; and Croisette gave me no sign of encouragement or support.

So we stood face to face for a moment; the boy and the man of the
world, the stripling and the ROUE.  Then the Vidame bowed to me in
quite a new fashion.  "M. Anne de Caylus desires to answer for M. de
Pavannes?"  he asked smoothly; with a mocking smoothness.

I understood what he meant.  But something prompted me--Croisette said
afterwards that it was a happy thought, though now I know the crisis to
have been less serious than he fancied to answer, "Nay, not for M. de
Pavannes.  Rather for my cousin."  And I bowed.  "I have the honour on
her behalf to acknowledge your congratulations, M. le Vidame.  It
pleases her that our nearest neighbour should also be the first outside
the family to wish her well.  You have divined truly in supposing that
she will shortly be united to M. de Pavannes."

I suppose--for I saw the giant's colour change and his lip quiver as I
spoke--that his previous words had been only a guess.  For a moment the
devil seemed to be glaring through his eyes; and he looked at Marie and
me as a wild animal at its keepers.  Yet he maintained his cynical
politeness in part.  "Mademoiselle desires my congratulations?"  he
said, slowly, labouring with each word it seemed.  "She shall have them
on the happy day.  She shall certainly have them then.  But these are
troublous times.  And Mademoiselle's betrothed is I think a Huguenot,
and has gone to Paris.  Paris--well, the air of Paris is not good for
Huguenots, I am told."

I saw Catherine shiver; indeed she was on the point of fainting, I
broke in rudely, my passion getting the better of my fears. "M. de
Pavannes can take care of himself, believe me," I said brusquely.

"Perhaps so," Bezers answered, his voice like the grating of steel on
steel.  "But at any rate this will be a memorable day for Mademoiselle.
The day on which she receives her first congratulations--she will
remember it as long as she lives!  Oh, yes, I will answer for that, M.
Anne," he said looking brightly at one and another of us, his eyes more
oblique than ever, "Mademoiselle will remember it, I am sure!"

It would be impossible to describe the devilish glance he flung at the
poor sinking girl as he withdrew, the horrid emphasis he threw into
those last words, the covert deadly threat they conveyed to the dullest
ears.  That he went then, was small mercy.  He had done all the evil he
could do at present.  If his desire had been to leave fear behind him,
he had certainly succeeded.

Kit crying softly went into the house; her innocent coquetry more than
sufficiently punished already.  And we three looked at one another with
blank faces, It was clear that we had made a dangerous enemy, and an
enemy at our own gates.  As the Vidame had said, these were troublous
times when things were done to men--ay, and to women and
children--which we scarce dare to speak of now.  "I wish the Vicomte
were here," Croisette said uneasily after we had discussed several
unpleasant contingencies.

"Or even Malines the steward," I suggested.

"He would not be much good," replied Croisette.

"And he is at St. Antonin, and will not be back this week. Father
Pierre too is at Albi."

"You do not think," said Marie, "that he will attack us?"

"Certainly not!" Croisette retorted with contempt.  "Even the Vidame
would not dare to do that in time of peace.  Besides, he has not half a
score of men here," continued the lad, shrewdly, "and counting old Gil
and ourselves we have as many.  And Pavannes always said that three men
could hold the gate at the bottom of the ramp against a score.  Oh, he
will not try that!"

"Certainly not!" I agreed.  And so we crushed Marie.  "But for Louis de
Pavannes--"

Catherine interrupted me.  She came out quickly looking a different
person; her face flushed with anger, her tears dried.

"Anne!" she cried, imperiously, "what is the matter down below--will
you see?"

I had no difficulty in doing that.  All the sounds of town life came up
to us on the terrace.  Lounging there we could hear the chaffering over
the wheat measures in the cloisters of the market-square, the yell of a
dog, the voice of a scold, the church bell, the watchman's cry.  I had
only to step to the wall to overlook it all.  On this summer afternoon
the town had been for the most part very quiet.  If we had not been
engaged in our own affairs we should have taken the alarm before,
remarking in the silence the first beginnings of what was now a very
respectable tumult.  It swelled louder even as we stepped to the wall.

We could see--a bend in the street laying it open--part of the Vidame's
house; the gloomy square hold which had come to him from his mother.
His own chateau of Bezers lay far away in Franche Comte, but of late he
had shown a preference--Catherine could best account for it,
perhaps--for this mean house in Caylus.  It was the only house in the
town which did not belong to us.  It was known as the House of the
Wolf, and was a grim stone building surrounding a courtyard.  Rows of
wolves' heads carved in stone flanked the windows, whence their bare
fangs grinned day and night at the church porch opposite.

The noise drew our eyes in this direction; and there lolling in a
window over the door, looking out on the street with a laughing eye,
was Bezers himself.  The cause of his merriment--we had not far to look
for it--was a horseman who was riding up the street under difficulties.
He was reining in his steed--no easy task on that steep greasy
pavement--so as to present some front to a score or so of ragged knaves
who were following close at his heels, hooting and throwing mud and
pebbles at him.  The man had drawn his sword, and his oaths came up to
us, mingled with shrill cries of "VIVE LA MESSE!"  and half drowned by
the clattering of the horse's hoofs.  We saw a stone strike him in the
face, and draw blood, and heard him swear louder than before.

"Oh!"  cried Catherine, clasping her hands with a sudden shriek of
indignation, "my letter!  They will get my letter!"

"Death!"  exclaimed Croisette, "She is right!  It is M. de Pavannes'
courier!  This must be stopped!  We cannot stand this, Anne!"

"They shall pay dearly for it, by our Lady!"  I cried swearing myself.
"And in peace time too--the villains!  Gil!  Francis!" I shouted,
"where are you?"

And I looked round for my fowling piece, while Croisette jumped on the
wall, and forming a trumpet with his hands, shrieked at the top of his
voice, "Back!  he bears a letter from the Vicomte!"

But the device did not succeed, and I could not find my gun.  For a
moment we were helpless, and before I could have fetched the gun from
the house, the horseman and the hooting rabble at his heels, had turned
a corner and were hidden by the roofs.

Another turn however would bring them out in front of the gateway, and
seeing this we hurried down the ramp to meet them. I stayed a moment to
tell Gil to collect the servants, and, this keeping me, Croisette
reached the narrow street outside before me.  As I followed him I was
nearly knocked down by the rider, whose face was covered with, dirt and
blood, while fright had rendered his horse unmanageable.  Darting aside
I let him pass--he was blinded and could not see me--and then found
that Croisette--brave lad!  had collared the foremost of the ruffians,
and was beating him with his sheathed sword, while the rest of the
rabble stood back, ashamed, yet sullen, and with anger in their eyes.
A dangerous crew, I thought; not townsmen, most of them.

"Down with the Huguenots!"  cried one, as I appeared, one bolder than
the rest.

"Down with the CANAILLE!"  I retorted, sternly eyeing the ill-looking
ring.  "Will you set yourselves above the king's peace, dirt that you
are?  Go back to your kennels!"

The words were scarcely out of my mouth, before I saw that the fellow
whom Croisette was punishing had got hold of a dagger.  I shouted a
warning, but it came too late.  The blade fell, and--thanks to
God--striking the buckle of the lad's belt, glanced off harmless.  I
saw the steel flash up again--saw the spite in the man's eyes:  but
this time I was a step nearer, and before the weapon fell, I passed my
sword clean through the wretch's body. He went down like a log,
Croisette falling with him, held fast by his stiffening fingers.

I had never killed a man before, nor seen a man die; and if I had
stayed to think about it, I should have fallen sick perhaps.  But it
was no time for thought; no time for sickness.  The crowd were close
upon us, a line of flushed threatening faces from wall to wall.  A
single glance downwards told me that the man was dead, and I set my
foot upon his neck.  "Hounds!  Beasts!"  I cried, not loudly this time,
for though I was like one possessed with rage, it was inward rage, "go
to your kennels!  Will you dare to raise a hand against a Caylus?
Go--or when the Vicomte returns, a dozen of you shall hang in the
market-place!"

I suppose I looked fierce enough--I know I felt no fear, only a strange
exaltation--for they slunk away.  Unwillingly, but with little delay
the group melted, Bezers' following--of whom I knew the dead man was
one--the last to go.  While I still glared at them, lo!  the street was
empty; the last had disappeared round the bend.  I turned to find Gil
and half-a-dozen servants standing with pale faces at my back.
Croisette seized my hand with a sob.  "Oh, my lord," cried Gil,
quaveringly.  But I shook one off, I frowned at the other.

"Take up this carrion!"  I said, touching it with my foot, "And hang it
from the justice-elm.  And then close the gates!  See to it, knaves,
and lose no time."



CHAPTER II.

THE VIDAME'S THREAT.

Croisette used to tell a story, of the facts of which I have no
remembrance, save as a bad dream.  He would have it that I left my
pallet that night--I had one to myself in the summer, being the eldest,
while he and Marie slept on another in the same room--and came to him
and awoke him, sobbing and shaking and clutching him; and begging him
in a fit of terror not to let me go.  And that so I slept in his arms
until morning.  But as I have said, I do not remember anything of this,
only that I had an ugly dream that night, and that when I awoke I was
lying with him and Marie; so I cannot say whether it really happened.

At any rate, if I had any feeling of the kind it did not last long; on
the contrary--it would be idle to deny it--I was flattered by the
sudden respect, Gil and the servants showed me. What Catherine thought
of the matter I could not tell.  She had her letter and apparently
found it satisfactory.  At any rate we saw nothing of her.  Madame
Claude was busy boiling simples, and tending the messenger's hurts.
And it seemed natural that I should take command.

There could be no doubt--at any rate we had none that the assault on
the courier had taken place at the Vidame's instance.  The only wonder
was that he had not simply cut his throat and taken the letter.  But
looking back now it seems to me that grown men mingled some
childishness with their cruelty in those days--days when the religious
wars had aroused our worst passions.  It was not enough to kill an
enemy.  It pleased people to make--I speak literally--a football of his
head, to throw his heart to the dogs.  And no doubt it had fallen in
with the Vidame's grim humour that the bearer of Pavannes' first love
letter should enter his mistress's presence, bleeding and plaistered
with mud. And that the riff-raff about our own gates should have part
in the insult.

Bezers' wrath would be little abated by the issue of the affair, or the
justice I had done on one of his men.  So we looked well to bolts, and
bars, and windows, although the castle is well-nigh impregnable, the
smooth rock falling twenty feet at least on every side from the base of
the walls.  The gatehouse, Pavannes had shown us, might be blown up
with gunpowder indeed, but we prepared to close the iron grating which
barred the way half-way up the ramp.  This done, even if the enemy
should succeed in forcing an entrance he would only find himself caught
in a trap--in a steep, narrow way exposed to a fire from the top of the
flanking walls, as well as from the front.  We had a couple of
culverins, which the Vicomte had got twenty years before, at the time
of the battle of St. Quentin.  We fixed one of these at the head of the
ramp, and placed the other on the terrace, where by moving it a few
paces forward we could train it on Bezers' house, which thus lay at our
mercy.

Not that we really expected an attack.  But we did not know what to
expect or what to fear.  We had not ten servants, the Vicomte having
taken a score of the sturdiest lackeys and keepers to attend him at
Bayonne.  And we felt immensely responsible.  Our main hope was that
the Vidame would at once go on to Paris, and postpone his vengeance.
So again and again we cast longing glances at the House of the Wolf
hoping that each symptom of bustle heralded his departure.

Consequently it was a shock to me, and a great downfall of hopes, when
Gil with a grave face came to me on the terrace and announced that M.
le Vidame was at the gate, asking to see Mademoiselle.

"It is out of the question that he should see her," the old servant
added, scratching his head in grave perplexity.

"Most certainly.  I will see him instead," I answered stoutly. "Do you
leave Francis and another at the gate, Gil.  Marie, keep within sight,
lad.  And let Croisette stay with me."

These preparations made--and they took up scarcely a moment--I met the
Vidame at the head of the ramp.  "Mademoiselle de Caylus," I said,
bowing, "is, I regret to say, indisposed to-day, Vidame."

"She will not see me?"  he asked, eyeing me very unpleasantly.

"Her indisposition deprives her of the pleasure," I answered with an
effort.  He was certainly a wonderful man, for at sight of him,
three-fourths of my courage, and all my importance, oozed out at the
heels of my boots.

"She will not see me.  Very well," he replied, as if I had not spoken.
And the simple words sounded like a sentence of death. "Then, M. Anne,
I have a crow to pick with you.  What compensation do you propose to
make for the death of my servant? A decent, quiet fellow, whom you
killed yesterday, poor man, because his enthusiasm for the true faith
carried him away a little."

"Whom I killed because he drew a dagger on M. St. Croix de Caylus at
the Vicomte's gate," I answered steadily.  I had thought about this of
course and was ready for it.  "You are aware, M. de Bezers," I
continued, "that the Vicomte has jurisdiction extending to life and
death over all persons within the valley?"
