
As there is no better period to turn to for instruction than the age
of Anne, so, if we must choose a single writer there is no better
master to be studied than Swift. There have been many great writers
and many fine and beautiful styles since the days of the terrible Dean
of St. Patrick's, from the imposing and finely balanced sentences of
Gibbon to the subtle delicacy of Hawthorne and the careful finish of
Robert Louis Stevenson. But in Swift better than in any one writer can
we find the lessons which are so sorely needed now. He had in the
highest degree force, clearness and concentration all combined with a
marvelous simplicity. Swift's style may have lacked richness, but it
never failed in taste. There is not a line of false fine-writing in
all his books. Those are the qualities which are so needed now,
simplicity and clearness and a scrupulous avoidance of that would-be
fine writing which is not at all fine but merely vulgar and insincere.

The writing in our newspapers is where reform is particularly needed.
There are great journals here and there which maintain throughout a
careful standard of good and sober English. Most of them, unhappily,
are filled in the news columns at least with a strange jargon found
nowhere else, spoken by no one and never used in daily life by those
who every night furnish it to the compositors. It is happily
compounded in about equal parts of turgid fine writing, vulgar
jauntiness and indiscriminate slang.

I can best show my meaning by example. A writer in a newspaper wished
to state that a man who had once caused excitement by a book of
temporary interest and who, after the days of his notoriety were over,
lived a long and checkered career, had killed himself. This is the way
he said it:

     His life's work void of fruition and dissipated into
     emptiness, his fondest hopes and ambitions crumbled and
     scattered, shunned as a fanatic, and unable to longer wage
     life's battle, Hinton Rowan Helper, at one time United
     States consul general to Buenos Ayres, yesterday sought the
     darkest egress from his woes and disappointments--a
     suicide's death.

     In an unpretentious lodging-house in Pennsylvania avenue,
     near the Capitol, the man who as much, if not more than any
     other agitator, is said to have blazed the way to the Civil
     War, the writer who stirred this nation to its core by his
     anti-slavery philippics, and the promoter with the most
     gigantic railroad enterprise projected in the history of the
     world, was found gript in the icy hand of death. The brain
     which gave birth to his historic writings had willed the
     stilling of the heart which for three-quarters of a century
     had palpitated quick and high with roseate hopes.

That passage, taken at hazard from a newspaper, is intended, I think,
to be fine writing of an imposing and dramatic kind. Why could not
the writer have written it, a little more carefully perhaps, but still
in just the language which he would have used naturally in describing
the event to his wife or friend? Simply stated, it would have been far
more solemn and impressive than this turgid, insincere account with
its large words, its forced note of tragedy and its split infinitive.
Let me put beneath it another description of a death-bed:

     The blood and spirits of Le Fevre, which were waxing cold
     and slow, and were retreating to their last citadel, the
     heart--rallied back,--the film forsook his eyes for a
     moment,--he looked up wishfully into my Uncle Toby's
     face,--then cast a look upon his boy,--and that ligament,
     fine as it was,--was never broken.

     Nature instantly ebbed again,--the film returned to its
     place,--the pulse fluttered,--stopt,--went
     on,--throbbed,--stopt again,--moved,--stopt,--shall I go on?
     No.

This famous passage is neither unintentional sentiment nor unaffected
pathos. The art is apparent even in the punctuation. The writer meant
to be touching and pathetic and to awaken emotions of tenderness and
pity and he succeeded. The description is all he meant it to be. The
extract from the newspaper arouses no emotion, unless it be
resentment at its form and leaves us cold and unmoved. The other is
touching and pitiful. Observe the manner in which Sterne obtains his
effect, the perfect simplicity and good taste of every word, the
reserve, the gentleness, the utter absence of any straining for
effect. The one description died the day it appeared. The other has
held its place for a century and a half. Are not the qualities which
produced such a result worth striving for?

Let me take another haphazard selection from a description of a young
girl entitled as such to every one's kindness, courtesy and respect.
In it occurs this sentence: "The college girl is grammatical in
speech, but she has the jolliest, chummiest jargon of slang that ever
rolled from under a pink tongue." That articulate sounds come from
beneath the tongue is at least novel and few persons are fortunate
enough to be able to talk with that portion of their mouths. But I
have no desire to dwell either upon the anatomical peculiarities of
the sentence or upon its abysmal vulgarity. It is supposed to be
effective, it is what is appropriately called "breezy," it is a form
of words which can be heard nowhere in the speech of men and women.
Why should it be consigned to print? It is possible to describe a
young girl attractively and effectively in much simpler fashion. Let
me give an example, not a famous passage at all, from another writer:

     She shocked no canon of taste; she was admirably in keeping
     with herself, and never jarred against surrounding
     circumstances. Her figure, to be sure--so small as to be
     almost childlike and so elastic that motion seemed as easy
     or easier to it than rest--would hardly have suited one's
     idea of a countess. Neither did her face--with brown
     ringlets on either side and a slightly piquant nose, and the
     wholesome bloom, and the clear shade of tan, and the half
     dozen freckles, friendly remembrancers of the April sun and
     breeze--precisely give us the right to call her beautiful.
     But there was both luster and depth in her eyes. She was
     very pretty; as graceful as a bird and graceful much in the
     same way; as pleasant about the house as a gleam of sunshine
     falling on the floor through a shadow of twinkling leaves,
     or as a ray of firelight that dances on the wall while
     evening is drawing nigh.

Contrast this with the newspaper sentence and the sensation is one of
pain. Again I say, observe the method by which Hawthorne gets his
effect, the simplicity of the language, the balance of the sentences,
the reserve, the refinement, and the final imaginative touch in the
charming comparison with which the passage ends.

To blame the hard working men who write for the day which is passing
over them because they do not write like Sterne and Hawthorne would be
as absurd as it would be unjust. But they ought to recognize the
qualities of fine English prose, they ought to remember that they can
improve their readers by giving them good, simple English, pure and
undefiled, and they ought not to debauch the public taste by vulgar
fine writing and even more vulgar light writing. In short, they ought
to write for the public as they would talk to their wives and children
and friends; a little more formally and carefully perhaps, but in the
same simple and direct fashion.

For the prolific authors of the flood of stories, which every month
bears on its broad bosom many tons of advertisements, no such
allowance need be made. They are not compelled to furnish copy between
daylight and dark. They need a course of study in English prose more
than anyone else, and they would profit by the effort. As a class
they seem to be like the young man in Du Maurier's picture, who, being
asked if he had read Thackeray, replies, "No. I nevah read novels; I
write them."

In this age of quickening movement and restless haste it is, above all
things, important to struggle against the well-nigh universal
inclination to abandon all efforts for form and style. They are the
great preservers of what is best in literature, the salt which ought
never to lose its savor. Those who use English in public speech and
public writing have a serious responsibility too generally forgotten
and disregarded. I would fain call attention to it altho no single man
can hope to effect much by any plea he can make in behalf of the use
of good English, whether written or spoken. Yet no one, I think, can
read the great masterpieces of English prose and not have both lesson
and responsibility brought home to him. He would be insensible,
indeed, if he did not feel after such reading that he was a sharer in
a noble heritage which it behooved him to guard and cherish. If this
series serves no other purpose, it will exhibit to those who read it
some of the splendors and the beauties of English prose. It will at
least open the gates of literature and perhaps lead its readers to
authors they have not known before, or recall the words of writers who
have entered into their lives and thoughts and thus make them more
mindful of the ineffable value to them and their children of the great
language which is at once their birthright and their inheritance.

HENRY CABOT LODGE.

_Washington, D. C., July 15, 1909._




CONTENTS

VOL. I--GREECE


INTRODUCTION. By Henry Cabot Lodge.


HERODOTUS--(Born probably in 484 B.C., died probably in 424.)

I         Solon's Words of Wisdom to Croesus.
            (From Book I of the "History." Translated by Rawlinson)

II        Babylon and Its Capture by Cyrus.
            (From Book I of the "History." Translated by Taylor)

III       The Pyramid of Cheops.
            (From Book II of the "History." Translated by Rawlinson)

IV        The Story of Periander's Son.
            (From Book III of the "History." Translated by Rawlinson)


THUCYDIDES--(Born about 471 B.C., died about 401.)

I         The Athenians and Spartans Contrasted.
            (From Book I of the "Peloponnesian War." Translated by Benjamin
             Jowett)

II        The Plague at Athens.
            (From Book II of the "Peloponnesian War." Translated by
             Benjamin Jowett)

III       The Sailing of the Athenian Fleet for Sicily.
            (From Book VI of the "Peloponnesian War." Translated by
             Benjamin Jowett)

IV        Completion of the Athenian Defeat at Syracuse.
            (From Book VII of the "Peloponnesian War." Translated by
             Benjamin Jowett)


XENOPHON--(Born about 430 B.C., died about 357.)

I         The Character of Cyrus the Younger.
            (From the "Anabasis." Translated by J. S. Watson)

II        The Greek Army in the Snows of Armenia.
            (From the "Anabasis." Translated by Watson)

III       The Battle of Leuctra.
            (From Book VI of the "Hellenica." Translated by Watson)

IV        Of the Army of the Spartans.
            (From the treatise on "The Government of Lacedaemon."
             Translated by Watson)

V         How to Choose and Manage Saddle Horses.
            (From the treatise on "Horsemanship." Translated by Watson)


PLATO--(Born about 427 B.C., died in 347.)

I         The Image of the Cave.
            (From the "Republic." Translated by Benjamin Jowett)

II        Good and Evil.
            (From the "Protagoras." Translated by Benjamin Jowett)

III       Socrates in Praise of Love.
            (From the "Symposium." Translated by Benjamin Jowett)

IV        The Praise of Socrates by Alcibiades.
            (From the "Symposium." Translated by Benjamin Jowett)

V         The Refusal of Socrates to Escape from Prison.
            (From the "Crito." Translated by Benjamin Jowett)

VI        The Death of Socrates.
            (From the "Phaedo." Translated by Benjamin Jowett)


ARISTOTLE--(Born in 384 B.C., died in 322.)

I         What Things are Pleasant.
            (From Book I of the "Rhetoric." Translated by Buckley)

II        The Life Most Desirable.
            (From Book VII of the "Politics." Translated by Walford)

III       Ideal Husbands and Wives.
            (From Book I of the "Economics." Translated by Walford)

IV        Happiness as an End of Human Action.
            (From Book X of the "Nicomachean Ethics." Translated by Browne)


POLYBIUS--(Born in 204 B.C., died about 125.)

I         The Battle of Cannae.
            (From Book IV of the "Histories." Translated by Shuckburgh)

II        Hannibal's Advance on Rome.
            (From Book IX of the "Histories." Translated by Shuckburgh)

III       The Defense of Syracuse by Archimedes.
            (From Book VIII of the "Histories." Translated by Shuckburgh)


PLUTARCH--(Born about 46 A.D., died in 125.)

I         Demosthenes and Cicero Compared.
            (From the "Lives." Translated by Sir Thomas North)

II        The Assassination of Caesar.
            (From the "Lives." Translated by North)

III       Cleopatra's Barge.
            (From the "Life of Mark Antony." Translated by North)

IV        The Death of Antony and Cleopatra.
            (From the "Life of Mark Antony." Translated by North)


EPICTETUS--(Born about the middle of the first century.)

I         Of Freedom.
            (From the "Discourses." Translated by Thomas Wentworth
             Higginson)

II        Of Friendship.
            (From the "Discourses." Translated by Higginson)

III       The Philosopher and the Crowd.
            (From the "Discourses." Translated by Higginson)


LUCIAN--(Born about 120 A.D., died about 200.)

I         A Descent to the Unknown.
            (From "Menippus." Translated by H. W. and F. G. Fowler)

II        Among the Philosophers.
            (From the "Fisher: A Resurrection Piece." Translated by
             H. W. and F. G. Fowler)

III       Of Liars and Lying.
            (From the "Liar." Translated by H. W. and F. G. Fowler)

       *       *       *       *       *




GREECE

484 B.C.--200 A.D.




HERODOTUS

     Born in Asia Minor, probably in 484 B.C.; died in Italy,
     probably in 424; commonly called the "Father of History";
     assisted in the expulsion of the tyrant Lygdamis from
     Halicarnassus; traveled in Persia, Egypt, and Greece; lived
     afterward in Samos and Athens, settling in Thurii, Italy,
     about 444 B.C.; his history of the Persian invasion of
     Greece, extending to 479 B.C., was first printed in Greek by
     Aldus Manutius in 1502, but a Latin version had appeared in
     1474.[1]

I

SOLON'S WORDS OF WISDOM TO CROESUS[2]


When all these conquests had been added to the Lydian empire, and the
prosperity of Sardis[3] was now at its height, there came thither, one
after another, all the sages of Greece living at the time, and among
them Solon, the Athenian. He was on his travels, having left Athens to
be absent ten years, under the pretense of wishing to see the world,
but really to avoid being forced to repeal any of the laws which at
the request of the Athenians he had made for them. Without his
sanction the Athenians could not repeal them, as they had bound
themselves under a heavy curse to be governed for ten years by the
laws which should be imposed on them by Solon.

On this account, as well as to see the world, Solon set out upon his
travels, in the course of which he went to Egypt to the court of
Amasis,[4] and also paid a visit to Croesus at Sardis. Croesus
received him as his guest, and lodged him in the royal palace. On the
third or fourth day after, he bade his servants conduct Solon over his
treasuries and show him all their greatness and magnificence. When he
had seen them all, and so far as time allowed inspected them,
Croesus addrest this question to him: "Stranger of Athens, we have
heard much of thy wisdom and of thy travels through many lands, from
love of knowledge and a wish to see the world. I am curious therefore
to inquire of thee, whom of all the men that thou hast seen thou
deemest the most happy?"

This he asked because he thought himself the happiest of mortals; but
Solon answered him without flattery, according to his true sentiments,
"Tellus of Athens, sire." Full of astonishment at what he had heard
Croesus demanded sharply, "And wherefore dost thou deem Tellus
happiest?" To this the other replied: "First, because his country was
flourishing in his days, and he himself had sons both beautiful and
good, and he lived to see children born to each of them, and these
children all grew up; and further, because after a life spent in what
our people look upon as comfort, his end was surpassingly glorious. In
a battle between the Athenians and their neighbors near Eleusis, he
came to the assistance of his countrymen, routed the foe, and died
upon the field most gallantly. The Athenians gave him a public funeral
on the spot where he fell, and paid him the highest honors."

Thus did Solon admonish Croesus by the example of Tellus,
enumerating the manifold particulars of his happiness. When he had
ended, Croesus inquired a second time, who after Tellus seemed to
him the happiest, expecting that at any rate he would be given the
second place. "Cleobis and Bito," Solon answered: "they were of Argive
race; their fortune was enough for their wants, and they were besides
endowed with so much bodily strength that they had both gained prizes
at the games. Also, this tale is told of them: There was a great
festival in honor of the goddess Juno at Argos, to which their mother
must needs be taken in a car. Now, the oxen did not come home from the
field in time; so the youths, fearful of being too late, put the yoke
on their own necks, and themselves drew the car in which their mother
rode. Five and forty furlongs did they draw her, and stopt before the
temple. This deed of theirs was witnessed by the whole assembly of
worshipers, and then their life closed in the best possible way.
Herein, too, God showed forth most evidently how much better a thing
for man death is than life. For the Argive men stood thick around the
car and extolled the vast strength of the youths; and the Argive women
extolled the mother who was blest with such a pair of sons; and the
mother herself, overjoyed at the deed and at the praises it had won,
standing straight before the image, besought the goddess to bestow on
Cleobis and Bito, the sons who had so mightily honored her, the
highest blessing to which mortals can attain. Her prayer ended, they
offered sacrifice and partook of the holy banquet, after which the two
youths fell asleep in the temple. They never woke again, but so passed
from the earth. The Argives, looking on them as among the best of men,
caused statues of them to be made, which they gave to the shrine at
