extremely costly spectacle in regard to which we have noted nothing that
was striking for historical record, save that virgins contended in the
foot-race. After this, in the course of holding what seem to have been
triumphal celebrations, he arranged numerous contests. First of all, in
the hippodrome he had battles of infantry against infantry, and again
battles of cavalry, and next he gave a naval battle in a new place. And
there perished in it practically all the naval combatants and numbers of
the spectators. A great rain and violent storm had suddenly come up, yet
he allowed no one to leave the spectacle; indeed, though he himself
changed his clothing to a thick woolen cloak, he would not permit the
people to alter their attire. As a result, not a few fell sick and died.
By way of consoling them for this, he provided them at public expense a
dinner lasting all night. Often, too, he would conduct games at night, and
sometimes he would pit dwarfs [Footnote: Reading [Greek: nanous]
(Dindorf)] and women against each other.

[Sidenote:--9--] So at this time he feasted the populace as described, but
on another occasion he entertained the foremost men of the senate and the
knights in the following fashion. He prepared a room that was pitch black
on every side, ceiling, walls and floor, and had ready bare couches, all
alike, resting on the uncovered ground; then he invited in his guests
alone, at night, without their attendants. And first he set beside each of
them a slab shaped like a gravestone, bearing a person's name and also a
small lamp, such as hangs in tombs. Next well-shaped, naked boys, likewise
painted black, entered after the manner of phantoms, and, after passing
around the guests in a kind of terrifying dance, took up their stations at
their feet. After that, whatever is commonly dedicated in the course of
offerings to departed spirits was set before them also, all black, and in
dishes of a similar hue. Consequently, every single one of the guests
feared and trembled and every moment felt certain that he was to be slain,
especially as on the part of everybody save Domitian there was dead
silence, as if they were already in the realms of the dead, and the
emperor himself limited his conversation to matters pertaining to death
and slaughter. Finally he dismissed them. But he had previously removed
their servants, who stood at the doorway, and gave them in charge of
other, unknown slaves, to convey either to carriages or litters, and by
this act he filled them with far greater fear. Scarcely had each one
reached home and was beginning to a certain extent to recover his spirits,
when a message was brought him that some one was there from the Augustus.
While they were expecting, as a result of this, that now at last they
should surely perish, one person brought in the slab, which was of silver,
then another something else, and another one of the dishes set before them
at the dinner, which proved to be made of some costly material. Finally
came [Footnote: Verb supplied by Xylander.] that particular boy who had
been each one's familiar spirit, now washed and decked out. Thus, while in
terror all night long, they received their gifts.

Such was the triumph or, as the crowd said, such was the expiatory service
that Domitian celebrated for those who had died in Dacia and in Rome. Even
at this time, too, he killed off some of the foremost men. And he took
away the property of whoever buried the body of any one of them, because
the victim had died on ground belonging to the sovereign.

[Sidenote:--10--] Here are some more events worth recording, that took
place in the Dacian War. Julianus, assigned by the emperor to take charge
of the war, made many excellent regulations, one being his command that
the soldiers should inscribe their own names and those of the centurions
upon their shields, in order that those of them who committed any
particular good or bad action might be more readily observed by him.
Encountering the enemy at Tapai, [Footnote: Pape thinks that the proper
Latin form of this word be _Tabae_.] he killed a very great number of
them. Among them Vezinas, who ranked next to Decebalus, since he could not
get away alive, fell down purposely as if dead. In this way he escaped
notice and fled during the night. Decebalus, fearing that the Romans now
they had conquered would proceed against his residence, cut down the trees
that were on the site and attached weapons to the trunks, to the end that
his foes might think them soldiers, and so be frightened and withdraw.
This actually took place.

[Sidenote:--11--] Antonius, a certain commander of this period in Germany,
revolted against Domitian: him Lucius Maximus overcame and overthrew. For
his victory he does not deserve any remarkable praise; [for many others
have unexpectedly won victories, and his soldiers contributed largely to
his success:] but for his burning all the documents that were found in the
chests of Antonius, thus esteeming his own safety as of slight importance
in comparison with having no blackmail result from them, I do not see how
I may celebrate his memory as it deserves. But Domitian, as he had got a
pretext from that source, proceeded to a series of slaughters even without
the documents, and no one could well say how many he killed. [Indeed, he
condemned himself so for this act that, to prevent any remembrance of the
dead surviving, he prohibited the inscribing of their names in the
records. Furthermore, he did not even make any communication to the senate
regarding those put out of the way, although he sent their heads as well
as that of Antonius to Rome and exposed them in the Forum.] But one young
man, Julius Calvaster, who had served as military tribune in the hope of
getting into the senate, was saved in a most unexpected fashion. Inasmuch
as it was being proved that he had frequent meetings with Antonius alone
and he had no other way to free himself from the charge of conspiracy, he
declared that he had met him for amorous intercourse. The fact that he was
of an appearance to inspire passion lent color to his statement. In this
way he was acquitted.

After just one more remark about the events of that time, I will cease.
Lusianus Proculus, an aged senator, who spent most of his time in the
country, had come out with Domitian from Borne under compulsion so as to
avoid the appearance of deserting him when in danger and the death that
might very likely be the result of such conduct. When the news came, he
said: "You have conquered, emperor, as I ever prayed. Therefore, restore
me to the country." Thereupon he left him without more ado and retired to
his farm. And after this, although he survived for a long time, he never
came near him.

During this period some had become accustomed to smear needles with poison
and then to prick with them whomsoever they would. Many persons thus
attacked died without even knowing the cause, and many of the murderers
were informed against and punished. And this went on not only in Rome but
over practically the entire civilized world.

[Sidenote:--12--] To Ulpius Trajan and to Acilius Glabrio, who were
consuls then, the same signs are said to have appeared. They foretold to
Glabrio destruction, but to Trajan the imperial office. [Numerous wealthy
men and women both were punished for adultery, and some of the women had
been debauched by _him_. Many more were fined or executed on other
charges.] A woman was tried and lost her life because she had stripped in
front of an image of Domitian [and another for having had dealings with
astrologers]. Among the many who perished at this time was also Mettius
Pompusianus, whom Vespasian had refused to harm in any way after learning
from some report that he would one day be sole ruler, but [Footnote:
Reading [Greek: halla](Dindorf).] rather honored, saying: "You will
certainly remember me and will certainly honor me in return." But Domitian
first exiled him to Corsica and later put him to death, one of the
complaints being that he had the inhabited world painted on the walls of
his bedchamber and another that he had excerpted and was wont to read the
speeches of kings and other eminent men that are written in Livy. Also
Maternus, a sophist, met his death because in a practice speech [Footnote:
Hartman (Mnemosyne, N. S. XXI, p. 395) would read [Greek: hasteion] for
[Greek: haschon]. "Maternus met his death because he had made some witty
remark against tyrants." H. maintains that Domitian could not know what
Maternus said in his closet; but to the present translator the MS.
tradition seems to lend to this incident a greater homogeneousness of
detail with the preceding, and he retains it simply on that basis.] he had
said something against tyrants. The emperor himself used to visit both
those who were to accuse and those who were to give evidence for
condemnation, and he would frame and compose everything that required to
be said. Often, too, he would talk to the prisoners alone, keeping tight
hold of their chains with his hands. In the former case he would not
entrust to others what was to be said, and in the latter he feared the men
even in their bonds.

[Sidenote: A.D. 93 (a.u. 846)] [Sidenote:--13--] As censor, likewise, his
behavior was noteworthy. He expelled Caecilius Rufinus from the senate
because he danced, and restored Claudius Pacatus, though an ex-centurion,
to his master because he was proved to be a slave. What came after, to be
sure, can not be described in similar terms,--his deeds, that is to say,
as emperor. _Then_ he killed Arulenus Rusticus for being a
philosopher and for calling Thrasea sacred, and Herennius Senecio because
in his long career he had stood for no office after the quaestorship and
because he had compiled the life of Helvidius Priscus. Many others also
perished as a result of this same charge of philosophizing, and all
remaining members of that profession were again driven from Rome. One
Juventius Celsus, however, who had been conspicuous in conspiring with
certain persons against Domitian and had been accused of it, saved his
life in a remarkable way. When he was on the point of being condemned, he
begged that he might speak a few words with the emperor in private. Having
gained the opportunity he did obeisance before him and after repeatedly
calling him "master," and "god" (terms that were already being applied to
him by others), he said: "I have done nothing of the sort. And if I obtain
a respite, I will pry into everything and both inform against and convict
many persons for you." He was released on these conditions, but did not
report any one; instead, by advancing different excuses at different
times, he lived until Domitian was killed.

[Sidenote: A.D. 95 (a.u. 848)] [Sidenote:--14--] During this period the
road leading from Sinuessa to Puteoli was paved with stones. And the same
year Domitian slew among many others Flavius Clemens the consul, though he
was a cousin and had to wife Flavia Domitilla, who was also a relative of
the emperor's. [Footnote: His sister's daughter.] The complaint brought
against them both was that of atheism, under which many others who drifted
into Jewish ways were condemned. Some of these were killed and the
remainder were at least deprived of their property. Domitilla was merely
banished to Pandateria; but Glabrio, colleague of Trajan in the
consulship, after being accused on various regular stock charges, and also
of fighting with wild beasts, suffered death. This ability in the arena
was the chief cause of the emperor's anger against him,--an anger prompted
by jealousy. In the victim's consulship Domitian had summoned him to
Albanum to attend the so-called Juvenalia and had imposed on him the task
of killing a large lion. Glabrio not only had escaped all injury but had
despatched the creature with most accurate aim.

As a consequence of his cruelty the emperor was suspicious of all mankind
and ceased now to put hopes of safety in either the freedmen or the
prefects, whom he usually caused to be tried during their very term of
office. Moreover, Epaphroditus, who belonged to Nero, he first drove out
and then slew, censuring him for not having defended Nero; his object was
by the vengeance that he took in this person's case to terrify his own
freedmen long enough in advance to prevent their ever attempting a similar
deed. [Sidenote: A.D. 96 (a.u. 849)] It did him no good, however, for he
became the object of a conspiracy in the following year and perished in
the consulship of Gaius [Footnote: An error, possibly emanating from Dio.
The man's right name is _T. Manlius Valens._] Valens (who died after
holding the consular office in his ninetieth year) and of Gaius Antistius.
[Sidenote:--15--] Those who attacked him and prepared the undertaking were
Parthenius his cubicularius (though he was the recipient of such marks of
imperial favor as to be allowed to wear a sword) and Sigerus, [Footnote:
Probably the person who is called Saturius in Suetonius, Domitian, chapter
17.] who was also a member of the excubiae, as well as Entellus, the
person entrusted with the care of the state documents, and Stephanus, a
freedman. The plot was not unknown to Domitia, the emperor's wife, nor to
the prefect Norbanus, nor to the latter's partner in office, Petronius
Secundus: at least, this is the tradition. Domitia was ever an object of
the imperial hatred and consequently stood in terror of her life; the rest
no longer loved their sovereign, some of them because complaints had been
lodged against them and others because they were expecting them to be
lodged. For my part, I have heard also the following account,--that
Domitian, having become suspicious of all these persons, conceived a
desire to kill them, and wrote their names on a two-leaved tablet of
linden wood, and put it under his pillow on the couch where he was wont to
repose; and one of the naked prattling [Footnote: Compare Book
Forty-eight, chapter 44.] boys, while the emperor was asleep in the
daytime, filched it away and kept it without knowing what it contained.
Domitia then chanced upon it and reading what was written gave information
of the matter to those involved. As a result, they changed their plans
somewhat and hastened the plot; yet they did not proceed to action until
they had determined who was to succeed to the office. Having conversed
with various persons, when they found that no one would accept it
(everybody was afraid of them, thinking that they were simply testing
people's loyalty) they betook themselves to Nerva. He was of most noble
birth and most suitable character and had, besides, encountered danger
through being slandered by astrologers [who declared that he should be
sovereign.] Thus they the more easily persuaded him to be the next to
receive the power. In truth, Domitian, who conducted an investigation of
the days and the hours when the foremost men had been born, had
consequently ere this despatched not a few even of those who entertained
no hopes of gaining any power. [Footnote: As the MS tradition of this
sentence is corrupt, the emendations of Polak have been adopted.] And he
would have slain Nerva, had not one of the astrologers who favored the
latter declared that he would die within a few days. [Believing that this
would really prove true, he did not desire to be guilty of this additional
murder, inasmuch as Nerva in any event was to meet death so very soon.]

[Sidenote:--16--] Since no occurrence of such magnitude is without
previous indications, various unfavorable tokens appeared in his case,
too. In a vision he himself beheld Rusticus approaching him with a sword;
and he thought that Minerva, whose statue he kept in his bedchamber, had
thrown away her weapons and, mounted upon a chariot drawn by black horses,
was being swallowed up in an abyss. But the feature which of all claims
our wonder is connected with the name of Larginus Proculus. He had
publicly foretold in Germany that the emperor should die on the day when
he actually did die, and was, therefore, sent on to Rome by the governor.
Brought before Domitian he declared once more that this should be so. A
death sentence was postponed in order that he might be put to death after
the emperor had escaped the danger. Meanwhile Domitian was slain, his life
was saved, and he received a hundred thousand denarii from Nerva. Some one
else had on a previous occasion told the ruler both when and how he should
perish, and then being asked what manner of death he, the prophet, should
meet, he answered that he would be despatched by dogs. Thereupon command
was given that the fellow should be burned alive, and the fire was applied
to him. But just then there was a great downpour of rain, the pyre was
extinguished, and later dogs found him lying upon it with his hands bound
behind him and tore him to pieces.

[Sidenote:--17--] I have one more astonishing fact to record, which I
shall touch on after I have given the account of Domitian's end. As soon
as he rose to leave the courthouse and was ready to take his afternoon
nap, as was his custom, first Parthenius took the blade out of the sword,
which always lay under his pillow, so that he should not have the use of
that. Next he sent in Stephanus, who was stronger then the rest. The
latter smote Domitian, and though it was not an opportune blow the emperor
was knocked to the ground, where he lay. Then, fearing an escape,
Parthenius leaped in, or, as some believe, he sent in Maximus, a freedman.
Thus both Domitian was murdered, and Stephanus perished likewise in a rush
that those who had not shared in the conspiracy made upon him.

[Sidenote:--18--] The matter of which I spoke, saying that it surprises me
more than anything else, is this. A certain Apollonius of Tyana on the
very day and at that very hour when Domitian was being murdered (this was
later confirmed by other events that happened in both places) climbed a
lofty stone at Ephesus (or possibly some other town) and having gathered
the populace, uttered these words: "Bravo, Stephanus! Good, Stephanus!
Smite the wretch! You have struck, you have wounded, you have killed
him!!" This is what really took place, though there should be ten thousand
doubters. Domitian had lived forty-four years, ten months, and twenty-six
days. His reign had lasted fifteen years and five days. His body was
stolen away and buried by his nurse, Phyllis.




DIO'S ROMAN HISTORY
68

Most of Domitian's measures are annulled (chapter 1).

The excellencies of Nerva Augustus Caesar: his kindness to Verginius
(chapter 2).

The conspiracy of Crassus: rebellion of the Pretorians: adoption of Trajan
(chapter 3).

Birthplace and praise of Trajan: Nerva dies (chapter 4).

How Trajan entered upon his sovereignty (chapter 5),

He undertakes a war against Decebalus, proving himself formidable to the
latter but worthy the affection of his own people (chapters 6, 7).

He conquers the Dacians and holds a triumph over them (chapters 8-10).

A second war against the Dacians (chapters 11, 12).

How Trajan saddled the Danube with a stone bridge (chapter 13).

With the disappearance from the scene of Decebalus the Dacians are reduced
to the condition of a province: Arabia is taken (chapter 14).

Embassies: the Pontine marshes filled: statues to the well-deserving: the
column of Trajan (chapters 15, 16).

Campaign against the Parthians on account of the expulsion of Exedares
from Armenia and the introduction there of Parthomasiris (chapters 17,
18).

Parthomasiris gains access to Trajan and Armenia is taken away from him
(chapters 19, 20).

How Abgarus the Osrhoenian obtained pardon from Trajan (chapter 21).

About the envoys of Mannus and Manisarus sent to Trajan (chapter 22).

Trajan is named Optimus, and, after the capture of Nisibis and Batnae,
Parthicus (chapter 23).

About the huge earthquake at Antioch (chapters 24, 25).

