"because they do work hard to learn what Jarl Cerda teaches them."

"Yes," said King Ethelwulf, "they are apt to learn how to fight; but you
must make them learned, as kings should be, so as to rule wisely and
well when the Danes have killed me and they are called upon to reign."

"The Danes never shall kill you, sir," cried the little monk fiercely,
"so long as I can stand in their way."

The little group now separated, for the King and Queen had many duties
to perform in connection with state affairs, and the little monk had to
prepare the lessons for the boys.

And that's how matters were on that bright sunny day when King
Ethelwulf's sons lay out on the steep hill-side--Bald, Bert, Red, and
Fred--four as crisp and tongue-tripping names as four bright Saxon
English boys could own, but each with the addition of Athel or Ethel
before, except the youngest, in whose name it shortened into Al; and
these were their titles, because each was a Prince.



CHAPTER TWO.

"BOYS WILL BE BOYS."

One of the boys' amusements had been for one to shoot an arrow as high
up as he could, and for his brothers to follow and try and hit the first
one sent.  Fine practice this in marksmanship, but unsatisfactory and
tiring after a few tries, for the arrows flew far, and this time they
had brought no young serfs' sons to retrieve the arrows, one of which
took a long time to find.

But it was found at last, just as the head of a man appeared above the
distant ridge; and the boys stopped to look, the head being followed by
the shoulders and breast of the man, while behind him there was a fringe
of something bright and shimmering in the sunshine.

The next minute the boys began to run, for they saw that the object
first seen was a mounted man, and what followed the heads of spears
borne by a party of quite a hundred men, whose leader had been seen
first owing to his being mounted upon an active little horse.

"Where's Cerda going?" shouted one of the boys.

"There's a fight somewhere," said another.

And the other two joined in, crying together:

"Let's go and see."

So, in a state of wild excitement and wonder that they had not heard the
news of danger before, the boys raced to head off the body of armed men,
the first up being greeted by the big bluff leader with a cheery shout.

"What now?  What now?" he cried.  "Have you boys come to tell us that we
are too late, and that the enemy are all slain?  Who was it found the
Norsemen's ship?"

"Then the Danes have landed?" cried the eldest boy excitedly.

"Yes," cried his brother.  "I knew that was it."

"Yes, that's it, boy," said the leader, dragging at his horse's head,
for the animal was impatient to go on.

"Where are they?" cried the youngest boy, with his cheeks flushing and
eyes sparkling.

"A day's journey away, my boy.  The people over Farringdon way have
asked for help, and the King sends me."

"That's right," cried the boy who had last spoken.  "We'll go with you."

The leader smiled and shook his head, and the band of fine-looking,
picked men indulged in a hearty laugh.

"What are you mocking and gibing at?" cried the youngest boy fiercely.
"Do you think that because I and my brothers are young we cannot fight?"

"Yes," cried the eldest brother; "we can shoot an arrow with any of you.
Pick out your four best men, Jarl Cerda, and we'll shoot against them."

"Yes," said another.  "You know we can shoot well."

"Do I not?" said the jarl; "for I taught you."

"Yes, yes; they can all shoot well," came in concert.

"Oh, yes, they can shoot," said the leader; "but I have no time to prove
it."

"Of course not," cried Alfred.  "Never mind that.  Lead on."

"I'm afraid we should never catch the Danes if you boys came," said the
jarl solemnly.

"Why?" cried Bald, the eldest.

"Yes, why shouldn't we?" cried Ethelred.

"Don't ask him," said Alfred, frowning.

"Why?"

"Look at his eyes and the corners of his mouth.  He's laughing at us."

The big jarl's shoulders began to shake, and his lids half-closed in his
mirth, while the eyes of all four boys flashed in their anger.

"Why, of course I'm laughing, my boys," he said; "but it's not out of a
desire to mock at you.  I know you, my brave little fellows, and I hope
to come back safe, and to see you all grow up to stark men who will deal
well with the Norsemen.  But you must wait a bit."

"No, no," cried Alfred.  "We can stand back and shoot."

"So can the Danes, my boy; and their arrows are sharp."

"But we can shoot sharper and quicker than they," said Ethelred.  "Oh,
do take us, Jarl Cerda."

"No, my boy," said the stout Saxon noble firmly; "I cannot take you.
The King stood by and picked out my men, and he said I was to take these
and no more.  Would you have me give pain to our good Queen Osburga by
breaking the King's commands?"

"No," said Alfred, with a quick, old-fashioned look.  "We cannot do
that, boys."

"Come, that's bravely spoken, Alfred, boy; I like that," said the jarl,
leaning down from his horse to pat the youngest boy on the shoulder.
"Look here, if I come back safely after beating the Danes I'll bring you
one of their winged helmets for a prize."

"You will?" cried Alfred.

"I promise you I will, my boy," cried the big Saxon noble, "and trophies
for your brothers too.--There, we must go on.  Good-bye, my brave boys.
Give them a shout, my lads."

The men waved sword and spear in the air as they marched off and Alfred
and his brothers stood watching them till the last twinkling spear had
disappeared in the distance, and then the boys turned away with a sigh.

"Oh, I wish I was a man!" said Alfred sadly.

"No use to wish," said the next brother.  "Here, let's go on down the
stream to get some fish."

The disappointment was soon forgotten, and the boys dashed off downhill
as hard as they could go, neither of them hearing a shout, nor seeing
the little monk come panting up, to stand gazing ruefully after them and
wiping the great drops of perspiration off his face and head.

"Oh, dear!" he said; "it's a fine thing to be young and strong, and--"

He paused for a few moments to look down at his plump proportions.

"--And light," he added sadly.  "I can't run as they do."

He stood perfectly still as he spoke, watching the deep crease in the
valley, whose bottom was hidden by clumps of willow and beds of reeds
with their dark purply waving blooms.

"I suppose I must go after them," he sighed.  "What can they want down
there?"

The little monk sighed again and then started off to follow the boys,
trying hard to walk slowly and steadily; but it was all in vain.  The
hill-side sloped very steeply to the broad bed of willows and reeds far
below, making the way very bad for so heavy and inactive a man.  Worse
still: walking over the short grass in the hot sun had made the bottoms
of the monk's sandals as slippery as glass, and so it was that before he
had gone far down the slope he began to talk to himself, at first
slowly--then quickly--then in a loud excited way--and lastly he uttered
a shout and a cry for help.

"Here," he said, at first, "I want to go down slowly.  It's too hot to
