that there was any prospect of success."

"What were the British doing, all this time?" inquired Charley.

"They lay idle in the town," replied Grandfather. "General Gage had been
recalled to England, and was succeeded by Sir William Howe. The British
army, and the inhabitants of Boston, were now in great distress. Being
shut up in the town so long, they had consumed almost all their
provisions, and burnt up all their fuel. The soldiers tore down the Old
North church, and used its rotten boards and timbers for fire-wood. To
heighten their distress, the small pox broke out. They probably lost far
more men by cold, hunger, and sickness, than had been slain at Lexington
and Bunker Hill."

"What a dismal time for the poor women and children!" exclaimed Clara.

"At length," continued Grandfather, "in March, 1776, General Washington,
who had now a good supply of powder, began a terrible cannonade and
bombardment from Dorchester heights. One of the cannon balls which he
fired into the town, struck the tower of the Brattle Street church, where
it may still be seen. Sir William Howe made preparations to cross over in
boats, and drive the Americans from their batteries, but was prevented by
a violent gale and storm. General Washington next erected a battery on
Nook's hill, so near the enemy, that it was impossible for them to remain
in Boston any longer."

"Hurra! Hurra!" cried Charley, clapping his hands triumphantly. "I wish I
had been there, to see how sheepish the Englishmen looked."

And, as Grandfather thought that Boston had never witnessed a more
interesting period than this, when the royal power was in its death agony,
he determined to take a peep into the town, and imagine the feelings of
those who were quitting it forever.




Chapter IX


"Alas! for the poor tories!" said Grandfather. "Until the very last
morning after Washington's troops had shown themselves on Nook's hill,
these unfortunate persons could not believe that the audacious rebels, as
they called the Americans, would ever prevail against King George's army.
But, when they saw the British soldiers preparing to embark on board of
the ships of war, then they knew that they had lost their country. Could
the patriots have known how bitter were their regrets, they would have
forgiven them all their evil deeds, and sent a blessing after them as they
sailed away from their native shore."

In order to make the children sensible of the pitiable condition of these
men, Grandfather singled out Peter Oliver, chief justice of Massachusetts
under the crown, and imagined him walking through the streets of Boston,
on the morning before he left it forever.

This effort of Grandfather's fancy may be called--



THE TORY'S FAREWELL


Old Chief Justice Oliver threw on his red cloak, and placed his
three-cornered hat on the top of his white wig. In this garb he intended
to go forth and take a parting look at objects that had been familiar to
him from his youth. Accordingly, he began his walk in the north part of
the town, and soon came to Faneuil Hall. This edifice, the cradle of
liberty, had been used by the British officers as a play-house.

"Would that I could see its walls crumble to dust!" thought the chief
justice; and, in the bitterness of his heart, he shook his fist at the
famous hall. "There began the mischief which now threatens to rend asunder
the British empire. The seditious harangues of demagogues in Faneuil Hall,
have made rebels of a loyal people, and deprived me of my country."

He then passed through a narrow avenue, and found himself in King Street,
almost in the very spot which, six years before, had been reddened by the
blood of the Boston Massacre. The chief justice stept cautiously, and
shuddered, as if he were afraid, that, even now, the gore of his
slaughtered countrymen might stain his feet.

Before him rose the town house, on the front of which were still displayed
the royal arms. Within that edifice he had dispensed justice to the
people, in the days when his name was never mentioned without honor.
There, too, was the balcony whence the trumpet had been sounded, and the
proclamation read to an assembled multitude, whenever a new king of
England ascended the throne.

"I remember--I remember," said Chief Justice Oliver to himself, "when his
present most sacred majesty was proclaimed. Then how the people shouted.
Each man would have poured out his life-blood to keep a hair of King
George's head from harm. But now, there is scarcely a tongue in all New
England that does not imprecate curses on his name. It is ruin and
disgrace to love him. Can it be possible that a few fleeting years have
wrought such a change!"

It did not occur to the chief justice, that nothing but the most grievous
tyranny could so soon have changed the people's hearts. Hurrying from the
spot, he entered Cornhill, as the lower part of Washington Street was then
called. Opposite to the town house was the waste foundation of the Old
North church. The sacrilegious hands of the British soldiers had torn it
down, and kindled their barrack fires with the fragments.

Further on, he passed beneath the tower of the Old South. The threshold of
this sacred edifice was worn by the iron tramp of horse's feet: for the
interior had been used as a riding-school and rendezvous, for a regiment
of dragoons. As the chief justice lingered an instant at the door, a
trumpet sounded within, and the regiment came clattering forth, and
galloped down the street. They were proceeding to the place of
embarkation.

"Let them go!" thought the chief justice, with somewhat of an old puritan
feeling in his breast. "No good can come of men who desecrate the house of
God."

He went on a few steps further, and paused before the Province House. No
range of brick stores had then sprung up to hide the mansion of the royal
governors from public view. It had a spacious court-yard, bordered with
trees, and enclosed with a wrought-iron fence. On the cupola, that
surmounted the edifice, was the gilded figure of an Indian chief, ready to
let fly an arrow from his bow. Over the wide front door was a balcony, in
which the chief justice had often stood, when the governor and high
officers of the province showed themselves to the people.

While Chief Justice Oliver gazed sadly at the Province House, before which
a sentinel was pacing, the double leaves of the door were thrown open, and
Sir William Howe made his appearance. Behind him came a throng of
officers, whose steel scabbards clattered against the stones, as they
hastened down the court-yard. Sir William Howe was a dark-complexioned
man, stern and haughty in his deportment. He stepped as proudly, in that
hour of defeat, as if he were going to receive the submission of the rebel
general.

The chief justice bowed and accosted him.

"This is a grievous hour for both of us, Sir William," said he.

"Forward! gentlemen," said Sir William Howe to the officers who attended
him: "we have no time to hear lamentations now!"

And, coldly bowing, he departed. Thus, the chief justice had a foretaste
of the mortifications which the exiled New Englanders afterwards suffered
from the haughty Britons. They were despised even by that country which
they had served more faithfully than their own.

A still heavier trial awaited Chief Justice Oliver, as he passed onward
from the Province House. He was recognized by the people in the street.
They had long known him as the descendant of an ancient and honorable
family. They had seen him sitting, in his scarlet robes, upon the judgment
seat. All his life long, either for the sake of his ancestors, or on
account of his own dignified station and unspotted character, he had been
held in high respect. The old gentry of the province were looked upon
almost as noblemen, while Massachusetts was under royal government.

But now, all hereditary reverence for birth and rank was gone. The
inhabitants shouted in derision, when they saw the venerable form of the
old chief justice. They laid the wrongs of the country, and their own
sufferings during the siege--their hunger, cold, and sickness--partly to his
charge, and to that of his brother Andrew, and his kinsman Hutchinson. It
was by their advice that the king had acted, in all the colonial troubles.
But the day of recompense was come.

"See the old tory!" cried the people, with bitter laughter. "He is taking
his last look at us. Let him show his white wig among us an hour hence,
and we'll give him a coat of tar and feathers!"

The chief justice, however, knew that he need fear no violence, so long as
the British troops were in possession of the town. But alas! it was a
bitter thought, that he should leave no loving memory behind him. His
forefathers, long after their spirits left the earth, had been honored in
the affectionate remembrance of the people. But he, who would henceforth
be dead to his native land, would have no epitaph save scornful and
vindictive words. The old man wept.

"They curse me--they invoke all kinds of evil on my head!" thought he, in
the midst of his tears. "But, if they could read my heart, they would know
that I love New England well. Heaven bless her, and bring her again under
the rule of our gracious king! A blessing, too, on these poor, misguided
people!"

The chief justice flung out his hands with a gesture, as if he were
bestowing a parting benediction on his countrymen. He had now reached the
southern portion of the town, and was far within the range of cannon shot
from the American batteries. Close beside him was the broad stump of a
tree, which appeared to have been recently cut down. Being weary and heavy
at heart, he was about to sit down upon the stump.

Suddenly, it flashed upon his recollection, that this was the stump of
Liberty Tree! The British soldiers had cut it down, vainly boasting that
they could as easily overthrow the liberties of America. Under its shadowy
branches, ten years before, the brother of Chief Justice Oliver had been
compelled to acknowledge the supremacy of the people, by taking the oath
which they prescribed. This tree was connected with all the events that
had severed America from England.

"Accursed tree!" cried the chief justice, gnashing his teeth: for anger
overcame his sorrow. "Would that thou hadst been left standing, till
Hancock, Adams, and every other traitor, were hanged upon thy branches!
Then fitly mightest thou have been hewn down, and cast into the flames."

He turned back, hurried to Long Wharf without looking behind him, embarked
with the British troops for Halifax, and never saw his country more.
Throughout the remainder of his days, Chief Justice Oliver was agitated
with those same conflicting emotions, that had tortured him, while taking
his farewell walk through the streets of Boston. Deep love and fierce
resentment burned in one flame within his breast. Anathemas struggled with
benedictions. He felt as if one breath of his native air would renew his
life, yet would have died, rather than breathe the same air with rebels.

And such, likewise, were the feelings of the other exiles, a thousand in
number, who departed with the British army. Were they not the most
unfortunate of men?



"The misfortunes of these exiled tories," observed Laurence, "must have
made them think of the poor exiles of Acadia."

"They had a sad time of it, I suppose," said Charley. "But I choose to
rejoice with the patriots, rather than be sorrowful with the tories.
Grandfather, what did General Washington do now?"

"As the rear of the British army embarked from the wharf," replied
Grandfather, "General Washington's troops marched over the neck, through
the fortification gates, and entered Boston in triumph. And now, for the
first time since the pilgrims landed, Massachusetts was free from the
dominion of England. May she never again be subjected to foreign
rule--never again feel the rod of oppression!"

"Dear Grandfather," asked little Alice, "did General Washington bring our
chair back to Boston?"

"I know not how long the chair remained at Cambridge," said Grandfather.
"Had it staid there till this time, it could not have found a better or
more appropriate shelter. The mansion which General Washington occupied is
still standing; and his apartments have since been tenanted by several
eminent men. Governor Everett, while a professor in the university,
resided there. So at an after period, did Mr. Sparks, whose invaluable
labors have connected his name with the immortality of Washington. And, at
this very time, a venerable friend and contemporary of your Grandfather,
after long pilgrimages beyond the sea, has set up his staff of rest at
Washington's head-quarters."

"You mean Professor Longfellow, Grandfather," said Laurence. "Oh, how I
should love to see the author of those beautiful VOICES OF THE NIGHT!"

"We will visit him next summer," answered Grandfather, "and take Clara and
little Alice with us--and Charley, too, if he will be quiet."




Chapter X


When Grandfather resumed his narrative, the next evening, he told the
children that he had some difficulty in tracing the movements of the
chair, during a short period after General Washington's departure from
Cambridge.

Within a few months, however, it made its appearance at a shop in Boston,
before the door of which was seen a striped pole. In the interior was
displayed a stuffed alligator, a rattlesnake's skin, a bundle of Indian
arrows, an old-fashioned matchlock gun, a walking-stick of Governor
Winthrop's, a wig of old Cotton Mather's, and a colored print of the
Boston Massacre. In short, it was a barber's shop, kept by a Mr. Pierce,
who prided himself on having shaved General Washington, Old Put, and many
other famous persons.

"This was not a very dignified situation for our venerable chair,"
continued Grandfather; "but, you know, there is no better place for news,
than a barber's shop. All the events of the revolutionary war were heard
of there, sooner than anywhere else. People used to sit in the chair,
reading the newspaper or talking, and waiting to be shaved, while Mr.
Pierce with his scissors and razor, was at work upon the heads or chins of
his other customers."

"I am sorry the chair could not betake itself to some more suitable place
of refuge," said Laurence. "It was old now, and must have longed for
quiet. Besides, after it had held Washington in its arms, it ought not to
have been compelled to receive all the world. It should have been put into
the pulpit of the Old South Church, or some other consecrated place."

"Perhaps so," answered Grandfather. "But the chair, in the course of its
varied existence, had grown so accustomed to general intercourse with
society, that I doubt whether it would have contented itself in the pulpit
of the Old South. There it would have stood solitary, or with no livelier
companion than the silent organ, in the opposite gallery, six days out of
seven. I incline to think, that it had seldom been situated more to its
mind, than on the sanded floor of the snug little barber's shop."

Then Grandfather amused his children and himself, with fancying all the
different sorts of people who had occupied our chair, while they awaited
the leisure of the barber.

There was the old clergyman, such as Dr. Chauncey, wearing a white wig,
which the barber took from his head, and placed upon a wig-block. Half an
hour, perhaps, was spent in combing and powdering this reverend appendage
to a clerical skull. There too, were officers of the continental army, who
required their hair to be pomatumed and plastered, so as to give them a
bold and martial aspect. There, once in a while, was seen the thin,
care-worn, melancholy visage of an old tory, with a wig that, in times
long past, had perhaps figured at a Province House ball. And there, not
unfrequently, sat the rough captain of a privateer, just returned from a
successful cruise, in which he had captured half a dozen richly laden
vessels, belonging to King George's subjects. And, sometimes, a rosy
little school-boy climbed into our chair, and sat staring, with wide-open
eyes, at the alligator, the rattlesnake, and the other curiosities of the
barber's shop. His mother had sent him, with sixpence in his hand, to get
his glossy curls cropped off. The incidents of the Revolution plentifully
supplied the barber's customers with topics of conversation. They talked
sorrowfully of the death of General Montgomery, and the failure of our
troops to take Quebec; for the New Englanders were now as anxious to get
Canada from the English, as they had formerly been to conquer it from the
French.

"But, very soon," said Grandfather, "came news from Philadelphia, the most
important that America had ever heard of. On the 4th of July, 1776,
Congress had signed the Declaration of Independence. The thirteen colonies
were now free and independent states. Dark as our prospects were, the
inhabitants welcomed these glorious tidings, and resolved to perish,
rather than again bear the yoke of England!"

"And I would perish too!" cried Charley.

"It was a great day--a glorious deed!" said Laurence, coloring high with
enthusiasm. "And, Grandfather, I love to think that the sages in Congress
showed themselves as bold and true as the soldiers in the field. For it
must have required more courage to sign the Declaration of Independence,
than to fight the enemy in battle."

Grandfather acquiesced in Laurence's view of the matter. He then touched
briefly and hastily upon the prominent events of the Revolution. The
thunder-storm of war had now rolled southward, and did not again burst
upon Massachusetts, where its first fury had been felt. But she
contributed her full share to the success of the contest. Wherever a
battle was fought--whether at Long Island, White Plains, Trenton,
Princeton, Brandywine, or German-town--some of her brave sons were found
slain upon the field.

In October, 1777, General Burgoyne surrendered his army, at Saratoga, to
the American general, Gates. The captured troops were sent to
Massachusetts. Not long afterwards, Doctor Franklin and other American
commissioners made a treaty at Paris, by which France bound herself to
assist our countrymen. The gallant Lafayette was already fighting for our
freedom, by the side of Washington. In 1778, a French fleet, commanded by
Count d'Estaing, spent a considerable time in Boston Harbor. It marks the
vicissitudes of human affairs, that the French, our ancient enemies,
should come hither as comrades and brethren, and that kindred England
should be our foe.

"While the war was raging in the Middle and Southern States," proceeded
Grandfather, "Massachusetts had leisure to settle a new constitution of
government, instead of the royal charter. This was done in 1780. In the
same year, John Hancock, who had been president of Congress, was chosen
governor of the state. He was the first whom the people had elected, since
the days of old Simon Bradstreet."

"But, Grandfather, who had been governor since the British were driven
away?" inquired Laurence. "General Gage and Sir William Howe were the last
whom you have told us of."

"There had been no governor for the last four years," replied Grandfather.
"Massachusetts had been ruled by the legislature, to whom the people paid
obedience of their own accord. It is one of the most remarkable
circumstances in our history, that, when the charter government was
overthrown by the war, no anarchy, nor the slightest confusion ensued.
This was a great honor to the people. But now, Hancock was proclaimed
governor by sound of trumpet; and there was again a settled government."

Grandfather again adverted to the progress of the war. In 1781, General
Greene drove the British from the Southern States. In October, of the same
year, General Washington compelled Lord Cornwallis to surrender his army,
at Yorktown, in Virginia. This was the last great event of the
revolutionary contest. King George and his ministers perceived, that all
the might of England could not compel America to renew her allegiance to
the crown. After a great deal of discussion, a treaty of peace was signed,
in September, 1783.

"Now, at last," said Grandfather, "after weary years of war, the regiments
of Massachusetts returned in peace to their families. Now, the stately and
dignified leaders, such as General Lincoln and General Knox, with their
pondered hair and their uniforms of blue and buff, were seen moving about
the streets."

"And little boys ran after them, I suppose," remarked Charley; "and the
grown people bowed respectfully."

"They deserved respect, for they were good men, as well as brave,"
answered Grandfather. "Now, too, the inferior officers and privates came
home, to seek some peaceful occupation. Their friends remembered them as
slender and smooth-cheeked young men; but they returned with the erect and
rigid mien of disciplined soldiers. Some hobbled on crutches and wooden
legs; others had received wounds, which were still rankling in their
breasts. Many, alas! had fallen in battle, and perhaps were left unburied
on the bloody field."

"The country must have been sick of war," observed Laurence.

"One would have thought so," said Grandfather. "Yet only two or three
years elapsed, before the folly of some misguided men caused another
mustering of soldiers. This affair was called Shays' War, because a
Captain Shays was the chief leader of the insurgents."

"O Grandfather, don't let there be another war!" cried little Alice,
piteously.

Grandfather comforted his dear little girl, by assuring her that there was
no great mischief done. Shays's War happened in the latter part of 1786,
and the beginning of the following year. Its principal cause was the
badness of the times. The State of Massachusetts, in its public capacity,
was very much in debt. So, likewise, were many of the people. An
insurrection took place, the object of which seems to have been, to
interrupt the course of law, and get rid of debts and taxes.

James Bowdoin, a good and able man, was now governor of Massachusetts. He
sent General Lincoln, at the head of four thousand men, to put down the
insurrection. This general, who had fought through several hard campaigns
in the Revolution, managed matters like an old soldier, and totally
defeated the rebels, at the expense of very little blood.

"There is but one more public event to be recorded in the history of our
chair," proceeded Grandfather. "In the year 1794, Samuel Adams was elected
governor of Massachusetts. I have told you what a distinguished patriot he
was, and how much he resembled the stern old Puritans. Could the ancient
freemen of Massachusetts, who lived in the days of the first charter, have
arisen from their graves, they would probably have voted for Samuel Adams
to be governor."

"Well, Grandfather, I hope he sat in our chair!" said Clara.

"He did," replied Grandfather. "He had long been in the habit of visiting
the barber's shop, where our venerable chair, philosophically forgetful of
its former dignities, had now spent nearly eighteen not uncomfortable
years. Such a remarkable piece of furniture, so evidently a relic of
long-departed times, could not escape the notice of Samuel Adams. He made
minute researches into its history, and ascertained what a succession of
excellent and famous people had occupied it."

"How did he find it out?" asked Charley. "For I suppose the chair could
not tell its own history."

"There used to be a vast collection of ancient letters and other
documents, in the tower of the old South Church," answered Grandfather.
"Perhaps the history of our chair was contained among these. At all
