handsome enough to set any woman's heart beating--as he rode through
the Gloucestershire lanes; if they had dreamed that such a thing was
within the bounds of human possibility, what a tumult would have been
roused among them; how they would have stared at each other, with
mouths open, uttering exclamatory oaths of wild amazement and ecstatic
triumph; how they would have exulted and drunk each other's healths
and their wild playmate's and her splendid fortunes. But, in truth,
that such a thing could be, would have seemed to them as likely as that
Queen Anne herself should cast a gracious eye upon a poor, fox-hunting,
country baronet who was one of her rustic subjects. The riot of
Wildairs and its company was a far cry indeed from Camylott and St.
James.

If my Lord Twemlow had guessed at the possibility of the strange thing,
and had found himself confronting a solution of his carking problem
which would flood its past with brilliance and illuminate all its
future with refulgent light, casting a glow of splendour even over his
own plain country gentleman's existence, how he would have started and
flushed with bewildered pride and rubbed his periwig awry in his
delighted excitement. If my Lord Dunstanwolde, sitting at that hour in
his silent library, a great book open before him, his forehead on his
slender veined hand, his thoughts wandering far away, if he had been
given by Fate an inkling of the truth which none knew or suspected, or
had reason for suspecting, perhaps he would have been the most startled
and struck dumb of all--the most troubled and amazed and shocked.

But of such a thing no one dreamed, as, indeed, why should they, and my
lord Duke of Osmonde rode over the border into Gloucestershire on his
fine beast, and, trotting-up the roads and down the lanes, wore a look
upon his face which showed him deep in thought.

'Twas a grey day, unbrightened by any sun. For almost a week there had
been rain, and the roads were heavy and the lanes muddy and full of
pools of miry water.

It was the intention of my lord Duke to let his horse carry him over
such roads and lands as would be in the near neighbourhood of Wildairs,
and while he recognised the similarity of his action to that of a
school-boy in love, who paces the street before his sweetheart's
dwelling, there was no smile at himself, either on his countenance or
in his mind.

"I may see her," he said quietly to himself. "I am more like to catch
sight of her on these roads than on any other, and, school-boy trick or
not, 'twill serve, and if she passes will have won me what I long
for--for it is _longing_, this. I know it now, and own it to myself."

And see her he did, but as is ever the case when a man has planned a
thing, it befell as he had not thought of its happening--and 'twas over
in a flash.

Down one of the wet lanes he had turned and was riding slowly when he
heard suddenly behind him a horse coming at such a sharp gallop that
he wheeled his own beast aside, the way being dangerously narrow, that
so tempestuous a rider might tear by in safety. And as he turned and
was half screened by the bushes, the rider swept past him splashing
through the mire and rain-pools so that the muddy water flew up beneath
the horses' hoofs--and 'twas the object of his thoughts herself!

She rode her tall young horse and was not clad as he had before beheld
her, but in rich riding-coat and hat and sweeping feather. No maid of
honour of her Majesty Queen Anne's rode attired more fittingly, none
certainly with such a seat and spirit, and none, Heaven knew, looked
like her.

These things he marked in a flash, not knowing he had marked them until
afterwards, so strong and moving was his sudden feeling that in her
nature at that moment there worked some strange new thing--some mood
new to herself and angering her. Her brows were bent, her eyes were set
and black with shadow. She bit her full lip as she rode, and her horse
went like the wind. For but a moment she was through the lane and
clattering on the road.

My lord Duke was breathing fast and bit his own lip, but the next
second broke into a laugh, turning his horse, whose bridle he had
caught up with a sudden gesture.

"Nay," he said, "a man cannot gallop after a lady without ceremony, and
command her to stand and deliver as if he were a highwayman. Yet I was
within an ace of doing it--within an ace. I have beheld her! I had best
ride back to Dunstan's Wolde."

And so he did, at a hot pace; but if he had chanced to turn on the top
of the hill he might have seen below him in a lane to the right that
two rode together, and one was she whom he had but just seen, her
companion a horseman who had leapt a gate in a field and joined her,
with flushed cheeks and wooing eyes, though she had frowned--and 'twas
the town rake and beauty, Sir John Oxon.




_CHAPTER XVI_

_A Rumour_


Through the passing of two years Osmonde's foot did not press English
soil again, and his existence during that period was more vivid and
changeful than it had ever been before. He saw Ramillies follow
Blenheim, great Marlborough attain the height of renown, and French
Louis's arrogant ambitions end in downfall and defeat. Life in both
camp and Court he knew at its highest tension, brilliant scenes he
beheld, strange ones, wicked ones, and lived a life so eventful and
full of motion and excitement that there were few men who through its
picturesque adventures would have been like to hold in mind one image
and one thought. Yet this he did, telling himself that 'twas the
thought which held him, not he the thought, it having been proven in
the past 'twas one which would not have released him from its dominion
even had he been inclined to withdraw himself from it. And this he was
not. Nature had so built him, that on the day when he had found himself
saying, "In two years' time I will come back to Gloucestershire and see
what time has wrought," he had reached a point from which there was no
retreating. Through many an hour in time past there had been turmoil in
his mind, but in a measure, at least, this ended the uncertainties, and
was no rash outburst but a resolve. It had not been made lightly, but
had been like a plant which had grown from a seed, long hidden in dark
earth and slowly fructifying till at last summer rain and warming sun
had caused it to burst forth from its prison, a thing promising full
fruit and flower. For long he had not even known the seed was in the
soil; he had felt its stirrings before he had believed in its
existence, and then one day the earth had broke and he had seen its
life and known what its strength might be. 'Twould be of wondrous
strength, he knew, and of wondrous beauty if no frost should blight nor
storm uproot it.

In its freedom from all tendency to plaything-sentiments and trivial
romances, his youth had been unlike the youth of other men. Being man
and young, he had known temptation, but had disdained it; being also
proud and perhaps haughty in his fastidiousness, and being strong, he
had thrust base and light things aside. He had held in his brain a
fancy from his boyhood, and singularly enough it had but grown stronger
and become more fully formed with his own strength and increase of
years. 'Twas a strange fancy indeed to fit the time he lived in, but
'twas his choice. The woman whose eyes held the answer to the question
his own soul asked, and whose being asked the question to which his own
replied, would bring great and deep joy to him--others did not count in
his existence--and for her he had waited and longed, sometimes so
fiercely, that he wondered if he was in the wrong and but following a
haunting, mocking dream.

"You are an epicure, Osmonde," his Grace of Marlborough said more than
once, for he had watched and studied him closely. "Not an anchorite but
an epicure."

"Yes," answered Osmonde, "perhaps 'tis that. Any man can love a score
of women--most men do--but there are few who can love but one, as I
shall, if--" and the words came slowly--"if I ever find her."

"You may not," remarked his Grace.

"I may not," said Osmonde, and he smiled his faint, grim smile.

He could not have sworn when he returned to the Continent that he had
found her absolutely at last. Her body he had found, but herself he had
not approached nearly enough to know. But this thing he realised, that
even in the mad stories he had heard, when they had been divested of
their madness, the chief figure in them had always stood out an honest,
strong, fair thing, dwarfed by no petty feminine weakness, nor follies,
nor spites. Rules she broke, decorums she defied, but in such manner
as hurt none but herself. She played no tricks and laid no plots for
vengeance, as she might well have done; she but went her daring,
lawless way, with her head up and her great eyes wide open; and 'twas
her fearless frankness and just, clear wit which moved him more than
aught else, since 'twas they which made him feel that 'twas not alone
her splendid body commanded love, but a spirit which might mate with a
strong man's and be companion to his own. His theories of womankind,
which were indeed curiously in advance of his age, were such as
demanded great things, and not alone demanded, but also gave them.

"A man and woman should not seem beings of a different race--the one
all strength, the other all weakness," was his thought. "They should
gaze into each other's eyes with honest, tender human passion, which is
surely a great thing, as nature made it. Each should know the other's
love, and strength, and honour may be trusted through death--or
life--themselves. 'Tis not a woman's love is won by pretty gallantries,
nor a man's by flattering weak surrender. Love grows from a greater
thing, and should be as compelling--even in the higher, finer thing
which thinks--as is the roar of the lion in the jungle to his mate, and
her glad cry which answers him."

And therefore, at last he had said to himself that this beauteous,
strong, wild thing surely might be she who would answer him one day,
and he held his thoughts of her in check no more, nor avoided the
speech he heard of her, and indeed, with adroitness which never
betrayed itself through his reserve of bearing, at times encouraged it;
and in a locked drawer in his apartments, wheresoever he travelled,
there lay always the picture with the stormy, yearning eyes.

From young Tantillion he could, without any apparent approach at
questioning, hear such details of Gloucestershire life in the
neighbourhood of Wildairs as made him feel that he was not far
separated from that which his mind dwelt on. Little Lady Betty, having
entered the world of fashion, was more voluminous in her correspondence
than ever, the more especially as young Langton appeared to her a very
pretty fellow, and he being Tom's confidant, was likely to hear her
letters read, or at least be given extracts from them. Her caustic
condemnation of the fantastical Mistress Clo had gradually lapsed into
a doubtful wonder, which later became open amaze not untinged with a
pretty spitefulness and resentment.

"'Tis indeed a strange thing, and one to make one suspicious of her,
Thomas," she wrote, "with all her bold ways, to suddenly put on such
decorum. We are all sure 'tis from some cunning motive, and wait to
find out what she will be at next. At first none believed she would
hold out or would know how to behave herself, but Lud! if you could see
her I am sure, Tom, both you and Mr. Langton would be disgusted by her
majestic airs. Being dressed in woman's clothing she is taller than
ever, and so holds her chin and her eyes that it makes any modist woman
mad. If she was a Duchess at Court she could not be more stately than
she now pretends she is (for of course it is pretence, as anyone
knows). She has had the vile cunningness to stop her bad langwidg, as
if she had never swore an oath in her life (such deseatfulness!). And
none can tell where she hath learned her manners, for if you will
beleave the thing, 'tis said she never makes a blunder, but can sweep a
great curtsey and sail about a saloon full of company as if she was
bred to it, and can dance a minuet and bear herself at a feast in a way
to surprise you. Lady Maddon says that women who are very vile and
undeserving are sometimes wickedly clever, and can pick up modist
women's manners wondrously, but they always break out before long and
are more indecent than ever; and you may mark my Lady Maddon's words,
she says this one will do the same, but first she is playing a part and
restraining herself that she may deseave some poor gentleman and trap
him into marrying her. It makes Lady Maddon fall into a passion to
talk of her, and she will flush quite red and talk so fast, but indeed
after I see the creature or hear some new story of her impudent
victories, I fall into a passion myself--for, Tom, _no human being can
put her in her place_."

It must be confessed that the attitude of the recipient of these
letters was by no means a respectful one, they being read and re-read
with broad grins and frequent outbursts of roaring laughter, ending in
derisive or admiring comments, even Bob Langton, who had no objection
to pretty Lady Betty's oglings and summing of him as a dangerous beau,
breaking forth into gleeful grinning himself.

"Hang me if some great nobleman won't marry her," cried Tom, "and a
fine lady she'll make, too! Egad, it almost frightens one, for all the
joke of it, to think of a woman who can do such things--to be a madder
romp than any and suddenly to will that she will change in such a way,
and hold herself firm and be beat by naught. 'Tis scarce human. Bet
says that her kinsman, my Lord Twemlow, has took her in hand and is as
proud of her and as fidgety as some match-making mother. And the county
people who would not have spoke to her a year ago, have begun to visit
Wildairs and invite her to their houses, for all the men are wild
after her, and the best way to make an entertainment a fine thing is to
let it be known that she will grace it. Even Sir Jeof and his cronies
are taken in because they shine in her glory and are made decent by
it."

"They say, too," cried Bob Langton, "that she makes them all behave
themselves, telling them that unless their manners are decent they
cannot follow her to the fine houses she is bid to--and she puts them
through a drill and cuts off their drink and their cursings and wicked
stories. And Gloucestershire and Warwickshire and Worcestershire are
all agog with it!"

"And they follow her like slaves," added Tantillion, in an ecstacy,
"and stand about with their mouths open to stare at her swimming though
her minuets with bowing worshippers, and oh! Roxholm--nay, I should say
Osmonde; but how can a man remember you are Duke instead of
Marquis?--'tis told that in the field in her woman's hat and
hunting-coat she is handsomer than ever. Even my Lord Dunstanwolde has
rode to the meet to behold her, and admires her as far as a sober
elderly gentleman can."

That my Lord Dunstanwolde admired her, Osmonde knew. His rare letters
told a grave and dignified gentleman's version of the story and spoke
of it with kindly courtesy and pleasure in it. It had proved that the
change which had come over her had been the result of no caprice or
mischievous spirit but of a reasonable intention, to which she had been
faithful with such consistency of behaviour as filled the gossips and
onlookers with amazement.

"'Tis my belief," said the kindly nobleman, "that being in truth a
noble creature, though bred so wildly, the time came when she realised
herself a woman, and both wit and heart told her that 'twas more
honourable to live a woman's life and not a madcap boy's. And her
intellect being of such vigour and fineness, she can execute what her
thought conceives."

Among the gentlemen who were her courtiers there was much talk of the
fashionable rake Sir John Oxon, who, having appeared at her birthnight
supper, had become madly enamoured of her, and had stayed in the
country at Eldershawe Park and laid siege to her with all his forces
and with much fervour of feeling besides. 'Twas a thing well known that
this successful rake had never lost his heart to a woman in his life
before, and that his victims had all been snared by a part played to
villanous perfection; but 'twas plain enough that at last he had met a
woman who had set that which he called his soul on fire. He could not
tear himself away from the country, though the gayeties of the town
were at their highest. When in her presence his burning blue eyes
followed her every movement, and when she treated him disdainfully he
turned pale.

"But she leaves him no room for boasting," related young Tantillion.
"He may worship as any man may, but she shows no mercy to any, and him
she treats with open scorn when he languishes. He grows thin and pale
and is half-crazed with his passion for her."

There is no man who has given himself up to a growing passion and has
not yet revealed it, who does not pass through many an hour of unrest.
How could it be otherwise? In his absence from the object of his
feeling every man who lives is his possible rival, every woman his
possible enemy, every event a possible obstacle in the way to that he
yearns for. And from this situation there is nothing which can save a
man. He need not be a boy or a fool to be tormented despite himself;
the wisest and gravest are victims to these fits of heat and cold if
they have modesty and know somewhat of the game of chance called Life.
What may not happen to a castle left undefended; what may not be
filched from coffers left unlocked? This is the history of a man who,
despite the lavishness of Fortune and the gifts she had poured forth
before him, was of a stately humility. That he was a Duke and of great
estate, that he had already been caressed by the hand of Fame and had
been born more stalwart and beautiful than nine men of ten, did not,
to his mind, make sure for him the love of any woman whom he had not
served and won. He was of no meek spirit, but he had too much wit and
too great knowledge of the chances of warfare not to know that in
love's campaign, as in any other, a man must be on the field if he
would wield his sword.

So my lord Duke had his days of fret and restlessness as less fortunate
men have them, and being held on the Continent by duties he had
undertaken in calmer moments, lay sometimes awake at night reproaching
himself that he had left England. Such hours do not make a man grow
cooler, and by the time the second year had ripened, the months were
long indeed. Well as he had thought he knew himself, there were times
when the growth of this passion which possessed him awaked in him
somewhat of wonder. 'Twas for one with whom he had yet never exchanged
word or glance, a creature whose wild youth seemed sometimes a century
away from him. There had been so many others who had crossed his
path--great beauties and small ones--but only to this one had his being
cried out aloud.

"It has begun," he had said to himself. "I have heard them tell of
it--of how one woman's face came back to a man again and again, of how
her eyes would look into his and would not leave him or let him rest.
It has begun for me, too."

He had grave duties to perform, affairs of serious import to arrange,
interviews to hold with great personages and small, and though none
might read it in his bearing he found himself ever beholding this face,
ever followed by the eyes which would not leave him and which, had they
done so, would have left him to the dark. Yet this was hid within his
own breast and was his own strange secret which he gave himself up to
dwell upon but when he was alone. When he awakened in the morning he
lay and thought of it and counted that a day had passed and another
begun, and found himself pondering, as all those in his case do, on the
events of the future and the incidents which would lead him to them. At
night, sometimes in long rides or walks he took alone, he lived these
incidents through and imagined he beheld her as she would look when
they first met, as she would look when he told her his purpose in
coming to her. If he pleased her, his fancy pictured him the warm flash
of her large eye, the smile of her mouth, half-proud, half-tender, a
look which even when but imagined made his pulses beat.

"I do not know her face well enough," he said, "to picture all the
beauteous changes of it, but there will sure be a thousand which a man
might spend a life of love in studying."

Among the many who passed hours in his company at this time, there was
but one who guessed, even distantly, at what lay at the root of his
being, and this was the man who, being in a measure of like nature with
his own, had been in the same way possessed when deep passion came to
him.

At this period his Grace of Marlborough already felt the tossings of
the rising storm in England, and the emotions which his Duchess's
letters aroused within him, her anger at the intrigues about her, her
tigress love for and belief in him, her determination to defend and
uphold him with all the powers of her life and strength and imperial
spirit, were, it is probable, moving and stimulating things which put
him in the mood to be keen of sight and sympathy.

"There dwells some constant thought in your mind, my lord Duke," he
said, on a night in which they sate together alone. "Is it a new one?"

"No," Osmonde answered; "'twould perhaps not be so constant if it were.
It is an old thought which has taken a new form. In times past"--his
voice involuntarily falling a tone--"I did not realise its presence."
