hem of her garment? Why did she stand proudly in the midst of them, and
extend her hand, armed with the knife, over them? Was she their
sovereign mistress, that they bent so lowly at her coming, and rose so
reverentially at her bidding? Was this terrible woman, now seated oh a
dilapidated tomb, and regarding the dark conclave with the eye of a
queen who held their lives in her hands--was she her mother? Oh,
no!--no!--it could not be! It must be some fiend that usurped her
likeness.

Still, though Alizon thus strove to discredit the evidence of her
senses, and to hold all she saw to be delusion, and the work of
darkness, she could not entirely convince herself, but imperfectly
recalling the fearful vision she had witnessed during her former stupor,
began to connect it with the scene now passing before her. The storm had
wholly ceased, and the stars again twinkled down through the shattered
roof. Deep silence prevailed, broken only by the hissing and bubbling of
the caldron.

Alizon's gaze was riveted upon her mother, whose slightest gestures she
watched. After numbering the assemblage thrice, Mistress Nutter
majestically arose, and motioning Mother Chattox towards her, the old
witch tremblingly advanced, and some words passed between them, the
import of which did not reach the listener's ear. In conclusion,
however, Mistress Nutter exclaimed aloud, in accents of command--"Go,
bring it at once, the sacrifice must be made."--And on this, Mother
Chattox hobbled off to one of the side chapels.

A mortal terror seized Alizon, and she could scarcely draw breath. Dark
tales had been told her that unbaptised infants were sometimes
sacrificed by witches, and their flesh boiled and devoured at their
impious banquets, and dreading lest some such atrocity was now about to
be practised, she mustered all her resolution, determined, at any risk,
to interfere, and, if possible, prevent its accomplishment.

In another moment, Mother Chattox returned bearing some living thing,
wrapped in a white cloth, which struggled feebly for liberation,
apparently confirming Alizon's suspicions, and she was about to rush
forward, when Mistress Nutter, snatching the bundle from the old witch,
opened it, and disclosed a beautiful bird, with plumage white as driven
snow, whose legs were tied together, so that it could not escape.
Conjecturing what was to follow, Alizon averted her eyes, and when she
looked round again the bird had been slain, while Mother Chattox was in
the act of throwing its body into the caldron, muttering a charm as she
did so. Mistress Nutter held the ensanguined knife aloft, and casting
some ruddy drops upon the glowing embers, pronounced, as they hissed and
smoked, the following adjuration:--

          "Thy aid I seek, infernal Power!
           Be thy word sent to Malkin Tower,
           That the beldame old may know
           Where I will, thou'dst have her go--
           What I will, thou'dst have her do!"

An immediate response was made by an awful voice issuing apparently from
the bowels of the earth.

          "Thou who seek'st the Demon's aid,
           Know'st the price that must be paid."

The queen witch rejoined--

          "I do. But grant the aid I crave,
           And that thou wishest thou shalt have.
           Another worshipper is won,
           Thine to be, when all is done."

Again the deep voice spake, with something of mockery in its accents:--

           "Enough proud witch, I am content.
           To Malkin Tower the word is sent,
           Forth to her task the beldame goes,
           And where she points the streamlet flows;
           Its customary bed forsaking,
           Another distant channel making.
           Round about like elfets tripping,
           Stock and stone, and tree are skipping;
           Halting where she plants her staff,
           With a wild exulting laugh.
               Ho! ho! 'tis a merry sight,
               Thou hast given the hag to-night.

           Lo! the sheepfold, and the herd,
           To another site are stirr'd!
           And the rugged limestone quarry,
           Where 'twas digg'd may no more tarry;
           While the goblin haunted dingle,
           With another dell must mingle.
           Pendle Moor is in commotion,
           Like the billows of the ocean,
           When the winds are o'er it ranging,
           Heaving, falling, bursting, changing.
               Ho! ho! 'tis a merry sight
               Thou hast given the hag to-night.

           Lo! the moss-pool sudden flies,
           In another spot to rise;
           And the scanty-grown plantation,
           Finds another situation,
           And a more congenial soil,
           Without needing woodman's toil.
           Now the warren moves--and see!
           How the burrowing rabbits flee,
           Hither, thither till they find it,
           With another brake behind it.
               Ho! ho! 'tis a merry sight
               Thou hast given the hag to-night.

           Lo! new lines the witch is tracing,
           Every well-known mark effacing,
           Elsewhere, other bounds erecting,
           So the old there's no detecting.
               Ho! ho! 'tis a pastime quite,
               Thou hast given the hag to-night!

           The hind at eve, who wander'd o'er
           The dreary waste of Pendle Moor,
           Shall wake at dawn, and in surprise,
           Doubt the strange sight that meets his eyes.
           The pathway leading to his hut
           Winds differently,--the gate is shut.
           The ruin on the right that stood.
           Lies on the left, and nigh the wood;
           The paddock fenced with wall of stone,
           Wcll-stock'd with kine, a mile hath flown,
           The sheepfold and the herd are gone.
           Through channels new the brooklet rushes,
           Its ancient course conceal'd by bushes.
           Where the hollow was, a mound
           Rises from the upheaved ground.
           Doubting, shouting with surprise,
           How the fool stares, and rubs his eyes!
           All's so changed, the simple elf
           Fancies he is changed himself!
           Ho! ho! 'tis a merry sight
           The hag shall have when dawns the light.
           But see! she halts and waves her hand.
           All is done as thou hast plann'd."

After a moment's pause the voice added,

          "I have done as thou hast will'd--
           Now be thy path straight fulfill'd."

"It shall be," replied Mistress Nutter, whose features gleamed with
fierce exultation. "Bring forth the proselyte!" she shouted.

And at the words, her swarthy serving-man, Blackadder, came forth from
the Lacy chapel, leading Jennet by the hand. They were followed by Tib,
who, dilated to twice his former size, walked with tail erect, and eyes
glowing like carbuncles.

At sight of her daughter a loud cry of rage and astonishment burst from
Elizabeth Device, and, rushing forward, she would have seized her, if
Tib had not kept her off by a formidable display of teeth and talons.
Jennet made no effort to join her mother, but regarded her with a
malicious and triumphant grin.

"This is my chilt," screamed Elizabeth. "She canna be baptised without
my consent, an ey refuse it. Ey dunna want her to be a witch--at least
not yet awhile. What mays yo here, yo little plague?"

"Ey wur brought here, mother," replied Jennet, with affected simplicity.

"Then get whoam at once, and keep there," rejoined Elizabeth, furiously.

"Nay, eyst nah go just yet," replied Jennet. "Ey'd fain be a witch as
weel as yo."

"Ho! ho! ho!" laughed the voice from below.

"Nah, nah--ey forbid it," shrieked Elizabeth, "ye shanna be bapteesed.
Whoy ha ye brought her here, madam?" she added to Mistress Nutter. "Yo
ha' stolen her fro' me. Boh ey protest agen it."

"Your consent is not required," replied Mistress Nutter, waving her off.
"Your daughter is anxious to become a witch. That is enough."

"She is not owd enough to act for herself," said Elizabeth.

"Age matters not," replied Mistress Nutter.

"What mun ey do to become a witch?" asked Jennet.

"You must renounce all hopes of heaven," replied Mistress Nutter, "and
devote yourself to Satan. You will then be baptised in his name, and
become one of his worshippers. You will have power to afflict all
persons with bodily ailments--to destroy cattle--blight corn--burn
dwellings--and, if you be so minded, kill those you hate, or who molest
you. Do you desire to do all this?"

"Eigh, that ey do," replied Jennet. "Ey ha' more pleasure in evil than
in good, an wad rayther see folk weep than laugh; an if ey had the
power, ey wad so punish them os jeer at me, that they should rue it to
their deein' day."

"All this you shall do, and more," rejoined Mistress Nutter. "You
renounce all hopes of salvation, then, and devote yourself, soul and
body, to the Powers of Darkness."

Elizabeth, who was still kept at bay by Tib, shaking her arms, and
gnashing her teeth, in impotent rage, now groaned aloud; but ere Jennet
could answer, a piercing cry was heard, which thrilled through Mistress
Nutter's bosom, and Alizon, rushing from her place of concealment,
passed through the weird circle, and stood beside the group in the midst
of it.

"Forbear, Jennet," she cried; "forbear! Pronounce not those impious
words, or you are lost for ever. Come with me, and I will save you."

"Sister Alizon," cried Jennet, staring at her in surprise, "what makes
you here?"

"Do not ask--but come," cried Alizon, trying to take her hand.

"Oh! what is this?" cried Mistress Nutter, now partly recovered from the
consternation and astonishment into which she had been thrown by
Alizon's unexpected appearance. "Why are you here? How have you broken
the chains of slumber in which I bound you? Fly--fly--at once, this girl
is past your help. You cannot save her. She is already devoted. Fly. I
am powerless to protect you here."

"Ho! ho! ho!" laughed the voice.

"Do you not hear that laughter?" cried Mistress Nutter, with a haggard
look. "Go!"

"Never, without Jennet," replied Alizon, firmly.

"My child--my child--on my knees I implore you to depart," cried
Mistress Nutter, throwing herself before her--"You know not your
danger--oh, fly--fly!"

But Alizon continued inflexible.

"Yo are caught i' your own snare, madam," cried Elizabeth Device, with a
taunting laugh. "Sin Jennet mun be a witch, Alizon con be bapteesed os
weel. Your consent is not required--and age matters not--ha! ha!"

"Curses upon thy malice," cried Mistress Nutter, rising. "What can be
done in this extremity?"

"Nothing," replied the voice. "Jennet is mine already. If not brought
hither by thee, or by her mother, she would have come of her own accord.
I have watched her, and marked her for my own. Besides, she is fated.
The curse of Paslew clings to her."

As the words were uttered, the shade of the abbot glided forwards, and,
touching the shuddering child upon the brow with its finger, vanished
with a lamentable cry.

"Kneel, Jennet," cried Alizon; "kneel, and pray!"

"To me," rejoined the voice; "she can bend to no other power. Alice
Nutter, thou hast sought to deceive me, but in vain. I bade thee bring
thy daughter here, and in place of her thou offerest me the child of
another, who is mine already. I am not to be thus trifled with. Thou
knowest my will. Sprinkle water over her head, and devote her to me."

Alizon would fain have thrown herself on her knees, but extremity of
horror, or some overmastering influence, held her fast; and she remained
with her gaze fixed upon her mother, who seemed torn by conflicting
emotions.

"Is there no way to avoid this?" cried Mistress Nutter.

"No way but one," replied the voice. "I have been offered a new devotee,
and I claim fulfilment of the promise. Thy daughter or another, it
matters not--but not Jennet."

"I embrace the alternative," cried Mistress Nutter.

"It must be done upon the instant," said the voice.

"It shall be," replied Mistress Nutter. And, stretching her arm in the
direction of the mansion, she called in a loud imperious voice, "Dorothy
Assheton, come hither!"

A minute elapsed, but no one appeared, and, with a look of
disappointment, Mistress Nutter repeated the gesture and the words.

Still no one came.

"Baffled!" she exclaimed, "what can it mean?"

"There is a maiden within the south transept, who is not one of my
servants," cried the voice. "Call her."

"'Tis she!" cried Mistress Nutter, stretching her arm towards the
transept. "This time I am answered," she added, as with a wild laugh
Dorothy obeyed the summons.

"I have anointed myself with the unguent, and drank of the potion, ha!
ha! ha!" cried Dorothy, with a wild gesture, and wilder laughter.

"Ha! this accounts for her presence here," muttered Mistress Nutter.
"But it could not be better. She is in no mood to offer resistance.
Dorothy, thou shalt be a witch."

"A witch!" exclaimed the bewildered maiden. "Is Alizon a witch?"

"We are all witches here," replied Mistress Nutter.

Alizon had no power to contradict her.

"A merry company!" exclaimed Dorothy, laughing loudly.

"You will say so anon," replied Mistress Nutter, waving her hand over
her, and muttering a spell; "but you see them not in their true forms,
Dorothy. Look again--what do you behold now?"

"In place of a troop of old wrinkled crones in wretched habiliments,"
replied Dorothy, "I behold a band of lovely nymphs in light gauzy
attire, wreathed with flowers, and holding myrtle and olive branches in
their hands. See they rise, and prepare for the dance. Strains of
ravishing music salute the ear. I never heard sounds so sweet and
stirring. The round is formed. The dance begins. How gracefully--how
lightly they move--ha! ha!"

Alizon could not check her--could not undeceive her--for power of speech
as of movement was denied her, but she comprehended the strange delusion
under which the poor girl laboured. The figures Dorothy described as
young and lovely, were still to her the same loathsome and abhorrent
witches; the ravishing music jarred discordantly on her ear, as if
produced by a shrill cornemuse; and the lightsome dance was a fantastic
round, performed with shouts and laughter by the whole unhallowed crew.

Jennet laughed immoderately, and seemed delighted by the antics of the
troop.

"Ey never wished to dance efore," she cried, "boh ey should like to try
now."

"Join them, then," said Mistress Nutter.

And to the little girl's infinite delight a place was made for her in
the round, and, taking hands with Mother Mould-heels and the red-haired
witch, she footed it as merrily as the rest.

"Who is she in the nunlike habit?" inquired Dorothy, pointing to the
shade of Isole de Heton, which still hovered near the weird assemblage.
"She seems more beautiful than all the others. Will she not dance with
me?"

"Heed her not," said Mistress Nutter.

Dorothy, however, would not be gainsaid, but, spite of the caution,
beckoned the figure towards her. It came at once, and in another instant
its arms were enlaced around her. The same frenzy that had seized
Nicholas now took possession of Dorothy, and her dance with Isole might
have come to a similar conclusion, if it had not been abruptly checked
by Mistress Nutter, who, waving her hand, and pronouncing a spell, the
figure instantly quitted Dorothy, and, with a wild shriek, fled.

"How like you these diversions?" said Mistress Nutter to the panting and
almost breathless maiden.

"Marvellously," replied Dorothy; "but why have you scared my partner
away?"

"Because she would have done you a mischief," rejoined Mistress Nutter.
"But now let me put a question to you. Are you willing to renounce your
baptism, and enter into a covenant with the Prince of Darkness?"

Dorothy did not seem in the least to comprehend what was said to her;
but she nevertheless replied, "I am."

"Bring water and salt," said Mistress Nutter to Mother Chattox. "By
these drops I baptise you," she added, dipping her fingers in the
liquid, and preparing to sprinkle it over the brow of the proselyte.

Then it was that Alizon, by an almost superhuman effort, burst the
spell that bound her, and clasped Dorothy in her arms.

"You know not what you do, dear Dorothy," she cried. "I answer for you.
You will not yield to the snares and temptations of Satan, however
subtly devised. You defy him and all his works. You will make no
covenant with him. Though surrounded by his bond-slaves, you fear him
not. Is it not so? Speak!"

But Dorothy could only answer with an insane laugh--"I will be a witch."

"It is too late," interposed Mistress Nutter. "You cannot save her. And,
remember! she stands in your place. Or you or she must be devoted."

"I will never desert her," cried Alizon, twining her arms round her.
"Dorothy--dear Dorothy--address yourself to Heaven."

An angry growl of thunder was heard.

"Beware!" cried Mistress Nutter.

"I am not to be discouraged," rejoined Alizon, firmly. "You cannot gain
a victory over a soul in this condition, and I shall effect her
deliverance. Heaven will aid us, Dorothy."

A louder roll of thunder was heard, followed by a forked flash of
lightning.

"Provoke not the vengeance of the Prince of Darkness," said Mistress
Nutter.

"I have no fear," replied Alizon. "Cling to me, Dorothy. No harm shall
befall you."

"Be speedy!" cried the voice.

"Let her go," cried Mistress Nutter to Alizon, "or you will rue this
disobedience. Why should you interfere with my projects, and bring ruin
on yourself! I would save you. What, still obstinate? Nay, then, I will
no longer show forbearance. Help me, sisters. Force the new witch from
her. But beware how you harm my child."

At these words the troop gathered round the two girls. But Alizon only
clasped her hands more tightly round Dorothy; while the latter, on whose
brain the maddening potion still worked, laughed frantically at them. It
was at this moment that Elizabeth Device, who had conceived a project of
revenge, put it into execution. While near Dorothy, she stamped, spat on
the ground, and then cast a little mould over her, breathing in her ear,
"Thou art bewitched--bewitched by Alizon Device."

Dorothy instantly struggled to free herself from Alizon.

"Oh! do not you strive against me, dear Dorothy," cried Alizon. "Remain
with me, or you are lost."

"Hence! off! set me free!" shrieked Dorothy; "you have bewitched me. I
heard it this moment."

"Do not believe the false suggestion," cried Alizon.

"It is true," exclaimed all the other witches together. "Alizon has
bewitched you, and will kill you. Shake her off--shake her off!"

"Away!" cried Dorothy, mustering all her force. "Away!"

But Alizon was still too strong for her, and, in spite of her efforts at
liberation, detained her.

"My patience is wellnigh exhausted," exclaimed the voice.

"Alizon!" cried Mistress Nutter, imploringly.

And again the witches gathered furiously round the two girls.

"Kneel, Dorothy, kneel!" whispered Alizon. And forcing her down, she
fell on her knees beside her, exclaiming, with uplifted hands, "Gracious
heaven! deliver us."

As the words were uttered, a fearful cry was heard, and the weird troop
fled away screaming, like ill-omened birds. The caldron sank into the
ground; the dense mist arose like a curtain; and the moon and stars
shone brightly down upon the ruined pile.

Alizon prayed long and fervently, with clasped hands and closed eyes,
for deliverance from evil. When she looked round again, all was so calm,
so beautiful, so holy in its rest, that she could scarcely believe in
the recent fearful occurrences. Her hair and garments were damp with the
dews of night; and at her feet lay Dorothy, insensible.

She tried to raise her--to revive her, but in vain; when at this moment
footsteps were heard approaching, and the next moment Mistress Nutter,
accompanied by Adam Whitworth and some other serving-men, entered the
choir.

"I see them--they are here!" cried the lady, rushing forward.

"Heaven be praised you have found them, madam!" exclaimed the old
steward, coming quickly after her.

"Oh! what an alarm you have given me, Alizon," said Mistress Nutter.
"What could induce you to go forth secretly at night in this way with
Dorothy! I dreamed you were here, and missing you when I awoke, roused
the house and came in search of you. What is the matter with Dorothy?
She has been frightened, I suppose. I will give her to breathe at this
phial. It will revive her. See, she opens her eyes."

Dorothy looked round wildly for a moment, and then pointing her finger
at Alizon, said--

"She has bewitched me."

"Poor thing! she rambles," observed Mistress Nutter to Adam Whitworth,
who, with the other serving-men, stared aghast at the accusation; "she
has been scared out of her senses by some fearful sight. Let her be
conveyed quickly to my chamber, and I will see her cared for."

The orders were obeyed. Dorothy was raised gently by the serving-men,
but she still kept pointing to Alizon, and repeatedly exclaimed--

"She has bewitched me!"

The serving-men shook their heads, and looked significantly at each
other, while Mistress Nutter lingered to speak to her daughter.

"You look greatly disturbed, Alizon, as if you had been visited by a
nightmare in your sleep, and were still under its influence."

Alizon made no reply.

"A few hours' tranquil sleep will restore you," pursued Mistress Nutter,
"and you will forget your fears. You must not indulge in these nocturnal
rambles again, or they may be attended with dangerous consequences. I
may not have a second warning dream. Come to the house."

And, as Alizon followed her along the garden path, she could not help
asking herself, though with little hope in the question, if all she had
witnessed was indeed nothing more than a troubled dream.


END OF THE FIRST BOOK.




THE LANCASHIRE WITCHES.

BOOK THE SECOND.

Pendle Forest.




CHAPTER I.--FLINT.


A lovely morning succeeded the strange and terrible night. Brightly
shone the sun upon the fair Calder as it winded along the green meads
above the bridge, as it rushed rejoicingly over the weir, and pursued
its rapid course through the broad plain below the Abbey. A few white
vapours hung upon the summit of Whalley Nab, but the warm rays tinging
them with gold, and tipping with fire the tree-tops that pierced through
them, augured their speedy dispersion. So beautiful, so tranquil, looked
the old monastic fane, that none would have deemed its midnight rest had
been broken by the impious rites of a foul troop. The choir, where the
unearthly scream and the demon laughter had resounded, was now vocal
with the melodies of the blackbird, the thrush, and other songsters of
the grove. Bells of dew glittered upon the bushes rooted in the walls,
and upon the ivy-grown pillars; and gemming the countless spiders' webs
stretched from bough to bough, showed they were all unbroken. No traces
were visible on the sod where the unhallowed crew had danced their
round; nor were any ashes left where the fire had burnt and the caldron
had bubbled. The brass-covered tombs of the abbots in the presbytery
looked as if a century had passed over them without disturbance; while
the graves in the cloister cemetery, obliterated, and only to be
detected when a broken coffin or a mouldering bone was turned up by the
tiller of the ground, preserved their wonted appearance. The face of
nature had received neither impress nor injury from the fantastic freaks
and necromantic exhibitions of the witches. Every thing looked as it was
left overnight; and the only footprints to be detected were those of the
two girls, and of the party who came in quest of them. All else had
passed by like a vision or a dream. The rooks cawed loudly in the
neighbouring trees, as if discussing the question of breakfast, and the
jackdaws wheeled merrily round the tall spire, which sprang from the
eastern end of the fane.

Brightly shone the sun upon the noble timber embowering the mansion of
the Asshetons; upon the ancient gateway, in the upper chamber of which
Ned Huddlestone, the porter, and the burly representative of Friar Tuck,
was rubbing his sleepy eyes, preparatory to habiting himself in his
ordinary attire; and upon the wide court-yard, across which Nicholas was
walking in the direction of the stables. Notwithstanding his excesses
overnight, the squire was astir, as he had declared he should be, before
daybreak; and a plunge into the Calder had cooled his feverish limbs and
cured his racking headache, while a draught of ale set his stomach
right. Still, in modern parlance, he looked rather "seedy," and his
recollection of the events of the previous night was somewhat confused.
Aware he had committed many fooleries, he did not desire to investigate
matters too closely, and only hoped he should not be reminded of them by
Sir Ralph, or worse still, by Parson Dewhurst. As to his poor, dear,
uncomplaining wife, he never once troubled his head about her, feeling
quite sure she would not upbraid him. On his appearance in the
court-yard, the two noble blood-hounds and several lesser dogs came
forward to greet him, and, attended by this noisy pack, he marched up to
a groom, who was rubbing down his horse at the stable-door.

"Poor Robin," he cried to the steed, who neighed at his approach. "Poor
Robin," he said, patting his neck affectionately, "there is not thy
match for speed or endurance, for fence or ditch, for beck or stone
wall, in the country. Half an hour on thy back will make all right with
me; but I would rather take thee to Bowland Forest, and hunt the stag
there, than go and perambulate the boundaries of the Rough Lee estates
with a rascally attorney. I wonder how the fellow will be mounted."

"If yo be speering about Mester Potts, squoire," observed the groom, "ey
con tell ye. He's to ha' little Flint, the Welsh pony."

"Why, zounds, you don't say, Peter!" exclaimed Nicholas, laughing;
"he'll never be able to manage him. Flint's the wickedest and most
wilful little brute I ever knew. We shall have Master Potts run away
with, or thrown into a moss-pit. Better give him something quieter."

"It's Sir Roaph's orders," replied Peter, "an ey darna disobey 'em. Boh
Flint's far steadier than when yo seed him last, squoire. Ey dar say
he'll carry Mester Potts weel enough, if he dusna mislest him."

"You think nothing of the sort, Peter," said Nicholas. "You expect to
see the little gentleman fly over the pony's head, and perhaps break his
own at starting. But if Sir Ralph has ordered it, he must abide by the
consequences. I sha'n't interfere further. How goes on the young colt
you were breaking in? You should take care to show him the saddle in the
manger, let him smell it, and jingle the stirrups in his ears, before
you put it on his back. Better ground for his first lessons could not be
desired than the field below the grange, near the Calder. Sir Ralph was
saying yesterday, that the roan mare had pricked her foot. You must wash
the sore well with white wine and salt, rub it with the ointment the
farriers call aegyptiacum, and then put upon it a hot plaster compounded
of flax hards, turpentine, oil and wax, bathing the top of the hoof with
bole armeniac and vinegar. This is the best and quickest remedy. And
recollect, Peter, that for a new strain, vinegar, bole armeniac, whites
of eggs, and bean-flour, make the best salve. How goes on Sir Ralph's
black charger, Dragon? A brave horse that, Peter, and the only one in
your master's whole stud to compare with my Robin! But Dragon, though of
high courage and great swiftness, has not the strength and endurance of
Robin--neither can he leap so well. Why, Robin would almost clear the
Calder, Peter, and makes nothing of Smithies Brook, near Downham, and
you know how wide that stream is. I once tried him at the Ribble, at a
narrow point, and if horse could have done it, he would--but it was too
much to expect."

"A great deal, ey should say, squoire," replied the groom, opening his
eyes to their widest extent. "Whoy, th' Ribble, where yo speak on, mun
be twenty yards across, if it be an inch; and no nag os ever wur bred
could clear that, onless a witch wur on his back."

"Don't allude to witches, Peter," said Nicholas. "I've had enough of
them. But to come back to our steeds. Colour is matter of taste, and a
man must please his own eye with bay or grey, chestnut, sorrel, or
black; but dun is my fancy. A good horse, Peter, should be clean-limbed,
short-jointed, strong-hoofed, out-ribbed, broad-chested, deep-necked,
loose-throttled, thin-crested, lean-headed, full-eyed, with wide
nostrils. A horse with half these points would not be wrong, and Robin
has them all."

"So he has, sure enough, squoire," replied Peter, regarding the animal
with an approving eye, as Nicholas enumerated his merits. "Boh, if ey
might choose betwixt him an yunk Mester Ruchot Assheton's grey gelding,
Merlin, ey knoas which ey'd tak."

"Robin, of course," said Nicholas.

"Nah, squoire, it should be t'other," replied the groom.

"You're no judge of a horse, Peter," rejoined Nicholas, shrugging his
shoulders.

"May be not," said the groom, "boh ey'm bound to speak truth. An see!
Tum Lomax is bringin' out Merlin. We con put th' two nags soide by
soide, if yo choose."

"They shall be put side by side in the field, Peter--that's the way to
test their respective merit," returned Nicholas, "and they won't remain
long together, I'll warrant you. I offered to make a match for twenty
pieces with Master Richard, but he declined the offer. Harkee, Peter,
break an egg in Robin's mouth before you put on his bridle. It
strengthens the wind, and adds to a horse's power of endurance. You
understand?"

"Parfitly, squoire," replied the groom. "By th' mess! that's a secret
worth knoain'. Onny more orders?"

"No," replied Nicholas. "We shall set out in an hour--or it may be
sooner."

"Aw shan be ready," said Peter. And he added to himself, as Nicholas
moved away, "Ey'st tak care Tum Lomax gies an egg to Merlin, an that'll
may aw fair, if they chance to try their osses' mettle."

As Nicholas returned to the house, he perceived to his dismay Sir Ralph
and Parson Dewhurst standing upon the steps; and convinced, from their
grave looks, that they were prepared to lecture him, he endeavoured to
nerve himself for the infliction.

"Two to one are awkward odds," said the squire to himself, "especially
when they have the 'vantage ground. But I must face them, and make the
best fight circumstances will allow. I shall never be able to explain
that mad dance with Isole de Heton. No one but Dick will believe me, and
the chances are he will not support my story. But I must put on an air
of penitence, and sooth to say, in my present state, it is not very
difficult to assume."

Thus pondering, with slow step, affectedly humble demeanour, and
surprisingly-lengthened visage, he approached the pair who were waiting
for him, and regarding him with severe looks.

Thinking it the best plan to open the fire himself, Nicholas saluted
them, and said--

"Give you good-day, Sir Ralph, and you too, worthy Master Dewhurst. I
scarcely expected to see you so early astir, good sirs; but the morning
is too beautiful to allow us to be sluggards. For my own part I have
been awake for hours, and have passed the time wholly in self-reproaches
for my folly and sinfulness last night, as well as in forming
resolutions for self-amendment, and better governance in future."

"I hope you will adhere to those resolutions, then, Nicholas," rejoined
Sir Ralph, sternly; "for change of conduct is absolutely necessary, if
you would maintain your character as a gentleman. I can make allowance
for high animal spirits, and can excuse some licence, though I do not
approve of it; But I will not permit decorum to be outraged in my house,
and suffer so ill an example to be set to my tenantry."

"Fortunately I was not present at the exhibition," said Dewhurst; "but I
am told you conducted yourself like one possessed, and committed such
freaks as are rarely, if ever, acted by a rational being."

"I can offer no defence, worthy sir, and you my respected relative,"
returned Nicholas, with a contrite air; "neither can you reprove me
more strongly than I deserve, nor than I upbraid myself. I allowed
myself to be overcome by wine, and in that condition was undoubtedly
guilty of follies I must ever regret."

"Amongst others, I believe you stood upon your head," remarked Dewhurst.

"I am not aware of the circumstance, reverend sir," replied Nicholas,
with difficulty repressing a smile; "but as I certainly lost my head, I
may have stood upon it unconsciously. But I do recollect enough to make
me heartily ashamed of myself, and determine to avoid all such excesses
in future."

"In that case, sir," rejoined Dewhurst, "the occurrences of last night,
though sufficiently discreditable to you, will not be without profit;
for I have observed to my infinite regret, that you are apt to indulge
in immoderate potations, and when under their influence to lose due
command of yourself, and commit follies which your sober reason must
condemn. At such times I scarcely recognise you. You speak with
unbecoming levity, and even allow oaths to escape your lips."

"It is too true, reverend sir," said Nicholas; "but, zounds!--a plague
upon my tongue--it is an unruly member. Forgive me, good sir, but my
brain is a little confused."

"I do not wonder, from the grievous assaults made upon it last night,
Nicholas," observed Sir Ralph. "Perhaps you are not aware that your
crowning act was whisking wildly round the room by yourself, like a
frantic dervish."

"I was dancing with Isole de Heton," said Nicholas.

"With whom?" inquired Dewhurst, in surprise.

"With a wicked votaress, who has been dead nearly a couple of
centuries," interposed Sir Ralph; "and who, by her sinful life, merited
the punishment she is said to have incurred. This delusion shows how
dreadfully intoxicated you were, Nicholas. For the time you had quite
lost your reason."

"I am sober enough now, at all events," rejoined Nicholas; "and I am
convinced that Isole did dance with me, nor will any arguments reason me
out of that belief."

"I am sorry to hear you say so, Nicholas," returned Sir Ralph. "That you
were under the impression at the time I can easily understand; but that
you should persist in such a senseless and wicked notion is more than I
can comprehend."

"I saw her with my own eyes as plainly as I see you, Sir Ralph," replied
Nicholas, warmly; "that I declare upon my honour and conscience, and I
also felt the pressure of her arms. Whether it may not have been the
Fiend in her likeness I will not take upon me to declare--and indeed I
have some misgivings on the subject; but that a beautiful creature,
exactly resembling the votaress, danced with me, I will ever maintain."

"If so, she was invisible to others, for I beheld her not," said Sir
Ralph; "and, though I cannot yield credence to your explanation, yet,
granting it to be correct, I do not see how it mends your case."

"On the contrary, it only proves that Master Nicholas yielded to the
snares of Satan," said Dewhurst, shaking his head. "I would recommend
you long fasting and frequent prayer, my good sir, and I shall prepare a
lecture for your special edification, which I will propound to you on
your return to Downham, and, if it fails in effect, I will persevere
with other godly discourses."

"With your aid, I trust to be set free, reverend sir," returned
Nicholas; "but, as I have already passed two or three hours in prayer, I
hope they may stand me in lieu of any present fasting, and induce you to
omit the article of penance, or postpone it to some future occasion,
when I may be better able to perform it; for I am just now particularly
hungry, and am always better able to resist temptation with a full
stomach than an empty one. As I find it displeasing to Sir Ralph, I will
not insist upon my visionary partner in the dance, at least until I am
better able to substantiate the fact; and I shall listen to your
lectures, worthy sir, with great delight, and, I doubt not, with equal
benefit; but in the meantime, as carnal wants must be supplied, and
mundane matters attended to, I propose, with our excellent host's
permission, that we proceed to breakfast."

Sir Ralph made no answer, but ascended the steps, and was followed by
Dewhurst, heaving a deep sigh, and turning up the whites of his eyes,
and by Nicholas, who felt his bosom eased of half its load, and secretly
congratulated himself upon getting out of the scrape so easily.

In the hall they found Richard Assheton habited in a riding-dress,
booted, spurred, and in all respects prepared for the expedition. There
were such evident traces of anxiety and suffering about him, that Sir
Ralph questioned him as to the cause, and Richard replied that he had
passed a most restless night. He did not add, that he had been made
acquainted by Adam Whitworth with the midnight visit of the two girls to
the conventual church, because he was well aware Sir Ralph would be
greatly displeased by the circumstance, and because Mistress Nutter had
expressed a wish that it should be kept secret. Sir Ralph, however, saw
there was more upon his young relative's mind than he chose to confess,
but he did not urge any further admission into his confidence.

Meantime, the party had been increased by the arrival of Master Potts,
who was likewise equipped for the ride. The hour was too early, it might
be, for him, or he had not rested well like Richard, or had been
troubled with bad dreams, but certainly he did not look very well, or in
very good-humour. He had slept at the Abbey, having been accommodated
with a bed after the sudden seizure which he attributed to the
instrumentality of Mistress Nutter. The little attorney bowed
obsequiously to Sir Ralph, who returned his salutation very stiffly,
nor was he much better received by the rest of the company.

At a sign from Sir Ralph, his guests then knelt down, and a prayer was
uttered by the divine--or rather a discourse, for it partook more of the
latter character than the former. In the course of it he took occasion
to paint in strong colours the terrible consequences of intemperance,
and Nicholas was obliged to endure a well-merited lecture of half an
hour's duration. But even Parson Dewhurst could not hold out for ever,
and, to the relief of all his hearers, he at length brought this
discourse to a close.

Breakfast at this period was a much more substantial affair than a
modern morning repast, and differed little from dinner or supper, except
in respect to quantity. On the present occasion, there were carbonadoes
of fish and fowl, a cold chine, a huge pasty, a capon, neat's tongues,
sausages, botargos, and other matters as provocative of thirst as
sufficing to the appetite. Nicholas set to work bravely. Broiled trout,
steaks, and a huge slice of venison pasty, disappeared quickly before
him, and he was not quite so sparing of the ale as seemed consistent
with his previously-expressed resolutions of temperance. In vain Parson
Dewhurst filled a goblet with water, and looked significantly at him. He
would not take the hint, and turned a deaf ear to the admonitory cough
of Sir Ralph. He had little help from the others, for Richard ate
sparingly, and Master Potts made a very poor figure beside him. At
length, having cleared his plate, emptied his cup, and wiped his lips,
the squire arose, and said he must bid adieu to his wife, and should
then be ready to attend them.

While he quitted the hall for this purpose, Mistress Nutter entered it.
She looked paler than ever, and her eyes seemed larger, darker, and
brighter. Nicholas shuddered slightly as she approached, and even Potts
felt a thrill of apprehension pass through his frame. He scarcely,
indeed, ventured a look at her, for he dreaded her mysterious power, and
feared she could fathom the designs he secretly entertained against her.
But she took no notice whatever of him. Acknowledging Sir Ralph's
salutation, she motioned Richard to follow her to the further end of the
room.

"Your sister is very ill, Richard," she said, as the young man attended
her, "feverish, and almost light-headed. Adam Whitworth has told you, I
know, that she was imprudent enough, in company with Alizon, to visit
the ruins of the conventual church late last night, and she there
sustained some fright, which has produced a great shock upon her system.
When found, she was fainting, and though I have taken every care of her,
she still continues much excited, and rambles strangely. You will be
surprised as well as grieved when I tell you, that she charges Alizon
with having bewitched her."

"How, madam!" cried Richard. "Alizon bewitch her! It is impossible."

"You are right, Richard," replied Mistress Nutter; "the thing is
impossible; but the accusation will find easy credence among the
superstitious household here, and may be highly prejudicial, if not
fatal to poor Alizon. It is most unlucky she should have gone out in
this way, for the circumstance cannot be explained, and in itself serves
to throw suspicion upon her."

"I must see Dorothy before I go," said Richard; "perhaps I may be able
to soothe her."

"It was for that end I came hither," replied Mistress Nutter; "but I
thought it well you should be prepared. Now come with me."

Upon this they left the hall together, and proceeded to the abbot's
chamber, where Dorothy was lodged. Richard was greatly shocked at the
sight of his sister, so utterly changed was she from the blithe being of
yesterday--then so full of health and happiness. Her cheeks burnt with
fever, her eyes were unnaturally bright, and her fair hair hung about
her face in disorder. She kept fast hold of Alizon, who stood beside
her.

