  From the horse-hoofs, and from the fellied wheels.
  Full on the multitude he drove, on fire
  To burst the phalanx, and confusion sent
  Among the Greeks, for nought[17] he shunn'd the spear.         650
  All quarters else with falchion or with lance,
  Or with huge stones he ranged, but cautious shunn'd
  The encounter of the Telamonian Chief.
    But the eternal father throned on high
  With fear fill'd Ajax; panic-fixt he stood,                    655
  His seven-fold shield behind his shoulder cast,
  And hemm'd by numbers, with an eye askant,
  Watchful retreated. As a beast of prey
  Retiring, turns and looks, so he his face
  Turn'd oft, retiring slow, and step by step.                   660
  As when the watch-dogs and assembled swains
  Have driven a tawny lion from the stalls,
  Then, interdicting him his wish'd repast,
  Watch all the night, he, famish'd, yet again
  Comes furious on, but speeds not, kept aloof                   665
  By frequent spears from daring hands, but more
  By flash of torches, which, though fierce, he dreads,
  Till, at the dawn, sullen he stalks away;
  So from before the Trojans Ajax stalk'd
  Sullen, and with reluctance slow retired.                      670
  His brave heart trembling for the fleet of Greece.
  As when (the boys o'erpower'd) a sluggish ass,
  On whose tough sides they have spent many a staff,
  Enters the harvest, and the spiry ears
  Crops persevering; with their rods the boys                    675
  Still ply him hard, but all their puny might
  Scarce drives him forth when he hath browsed his fill,
  So, there, the Trojans and their foreign aids
  With glittering lances keen huge Ajax urged,
  His broad shield's centre smiting.[18] He, by turns,           680
  With desperate force the Trojan phalanx dense
  Facing, repulsed them, and by turns he fled,
  But still forbad all inroad on the fleet.
  Trojans and Greeks between, alone, he stood
  A bulwark. Spears from daring hands dismiss'd                  685
  Some, piercing his broad shield, there planted stood,
  While others, in the midway falling, spent
  Their disappointed rage deep in the ground.
    Eurypylus, Evaemon's noble son,
  Him seeing, thus, with weapons overwhelmed                     690
  Flew to his side, his glittering lance dismiss'd,
  And Apisaon, son of Phausias, struck
  Under the midriff; through his liver pass'd
  The ruthless point, and, falling, he expired.
  Forth sprang Eurypylus to seize the spoil;                     695
  Whom soon as godlike Alexander saw
  Despoiling Apisaon of his arms,
  Drawing incontinent his bow, he sent
  A shaft to his right thigh; the brittle reed
  Snapp'd, and the rankling barb stuck fast within.              700
  Terrified at the stroke, the wounded Chief
  To his own band retired, but, as he went,
  With echoing voice call'd on the Danai--
    Friends! Counsellors, and leaders of the Greeks!
  Turn ye and stand, and from his dreadful lot                   705
  Save Ajax whelm'd with weapons; 'scape, I judge,
  He cannot from the roaring fight, yet oh
  Stand fast around him; if save ye may,
  Your champion huge, the Telamonian Chief!
    So spake the wounded warrior. They at once                   710
  With sloping bucklers, and with spears erect,
  To his relief approach'd. Ajax with joy
  The friendly phalanx join'd, then turn'd and stood.
    Thus burn'd the embattled field as with the flames
  Of a devouring fire. Meantime afar                             715
  From all that tumult the Neleian mares
  Bore Nestor, foaming as they ran, with whom
  Machaon also rode, leader revered.
  Achilles mark'd him passing; for he stood
  Exalted on his huge ship's lofty stern,                        720
  Spectator of the toil severe, and flight
  Deplorable of the defeated Greeks.
  He call'd his friend Patroclus. He below
  Within his tent the sudden summons heard
  And sprang like Mars abroad, all unaware                       725
  That in that sound he heard the voice of fate.
  Him first Menoetius' gallant son address'd.
    What would Achilles? Wherefore hath he call'd?
  To whom Achilles swiftest of the swift:
    Brave Menoetiades! my soul's delight!                        730
  Soon will the Grecians now my knees surround
  Suppliant, by dread extremity constrain'd.
  But fly Patroclus, haste, oh dear to Jove!
  Inquire of Nestor, whom he hath convey'd
  From battle, wounded? Viewing him behind,                      735
  I most believed him AEsculapius' son
  Machaon, but the steeds so swiftly pass'd
  My galley, that his face escaped my note.[19]
    He said, and prompt to gratify his friend,
  Forth ran Patroclus through the camp of Greece.                740
    Now when Neleian Nestor to his tent
  Had brought Machaon, they alighted both,
  And the old hero's friend Eurymedon
  Released the coursers. On the beach awhile
  Their tunics sweat-imbued in the cool air                      745
  They ventilated, facing full the breeze,
  Then on soft couches in the tent reposed.
  Meantime, their beverage Hecamede mix'd,
  The old King's bright-hair'd captive, whom he brought
  From Tenedos, what time Achilles sack'd                        750
  The city, daughter of the noble Chief
  Arsinoues, and selected from the rest
  For Nestor, as the honorable meed
  Of counsels always eminently wise.
  She, first, before them placed a table bright,                 755
  With feet coerulean; thirst-provoking sauce
  She brought them also in a brazen tray,
  Garlic[20] and honey new, and sacred meal.
  Beside them, next, she placed a noble cup
  Of labor exquisite, which from his home                        760
  The ancient King had brought with golden studs
  Embellish'd; it presented to the grasp
  Four ears; two golden turtles, perch'd on each,
  Seem'd feeding, and two turtles[21] form'd the base.
  That cup once fill'd, all others must have toil'd              765
  To move it from the board, but it was light
  In Nestor's hand; he lifted it with ease.[22]
  The graceful virgin in that cup a draught
  Mix'd for them, Pramnian wine and savory cheese
  Of goat's milk, grated with a brazen rasp,                     770
  Then sprinkled all with meal. The draught prepared,
  She gave it to their hand; they, drinking, slaked
  Their fiery thirst, and with each other sat
  Conversing friendly, when the godlike youth
  By brave Achilles sent, stood at the door.                     775
    Him seeing, Nestor from his splendid couch
  Arose, and by the hand leading him in,
  Entreated him to sit, but that request
  Patroclus, on his part refusing, said,
    Oh venerable King! no seat is here                           780
  For me, nor may thy courtesy prevail.
  He is irascible, and to be fear'd
  Who bade me ask what Chieftain thou hast brought
  From battle, wounded; but untold I learn;
  I see Machaon, and shall now report                            785
  As I have seen; oh ancient King revered!
  Thou know'st Achilles fiery, and propense
  Blame to impute even where blame is none.
    To whom the brave Gerenian thus replied.
  Why feels Achilles for the wounded Greeks                      790
  Such deep concern? He little knows the height
  To which our sorrows swell. Our noblest lie
  By spear or arrow wounded in the fleet.
  Diomede, warlike son of Tydeus, bleeds,
  Gall'd by a shaft; Ulysses, glorious Chief,                    795
  And Agamemnon[23] suffer by the spear;
  Eurypylus is shot into the thigh,
  And here lies still another newly brought
  By me from fight, pierced also by a shaft.
  What then? How strong soe'er to give them aid,                 800
  Achilles feels no pity of the Greeks.
  Waits he till every vessel on the shore
  Fired, in despite of the whole Argive host,
  Be sunk in its own ashes, and ourselves
  All perish, heaps on heaps? For in my limbs                    805
  No longer lives the agility of my youth.
  Oh, for the vigor of those days again,
  When Elis, for her cattle which we took,
  Strove with us and Itymoneus I slew,
  Brave offspring of Hypirochus; he dwelt                        810
  In Elis, and while I the pledges drove,
  Stood for his herd, but fell among the first
  By a spear hurl'd from my victorious arm.
  Then fled the rustic multitude, and we
  Drove off abundant booty from the plain,                       815
  Herds fifty of fat beeves, large flocks of goats
  As many, with as many sheep and swine,
  And full thrice fifty mares of brightest hue,
  All breeders, many with their foals beneath.
  All these, by night returning safe, we drove                   820
  Into Neleian Pylus, and the heart
  Rejoiced of Neleus, in a son so young
  A warrior, yet enrich'd with such a prize.
  At early dawn the heralds summon'd loud
  The citizens, to prove their just demands                      825
  On fruitful Elis, and the assembled Chiefs
  Division made (for numerous were the debts
  Which the Epeans, in the weak estate
  Of the unpeopled Pylus, had incurr'd;
  For Hercules, few years before, had sack'd[24]                 830
  Our city, and our mightiest slain. Ourselves
  The gallant sons of Neleus, were in all
  Twelve youths, of whom myself alone survived;
  The rest all perish'd; whence, presumptuous grown,
  The brazen-mail'd Epeans wrong'd us oft).                      835
  A herd of beeves my father for himself
  Selected, and a numerous flock beside,
  Three hundred sheep, with shepherds for them all.
  For he a claimant was of large arrears
  From sacred Elis. Four unrivall'd steeds                       840
  With his own chariot to the games he sent,
  That should contend for the appointed prize
  A tripod; but Augeias, King of men,
  Detain'd the steeds, and sent the charioteer
  Defrauded home. My father, therefore, fired                    845
  At such foul outrage both of deeds and words,
  Took much, and to the Pylians gave the rest
  For satisfaction of the claims of all.
  While thus we busied were in these concerns,
  And in performance of religious rites                          850
  Throughout the city, came the Epeans arm'd,
  Their whole vast multitude both horse and foot
  On the third day; came also clad in brass
  The two Molions, inexpert as yet
  In feats of arms, and of a boyish age.                         855
  There is a city on a mountain's head,
  Fast by the banks of Alpheus, far remote,
  The utmost town which sandy Pylus owns,
  Named Thryoessa, and, with ardor fired
  To lay it waste, that city they besieged.                      860
  Now when their host had traversed all the plain,
  Minerva from Olympus flew by night
  And bade us arm; nor were the Pylians slow
  To assemble, but impatient for the fight.
  Me, then, my father suffer'd not to arm,                       865
  But hid my steeds, for he supposed me raw
  As yet, and ignorant how war is waged.
  Yet, even thus, unvantaged and on foot,
  Superior honors I that day acquired
  To theirs who rode, for Pallas led me on                       870
  Herself to victory. There is a stream
  Which at Arena falls into the sea,
  Named Minueius; on that river's bank
  The Pylian horsemen waited day's approach,
  And thither all our foot came pouring down.                    875
  The flood divine of Alpheus thence we reach'd
  At noon, all arm'd complete; there, hallow'd rites
  We held to Jove omnipotent, and slew
  A bull to sacred Alpheus, with a bull
  To Neptune, and a heifer of the herd                           880
  To Pallas; then, all marshall'd as they were,
  From van to rear our legions took repast,
  And at the river's side slept on their arms.
  Already the Epean host had round
  Begirt the city, bent to lay it waste,                         885
  A task which cost them, first, both blood and toil,
  For when the radiant sun on the green earth
  Had risen, with prayer to Pallas and to Jove,
  We gave them battle. When the Pylian host
  And the Epeans thus were close engaged,                        890
  I first a warrior slew, Mulius the brave,
  And seized his coursers. He the eldest-born
  Of King Augeias' daughters had espoused
  The golden Agamede; not an herb
  The spacious earth yields but she knew its powers,             895
  Him, rushing on me, with my brazen lance
  I smote, and in the dust he fell; I leap'd
  Into his seat, and drove into the van.
  A panic seized the Epeans when they saw
  The leader of their horse o'erthrown, a Chief                  900
  Surpassing all in fight. Black as a cloud
  With whirlwind fraught, I drove impetuous on,
  Took fifty chariots, and at side of each
  Lay two slain warriors, with their teeth the soil
  Grinding, all vanquish'd by my single arm.                     905
  I had slain also the Molions, sons
  Of Actor, but the Sovereign of the deep
  Their own authentic Sire, in darkness dense
  Involving both, convey'd them safe away.
  Then Jove a victory of prime renown                            910
  Gave to the Pylians; for we chased and slew
  And gather'd spoil o'er all the champain spread
  With scatter'd shields, till we our steeds had driven
  To the Buprasian fields laden with corn,
  To the Olenian rock, and to a town                             915
  In fair Colona situate, and named
  Alesia. There it was that Pallas turn'd
  Our people homeward; there I left the last
  Of all the slain, and he was slain by me.
  Then drove the Achaians from Buprasium home                    920
  Their coursers fleet, and Jove, of Gods above,
  Received most praise, Nestor of men below.
    Such once was I. But brave Achilles shuts
  His virtues close, an unimparted store;
  Yet even he shall weep, when all the host,                     925
  His fellow-warriors once, shall be destroy'd.
  But recollect, young friend! the sage advice
  Which when thou earnest from Phthia to the aid
  Of Agamemnon, on that selfsame day
  Menoetius gave thee. We were present there,                    930
  Ulysses and myself, both in the house,
  And heard it all; for to the house we came
  Of Peleus in our journey through the land
  Of fertile Greece, gathering her states to war.
  We found thy noble sire Menoetius there,                       935
  Thee and Achilles; ancient Peleus stood
  To Jove the Thunderer offering in his court
  Thighs of an ox, and on the blazing rites
  Libation pouring from a cup of gold.
  While ye on preparation of the feast                           940
  Attended both, Ulysses and myself
  Stood in the vestibule; Achilles flew
  Toward us, introduced us by the hand,
  And, seating us, such liberal portion gave
  To each, as hospitality requires.                              945
  Our thirst, at length, and hunger both sufficed,
  I, foremost speaking, ask'd you to the wars,
  And ye were eager both, but from your sires
  Much admonition, ere ye went, received.
  Old Peleus charged Achilles to aspire                          950
  To highest praise, and always to excel.
  But thee, thy sire Menoetius thus advised.
  "My son! Achilles boasts the nobler birth,
  But thou art elder; he in strength excels
  Thee far; thou, therefore, with discretion rule                955
  His inexperience; thy advice impart
  With gentleness; instruction wise suggest
  Wisely, and thou shalt find him apt to learn."
  So thee thy father taught, but, as it seems,
  In vain. Yet even now essay to move                            960
  Warlike Achilles; if the Gods so please,
  Who knows but that thy reasons may prevail
  To rouse his valiant heart? men rarely scorn
  The earnest intercession of a friend.
  But if some prophecy alarm his fears,                          965
  And from his Goddess mother he have aught
  Received, who may have learnt the same from Jove,
  Thee let him send at least, and order forth
  With thee the Myrmidons; a dawn of hope
  Shall thence, it may be, on our host arise.                    970
  And let him send thee to the battle clad
  In his own radiant armor; Troy, deceived
  By such resemblance, shall abstain perchance
  From conflict, and the weary Greeks enjoy
  Short respite; it is all that war allows.                      975
  Fresh as ye are, ye, by your shouts alone,
  May easily repulse an army spent
  With labor from the camp and from the fleet.
    Thus Nestor, and his mind bent to his words.
  Back to AEacides through all the camp                           980
  He ran; and when, still running, he arrived
  Among Ulysses' barks, where they had fix'd
  The forum, where they minister'd the laws,
  And had erected altars to the Gods,
  There him Eurypylus, Evaemon's son,                             985
  Illustrious met, deep-wounded in his thigh,
  And halting-back from battle. From his head
  The sweat, and from his shoulders ran profuse,
  And from his perilous wound the sable blood
  Continual stream'd; yet was his mind composed.                 990
  Him seeing, Menoetiades the brave
  Compassion felt, and mournful, thus began.
    Ah hapless senators and Chiefs of Greece!
  Left ye your native country that the dogs
  Might fatten on your flesh at distant Troy?                    995
  But tell me, Hero! say, Eurypylus!
  Have the Achaians power still to withstand
  The enormous force of Hector, or is this
  The moment when his spear must pierce us all?
    To whom Eurypylus, discreet, replied.                       1000
  Patroclus, dear to Jove! there is no help,
  No remedy. We perish at our ships.
  The warriors, once most strenuous of the Greeks,
  Lie wounded in the fleet by foes whose might
  Increases ever. But thyself afford                            1005
  To me some succor; lead me to my ship;
  Cut forth the arrow from my thigh; the gore
  With warm ablution cleanse, and on the wound
  Smooth unguents spread, the same as by report
  Achilles taught thee; taught, himself, their use              1010
  By Chiron, Centaur, justest of his kind
  For Podalirius and Machaon both
  Are occupied. Machaon, as I judge,
  Lies wounded in his tent, needing like aid
  Himself, and Podalirius in the field                          1015
  Maintains sharp conflict with the sons of Troy.
    To whom Menoetius' gallant son replied.
  Hero! Eurypylus! how shall we act
  In this perplexity? what course pursue?
  I seek the brave Achilles, to whose ear                       1020
  I bear a message from the ancient chief
  Gerenian Nestor, guardian of the Greeks.
  Yet will I not, even for such a cause,
  My friend! abandon thee in thy distress.
    He ended, and his arms folding around                       1025
  The warrior bore him thence into his tent.
  His servant, on his entrance, spread the floor
  With hides, on which Patroclus at his length
  Extended him, and with his knife cut forth
  The rankling point; with tepid lotion, next,                  1030
  He cleansed the gore, and with a bitter root
  Bruised small between his palms, sprinkled the wound.
  At once, the anodyne his pain assuaged,
  The wound was dried within, and the blood ceased.

                *        *        *        *        *

It will be well here to observe the position of the Greeks. All human
aid is cut off by the wounds of their heroes, and all assistance from
the Gods forbidden by Jupiter. On the contrary, the Trojans see their
general at their head, and Jupiter himself fights on their side. Upon
this hinge turns the whole poem. The distress of the Greeks occasions
first the assistance of Patroclus, and then the death of that hero
brings back Achilles.

The poet shows great skill in conducting these incidents. He gives
Achilles the pleasure of seeing that the Greeks could not carry on the
war without his assistance, and upon this depends the great
catastrophe of the poem.




                              THE ILIAD.

                              BOOK XII.




                    ARGUMENT OF THE TWELFTH BOOK.


    The Trojans assail the ramparts, and Hector forces the gates.




                              BOOK XII.


  So was Menoetius' gallant son employ'd
  Healing Eurypylus. The Greeks, meantime,
  And Trojans with tumultuous fury fought.
  Nor was the foss ordain'd long time to exclude
  The host of Troy, nor yet the rampart built                      5
  Beside it for protection of the fleet;
  For hecatomb the Greeks had offer'd none,
  Nor prayer to heaven, that it might keep secure
  Their ships with all their spoils. The mighty work
  As in defiance of the Immortal Powers                           10
  Had risen, and could not therefore long endure.
  While Hector lived, and while Achilles held
  His wrathful purpose; while the city yet
  Of royal Priam was unsack'd, so long
  The massy structure stood; but when the best                    15
  And bravest of the Trojan host were slain,
  And of the Grecian heroes, some had fallen
  And some survived, when Priam's towers had blazed
  In the tenth year, and to their native shores
  The Grecians with their ships, at length, return'd,             20
  Then Neptune, with Apollo leagued, devised
  Its ruin; every river that descends
  From the Idaean heights into the sea
  They brought against it, gathering all their force.
  Rhesus, Caresus, Rhodius, the wide-branch'd                     25
  Heptaporus, AEsepus, Granicus,
  Scamander's sacred current, and thy stream
  Simoeis, whose banks with helmets and with shields
  Were strew'd, and Chiefs of origin divine;
  All these with refluent course Apollo drove                     30
  Nine days against the rampart, and Jove rain'd
  Incessant, that the Grecian wall wave-whelm'd
  Through all its length might sudden disappear.
  Neptune with his tridental mace, himself,
  Led them, and beam and buttress to the flood                    35
  Consigning, laid by the laborious Greeks,
  Swept the foundation, and the level bank
  Of the swift-rolling Hellespont restored.
  The structure thus effaced, the spacious beach
  He spread with sand as at the first; then bade                  40
  Subside the streams, and in their channels wind
  With limpid course, and pleasant as before,
    Apollo thus and Neptune, from the first,
  Design'd its fall; but now the battle raved
  And clamors of the warriors all around                          45
  The strong-built turrets, whose assaulted planks
  Rang, while the Grecians, by the scourge of Jove
  Subdued, stood close within their fleet immured,
  At Hector's phalanx-scattering force appall'd.
  He, as before, with whirlwind fury fought.                      50
  As when the boar or lion fiery-eyed
  Turns short, the hunters and the hounds among,
  The close-embattled troop him firm oppose,
  And ply him fast with spears; he no dismay
  Conceives or terror in his noble heart,                         55
  But by his courage falls; frequent he turns
  Attempting bold the ranks, and where he points
  Direct his onset, there the ranks retire;
  So, through the concourse on his rolling wheels
  Borne rapid, Hector animated loud                               60
  His fellow-warriors to surpass the trench.
  But not his own swift-footed steeds would dare
  That hazard; standing on the dangerous brink
  They neigh'd aloud, for by its breadth the foss
  Deterr'd them; neither was the effort slight                    65
  To leap that gulf, nor easy the attempt
  To pass it through; steep were the banks profound
  On both sides, and with massy piles acute
  Thick-planted, interdicting all assault.
  No courser to the rapid chariot braced                          70
  Had enter'd there with ease; yet strong desires
  Possess'd the infantry of that emprize,
  And thus Polydamas the ear address'd
  Of dauntless Hector, standing at his side.
    Hector, and ye the leaders of our host,                       75
  Both Trojans and allies! rash the attempt
  I deem, and vain, to push our horses through,
  So dangerous is the pass; rough is the trench
  With pointed stakes, and the Achaian wall
  Meets us beyond. No chariot may descend                         80
  Or charioteer fight there; strait are the bounds,
  And incommodious, and his death were sure.
  If Jove, high-thundering Ruler of the skies,
  Will succor Ilium, and nought less intend
  Than utter devastation of the Greeks,                           85
  I am content; now perish all their host
  Inglorious, from their country far remote.
  But should they turn, and should ourselves be driven
  Back from the fleet impeded and perplex'd
  In this deep foss, I judge that not a man,                      90
  'Scaping the rallied Grecians, should survive
  To bear the tidings of our fate to Troy.
  Now, therefore, act we all as I advise.
  Let every charioteer his coursers hold
  Fast-rein'd beside the foss, while we on foot,                  95
  With order undisturb'd and arms in hand,
  Shall follow Hector. If destruction borne
  On wings of destiny this day approach
  The Grecians, they will fly our first assault.
    So spake Polydamas, whose safe advice                        100
  Pleased Hector; from his chariot to the ground
  All arm'd he leap'd, nor would a Trojan there
  (When once they saw the Hero on his feet)
  Ride into battle, but unanimous
  Descending with a leap, all trod the plain.                    105
  Each gave command that at the trench his steeds
  Should stand detain'd in orderly array;
  Then, suddenly, the parted host became
  Five bands, each following its appointed chief.
  The bravest and most numerous, and whose hearts                110
  Wish'd most to burst the barrier and to wage
  The battle at the ships, with Hector march'd
  And with Polydamas, whom follow'd, third,
  Cebriones; for Hector had his steeds
  Consign'd and chariot to inferior care.                        115
  Paris, Alcathoues, and Agenor led
  The second band, and, sons of Priam both,
  Deiphobus and Helenus, the third;
  With them was seen partner of their command;
  The Hero Asius; from Arisba came                               120
  Asius Hyrtacides, to battle drawn
  From the Selleis banks by martial steeds
  Hair'd fiery-red and of the noblest size.
  The fourth, Anchises' mighty son controll'd,
  AEneas; under him Antenor's sons,                               125
  Archilochus and Acamas, advanced,
  Adept in all the practice of the field.
  Last came the glorious powers in league with Troy
  Led by Sarpedon; he with Glaucus shared
  His high control, and with the warlike Chief                   130
  Asteropaeus; for of all his host
  Them bravest he esteem'd, himself except
  Superior in heroic might to all.
  And now (their shields adjusted each to each)
  With dauntless courage fired, right on they moved              135
  Against the Grecians; nor expected less
  Than that beside their sable ships, the host
  Should self-abandon'd fall an easy prey.
    The Trojans, thus with their confederate powers,
  The counsel of the accomplish'd Prince pursued,                140
  Polydamas, one Chief alone except,
  Asius Hyrtacides. He scorn'd to leave
  His charioteer and coursers at the trench,
  And drove toward the fleet. Ah, madly brave!
  His evil hour was come; he was ordain'd                        145
  With horse and chariot and triumphant shout
  To enter wind-swept Ilium never more.
  Deucalion's offspring, first, into the shades
  Dismiss'd him; by Idomeneus he died.
  Leftward he drove furious, along the road                      150
  By which the steeds and chariots of the Greeks
  Return'd from battle; in that track he flew,
  Nor found the portals by the massy bar
  Secured, but open for reception safe
  Of fugitives, and to a guard consign'd.                        155
  Thither he drove direct, and in his rear
  His band shrill-shouting follow'd, for they judged
  The Greeks no longer able to withstand
  Their foes, but sure to perish in the camp.
  Vain hope! for in the gate two Chiefs they found               160
  Lapithae-born, courageous offspring each
  Of dauntless father; Polypoetes, this,
  Sprung from Pirithoeus; that, the warrior bold
  Leonteus, terrible as gore-tainted Mars.
  These two, defenders of the lofty gates,                       165
  Stood firm before them. As when two tall oaks
  On the high mountains day by day endure
  Rough wind and rain, by deep-descending roots
  Of hugest growth fast-founded in the soil;
  So they, sustain'd by conscious valor, saw,                    170
  Unmoved, high towering Asius on his way,
  Nor fear'd him aught, nor shrank from his approach
  Right on toward the barrier, lifting high
  Their season'd bucklers and with clamor loud
  The band advanced, King Asius at their head,                   175
  With whom Iaemenus, expert in arms,
  Orestes, Thoeon, Acamas the son
  Of Asius, and Oenomaeus, led them on.
  Till now, the warlike pair, exhorting loud
  The Grecians to defend the fleet, had stood                    180
  Within the gates; but soon as they perceived
  The Trojans swift advancing to the wall,
  And heard a cry from all the flying Greeks,
  Both sallying, before the gates they fought
  Like forest-boars, which hearing in the hills                  185
  The crash of hounds and huntsmen nigh at hand,
  With start oblique lay many a sapling flat
  Short-broken by the root, nor cease to grind
  Their sounding tusks, till by the spear they die;
  So sounded on the breasts of those brave two                   190
  The smitten brass; for resolute they fought,
  Embolden'd by their might who kept the wall,
  And trusting in their own; they, in defence
  Of camp and fleet and life, thick battery hurl'd
  Of stones precipitated from the towers;                        195
  Frequent as snows they fell, which stormy winds,
  Driving the gloomy clouds, shake to the ground,
  Till all the fertile earth lies cover'd deep.
  Such volley pour'd the Greeks, and such return'd
  The Trojans; casques of hide, arid and tough,                  200
  And bossy shields rattled, by such a storm
  Assail'd of millstone masses from above.
  Then Asius, son of Hyrtacus, a groan
  Indignant utter'd; on both thighs he smote
  With disappointment furious, and exclaim'd,                    205
    Jupiter! even thou art false become,
  And altogether such. Full sure I deem'd
  That not a Grecian hero should abide
  One moment force invincible as ours,
  And lo! as wasps ring-streaked,[1] or bees that build          210
  Their dwellings in the highway's craggy side
  Leave not their hollow home, but fearless wait
  The hunter's coming, in their brood's defence,
  So these, although two only, from the gates
  Move not, nor will, till either seized or slain.               215
    So Asius spake, but speaking so, changed not
  The mind of Jove on Hector's glory bent.
  Others, as obstinate, at other gates
  Such deeds perform'd, that to enumerate all
  Were difficult, unless to power divine.                        220
  For fierce the hail of stones from end to end
  Smote on the barrier; anguish fill'd the Greeks.
  Yet, by necessity constrain'd, their ships
  They guarded still; nor less the Gods themselves,
  Patrons of Greece, all sorrow'd at the sight.                  225
    At once the valiant Lapithae began
  Terrible conflict, and Pirithous' son
  Brave Polypoetes through his helmet pierced
  Damasus; his resplendent point the brass
  Sufficed not to withstand; entering, it crush'd                230
  The bone within, and mingling all his brain
  With his own blood, his onset fierce repress'd.
  Pylon and Ormenus he next subdued.
  Meantime Leonteus, branch of Mars, his spear
  Hurl'd at Hippomachus, whom through his belt                   235
  He pierced; then drawing forth his falchion keen,
  Through all the multitude he flew to smite
  Antiphates, and with a downright stroke
  Fell'd him. Iaemenus and Menon next
  He slew, with brave Orestes, whom he heap'd,                   240
  All three together, on the fertile glebe.
    While them the Lapithae of their bright arms
  Despoil'd, Polydamas and Hector stood
  (With all the bravest youths and most resolved
  To burst the barrier and to fire the fleet)                    245
  Beside the foss, pondering the event.
  For, while they press'd to pass, they spied a bird
  Sublime in air, an eagle. Right between
  Both hosts he soar'd (the Trojan on his left)
  A serpent bearing in his pounces clutch'd                      250
  Enormous, dripping blood, but lively still
  And mindful of revenge; for from beneath
  The eagle's breast, updarting fierce his head,
  Fast by the throat he struck him; anguish-sick
  The eagle cast him down into the space                         255
  Between the hosts, and, clanging loud his plumes
  As the wind bore him, floated far away.
  Shudder'd the Trojans viewing at their feet
  The spotted serpent ominous, and thus
  Polydamas to dauntless Hector spake.                           260
    Ofttimes in council, Hector, thou art wont
  To censure me, although advising well;
  Nor ought the private citizen, I confess,
  Either in council or in war to indulge
  Loquacity, but ever to employ                                  265
  All his exertions in support of thine.
  Yet hear my best opinion once again.
  Proceed we not in our attempt against
  The Grecian fleet. For if in truth the sign
  Respect the host of Troy ardent to pass,                       270
  Then, as the eagle soar'd both hosts between,
  With Ilium's on his left, and clutch'd a snake
  Enormous, dripping blood, but still alive,
  Which yet he dropp'd suddenly, ere he reach'd
  His eyry, or could give it to his young,                       275
  So we, although with mighty force we burst
  Both gates and barrier, and although the Greeks
  Should all retire, shall never yet the way
  Tread honorably back by which we came.
  No. Many a Trojan shall we leave behind                        280
  Slain by the Grecians in their fleet's defence.
  An augur skill'd in omens would expound
  This omen thus, and faith would win from all.
    To whom, dark-louring, Hector thus replied.
  Polydamas! I like not thy advice;                              285
  Thou couldst have framed far better; but if this
  Be thy deliberate judgment, then the Gods
  Make thy deliberate judgment nothing worth,
  Who bidd'st me disregard the Thunderer's[2] firm
  Assurance to myself announced, and make                        290
  The wild inhabitants of air my guides,
  Which I alike despise, speed they their course
  With right-hand flight toward the ruddy East,
  Or leftward down into the shades of eve.
  Consider _we_ the will of Jove alone,                          295
  Sovereign of heaven and earth. Omens abound,
  But the best omen is our country's cause.[3]
  Wherefore should fiery war _thy_ soul alarm?
  For were we slaughter'd, one and all, around
  The fleet of Greece, _thou_ need'st not fear to die,           300
  Whose courage never will thy flight retard.
  But if thou shrink thyself, or by smooth speech
  Seduce one other from a soldier's part,
  Pierced by this spear incontinent thou diest.
    So saying he led them, who with deafening roar               305
  Follow'd him. Then, from the Idaean hills
  Jove hurl'd a storm which wafted right the dust
  Into the fleet; the spirits too he quell'd
  Of the Achaians, and the glory gave
  To Hector and his host; they, trusting firm                    310
  In signs from Jove, and in their proper force,
  Assay'd the barrier; from the towers they tore
  The galleries, cast the battlements to ground,
  And the projecting buttresses adjoin'd
  To strengthen the vast work, with bars upheaved.               315
  All these, with expectation fierce to break
  The rampart, down they drew; nor yet the Greeks
  Gave back, but fencing close with shields the wall,
  Smote from behind them many a foe beneath.
  Meantime from tower to tower the Ajaces moved                  320
  Exhorting all; with mildness some, and some
  With harsh rebuke, whom they observed through fear
  Declining base the labors of the fight,
    Friends! Argives! warriors of whatever rank!
  Ye who excel, and ye of humbler note!                          325
  And ye the last and least! (for such there are,
  All have not magnanimity alike)
  Now have we work for all, as all perceive.
  Turn not, retreat not to your ships, appall'd
  By sounding menaces, but press the foe;                        330
  Exhort each other, and e'en now perchance
  Olympian Jove, by whom the lightnings burn,
  Shall grant us to repulse them, and to chase
  The routed Trojans to their gates again.
    So they vociferating to the Greeks,                          335
  Stirr'd them to battle. As the feathery snows
  Fall frequent, on some wintry day, when Jove
  Hath risen to shed them on the race of man,
  And show his arrowy stores; he lulls the winds,
  Then shakes them down continual, covering thick                340
  Mountain tops, promontories, flowery meads,
  And cultured valleys rich; the ports and shores
  Receive it also of the hoary deep,
  But there the waves bound it, while all beside
  Lies whelm'd beneath Jove's fast-descending shower,            345
  So thick, from side to side, by Trojans hurl'd
  Against the Greeks, and by the Greeks return'd
  The stony vollies flew; resounding loud
  Through all its length the battered rampart roar'd.
  Nor yet had Hector and his host prevail'd                      350
  To burst the gates, and break the massy bar,
  Had not all-seeing Jove Sarpedon moved
  His son, against the Greeks, furious as falls
  The lion on some horned herd of beeves.
  At once his polish'd buckler he advanced                       355
  With leafy brass o'erlaid; for with smooth brass
  The forger of that shield its oval disk
  Had plated, and with thickest hides throughout
  Had lined it, stitch'd with circling wires of gold.
  That shield he bore before him; firmly grasp'd                 360
