replied in blank verse, and a formal challenge ensued. They agreed to
meet early next morning and decide the dispute with sword and pistol. I
heard nothing at all of the affair, till Mr Morley came to my bed-side
in the morning, and told me he was afraid my nephew was going to fight,
as he had been overheard talking very loud and vehement with Wilson
at the young man's lodgings the night before, and afterwards went
and bought powder and ball at a shop in the neighbourhood. I got up
immediately, and upon inquiry found he was just going out. I begged
Morley to knock up the mayor, that he might interpose as a magistrate,
and in the mean time I hobbled after the squire, whom I saw at a
distance walking at a great pace towards the city gate--in spite of all
my efforts, I could not come up till our two combatants had taken their
ground, and were priming their pistols. An old house luckily screened
me from their view; so that I rushed upon them at once, before I was
perceived. They were both confounded, and attempted to make their escape
different ways; but Morley coming up with constables, at that instant,
took Wilson into custody, and Jery followed him quietly to the mayor's
house. All this time I was ignorant of what had passed the preceding
day; and neither of the parties would discover a tittle of the matter.
The mayor observed that it was great presumption in Wilson, who was a
stroller, to proceed to such extremities with a gentleman of family and
fortune; and threatened to commit him on the vagrant act.--The young
fellow bustled up with great spirit, declaring he was a gentleman, and
would be treated as such; but he refused to explain himself further. The
master of the company being sent for, and examined, touching the said
Wilson, said the young man had engaged with him at Birmingham about six
months ago; but never would take his salary; that he had behaved so well
in his private character, as to acquire the respect and good-will of all
his acquaintance, and that the public owned his merit as an actor was
altogether extraordinary.--After all, I fancy, he will turn out to be a
run-away prentice from London.--The manager offered to bail him for any
sum, provided he would give his word and honour that he would keep the
peace; but the young gentleman was on his high ropes, and would by no
means lay himself under any restrictions: on the other hand, Hopeful was
equally obstinate; till at length the mayor declared, that if they
both refused to be bound over, he would immediately commit Wilson as a
vagrant to hard labour. I own I was much pleased with Jery's behaviour
on this occasion: he said, that rather than Mr Wilson should be treated
in such an ignominious manner, he would give his word and honour
to prosecute the affair no further while they remained at
Gloucester--Wilson thanked him for his generous manner of proceeding,
and was discharged. On our return to our lodgings, my nephew explained
the whole mystery; and I own I was exceedingly incensed--Liddy being
questioned on the subject, and very severely reproached by that wildcat
my sister Tabby, first swooned away, then dissolving in a flood of
tears, confessed all the particulars of the correspondence, at the same
time giving up three letters, which was all she had received from her
admirer. The last, which Jery intercepted, I send you inclosed, and when
you have read it, I dare say you won't wonder at the progress the writer
had made in the heart of a simple girl, utterly unacquainted with the
characters of mankind. Thinking it was high time to remove her from such
a dangerous connexion, I carried her off the very next day to Bristol;
but the poor creature was so frightened and fluttered, by our threats
and expostulations, that she fell sick the fourth day after our arrival
at Clifton, and continued so ill for a whole week, that her life was
despaired of. It was not till yesterday that Dr Rigge declared her out
of danger. You cannot imagine what I have suffered, partly from the
indiscretion of this poor child, but much more from the fear of
losing her entirely. This air is intolerably cold, and the place quite
solitary--I never go down to the Well without returning low-spirited;
for there I meet with half a dozen poor emaciated creatures, with
ghostly looks, in the last stage of a consumption, who have made shift
to linger through the winter like so many exotic plants languishing in a
hot-house; but in all appearance, will drop into their graves before
the sun has warmth enough to mitigate the rigour of this ungenial
spring.--If you think the Bath-water will be of any service to me, I
will go thither so soon as my niece can bear the motion of the coach.
Tell Barns I am obliged to him for his advice; but don't choose to
follow it. If Davis voluntarily offers to give up the farm, the other
shall have it; but I will not begin at this time of day to distress my
tenants, because they are unfortunate, and cannot make regular payments:
I wonder that Barns should think me capable of such oppression--As for
Higgins, the fellow is a notorious poacher, to be sure; and an impudent
rascal to set his snares in my own paddock; but, I suppose, he thought
he had some right (especially in my absence) to partake of what nature
seems to have intended for common use--you may threaten him in my name,
as much as you please, and if he repeats the offence, let me know it
before you have recourse to justice.--I know you are a great sportsman,
and oblige many of your friends: I need not tell you to make use of my
grounds; but it may be necessary to hint, that I am more afraid of my
fowling-piece than of my game. When you can spare two or three brace of
partridges, send them over by the stagecoach, and tell Gwyllim that she
forgot to pack up my flannel and wide shoes in the trunk-mail--I shall
trouble you as usual, from time to time, till at last I suppose you will
be tired of corresponding with

Your assured friend, M. BRAMBLE CLIFTON, April 17.




To Miss LYDIA MELFORD.

Miss Willis has pronounced my doom--you are going away, dear Miss
Melford!--you are going to be removed, I know not whither! what shall I
do? which way shall I turn for consolation? I know not what I say--all
night long have I been tossed in a sea of doubts and fears, uncertainty
and distraction, without being able to connect my thoughts, much less to
form any consistent plan of conduct--I was even tempted to wish that
I had never seen you; or that you had been less amiable, or less
compassionate to your poor Wilson; and yet it would be detestable
ingratitude in me to form such a wish, considering how much I am
indebted to your goodness, and the ineffable pleasure I have derived
from your indulgence and approbation--Good God! I never heard your name
mentioned without emotion! the most distant prospect of being admitted
to your company, filled my whole soul with a kind of pleasing alarm! as
the time approached, my heart beat with redoubled force, and every
nerve thrilled with a transport of expectation; but, when I found myself
actually in your presence;--when I heard you speak;--when I saw you
smile; when I beheld your charming eyes turned favourably upon me; my
breast was filled with such tumults of delight, as wholly deprived me of
the power of utterance, and wrapt me in a delirium of joy!--encouraged
by your sweetness of temper and affability, I ventured to describe the
feelings of my heart--even then you did not check my presumption--you
pitied my sufferings and gave me leave to hope you put a
favourable--perhaps too favourable a construction, on my
appearance--certain it is, I am no player in love--I speak the language
of my own heart; and have no prompter but nature. Yet there is something
in this heart, which I have not yet disclosed.--I flattered myself--But,
I will not--I must not proceed. Dear Miss Liddy! for Heaven's sake,
contrive, if possible, some means of letting me speak to you before you
leave Gloucester; otherwise, I know not what will--But I begin to rave
again.--I will endeavour to bear this trial with fortitude--while I am
capable of reflecting upon your tenderness and truth, I surely have no
cause to despair--a cloud hangs over me, and there is a dreadful weight
upon my spirits! While you stay in this place, I shall continually hover
about your lodgings, as the parted soul is said to linger about the
grave where its mortal comfort lies.--I know, if it is in your power,
you will task your humanity--your compassion--shall I add, your
affection?--in order to assuage the almost intolerable disquiet that
torments the heart of your afflicted,

WILSON GLOUCESTER, March 31.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, of Jesus college, Oxon.

HOT WELL, April 18.

DEAR PHILLIPS,

I give Mansel credit for his invention, in propagating the report that I
had a quarrel with a mountebank's merry Andrew at Gloucester: but I have
too much respect for every appendage of wit, to quarrel even with the
lowest buffoonery; and therefore I hope Mansel and I shall always be
good friends. I cannot, however, approve of his drowning my poor
dog Ponto, on purpose to convert Ovid's pleonasm into a punning
epitaph,--deerant quoque Littora Ponto: for, that he threw him into the
Isis, when it was so high and impetuous, with no other view than to kill
the fleas, is an excuse that will not hold water--But I leave poor Ponto
to his fate, and hope Providence will take care to accommodate Mansel
with a drier death.

As there is nothing that can be called company at the Well, I am here
in a state of absolute rustication: This, however, gives me leisure to
observe the singularities in my uncle's character, which seems to have
interested your curiosity. The truth is, his disposition and mine,
which, like oil and vinegar, repelled one another at first, have now
begun to mix by dint of being beat up together. I was once apt to
believe him a complete Cynic; and that nothing but the necessity of his
occasions could compel him to get within the pale of society--I am now
of another opinion. I think his peevishness arises partly from bodily
pain, and partly from a natural excess of mental sensibility; for, I
suppose, the mind as well as the body, is in some cases endued with a
morbid excess of sensation.

I was t'other day much diverted with a conversation that passed in the
Pump-room, betwixt him and the famous Dr L--n, who is come to ply at the
Well for patients. My uncle was complaining of the stink, occasioned
by the vast quantity of mud and slime which the river leaves at low ebb
under the windows of the Pumproom. He observed, that the exhalations
arising from such a nuisance, could not but be prejudicial to the weak
lungs of many consumptive patients, who came to drink the water. The
Doctor overhearing this remark, made up to him, and assured him he was
mistaken. He said, people in general were so misled by vulgar prejudices
that philosophy was hardly sufficient to undeceive them. Then humming
thrice, he assumed a most ridiculous solemnity of aspect, and entered
into a learned investigation of the nature of stink. He observed,
that stink, or stench, meant no more than a strong impression on
the olfactory nerves; and might be applied to substances of the most
opposite qualities; that in the Dutch language, stinken signifies the
most agreeable perfume, as well as the most fetid odour, as appears in
Van Vloudel's translation of Horace, in that beautiful ode, Quis multa
gracilis, &c.--The words fiquidis perfusus odoribus, he translates van
civet & moschata gestinken: that individuals differed toto coelo in
their opinion of smells, which, indeed, was altogether as arbitrary
as the opinion of beauty; that the French were pleased with the putrid
effluvia of animal food; and so were the Hottentots in Africa, and the
Savages in Greenland; and that the Negroes on the coast of Senegal would
not touch fish till it was rotten; strong presumptions in favour of what
is generally called stink, as those nations are in a state of nature,
undebauched by luxury, unseduced by whim and caprice: that he had reason
to believe the stercoraceous flavour, condemned by prejudice as a stink,
was, in fact, most agreeable to the organs of smelling; for, that every
person who pretended to nauseate the smell of another's excretions,
snuffed up his own with particular complacency; for the truth of which
he appealed to all the ladies and gentlemen then present: he said, the
inhabitants of Madrid and Edinburgh found particular satisfaction
in breathing their own atmosphere, which was always impregnated with
stercoraceous effluvia: that the learned Dr B--, in his treatise on the
Four Digestions, explains in what manner the volatile effluvia from the
intestines stimulate and promote the operations of the animal economy:
he affirmed, the last Grand Duke of Tuscany, of the Medicis family,
who refined upon sensuality with the spirit of a philosopher, was so
delighted with that odour, that he caused the essence of ordure to be
extracted, and used it as the most delicious perfume: that he himself
(the doctor) when he happened to be low-spirited, or fatigued with
business, found immediate relief and uncommon satisfaction from hanging
over the stale contents of a close-stool, while his servant stirred it
about under his nose; nor was this effect to be wondered at, when we
consider that this substance abounds with the self-same volatile salts
that are so greedily smelled to by the most delicate invalids, after
they have been extracted and sublimed by the chemists.--By this time the
company began to hold their noses; but the doctor, without taking
the least notice of this signal, proceeded to shew, that many fetid
substances were not only agreeable but salutary; such as assa foetida,
and other medicinal gums, resins, roots, and vegetables, over and above
burnt feathers, tan-pits, candle-snuffs, &c. In short, he used many
learned arguments to persuade his audience out of their senses; and from
stench made a transition to filth, which he affirmed was also a mistaken
idea, in as much as objects so called, were no other than certain
modifications of matter, consisting of the same principles that enter
into the composition of all created essences, whatever they may be: that
in the filthiest production of nature, a philosopher considered nothing
but the earth, water, salt and air, of which it was compounded; that,
for his own part, he had no more objections to drinking the dirtiest
ditch-water, than he had to a glass of water from the Hot Well, provided
he was assured there was nothing poisonous in the concrete. Then
addressing himself to my uncle, 'Sir (said he) you seem to be of a
dropsical habit, and probably will soon have a confirmed ascites: if
I should be present when you are tapped, I will give you a convincing
proof of what I assert, by drinking without hesitation the water
that comes out of your abdomen.'--The ladies made wry faces at this
declaration, and my uncle, changing colour, told him he did not desire
any such proof of his philosophy: 'But I should be glad to know (said
he) what makes you think I am of a dropsical habit?' 'Sir, I beg pardon
(replied the Doctor) I perceive your ancles are swelled, and you seem to
have the facies leucophlegmatica. Perhaps, indeed, your disorder may
be oedematous, or gouty, or it may be the lues venerea: If you have any
reason to flatter yourself it is this last, sir, I will undertake
to cure you with three small pills, even if the disease should have
attained its utmost inveteracy. Sir, it is an arcanum, which I have
discovered, and prepared with infinite labour.--Sir, I have lately cured
a woman in Bristol--a common prostitute, sir, who had got all the worst
symptoms of the disorder; such as nodi, tophi, and gummata, verruca,
cristoe Galli, and a serpiginous eruption, or rather a pocky itch
all over her body. By the time she had taken the second pill, sir, by
Heaven! she was as smooth as my hand, and the third made her sound and
as fresh as a new born infant.' 'Sir (cried my uncle peevishly) I have
no reason to flatter myself that my disorder comes within the efficacy
of your nostrum. But this patient you talk of may not be so sound at
bottom as you imagine.' 'I can't possibly be mistaken (rejoined the
philosopher) for I have had communication with her three times--I always
ascertain my cures in that manner.' At this remark, all the ladies
retired to another corner of the room, and some of them began to
spit.--As to my uncle, though he was ruffled at first by the doctor's
saying he was dropsical, he could not help smiling at this ridiculous
confession and, I suppose, with a view to punish this original, told
him there was a wart upon his nose, that looked a little suspicious. 'I
don't pretend to be a judge of those matters (said he) but I understand
that warts are often produced by the distemper; and that one upon your
nose seems to have taken possession of the very keystone of the
bridge, which I hope is in no danger of falling.' L--n seemed a little
confounded at this remark, and assured him it was nothing but a common
excrescence of the cuticula, but that the bones were all sound below;
for the truth of this assertion he appealed to the touch, desiring he
would feel the part. My uncle said it was a matter of such delicacy to
meddle with a gentleman's nose, that he declined the office--upon which,
the Doctor turning to me, intreated me to do him that favour. I complied
with his request, and handled it so roughly, that he sneezed, and the
tears ran down his cheeks, to the no small entertainment of the company,
and particularly of my uncle, who burst out a-laughing for the first
time since I have been with him; and took notice, that the part seemed
to be very tender. 'Sir (cried the Doctor) it is naturally a tender
part; but to remove all possibility of doubt, I will take off the wart
this very night.'

So saying, he bowed, with great solemnity all round, and retired to his
own lodgings, where he applied a caustic to the wart; but it spread in
such a manner as to produce a considerable inflammation, attended with
an enormous swelling; so that when he next appeared, his whole face was
overshadowed by this tremendous nozzle; and the rueful eagerness with
which he explained this unlucky accident, was ludicrous beyond all
description.--I was much pleased with meeting the original of a
character, which you and I have often laughed at in description; and
what surprises me very much, I find the features in the picture, which
has been drawn for him, rather softened than over-charged.

As I have something else to say; and this letter has run to an
unconscionable length, I shall now give you a little respite, and
trouble you again by the very first post. I wish you would take it in
your head to retaliate these double strokes upon

Yours always, J. MELFORD




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, of Jesus college, Oxon.

HOT WELL, April 20.

DEAR KNIGHT,

I now sit down to execute the threat in the tail of my last. The truth
is, I am big with the secret, and long to be delivered. It relates to my
guardian, who, you know, is at present our principal object in view.

T'other day, I thought I had detected him in such a state of frailty, as
would but ill become his years and character. There is a decent sort of
woman, not disagreeable in her person, that comes to the Well, with a
poor emaciated child, far gone in a consumption. I had caught my uncle's
eyes several times directed to this person, with a very suspicious
expression in them, and every time he saw himself observed, he hastily
withdrew them, with evident marks of confusion--I resolved to watch him
more narrowly, and saw him speaking to her privately in a corner of the
walk. At length, going down to the Well one day, I met her half way up
the hill to Clifton, and could not help suspecting she was going to our
lodgings by appointment, as it was about one o'clock, the hour when my
sister and I are generally at the Pump-room.--This notion exciting my
curiosity, I returned by a back-way, and got unperceived into my own
chamber, which is contiguous to my uncle's apartment. Sure enough, the
woman was introduced but not into his bedchamber; he gave her audience
in a parlour; so that I was obliged to shift my station to another room,
where, however, there was a small chink in the partition, through which
I could perceive what passed. My uncle, though a little lame, rose up
when she came in, and setting a chair for her, desired she would sit
down: then he asked if she would take a dish of chocolate, which she
declined, with much acknowledgment. After a short pause, he said, in a
croaking tone of voice, which confounded me not a little, 'Madam, I am
truly concerned for your misfortunes; and if this trifle can be of any
service to you, I beg you will accept it without ceremony.' So saying,
he put a bit of paper into her hand, which she opening with great
trepidation, exclaimed in an extacy, 'Twenty pounds! Oh, sir!' and
sinking down upon a settee, fainted away--Frightened at this fit, and,
I suppose, afraid of calling for assistance, lest her situation
should give rise to unfavourable conjectures, he ran about the room in
distraction, making frightful grimaces; and, at length, had recollection
enough to throw a little water in her face; by which application she was
brought to herself: but, then her feeling took another turn. She shed
a flood of tears, and cried aloud, 'I know not who you are: but,
sure--worthy sir--generous sir!--the distress of me and my poor dying
child--Oh! if the widow's prayers--if the orphan's tears of gratitude
can ought avail--gracious Providence--Blessings!--shower down eternal
blessings.'--Here she was interrupted by my uncle, who muttered in
a voice still more and more discordant, 'For Heaven's sake be quiet,
madam--consider--the people of the house--'sdeath! can't you.'--All this
time she was struggling to throw herself on her knees, while he seizing
her by the wrists, endeavoured to seat her upon the settee, saying,
'Prithee--good now--hold your tongue'--At that instant, who should
burst into--the room but our aunt Tabby! of all antiquated maidens the
most diabolically capricious--Ever prying into other people's affairs,
she had seen the woman enter, and followed her to the door, where she
stood listening, but probably could hear nothing distinctly, except my
uncle's, last exclamation; at which she bounded into the parlour in a
violent rage, that dyed the tip of her nose of a purple hue,--'Fy upon
you, Matt! (cried she) what doings are these, to disgrace your own
character, and disparage your family?'--Then, snatching the bank note
out of the stranger's hand, she went on--'How now, twenty
pounds!--here is temptation with a witness!--Good-woman, go about
your business--Brother, brother, I know not which most to admire; your
concupissins, or your extravagance!'--'Good God (exclaimed the poor
woman) shall a worthy gentleman's character suffer for an action
that does honour to humanity?' By this time, uncle's indignation was
effectually roused. His face grew pale, his teeth chattered, and his
eyes flashed--'Sister (cried he, in a voice like thunder) I vow to God,
your impertinence is exceedingly provoking.' With these words, he took
her by the hand, and, opening the door of communication, thrust her into
the chamber where I stood, so affected by the scene, that the tears ran
down my cheeks. Observing these marks of emotion, 'I don't wonder (said
she) to see you concerned at the back-slidings of so near a relation; a
man of his years and infirmities: These are fine doings, truly--This
is a rare example, set by a guardian, for the benefit of his
pupils--Monstrous! incongruous! sophistical!'--I thought it was but
an act of justice to set her to rights; and therefore explained the
mystery. But she would not be undeceived, 'What (said she) would you
go for to offer for to arguefy me out of my senses? Did'n't I hear
him whispering to her to hold her tongue? Did'n't I see her in tears?
Did'n't I see him struggling to throw her upon the couch? 0 filthy!
hideous! abominable! Child, child, talk not to me of charity.--Who gives
twenty pounds in charity?--But you are a stripling--You know nothing of
the world. Besides, charity begins at home--Twenty pounds would buy me a
complete suit of flowered silk, trimmings and all--' In short, I quitted
the room, my contempt for her, and my respect for her brother, being
increased in the same proportion. I have since been informed, that the
person, whom my uncle so generously relieved, is the widow of an ensign,
who has nothing to depend upon but the pension of fifteen pounds a year.
The people of the Well-house give her an excellent character. She lodges
in a garret, and works very hard at plain work, to support her daughter,
who is dying of a consumption. I must own, to my shame, I feel a strong
inclination to follow my uncle's example, in relieving this poor widow;
but, betwixt friends, I am afraid of being detected in a weakness, that
might entail the ridicule of the company, upon,

Dear Phillips, Yours always, J. MELFORD

Direct your next to me at Bath; and remember me to all our
fellow-jesuits.




To Dr LEWIS.

HOT WELL, April 20.

I understand your hint. There are mysteries in physic, as well as in
religion; which we of the profane have no right to investigate--A
man must not presume to use his reason, unless he has studied the
categories, and can chop logic by mode and figure--Between friends, I
think every man of tolerable parts ought, at my time of day, to be both
physician and lawyer, as far as his own constitution and property are
concerned. For my own part, I have had an hospital these fourteen years
within myself, and studied my own case with the most painful attention;
consequently may be supposed to know something of the matter, although
I have not taken regular courses of physiology et cetera et cetera.--
In short, I have for some time been of opinion (no offence, dear Doctor)
that the sum of all your medical discoveries amounts to this, that the
more you study the less you know.--I have read all that has been written
on the Hot Wells, and what I can collect from the whole, is, that the
water contains nothing but a little salt, and calcarious earth, mixed in
such inconsiderable proportion, as can have very little, if any, effect
on the animal economy. This being the case, I think the man deserves to
be fitted with a cap and bells, who for such a paultry advantage as this
spring affords, sacrifices his precious time, which might be employed
in taking more effectual remedies, and exposes himself to the dirt, the
stench, the chilling blasts, and perpetual rains, that render this place
to me intolerable. If these waters, from a small degree of astringency,
are of some service in the diabetes, diarrhoea, and night sweats, when
the secretions are too much increased, must not they do harm in the same
proportion, where the humours are obstructed, as in the asthma,
scurvy, gout and dropsy?--Now we talk of the dropsy, here is a strange
fantastical oddity, one of your brethren, who harangues every day in
the Pump-room, as if he was hired to give lectures on all subjects
whatsoever--I know not what to make of him--Sometimes he makes
shrewd remarks; at other times he talks like the greatest simpleton in
nature--He has read a great deal; but without method or judgment, and
digested nothing. He believes every thing he has read; especially if
it has any thing of the marvellous in it and his conversation is a
surprizing hotch-potch of erudition and extravagance. He told me t'other
day, with great confidence, that my case was dropsical; or, as he called
it, leucophlegmatic: A sure sign, that his want of experience is equal
to his presumption--for, you know, there is nothing analogous to the
dropsy in my disorder--I wish those impertinent fellows, with their
ricketty understandings, would keep their advice for those that ask it.
Dropsy, indeed! Sure I have not lived to the age of fifty-five, and had
such experience of my own disorder, and consulted you and other eminent
physicians, so often, and so long, to be undeceived by such a--But,
without all doubt, the man is mad; and, therefore, what he says is of
no consequence. I had, yesterday, a visit from Higgins, who came hither
under the terror of your threats, and brought me in a present a brace of
hares, which he owned he took in my ground; and I could not persuade
the fellow that he did wrong, or that I would ever prosecute him for
poaching--I must desire you will wink hard at the practices of this
rascallion, otherwise I shall be plagued with his presents, which cost
me more than they are worth.--If I could wonder at any thing Fitzowen
does, I should be surprized at his assurance in desiring you to solicit
my vote for him at the next election for the county: for him, who
opposed me, on the like occasion, with the most illiberal competition.
You may tell him civilly, that I beg to be excused. Direct your next for
me at Bath, whither I propose to remove to-morrow; not only on my own
account, but for the sake of my niece, Liddy, who is like to relapse.
The poor creature fell into a fit yesterday, while I was cheapening a
pair of spectacles, with a Jew-pedlar. I am afraid there is something
still lurking in that little heart of hers, which I hope a change of
objects will remove. Let me know what you think of this half-witted
Doctor's impertinent, ridiculous, and absurd notion of my disorder--So
