not glance behind him again, and, for the time at least, his nervous
dislike of the box in the corner seemed to have ceased. He laboured with
patient care, touching and re-touching, believing that each tap of the
hammer should be the last, and yet not wholly satisfied.

The light waned, and he took down the curtain to admit the last glows of
the evening. He could do no more, art itself could have done no more to
beautify and perfect the masterpiece that lay upon the cushion before
him. The many hours he had spent in putting the last finish upon the
work had produced their result. His hand had imparted something to the
features of the dying head which had not been there before, and as he
stood over the bench he knew that he had surpassed his greatest work. He
went and fetched the black cross from the shelf, and polished its smooth
surface carefully with a piece of silk. Then he took the figure tenderly
in his hands and laid it in its position. The small screws turned evenly
in the threads, fitting closely into their well-concealed places, and
the work was finished. Marzio placed the whole crucifix upon the bench
and sat down to look at it.

It made a strong impression upon him, this thing of his own hands, and
again he remained a long time resting his chin upon his folded fingers
and gazing up at the drooping lids. The shadows lay softly on the
modelled silver, so softly that the metal itself seemed to tremble and
move, and in his reverie Marzio could almost have expected the divine
eyes to open and look into his face. And gradually the shadows deepened
more and more, and gathered into gloom till in the dark the black arms
of the cross scarcely stood out from the darkness, and in the last
lingering twilight he could see only the clear outline of the white head
and outstretched hands, that seemed to emit a soft radiance gathered
from the brightness of the departed day.

Marzio struck a match and lit his lamp. His thoughts were so wholly
absorbed that he had not remembered the workmen, nor wondered why they
had not come back. After all, most of them lived in the direction of the
church, and if they had finished their work late they would very
probably go home without returning to the shop. The chiseller wrapped
the crucifix in the old white cloth, and laid it in its plain wooden
box, but he did not screw the cover down, merely putting it on loosely
so that it could be removed in a moment. He laid his tools in order,
mechanically, as he did every evening, and then he extinguished the
light and made his way to the door, carrying the box under his arm.

The boy who alone had remained at work had lighted a tallow candle, and
was sitting dangling his heels from his stool as Marzio came out.

"Still here!" exclaimed the artist.

"Eh! You did not tell me to go," answered the lad.

Marzio locked the heavy outer door and crossed over to his house, while
the boy went whistling down the street in the dusk. Slowly the artist
mounted the stairs, pondering, as he went, on the many emotions of the
day, and at last repeating his conclusion, that he was glad that he had
not killed Paolo.

By a change of feeling which he did not wholly realise, he felt for the
first time in many years that he would be glad to see his brother alive
and well. He had that day so often fancied him dead, lying on the floor
of the workshop, or buried in a dark corner of the cellar, that the idea
of meeting him, calm and well as ever, had something refreshing in it.
It was like the waking from a hideous dream of evil to find that the
harm is still undone, to experience that sense of unutterable relief
which every one knows when the dawn suddenly touches the outlines of
familiar objects in the room, and dispels in an instant the visions of
the night.

Paolo might not come that evening, but at least Maria Luisa and Lucia
would speak of him, and it would be a comfort to hear his name spoken
aloud. Marzio's step quickened with the thought, and in another moment
he was at the door. To his surprise it was opened before he could ring,
and old Assunta came forward with her wrinkled fingers raised to her
lips.

"Hist! hist!" she whispered. "It goes a little better--or at least--"

"What? Who?" asked Marzio, instinctively whispering also.

"Eh! You have not heard? Don Paolo--they have killed him!"

"Paolo!" exclaimed Marzio, staggering and leaning against the door-post.

"He is not dead--not dead yet at least," went on the old woman in low,
excited tones. "He was in the church with Tista--a ladder--"

Marzio did not stop to hear more, but pushed past Assunta with his
burden under his arm, and entered the passage. The door at the end was
open, and he saw his wife standing in the bright light in the
sitting-room, anxiously looking towards him as though she had heard his
coming.

"For God's sake, Gigia," he said, addressing her by her old pet name,
"tell me quickly what has happened!"

The Signora Pandolfi explained as well as she could, frequently giving
way to her grief in passionate sobs. She was incoherent, but the facts
were so simple that Marzio understood them. He was standing by the
table, his hand resting upon the wooden case he had brought, and his
face was very pale.

"Let me understand," he said at last. "Tista was on the ladder. The
ladder slipped, Paolo ran to catch it, and it fell on him. He is badly
hurt, but not dead; is that it, Gigia?"

Maria Luisa nodded in the midst of a fit of weeping.

"The surgeon has been, you say? Yes. And where is Paolo lying?"

"In Tista's room," sobbed his wife. "They are with him now."

Marzio stood still and hesitated. He was under the influence of the most
violent emotion, and his face betrayed something of what he felt. The
idea of Paolo's death had played a tremendous part in his thoughts
during the whole day, and he had firmly believed that he had got rid of
that idea, and was to realise in meeting his brother that it had all
been a dream. The news he now heard filled him with horror. It seemed as
if the intense wish for Paolo's death had in some way produced a
material result without his knowledge; it was as though he had killed
his brother by a thought--as though he had had a real share in his
death.

He could hardly bear to go and see the wounded man, so strong was the
impression that gained possession of him. His fancy called up pictures
of Paolo lying wounded in bed, and he dreaded to face the sight. He
turned away from the table and began to walk up and down the little
room. In a corner his foot struck against something--the drawing board
on which he had begun to sketch the night before. Marzio took it up and
brought it to the light. Maria Luisa stared at him sorrowfully, as
though reproaching him with indifference in the general calamity. But
Marzio looked intently at the drawing. It was only a sketch, but it was
very beautifully done. He saw that his ideal was still the same, and
that upon the piece of paper he had only reproduced the features he had
chiselled ten years ago, with an added beauty of expression, with just
those additions which to-day he had made upon the original. The moment
he was sure of the fact he laid aside the board and opened the wooden
case.

Maria Luisa, who was very far from guessing what an intimate connection
existed between the crucifix and Paolo in her husband's mind, looked on
with increasing astonishment as he took out the beautiful object and Bet
it upon the table in the light. But when she saw it her admiration
overcame her sorrow for one moment.

"_Dio mio!_ What a miracle!" she exclaimed.

"A miracle?" repeated her husband, with a strange expression. "Who
knows? Perhaps!"

At that moment Gianbattista and Lucia entered through the open door, and
stood together watching the scene without understanding what was
passing. The young girl recognised the crucifix at once. She supposed
that her father did not realise Paolo's condition, and was merely
showing the masterpiece to her mother.

"That is the one I saw," she whispered to Gianbattista. The young man
said nothing, but fixed his eyes upon the cross.

"Papa," said Lucia timidly, "do you know?"

"Yes. Is he alone?" asked Marzio in a tone which was not like his own.

"There is Assunta," answered the young girl.

"I will go to him," said the artist, and without further words he lifted
the crucifix from the table and went out. His face was very grave, and
his features had something in them that none of the three had seen
before--something almost of grandeur. Gianbattista and Lucia followed
him.

"I will be alone with him," said Marzio, looking back at the pair as he
reached the door of the sick chamber. He entered and a moment afterwards
old Assunta came out and shuffled away, holding her apron to her eyes.

Marzio went in. There was a small shaded lamp on the deal table, which
illuminated the room with a soft light. Marzio felt that he could not
trust himself at first to look at his brother's face. He set the
crucifix upon the old chest of drawers, and put the lamp near it. Then
he remained standing before it with his back to the bed, and his hands
in the pockets of his blouse. He could hear the regular breathing which
told that Paolo was still alive. For a long time he could not turn
round; it was as though an unseen power held him motionless in his
position. He looked at the crucifix.

"If he wakes," he thought, "he will see it. It will comfort him if he is
going to die!"

With his back still turned towards the bed, he moved to one side, until
he thought that Paolo could see what he had brought, if consciousness
returned. Very slowly, as though fearing some horrible sight, he changed
his position and looked timidly in the direction of the sick man. At
last he saw the pale upturned face, and was amazed that such an accident
should have produced so little change in the features. He came and stood
beside the bed.

Paolo had not moved since the surgeon had left; he was lying on his
back, propped by pillows so that his face was towards the light. He was
pale now, for the flush that had been in his cheeks had subsided; his
eyelids, which had been half open, had dropped and closed, so that he
seemed to be sleeping peacefully, ready to wake at the slightest sound.

Marzio stood and looked at him. This was the man he had hated through so
many years of boyhood and manhood--the man who had faced him and opposed
him at every step--who had stood up boldly before him in his own house
to defend what he believed to be right. This was Paolo, whom he had
nearly killed that morning. Marzio's right hand felt the iron tool in
the pocket of his blouse, and his fingers trembled as he touched it,
while his long arms twitched nervously from the shoulder to the elbow.
He took it out, looked at it, and at the sick man's face. He asked
himself whether he could think of using it as he had meant to, and then
he let it fall upon the bit of green drugget by the bedside.

That was Paolo--it would not need any sharpened weapon to kill him now.
A little pressure on the throat, a pillow held over his face for a few
moments, and it would all be over. And what for? To be pursued for ever
by that same white face? No. It was not worth while, it had never been
worth while, even were that all. But there was something else to be
considered. Paolo might now die of his accident, in his bed. There would
be no murder done in that case, no haunting horror of a presence, no
discovery to be feared, since there would have been no evil. Let him
die, if he was dying!

But that was not all either. What would it be when Paolo should be dead?
Well, he had his ideas, of course. They were mistaken ideas. Were they?
Perhaps, who could tell? But he was not a bad man, this Paolo. He had
never tried to wring money out of Marzio, as some people did. On the
contrary, Marzio still felt a sense of humiliation when he thought how
much he owed to the kindness of this man, his brother, lying here
injured to death, and powerless to help himself or to save himself.
Powerless? yes--utterly so. How easy it would be, after all, to press a
pillow on the unconscious face. There would probably not even be a
struggle. Who should save him, or who could know of it? And yet Marzio
did not want to do it, as he had wished to a few hours ago. As he looked
down on the pale head he realised that he did not want Paolo to die.
Standing on the sharp edge of the precipice where life ends and breaks
off, close upon the unfathomable depths of eternity, himself firmly
standing and fearing no fall, but seeing his brother slipping over the
brink, he would put out his hand to save him, to draw him back. He would
not have Paolo die.

He gazed upon the calm features, and he knew that he feared lest they
should be still for ever. The breath came more softly, more and more
faintly. Marzio thought. He bent down low and tried to feel the warm
air as it issued from the lips. His fears grew to terror as the life
seemed to ebb away from the white face. In the agony of his
apprehension, Marzio inadvertently laid his hand upon the injured
shoulder, unconsciously pressing his weight upon the place.

With a faint sigh the priest's eyes opened and seemed to gaze for a
moment on the crucifix standing in the bright light of the lamp. An
expression of wonderful gentleness and calm overspread the refined
features.

"_Qui propter nos homines et propter nostram salutem descendit de
coelis_."

The words came faintly from the dying man's lips, the last syllables
scarcely audible in the intense stillness. A deathly pallor crept
quickly over the smooth forehead and thin cheeks. Marzio looked for one
instant more, and then with a loud cry fell upon his knees by the
bedside, his long arms extended across his brother's body. The strong
hot tears fell upon the bed coverings, and his breast heaved with
passionate sobbing.

He did not see that Paolo opened his eyes at the sound. He did not
notice the rush of feet in the passage without, as Maria Luisa and Lucia
and Gianbattista ran to the door, followed by old Assunta holding up her
apron to her eyes.

"Courage, Sor Marzio," said Gianbattista, drawing the artist back from
the bed. "You will disturb him. Do you not see that he is conscious at
last?"

Lucia was arranging the pillows under Paolo's head, and Maria Luisa was
crying with joy. Marzio sprang to his feet and stared as though he could
not believe what he saw. Paolo turned his head and looked kindly at his
brother.

"Courage, Marzio," he said, "I have been asleep, I believe--what has
happened to me? Why are you all crying?"

Marzio's tears broke out again, mingled with incoherent words of joy. In
his sudden happiness he clasped the two persons nearest to him, and
hugged them and kissed them. These two chanced to be Lucia and
Gianbattista. Paolo smiled, but the effort of speaking had tired him.

"Well," said Marzio at last, with a kinder smile than had been on his
face for many a day--"very well, children. For Paolo's sake you shall
have your own way."

Half an hour later the surgeon made his visit and assured them all that
there was no serious injury, nor any further danger to be feared. The
patient had been very badly stunned, that was all. Marzio remained by
his brother's side.

"You see, Tista," said Lucia when they were in the sitting-room, "I was
quite right about the crucifix and the rest."

"Of course," assented the Signora Pandolfi, though she did not
understand the allusion in the least. "Of course you are all of you
right. But what a day this has been, _cari miei_! What a day! Dear,
dear!" She spread out her fat hands upon her knees, looking the picture
of solid contentment.

THE END



       *       *       *       *       *



ZOROASTER

TO

My Beloved Wife

I DEDICATE THIS DRAMA





CHAPTER I.


The hall of the banquets was made ready for the feast in the palace of
Babylon. That night Belshazzar the king would drink wine with a thousand
of his lords, and be merry before them; and everything was made ready.

From end to end of the mighty nave, the tables of wood, overlaid with
gold and silver, stood spread with those things which the heart of man
can desire; with cups of gold and of glass and of jade; with great
dishes heaped high with rare fruits and rarer flowers; and over all, the
last purple rays of the great southern sun came floating through the
open colonnades of the porch, glancing on the polished marbles, tingeing
with a softer hue the smooth red plaster of the walls, and lingering
lovingly on the golden features and the red-gold draperies of the vast
statue that sat on high and overlooked the scene.

On his head the head-dress of thrice royal supremacy, in his right hand
and his left the sceptre of power and the winged wheel of immortality
and life, beneath his feet the bowed necks of prostrate captives;--so
sat the kingly presence of great Nebuchadnezzar, as waiting to see what
should come to pass upon his son; and the perfume of the flowers and the
fruits and the rich wine came up to his mighty nostrils, and he seemed
to smile there in the evening sunlight, half in satisfaction, half in
scorn.

On each side of the great building, in the aisles and wings, among the
polished pillars of marble thronged the serving-men, bearing ever fresh
spices and flowers and fruits, wherewith to deck the feast, whispering
together in a dozen Indian, Persian and Egyptian dialects, or in the
rich speech of those nobler captives whose pale faces and eagle eyes
stood forth everywhere in strong contrast with the coarser features and
duskier skins of their fellows in servitude,--the race not born to
dominate, but born to endure even to the end. These all mingled together
in the strange and broken reflections of the evening light, and here and
there the purple dye of the sun tinged the white tunic of some poor
slave to as fair a colour as a king's son might wear.

On this side and on that of the tables that were spread for the feast,
stood great candlesticks, as tall as the height of two men, tapering
from the thickness and heavy carving below to the fineness and delicate
tracery above, and bearing upon them cups of bronze, each having its
wick steeped in fine oil mixed with wax. Moreover, in the midst of the
hall, where the seat of the king was put upon a raised floor, the
pillars stood apart for a space, so that there was a chamber, as it
were, from the wall on the right to the wall on the left, roofed with
great carved rafters; and the colour of the walls was red,--a deep and
glorious red that seemed to make of the smooth plaster a sheet of
precious marble. Beyond, beneath the pillars, the panels of the aisles
were pictured and made many-coloured with the story of Nebuchadnezzar
the king, his conquests and his feasts, his captives and his courtiers,
in endless train upon the splendid wall. But where the king should sit
in the midst of the hall there were neither pillars nor paintings; only
the broad blaze of the royal colour, rich and even. Beside the table
also stood a great lamp, taller and more cunningly wrought than the
rest,--the foot of rare marble and chiselled bronze and the lamp above
of pure gold from southern Ophir. But it was not yet kindled, for the
sun was not set and the hour for the feast was not fully come.

At the upper end of the hall, before the gigantic statue of wrought
gold, there was an open space, unencumbered by tables, where the smooth,
polished marble floor came to view in all its rich design and colour.
Two persons, entering the hall with slow steps, came to this place and
stood together, looking up at the face of the golden king.

Between the two there was the gulf of a lifetime. The one was already
beyond the common limit of age, while he who stood beside him was but a
fair boy of fourteen summers.

The old man was erect still, and his snowy hair and beard grew like a
lion's mane about his massive brow and masterful face. The deep lines of
thought, graven deeper by age, followed the noble shaping of his brows
in even course, and his dark eyes still shot fire, as piercing the
bleared thickness of time to gaze boldly on the eternity beyond. His
left hand gathered the folds of a snow-white robe around him, while in
his right he grasped a straight staff of ebony and ivory, of fine
workmanship, marvellously polished, whereon were wrought strange sayings
in the Israelitish manner of writing. The old man stood up to his noble
height, and looked from the burnished face of the king's image to the
eyes of the boy beside him, in silence, as though urging his young
companion to speak for him the thoughts that filled the hearts of both.

The youth spoke not, nor gave any sign, but stood with folded hands and
gazed up to the great features of Nebuchadnezzar.

He was but fourteen years of age, tall and delicately made, full of the
promise of a graceful and elastic power, fine of skin, and instinct with
the nervous strength of a noble and untainted race. His face was fair
and white, tinged with faint colour, and his heavy golden hair fell in
long curls upon his shoulders, thick and soft with the silken fineness
of early youth. His delicate features were straight and noble, northern
rather than Oriental in their type--supremely calm and thoughtful,
almost godlike in their young restfulness. The deep blue eyes were
turned upward with a touch of sadness, but the broad forehead was as
marble, and the straight marking of the brows bounded it and divided it
from the face. He wore the straight white tunic, edged about with fine
embroideries of gold and gathered at the waist with a rich belt, while
his legs were covered with wide Persian trousers wrought in many colours
of silk upon fine linen. He wore also a small cap of linen, stiffened
to a point and worked with a cunning design in gold and silver. But the
old man's head was covered only by the thick masses of his snowy hair,
and his wide white mantle hid the details of his dress from view.

Again he glanced from the statue to his companion's eyes, and at last he
spoke, in a deep smooth voice, in the Hebrew tongue.

"Nebuchadnezzar the king is gathered to his fathers, and his son also,
and Nabonnedon Belshazzar reigns in his stead, yet have I endured to
this day, in Babylon, these threescore and seven years, since
Nebuchadnezzar the king destroyed our place upon the earth and led us
away captive. Unto this day, Zoroaster, have I endured, and yet a little
longer shall I stand and bear witness for Israel."

The old man's eyes flashed, and his strong aquiline features assumed an
expression of intense vitality and life. Zoroaster turned to him and
spoke softly, almost sadly:

"Say, O Daniel, prophet and priest of the Lord, why does the golden
image seem to smile to-day? Are the times accomplished of thy vision
which thou sawest in Shushan, in the palace, and is the dead king glad?
I think his face was never so gentle before to look upon,--surely he
rejoices at the feast, and the countenance of his image is gladdened."

"Nay, rather then should his face be sorrowful for the destruction of
his seed and of his kingdom," answered the prophet somewhat scornfully.
"Verily the end is at hand, and the stones of Babylon shall no longer
cry out for the burden of the sins of Belshazzar, and the people call
upon Bel to restore unto life the King Nebuchadnezzar; nay, or to send
hither a Persian or a Mede to be a just ruler in the land."

"Hast thou read it in the stars, or have thine eyes seen these things in
the visions of the night, my master?" The boy came nearer to the aged
prophet and spoke in low earnest tones. But Daniel only bent his head,
till his brow touched his ebony staff, and so he remained, deep in
thought.

"For I also have dreamed,"--continued Zoroaster, after a short
pause,--"and my dream took hold of me, and I am sorry and full of great
weariness. Now this is the manner of my dreaming." He stopped and
glanced down the great nave of the hall through the open porch at the
other end. The full glory of the red sun, just touching the western
plain, streamed upon his face and made the tables, the preparations and
the crowd of busy serving-men look like black shadows between him and
the light. But Daniel leaned upon his staff and spoke no word, nor moved
from his position.

"I saw in my dream," said Zoroaster, "and there was darkness; and upon
the winds of the night arose the sound of war, and the cry and the clash
of battle, mighty men striving one with another for the mastery and the
victory, which should be to the stronger. And I saw again, and behold it
was morning, and the people were led away captive, by tens, and by
hundreds, and by thousands, and the maidens also and young women into a
far country. And I looked, and the face of one of the maidens was as the
face of the fairest among the daughters of thy people. Then my heart
yearned for her, and I would have followed after into the captivity; but
