    He that won't be counselled can't be helped.

That he was a philosopher in deed as well as in word was soon to be
proved, for, at the age of forty-two, he did the wisest thing a man can
do, but for which very few have courage. He had won an established
position in the world and as much wealth as he felt he needed, so he
sold his business, intending to devote the remainder of his life to
science, of which he had always been passionately fond. Already he had
founded the Philadelphia Library and the American Philosophical Society,
had invented the Franklin stove, and served as postmaster of
Philadelphia, and a few years later, he established the institution
which is now the University of Pennsylvania. It was at about this time
that, by experimenting with a kite, he proved lightning to be a
discharge of electricity, and suggested the use of lightning rods.

[Illustration: FRANKLIN]

But his scientific studies were destined to be interrupted, for his
country called him, and the remainder of his life was passed in her
service, first as agent in London for Pennsylvania, where he did
everything possible to avert the Revolution; then as a member of the
Continental Congress, and one of the committee of five which drew up the
Declaration of Independence; then as ambassador to France, where,
practically unaided, he succeeded in effecting the alliance between the
two countries which secured the independence of the colonies; and
finally as President of Pennsylvania and a member of the Constitutional
Convention. His last public act was to petition Congress to abolish
slavery in the United States. If one were asked to name the three men
who did most to secure the independence of their country, they would be
George Washington, who fought her battles, Robert Morris, who financed
them, and Benjamin Franklin, who secured the aid of France. When Thomas
Jefferson, who had been selected as minister to France, appeared at the
court of Louis XVI, he presented his papers to the Comte de Vergennes.

"You replace Mr. Franklin?" inquired the nobleman, glancing at the
papers.

"No, monsieur," Jefferson replied, "I succeed him. No one could replace
him."

And that answer had more truth than wit.

Honors came to Franklin such as no other American has ever received, but
he remained from first to last the same quiet, deep-hearted, and
unselfish man, whose chief motive was the promotion of human welfare. He
had his faults and made his mistakes; but time has sloughed them all
away, and there are few sources of inspiration which can compare with
the study of his life.

       *       *       *       *       *

No family has loomed larger in American affairs than the Adams family of
Massachusetts. John Adams, President himself and living to see his own
son President--an experience which, probably no other man will ever
enjoy--had a second cousin who played a much more important part than he
did in securing the independence of the United States. His name was
Samuel Adams, and when he graduated from Harvard in 1740, at the age of
eighteen, his thesis discussed the question, "Whether it be lawful to
resist the supreme magistrate if the commonwealth cannot otherwise be
preserved," and answered it in the affirmative.

Samuel Adams was a silent, stern and deeply religious man, something of
a dreamer, a bad manager and constantly in debt; but he was perhaps the
first in America to conceive the idea of absolute independence from
Great Britain, and he worked for this end unceasingly and to good
purpose. The wealthy John Hancock was one of his converts, and it was
partly to warn these two of the troops sent out to capture them that
Paul Revere took that famous ride to Lexington on the night of April 18,
1775. A month later, when General Gage offered amnesty to all the
rebels, Hancock and Adams were especially excepted.

It was Samuel Adams who, perceiving that Virginia was apt to be lukewarm
in aiding a war which was to be fought mostly in the North, suggested
the appointment of Virginia's favorite son, George Washington, as
commander-in-chief of the American army, and who seconded the motion to
that effect made by John Adams. He lived to see his dream of
independence realized, and his grave in the old Granary burying ground
at Boston is one of the pilgrimage places of America.

With his name that of John Hancock is, as we have seen, closely
associated. The worldly circumstances of the two were very different,
for Samuel Adams was always poor, while John Hancock had fallen heir to
one of the greatest fortunes in New England. He was only twenty-seven at
the time, and his fortune made a fool of him, as sudden wealth has a way
of doing. It was at this time, being young and impressionable, he met
Samuel Adams, a silent and reserved man, fifteen years his senior and
regarded by his neighbors as a harmless crank. But there was something
about him which touched Hancock's imagination--and touched his
pocketbook, too, for about the first thing Adams did was to borrow money
from him.

Hancock was no doubt glad to lend the money, for he had more than he
knew what to do with, and spent it in such a lavish manner that he was
soon one of the most popular men in Boston. So when one of his ships was
seized for smuggling in a cargo of wine, all his friends and employees
got together and paraded the streets, and a lot of boys and loafers
joined them, for drink was flowing freely, and pretty soon there was a
riot, and the troops were called out and fired a volley and killed five
men, and the rest of the mob decided that it was time to go home, and
went. And that was the Boston massacre about which you have heard so
much that it would almost seem to rank with that of St. Bartholomew.
But, as the Irishman remarked, the man who gets his finger pinched makes
a lot more racket than the one who gets his head cut off; and the Boston
massacre, for all the hullabaloo that was raised about it, was merely
an insignificant street riot. No doubt Samuel Adams did his full share
in fanning that little spark into a conflagration!

For Adams had acquired great influence over Hancock, and that vapid
young man was fond of being seen in the company of the older one. Adams
was anxious to secure Hancock for the revolutionary cause, and soon had
him so hopelessly entangled that there was no escape for him. On the
anniversary of the Boston massacre, he persuaded Hancock to deliver a
revolutionary speech, which he had himself prepared, and after that
there was a British order out for Hancock's arrest; Adams contrived that
Hancock should be one of the three delegates from Massachusetts to the
Continental Congress--John and Samuel Adams were the other two--and
Hancock was deeply impressed by the honor; at the second Congress, Adams
saw to it that his friend was chosen President. In consequence, Hancock
was the first signer of the Declaration of Independence, the incident
which is the best known in his career. He signed the document in great
sprawly letters, remarking grandiloquently, as he did so, "I guess King
George can read that without spectacles," and for many years, "John
Hancock" was the synonym for a bold signature. He was afterwards
governor of Massachusetts for more than a decade, and on one occasion
attempted to snub Washington, with very poor success. His body lies in
the old Granary burying-ground, only a step from that of Samuel Adams.

       *       *       *       *       *

One day, while Thomas Jefferson was a student at William and Mary
College, at Williamsburg, a young friend named Patrick Henry dropped in
to see him, and announced that he had come to Williamsburg to be
admitted to the bar.

"How long have you studied law?" Jefferson inquired.

"Oh, for over six weeks," Henry answered.

The story goes that Jefferson advised his friend to go home and study
for at least a fortnight longer; but Henry declared that the only way to
learn law was to practice it, and went ahead and took the examination,
such as it was, and passed!

That was in 1760, and Patrick Henry was twenty-four years old at the
time. He had been a wild boy, cared little for books, and had failed as
a farmer and as a merchant before turning to law as a last resort. Nor
as a lawyer was he a great success, the truth being that he lacked the
industry and diligence which are essential to success in any profession;
but he had one supreme gift, that of lofty and impassioned oratory. In
1765, as a member of the Virginia House of Burgesses, he made the
rafters ring and his auditors turn pale by his famous speech against the
stamp act; as a delegate to the Continental Congress in 1774, he made
the only real speech of the Congress, arousing the delegates from an
attitude of mutual suspicion to one of patriotic ardor for a common
cause.

"Government," said he, "is dissolved. Where are your landmarks, your
boundaries of colonies? The distinctions between Virginians,
Pennsylvanians, New Yorkers, and New Englanders are no more. I am not a
Virginian, but an American."

Samuel Adams said afterwards that, but for that speech, which drew the
delegates together and made them forget their differences, the Congress
would probably have ended in a wrangle. And a year later, again in
Virginia, in defense of his resolution to arm the militia, he gave
utterance to the most famous speech of all, starting quietly with the
sentence, "Mr. President, it is natural for man to indulge in the
illusions of hope," and ending with the tremendous cry: "I know not what
course others may take, but as for me, give me liberty, or give me
death!"

That was the supreme moment of Patrick Henry's life. He did a great work
after that, as member of the Continental Congress, as commander-in-chief
of the Virginia forces, and as governor of the Commonwealth, but never
again did he come so near the stars--as, indeed, few men ever do.

       *       *       *       *       *

You have all heard the story of Damon and Pythias, true type of devoted
friendship, and history abounds in such examples; but sometimes it shows
a darker side, and the controlling force in two men's lives will be hate
instead of love, and the end will be shipwreck and tragedy. Such a story
we are to tell briefly here of the lives of Alexander Hamilton and
Aaron Burr.

They were born a year apart. Burr in 1756, at Newark, New Jersey;
Hamilton, in 1757, on the little West Indian island of Nevis. Burr was
of a distinguished ancestry, his grandfather being the famous Jonathan
Edwards; Hamilton's father was an obscure planter whose first name has
been lost to history. Burr graduated at Princeton, entered the army,
rose to the rank of lieutenant-colonel, and resigned in 1777 to study
law, being admitted to the New York bar five years later. Hamilton was
sent to New York, entered King's, now Columbia, College, got caught in
the rising tide of Revolution, proved himself uncommonly ready with
tongue and pen, enlisted, saw the battles of Long Island, Trenton, and
Princeton, was appointed aide-de-camp to Washington and acted as his
secretary, filling the post admirably, but resigned in a fit of pique
over a fancied slight, and repaired to New York to study law. Such, in
outline, is the history of these two men until Fate threw them in each
other's way.

New York City was the arena where the battle was fought. Within a few
years, Hamilton and Burr were the most famous men in the town. They
resembled each other strongly in temperament and disposition; each was
"passionate, brooking no rivalry; ambitious, faltering at no obstacle;
proud with a fiery and aggressive pride; eloquent with the quick wit,
the natural vivacity, and the lofty certainty of the true orator." They
were too nearly alike to be friends; they became instinctive enemies.
Each felt that the other was in the way.

For sixteen years, Burr practiced law in New York, growing steadily in
influence. For five of those years, Hamilton did the same. They were the
foremost lawyers in the city. No man could stand before them, and when
they met on opposite sides of a case, it was, indeed, a meeting of
giants. But in 1789, Washington appointed Hamilton his secretary of the
treasury, and leaving New York, Hamilton applied himself to the great
task of establishing the public credit, laying the basis for the
financial system of the nation, which endures until this day. It was a
splendid task, splendidly performed, and Hamilton emerged from it the
leader of the powerful Federal party.

In 1800, two men were candidates for the presidency. One was Thomas
Jefferson and the other was Aaron Burr. Instead of being overwhelmed by
the great Virginian, Burr received an equal number of electoral votes,
and the contest was referred to Congress for decision. As a Federalist,
Burr felt that he should have Hamilton's support, but Hamilton used his
great influence against him, stigmatizing him as "a dangerous man," and
Jefferson was elected. Four years later, Burr was a candidate for
governor of New York, and again Hamilton openly, bitterly, and
successfully opposed him, again speaking of him as "a dangerous man."

Smarting under the sting of this second defeat, Burr sent a note to
Hamilton asking if the expression, "a dangerous man," referred to him
politically or personally. Hamilton sent a sneering reply, and expressed
himself as willing to abide by the consequences. It was "fighting
language between fighting men"--a quarrel which Hamilton had been
seeking for five years and which he had done everything in his power to
provoke--and Burr promptly sent a challenge. Hamilton as promptly
accepted it, named pistols at ten paces as the weapons, and at seven
o'clock on the morning of July 11, 1804, the two men faced each other on
the heights of Weehawken, overlooking New York bay. Both fired at the
word; Burr's bullet passed through Hamilton's body; Hamilton's cut a
twig above Burr's head. Hamilton died next day, and Burr, his political
career at an end, buried himself in the West.

Three years later, he was arrested, charged with treason, for attempting
to found an independent state within the borders of the Union. He had a
wild dream of establishing a great empire to the west of the
Mississippi, and had collected arms and men for the expedition, and was
on his way down the Mississippi when he was arrested and taken back to
Richmond for trial. But his plan could not be proved to be treasonable;
indeed, his arrest was due more to the animosity which Jefferson felt
toward him, than from any other cause, and, brought to trial a year
later, he was acquitted. But his reputation was ruined, there was no
hope for him in public life, and his remaining years were spent quietly
in the practice of his profession, partly abroad and partly in New
York.

It has been too much the habit to picture Burr as a thoroughgoing
scoundrel who murdered an innocent man and conspired against his
country. As a matter of fact, he did neither. Of the charge of treason
he was acquitted, even at a time when public feeling ran high against
him, and in the quarrel with Hamilton, it was Hamilton who was at all
times the aggressor. Both were brilliant, accomplished and courtly
men--even, perhaps, men of genius--but Fate spread a net for their feet,
blindly they stumbled into it, and, too proud to retrace their steps,
pushed on to the tragic end.

The presiding judge at Burr's trial, not the least of whose achievements
was the holding level of the scales of justice on that memorable
occasion, was the last of that great school of statesmen who had fought
for their country's independence, and who had seen the states united
under a common Constitution. John Marshall lived well into the
nineteenth century, and his great work was to interpret that
Constitution to the country, to give it the meaning which it has for us
to-day. Marshall was a Virginian, was just of age at the outbreak of the
Revolution, and served in the American army for five years, enlisting as
a private and rising to the rank of captain. At the close of the war, he
studied law, gained a prominent place in the politics of his state, drew
the attention of Washington by his unusual ability, and in 1800 was
appointed by him secretary of state. A year later he was made chief
justice of the Supreme Court--an appointment little less than inspired
in its wisdom.

For thirty-four years, John Marshall occupied that exalted position,
interpreting to the new country its organic law, and the decisions
handed down by him remain the standard authority on constitutional
questions. In clearness of thought, breadth of view, and strength of
logic they have never been surpassed. His service to his country was of
incalculable value, for he built for the national government a firm,
foundation which has stood unshaken through the years.

       *       *       *       *       *

So we come to a new era in American history--an era marked by unexampled
bitterness of feeling and culminating in the great struggle for the
preservation of the Union. Across this era, three mighty giants cast
their shadows--Henry Clay and Daniel Webster and John C. Calhoun.

Closely and curiously intertwined were the destinies of these three men,
Clay was born in 1777; Webster and Calhoun five years later. Calhoun and
Clay were Irishmen and hated England; Webster was a Scotchman, and
Scotchmen were usually Tories. Calhoun and Clay were southerners, but
with a difference, for Calhoun was born in the very sanctum sanctorum of
the South, South Carolina, while Clay's life was spent in the border
state of Kentucky, so removed from the South that it did not secede from
the Union. Webster was a product of Massachusetts. Calhoun and Webster
were, in temperament and belief, as far apart as the poles; Clay stood
between them, "the great compromiser." Calhoun and Webster were greater
than Clay, for they possessed a larger genius and a broader culture; and
Webster was a greater man than Calhoun, because he possessed the truer
vision. Calhoun died in 1850; Clay and Webster in 1852. For the forty
years previous to that, these three men were in every way the most
famous and conspicuous in America. Others flashed, meteor-like, into a
brief brilliance; but these three burned steady as the stars. They had
no real rivals. And yet, though each of them was consumed by an ambition
to be President, not one was able to realize that ambition, and their
last years were embittered by defeat.

As has been said, Clay was the smallest man of the three. His reputation
rests, not upon constructive statesmanship, but upon his ability as a
party leader, in which respect he has had few equals in American
history, and upon his success in proposing compromises. Born in
Virginia, and admitted to the bar in 1797, he moved the same year to
Lexington, Kentucky, where his practice brought him rapid and brilliant
success. His personality, too, won him many friends, and it was so all
his life. "To come within reach of the snare of his speech was to love
him," and even to this day Kentucky believes that no statesman ever
lived who equalled this adopted son of hers, nor doubts the entire
sincerity of his famous boast that he would rather be right than
President.

Of course he got into politics. That was his natural and inevitable
field. As early as 1806 he was sent to the Senate, and afterwards to the
House, of which he was speaker for thirteen years. Three times was he a
candidate for the presidency, defeated once by John Quincy Adams, once
by Andrew Jackson, and once, when victory seemed almost his, by William
Henry Harrison. That other great party leader, James G. Blaine, was to
meet a similar fate years later. Henry Clay lacked the deep foresight,
the prophetic intuition necessary to statesmanship of the first rank,
and some of the achievements which he considered the greatest of his
life were in reality blunders which had afterwards to be corrected. But
as a compromiser, as a rider of troubled waters, and a pilot at a time
when shipwreck seemed imminent and unavoidable, he proved his consummate
ability, and merits the gratitude of his country.

Henry Clay and Daniel Webster were leaders in the same great party, and
were, for the most part, personal friends as well as political allies.
But Webster overshadowed Clay in intellect, however he may have been
outdistanced by him in political astuteness. If Clay were the fox,
Webster was the lion. As a constitutional lawyer, he has never been
