     everywhere; so that I might be glad to be locked up too. But I do
     not see that they will be willing to consent to that any more than
     to the other.

     _John._ Why, what will you do then, brother? And what shall I do?
     for I am almost as bad as you. The people where I lodge are all
     gone into the country but a maid, and she is to go next week, and
     to shut the house quite up; so that I shall be turned adrift to the
     wide world before you: and I am resolved to go away too, if I knew
     but where to go.

     _Tho._ We were both distracted we did not go away at first, when we
     might ha' traveled anywhere: there is no stirring now. We shall be
     starved if we pretend to go out of town. They won't let us have
     victuals, no, not for our money, nor let us come into the towns,
     much less into their houses.

     _John._ And, that which is almost as bad, I have but little money
     to help myself with, neither.

     _Tho._ As to that, we might make shift. I have a little, though not
     much; but I tell you there is no stirring on the road. I know a
     couple of poor honest men in our street have attempted to travel;
     and at Barnet,[186] or Whetstone, or thereabout, the people offered
     to fire at them if they pretended to go forward: so they are come
     back again quite discouraged.

     _John._ I would have ventured their fire, if I had been there. If I
     had been denied food for my money, they should have seen me take it
     before their faces; and, if I had tendered money for it, they could
     not have taken any course with me by the law.

     _Tho._ You talk your old soldier's language, as if you were in the
     Low Countries[187] now; but this is a serious thing. The people
     have good reason to keep anybody off that they are not satisfied
     are sound at such a time as this, and we must not plunder them.

     _John._ No, brother, you mistake the case, and mistake me too: I
     would plunder nobody. But for any town upon the road to deny me
     leave to pass through the town in the open highway, and deny me
     provisions for my money, is to say the town has a right to starve
     me to death; which cannot be true.

     _Tho._ But they do not deny you liberty to go back again from
     whence you came, and therefore they do not starve you.

     _John._ But the next town behind me will, by the same rule, deny me
     leave to go back; and so they do starve me between them. Besides,
     there is no law to prohibit my traveling wherever I will on the
     road.

     _Tho._ But there will be so much difficulty in disputing with them
     at every town on the road, that it is not for poor men to do it, or
     undertake it, at such a time as this is especially.

     _John._ Why, brother, our condition, at this rate, is worse than
     anybody's else; for we can neither go away nor stay here. I am of
     the same mind with the lepers of Samaria.[188] If we stay here, we
     are sure to die. I mean especially as you and I are situated,
     without a dwelling house of our own, and without lodging in
     anybody's else. There is no lying in the street at such a time as
     this; we had as good[189] go into the dead cart at once. Therefore,
     I say, if we stay here, we are sure to die; and if we go away, we
     can but die. I am resolved to be gone.

     _Tho._ You will go away. Whither will you go, and what can you do?
     I would as willingly go away as you, if I knew whither; but we have
     no acquaintance, no friends. Here we were born, and here we must
     die.

     _John._ Look you, Tom, the whole kingdom is my native country as
     well as this town. You may as well say I must not go out of my
     house if it is on fire, as that I must not go out of the town I was
     born in when it is infected with the plague. I was born in England,
     and have a right to live in it if I can.

     _Tho._ But you know every vagrant person may, by the laws of
     England, be taken up, and passed back to their last legal
     settlement.

     _John._ But how shall they make me vagrant? I desire only to
     travel on upon my lawful occasions.

     _Tho._ What lawful occasions can we pretend to travel, or rather
     wander, upon? They will not be put off with words.

     _John._ Is not flying to save our lives a lawful occasion? And do
     they not all know that the fact is true? We cannot be said to
     dissemble.

     _Tho._ But, suppose they let us pass, whither shall we go?

     _John._ Anywhere to save our lives: it is time enough to consider
     that when we are got out of this town. If I am once out of this
     dreadful place, I care not where I go.

     _Tho._ We shall be driven to great extremities. I know not what to
     think of it.

     _John._ Well, Tom, consider of it a little.

This was about the beginning of July; and though the plague was come
forward in the west and north parts of the town, yet all Wapping, as I
have observed before, and Redriff and Ratcliff, and Limehouse and
Poplar, in short, Deptford and Greenwich, both sides of the river from
the Hermitage, and from over against it, quite down to Blackwall, was
entirely free. There had not one person died of the plague in all
Stepney Parish, and not one on the south side of Whitechapel Road, no,
not in any parish; and yet the weekly bill was that very week risen up
to 1,006.

It was a fortnight after this before the two brothers met again, and
then the case was a little altered, and the plague was exceedingly
advanced, and the number greatly increased. The bill was up at 2,785,
and prodigiously increasing; though still both sides of the river, as
below, kept pretty well. But some began to die in Redriff, and about
five or six in Ratcliff Highway, when the sailmaker came to his brother
John, express,[190] and in some fright; for he was absolutely warned out
of his lodging, and had only a week to provide himself. His brother John
was in as bad a case, for he was quite out, and had only[191] begged
leave of his master, the biscuit baker, to lodge in an outhouse
belonging to his workhouse, where he only lay upon straw, with some
biscuit sacks, or "bread sacks," as they called them, laid upon it, and
some of the same sacks to cover him.

Here they resolved, seeing all employment being at an end, and no work
or wages to be had, they would make the best of their way to get out of
the reach of the dreadful infection, and, being as good husbands as they
could, would endeavor to live upon what they had as long as it would
last, and then work for more, if they could get work anywhere of any
kind, let it be what it would.

While they were considering to put this resolution in practice in the
best manner they could, the third man, who was acquainted very well with
the sailmaker, came to know of the design, and got leave to be one of
the number; and thus they prepared to set out.

It happened that they had not an equal share of money; but as the
sailmaker, who had the best stock, was, besides his being lame, the most
unfit to expect to get anything by working in the country, so he was
content that what money they had should all go into one public stock, on
condition that whatever any one of them could gain more than another, it
should, without any grudging, be all added to the public stock.

They resolved to load themselves with as little baggage as possible,
because they resolved at first to travel on foot, and to go a great way,
that they might, if possible, be effectually safe. And a great many
consultations they had with themselves before they could agree about
what way they should travel; which they were so far from adjusting,
that, even to the morning they set out, they were not resolved on it.

At last the seaman put in a hint that determined it. "First," says he,
"the weather is very hot; and therefore I am for traveling north, that
we may not have the sun upon our faces, and beating upon our breasts,
which will heat and suffocate us; and I have been told," says he, "that
it is not good to overheat our blood at a time when, for aught we know,
the infection may be in the very air. In the next place," says he, "I am
for going the way that may be contrary to the wind as it may blow when
we set out, that we may not have the wind blow the air of the city on
our backs as we go." These two cautions were approved of, if it could be
brought so to hit that the wind might not be in the south when they set
out to go north.

John the baker, who had been a soldier, then put in his opinion.
"First," says he, "we none of us expect to get any lodging on the road,
and it will be a little too hard to lie just in the open air. Though it
may be warm weather, yet it may be wet and damp, and we have a double
reason to take care of our healths at such a time as this; and
therefore," says he, "you, brother Tom, that are a sailmaker, might
easily make us a little tent; and I will undertake to set it up every
night and take it down, and a fig for all the inns in England. If we
have a good tent over our heads, we shall do well enough."

The joiner opposed this, and told them, let them leave that to him: he
would undertake to build them a house every night with his hatchet and
mallet, though he had no other tools, which should be fully to their
satisfaction, and as good as a tent.

The soldier and the joiner disputed that point some time; but at last
the soldier carried it for a tent: the only objection against it was,
that it must be carried with them, and that would increase their baggage
too much, the weather being hot. But the sailmaker had a piece of good
hap[192] fall in, which made that easy; for his master who[193] he
worked for, having a ropewalk, as well as sailmaking trade, had a little
poor horse that he made no use of then, and, being willing to assist the
three honest men, he gave them the horse for the carrying their baggage;
also, for a small matter of three days' work that his man did for him
before he went, he let him have an old topgallant sail[194] that was
worn out, but was sufficient, and more than enough, to make a very good
tent. The soldier showed how to shape it, and they soon, by his
direction, made their tent, and fitted it with poles or staves for the
purpose: and thus they were furnished for their journey; viz., three
men, one tent, one horse, one gun for the soldier (who would not go
without arms, for now he said he was no more a biscuit baker, but a
trooper). The joiner had a small bag of tools, such as might be useful
if he should get any work abroad, as well for their subsistence as his
own. What money they had they brought all into one public stock, and
thus they began their journey. It seems that in the morning when they
set out, the wind blew, as the sailor said, by his pocket compass, at
N.W. by W., so they directed, or rather resolved to direct, their course
N.W.

But then a difficulty came in their way, that as they set out from the
hither end of Wapping, near the Hermitage, and that the plague was now
very violent, especially on the north side of the city, as in Shoreditch
and Cripplegate Parish, they did not think it safe for them to go near
those parts: so they went away east, through Ratcliff Highway, as far as
Ratcliff Cross, and leaving Stepney church still on their left hand,
being afraid to come up from Ratcliff Cross to Mile End, because they
must come just by the churchyard, and because the wind, that seemed to
blow more from the west, blowed directly from the side of the city where
the plague was hottest. So, I say, leaving Stepney, they fetched a long
compass,[195] and, going to Poplar and Bromley, came into the great road
just at Bow.

Here the watch placed upon Bow Bridge would have questioned them; but
they, crossing the road into a narrow way that turns out of the higher
end of the town of Bow to Oldford, avoided any inquiry there, and
traveled on to Oldford. The constables everywhere were upon their guard,
not so much, it seems, to stop people passing by, as to stop them from
taking up their abode in their towns; and, withal, because of a report
that was newly raised at that time, and that indeed was not very
improbable, viz., that the poor people in London, being distressed and
starved for want of work, and by that means for want of bread, were up
in arms, and had raised a tumult, and that they would come out to all
the towns round to plunder for bread. This, I say, was only a rumor, and
it was very well it was no more; but it was not so far off from being a
reality as it has been thought, for in a few weeks more the poor people
became so desperate by the calamity they suffered, that they were with
great difficulty kept from running out into the fields and towns, and
tearing all in pieces wherever they came. And, as I have observed
before, nothing hindered them but that the plague raged so violently,
and fell in upon them so furiously, that they rather went to the grave
by thousands than into the fields in mobs by thousands; for in the parts
about the parishes of St. Sepulchre's, Clerkenwell, Cripplegate,
Bishopsgate, and Shoreditch, which were the places where the mob began
to threaten, the distemper came on so furiously, that there died in
those few parishes, even then, before the plague was come to its height,
no less than 5,361 people in the first three weeks in August, when at
the same time the parts about Wapping, Ratcliff, and Rotherhithe were,
as before described, hardly touched, or but very lightly; so that in a
word, though, as I said before, the good management of the lord mayor
and justices did much to prevent the rage and desperation of the people
from breaking out in rabbles and tumults, and, in short, from the poor
plundering the rich,--I say, though they did much, the dead cart did
more: for as I have said, that, in five parishes only, there died above
five thousand in twenty days, so there might be probably three times
that number sick all that time; for some recovered, and great numbers
fell sick every day, and died afterwards. Besides, I must still be
allowed to say, that, if the bills of mortality said five thousand, I
always believed it was twice as many in reality, there being no room to
believe that the account they gave was right, or that indeed they[196]
were, among such confusions as I saw them in, in any condition to keep
an exact account.

But to return to my travelers. Here they were only examined, and, as
they seemed rather coming from the country than from the city, they
found the people easier with them; that they talked to them, let them
come into a public house where the constable and his warders were, and
gave them drink and some victuals, which greatly refreshed and
encouraged them. And here it came into their heads to say, when they
should be inquired of afterwards, not that they came from London, but
that they came out of Essex.

To forward this little fraud, they obtained so much favor of the
constable at Oldford as to give them a certificate of their passing from
Essex through that village, and that they had not been at London; which,
though false in the common acceptation of London in the country, yet was
literally true, Wapping or Ratcliff being no part either of the city or
liberty.

This certificate, directed to the next constable, that was at Homerton,
one of the hamlets of the parish of Hackney, was so serviceable to them,
that it procured them, not a free passage there only, but a full
certificate of health from a justice of the peace, who, upon the
constable's application, granted it without much difficulty. And thus
they passed through the long divided town of Hackney (for it lay then in
several separated hamlets), and traveled on till they came into the
great north road, on the top of Stamford Hill.

By this time they began to weary; and so, in the back road from Hackney,
a little before it opened into the said great road, they resolved to set
up their tent, and encamp for the first night; which they did
accordingly, with this addition: that, finding a barn, or a building
like a barn, and first searching as well as they could to be sure there
was nobody in it, they set up their tent with the head of it against the
barn. This they did also because the wind blew that night very high, and
they were but young at such a way of lodging, as well as at the managing
their tent.

Here they went to sleep; but the joiner, a grave and sober man, and not
pleased with their lying at this loose rate the first night, could not
sleep, and resolved, after trying it to no purpose, that he would get
out, and, taking the gun in his hand, stand sentinel, and guard his
companions. So, with the gun in his hand, he walked to and again before
the barn; for that stood in the field near the road, but within the
hedge. He had not been long upon the scout, but he heard a noise of
people coming on as if it had been a great number; and they came on, as
he thought, directly towards the barn. He did not presently awake his
companions, but in a few minutes more, their noise growing louder and
louder, the biscuit baker called to him and asked him what was the
matter, and quickly started out too. The other being the lame sailmaker,
and most weary, lay still in the tent.

As they expected, so the people whom they had heard came on directly to
the barn, when one of our travelers challenged, like soldiers upon the
guard, with, "Who comes there?" The people did not answer immediately;
but one of them speaking to another that was behind them, "Alas, alas!
we are all disappointed," says he; "here are some people before us; the
barn is taken up."

They all stopped upon that, as under some surprise; and it seems there
were about thirteen of them in all, and some women among them. They
consulted together what they should do; and by their discourse, our
travelers soon found they were poor distressed people too, like
themselves, seeking shelter and safety; and besides, our travelers had
no need to be afraid of their coming up to disturb them, for as soon as
they heard the words, "Who comes there?" they could hear the women say,
as if frighted, "Do not go near them; how do you know but they may have
the plague?" And when one of the men said, "Let us but speak to them,"
the women said, "No, don't, by any means; we have escaped thus far by
the goodness of God; do not let us run into danger now, we beseech you."

Our travelers found by this that they were a good sober sort of people,
and flying for their lives as they were; and as they were encouraged by
it, so John said to the joiner, his comrade, "Let us encourage them
