upon me, that for thy pleasure I should give freedom to thy son?"

"My lord, my lord, 'tis for thine own sake, for his, thy child as well
as mine, I do beseech, implore thy mercy? draw not the curse of heaven
on thy heart by exposing him to death. Thou wilt know and feel him as
indeed thy child when he lies bleeding before thee, when thine own hand
hath forged the death-bolt, and then, then it will be too late; thou
wilt yearn for his voice in vain. Oh! is it not sufficient triumph to
have in thy power the wife who hath dared thy authority, who hath joined
the patriot band, and so drawn down on her the vengeance of Edward? The
price of a traitor is set upon her head. My lord, my lord, is not one
victim enough--will not my capture insure thee reward and honor in the
court of Edward? Then do with me what thou wilt--chains, torture, death;
but my child, my brave boy--oh, if thou hast one spark of mercy in thy
heart, let him go!"

"Mother," hoarsely murmured Alan, as he strove to raise her from her
suppliant posture, "mother, this shall not be! look upon that face and
know thou pleadest in vain. I will not accept my freedom at such a
price; thy knee, thy supplications unto a heart of stone, for me! No,
no; mother, dear mother, we will die together!"

"Thou shalt not, thou shalt not, my beloved, my beautiful! thy death
will be on my head, though it come from a father's hand. I will plead, I
will be heard! My lord, my lord," she continued, wrought to a pitch of
agonized feeling, no heart save that to which she pleaded could have
heard unmoved, "I ask but his freedom, the freedom of a boy, a
child--and of whom do I ask it?--of his father, his own father! Speak to
me, answer me; thou canst not be so lost to the voice, the feelings of
nature. For the sake of the mother who loved, the father who blessed
_thee_, whose blessing hallowed our union and smiled on our infant boy,
have mercy on me, on thyself--let him, oh, let him be free!"

"Mercy on thee, thou false and perjured woman!" the earl burst forth,
the cold sarcastic expression with which he had at first listened to her
impassioned entreaties giving way to the fearful index of ungoverned
rage; "on thee, thou false traitress, not alone to thy husband's
principles but to his honor! Do I not know thee, minion--do I not know
the motives of thy conduct in leaving thy husband's castle for the court
of Bruce? Patriotism, forsooth--patriotism, ha! the patriotism that had
vent in giving and receiving love from him; it was so easy to do homage
to him in public as thy king. Oh, most rare and immaculate specimen of
female loyalty and virtue, I know thee well!"

"Man!" answered the countess, springing from her knee, and standing
before him with a mien and countenance of such majestic dignity, that
for a brief moment it awed even him, and her bewildered son gazed at her
with emotions of awe, struggling with surprise.

"Ha! faithless minion, thou bravest it well," continued Buchan,
determined on evincing no faltering in his purpose, "but thou bravest it
in vain; dishonored thou art, and hast been, aye, from the time thy
minion Robert visited thee in Buchan Tower, and lingered with thee the
months he had disappeared from Edward's court. Would Isabella of Buchan
have rendered homage to any other bold usurper, save her minion Robert?
Would the murder of a Comyn have passed unavenged by her had the
murderer been other than her gallant Bruce? Would Isabella of Buchan be
here, the only female in the Bruce's train--for I know that he is with
thee--were loyalty and patriotism her only motive? Woman, I know thee! I
know that thou didst love him, ere that false hand and falser heart were
given to me; thy lips spoke perfidy when they vowed allegiance at the
altar; and shall I have mercy on thy son, for such as thee? Mercy! ha,
have I silenced thy eloquence now?"

"Silenced, false, blasphemous villain!" vociferated Alan, every other
feeling lost in the whirlwind of passion, and springing on the earl,
with his drawn sword. "'Tis thou who art the false and faithless--thou
who art lost to every feeling of honor and of truth. Thy words are false
as hell, from whence they spring!"

"Alan, by the love thou bearest me, I charge thee put up thy sword--it
is thy father!" exclaimed, the countess, commandingly, and speaking the
last word in a tone that thrilled to the boy's heart. He checked himself
in his full career; he snapped his drawn sword in twain, he cast it
passionately from him, and uttering, convulsively, "Oh God, oh God, my
father!" flung himself in agony on the ground. With arms folded and the
smile of a demon on his lip the earl had awaited his attack, but there
was disappointment within, for his foul charge had failed in its
intended effect. Prouder, colder, more commandingly erect had become the
mein of the countess as he spoke, till she even appeared to increase in
stature; her flashing eyes had never moved from his face, till his fell
beneath them; her lip had curled, his cheek had flushed: powerful indeed
became the contrast between the accused and the accuser.

"Arise, my son," she said, "arise and look upon thy mother; her brow
even as her heart is unstained with shame; she fears not to meet the
glance of her child. Look up, my boy; I speak these words to _thee_, not
to that bold, bad man, who hath dared unite the name of a daughter of
Fife with shame. He hath no word either of exculpation, denial, or
assent from me. But to thee, my child, my young, my innocent child,
thee, whose ear, when removed from me, they may strive to poison with
false tales, woven with such skill that hadst thou not thy mother's
word, should win thee to belief--to thee I say, look on me, Alan--is
this a brow of guilt?"

"No, no, no, I will not look on thee, my mother! I need not to gaze on
thee to know the horrid falsity of the charge," answered Alan, flinging
his arms passionately around his mother. "Did I never see thee more,
never list that voice again, and did all the fiends of hell come around
me with their lies, I would not hear, much less believe such charge. No,
no! oh God, 'tis my father, speaks it! Father--and my hand is powerless
to avenge."

"I need not vengeance, my beloved; grieve not, weep not that thy hand is
chained, and may not defend thy mother's stainless name; I need it not.
My heart is known unto my God, my innocence to thee; his blessing rest
with thee, my beautiful, and give thee strength for all thou mayest
endure."

She bent down to kiss his brow, which was damp with the dew of intense
anguish. He started up, he gave one long look on her calm and noble
face, and then he flung himself in her arms, and sobbed like a child on
her bosom. It was a fearful moment for that woman heart; had she been
alone with her child, both nerve and spirit must have given way, but
fortunately, perhaps, for the preservation of her fortitude, the Earl of
Buchan was still the witness of that scene, triumphing in the sufferings
he had caused. The countess did indeed fold her boy convulsively to her
breast, but she did not bend her head on his, as Nature prompted; it was
still erect; her mien majestic still, and but a slight quivering in her
beautiful lip betrayed emotion.

"Be firm; be thy noble self," she said. "Forget not thou art a knight
and soldier amid the patriots of Scotland. And now a while, farewell."

She extricated herself with some difficulty from his embrace; she paused
not to gaze again upon the posture of overwhelming despondency in which
he had sunk, but with a step quick and firm advanced to the door.

"Whither goest thou, madam?" demanded the earl fiercely. "Bold as thou
art, it is well to know thou art a prisoner, accused of high treason
against King Edward."

"I need not your lordship's voice to give me such information," she
answered, proudly. "Methinks these armed followers are all-sufficient
evidence. Guard me, aye, confine me with fetters an thou wilt, but in
thy presence thou canst not force me to abide."

"Bid a last farewell to thy son, then, proud minion," he replied, with
fiendish malignity; "for an ye part now, it is forever. Ye see him not
again."

"Then be it so," she rejoined; "we shall meet where falsehood and
malignant hate can never harm us more," and with a gesture of dignity,
more irritating to the earl than the fiercest demonstration of passion,
she passed the threshold. A sign from Buchan surrounded her with guards,
and by them she was conducted to a smaller apartment, which was first
carefully examined as to any concealed means of escape, and then she was
left alone, a strong guard stationed at the door.

The first few minutes after the disappearance of the countess were
passed by her husband in rapidly striding up and down the room, by her
son, in the same posture of mute and motionless anguish in which she had
left him. There is no need to define that suffering, his peculiar
situation is all-sufficient to explain it. Hurriedly securing the door
from all intruders, the earl at length approached his son.

"Wouldst thou be free?" he said, abruptly. "Methinks thou art young
enough still to love liberty better than chains, and perchance death.
Speak, I tell thee; wouldst thou be free?"

"Free!" answered Alan, raising his head, with flashing eye and burning
cheek; "would I be free? Ask of the chained lion, the caged bird, and
they will tell thee the greenwood and forest glade are better, dearer,
even though the chain were gemmed, the prison gilded. Would I be free?
Thou knowest that I would."

"Swear, then, that thou wilt quit Scotland, and vow fealty to Edward;
that never more will thy sword be raised save against the contemned and
hated Bruce. Be faithful but to me and to King Edward, and thou shalt be
free."

"Never!" answered Alan, proudly. "Earl of Buchan, I accept no conditions
with my freedom; I will not be free, if only on this base condition.
Turn recreant and traitor to my country and my king! resign the precious
privilege of _dying_, if I may not _live_, for Scotland--I tell thee,
never! Urge me no more."

"Nay, thou art but a boy, a foolish boy," continued the earl, struggling
to speak persuadingly, "incapable of judging that which is right and
best. I tell thee, I will give thee not freedom alone, but honor,
station, wealth; I will acknowledge thee as my well-beloved son and
heir; I will forget all that is past; nay, not e'en thy will or actions
will I restrain; I will bind thee by no vow; thou shalt take no part
with Edward; I will interfere not with thy peculiar politics; e'en what
thou wilt thou shalt do, aye, and have--and all this but on one
condition, so slight and simple that thou art worse than fool an thou
refusest."

"Speak on," muttered Alan, without raising his head. "I hear."

"Give me but information of the movements of him thou callest king,"
replied Buchan, in a low yet emphatically distinct voice; "give me but a
hint as to where we may meet him in combat--in all honorable and
knightly combat, thou knowest that I mean--give me but information such
as this, and thou art free, unshackled, in condition as in limb."

"In other words, _betray him,_" replied Alan, starting up. "Purchase my
freedom with the price of his! mine, of nothing worth, aye, less than
nothing, redeemed by his! Oh, shame, shame on thee, my lord! Well mayest
thou offer me freedom of action as in will on such condition. Of little
heed to Edward were the resistance of all Scotland, were Robert in his
power. Honor, station, wealth!--oh, knowest thou the human heart so
little as to believe these can exist with black treachery and fell
remorse? Once and forever, I tell thee thine offers are in vain. Were
death in one scale, and free, unshackled liberty in the other, and thou
badest me choose between, I would not so stain my soul. Death, death
itself were welcome, aye, worse than death--confinement, chains. I would
hug them to my heart as precious boons, rather than live and walk the
earth a traitor."

"Beware!" muttered the earl; "tempt me not too far, rash boy. I would
not do thee ill; I would have pity on thy erring youth, remembering the
evil counsels, the base heart which hath guided thee."

"Do thou beware!" retorted Alan, fiercely. "Speak not such foul words to
me. Father, as I know thou art in blood, there are ties far stronger
which bind me to my mother--ties, neglect, forgetfulness, indifference
as thine can never know. Pity, aye, mercy's self, I scorn them, for I
need them not."

"Ha! sayest thou so; then I swear thou shalt not have them!" exclaimed
the earl, rage again obtaining the ascendant. "I would have saved thee;
I would have given thee freedom, though I needed not the condition that
I offered. Thinkest thou I do not know that the traitor Bruce and his
followers will return hither, and fall into the net prepared? thinkest
thou I know not he is with thee, aye, that he would not have left his
patriot countess thus slightly guarded, an he hoped not to return
himself? He cannot escape me--the murder of Sir John Comyn will be
avenged."

"He shall, he will escape thee, proud earl," undauntedly returned Alan.
"The savior of his wretched country will not be forced to bow before
such as thee; he will be saved out of the net prepared--harassed,
chased, encompassed as he is. I tell thee, Earl of Buchan, he will
escape thee yet."

"Then, by heaven, thy head shall fall for his!" fiercely replied the
earl. "If he return not, he has been forewarned, prepared, and I, fool
as I was, have thought not of this danger. Look to it, proud boy, if the
Bruce return not forty-eight hours hence, and thou art still silent,
thou diest."

He held up his clenched hand in a threatening attitude, but Alan neither
moved nor spoke, firmly returning the earl's infuriated gaze till the
door closed on his father's retreating form. He heard the bolts drawn,
the heavy tramp of the guard, and then he threw himself on the couch,
and buried his face in his hands.




CHAPTER XV.


While these fearful scenes were passing in the hunting-lodge, Malcolm,
the young page already mentioned, had contrived to elude the vigilance
of the earl's numerous followers, and reach the brow of the hollow in
perfect safety. Endowed with a sense and spirit above his years, and
inspired by his devoted attachment to the countess and Sir Alan, the boy
did not merely think of his own personal security, and of the simple act
of warning the king against the treachery which awaited his return, but,
with an eye and mind well practised in intelligent observation, he
scanned the numbers, character, and peculiar situation of the foes which
had so unexpectedly come upon them. Being peculiarly small and light in
figure, and completely clothed in a dark green tunic and hose, which was
scarcely discernible from the trees and shrubs around, he stole, in and
out every brake and hollow, clambering lightly and noiselessly over
crags, hanging like a broken branch from stunted trees, leaping with the
elasticity of a youthful fawn over stream and shrub, and thus obtained a
true and exact idea of the matter he desired. The boy's heart did indeed
sink as he felt rescue would be utterly impossible; that in one
direction the English force extended nearly a mile, guarding every
avenue, every hollow in the forest, till it seemed next to impossible
King Robert could escape, even if forewarned. Wherever he turned his
steps the enemy appeared to lurk, but he wavered not in his purpose.
Aware of the direction which the king would take in returning, Malcolm
slackened not his speed until some three hours after he had quitted the
hollow, and he stood before his sovereign well-nigh too exhausted for
the utterance of his tale.

The first impulse of the king and his true-hearted followers was to dare
all danger, and rescue the countess and her brave son at the expense of
their lives; but Malcolm, flinging himself at the feet of Robert,
adjured him, in the name of the countess, to remember and act upon the
vow he had so solemnly pledged at parting. He earnestly and emphatically
repeated the last injunctions of his lady, her deep anguish that the
king, the savior of Scotland, should hazard all for her and her
child--better they should die than Robert; but these entreaties were but
anguish to the noble spirit who heard, aye, and felt their truth, though
abide by them he could not. Again and again he questioned and
cross-questioned as to their numbers and their strength, but Malcolm
never wavered from his first account; clearly and concisely he gave
every required information, and with bleeding hearts that little band of
patriots felt they dared not hope to rescue and to conquer. Yet tacitly
to assent to necessity, to retreat without one blow, to leave their
faithful companions to death, without one stroke for vengeance at least,
if not for relief, this should not be.

"We will see with our own eyes, hear with our own ears, at least, my
friends," King Robert said. "Is there one among ye would retreat, from,
the narrative of a child, true as it may be? Remember the pass in
Argyle; if necessary, your sovereign can protect your retreat now as
then, and we shall at least feel we have struggled to rescue, striven
for the mastery, even if it be in vain. Were my death, aye, the death of
Scotland the forfeit, I could not so stain my knightly fame by such
retreat. Let but the morning dawn, and we will ourselves mark the
strength of our foes."

There was not one dissenting voice, rash as his determination might
appear. The extraordinary skill and courage of their sovereign,
displayed in so many instances during their perilous wanderings, were
too fresh in their memories to permit of one doubt, one fear, even had
he led them on to certain death. To throw themselves from their tired
chargers, to give them food, to lie down themselves for a brief repose
on the turf, that they might be strengthened and cheered for the work of
the morning, all this did not occupy much time; and if their slumbers
were brief and troubled, it did not prevent their rising with, alacrity
at the first peep of day to polish their arms, look to the sharpening of
their swords and spears, share the rude huntsman's meal, and mount and
ride with the first signal of their king.

But bold and brave as were these true-hearted men, successful as,
comparatively speaking, they were in the numberless skirmishes which
took place that day, darkness overtook them, with increase of glory
indeed, but no nearer the accomplishment of their object than they had
been in the morning.

With bitter sorrow King Robert had perceived the full confirmation of
the page's words. The early close of the night attendant on the autumn
season was also unfavorable to his views; the events of the day had
fully convinced him that many an ambush was set in his path, that his
personal safety was wholly incompatible with a night attack, and
therefore he was compelled to remain on the defensive in one spot, which
was fortunately barricaded and concealed by Nature, during the many long
and weary hours forming an October night. Yet still the following day
beheld him struggling on, in the face alike of disappointment, defeat,
and danger the most imminent; still seeking the same object, still
hoping against hope, and retreating only because the welfare of his
country, of her unfortunate children, depended upon him; bands more and
more numerous pressed upon him, coming from every side, that scarcely
was one skilfully eluded ere he had to struggle against another. Nothing
but the most consummate skill, the most patient courage, and coolest
address could have extricated him from the fearful dangers which
encompassed him. Again did his followers believe he bore a charmed life,
for not only did he deal destruction, unhurt himself, but after three
days almost incessant fighting and fatigue, he had brought them to a
place of safety, with but the loss of five-and-twenty men.

But though painfully conscious that further efforts for the rescue of
his friends were completely useless, King Robert could not rest
satisfied without some more accurate knowledge of their fate, and after
some hurried yet anxious consultation. Sir James Douglas, with that
daring which so marked his simplest action, declared that at all risks
he would seek some tidings that would end their anxiety. In the disguise
of a peasant he would be secure from all discovery, he said; and he had
not the slightest fear as to the success of the adventure. Five others
started up as he spoke entreating permission to take the same disguise
and accompany him. It was granted; King Robert advising them, however,
to adopt a diversity of costume, and keep each one apart as they
approached inhabited districts, as their numbers might excite suspicion,
even though the actual disguise was complete. With arms concealed
beneath their various disguises, they departed that same evening,
engaging to meet the king at the base of Ben-Cruchan, some miles more
south than their present trysting. It was an anxious parting, and yet
more when they were actually gone; for the high spirit and vein of humor
which characterized the young Lord Douglas had power to cheer his
friends even in the most painful moments. King Robert, indeed, exerted
himself, but this last stroke had been a heavy one; knowing so well the
character of Edward, he trembled both for the countess and her noble
son, perhaps less for the latter than the former, for he hoped and
believed the Earl of Buchan, if indeed he were their captor, would at
least have some mercy on his son, but for the countess he knew that
there was no hope. The character, the sentiments of the earl had been
noticed by the Bruce when both were at the court of Edward, and he felt
and knew that any excuse to rid him of a wife whose virtues were
obnoxious to him would be acted on with joy. And here, perhaps, it may
be well to say a few words as to the real nature of King Robert's
sentiments towards Isabella of Buchan, as from the anxiety her detention
occasioned they may be so easily misunderstood.

We have performed our task but ill if our readers have imagined aught
but the most purely noble, most chivalric sentiments actuated the heart
of the king. Whatever might have been the nature of those sentiments in
earlier days, since his marriage with the daughter of the Earl of Mar
they had never entered his soul.

He had always believed the Lady Isabella's union with Lord John Comyn
was one of choice, not of necessity, nor did his visit to her after the
battle of Falkirk recall any former feeling. His mind had been under the
heavy pressure of that self-reproach which the impressive words of
Wallace had first awakened; the wretched state of his country, the
tyranny of Edward, occupied the mind of the man in which the emotions of
the boy had merged. He was, too, a husband and a father; and he was, as
his fond wife so trustingly believed, too nobly honorable to entertain
one thought to her dishonor. He looked on Isabella of Buchan as one
indeed demanding his utmost esteem and gratitude, his most faithful
friendship, and he secretly vowed that she should have it; but these
emotions took not their coloring from the past, they were excited simply
by her high-minded devotion to the cause of her country, her unshrinking
patriotism, her noble qualities, alike as a mother, subject, friend. He
felt but as one noble spirit ever feels for a kindred essence,
heightened perhaps by the dissimilarity of sex, but aught of love, even
in its faintest shadow, aught of dishonorable feelings towards her or
his own wife never entered his wildest dream. It was the recollection of
her unwavering loyalty, of the supporting kindness she had ever shown
his queen, which occasioned his bitter sorrow at her detention by the
foe; it was the dread that the cruel wrath of Edward would indeed
condemn her to death for the active part she had taken in his
coronation; the conviction, so agonizing to a mind like his, that he had
no power to rescue and avenge; the fearful foreboding that thus would
all his faithful friends fall from him--this, only this, would be the
reward of all who served and loved him; and even while still, with
undaunted firmness, cheering the spirits of his adherents, speaking hope
to them, his own inward soul was tortured with doubts as to the wisdom
of his resistance, lingering regrets for the fate of those of his
friends already lost to him, and painful fears for the final doom of
those who yet remained.

It was in such moments of despondency that remorse, too, ever gained
dominion, and heightened his inward struggles. Robert's hand was not
framed for blood; his whole soul revolted from the bitter remembrance of
that fatal act of passion which had stained his first rising. He would
have given worlds, if he had had them, to have recalled that deed. Busy
fancy represented a hundred ways of punishing treachery other than that
which his fury had adopted; and this remembrance ever increased the
anguish with which he regarded the fate of his friends. His lot was
indeed as yet one of unexampled suffering, borne by heroism as great as
unequalled but the lustre of the latter too frequently dazzles the mind,
and prevents the full meed of glory being obtained. His heroism is known
to all, his sufferings to but a few; but perhaps it was the latter yet
more than the former which gave to Scotland the glory and honor she
acquired in his reign. Heroism is scarce separable from ambition, but to
mere ambition, the voice of suffering is seldom heard. Heroism dazzles
the crowd, suffering purifies the man. If Robert the Bruce were
ambitious, the passion in him assumed a nobler and better form; yet we
can scarcely call that ambition which sought but the delivery of
Scotland from chains, but the regaining an ancient heritage, and sought
no more. It was patriotism hallowed by suffering, purified by adversity;
patriotism the noblest, purest which ever entered the heart of man.

King Robert and his handful of followers not only reached their
trysting-place themselves, but were joined by the queen, and many of her
female companions and their attendant warriors, ere Lord James of
Douglas returned; three of his companions had straggled in, one by one,
with various accounts, but none so satisfactory as the king desired, and
he believed with justice, that Douglas lingered to bring, if not
satisfactory (for that, alas! could not be) yet accurate intelligence.
If aught could have comforted Agnes in these moments of agonized
suspense, it would have been not alone the redoubled affection of her
Nigel, but the soothing kindness, the love and sympathy of a father,
which was lavished on her by King Robert; nay, each of those rude
warriors softened in address and tone, as they looked on and spoke to
that fair, fragile being, whom they feared now stood alone. She did not
weep when other eyes than those of Nigel, or the Lady Campbell, or the
gentle Isoline were on her, but that deadly pallor, that quivering lip,
and heavy eye spoke all that she endured.

A large cavern, divided by Nature into many compartments, was now the
temporary shelter of the king and his friends. It was situated at the
base of Ben-Cruchan, which, though at the entrance of the territories of
Lorn, was now comparatively secure, the foe imagining the Bruce still
amidst the mountains of Aberdeenshire.

The evening meal was spread; a huge fire blazing in the stony cavity
removed all appearance of damp or discomfort, and shed a warm, ruddy
light on the groups within. It was a rude home for the King of Scotland
and his court, yet neither murmuring nor despondency was marked on the
bold brows of the warriors, or the gentler and paler features of their
faithful companions; their frames, indeed, showed the effect of
wandering and anxiety; many an eye which had been bright was sunken,
many a blooming cheek was paled; but the lip yet smiled, the voice had
yet its gleesome tones to soothe and cheer their warrior friends; the
eager wish to prepare the couch and dress the simple meal, to perform
those many little offices of love and kindness so peculiarly a woman's,
and engaged in with a zest, a skill which was intuitive, for there had
been a time, and one not far distant, when those high-born females
little dreamed such household deeds would be their occupation.

Brightly and beautifully shone forth conjugal and filial love in those
wandering hours; the wife, the child, the sister bound themselves yet
closer to the warrior husband, father, brother, which claimed them his.
Yet sweet, most sweet as were those acts of love, there were anxious and
loving hearts which felt that soon, too soon, they must part from them,
they must persuade those gentle ones to accede to a temporary
separation--they could not, they would not expose them to the snows and
killing frosts of a Scottish winter.
