found what he sought, and he did not wish to have further cause of
offence with Martin Alonso until their Highnesses should know the news of
the voyage and what had been done. Afterwards he says, "I will not suffer
the deeds of evil-disposed persons, with little worth, who, without
respect for him to whom they owe their positions, presume to set up their
own wills with little ceremony."


_Thursday, 10th of January_

He departed from the place where he had anchored, and at sunset he
reached a river, to which he gave the name of Rio de Gracia, three
leagues to the S.E. He came to at the mouth,[219-1] where there is good
anchorage on the east side. There is a bar with no more than two fathoms
of water, and very narrow across the entrance. It is a good and
well-sheltered port, except that there are many shipworms,[219-2] owing
to which the caravel _Pinta_, under Martin Alonso, received a good deal
of damage. He had been here bartering for 16 days, and got much gold,
which was what Martin Alonso wanted. As soon as he heard from the Indians
that the Admiral was on the coast of the same island of Espanola, and
that he could not avoid him, Pinzon came to him. He wanted all the people
of the ship to swear that he had not been there more than six days. But
his treachery was so public that it could not be concealed. He had made a
law that half of all the gold that was collected was his. When he left
this port he took four men and two girls by force. But the Admiral
ordered that they should be clothed and put on shore to return to their
homes. "This," the Admiral says, "is a service of your Highnesses. For
all the men and women are subjects of your Highnesses, as well in this
island as in the others. Here, where your Highnesses already have a
settlement, the people ought to be treated with honor and favor, seeing
that this island has so much gold and such good spice-yielding lands."


_Friday, 11th of January_

At midnight the Admiral left the Rio de Gracia with the land-breeze, and
steered eastward until he came to a cape named Belprado, at a distance
of four leagues. To the S.E. is the mountain to which he gave the name of
Monte de Plata,[220-1] eight leagues distant. Thence from the cape
Belprado to E.S.E. is the point named Angel, eighteen leagues distant;
and from this point to the Monte de Plata there is a gulf, with the most
beautiful lands in the world, all high and fine lands which extend far
inland. Beyond there is a range of high mountains running east and west,
very grand and beautiful. At the foot of this mountain there is a very
good port,[220-2] with 14 fathoms in the entrance. The mountain is very
high and beautiful, and all the country is well peopled. The Admiral
believed there must be fine rivers and much gold. At a distance of 4
leagues E.S.E. of Cabo del Angel there is a cape named Punta del
Hierro,[220-3] and on the same course, 4 more leagues, a point is reached
named Punta Seca.[220-4] Thence, 6 leagues further on, is Cabo
Redondo,[220-5] and further on Cabo Frances, where a large bay[220-6] is
formed, but there did not appear to be anchorage in it. A league further
on is Cabo del Buen Tiempo, and thence, a good league S.S.E., is Cabo
Tajado.[220-7] Thence, to the south, another cape was sighted at a
distance of about 15 leagues. To-day great progress was made, as wind and
tide were favorable. The Admiral did not venture to anchor for fear of
the rocks, so he was hove-to all night.


_Saturday, 12th of January_

Towards dawn the Admiral filled and shaped a course to the east with a
fresh wind, running 20 miles before daylight, and in two hours
afterwards 24 miles. Thence he saw land to the south,[221-1] and steered
towards it, distant 48 miles. During the night he must have run 28 miles
N.N.E., to keep the vessels out of danger. When he saw the land, he named
one cape that he saw Cabo de Padre y Hijo, because at the east point
there are two rocks, one larger than the other.[221-2] Afterwards, at two
leagues to the eastward, he saw a very fine bay between two grand
mountains. He saw that it was a very large port with a very good
approach; but, as it was very early in the morning, and as the greater
part of the time it was blowing from the east, and then they had a N.N.W.
breeze, he did not wish to delay any more. He continued his course to the
east as far as a very high and beautiful cape, all of scarped rock, to
which he gave the name of Cabo del Enamorado,[221-3] which was 32 miles
to the east of the port named Puerto Sacro.[221-4] On rounding the cape,
another finer and loftier point came in sight,[221-5] like Cape St.
Vincent in Portugal, 12 miles east of Cabo del Enamorado. As soon as he
was abreast of the Cabo del Enamorado, the Admiral saw that there was a
great bay[221-6] between this and the next point, three leagues across,
and in the middle of it a small island.[221-7] The depth is great at the
entrance close to the land. He anchored here in twelve fathoms, and sent
the boat on shore for water, and to see if intercourse could be opened
with the natives, but they all fled. He also anchored to ascertain
whether this was all one land with the island of Espanola, and to make
sure that this was a gulf and not a channel, forming another island. He
remained astonished at the great size of Espanola.


_Sunday, 13th of January_

The Admiral did not leave the port, because there was no land-breeze with
which to go out. He wished to shift to another better port, because this
was rather exposed. He also wanted to wait, in that haven, the
conjunction of the sun and moon, which would take place on the 17th of
this month, and the opposition of the moon with Jupiter and conjunction
with Mercury, the sun being in opposition to Jupiter, which is the cause
of high winds. He sent the boat on shore to a beautiful beach to obtain
yams for food. They found some men with bows and arrows, with whom they
stopped to speak, buying two bows and many arrows from them. They asked
one of them to come on board the caravel and see the Admiral; who says
that he was very wanting in reverence, more so than any native he had yet
seen.[222-1] His face was all stained with charcoal,[222-2] but in all
parts there is the custom of painting the body different colors. He wore
his hair very long, brought together and fastened behind, and put into a
small net of parrots' feathers. He was naked, like all the others. The
Admiral supposed that he belonged to the Caribs, who eat men,[222-3] and
that the gulf he had seen yesterday formed this part of the land into an
island by itself. The Admiral asked about the Caribs, and he pointed to
the east, near at hand, which means that he saw the Admiral yesterday
before he entered the bay. The Indian said there was much gold to the
east, pointing to the poop of the caravel, which was a good size, meaning
that there were pieces as large. He called gold _tuob_, and did not
understand _caona_, as they call it in the first part of the island that
was visited, nor _nozay_, the name in San Salvador and the other islands.
Copper or a base gold is called _tuob_ in Espanola.[223-1] Of the island
of Matinino this Indian said that it was peopled by women without
men,[223-2] and that in it there was much _tuob_, which is gold or
copper, and that it is more to the east of Carib.[223-3] He also spoke of
the island of Goanin,[223-4] where there was much _tuob_. The Admiral
says that he had received notices of these islands from many persons;
that in the other islands the natives were in great fear of the Caribs,
called by some of them Caniba, but in Espanola Carib. He thought they
must be an audacious race, for they go to all these islands and eat the
people they can capture. He understood a few words, and the Indians who
were on board comprehended more, there being a difference in the
languages owing to the great distance between the various islands. The
Admiral ordered that the Indian should be fed, and given pieces of green
and red cloth, and glass beads, which they like very much, and then sent
on shore. He was told to bring gold if he had any, and it was believed
that he had, from some small things he brought with him. When the boat
reached the shore there were fifty-five men behind the trees, naked, and
with very long hair, as the women wear it in Castile. Behind the head
they wore plumes of feathers of parrots and other birds, and each man
carried a bow. The Indian landed, and signed to the others to put down
their bows and arrows, and a piece of a staff, which is like...,[223-5]
very heavy, carried instead of a sword.[224-1] As soon as they came to
the boat the crew landed, and began to buy the bows and arrows and other
arms, in accordance with an order of the Admiral. Having sold two bows,
they did not want to give more, but began to attack the Spaniards, and to
take hold of them. They were running back to pick up their bows and
arrows where they had laid them aside, and took cords in their hands to
bind the boat's crew. Seeing them rushing down, and being prepared--for
the Admiral always warned them to be on their guard--the Spaniards
attacked the Indians, and gave one a slash with a knife in the buttocks,
wounding another in the breast with an arrow. Seeing that they could gain
little, although the Christians were only seven and they numbered over
fifty, they fled, so that none were left, throwing bows and arrows
away.[224-2] The Christians would have killed many, if the pilot, who was
in command, had not prevented them. The Spaniards presently returned to
the caravel with the boat. The Admiral regretted the affair for one
reason, and was pleased for another. They would have fear of the
Christians, and they were no doubt an ill-conditioned people, probably
Caribs, who eat men. But the Admiral felt alarm lest they should do some
harm to the 39 men left in the fortress and town of Navidad, in the event
of their coming here in their boat. Even if they are not Caribs, they are
a neighboring people, with similar habits, and fearless, unlike the other
inhabitants of the island, who are timid, and without arms. The Admiral
says all this, and adds that he would have liked to have captured some of
them. He says that they lighted many smoke signals, as is the custom in
this island of Espanola.


_Monday, 14th of January_

This evening the Admiral wished to find the houses of the Indians and to
capture some of them, believing them to be Caribs. For, owing to the
strong east and north-east winds and the heavy sea, he had remained
during the day. Many Indians were seen on shore. The Admiral, therefore,
ordered the boat to be sent on shore, with the crew well armed. Presently
the Indians came to the stern of the boat, including the man who had been
on board the day before, and had received presents from the Admiral. With
him there came a king, who had given to the said Indian some beads in
token of safety and peace for the boat's crew. This king, with three of
his followers, went on board the boat and came to the caravel. The
Admiral ordered them to be given biscuit and treacle to eat, and gave the
chief a red cap, some beads, and a piece of red cloth. The others were
also given pieces of cloth. The chief said that next day he would bring a
mask made of gold, affirming that there was much here, and in
Carib[225-1] and Matinino.[225-2] They afterwards went on shore well
satisfied.

The Admiral here says that the caravels were making much water, which
entered by the keel; and he complains of the caulkers at Palos, who
caulked the vessels very badly, and ran away when they saw that the
Admiral had detected the badness of their work, and intended to oblige
them to repair the defect. But, notwithstanding that the caravels were
making much water, he trusted in the favor and mercy of our Lord, for his
high Majesty well knew how much controversy there was before the
expedition could be despatched from Castile, that no one was in the
Admiral's favor save Him alone who knew his heart, and after God came
your Highnesses, while all others were against him without any reason. He
further says: "And this has been the cause that the royal crown of your
Highnesses has not a hundred millions of revenue more than after I
entered your service, which is seven years ago in this very month, the
20th of January.[226-1] The increase will take place from now onwards.
For the almighty God will remedy all things,"[226-2] These are his words.


_Tuesday, 15th of January_

The Admiral now wished to depart, for there was nothing to be gained by
further delay, after these occurrences and the tumult with the Indians.
To-day he had heard that all the gold was in the district of the town of
Navidad, belonging to their Highnesses; and that in the island of
Carib[226-3] there was much copper, as well as in Matinino. The
intercourse at Carib would, however, be difficult, because the natives
are said to eat human flesh. Their island would be in sight from thence,
and the Admiral determined to go there, as it was on the route, and
thence to Matinino, which was said to be entirely peopled by women,
without men.[226-4] He would thus see both islands, and might take some
of the natives. The Admiral sent the boat on shore, but the king of that
district had not come, for his village was distant. He, however, sent his
crown of gold, as he had promised; and many other natives came with
cotton, and bread made from yams, all with their bows and arrows. After
the bartering was finished, four youths came to the caravel. They
appeared to the Admiral to give such a clear account of the islands to
the eastward, on the same route as the Admiral would have to take, that
he determined to take them to Castile with him. He says that they had no
iron nor other metals; at least none was seen, but it was impossible to
know much of the land in so short a time, owing to the difficulty with
the language, which the Admiral could not understand except by guessing,
nor could they know what was said to them, in such a few days. The bows
of these people are as large as those of France or England. The arrows
are similar to the darts of the natives who have been met with
previously, which are made of young canes, which grow very straight, and
a yard and a half or two yards in length. They point them with a piece of
sharp wood, a span and a half long, and at the end some of them fix a
fish's tooth, but most of them anoint it with an herb.[227-1] They do not
shoot as in other parts, but in a certain way which cannot do much harm.
Here they have a great deal of fine and long cotton, and plenty of
mastic. The bows appeared to be of yew, and there is gold and copper.
There is also plenty of _aji_,[227-2] which is their pepper, which is
more valuable than pepper, and all the people eat nothing else, it being
very wholesome. Fifty caravels might be annually loaded with it from
Espanola. The Admiral says that he found a great deal of weed in this
bay, the same as was met with at sea when he came on this discovery. He
therefore supposed that there were islands to the eastward, in the
direction of the position where he began to meet with it; for he
considers it certain that this weed has its origin in shallow water near
the land, and, if this is the case, these Indies must be very near the
Canary Islands. For this reason he thought the distance must be less than
400 leagues.


_Wednesday, 16th of January_

They got under way three hours before daylight, and left the gulf,
which was named Golfo de las Flechas,[228-1] with the land-breeze.
Afterwards there was a west wind, which was fair to go to the island of
Carib on an E.N.E. course. This was where the people live of whom all
the natives of the other islands are so frightened, because they roam
over the sea in canoes without number, and eat the men they can
capture. The Admiral steered the course indicated by one of the four
Indians he took yesterday in the Puerto de las Flechas. After having
sailed about 64 miles, the Indians made signs that the island was to
the S.E.[228-2] The Admiral ordered the sails to be trimmed for that
course, but, after having proceeded on it for two leagues, the wind
freshened from a quarter which was very favorable for the voyage to
Spain. The Admiral had noticed that the crew were downhearted when he
deviated from the direct route home, reflecting that both caravels were
leaking badly, and that there was no help but in God. He therefore gave
up the course leading to the islands, and shaped a direct course for
Spain E.N.E. He sailed on this course, making 48 miles, which is 12
leagues, by sunset. The Indians said that by that route they would fall
in with the island of Matinino, peopled entirely by women without men,
and the Admiral wanted very much to take five or six of them to the
Sovereigns. But he doubted whether the Indians understood the route
well, and he could not afford to delay, by reason of the leaky
condition of the caravels. He, however, believed the story and that, at
certain seasons, men came to them from the island of Carib, distant ten
or twelve leagues. If males were born, they were sent to the island of
the men; and if females, they remained with their mothers.[229-1] The
Admiral says that these two islands cannot have been more than 15 or 20
leagues to the S.E. from where he altered course, the Indians not
understanding how to point out the direction. After losing sight of the
cape, which was named San Theramo,[229-2] which was left 16 leagues to
the west, they went for 12 leagues E.N.E. The weather was very fine.


_Thursday, 17th of January_

The wind went down at sunset yesterday, the caravels having sailed 14
glasses, each a little less than half-an-hour, at 4 miles an hour, making
28 miles. Afterwards the wind freshened, and they ran all that watch,
which was 10 glasses. Then another six until sunrise at 8 miles an hour,
thus making altogether 84 miles, equal to 21 leagues, to the E.N.E., and
until sunset 44 miles, or 11 leagues, to the east. Here a booby[229-3]
came to the caravel, and afterwards another. The Admiral saw a great deal
of gulf-weed.


_Friday, 18th of January_

During the night they steered E.S.E., with little wind, for 40 miles,
equal to 10 leagues, and then 30 miles, or 7-1/2 leagues, until sunrise.
All day they proceeded with little wind to E.N.E. and N.E. by E., more or
less, her head being sometimes north and at others N.N.E., and, counting
one with the other they made 60 miles, or 15 leagues. There was little
weed, but yesterday and to-day the sea appeared to be full of tunnies.
The Admiral believed that from there they must go to the tunny-fisheries
of the Duke, of Conil and Cadiz.[230-1] He also thought they were near
some islands, because a frigate-bird[230-2] flew round the caravel, and
afterwards went away to the S.S.E. He said that to the S.E. of the island
of Espanola were the islands of Carib, Matinino, and many others.


_Saturday, 19th of January_

During the night they made good 56 miles N.N.E., and 64 N.E. by N. After
sunrise they steered N.E. with the wind fresh from S.W., and afterwards
W.S.W. 84 miles, equal to 21 leagues. The sea was again full of small
tunnies. There were boobies, frigate-birds, and terns.[230-3]


_Sunday, 20th of January_

It was calm during the night, with occasional slants of wind, and they
only made 20 miles to the N.E. After sunrise they went 11 miles S.E., and
then 36 miles N.N.E., equal to 9 leagues. They saw an immense quantity of
small tunnies, the air very soft and pleasant, like Seville in April or
May, and the sea, for which God be given many thanks, always very
smooth. Frigate-birds, sandpipers,[231-1] and other birds were seen.


_Monday, 21st of January_

Yesterday, before sunset, they steered N.E. b. E., with the wind east, at
the rate of 8 miles an hour until midnight, equal to 56 miles. Afterwards
they steered N.N.E. 8 miles an hour, so that they made 104 miles, or 26
leagues, during the night N.E. by N. After sunrise they steered N.N.E.
with the same wind, which at times veered to N.E., and they made good 88
miles in the eleven hours of daylight, or 21 leagues: except one that was
lost by delay caused by closing with the _Pinta_ to communicate. The air
was colder, and it seemed to get colder as they went further north, and
also that the nights grew longer owing to the narrowing of the sphere.
Many _boatswain-birds_ and terns[231-2] were seen, as well as other birds
but not so many fish, perhaps owing to the water being colder. Much weed
was seen.


_Tuesday, 22nd of January_

Yesterday, after sunset, they steered N.N.E. with an east wind. They made
8 miles an hour during five glasses, and three before the watch began,
making eight glasses, equal to 72 miles, or 18 leagues. Afterwards they
went N.E. by N. for six glasses, which would be another 18 miles. Then,
during four glasses of the second watch N.E. at six miles an hour, or
three leagues. From that time to sunset, for eleven glasses, E.N.E. at 6
leagues an hour,[231-3] equal to seven leagues. Then E.N.E. until 11
o'clock, 32 miles. Then the wind fell, and they made no more during that
day. The Indians swam about. They saw boatswain-birds and much weed.


_Wednesday, 23rd of January_

To-night the wind was very changeable, but, making the allowances applied
by good sailors, they made 84 miles or 21 leagues, N.E. by N. Many times
the caravel _Nina_ had to wait for the _Pinta_, because she sailed badly
when on a bowline the mizzen being of little use owing to the weakness of
the mast. He says that if her captain, that is, Martin Alonso Pinzon, had
taken the precaution to provide her with a good mast in the Indies, where
there are so many and such excellent spars, instead of deserting his
commander from motives of avarice, he would have done better. They saw
many boatswain-birds and much weed. The heavens have been clouded over
during these last days, but there has been no rain. The sea has been as
smooth as a river, for which many thanks be given to God. After sunrise
they went free, and made 30 miles, or 7-1/2 leagues N.E. During the rest
of the day E.N.E. another 30 miles.


_Thursday, 24th of January_

They made 44 miles, or 11 leagues, during the night, allowing for many
changes in the wind, which was generally N.E. After sunrise until sunset
E.N.E. 14 leagues.


_Friday, 25th of January_

They steered during part of the night E.N.E. for 13 glasses, making 9-1/2
leagues. Then N.N.E. 6 miles. The wind fell, and during the day they only
made 28 miles E.N.E., or 7 leagues. The sailors killed a tunny and a very
large shark, which was very welcome, as they now had nothing but bread
and wine, and some yams from the Indies.


_Saturday, 26th of January_

This night they made 56 miles, or 14 leagues, E.S.E. After sunrise they
steered E.S.E., and sometimes S.E., making 40 miles up to 11 o'clock.
Afterwards they went on another tack, and then on a bowline, 24 miles, or
6 leagues, to the north, until night.


_Sunday, 27th of January_

Yesterday, after sunset, they steered N.E. and N.E. by N. at the rate of
five miles an hour, which in thirteen hours would be 65 miles, or 16-1/2
leagues. After sunrise they steered N.E. 24 miles, or 6 leagues, until
noon, and from that time until sunset 3 leagues E.N.E.


_Monday, 28th of January_

All night they steered E.N.E. 36 miles, or 9 leagues. After sunrise until
sunset E.N.E. 20 miles, or 5 leagues. The weather was temperate and
pleasant. They saw boatswain-birds, sandpipers,[233-1] and much weed.


_Tuesday, 29th of January_

They steered E.N.E. 39 miles, or 9-1/2 leagues, and during the whole day
8 leagues. The air was very pleasant, like April in Castile, the sea
smooth, and fish they call _dorados_[233-2] came on board.


_Wednesday, 30th of January_

All this night they made 6 leagues E.N.E., and in the day S.E. by S.
13-1/2 leagues. Boatswain-birds, much weed, and many tunnies.


_Thursday, 31st of January_

This night they steered N.E. by N. 30 miles, and afterwards N.E. 35
miles, or 16 leagues. From sunrise to night E.N.E. 13-1/2 leagues. They
saw boatswain-birds and terns.[1]


_Friday, 1st of February_

They made 16-1/2 leagues E.N.E. during the night, and went on the same
course during the day 29-1/4 leagues. The sea very smooth, thanks be to
God.


_Saturday, 2nd of February_

They made 40 miles, or 10 leagues, E.N.E. this night. In the daytime,
with the same wind aft, they went 7 miles an hour, so that in eleven
hours they had gone 77 miles, or 9-1/4 leagues. The sea was very smooth,
thanks be to God, and the air very soft. They saw the sea so covered with
weed that, if they had not known about it before, they would have been
fearful of sunken rocks. They saw terns.[234-1]


_Sunday, 3rd of February_

This night, the wind being aft and the sea very smooth, thanks be to God,
they made 29 leagues. The North Star appeared very high, as it does off
Cape St. Vincent. The Admiral was unable to take the altitude, either
with the astrolabe or with the quadrant, because the rolling caused by
the waves prevented it. That day he steered his course E.N.E., going 10
miles an hour, so that in eleven hours he made 27 leagues.


_Monday, 4th of February_

During the night the course was N.E. by E., going twelve miles an hour
part of the time, and the rest ten miles. Thus they made 130 miles, or 32
leagues and a half. The sky was very threatening and rainy, and it was
rather cold, by which they knew that they had not yet reached the Azores.
After sunrise the course was altered to east. During the whole day they
made 77 miles, or 19-1/4 leagues.


_Tuesday, 5th of February_

This night they steered east, and made 55 miles, or 13-1/2 leagues. In
the day they were going ten miles an hour, and in eleven hours made 110
miles, or 27-1/2 leagues. They saw sandpipers, and some small sticks, a
sign that they were near land.


_Wednesday, 6th of February_

They steered east during the night, going at the rate of eleven miles an
hour, so that in the thirteen hours of the night they made 143 miles, or
35-1/4 leagues. They saw many birds. In the day they went 14 miles an
hour, and made 154 miles, or 38-1/2 leagues; so that, including night and
day, they made 74 leagues, more or less. Vicente Anes[235-1] said that
they had left the island of Flores to the north and Madeira to the east.
Roldan[235-2] said that the island of Fayal, or San Gregorio, was to the
N.N.E. and Puerto Santo to east. There was much weed.


_Thursday, 7th of February_

This night they steered east, going ten miles an hour, so that in
thirteen hours they made 130 miles, or 32-1/2 leagues. In the daytime the
rate was eight miles an hour, in eleven hours 88 miles, or 22 leagues.
This morning the Admiral found himself 65 leagues south of the island of
Flores, and the pilot Pedro Alonso,[236-1] being further north, according
to his reckoning, passed between Terceira and Santa Maria to the east,
passing to windward of the island of Madeira, twelve leagues further
north. The sailors saw a new kind of weed, of which there is plenty in
the islands of the Azores.


_Friday, 8th of February_

They went three miles an hour to the eastward for some time during the
night, and afterwards E.S.E., going twelve miles an hour. From sunrise to
noon they made 27 miles, and the same distance from noon till sunset,
equal to 13 leagues S.S.E.


_Saturday, 9th of February_

For part of this night they went 3 leagues S.S.E., and afterwards S. by
E., then N.E. 5 leagues until ten o'clock in the forenoon, then 9 leagues
east until dark.


_Sunday, 10th of February_

From sunset they steered east all night, making 130 miles, or 32-1/2
leagues. During the day they went at the rate of nine miles an hour,
making 99 miles, or 24-1/2 leagues, in eleven hours.

In the caravel of the Admiral, Vicente Yanez and the two pilots, Sancho
Ruiz and Pedro Alonso Nino, and Roldan, charted or plotted the route.
They all made the position a good deal beyond the islands of the Azores
to the east, and, navigating to the north, none of them touched Santa
Maria, which is the last of all the Azores. They made the position five
leagues beyond it, and were in the vicinity of the islands of Madeira and
Puerto Santo. But the Admiral was very different from them in his
reckoning, finding the position very much in rear of theirs. This night
he found the island of Flores to the north, and to the east he made the
direction to be towards Nafe in Africa, passing to leeward of the island
of Madeira to the north ... leagues.[237-1] So that the pilots were
nearer to Castile than the Admiral by 150 leagues. The Admiral says that,
with the grace of God, when they reach the land they will find out whose
reckoning was most correct. He also says that he went 263 leagues from
the island of Hierro to the place where he first saw the gulf-weed.


_Monday, 11th of February_

This night they went twelve miles an hour on their course, and during the
day they ran 16-1/2 leagues. They saw many birds, from which they judged
that land was near.


_Tuesday, 12th of February_

They went six miles an hour on an east course during the night,
altogether 73 miles, or 18-1/4 leagues. At this time they began to
encounter bad weather with a heavy sea; and, if the caravel had not been
very well managed, she must have been lost. During the day they made 11
or 12 leagues with much difficulty and danger.


_Wednesday, 13th of February_

From sunset until daylight there was great trouble with the wind, and the
high and tempestuous sea. There was lightning three times to the
N.N.E.--a sign of a great storm coming either from that quarter or its
opposite. They were lying-to most of the night, afterwards showing a
little sail, and made 52 miles, which is 13 leagues. In the day the wind
moderated a little, but it soon increased again. The sea was terrific,
the waves crossing each other, and straining the vessels. They made 55
miles more, equal to 13-1/2 leagues.


_Thursday, 14th of February_

This night the wind increased, and the waves were terrible, rising
against each other, and so shaking and straining the vessel that she
could make no headway, and was in danger of being stove in. They carried
the mainsail very closely reefed, so as just to give her steerage-way,
and proceeded thus for three hours, making 20 miles. Meanwhile, the wind
and sea increased, and, seeing the great danger, the Admiral began to run
before it, there being nothing else to be done. The caravel _Pinta_ began
to run before the wind at the same time, and Martin Alonso ran her out of
sight,[238-1] although the Admiral kept showing lanterns all night, and
the other answered. It would seem that she could do no more, owing to the
force of the tempest, and she was taken far from the route of the
Admiral. He steered that night E.N.E., and made 54 miles, equal to 13
leagues. At sunrise the wind blew still harder, and the cross sea was
terrific. They continued to show the closely-reefed mainsail, to enable
her to rise from between the waves, or she would otherwise have been
swamped. An E.N.E. course was steered, and afterwards N.E. by E. for six
hours, making 7-1/2 leagues. The Admiral ordered that a pilgrimage should
be made to Our Lady of Guadalupe,[239-1] carrying a candle of 6 lbs. of
weight in wax, and that all the crew should take an oath that the
pilgrimage should be made by the man on whom the lot fell. As many
chick-peas were got as there were persons on board, and on one a cross
was cut with a knife. They were then put into a cap and shaken up. The
first who put in his hand was the Admiral, and he drew out the chick-pea
with a cross, so the lot fell on him; and he was bound to go on the
pilgrimage and fulfil the vow. Another lot was drawn, to go on pilgrimage
to Our Lady of Loreto, which is in the march of Ancona, in the Papal
territory, a house where Our Lady works many and great miracles.[239-2]
The lot fell on a sailor of the port of Santa Maria, named Pedro de
