    Those, as of yore--sad ministry of woe--
    With eyes averted, hold the torch below.
    Oil, spice and viands, in promiscuous heap,
    They pour and pile upon the fire; and now,
    The embers crumbling and the flames asleep,
With draughts of ruddy wine the thirsty ash they steep.

XXXII. And Cornyaeus in a brazen urn
    Enshrined the bones, upgathered in a caul,
    And bearing round pure water, thrice in turn
    From olive branch the lustral dew lets fall,
    And, sprinkling, speaks the latest words of all.
    A lofty mound AEneas hastes to frame,
    Crowned with his oar and trumpet, 'neath a tall
    And airy cliff, which still Misenus' name
Preserves, and ages keep his everlasting fame.

XXXIII. This done, AEneas hastens to obey
    The Sibyl's hest.--There was a monstrous cave,
    Rough, shingly, yawning wide-mouthed to the day,
    Sheltered from access by the lake's dark wave
    And shadowing forests, gloomy as the grave.
    O'er that dread space no flying thing could ply
    Its wings unjeopardied (whence Grecians gave
    The name "Aornos"), such a stench on high
Rose from the poisonous jaws, and filled the vaulted sky.

XXXIV. Here four black oxen, as the maid divine
    Commands them, forth to sacrifice are led.
    Over their brows she pours the sacred wine,
    Then plucks the hairs that sprouted on the head
    And burns them, as the first-fruits to the dead,
    Calling aloud on Hecate, whose reign
    In Heaven and Erebus is owned with dread.
    These stab the victims in the throat, and drain
In bowls the steaming blood that gushes from the slain.

XXXV. A black-fleeced lamb AEneas slays, to please
    The Furies' mother and her sister dread,
    A barren cow to Proserpine decrees.
    Then to the Stygian monarch of the dead
    The midnight altars he began to spread.
    The bulls' whole bodies on the flames he laid,
    And fat oil on the broiling entrails shed,
    When lo! as Morn her opening beams displayed,
Loud rumblings shook the ground, the wooded hill-tops swayed,

XXXVI. And hell-dogs baying through the gloom, proclaimed
    The Goddess near. "Back, back, unhallowed crew,
    And quit the grove!" the prophetess exclaimed,
    "Thou, bare thy blade, and take the road in view.
    Now, Trojan, for a stalwart heart and true;
    Firmness and steadiness!" No more she cried,
    But back into the open cave withdrew,
    Fired with new frenzy. He, with fearless stride,
Treads on the Sibyl's heels, rejoicing in his guide.

XXXVII. O silent Shades, and ye, the powers of Hell,
    Chaos and Phlegethon, wide realms of night,
    What ear hath heard, permit the tongue to tell,
    High matter, veiled in darkness, to indite.--
    On through the gloomy shade, in darkling plight,
    Through Pluto's solitary halls they stray,
    As travellers, whom the Moon's unkindly light
    Baffles in woods, when, on a lonely way,
Jove shrouds the heavens, and night has turned the world to grey.

XXXVIII. Before the threshold, in the jaws of Hell,
    Grief spreads her pillow, with remorseful Care.
    There sad Old Age and pale Diseases dwell,
    And misconceiving Famine, Want and Fear,
    Terrific shapes, and Death and Toil appear.
    Death's kinsman, Sleep, and Joys of sinful kind,
    And deadly War crouch opposite, and here
    The Furies' iron chamber, Discord blind
And Strife, her viperous locks with gory fillets twined.

XXXIX. High in the midst a giant elm doth fling
    The shadows of its aged arms. There dwell
    False Dreams and, nestling, to the foliage cling,
    And monstrous shapes, too numerous to tell,
    Keep covert, stabled in the porch of Hell.
    The beast of Lerna, hissing in his ire,
    Huge Centaurs, two-formed Scyllas, fierce and fell,
    Briareus hundred-handed, Gorgons dire,
Harpies, the triple Shade, Chimaera fenced with fire.

XL. At once AEneas, stirred by sudden fear,
    Clutches his sword, and points the naked blade
    To affront them. Then, but that the Heaven-taught seer
    Warned him that each was but an empty shade,
    A shapeless soul, vain onset he had made,
    And slashed the shadows. So he checked his hand,
    And past the gateway in the gloom they strayed
    Through Tartarus to Acheron's dark strand,
Where thick the whirlpool boils, and voids the seething sand

XLI. Into the deep Cocytus. Charon there,
    Grim ferryman, stands sentry. Mean his guise,
    His chin a wilderness of hoary hair,
    And like a flaming furnace stare his eyes.
    Hung in a loop around his shoulders lies
    A filthy gaberdine. He trims the sail,
    And, pole in hand, across the water plies
    His steel-grey shallop with the corpses pale,
Old, but a god's old age has left him green and hale.

XLII. There shoreward rushed a multitude, the shades
    Of noble heroes, numbered with the dead,
    Boys, husbands, mothers and unwedded maids,
    Sons on the pile before their parents spread,
    As leaves in number, which the trees have shed
    When Autumn's frosts begin to chill the air,
    Or birds, that from the wintry blasts have fled
    And over seas to sunnier shores repair.
So thick the foremost stand, and, stretching hands of prayer,

XLIII. Plead for a passage. Now the boatman stern
    Takes these, now those, then thrusts the rest away,
    And vainly for the distant bank they yearn.
    Then spake AEneas, for with strange dismay
    He viewed the tumult, "Prithee, maiden, say
    What means this thronging to the river-side?
    What seek the souls? Why separate, do they
    Turn back, while others sweep the leaden tide?
Who parts the shades, what doom the difference can decide?"

XLIV. Thereto in brief the aged priestess spake:
    "Son of Anchises, and the god's true heir,
    Thou see'st Cocytus and the Stygian lake,
    By whose dread majesty no god will dare
    His solemn oath attested to forswear.
    These are the needy, who a burial crave;
    The ferryman is Charon; they who fare
    Across the flood, the buried; none that wave
Can traverse, ere his bones have rested in the grave.

XLV. "A hundred years they wander in the cold
    Around these shores, till at the destined date
    The wished-for pools, admitted, they behold."
    Sad stood AEneas, pitying their estate,
    And, thoughtful, pondered their unequal fate.
    Leucaspis there, and Lycia's chief he viewed,
    Orontes, joyless, tombless, whom of late,
    Sea-tost from Troy, the blustering South pursued,
And ship and crew at once whelmed in the rolling flood.

XLVI. There paced in sorrow Palinurus' ghost,
    Who, lately from the Libyan shore their guide,
    Watching the stars, headforemost from his post
    Had fallen, and perished in the wildering tide.
    Him, known, but dimly in the gloom descried,
    The Dardan hails, "O Palinurus! who
    Of all the gods hath torn thee from our side?
    Speak, for Apollo, never known untrue,
This once hath answered false, and mocked with hopes undue.

XLVII. "Safe--so he sang--should'st thou escape the sea,
    And scatheless to Ausonia's coast attain.
    Lo, this, his plighted promise!"--"Nay," said he,
    "Nor answered Phoebus' oracle in vain,
    Nor did a god o'erwhelm me in the main.
    For while I ruled the rudder, charged to keep
    Our course, and steered thee o'er the billowy plain,
    Sudden, I slipped, and, falling prone and steep,
Snapped with sheer force the helm, and dragged it to the deep.

XLVIII. "Naught--let the rough seas witness--but for thee
    I feared, lest rudderless, her pilot lost,
    Your ship should fail in such a towering sea.
    Three wintry nights, nipt with the chilling frost,
    Upon the boundless waters I was tost,
    And on the fourth dawn from a wave at last
    Descried Italia. Slowly to her coast
    I swam, and clutching at the rock, held fast,
Cumbered with dripping clothes, and deemed the worst o'erpast.

XLIX. "When lo! the savage folk, with sword and stave,
    Set on me, weening to have found rich prey.
    And now my bones lie weltering on the wave,
    Now on strange shores winds blow them far away.
    O! by the memory of thy sire, I pray,
    By young Iulus, and his hope so fair,
    By heaven's sweet breath and light of gladsome day,
    Relieve my misery, assuage my care,
Sail back to Velia's port, great conqueror, and there

L.  "Strew earth upon me, for the task is light;
    Or, if thy goddess-mother deign to show
    Some path--for never in the god's despite
    O'er these dread waters would'st thou dare to go,
    Thine aid in pity on a wretch bestow;
    Reach forth thy hand, and bear me to my rest,
    Dead with the dead to ease me of my woe."
    He spake, and him the prophetess addressed:
"O Palinurus! whence so impious a request?

LI. "Think'st thou the Stygian waters to explore
    Unburied, and the Furies' flood to see,
    And reach unbidden yon relentless shore?
    Hope not by prayer to bend the Fates' decree,
    But take this comfort to thy misery;
    The neighbouring towns, and people far and near,
    Compelled by prodigies, thy ghost shall free,
    And load thy tomb with offerings year by year,
And Palinurus' name for aye the place shall bear."

LII. These words relieved his heaviness; joy came
    Upon his saddened spirit, pleased to hear
    The well-known land remembered by his name.
    Thus on they journey, and the stream draw near;
    Whom when the Stygian boatman saw appear,
    As shoreward through the silent grove they stray,
    With stern rebuke he challenged them: "Beware;
    Stand off; approach not, but your purpose say;
What brought you here, whoe'er ye come in armed array?

LIII. "Here Shades inhabit,--Sleep and drowsy Night,--
    I may not steer the living to yon shore.
    Small joy was mine, when, in the gods' despite,
    Alive Alcides o'er the stream I bore,
    And Theseus and Pirithous, though more
    Than men in prowess, nor of mortal clay.
    One tried to seize Hell's guardian, and before
    Our monarch's throne to chain the trembling prey;
These from her lord's own bed to drag the queen to day."

LIV. Briefly the seer Amphrysian spake again:
    "No guile these arms intend, nor open fight;
    Fear not; still may the monster in his den
    With endless howl the bloodless ghosts affright,
    And chaste Proserpine guard her uncle's right.
    Duteous and brave, his father's shade to view,
    Descends the famed AEneas; if the sight
    Of love so great is powerless to subdue,
Mark this,"--and from her vest the fateful gift she drew.

LV. Down fell his wrath: the venerable bough,
    So long unseen, with wonderment he eyed;
    Then, shoreward turning with his cold-blue prow,
    From bench and gangway thrusts the shades aside,
    And takes the great AEneas and his guide.
    The stitched bark, groaning with the load it bore,
    Gapes at each seam, and drinks the plenteous tide,
    Till Prince and Prophetess, borne safely o'er,
Stand on the dank, grey ooze and grim, unsightly shore.

LVI. Crouched in a fronting cave, huge Cerberus wakes
    These kingdoms with his three-mouthed bark. His head
    The priestess marked, all bristling now with snakes,
    And flung a sop of honied drugs and bread.
    He, famine-stung, with triple jaws dispread,
    The morsel snaps, then prone along the cave
    Lies stretched on earth, with loosened limbs, as dead.
    The sentry lulled, AEneas, blithe and brave,
Seizes the pass, and leaves the irremeable wave.

LVII. Loud shrieks are heard, and wails of the distrest,
    The souls of babes, that on the threshold cry,
    Reft of sweet life, and ravished from the breast,
    And early plunged in bitter death. Hard by
    Are those, whom slanderous charges doomed to die.
    Not without judgment these abodes they win.
    Here, urn in hand, dread Minos sits to try
    The charge anew; he summons from within
The silent court, and learns each several life and sin.

LVIII. And next are those, who, hateful of the day,
    With guiltless hands their sorrowing lives have ta'en,
    And miserably flung their souls away.
    How gladly now, in upper air again,
    Would they endure their poverty and pain!
    It may not be. The Fates their doom decide
    Past hope, and bind them to this sad domain.
    Dark round them rolls the sea, unlovely tide;
Ninefold the waves of Styx those dreary realms divide.

LIX. Not far off stretch the Mourning Meads, where those
    Whom cruel Love hath wasted with despair,
    In myrtle groves and alleys hide their woes,
    Nor Death itself relieves them of their care.
    Lo, Phaedra, Procris, Eriphyle there,
    Baring the breast by filial hands imbrued,
    Evadne, and Pasiphae, and fair
    Laodamia in the crowd he viewed,
And Caeneus, maid, then man, and now a maid renewed.

LX. There through the wood Phoenician Dido strayed,
    Fresh from her wound. Whom when AEneas knew,
    Scarce seen, though near, amid the doubtful shade,
    As one who views, or only seems to view,
    The clouded moon rise when the month is new,
    Fondly he spake, while tears were in his eye:
    "Ah, hapless Dido! then the news was true
    That thou had'st sought the bitter end. Was I,
Alas! the cause of death? O by the starry sky,

LXI. "By Gods above, by faith, if aught, below,
    Unwillingly, O Queen, I left thy sight.
    The Gods, at whose compulsion now I go
    Through these dark Shades, this realm of deepest Night,
    These wastes of squalor, 'twas their word of might
    That drove me forth; nor could I dream such woe
    Was thine at my departing. Stay thy flight.
    Whom dost thou fly? O, whither wilt thou go?
One word--the last, sad word--one parting look bestow!"

LXII. So strove AEneas, weeping, to appease
    Her wrathful spirit. She, with down-fixt eyes
    Turns from him, scowling, heedless of his pleas,
    And hard as flint or marble, nor replies.
    Then, starting, to the shadowy grove she flies,
    Where dead Sychaeus, her old lord, renews
    His love with hers, and sorrows with her sighs.
    Touched by her fate, the Dardan hero views,
And far with tearful gaze the melting shade pursues.

LXIII. Thus onward to the furthest fields they strayed,
    The haunts of heroes here doth Tydeus fare,
    Parthenopaeus, pale Adrastus' shade.
    And many a Dardan, wailed in upper air,
    And fallen in war. Sighing, he sees them there,
    Glaucus, Thersilochus and Medon slain,
    Antenor's sons, three brethren past compare,
    And Polyphoetes, priest of Ceres' fane,
And brave Idaeus, still grasping the sword and rein.

LXIV. All throng around, nor rest content to claim
    One look, but linger with delight, and fain
    Would pace beside, and question why he came.
    But when the Greeks and Agamemnon's train
    Beheld the hero, and his arms shone plain,
    Huge terror shook them, and some turned to fly,
    As erst they scattered to their ships; some strain
    Their husky voice, and raise a feeble cry.
The warshout mocks their throats, the gibbering accents die.

LXV. There, too, he sees great Priam's son, the famed
    Deiphobus, in evil plight forlorn;
    A mangled shape, his visage marred and maimed.
    His ravaged face the ruthless steel had torn,--
    Face, nose and ears--and both his hands were shorn.
    Him, cowering back, and striving to disown
    The shameful tokens of his foemen's scorn,
    Scarcely AEneas knew, then, soon as known,
Thus, unaccosted, hailed in old, familiar tone:

LXVI. "O brave Deiphobus, great Teucer's seed!
    Whose heart had will, whose cruel hand had might
    To wreak such punishment? Fame told, indeed,
    That, tired with slaughter, thou had'st sunk that night
    On heaps of mingled carnage in the fight.
    Then on the shore I reared an empty mound,
    And called (thy name and armour mark the site)
    Thy shade. Thyself, dear comrade, ne'er was found.
Vain was my parting wish to lay thee in the ground."

LXVII. "Not thine the fault"; Deiphobus replied,
    "Thy debt is rendered; thou hast dealt aright.
    Fate, and the baseness of a Spartan bride
    Wrought this; behold the tokens of her spite.
    Thou know'st--too well must thou recall--that night
    Passed in vain pleasure and delusive joy,
    What time the fierce Steed, with a bound of might,
    Big with armed warriors, eager to destroy,
Leaped o'er the wall, and scaled the citadel of Troy.

LXVIII. "Feigning mock orgies, round the town she led
    Troy's dames, with shrieks that rent the midnight air,
    And, armed with blazing cresset, at their head
    Bright from the watch-tower made the signal flare,
    That called the Danaan foemen from their lair.
    I, sunk in sleep, the fatal couch had pressed,
    Worn out with watching, and weighed down with care,
    And, calm and deep, Death's image, gentle Rest
Crept o'er the wearied limbs, and stilled the troubled breast.

LXIX. "Meanwhile, all arms the traitress, as I slept,
    Stole from the house, and from beneath my head
    She took the trusty falchion, that I kept
    To guard the chamber and the bridal bed.
    Then, creeping to the door, with stealthy tread,
    She lifts the latch, and beckons from within
    To Menelaus; so, forsooth, she fled
    In hopes a lover's gratitude to win,
And from the past wipe out the scandal of old sin.

LXX. "O noble wife! But why the tale prolong?
    Few words were best; my chamber they invade,
    They and Ulysses, counsellor of wrong.
    Heaven! be these horrors on the Greeks repaid,
    If pious lips for just revenge have prayed.
    But thou, make answer, and in turn explain
    What brought thee, living, to these realms of shade?
    By heaven's command, or wandering o'er the main,
Com'st thou to view these shores, this sunless, sad domain?"

LXXI. So they in converse haply had the day
    Consumed, when, rosy-charioted, the Morn
    O'erpassed mid heaven on her ethereal way,
    And thus the Sibyl doth the Dardan warn:
    "Night lowers apace; we linger but to mourn.
    Here part the roads; beyond the walls of Dis
    _There_ lies for us Elysium; leftward borne
    Thou comest to Tartarus, in whose drear abyss
Poor sinners purge with pains the lives they lived amiss."

LXXII. "Spare, priestess," cried Deiphobus, "thy wrath;
    I will depart, and fill the tale, and hide
    In darkness. Thou, with happier fates, go forth,
    Our glory."--Sudden, from the Dardan's side
    He fled. Back looked AEneas, and espied
    Broad bastions, girt with triple wall, that frowned
    Beneath a rock to leftward, and the tide
    Of torrent Phlegethon, that flamed around,
And made the beaten rocks rebellow with the sound.

LXXIII. In front, a massive gateway threats the sky,
    And posts of solid adamant upstay
    An iron tower, firm-planted to defy
    All force, divine or human. Night and day,
    Sleepless Tisiphone defends the way,
    Girt up with bloody garments. From within
    Loud groans are heard, and wailings of dismay,
    The whistling scourge, the fetter's clank and din,
Shrieks, as of tortured fiends, and all the sounds of sin.

LXXIV. Aghast, AEneas listens to the cries.
    "O maid," he asks, "what crimes are theirs? What pain
    Do they endure? what wailings rend the skies?"
    Then she: "Famed Trojan, this accursed domain
    None chaste may enter; so the Fates ordain.
    Great Hecate herself, when here below
    She made me guardian of Avernus' reign,
    Led me through all the region, fain to show
The tortures of the gods, the various forms of woe.

LXXV. "Here Cretan Rhadamanthus, strict and stern,
    His kingdom holds. Each trespass, now confessed,
    He hears and punishes; each tells in turn
    The sin, with idle triumph long suppressed,
    Till death has bared the secrets of the breast.
    Swift at the guilty, as he stands and quakes,
    Leaps fierce Tisiphone, for vengeance prest,
    And calls her sisters; o'er the wretch she shakes
The torturing scourge aloft, and waves the twisted snakes.

LXXVI. "Then, opening slow, on horrid hinges grate
    The doors accursed. See'st thou what sentinel
    Sits in the porch? What presence guards the gate?
    Know, that within, still fiercer and more fell,
    Wide-yawning with her fifty throats, doth dwell
    A Hydra. Tartarus itself, hard by,
    Abrupt and sheer, beneath the ghosts in Hell,
    Gapes twice as deep, as o'er the earth on high
Towers up the Olympian steep, the summit of the sky.

LXXVII. "There roll the Titans, born of ancient Earth,
    Hurled to the bottom by the lightning's blast.
    There lie--twin monsters of enormous girth--
    Aloeus' sons, who 'gainst Olympus cast
    Their impious hands, and strove with daring vast
    To disenthrone the Thunderer. There, again,
    The famed Salmoneus I beheld, laid fast
    In cruel agonies of endless pain,
Who sought the flames of Jove with mimic art to feign,

LXXVIII. "And mocked Olympian thunder. Torch in hand,
    Drawn by four steeds, through Elis' streets he came,
    A conqueror, borne in triumph through the land.
    And, waving high the firebrand, dared to claim
    The God's own homage and a godlike name.
    Blind fool and vain! to think with brazen clash
    And hollow tramp of horn-hoofed steeds, to frame
    The dread Storm's counterfeit, the thunder's crash,
The matchless bolts of Jove, the inimitable flash.

LXXIX. "But lo! his bolt, no smoky torch of pine,
    The Sire omnipotent through darkness sped,
    And hurled him headlong with the blast divine.
    There, too, lay Tityos, nine roods outspread,
    Nursling of earth. Hook-beaked, a vulture dread,
    Pecking the deathless liver, plied his quest,
    And probed the entrails and the heart, that bred
    Immortal pain, and burrowed in his breast.
The torturing growth goes on, the fibres never rest.

LXXX. "Why now those ancient Lapithae recall,
    Ixion and Pirithous? There in sight
    The black rock frowns, and ever threats to fall.
    On golden pillars shine the couches bright,
    And royal feasts their longing eyes invite.
    But lo, the eldest of the Furies' band
    Sits by, and oft uprising in her might,
    Warns from the banquet, with uplifted hand,
And thunders in their ears, and waves a flaming brand.

LXXXI. "Those, who with hate a brother's love repaid,
    Or drove a parent outcast from their door,
    Or, weaving fraud, their client's trust betrayed;
    Those, who--the most in number--brooded o'er
    Their gold, nor gave to kinsmen of their store;
    Those, who for foul adultery were slain,
