rooms were in keeping with the dilapidated appearance of the outside of
the house. The walnut panels, polished by age, but rough and coarse in
design and badly executed, were loose in their places and ready to fall.
Their dingy color added to the gloom of these apartments, which were
barren of curtains and mirrors; a few venerable bits of furniture in
the last stages of decay alone remained, and harmonized with the general
destruction. Marie noticed maps and plans stretched out upon long
tables, and in the corners of the room a quantity of weapons and stacked
carbines. These things bore witness, though she did not know it, to an
important conference between the leaders of the Vendeans and those of
the Chouans.

The marquis led Mademoiselle de Verneuil to a large and worm-eaten
armchair placed beside the fireplace; Francine followed and stood behind
her mistress, leaning on the back of that ancient bit of furniture.

"You will allow me for a moment to play the part of master of the
house," he said, leaving the two women and mingling with the groups of
his other guests.

Francine saw the gentlemen hasten, after a few words from Montauran, to
hide their weapons, maps, and whatever else might arouse the suspicions
of the Republican officers. Some took off their broad leather belts
containing pistols and hunting-knives. The marquis requested them to
show the utmost prudence, and went himself to see to the reception of
the troublesome guests whom fate had bestowed upon him.

Mademoiselle de Verneuil, who had raised her feet to the fire and was
now warming them, did not turn her head as Montauran left the room, thus
disappointing those present, who were anxious to see her. Francine alone
saw the change produced upon the company by the departure of the young
chief. The gentlemen gathered hastily round Madame du Gua, and during
a conversation carried on in an undertone between them, they all turned
several times to look curiously at the stranger.

"You know Montauran," Madame du Gua said to them; "he has fallen in love
with that worthless girl, and, as you can easily understand, he thinks
all my warnings selfish. Our friends in Paris, Messieurs de Valois and
d'Esgrignon, have warned him of a trap set for him by throwing some
such creature at his head; but in spite of this he allows himself to be
fooled by the first woman he meets,--a girl who, if my information is
correct, has stolen a great name only to disgrace it."

The speaker, in whom our readers have already recognized the lady who
instigated the attack on the "turgotine," may be allowed to keep
the name which she used to escape the dangers that threatened her in
Alencon. The publication of her real name would only mortify a noble
family already deeply afflicted at the misconduct of this woman; whose
history, by the bye, has already been given on another scene.

The curiosity manifested by the company of men soon became impertinent
and almost hostile. A few harsh words reached Francine's ear, and after
a word said to her mistress the girl retreated into the embrasure of a
window. Marie rose, turned towards the insolent group, and gave them a
look full of dignity and even disdain. Her beauty, the elegance of her
manners, and her pride changed the behavior of her enemies, and won her
the flattering murmur which escaped their lips. Two or three men, whose
outward appearance seemed to denote the habits of polite society and
the gallantry acquired in courts, came towards her; but her propriety
of demeanor forced them to respect her, and none dared speak to her; so
that, instead of being herself arraigned by the company, it was she who
appeared to judge of them. These chiefs of a war undertaken for God and
the king bore very little resemblance to the portraits her fancy had
drawn of them. The struggle, really great in itself, shrank to mean
proportions as she observed these provincial noblemen, all, with one
or two vigorous exceptions, devoid of significance and virility. Having
made to herself a poem of such heroes, Marie suddenly awakened to the
truth. Their faces expressed to her eyes more a love of scheming than
a love of glory; self-interest had evidently put arms into their hands.
Still, it must be said that these men did become heroic when brought
into action. The loss of her illusions made Mademoiselle de Verneuil
unjust, and prevented her from recognizing the real devotion which
rendered several of these men remarkable. It is true that most of those
now present were commonplace. A few original and marked faces appeared
among them, but even these were belittled by the artificiality and the
etiquette of aristocracy. If Marie generously granted intellect and
perception to the latter, she also discerned in them a total absence of
the simplicity, the grandeur, to which she had been accustomed among
the triumphant men of the Republic. This nocturnal assemblage in the old
ruined castle made her smile; the scene seemed symbolic of the monarchy.
But the thought came to her with delight that the marquis at least
played a noble part among these men, whose only remaining merit in her
eyes was devotion to a lost cause. She pictured her lover's face upon
the background of this company, rejoicing to see it stand forth among
those paltry and puny figures who were but the instruments of his great
designs.

The footsteps of the marquis were heard in the adjoining room. Instantly
the company separated into little groups and the whisperings ceased.
Like schoolboys who have plotted mischief in the master's absence, they
hurriedly became silent and orderly. Montauran entered. Marie had
the happiness of admiring him among his fellows, of whom he was the
youngest, the handsomest, and the chief. Like a king in his court,
he went from group to group, distributing looks and nods and words of
encouragement or warning, with pressure of the hands and smiles; doing
his duty as leader of a party with a grace and self-possession hardly
to be expected in the young man whom Marie had so lately accused of
heedlessness.

The presence of the marquis put an end to the open curiosity bestowed
on Mademoiselle de Verneuil, but Madame du Gua's scandalous suggestions
bore fruit. The Baron du Guenic, familiarly called "l'Intime," who by
rank and name had the best right among those present to treat Montauran
familiarly, took the young leader by the arm and led him apart.

"My dear marquis," he said; "we are much disturbed at seeing you on the
point of committing an amazing folly."

"What do you mean by that?"

"Do you know where that girl comes from, who she is, and what her
schemes about you are?"

"Don't trouble yourself, my dear Intime; between you and me my fancy for
her will be over to-morrow."

"Yes; but suppose that creature betrays you to-night?"

"I'll answer that when you tell me why she has not done it already,"
said Montauran, assuming with a laugh an air of conceit. "My dear
fellow, look at that charming girl, watch her manners, and dare to tell
me she is not a woman of distinction. If she gave you a few favorable
looks wouldn't you feel at the bottom of your soul a respect for her? A
certain lady has prejudiced you. I will tell you this: if she were the
lost creature our friends are trying to make her out, I would, after
what she and I have said to each other, kill her myself."

"Do you suppose," said Madame du Gua, joining them, "that Fouche is
fool enough to send you a common prostitute out of the streets? He has
provided seductions according to your deserts. You may choose to be
blind, but your friends are keeping their eyes open to protect you."

"Madame," replied the Gars, his eyes flashing with anger, "be warned;
take no steps against that lady, nor against her escort; if you do,
nothing shall save you from my vengeance. I choose that Mademoiselle
de Verneuil is to be treated with the utmost respect, and as a lady
belonging to my family. We are, I believe, related to the de Verneuils."

The opposition the marquis was made to feel produced the usual effect
of such obstacles on all young men. Though he had, apparently, treated
Mademoiselle de Verneuil rather lightly, and left it to be supposed that
his passion for her was a mere caprice, he now, from a feeling of pride,
made immense strides in his relation to her. By openly protecting her,
his honor became concerned in compelling respect to her person; and he
went from group to group assuring his friends, in the tone of a man whom
it was dangerous to contradict, that the lady was really Mademoiselle
de Verneuil. The doubts and gossip ceased at once. As soon as Montauran
felt that harmony was restored and anxiety allayed, he returned to his
mistress eagerly, saying in a low voice:--

"Those mischievous people have robbed me of an hour's happiness."

"I am glad you have come back to me," she said, smiling. "I warn you
that I am inquisitive; therefore you must not get tired of my questions.
Tell me, in the first place, who is that worthy in a green cloth
jacket?"

"That is the famous Major Brigaut, a man from the Marais, a comrade of
the late Mercier, called La Vendee."

"And that fat priest with the red face to whom he is talking at this
moment about me?" she went on.

"Do you want to know what they are saying?"

"Do I want to know it? What a useless question!"

"But I could not tell it without offending you."

"If you allow me to be insulted in your house without avenging me,
marquis, adieu!" she said. "I will not stay another moment. I have
some qualms already about deceiving these poor Republicans, loyal and
confiding as they are!"

She made a few hasty steps; the marquis followed her.

"Dear Marie, listen to me. On my honor, I have silenced their evil
speaking, without knowing whether it was false or true. But, placed as
I am, if friends whom we have in all the ministries in Paris warn me
to beware of every woman I meet, and assure me that Fouche has employed
against me a Judith of the streets, it is not unnatural that my best
friends here should think you too beautiful to be an honest woman."

As he spoke the marquis plunged a glance into Mademoiselle de Verneuil's
eyes. She colored, and was unable to restrain her tears.

"I deserve these insults," she said. "I wish you really thought me that
despicable creature and still loved me; then, indeed, I could no longer
doubt you. I believed in you when you were deceiving me, and you
will not believe me now when I am true. Let us make an end of this,
monsieur," she said, frowning, but turning pale as death,--"adieu!"

She rushed towards the dining-room with a movement of despair.

"Marie, my life is yours," said the young marquis in her ear.

She stopped short and looked at him.

"No, no," she said, "I will be generous. Farewell. In coming with
you here I did not think of my past nor of your future--I was beside
myself."

"You cannot mean that you will leave me now when I offer you my life?"

"You offer it in a moment of passion--of desire."

"I offer it without regret, and forever," he replied.

She returned to the room they had left. Hiding his emotions the marquis
continued the conversation.

"That fat priest whose name you asked is the Abbe Gudin, a Jesuit,
obstinate enough--perhaps I ought to say devoted enough,--to remain in
France in spite of the decree of 1793, which banished his order. He
is the firebrand of the war in these regions and a propagandist of the
religious association called the Sacre-Coeur. Trained to use religion as
an instrument, he persuades his followers that if they are killed
they will be brought to life again, and he knows how to rouse their
fanaticism by shrewd sermons. You see, it is necessary to work upon
every man's selfish interests to attain a great end. That is the secret
of all political success."

"And that vigorous, muscular old man, with the repulsive face, who is
he? I mean the one in the ragged gown of a barrister."

"Barrister! he aspires to be considered a brigadier-general. Did you
never hear of de Longuy?"

"Is that he!" exclaimed Mademoiselle de Verneuil, horrified. "You employ
such men as that?"

"Hush! he'll hear you. Do you see that other man in malignant
conversation with Madame du Gua?"

"The one in black who looks like a judge?"

"That is one of our go-betweens, La Billardiere, son of a councillor to
the Breton Parliament, whose real name is something like Flamet; he is
in close correspondence with the princes."

"And his neighbor? the one who is just putting up his white clay pipe,
and uses all the fingers of his right hand to snap the box, like a
countryman."

"By Jove, you are right; he was game-keeper to the deceased husband
of that lady, and now commands one of the companies I send against the
Republican militia. He and Marche-a-Terre are the two most conscientious
vassals the king has here."

"But she--who is she?"

"Charette's last mistress," replied the marquis. "She wields great
influence over all these people."

"Is she faithful to his memory?"

For all answer the marquis gave a dubious smile.

"Do you think well of her?"

"You are very inquisitive."

"She is my enemy because she can no longer be my rival," said
Mademoiselle de Verneuil, laughing. "I forgive her her past errors if
she forgives mine. Who is that officer with the long moustache?"

"Permit me not to name him; he wants to get rid of the First Consul by
assassination. Whether he succeeds or not you will hear of him. He is
certain to become famous."

"And you have come here to command such men as these!" she exclaimed in
horror. "Are _they_ they king's defenders? Where are the gentlemen and
the great lords?"

"Where?" said the marquis, coolly, "they are in all the courts of
Europe. Who else should win over kings and cabinets and armies to
serve the Bourbon cause and hurl them at that Republic which threatens
monarchies and social order with death and destruction?"

"Ah!" she said, with generous emotion, "be to me henceforth the source
from which I draw the ideas I must still acquire about your cause--I
consent. But let me still remember that you are the only noble who
does his duty in fighting France with Frenchmen, without the help of
foreigners. I am a woman; I feel that if my child struck me in anger I
could forgive him; but if he saw me beaten by a stranger, and consented
to it, I should regard him as a monster."

"You shall remain a Republican," said the marquis, in the ardor produced
by the generous words which confirmed his hopes.

"Republican! no, I am that no longer. I could not now respect you if you
submitted to the First Consul," she replied. "But neither do I like to
see you at the head of men who are pillaging a corner of France, instead
of making war against the whole Republic. For whom are you fighting?
What do you expect of a king restored to his throne by your efforts? A
woman did that great thing once, and the liberated king allowed her to
be burned. Such men are the anointed of the Lord, and there is danger
in meddling with sacred things. Let God take care of his own, and
place, displace, and replace them on their purple seats. But if you have
counted the cost, and seen the poor return that will come to you, you
are tenfold greater in my eyes than I thought you--"

"Ah! you are bewitching. Don't attempt to indoctrinate my followers, or
I shall be left without a man."

"If you would let me convert you, only you," she said, "we might live
happily a thousand leagues away from all this."

"These men whom you seem to despise," said the marquis, in a graver
tone, "will know how to die when the struggle comes, and all their
misdeeds will be forgotten. Besides, if my efforts are crowned with some
success, the laurel leaves of victory will hide all."

"I see no one but you who is risking anything."

"You are mistaken; I am not the only one," he replied, with true
modesty. "See, over there, the new leaders from La Vendee. The first,
whom you must have heard of as 'Le Grand Jacques,' is the Comte de
Fontain; the other is La Billardiere, whom I mentioned to you just now."

"Have you forgotten Quiberon, where La Billardiere played so equivocal a
part?" she said, struck by a sudden recollection.

"La Billardiere took a great deal upon himself. Serving princes is far
from lying on a bed of roses."

"Ah! you make me shudder!" cried Marie. "Marquis," she continued, in
a tone which seemed to indicate some mysterious personal reticence, "a
single instant suffices to destroy illusions and to betray secrets
on which the life and happiness of many may depend--" she stopped, as
though she feared she had said too much; then she added, in another
tone, "I wish I could be sure that those Republican soldiers were in
safety."

"I will be prudent," he said, smiling to disguise his emotion; "but say
no more about your soldiers; have I not answered for their safety on my
word as a gentleman?"

"And after all," she said, "what right have I to dictate to you? Be my
master henceforth. Did I not tell you it would drive me to despair to
rule a slave?"

"Monsieur le marquis," said Major Brigaut, respectfully, interrupting
the conversation, "how long are the Blues to remain here?"

"They will leave as soon as they are rested," said Marie.

The marquis looked about the room and noticed the agitation of those
present. He left Mademoiselle de Verneuil, and his place beside her was
taken at once by Madame du Gua, whose smiling and treacherous face was
in no way disconcerted by the young chief's bitter smile. Just then
Francine, standing by the window, gave a stifled cry. Marie, noticing
with amazement that the girl left the room, looked at Madame du Gua, and
her surprise increased as she saw the pallor on the face of her enemy.
Anxious to discover the meaning of Francine's abrupt departure, she
went to the window, where Madame du Gua followed her, no doubt to guard
against any suspicions which might arise in her mind. They returned
together to the chimney, after each had cast a look upon the shore
and the lake,--Marie without seeing anything that could have caused
Francine's flight, Madame du Gua seeing that which satisfied her she was
being obeyed.

The lake, at the edge of which Marche-a-Terre had shown his head, where
Madame du Gua had seen him, joined the moat in misty curves, sometimes
broad as ponds, in other places narrow as the artificial streamlets of
a park. The steep bank, washed by its waters, lay a few rods from the
window. Francine, watching on the surface of the water the black lines
thrown by the willows, noticed, carelessly at first, the uniform trend
of their branches, caused by a light breeze then prevailing. Suddenly
she thought she saw against the glassy surface a figure moving with the
spontaneous and irregular motion of life. The form, vague as it was,
seemed to her that of a man. At first she attributed what she saw to
the play of the moonlight upon the foliage, but presently a second head
appeared, then several others in the distance. The shrubs upon the bank
were bent and then violently straightened, and Francine saw the long
hedge undulating like one of those great Indian serpents of fabulous
size and shape. Here and there, among the gorse and taller brambles,
points of light could be seen to come and go. The girl's attention
redoubled, and she thought she recognized the foremost of the dusky
figures; indistinct as its outlines were, the beating of her heart
convinced her it was no other than her lover, Marche-a-Terre. Eager
to know if this mysterious approach meant treachery, she ran to the
courtyard. When she reached the middle of its grass plot she looked
alternately at the two wings of the building and along the steep shores,
without discovering, on the inhabited side of the house, any sign
of this silent approach. She listened attentively and heard a slight
rustling, like that which might be made by the footfalls of some wild
animal in the silence of the forest. She quivered, but did not tremble.
Though young and innocent, her anxious curiosity suggested a ruse. She
saw the coach and slipped into it, putting out her head to listen, with
the caution of a hare giving ear to the sound of the distant hunters.
She saw Pille-Miche come out of the stable, accompanied by two peasants,
all three carrying bales of straw; these they spread on the ground in a
way to form a long bed of litter before the inhabited wing of the house,
parallel with the bank, bordered by dwarf trees.

"You're spreading straw as if you thought they'd sleep here! Enough,
Pille-Miche, enough!" said a low, gruff voice, which Francine
recognized.

"And won't they sleep here?" returned Pille-Miche with a laugh. "I'm
afraid the Gars will be angry!" he added, too low for Francine to hear.

"Well, let him," said Marche-a-Terre, in the same tone, "we shall have
killed the Blues anyway. Here's that coach, which you and I had better
put up."

Pille-Miche pulled the carriage by the pole and Marche-a-Terre pushed it
by one of the wheels with such force that Francine was in the barn and
about to be locked up before she had time to reflect on her situation.
Pille-Miche went out to fetch the barrel of cider, which the marquis had
ordered for the escort; and Marche-a-Terre was passing along the side of
