



PLINY THE ELDER

     Born in Como, in 23 A.D.; perished in the eruption of
     Vesuvius in 79; celebrated as naturalist; commanded cavalry
     in Germany at the age of twenty-three; procurator in Spain
     under Nero; wrote voluminously on military tactics, history,
     grammar and natural science; his death due to his efforts to
     observe more closely the eruption; of all his writings only
     his "Natural History" in thirty-seven books has survived.


I

THE QUALITIES OF THE DOG[86]


Among the animals that are domesticated with mankind there are many
circumstances that are deserving of being known: among these there are
more particularly that most faithful friend of man, the dog, and the
horse. We have an account of a dog that fought against a band of
robbers in defending its master; and altho it was pierced with wounds,
still it would not leave the body, from which it drove away all birds
and beasts. Another dog, in Epirus, recognized the murderer of its
master in the midst of an assemblage of people, and, by biting and
barking at him, extorted from him a confession of his crime. A king of
the Garamantes,[87] also, was brought back from exile by two hundred
dogs, which maintained the combat against all his opponents. The
people of Colophon[88] and Castabala[89] kept troops of dogs for the
purposes of war; and these used to fight in the front rank and never
retreat; they were the most faithful of auxiliaries, and yet required
no pay. After the defeat of the Cimbri[90] their dogs defended their
movable houses, which were carried upon wagons. Jason, the Lycian,
having been slain, his dog refused to take food, and died of famine. A
dog, to which Darius gives the name of Hyrcanus, upon the funeral pile
of King Lysimachus being lighted, threw itself into the flames; and
the dog of King Hiero[91] did the same. Philistus also gives a similar
account of Pyrrhus, the dog of the tyrant Gelon; and it is said also,
that the dog of Nicomedes, King of Bithynia[92], tore Consingis, the
wife of that king, in consequence of her wanton behavior, when toying
with her husband.

Dogs are the only animals that are sure to know their masters, and if
they suddenly meet him as a stranger, they will instantly recognize
him. They are the only animals that will answer to their names, and
recognize the voices of the family. They recollect a road along which
they have passed, however long it may be. Next to man there is no
living creature whose memory is so retentive. By sitting down on the
ground we may arrest their most impetuous attack, even when prompted
by the most violent rage.

In daily life, we have discovered many other valuable qualities in
this animal; but its intelligence and sagacity are more especially
shown in the chase. It discovers and traces out the tracks of the
animal, leading by the leash the sportsman who accompanies it straight
up to the prey; and as soon as ever it has perceived it, how silent it
is, and how secret but significant is the indication which it gives,
first by the tail and afterward by the nose!

When Alexander the Great was on his Indian expedition, he was
presented by the King of Albania with a dog of unusual size; being
greatly delighted with its noble appearance, he ordered bears, and
after them wild boars, and then deer, to be let loose before it; but
the dog lay down and regarded them with a kind of immovable contempt.
The noble spirit of the general became irritated by the sluggishness
thus manifested by an animal of such vast bulk, and he ordered it to
be killed. The report of this reached the king, who accordingly sent
another dog, and at the same time sent word that its powers were to be
tried, not upon small animals, but upon the lion or the elephant;
adding, that he had originally but two, and that if this one were put
to death, the race would be extinct. Alexander, without delay,
procured a lion, which in his presence was instantly torn to pieces.
He then ordered an elephant to be brought, and never was he more
delighted with any spectacle; for the dog, bristling up its hair all
over the body, began by thundering forth a loud barking, and then
attacked the animal, leaping at it first on the one side and then on
the other, attacking it in the most skilful manner, and then again
retreating at the opportune moment, until at last the elephant, being
rendered quite giddy by turning round and round, fell to the earth,
and made it quite reecho with its fall.




II

THREE GREAT ARTISTS OF GREECE[93]


Apelles,[94] of Cos, surpassed all the other painters who either
preceded or succeeded him. Single-handed, he contributed more to
painting than all the others together, and even went so far as to
publish some treatises on the principles of the art. The great point
of artistic merit with him was his singular charm of gracefulness, and
this too, tho the greatest of painters were his contemporaries. In
admiring their works and bestowing high eulogiums upon them, he used
to say that there was still wanting in them that equal of beauty so
peculiar to himself, and known to the Greeks as "Charis"; others, he
said, had acquired all the other requisites of perfection, but in
this one point he himself had no equal. He also asserted his claim to
another great point of merit; admiring a picture by Protogenes, which
bore evident marks of unbounded laboriousness and the most minute
finish, he remarked that in every respect Protogenes was fully his
equal, or perhaps his superior, except in this, that he himself knew
when to take his hand off a picture--a memorable lesson, which teaches
us that over-carefulness may be productive of bad results. His candor,
too, was equal to his talent; he acknowledged the superiority of
Melanthius[95] in his grouping, and of Asclepiodorus in the niceness
of his measurements, or in other words, the distances that ought to be
left between the objects represented.

A circumstance that happened to him in connection with Protogenes[96]
is worthy of notice. The latter was living at Rhodes, when Apelles
disembarked there, desirous of seeing the works of a man whom he had
hitherto only known by reputation. Accordingly, he repaired at once to
the studio; Protogenes was not at home, but there happened to be a
large panel upon the easel ready for painting, with an old woman who
was left in charge. To his inquiries she made answer that Protogenes
was not at home; and then asked whom she should name as the visitor.
"Here he is," was the reply of Apelles; and seizing a brush, he traced
with color upon the panel an outline of a singularly minute fineness.
Upon his return the old woman mentioned to Protogenes what had
happened. The artist, it is said, upon remarking the delicacy of the
touch, instantly exclaimed that Apelles must have been the visitor,
for that no other person was capable of executing anything so
exquisitely perfect. So saying, he traced within the same outline a
still finer outline, but with another color; and then took his
departure, with instructions to the woman to show it to the stranger
if he returned, and to let him know that this was the person whom he
had come to see.

It happened as he anticipated--Apelles returned; and vexed at finding
himself thus surpassed, he took up another color and split both of the
outlines, leaving no possibility of anything finer being executed.
Upon seeing this, Protogenes admitted that he was defeated, and at
once flew to the harbor to look for his guest. He thought proper, too,
to transmit the panel to posterity, just as it was; and it always
continued to be held in the highest admiration by all--artists in
particular. I am told that it was burned in the first fire which took
place at Caesar's palace on the Palatine Hill; but in former times I
have often stopt to admire it. Upon its vast surface it contained
nothing whatever except the three outlines, so remarkably fine as to
escape the sight: among the most elaborate works of numerous other
artists it had all the appearance of a blank space; and yet by that
very fact it attracted the notice of every one, and was held in higher
estimation than any other painting there.

It was a custom with Apelles, to which he most tenaciously adhered,
never to let any day pass, however busy he might be, without
exercising himself by tracing some outline or other; a practise which
has now passed into a proverb. It was also a practise with him, when
he had completed a work, to exhibit it to the view of the passers-by
in some exposed place; while he himself, concealed behind the picture,
would listen to the criticisms that were passed upon it: it being his
opinion that the judgment of the public was preferable to his own, as
being the more discerning of the two. It was under these
circumstances, they say, that he was censured by a shoemaker for
having represented the shoes with one shoe-string too little. The next
day, the shoemaker, quite proud at seeing the former error corrected,
thanks to his advice, began to criticize the leg; upon which Apelles,
full of indignation, popped his head out, and reminded him that a
shoemaker should give no opinion beyond the shoes--a piece of advice
which has equally passed into a proverbial saying. In fact, Apelles
was a person of great amenity of manners--a circumstance which
rendered him particularly agreeable to Alexander the Great, who would
often come to his studio. He had forbidden himself by public edict, as
already stated, to be represented by any other artist. On one
occasion, however, when the prince was in his studio, talking a great
deal about painting without knowing anything about it, Apelles quietly
begged that he would quit the subject, telling him that he would get
laughed at by the boys who were there grinding the colors; so great
was the influence which he rightfully possest over a monarch who was
otherwise of an irascible temperament. And yet, irascible as he was,
Alexander conferred upon him a very signal mark of the high estimation
in which he held him: for having, in his admiration of her
extraordinary beauty, engaged Apelles to paint Pancaste undraped--the
most beloved of all his concubines--the artist while so engaged fell
in love with her; upon which, Alexander, perceiving this to be the
ease, made him a present of her: thus showing himself, tho a great
king in courage, a still greater one in self-command--this action
redounding no less to his honor than any of his victories.

Superior to all the statues not only of Praxiteles,[97] but of any
other artist that ever existed, is his Cnidian Venus; for the
inspection of which, many persons before now have purposely undertaken
a voyage to Cnidos. The artist made two statues of the goddess, and
offered them both for sale: one of them was represented with drapery,
and for this reason was preferred by the people of Cos, who had the
choice; the second was offered them at the same price, but on the
grounds of propriety and modesty they thought fit to choose the other.
Upon this, the Cnidians purchased the rejected statue, and immensely
superior has it always been held in general estimation. At a later
period, King Nicomedes wished to purchase this statue of the Cnidians,
and made them an offer to pay off the whole of their public debt,
which was very large. They preferred, however, to submit to any
extremity rather than part with it; and with good reason, for by this
statue Praxiteles has perpetuated the glory of Cnidos. The little
temple in which it is placed is open on all sides, so that the
beauties of the statue admit of being seen from every point of
view--an arrangement which was favored by the goddess herself, it is
generally believed.

Among all nations which the fame of the Olympian Jupiter has reached,
Phidias[98] is looked upon, beyond all doubt, as the most famous of
artists; but to let those who have never seen his works know how
deservedly he is esteemed, we will take this opportunity of adducing a
few slight proofs of the genius which he displayed. In doing this we
shall not appeal to the beauty of his Olympian Jupiter, nor yet to the
vast proportions of his Athenian Minerva, six-and-twenty cubits in
height, and composed of ivory and gold: but it is to the shield of
this last statue that we shall draw attention; upon the convex face of
which he has chased a combat of the Amazons, while upon the concave
side of it he has represented the battle between the gods and the
giants. Upon the sandals, again, we see the wars of the Lapithae and
Centaurs; so careful has he been to fill every smallest portion of his
work with some proof or other of his artistic skill.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 86: From the "Natural History." Translated by John Bostock
and H. T. Riley.]

[Footnote 87: A name applied to tribes living in Africa east of the
desert of Sahara.]

[Footnote 88: An Ionian city of Asia, distant seventy miles from
Ephesus.]

[Footnote 89: An interior town of Cilicia, in Asia Minor.]

[Footnote 90: The home of this warlike people appears to have been
Jutland.]

[Footnote 91: The tyrant king of Syracuse, successor to Gelon.]

[Footnote 92: A country of Asia Minor occupying a part of the Black
Sea coast.]

[Footnote 93: From the "Natural History." Translated by John Bostock
and H. T. Riley.]

[Footnote 94: Apelles lived in the time of Philip and Alexander the
Great. Cos is an island in the AEgean Sea.]

[Footnote 95: A painter of the Sicyonian school who flourished in the
third century B.C.]

[Footnote 96: Protogenes, a native of Caria, in Asia Minor, was
celebrated as a painter at Rhodes in the second half of the fourth
century B.C.]

[Footnote 97: Praxiteles was born in Athena about the end of the fifth
century and continued active as an artist until the time at Alexander
the Great. Nearly sixty of his works are mentioned in ancient
writings, but only two have been identified in modern times.]

[Footnote 98: Phidias was born in Athens about 500 B.C. and died about
430.]




QUINTILIAN

     Born in Spain about 35 A.D.; died about 95; celebrated as
     rhetorian; educated in Rome, where he taught oratory for
     twenty years; patronized by the emperors Vespasian and
     Domitian; his most celebrated work the "Institutio
     Oratoria."[99]


THE ORATOR MUST BE A GOOD MAN[100]


Let the orator, then, whom I propose to form, be such a one as is
characterized by the definition of Marcus Cato, _a good man skilled in
speaking_.

But the requisite which Cato has placed first in this definition, that
an orator should be _a good man_, is naturally of more estimation and
importance than the other. It is of importance that an orator should
be good, because, should the power of speaking be a support to evil,
nothing would be more pernicious than eloquence alike to public
concerns and private, and I myself, who, as far as is in my power,
strive to contribute something to the faculty of the orator, should
deserve very ill of the world, since I should furnish arms, not for
soldiers, but for robbers. May I not draw an argument from the
condition of mankind? Nature herself, in bestowing on man that which
she seems to have granted him preeminently, and by which she appears
to have distinguished us from all other animals, would have acted, not
as a parent, but as a stepmother, if she had designed the faculty of
speech to be the promoter of crime, the oppressor of innocence, and
the enemy of truth; for it would have been better for us to have been
born dumb, and to have been left destitute of reasoning powers, than
to have received endowments from providence only to turn them to the
destruction of one another.

My judgment carries me still further; for I not only say that he who
would answer my idea of an orator must be a good man, but that no man,
unless he be good, can ever be an orator. To an orator discernment and
prudence are necessary; but we can certainly not allow discernment to
those, who when the ways of virtue and vice are set before them,
prefer to follow that of vice; nor can we allow them prudence, since
they subject themselves, by the unforeseen consequences of their
actions, often to the heaviest penalty of the law, and always to that
of an evil conscience. But if it be not only truly said by the wise,
but always justly believed by the vulgar, that no man is vicious who
is not also foolish, a fool, assuredly, will never become an orator.

It is to be further considered that the mind can not be in a condition
for pursuing the most noble of studies, unless it be entirely free
from vice; not only because there can be no communion of good and evil
in the same breast, and to meditate at once on the best things and the
worst is no more in the power of the same mind than it is possible
for the same man to be at once virtuous and vicious; but also because
a mind intent on so arduous a study should be exempt from all other
cares, even such as are unconnected with vice; for then, and then
only, when it is free and master of itself, and when no other object
harasses and distracts its attention, will it be able to keep in view
the end to which it is devoted. But if an inordinate attention to an
estate, a too anxious pursuit of wealth, indulgence in the pleasures
of the chase, and the devotion of our days to public spectacles, rob
our studies of much of our time (for whatever time is given to one
thing is lost to another), what effect must we suppose that ambition,
avarice, and envy will produce, whose excitements are so violent as
even to disturb our sleep and our dreams? Nothing indeed is so
preoccupied, so unsettled, so torn and lacerated with such numerous
and various passions, as a bad mind; for when it intends evil, it is
agitated with hope, care, and anxiety, and when it has attained the
object of its wickedness, it is tormented with uneasiness, and the
dread of every kind of punishment.

No man, certainly, will doubt, that it is the object of all oratory,
that what is stated to the judge may appear to him to be true and
just; and which of the two, let me ask, will produce such a conviction
with the greater ease, the good man or the bad? A good man, doubtless,
will speak of what is true and honest with greater frequency; but even
if, from being influenced by some call of duty, he endeavors to
support what is fallacious (a case which, as I shall show, may
sometimes occur), he must still be heard with greater credit than a
bad man. But with bad men, on the other hand, dissimulation sometimes
fails, as well through their contempt for the opinion of mankind, as
through their ignorance of what is right; hence they assert without
modesty, and maintain their assertions without shame; and, in
attempting what evidently can not be accomplished, there appears in
them a repulsive obstinacy and useless perseverance; for bad men, as
well in their pleadings as in their lives, entertain dishonest
expectations; and it often happens, that even when they speak the
truth, belief is not accorded them, and the employment of advocates of
such a character is regarded as a proof of the badness of a cause.

I must, however, notice those objections to my opinion, which appear
to be clamored forth, as it were, by the general consent of the
multitude. Was not then Demosthenes, they ask, a great orator? yet we
have heard that he was not a good man. Was not Cicero a great orator?
yet many have thrown censure upon his character. To such questions how
shall I answer? Great displeasure is likely to be shown at any reply
whatever; and the ears of my audience require first to be propitiated.
The character of Demosthenes, let me say, does not appear to me
deserving of such severe reprehension, that I should believe all the
calumnies that are heaped upon him by his enemies, especially when I
read his excellent plans for the benefit of his country and the
honorable termination of his life. Nor do I see that the feeling of an
upright citizen was, in any respect, wanting to Cicero. As proofs of
his integrity, may be mentioned his consulship, in which he conducted
himself with so much honor, his honorable administration of his
province; his refusal to be one of the twenty commissioners; and,
during the civil wars, which fell with great severity on his times,
his uprightness of mind, which was never swayed, either by hope or by
fear, from adhering to the better party, or the supporters of the
commonwealth. He is thought by some to have been deficient in courage,
but he has given an excellent reply to this charge, when he says that
he was timid, not in encountering dangers, but in taking precautions
against them; an assertion of which he proved the truth at his death,
