    Nor even look vouchsafes to her own son.
    How shall she learn, prophet, that I am her's?
      So I, to whom Tiresias quick replied.
    The course is easy. Learn it, taught by me.
    What shade soe'er, by leave of thee obtain'd,
    Shall taste the blood, that shade will tell thee truth;
    The rest, prohibited, will all retire.
      When thus the spirit of the royal Seer
    Had his prophetic mind reveal'd, again                           180
    He enter'd Pluto's gates; but I unmoved
    Still waited till my mother's shade approach'd;
    She drank the blood, then knew me, and in words
    Wing'd with affection, plaintive, thus began.
      My son! how hast thou enter'd, still alive,
    This darksome region? Difficult it is
    For living man to view the realms of death.
    Broad rivers roll, and awful floods between,
    But chief, the Ocean, which to pass on foot,
    Or without ship, impossible is found.                            190
    Hast thou, long wand'ring in thy voyage home
    From Ilium, with thy ship and crew arrived,
    Ithaca and thy consort yet unseen?
      She spake, to whom this answer I return'd.
    My mother! me necessity constrain'd
    To Pluto's dwelling, anxious to consult
    Theban Tiresias; for I have not yet
    Approach'd Achaia, nor have touch'd the shore
    Of Ithaca, but suff'ring ceaseless woe
    Have roam'd, since first in Agamemnon's train                    200
    I went to combat with the sons of Troy.
    But speak, my mother, and the truth alone;
    What stroke of fate slew _thee_? Fell'st thou a prey
    To some slow malady? or by the shafts
    Of gentle Dian suddenly subdued?
    Speak to me also of my ancient Sire,
    And of Telemachus, whom I left at home;
    Possess I still unalienate and safe
    My property, or hath some happier Chief
    Admittance free into my fortunes gain'd,                         210
    No hope subsisting more of my return?
    The mind and purpose of my wedded wife
    Declare thou also. Dwells she with our son
    Faithful to my domestic interests,
    Or is she wedded to some Chief of Greece?
      I ceas'd, when thus the venerable shade.
    Not so; she faithful still and patient dwells
    Thy roof beneath; but all her days and nights
    Devoting sad to anguish and to tears.
    Thy fortunes still are thine; Telemachus                         220
    Cultivates, undisturb'd, thy land, and sits
    At many a noble banquet, such as well
    Beseems the splendour of his princely state,
    For all invite him; at his farm retired
    Thy father dwells, nor to the city comes,
    For aught; nor bed, nor furniture of bed,
    Furr'd cloaks or splendid arras he enjoys,
    But, with his servile hinds all winter sleeps
    In ashes and in dust at the hearth-side,
    Coarsely attired; again, when summer comes,                      230
    Or genial autumn, on the fallen leaves
    In any nook, not curious where, he finds
    There, stretch'd forlorn, nourishing grief, he weeps
    Thy lot, enfeebled now by num'rous years.
    So perish'd I; such fate I also found;
    Me, neither the right-aiming arch'ress struck,
    Diana, with her gentle shafts, nor me
    Distemper slew, my limbs by slow degrees
    But sure, bereaving of their little life,                        240
    But long regret, tender solicitude,
    And recollection of thy kindness past,
    These, my Ulysses! fatal proved to me.
      She said; I, ardent wish'd to clasp the shade
    Of my departed mother; thrice I sprang
    Toward her, by desire impetuous urged,
    And thrice she flitted from between my arms,
    Light as a passing shadow or a dream.
    Then, pierced by keener grief, in accents wing'd
    With filial earnestness I thus replied.                          250
      My mother, why elud'st thou my attempt
    To clasp thee, that ev'n here, in Pluto's realm,
    We might to full satiety indulge
    Our grief, enfolded in each other's arms?
    Hath Proserpine, alas! only dispatch'd
    A shadow to me, to augment my woe?
      Then, instant, thus the venerable form.
    Ah, son! thou most afflicted of mankind!
    On thee, Jove's daughter, Proserpine, obtrudes
    No airy semblance vain; but such the state                       260
    And nature is of mortals once deceased.
    For they nor muscle have, nor flesh, nor bone;
    All those (the spirit from the body once
    Divorced) the violence of fire consumes,
    And, like a dream, the soul flies swift away.
    But haste thou back to light, and, taught thyself
    These sacred truths, hereafter teach thy spouse.
      Thus mutual we conferr'd. Then, thither came,
    Encouraged forth by royal Proserpine,
    Shades female num'rous, all who consorts, erst,                  270
    Or daughters were of mighty Chiefs renown'd.
    About the sable blood frequent they swarm'd.
    But I, consid'ring sat, how I might each
    Interrogate, and thus resolv'd. My sword
    Forth drawing from beside my sturdy thigh,
    Firm I prohibited the ghosts to drink
    The blood together; they successive came;
    Each told her own distress; I question'd all.
      There, first, the high-born Tyro I beheld;
    She claim'd Salmoneus as her sire, and wife                      280
    Was once of Cretheus, son of AEolus.
    Enamour'd of Enipeus, stream divine,
    Loveliest of all that water earth, beside
    His limpid current she was wont to stray,
    When Ocean's God, (Enipeus' form assumed)
    Within the eddy-whirling river's mouth
    Embraced her; there, while the o'er-arching flood,
    Uplifted mountainous, conceal'd the God
    And his fair human bride, her virgin zone
    He loos'd, and o'er her eyes sweet sleep diffused.               290
    His am'rous purpose satisfied, he grasp'd
    Her hand, affectionate, and thus he said.
      Rejoice in this my love, and when the year
    Shall tend to consummation of its course,
    Thou shalt produce illustrious twins, for love
    Immortal never is unfruitful love.
    Rear them with all a mother's care; meantime,
    Hence to thy home. Be silent. Name it not.
    For I am Neptune, Shaker of the shores.
      So saying, he plunged into the billowy Deep.                   300
    She pregnant grown, Pelias and Neleus bore,
    Both, valiant ministers of mighty Jove.
    In wide-spread Iaeolchus Pelias dwelt,
    Of num'rous flocks possess'd; but his abode
    Amid the sands of Pylus Neleus chose.
    To Cretheus wedded next, the lovely nymph
    Yet other sons, AEson and Pheres bore,
    And Amythaon of equestrian fame.
      I, next, the daughter of Asopus saw,
    Antiope; she gloried to have known                               310
    Th' embrace of Jove himself, to whom she brought
    A double progeny, Amphion named
    And Zethus; they the seven-gated Thebes
    Founded and girded with strong tow'rs, because,
    Though puissant Heroes both, in spacious Thebes
    Unfenced by tow'rs, they could not dwell secure.
      Alcmena, next, wife of Amphitryon
    I saw; she in the arms of sov'reign Jove
    The lion-hearted Hercules conceiv'd,
    And, after, bore to Creon brave in fight                         320
    His daughter Megara, by the noble son
    Unconquer'd of Amphitryon espoused.
      The beauteous Epicaste[44] saw I then,
    Mother of Oedipus, who guilt incurr'd
    Prodigious, wedded, unintentional,
    To her own son; his father first he slew,
    Then wedded her, which soon the Gods divulged.
    He, under vengeance of offended heav'n,
    In pleasant Thebes dwelt miserable, King
    Of the Cadmean race; she to the gates                            330
    Of Ades brazen-barr'd despairing went,
    Self-strangled by a cord fasten'd aloft
    To her own palace-roof, and woes bequeath'd
    (Such as the Fury sisters execute
    Innumerable) to her guilty son.
      There also saw I Chloris, loveliest fair,
    Whom Neleus woo'd and won with spousal gifts
    Inestimable, by her beauty charm'd
    She youngest daughter was of Iasus' son,
    Amphion, in old time a sov'reign prince                          340
    In Minueian Orchomenus,
    And King of Pylus. Three illustrious sons
    She bore to Neleus, Nestor, Chromius,
    And Periclymenus the wide-renown'd,
    And, last, produced a wonder of the earth,
    Pero, by ev'ry neighbour prince around
    In marriage sought; but Neleus her on none
    Deign'd to bestow, save only on the Chief
    Who should from Phylace drive off the beeves
    (Broad-fronted, and with jealous care secured)                   350
    Of valiant Iphicles. One undertook
    That task alone, a prophet high in fame,
    Melampus; but the Fates fast bound him there
    In rig'rous bonds by rustic hands imposed.
    At length (the year, with all its months and days
    Concluded, and the new-born year begun)
    Illustrious Iphicles releas'd the seer,
    Grateful for all the oracles resolved,[45]
    Till then obscure. So stood the will of Jove.
      Next, Leda, wife of Tyndarus I saw,                            360
    Who bore to Tyndarus a noble pair,
    Castor the bold, and Pollux cestus-famed.
    They pris'ners in the fertile womb of earth,
    Though living, dwell, and even there from Jove
    High priv'lege gain; alternate they revive
    And die, and dignity partake divine.
      The comfort of Aloeus, next, I view'd,
    Iphimedeia; she th' embrace profess'd
    Of Neptune to have shared, to whom she bore
    Two sons; short-lived they were, but godlike both,               370
    Otus and Ephialtes far-renown'd.
    Orion sole except, all-bounteous Earth
    Ne'er nourish'd forms for beauty or for size
    To be admired as theirs; in his ninth year
    Each measur'd, broad, nine cubits, and the height
    Was found nine ells of each. Against the Gods
    Themselves they threaten'd war, and to excite
    The din of battle in the realms above.
    To the Olympian summit they essay'd
    To heave up Ossa, and to Ossa's crown                            380
    Branch-waving Pelion; so to climb the heav'ns.
    Nor had they failed, maturer grown in might,
    To accomplish that emprize, but them the son[46]
    Of radiant-hair'd Latona and of Jove
    Slew both, ere yet the down of blooming youth
    Thick-sprung, their cheeks or chins had tufted o'er.
      Phaedra I also there, and Procris saw,
    And Ariadne for her beauty praised,
    Whose sire was all-wise Minos. Theseus her
    From Crete toward the fruitful region bore                       390
    Of sacred Athens, but enjoy'd not there,
    For, first, she perish'd by Diana's shafts
    In Dia, Bacchus witnessing her crime.[47]
      Maera and Clymene I saw beside,
    And odious Eriphyle, who received
    The price in gold of her own husband's life.
      But all the wives of Heroes whom I saw,
    And all their daughters can I not relate;
    Night, first, would fail; and even now the hour
    Calls me to rest either on board my bark,                        400
    Or here; meantime, I in yourselves confide,
    And in the Gods to shape my conduct home.
      He ceased; the whole assembly silent sat,
    Charm'd into ecstacy by his discourse
    Throughout the twilight hall, till, at the last,
    Areta iv'ry arm'd them thus bespake.
      Phaeacians! how appears he in your eyes
    This stranger, graceful as he is in port,
    In stature noble, and in mind discrete?
    My guest he is, but ye all share with me                         410
    That honour; him dismiss not, therefore, hence
    With haste, nor from such indigence withhold
    Supplies gratuitous; for ye are rich,
    And by kind heav'n with rare possessions blest.
      The Hero, next, Echeneus spake, a Chief
    Now ancient, eldest of Phaeacia's sons.
      Your prudent Queen, my friends, speaks not beside
    Her proper scope, but as beseems her well.
    Her voice obey; yet the effect of all
    Must on Alcinoues himself depend.                                 420
      To whom Alcinoues, thus, the King, replied.
    I ratify the word. So shall be done,
    As surely as myself shall live supreme
    O'er all Phaeacia's maritime domain.
    Then let the guest, though anxious to depart,
    Wait till the morrow, that I may complete
    The whole donation. His safe conduct home
    Shall be the gen'ral care, but mine in Chief,
    To whom dominion o'er the rest belongs.
      Him answer'd, then, Ulysses ever-wise.                         430
    Alcinoues! Prince! exalted high o'er all
    Phaeacia's sons! should ye solicit, kind,
    My stay throughout the year, preparing still
    My conduct home, and with illustrious gifts
    Enriching me the while, ev'n that request
    Should please me well; the wealthier I return'd,
    The happier my condition; welcome more
    And more respectable I should appear
    In ev'ry eye to Ithaca restored.
      To whom Alcinoues answer thus return'd.                         440
    Ulysses! viewing thee, no fears we feel
    Lest thou, at length, some false pretender prove,
    Or subtle hypocrite, of whom no few
    Disseminated o'er its face the earth
    Sustains, adepts in fiction, and who frame
    Fables, where fables could be least surmised.
    Thy phrase well turn'd, and thy ingenuous mind
    Proclaim _thee_ diff'rent far, who hast in strains
    Musical as a poet's voice, the woes
    Rehears'd of all thy Greecians, and thy own.                     450
    But say, and tell me true. Beheld'st thou there
    None of thy followers to the walls of Troy
    Slain in that warfare? Lo! the night is long--
    A night of utmost length; nor yet the hour
    Invites to sleep. Tell me thy wond'rous deeds,
    For I could watch till sacred dawn, could'st thou
    So long endure to tell me of thy toils.
      Then thus Ulysses, ever-wise, replied.
    Alcinoues! high exalted over all
    Phaeacia's sons! the time suffices yet                            460
    For converse both and sleep, and if thou wish
    To hear still more, I shall not spare to unfold
    More pitiable woes than these, sustain'd
    By my companions, in the end destroy'd;
    Who, saved from perils of disast'rous war
    At Ilium, perish'd yet in their return,
    Victims of a pernicious woman's crime.[48]
      Now, when chaste Proserpine had wide dispers'd
    Those female shades, the spirit sore distress'd
    Of Agamemnon, Atreus' son, appear'd;                             470
    Encircled by a throng, he came; by all
    Who with himself beneath AEgisthus' roof
    Their fate fulfill'd, perishing by the sword.
    He drank the blood, and knew me; shrill he wail'd
    And querulous; tears trickling bathed his cheeks,
    And with spread palms, through ardour of desire
    He sought to enfold me fast, but vigour none,
    Or force, as erst, his agile limbs inform'd.
    I, pity-moved, wept at the sight, and him,
    In accents wing'd by friendship, thus address'd.                 480
      Ah glorious son of Atreus, King of men!
    What hand inflicted the all-numbing stroke
    Of death on thee? Say, didst thou perish sunk
    By howling tempests irresistible
    Which Neptune raised, or on dry land by force
    Of hostile multitudes, while cutting off
    Beeves from the herd, or driving flocks away,
    Or fighting for Achaia's daughters, shut
    Within some city's bulwarks close besieged?
      I ceased, when Agamemnon thus replied.                         490
    Ulysses, noble Chief, Laertes' son
    For wisdom famed! I neither perish'd sunk
    By howling tempests irresistible
    Which Neptune raised, nor on dry land received
    From hostile multitudes the fatal blow,
    But me AEgisthus slew; my woeful death
    Confed'rate with my own pernicious wife
    He plotted, with a show of love sincere
    Bidding me to his board, where as the ox
    Is slaughter'd at his crib, he slaughter'd _me_.                 500
    Such was my dreadful death; carnage ensued
    Continual of my friends slain all around,
    Num'rous as boars bright-tusk'd at nuptial feast,
    Or feast convivial of some wealthy Chief.
    Thou hast already witness'd many a field
    With warriors overspread, slain one by one,
    But that dire scene had most thy pity moved,
    For we, with brimming beakers at our side,
    And underneath full tables bleeding lay.
    Blood floated all the pavement. Then the cries                   510
    Of Priam's daughter sounded in my ears
    Most pitiable of all. Cassandra's cries,
    Whom Clytemnestra close beside me slew.
    Expiring as I lay, I yet essay'd
    To grasp my faulchion, but the trayt'ress quick
    Withdrew herself, nor would vouchsafe to close
    My languid eyes, or prop my drooping chin
    Ev'n in the moment when I sought the shades.
    So that the thing breathes not, ruthless and fell
    As woman once resolv'd on such a deed                            520
    Detestable, as my base wife contrived,
    The murther of the husband of her youth.
    I thought to have return'd welcome to all,
    To my own children and domestic train;
    But she, past measure profligate, hath poured
    Shame on herself, on women yet unborn,
    And even on the virtuous of her sex.
      He ceas'd, to whom, thus, answer I return'd.
    Gods! how severely hath the thund'rer plagued
    The house of Atreus even from the first,                         530
    By female counsels! we for Helen's sake
    Have num'rous died, and Clytemnestra framed,
    While thou wast far remote, this snare for thee!
      So I, to whom Atrides thus replied.
    Thou, therefore, be not pliant overmuch
    To woman; trust her not with all thy mind,
    But half disclose to her, and half conceal.
    Yet, from thy consort's hand no bloody death,
    My friend, hast thou to fear; for passing wise
    Icarius' daughter is, far other thoughts,                        540
    Intelligent, and other plans, to frame.
    Her, going to the wars we left a bride
    New-wedded, and thy boy hung at her breast,
    Who, man himself, consorts ere now with men
    A prosp'rous youth; his father, safe restored
    To his own Ithaca, shall see him soon,
    And _he_ shall clasp his father in his arms
    As nature bids; but me, my cruel one
    Indulged not with the dear delight to gaze
    On my Orestes, for she slew me first.                            550
    But listen; treasure what I now impart.[49]
    Steer secret to thy native isle; avoid
    Notice; for woman merits trust no more.
    Now tell me truth. Hear ye in whose abode
    My son resides? dwells he in Pylus, say,
    Or in Orchomenos, or else beneath
    My brother's roof in Sparta's wide domain?
    For my Orestes is not yet a shade.
      So he, to whom I answer thus return'd.
    Atrides, ask not me. Whether he live,                            560
    Or have already died, I nothing know;
    Mere words are vanity, and better spared.
      Thus we discoursing mutual stood, and tears
    Shedding disconsolate. The shade, meantime,
    Came of Achilles, Peleus' mighty son;
    Patroclus also, and Antilochus
    Appear'd, with Ajax, for proportion just
    And stature tall, (Pelides sole except)
    Distinguish'd above all Achaia's sons.
    The soul of swift AEacides at once                                570
    Knew me, and in wing'd accents thus began.
      Brave Laertiades, for wiles renown'd!
    What mightier enterprise than all the past
    Hath made thee here a guest? rash as thou art!
    How hast thou dared to penetrate the gloom
    Of Ades, dwelling of the shadowy dead,
    Semblances only of what once they were?
      He spake, to whom I, answ'ring, thus replied.
    O Peleus' son! Achilles! bravest far
    Of all Achaia's race! I here arrived                             580
    Seeking Tiresias, from his lips to learn,
    Perchance, how I might safe regain the coast
    Of craggy Ithaca; for tempest-toss'd
    Perpetual, I have neither yet approach'd
    Achaia's shore, or landed on my own.
    But as for thee, Achilles! never man
    Hath known felicity like thine, or shall,
    Whom living we all honour'd as a God,
    And who maintain'st, here resident, supreme
    Controul among the dead; indulge not then,                       590
    Achilles, causeless grief that thou hast died.
      I ceased, and answer thus instant received.
    Renown'd Ulysses! think not death a theme
    Of consolation; I had rather live
    The servile hind for hire, and eat the bread
    Of some man scantily himself sustain'd,
    Than sov'reign empire hold o'er all the shades.
    But come--speak to me of my noble boy;
    Proceeds he, as he promis'd, brave in arms,
    Or shuns he war? Say also, hast thou heard                       600
    Of royal Peleus? shares he still respect
    Among his num'rous Myrmidons, or scorn
    In Hellas and in Phthia, for that age
    Predominates in his enfeebled limbs?
    For help is none in me; the glorious sun
    No longer sees me such, as when in aid
    Of the Achaians I o'erspread the field
    Of spacious Troy with all their bravest slain.
    Oh might I, vigorous as then, repair[50]
    For one short moment to my father's house,                       610
    They all should tremble; I would shew an arm,
    Such as should daunt the fiercest who presumes
    To injure _him_, or to despise his age.
      Achilles spake, to whom I thus replied.
    Of noble Peleus have I nothing heard;
    But I will tell thee, as thou bidd'st, the truth
    Unfeign'd of Neoptolemus thy son;
    For him, myself, on board my hollow bark
    From Scyros to Achaia's host convey'd.
    Oft as in council under Ilium's walls                            620
    We met, he ever foremost was in speech,
    Nor spake erroneous; Nestor and myself
    Except, no Greecian could with him compare.
    Oft, too, as we with battle hemm'd around
    Troy's bulwarks, from among the mingled crowd
    Thy son sprang foremost into martial act,
    Inferior in heroic worth to none.
    Beneath him num'rous fell the sons of Troy
    In dreadful fight, nor have I pow'r to name
    Distinctly all, who by his glorious arm                          630
    Exerted in the cause of Greece, expired.
    Yet will I name Eurypylus, the son
    Of Telephus, an Hero whom his sword
    Of life bereaved, and all around him strew'd
    The plain with his Cetean warriors, won
    To Ilium's side by bribes to women giv'n.[51]
    Save noble Memnon only, I beheld
    No Chief at Ilium beautiful as he.
    Again, when we within the horse of wood
    Framed by Epeues sat, an ambush chos'n                            640
    Of all the bravest Greeks, and I in trust
    Was placed to open or to keep fast-closed
    The hollow fraud; then, ev'ry Chieftain there
    And Senator of Greece wiped from his cheeks
    The tears, and tremors felt in ev'ry limb;
    But never saw I changed to terror's hue
    _His_ ruddy cheek, no tears wiped _he_ away,
    But oft he press'd me to go forth, his suit
    With pray'rs enforcing, griping hard his hilt
    And his brass-burthen'd spear, and dire revenge                  650
    Denouncing, ardent, on the race of Troy.
    At length, when we had sack'd the lofty town
    Of Priam, laden with abundant spoils
    He safe embark'd, neither by spear or shaft
    Aught hurt, or in close fight by faulchion's edge,
    As oft in war befalls, where wounds are dealt
    Promiscuous at the will of fiery Mars.
      So I; then striding large, the spirit thence
    Withdrew of swift AEacides, along
    The hoary mead pacing,[52] with joy elate                        660
    That I had blazon'd bright his son's renown.
      The other souls of men by death dismiss'd
    Stood mournful by, sad uttering each his woes;
    The soul alone I saw standing remote
    Of Telamonian Ajax, still incensed
    That in our public contest for the arms
    Worn by Achilles, and by Thetis thrown
    Into dispute, my claim had strongest proved,
    Troy and Minerva judges of the cause.
    Disastrous victory! which I could wish                           670
    Not to have won, since for that armour's sake
    The earth hath cover'd Ajax, in his form
    And martial deeds superior far to all
    The Greecians, Peleus' matchless son except.
    I, seeking to appease him, thus began.
      O Ajax, son of glorious Telamon!
    Canst thou remember, even after death,
    Thy wrath against me, kindled for the sake
    Of those pernicious arms? arms which the Gods
    Ordain'd of such dire consequence to Greece,                     680
    Which caused thy death, our bulwark! Thee we mourn
    With grief perpetual, nor the death lament
    Of Peleus' son, Achilles, more than thine.
    Yet none is blameable; Jove evermore
    With bitt'rest hate pursued Achaia's host,
    And he ordain'd thy death. Hero! approach,
    That thou may'st hear the words with which I seek
    To sooth thee; let thy long displeasure cease!
    Quell all resentment in thy gen'rous breast!
      I spake; nought answer'd he, but sullen join'd                 690
    His fellow-ghosts; yet, angry as he was,
    I had prevail'd even on him to speak,
    Or had, at least, accosted him again,
    But that my bosom teem'd with strong desire
    Urgent, to see yet others of the dead.
      There saw I Minos, offspring famed of Jove;
    His golden sceptre in his hand, he sat
    Judge of the dead; they, pleading each in turn,
    His cause, some stood, some sat, filling the house
    Whose spacious folding-gates are never closed.                   700
      Orion next, huge ghost, engaged my view,
    Droves urging o'er the grassy mead, of beasts
    Which he had slain, himself, on the wild hills,
    With strong club arm'd of ever-during brass.
      There also Tityus on the ground I saw
    Extended, offspring of the glorious earth;
    Nine acres he o'erspread, and, at his side
    Station'd, two vultures on his liver prey'd,
    Scooping his entrails; nor sufficed his hands
    To fray them thence; for he had sought to force                  710
    Latona, illustrious concubine of Jove,
    What time the Goddess journey'd o'er the rocks
    Of Pytho into pleasant Panopeus.
      Next, suff'ring grievous torments, I beheld
    Tantalus; in a pool he stood, his chin
    Wash'd by the wave; thirst-parch'd he seem'd, but found
    Nought to assuage his thirst; for when he bow'd
    His hoary head, ardent to quaff, the flood
    Vanish'd absorb'd, and, at his feet, adust
    The soil appear'd, dried, instant, by the Gods.                  720
    Tall trees, fruit-laden, with inflected heads
    Stoop'd to him, pomegranates, apples bright,
    The luscious fig, and unctuous olive smooth;
    Which when with sudden grasp he would have seized,
    Winds hurl'd them high into the dusky clouds.
      There, too, the hard-task'd Sisyphus I saw,
    Thrusting before him, strenuous, a vast rock.[53]
    With hands and feet struggling, he shoved the stone
    Up to a hill-top; but the steep well-nigh
    Vanquish'd, by some great force repulsed,[54] the mass           730
    Rush'd again, obstinate, down to the plain.
    Again, stretch'd prone, severe he toiled, the sweat
    Bathed all his weary limbs, and his head reek'd.
      The might of Hercules I, next, survey'd;
    His semblance; for himself their banquet shares
    With the Immortal Gods, and in his arms
    Enfolds neat-footed Hebe, daughter fair
    Of Jove, and of his golden-sandal'd spouse.
    Around him, clamorous as birds, the dead
    Swarm'd turbulent; he, gloomy-brow'd as night,                   740
    With uncased bow and arrow on the string
    Peer'd terrible from side to side, as one
    Ever in act to shoot; a dreadful belt
    He bore athwart his bosom, thong'd with gold.
    There, broider'd shone many a stupendous form,
    Bears, wild boars, lions with fire-flashing eyes,
    Fierce combats, battles, bloodshed, homicide.
    The artist, author of that belt, none such
