Majesty's return; she had tokens from the Queen, and relics of the saint
who, if the story was true, had not always been a saint as far as she
and many others were concerned. She believed in the miracles wrought at
his tomb, and had a hundred authentic stories of wondrous cures effected
by the blessed king's rosaries, the medals which he wore, the locks of
his hair, or what not. Esmond remembered a score of marvellous tales
which the credulous old woman told him. There was the Bishop of Autun,
that was healed of a malady he had for forty years, and which left
him after he said mass for the repose of the king's soul. There was M.
Marais, a surgeon in Auvergne, who had a palsy in both his legs, which
was cured through the king's intercession. There was Philip Pitet, of
the Benedictines, who had a suffocating cough, which wellnigh
killed him, but he besought relief of heaven through the merits and
intercession of the blessed king, and he straightway felt a profuse
sweat breaking out all over him, and was recovered perfectly. And
there was the wife of Mons. Lepervier, dancing-master to the Duke
of Saxe-Gotha, who was entirely eased of a rheumatism by the king's
intercession, of which miracle there could be no doubt, for her surgeon
and his apprentice had given their testimony, under oath, that they did
not in any way contribute to the cure. Of these tales, and a thousand
like them, Mr. Esmond believed as much as he chose. His kinswoman's
greater faith had swallow for them all.

The English High Church party did not adopt these legends. But truth and
honor, as they thought, bound them to the exiled king's side; nor
had the banished family any warmer supporter than that kind lady of
Castlewood, in whose house Esmond was brought up. She influenced her
husband, very much more perhaps than my lord knew, who admired his wife
prodigiously though he might be inconstant to her, and who, adverse
to the trouble of thinking himself, gladly enough adopted the opinions
which she chose for him. To one of her simple and faithful heart,
allegiance to any sovereign but the one was impossible. To serve King
William for interest's sake would have been a monstrous hypocrisy and
treason. Her pure conscience could no more have consented to it than to
a theft, a forgery, or any other base action. Lord Castlewood might have
been won over, no doubt, but his wife never could: and he submitted his
conscience to hers in this case as he did in most others, when he was
not tempted too sorely. And it was from his affection and gratitude
most likely, and from that eager devotion for his mistress, which
characterized all Esmond's youth, that the young man subscribed to this,
and other articles of faith, which his fond benefactress set him. Had
she been a Whig, he had been one; had she followed Mr. Fox, and turned
Quaker, no doubt he would have abjured ruffles and a periwig, and have
forsworn swords, lace-coats, and clocked stockings. In the scholars'
boyish disputes at the University, where parties ran very high,
Esmond was noted as a Jacobite, and very likely from vanity as much as
affection took the side of his family.

Almost the whole of the clergy of the country and more than a half of
the nation were on this side. Ours is the most loyal people in the world
surely; we admire our kings, and are faithful to them long after they
have ceased to be true to us. 'Tis a wonder to any one who looks back at
the history of the Stuart family to think how they kicked their
crowns away from them; how they flung away chances after chances; what
treasures of loyalty they dissipated, and how fatally they were bent on
consummating their own ruin. If ever men had fidelity, 'twas they; if
ever men squandered opportunity, 'twas they; and, of all the enemies
they had, they themselves were the most fatal.

When the Princess Anne succeeded, the wearied nation was glad enough to
cry a truce from all these wars, controversies, and conspiracies, and
to accept in the person of a Princess of the blood royal a compromise
between the parties into which the country was divided. The Tories
could serve under her with easy consciences; though a Tory herself,
she represented the triumph of the Whig opinion. The people of England,
always liking that their Princes should be attached to their own
families, were pleased to think the Princess was faithful to hers; and
up to the very last day and hour of her reign, and but for that fatality
which he inherited from his fathers along with their claims to the
English crown, King James the Third might have worn it. But he neither
knew how to wait an opportunity, nor to use it when he had it; he was
venturesome when he ought to have been cautious, and cautious when
he ought to have dared everything. 'Tis with a sort of rage at his
inaptitude that one thinks of his melancholy story. Do the Fates deal
more specially with kings than with common men? One is apt to imagine
so, in considering the history of that royal race, in whose behalf
so much fidelity, so much valor, so much blood were desperately and
bootlessly expended.

The King dead then, the Princess Anne (ugly Anne Hyde's daughter, our
Dowager at Chelsey called her) was proclaimed by trumpeting heralds
all over the town from Westminster to Ludgate Hill, amidst immense
jubilations of the people.

Next week my Lord Marlborough was promoted to the Garter, and to
be Captain-General of her Majesty's forces at home and abroad. This
appointment only inflamed the Dowager's rage, or, as she thought it, her
fidelity to her rightful sovereign. "The Princess is but a puppet in
the hands of that fury of a woman, who comes into my drawing-room and
insults me to my face. What can come to a country that is given over to
such a woman?" says the Dowager: "As for that double-faced traitor, my
Lord Marlborough, he has betrayed every man and every woman with whom he
has had to deal, except his horrid wife, who makes him tremble. 'Tis all
over with the country when it has got into the clutches of such wretches
as these."

Esmond's old kinswoman saluted the new powers in this way; but some good
fortune at last occurred to a family which stood in great need of it, by
the advancement of these famous personages who benefited humbler people
that had the luck of being in their favor. Before Mr. Esmond left
England in the month of August, and being then at Portsmouth, where he
had joined his regiment, and was busy at drill, learning the practice
and mysteries of the musket and pike, he heard that a pension on the
Stamp Office had been got for his late beloved mistress, and that the
young Mistress Beatrix was also to be taken into court. So much good,
at least, had come of the poor widow's visit to London, not revenge upon
her husband's enemies, but reconcilement to old friends, who pitied, and
seemed inclined to serve her. As for the comrades in prison and the
late misfortune, Colonel Westbury was with the Captain-General gone to
Holland; Captain Macartney was now at Portsmouth, with his regiment of
Fusileers and the force under command of his Grace the Duke of Ormond,
bound for Spain it was said; my Lord Warwick was returned home; and Lord
Mohun, so far from being punished for the homicide which had brought so
much grief and change into the Esmond family, was gone in company of my
Lord Macclesfield's splendid embassy to the Elector of Hanover, carrying
the Garter to his Highness, and a complimentary letter from the Queen.




CHAPTER IV.

RECAPITULATIONS.


From such fitful lights as could be cast upon his dark history by the
broken narrative of his poor patron, torn by remorse and struggling in
the last pangs of dissolution, Mr. Esmond had been made to understand
so far, that his mother was long since dead; and so there could be
no question as regarded her or her honor, tarnished by her husband's
desertion and injury, to influence her son in any steps which he might
take either for prosecuting or relinquishing his own just claims. It
appeared from my poor lord's hurried confession, that he had been made
acquainted with the real facts of the case only two years since, when
Mr. Holt visited him, and would have implicated him in one of those many
conspiracies by which the secret leaders of King James's party in this
country were ever endeavoring to destroy the Prince of Orange's life or
power: conspiracies so like murder, so cowardly in the means used, so
wicked in the end, that our nation has sure done well in throwing
off all allegiance and fidelity to the unhappy family that could not
vindicate its right except by such treachery--by such dark intrigue and
base agents. There were designs against King William that were no
more honorable than the ambushes of cut-throats and footpads. 'Tis
humiliating to think that a great Prince, possessor of a great and
sacred right, and upholder of a great cause, should have stooped to such
baseness of assassination and treasons as are proved by the unfortunate
King James's own warrant and sign manual given to his supporters in this
country. What he and they called levying war was, in truth, no better
than instigating murder. The noble Prince of Orange burst magnanimously
through those feeble meshes of conspiracy in which his enemies tried
to envelop him: it seemed as if their cowardly daggers broke upon the
breast of his undaunted resolution. After King James's death, the
Queen and her people at St. Germains--priests and women for the most
part--continued their intrigues in behalf of the young Prince, James the
Third, as he was called in France and by his party here (this Prince, or
Chevalier de St. George, was born in the same year with Esmond's young
pupil Frank, my Lord Viscount's son); and the Prince's affairs, being in
the hands of priests and women, were conducted as priests and women will
conduct them, artfully, cruelly, feebly, and to a certain bad issue. The
moral of the Jesuits' story I think as wholesome a one as ever was
writ: the artfullest, the wisest, the most toilsome, and dexterous
plot-builders in the world--there always comes a day when the roused
public indignation kicks their flimsy edifice down, and sends its
cowardly enemies a-flying. Mr. Swift hath finely described that passion
for intrigue, that love of secrecy, slander, and lying, which belongs to
weak people, hangers-on of weak courts. 'Tis the nature of such to
hate and envy the strong, and conspire their ruin; and the conspiracy
succeeds very well, and everything presages the satisfactory overthrow
of the great victim; until one day Gulliver rouses himself, shakes off
the little vermin of an enemy, and walks away unmolested. Ah! the Irish
soldiers might well say after the Boyne, "Change kings with us and we
will fight it over again." Indeed, the fight was not fair between the
two. 'Twas a weak, priest-ridden, woman-ridden man, with such puny
allies and weapons as his own poor nature led him to choose, contending
against the schemes, the generalship, the wisdom, and the heart of a
hero.

On one of these many coward's errands then, (for, as I view them now,
I can call them no less,) Mr. Holt had come to my lord at Castlewood,
proposing some infallible plan for the Prince of Orange's destruction,
in which my Lord Viscount, loyalist as he was, had indignantly refused
to join. As far as Mr. Esmond could gather from his dying words, Holt
came to my lord with a plan of insurrection, and offer of the renewal,
in his person, of that marquis's title which King James had conferred on
the preceding viscount; and on refusal of this bribe, a threat was made,
on Holt's part, to upset my Lord Viscount's claim to his estate and
title of Castlewood altogether. To back this astounding piece of
intelligence, of which Henry Esmond's patron now had the first light,
Holt came armed with the late lord's dying declaration, after the affair
of the Boyne, at Trim, in Ireland, made both to the Irish priest and a
French ecclesiastic of Holt's order, that was with King James's army.
Holt showed, or pretended to show, the marriage certificate of the late
Viscount Esmond with my mother, in the city of Brussels, in the year
1677, when the viscount, then Thomas Esmond, was serving with the
English army in Flanders; he could show, he said, that this Gertrude,
deserted by her husband long since, was alive, and a professed nun in
the year 1685, at Brussels, in which year Thomas Esmond married
his uncle's daughter, Isabella, now called Viscountess Dowager of
Castlewood; and leaving him, for twelve hours, to consider this
astounding news (so the poor dying lord said), disappeared with his
papers in the mysterious way in which he came. Esmond knew how, well
enough: by that window from which he had seen the Father issue:--but
there was no need to explain to my poor lord, only to gather from his
parting lips the words which he would soon be able to utter no more.

Ere the twelve hours were over, Holt himself was a prisoner, implicated
in Sir John Fenwick's conspiracy, and locked up at Hexton first, whence
he was transferred to the Tower; leaving the poor Lord Viscount, who
was not aware of the others being taken, in daily apprehension of his
return, when (as my Lord Castlewood declared, calling God to witness,
and with tears in his dying eyes) it had been his intention at once to
give up his estate and his title to their proper owner, and to retire to
his own house at Walcote with his family. "And would to God I had done
it," the poor lord said. "I would not be here now, wounded to death, a
miserable, stricken man!"

My lord waited day after day, and, as may be supposed, no messenger
came; but at a month's end Holt got means to convey to him a message
out of the Tower, which was to this effect: that he should consider all
unsaid that had been said, and that things were as they were.

"I had a sore temptation," said my poor lord. "Since I had come into
this cursed title of Castlewood, which hath never prospered with me, I
have spent far more than the income of that estate, and my paternal one,
too. I calculated all my means down to the last shilling, and found I
never could pay you back, my poor Harry, whose fortune I had had for
twelve years. My wife and children must have gone out of the house
dishonored, and beggars. God knows, it hath been a miserable one for me
and mine. Like a coward, I clung to that respite which Holt gave me. I
kept the truth from Rachel and you. I tried to win money of Mohun, and
only plunged deeper into debt; I scarce dared look thee in the face when
I saw thee. This sword hath been hanging over my head these two years. I
swear I felt happy when Mohun's blade entered my side."

After lying ten months in the Tower, Holt, against whom nothing could
be found except that he was a Jesuit priest, known to be in King James's
interest, was put on shipboard by the incorrigible forgiveness of King
William, who promised him, however, a hanging if ever he should again
set foot on English shore. More than once, whilst he was in prison
himself, Esmond had thought where those papers could be, which the
Jesuit had shown to his patron, and which had such an interest for
himself. They were not found on Mr. Holt's person when that Father was
apprehended, for had such been the case my Lords of the Council had seen
them, and this family history had long since been made public. However,
Esmond cared not to seek the papers. His resolution being taken; his
poor mother dead; what matter to him that documents existed proving his
right to a title which he was determined not to claim, and of which he
vowed never to deprive that family which he loved best in the world?
Perhaps he took a greater pride out of his sacrifice than he would have
had in those honors which he was resolved to forego. Again, as long as
these titles were not forthcoming, Esmond's kinsman, dear young Francis,
was the honorable and undisputed owner of the Castlewood estate and
title. The mere word of a Jesuit could not overset Frank's right of
occupancy, and so Esmond's mind felt actually at ease to think the
papers were missing, and in their absence his dear mistress and her son
the lawful Lady and Lord of Castlewood.

Very soon after his liberation, Mr. Esmond made it his business to ride
to that village of Ealing where he had passed his earliest years in
this country, and to see if his old guardians were still alive and
inhabitants of that place. But the only relique which he found of old
M. Pastoureau was a stone in the churchyard, which told that Athanasius
Pastoureau, a native of Flanders, lay there buried, aged 87 years. The
old man's cottage, which Esmond perfectly recollected, and the garden
(where in his childhood he had passed many hours of play and reverie,
and had many a beating from his termagant of a foster-mother), were
now in the occupation of quite a different family; and it was with
difficulty that he could learn in the village what had come of
Pastoureau's widow and children. The clerk of the parish recollected
her--the old man was scarce altered in the fourteen years that had
passed since last Esmond set eyes on him. It appeared she had pretty
soon consoled herself after the death of her old husband, whom she ruled
over, by taking a new one younger than herself, who spent her money
and ill-treated her and her children. The girl died; one of the boys
'listed; the other had gone apprentice. Old Mr. Rogers, the clerk, said
he had heard that Mrs. Pastoureau was dead too. She and her husband had
left Ealing this seven year; and so Mr. Esmond's hopes of gaining any
information regarding his parentage from this family were brought to an
end. He gave the old clerk a crown-piece for his news, smiling to think
of the time when he and his little playfellows had slunk out of the
churchyard or hidden behind the gravestones, at the approach of this
awful authority.

Who was his mother? What had her name been? When did she die? Esmond
longed to find some one who could answer these questions to him, and
thought even of putting them to his aunt the Viscountess, who had
innocently taken the name which belonged of right to Henry's mother.
But she knew nothing, or chose to know nothing, on this subject, nor,
indeed, could Mr. Esmond press her much to speak on it. Father Holt was
the only man who could enlighten him, and Esmond felt he must wait until
some fresh chance or new intrigue might put him face to face with his
old friend, or bring that restless indefatigable spirit back to England
again.

The appointment to his ensigncy, and the preparations necessary for the
campaign, presently gave the young gentleman other matters to think of.
His new patroness treated him very kindly and liberally; she promised
to make interest and pay money, too, to get him a company speedily; she
bade him procure a handsome outfit, both of clothes and of arms, and
was pleased to admire him when he made his first appearance in his laced
scarlet coat, and to permit him to salute her on the occasion of this
interesting investiture. "Red," says she, tossing up her old head, "hath
always been the color worn by the Esmonds." And so her ladyship wore
it on her own cheeks very faithfully to the last. She would have him be
dressed, she said, as became his father's son, and paid cheerfully for
his five-pound beaver, his black buckled periwig, and his fine holland
shirts, and his swords, and his pistols, mounted with silver. Since the
day he was born, poor Harry had never looked such a fine gentleman: his
liberal step-mother filled his purse with guineas, too, some of which
Captain Steele and a few choice spirits helped Harry to spend in an
entertainment which Dick ordered (and, indeed, would have paid for, but
that he had no money when the reckoning was called for; nor would the
landlord give him any more credit) at the "Garter," over against the
gate of the Palace, in Pall Mall.

The old Viscountess, indeed, if she had done Esmond any wrong formerly,
seemed inclined to repair it by the present kindness of her behavior:
she embraced him copiously at parting, wept plentifully, bade him write
by every packet, and gave him an inestimable relic, which she besought
him to wear round his neck--a medal, blessed by I know not what pope,
and worn by his late sacred Majesty King James. So Esmond arrived at his
regiment with a better equipage than most young officers could afford.
He was older than most of his seniors, and had a further advantage which
belonged but to very few of the army gentlemen in his day--many of whom
could do little more than write their names--that he had read much, both
at home and at the University, was master of two or three languages, and
had that further education which neither books nor years will give, but
which some men get from the silent teaching of adversity. She is a great
schoolmistress, as many a poor fellow knows, that hath held his hand out
to her ferule, and whimpered over his lesson before her awful chair.




CHAPTER V.

I GO ON THE VIGO BAY EXPEDITION, TASTE SALT-WATER AND SMELL POWDER.


The first expedition in which Mr. Esmond had the honor to be engaged,
rather resembled one of the invasions projected by the redoubted Captain
Avory or Captain Kidd, than a war between crowned heads, carried on by
generals of rank and honor. On the 1st day of July, 1702, a great fleet,
of a hundred and fifty sail, set sail from Spithead, under the command
of Admiral Shovell, having on board 12,000 troops, with his Grace the
Duke of Ormond as the Capt.-General of the expedition. One of these
12,000 heroes having never been to sea before, or, at least, only once
in his infancy, when he made the voyage to England from that unknown
country where he was born--one of those 12,000--the junior ensign of
Colonel Quin's regiment of Fusileers--was in a quite unheroic state of
corporal prostration a few hours after sailing; and an enemy, had he
boarded the ship, would have had easy work of him. From Portsmouth
we put into Plymouth, and took in fresh reinforcements. We were off
Finisterre on the 31st of July, so Esmond's table-book informs him: and
on the 8th of August made the rock of Lisbon. By this time the Ensign
was grown as bold as an admiral, and a week afterwards had the fortune
to be under fire for the first time--and under water, too,--his boat
being swamped in the surf in Toros Bay, where the troops landed. The
ducking of his new coat was all the harm the young soldier got in this
expedition, for, indeed, the Spaniards made no stand before our troops,
and were not in strength to do so.

But the campaign, if not very glorious, was very pleasant. New sights of
nature, by sea and land--a life of action, beginning now for the first
time--occupied and excited the young man. The many accidents, and the
routine of shipboard--the military duty--the new acquaintances, both of
his comrades in arms, and of the officers of the fleet--served to cheer
and occupy his mind, and waken it out of that selfish depression into
which his late unhappy fortunes had plunged him. He felt as if the ocean
separated him from his past care, and welcomed the new era of life which
was dawning for him. Wounds heal rapidly in a heart of two-and-twenty;
hopes revive daily; and courage rallies in spite of a man. Perhaps,
as Esmond thought of his late despondency and melancholy, and how
irremediable it had seemed to him, as he lay in his prison a few months
back, he was almost mortified in his secret mind at finding himself so
cheerful.

To see with one's own eyes men and countries, is better than reading all
the books of travel in the world: and it was with extreme delight and
exultation that the young man found himself actually on his grand tour,
and in the view of people and cities which he had read about as a boy.
He beheld war for the first time--the pride, pomp, and circumstance of
it, at least, if not much of the danger. He saw actually, and with
his own eyes, those Spanish cavaliers and ladies whom he had beheld
in imagination in that immortal story of Cervantes, which had been
the delight of his youthful leisure. 'Tis forty years since Mr. Esmond
witnessed those scenes, but they remain as fresh in his memory as on the
day when first he saw them as a young man. A cloud, as of grief, that
had lowered over him, and had wrapped the last years of his life in
gloom, seemed to clear away from Esmond during this fortunate voyage and
campaign. His energies seemed to awaken and to expand under a cheerful
sense of freedom. Was his heart secretly glad to have escaped from that
fond but ignoble bondage at home? Was it that the inferiority to
which the idea of his base birth had compelled him, vanished with the
knowledge of that secret, which though, perforce, kept to himself, was
yet enough to cheer and console him? At any rate, young Esmond of the
army was quite a different being to the sad little dependant of the
kind Castlewood household, and the melancholy student of Trinity Walks;
discontented with his fate, and with the vocation into which that drove
him, and thinking, with a secret indignation, that the cassock and
bands, and the very sacred office with which he had once proposed to
invest himself, were, in fact, but marks of a servitude which was to
continue all his life long. For, disguise it as he might to himself,
he had all along felt that to be Castlewood's chaplain was to be
Castlewood's inferior still, and that his life was but to be a long,
hopeless servitude. So, indeed, he was far from grudging his old friend
Tom Tusher's good fortune (as Tom, no doubt, thought it). Had it been a
mitre and Lambeth which his friends offered him, and not a small living
and a country parsonage, he would have felt as much a slave in one case
as in the other, and was quite happy and thankful to be free.

The bravest man I ever knew in the army, and who had been present in
most of King William's actions, as well as in the campaigns of the great
Duke of Marlborough, could never be got to tell us of any achievement of
his, except that once Prince Eugene ordered him up a tree to reconnoitre
the enemy, which feat he could not achieve on account of the horseman's
boots he wore; and on another day that he was very nearly taken prisoner
because of these jack-boots, which prevented him from running away.
The present narrator shall imitate this laudable reserve, and doth not
intend to dwell upon his military exploits, which were in truth not very
different from those of a thousand other gentlemen. This first campaign
of Mr. Esmond's lasted but a few days; and as a score of books have been
written concerning it, it may be dismissed very briefly here.

When our fleet came within view of Cadiz, our commander sent a boat
with a white flag and a couple of officers to the Governor of Cadiz, Don
Scipio de Brancaccio, with a letter from his Grace, in which he hoped
that as Don Scipio had formerly served with the Austrians against the
French, 'twas to be hoped that his Excellency would now declare himself
against the French King, and for the Austrian in the war between King
Philip and King Charles. But his Excellency, Don Scipio, prepared a
reply, in which he announced that, having served his former king with
honor and fidelity, he hoped to exhibit the same loyalty and devotion
towards his present sovereign, King Philip V.; and by the time this
letter was ready, the two officers had been taken to see the town, and
the alameda, and the theatre, where bull-fights are fought, and the
convents, where the admirable works of Don Bartholomew Murillo inspired
one of them with a great wonder and delight--such as he had never felt
before--concerning this divine art of painting; and these sights over,
and a handsome refection and chocolate being served to the English
gentlemen, they were accompanied back to their shallop with every
courtesy, and were the only two officers of the English army that saw at
that time that famous city.

The general tried the power of another proclamation on the Spaniards, in
which he announced that we only came in the interest of Spain and King
Charles, and for ourselves wanted to make no conquest nor settlement
in Spain at all. But all this eloquence was lost upon the Spaniards, it
would seem: the Captain-General of Andalusia would no more listen to us
than the Governor of Cadiz; and in reply to his Grace's proclamation,
the Marquis of Villadarias fired off another, which those who knew the
Spanish thought rather the best of the two; and of this number was Harry
Esmond, whose kind Jesuit in old days had instructed him, and now had
the honor of translating for his Grace these harmless documents of war.
There was a hard touch for his Grace, and, indeed, for other generals in
her Majesty's service, in the concluding sentence of the Don: "That he
and his council had the generous example of their ancestors to follow,
who had never yet sought their elevation in the blood or in the flight
of their kings. 'Mori pro patria' was his device, which the Duke might
communicate to the Princess who governed England."

Whether the troops were angry at this repartee or no, 'tis certain
something put them in a fury; for, not being able to get possession of
Cadiz, our people seized upon Port Saint Mary's and sacked it, burning
down the merchants' storehouses, getting drunk with the famous wines
there, pillaging and robbing quiet houses and convents, murdering and
doing worse. And the only blood which Mr. Esmond drew in this shameful
campaign, was the knocking down an English sentinel with a half-pike,
who was offering insult to a poor trembling nun. Is she going to turn
out a beauty? or a princess? or perhaps Esmond's mother that he had lost
and never seen? Alas no, it was but a poor wheezy old dropsical woman,
with a wart upon her nose. But having been early taught a part of the
Roman religion, he never had the horror of it that some Protestants have
shown, and seem to think to be a part of ours.

After the pillage and plunder of St. Mary's and an assault upon a fort
or two, the troops all took shipping, and finished their expedition, at
any rate, more brilliantly than it had begun. Hearing that the French
fleet with a great treasure was in Vigo Bay, our Admirals, Rooke and
Hopson, pursued the enemy thither; the troops landed and carried the
forts that protected the bay, Hopson passing the boom first on board
his ship the "Torbay," and the rest of the ships, English and Dutch,
following him. Twenty ships were burned or taken in the Port of
Redondilla, and a vast deal more plunder than was ever accounted for;
but poor men before that expedition were rich afterwards, and so often
was it found and remarked that the Vigo officers came home with pockets
full of money, that the notorious Jack Shafto, who made such a figure at
the coffeehouses and gaming-tables in London, and gave out that he had
been a soldier at Vigo, owned, when he was about to be hanged, that
Bagshot Heath had been HIS Vigo, and that he only spoke of La Redondilla
to turn away people's eyes from the real place where the booty lay.
Indeed, Hounslow or Vigo--which matters much? The latter was a bad
business, though Mr. Addison did sing its praises in Latin. That honest
gentleman's muse had an eye to the main chance; and I doubt whether she
saw much inspiration in the losing side.

But though Esmond, for his part, got no share of this fabulous booty,
one great prize which he had out of the campaign was, that excitement of
action and change of scene, which shook off a great deal of his previous
melancholy. He learnt at any rate to bear his fate cheerfully. He
brought back a browned face, a heart resolute enough, and a little
pleasant store of knowledge and observation, from that expedition, which
was over with the autumn, when the troops were back in England again;
and Esmond giving up his post of secretary to General Lumley, whose
command was over, and parting with that officer with many kind
expressions of good will on the General's side, had leave to go to
London, to see if he could push his fortunes any way further, and found
himself once more in his dowager aunt's comfortable quarters at Chelsey,
and in greater favor than ever with the old lady. He propitiated her
with a present of a comb, a fan, and a black mantle, such as the ladies
of Cadiz wear, and which my Lady Viscountess pronounced became her style
of beauty mightily. And she was greatily edified at hearing of that
story of his rescue of the nun, and felt very little doubt but that her
King James's relic, which he had always dutifully worn in his desk, had
kept him out of danger, and averted the shot of the enemy. My lady made
feasts for him, introduced him to more company, and pushed his fortunes
with such enthusiasm and success, that she got a promise of a company
for him through the Lady Marlborough's interest, who was graciously
pleased to accept of a diamond worth a couple of hundred guineas, which
Mr. Esmond was enabled to present to her ladyship through his aunt's
bounty, and who promised that she would take charge of Esmond's fortune.
He had the honor to make his appearance at the Queen's drawing-room
occasionally, and to frequent my Lord Marlborough's levees. That
great man received the young one with very especial favor, so Esmond's
comrades said, and deigned to say that he had received the best reports
of Mr. Esmond, both for courage and ability, whereon you may be sure
the young gentleman made a profound bow, and expressed himself eager to
serve under the most distinguished captain in the world.

Whilst his business was going on thus prosperously, Esmond had his
share of pleasure too, and made his appearance along with other young
gentlemen at the coffee-houses, the theatres, and the Mall. He longed to
hear of his dear mistress and her family: many a time, in the midst of
the gayeties and pleasures of the town, his heart fondly reverted to
them; and often as the young fellows of his society were making merry
at the tavern, and calling toasts (as the fashion of that day was) over
their wine, Esmond thought of persons--of two fair women, whom he had
been used to adore almost, and emptied his glass with a sigh.

By this time the elder Viscountess had grown tired again of the younger,
and whenever she spoke of my lord's widow, 'twas in terms by no means
complimentary towards that poor lady: the younger woman not needing her
protection any longer, the elder abused her. Most of the family quarrels
that I have seen in life (saving always those arising from money
disputes, when a division of twopence halfpenny will often drive the
dearest relatives into war and estrangement,) spring out of jealousy
and envy. Jack and Tom, born of the same family and to the same fortune,
live very cordially together, not until Jack is ruined when Tom deserts
him, but until Tom makes a sudden rise in prosperity, which Jack can't
forgive. Ten times to one 'tis the unprosperous man that is angry, not
the other who is in fault. 'Tis Mrs. Jack, who can only afford a chair,
that sickens at Mrs. Tom's new coach-and-sick, cries out against her
sister's airs, and sets her husband against his brother. 'Tis Jack who
sees his brother shaking hands with a lord (with whom Jack would like
to exchange snuff-boxes himself), that goes home and tells his wife how
poor Tom is spoiled, he fears, and no better than a sneak, parasite, and
beggar on horse back. I remember how furious the coffee-house wits were
with Dick Steele when he set up his coach and fine house in Bloomsbury:
they began to forgive him when the bailiffs were after him, and abused
Mr. Addison for selling Dick's country-house. And yet Dick in the
sponging-house, or Dick in the Park, with his four mares and plated
harness, was exactly the same gentle, kindly, improvident, jovial Dick
Steele: and yet Mr. Addison was perfectly right in getting the money
which was his, and not giving up the amount of his just claim, to
be spent by Dick upon champagne and fiddlers, laced clothes, fine
furniture, and parasites, Jew and Christian, male and female, who clung
to him. As, according to the famous maxim of Monsieur de Rochefoucault,
"in our friends' misfortunes there's something secretly pleasant to us;"
so, on the other hand, their good fortune is disagreeable. If 'tis hard
for a man to bear his own good luck, 'tis harder still for his friends
to bear it for him and but few of them ordinarily can stand that trial:
whereas one of the "precious uses" of adversity is, that it is a great
reconciler; that it brings back averted kindness, disarms animosity, and
causes yesterday's enemy to fling his hatred aside, and hold out a hand
to the fallen friend of old days. There's pity and love, as well as
envy, in the same heart and towards the same person. The rivalry stops
when the competitor tumbles; and, as I view it, we should look at these
agreeable and disagreeable qualities of our humanity humbly alike. They
are consequent and natural, and our kindness and meanness both manly.

So you may either read the sentence, that the elder of Esmond's two
kinswomen pardoned the younger her beauty, when that had lost somewhat
of its freshness, perhaps; and forgot most her grievances against the
other, when the subject of them was no longer prosperous and enviable;
or we may say more benevolently (but the sum comes to the same figures,
worked either way,) that Isabella repented of her unkindness towards
Rachel, when Rachel was unhappy; and, bestirring herself in behalf of
the poor widow and her children, gave them shelter and friendship.
The ladies were quite good friends as long as the weaker one needed a
protector. Before Esmond went away on his first campaign, his mistress
was still on terms of friendship (though a poor little chit, a
woman that had evidently no spirit in her, &c.) with the elder Lady
Castlewood; and Mistress Beatrix was allowed to be a beauty.

But between the first year of Queen Anne's reign, and the second, sad
changes for the worse had taken place in the two younger ladies,
at least in the elder's description of them. Rachel, Viscountess
Castlewood, had no more face than a dumpling, and Mrs. Beatrix was grown
quite coarse, and was losing all her beauty. Little Lord Blandford--(she
never would call him Lord Blandford; his father was Lord Churchill--the
King, whom he betrayed, had made him Lord Churchill, and he was Lord
Churchill still)--might be making eyes at her; but his mother, that
vixen of a Sarah Jennings, would never hear of such a folly. Lady
Marlborough had got her to be a maid of honor at Court to the Princess,
but she would repent of it. The widow Francis (she was but Mrs. Francis
Esmond) was a scheming, artful, heartless hussy. She was spoiling her
brat of a boy, and she would end by marrying her chaplain.

"What, Tusher!" cried Mr. Esmond, feeling a strange pang of rage and
astonishment.

"Yes--Tusher, my maid's son; and who has got all the qualities of
his father the lackey in black, and his accomplished mamma the
