If any one had an ache or a pain it was easily accounted for.  For
why, they were bewitched! The poor old crone was the witch who had
"cast the evil eye" upon them.  And sometimes these poor creatures
were put to death for their so-called deeds of witchcraft.

People believed that these witches sold themselves to the Evil One,
and that he gave them power to harm other people.  And what made
them more dangerous was the fact that they did not need to go near
people to harm them, but could do evil at a distance by thinking
wicked thoughts, or saying wicked words.  Some even of the most
saintly and most learned people, believed in witches and witchcraft.
So there is nothing surprising in the fact that suddenly, in 1692,
whole towns and villages of New England were thrown into a ferment
of terror by stories of witchcraft.

It came about quite simply.  Two little girls of nine and eleven, the
niece and daughter of a minister named Samuel Parris, who lived in
Salem village, began suddenly to behave in a most curious manner.
They would creep into holes, hide under chairs and benches, twist
themselves into queer positions, make curious gestures and weird
noises, and talk arrant nonsense.  Their parents knew not what to
make of it, and so they called in the doctors.  Nowadays a clever
doctor would have found out pretty soon that the children were
merely pretending and playing a foolish trick upon their elders.
But in those days doctors were not very wise, and they knew not
what to make of this new and strange disease.  One of them, however,
said he thought that the children must be bewitched.

That was a terrible thought, and at once the minister called in all
the other ministers from round about and they spent a day fasting
and praying that the children might be released from the evil
enchantment.  All the neighbours, too, came crowding to the house,
eager to hear about the dreadful happenings.  And the children,
finding themselves all at once people of the first importance, and
no doubt enjoying the fuss which was being made, went on more than
ever with their mad antics.

It was quite plain to every one that the children were bewitched.  But
who had done it? Every day the children were asked this question,
and at length they accused a poor old Indian woman, who was a servant
in the family.  And the poor old creature was beaten and terrified
until she actually confessed that she was a witch, and in league
with the Evil One.

Perhaps the children had a spite against the old woman, perhaps they
did not realise at first how wicked and cruel they were.  Certainly
when they found what excitement they caused, and how interesting
they had become to every one they forgot all else.  They became
bolder now and accused other old women.  Soon more and older girls
joined them, and many innocent people, both men and women, were
accused by them of witchcraft.

They did all sorts of things to make people believe in these
accusations.  As soon as an old woman was brought in they would
fall down on the ground screaming.  If she moved they would cry out
that she was crushing them to death; if she bit her lip they would
declare that she was biting them and so on.  They told strange
tales, too, of how they had been made to write in a long, thick, red
book,--the book of the Evil One.  They talked a jumble of nonsense
about a Black Man, a black dog and a yellow bird.  They would seem
to fall down in fits or to be struck dumb.  And they so worked upon
the superstitious fears of those present that at length both judges
and jury, carried away by mysterious terror, would condemn the old
woman to death.

Soon a kind of madness took possession of the people.  Person after
person was accused; wrongs and misfortunes ten or even twenty years
old were remembered, and charged to this person or that.  No man or
woman was safe.  Neither age nor youth, beauty, learning nor goodness
were any safeguard.  Not only the good name, but the very life of
every Man was at the mercy of every other man.  Terror and mistrust
stalked abroad, and entered every home.  Parents accused their
children, children their parents, husbands and wives turned against
each other until the prisons were filled to overflowing.

It was quite useless for the prisoners to declare that they were
innocent.  Few believed them.  If any did they hardly dare say so,
lest they should find themselves accused in their turn and lodged
in prison.  Yet at length some were brave enough to stand by their
loved ones.

One determined young man with great difficulty succeeded in rescuing
his mother from prison.  In getting out the poor woman broke her
leg, but her son lifted her on to his horse and carried her away
to a swamp near by.  Here he built her a hut and brought her food
and kept her safe until all danger was passed.

One or two other men escaped with their wives and fled beyond the
borders of the colony.  Twenty, however, were put to death by hanging,
among them a minister.  All these twenty to the last declared their
innocence.  Many others, strange to say, confessed to being witches.
They confessed because they were terrified into it.  Many confessed
because they saw that by so doing they might save their lives.  But
some, having confessed, were so distressed at having lied that they
took back their confession.  Then they were hanged without mercy.

For a year this terrible madness lasted.  Then it passed as suddenly
as it had come.  The people awoke again to their right senses.  The
prison doors were opened and the poor innocent people were set
free.  The wicked children who had accused them were never punished
unless their own hearts punished them.  One of them at least repented
bitterly, and years later openly acknowledged her sorrow for her
share in the sad business.

The minister in whose house the persecution began was punished.  For
the people were so angry with him and the part he had taken that
they would have no more to do with him, and he was obliged to leave
Salem village.

Some others who had taken as great a part as he in hounding guiltless
people to death remained impenitent and unpunished.  But the jury
and some of the judges made some amends.  They did a hard thing,
for they publicly acknowledged that they had been wrong.  The jury
wrote and signed a paper in which they said, "We do hereby declare
that we justly fear that we were sadly deluded and mistaken, for
which we are much disquieted and distressed in our minds.  And do
therefore humbly beg forgiveness."

One of the judges, Judge Sewall, was bitterly grieved at the part
he had played.  And on a day of general intercession he stood up
before the whole congregation, acknowledging his guilt and praying
God to forgive him.  And throughout all his life he kept one day a
year upon which he prayed and fasted in repentance.

Perhaps you may think that there is nothing in this story to make
you proud of your ancestors.  But think again.  Think of the courage
of those men and women who cheerfully went to death rather than
save their lives by lying and making false confessions.  Truth to
those brave men and women was worth more than life.  And is there
nothing to be proud of in the fact that the judge and jury, when
they found themselves in the wrong, had the manliness to own it
publicly and without reserve?

To some of us nothing in all the world seems so hard as to own
ourselves in the wrong.

Part IV STORIES OF THE MIDDLE AND SOUTHERN COLONIES

__________




Chapter 35 - The Founding of Maryland





About the same time as Gorges was making laws for his little kingdom
of New Hampshire another English gentleman was doing much the same
somewhat farther south.  This was Lord Baltimore.

The first Lord Baltimore was a Yorkshire gentleman named Calvert;
he was a favourite of James I, who made him a baron, and he took
his title from a tiny village in Ireland.

Like so many other men of his time Lord Baltimore was interested
in America, and wanted to found a colony there.  First he tried to
found one in Newfoundland.  There he received a large grant of land
which he called Avalon after the fabled land in the story of King
Arthur, and he had a kind of fairy vision of the warmth and sunny
delights which were to be found in his new land.

But instead of being warm and sunny he found that Newfoundland was
bleak and cold, so his fairy vision shriveled and died, and be came
home and asked for a grant of land on the Potomac instead.  In 1632
King James gave Lord Baltimore what he asked and called the land
Maryland in honour of his wife, Queen Henrietta Maria.

But before the grant was sealed "with the King's broad seal" Lord
Baltimore died.  Not he, therefore, but his son, Cecilius, was the
first "Lord Proprietary" of Maryland, and for his broad lands all
he had to pay to King James was two Indian arrows, to be delivered
at Windsor Castle every year on Tuesday in Easter week.  He had
also to pay one-fifth part of all the gold and silver which might
be found within his borders.  But no gold or silver was found in
the colony, so there was nothing to pay.

Lord Baltimore did not himself go to America, but sent his brother,
Leonard Calvert, as Governor.  Maryland was not founded like the
Puritan colonies for religious purposes, but like New Hampshire,
merely for trade and profit.  But in those days religion and religious
strife entered into everything.  So it did into the founding of
Maryland.

For Lord Baltimore was a Catholic, and in England Roman Catholics
in their turn, as well as dissenters, were persecuted, and Lord
Baltimore hoped to found a refuge for them in his new possessions
in America.  So although, in the charter given by a Protestant King
the Church of England was recognised as the state religion, in
reality there was great religious freedom in Maryland, and for a
time it was there only that Catholics found freedom in America.

But in order to secure toleration for the Catholic religion Lord
Baltimore found himself obliged to tolerate all others.  So men of
all creeds came to settle in Maryland and find freedom.

The people of Virginia were very far from pleased when they heard
of the new colony about to be planted so near them.  For part of the
land which had been given to Lord Baltimore they claimed as their
own, and they looked upon the newcomers as intruders on their
territory and resolved to maintain their rights.  They did all they
could to prevent the new settlers coming.  Nevertheless, in spite
of everything, Leonard Calvert set sail with his colonists, many
of whom were well-to-do people, in two ships called the Ark and
the Dove.

They had a prosperous voyage and landed in Virginia full of doubt
lest the inhabitants, who were very angry at their coming, should
be plotting something against them.  But the letters which they
carried from the King seemed to appease the anger of the Virginians
for a little, and the newcomers sailed on again to their own
destination in Chesapeake Bay.

So at length they reached the "wished-for country" and Calvert
landed with solemn state to take possession of the land in the name
of God and the King of England.

As he stepped ashore a salute was fired from the boats.  Then,
reverently kneeling, the colonists listened while Mass was said for
the first time in English America.  Mass being over, they formed a
procession at the head of which a rough wooden cross was carried.
Then when they reached a spot chosen beforehand they planted the
cross, and, kneeling round it, chanted the Litany of the Sacred
Cross with great fervour.

And thus a new colony was begun.

With the Indians Calvert made friends, for he was both just and
kind to them, paying them for their land in hoes, hatchets, coloured
cloths and the beads and gew-gaws they loved.  So in those early
days there were no Indian wars and massacres in Maryland.

But although at peace with the Redmen the Marylanders were not at
peace with their fellow white men.  For the Virginians could not
forget that Lord Baltimore had taken land which they had looked
upon as their own.  They had done their best to hinder him coming
at all.  And now that he had come they did their best to drive him
away again.  They tried to stir up mischief between the newcomers
and the Indians by telling the Indians that these newcomers were
Spaniards, and enemies of the English nation.  They complained to
the people in power at home, and did everything they could to make
Maryland an uncomfortable dwelling place for those they looked upon
as interlopers.

The chief enemy of the Marylanders among the Virginians was a man
named William Clayborne.  Before the coming of these new colonists
he had settled himself upon the Isle of Kent, which was within
their bounds, and now he absolutely refused either to move or to
recognise the authority of Calvert as Governor; for he claimed the
Isle of Kent as part of Virginia.

Calvert on his side insisted on his rights, and as neither would
give way it came at length to fighting.  There was bloodshed on both
sides, now one, now the other getting the upper hand.  Each appealed
in turn to King, Parliament, or Protector, and so for more than
twenty years the quarrel went on.  But when the great Cromwell came
to power he took Lord Baltimore's part, Catholic though he was.  And
at length in 1657, weary perhaps of the struggle, each side gave
way a little and there was peace between the two colonies.

But in spite of the constant trouble with Clayborne the colony grew
and prospered, for there was greater religious freedom to be found
there than anywhere else either in England or America.  And in the
seventeenth century religion bulked more largely in an Englishman's
thoughts than almost anything else.  Then in 1649 the Governor issued
an Act called the Toleration Act, which has made him famous.  It
gave freedom to every one to follow his own religion save Jews and
Unitarians, and for those days it was a wonderfully liberal and
broad-minded Act.  It threatened with a fine of ten shillings any one
who should in scorn or reproach call any man such names as popish
priest, Roundhead, heretic.  It declared that no person whatsoever
within the Province professing to believe in Jesus Christ should
be in any way troubled or molested for his or her religion.

This was the first law of its kind ever brought into force in
America, and although suspended once or twice for short periods it
remained almost continuously in force for many years.

Maryland becomes a royal province, 1691 Time went on and the great
estate of Maryland passed from one Lord Baltimore to another.  Although
founded as a refuge for Catholics there were far more Protestants
than Catholics within the colony.  And when William III, the Protestant
King, came to the throne he deprived Baltimore of his rights, and
made Maryland a royal province.  The Church of England was then
established, and Catholics forbidden to hold services.  Thus Lord
Baltimore's dream of providing a refuge for the oppressed was at
an end.

But in 1715 Benedict, the fourth Lord Baltimore, became a Protestant,
and Maryland was given back to him.  It remained in possession of
his family until the Revolution.

__________





Chapter 36 - How New Amsterdam Became New York




All the colonies which we have so far talked about were founded by
Englishmen.  Now we come to one which was founded by another people
who, like the English, were great sea rovers and adventurer's-the
Dutch.  Even before the landing of the Pilgrim Fathers the Dutch
laid claim to the valleys of the Hudson and the Delaware.

In those days people still knew very little about the continent
of North America.  They knew it was a continent, but they did not
believe it to be very wide, as is proved by charters like that
of Virginia which made the colony extend from sea to sea.  Nor did
people know how long the continent was.  They had no idea that the
great double continent stretched from north to south all across the
hemisphere, and they were continually seeking for that North-West
passage which would lead them to India by way of the west.

Now in 1609 Henry Hudson, an English sailor in the pay of the Dutch,
came seeking the North-West passage.  He did not find it, but sailed
into Delaware Bay and up the beautiful river which is now known
by his name as far as where the town of Albany now stands.  It was
autumn when Hudson sailed up the river; the sky was gloriously
blue, and the woods aflame with red and yellow, and he went home
to tell the Dutch that he had found "as pleasant a land with grass
and flowers and goodly trees as ever he had seen," "a very good
land to fall with, and a pleasant land to see."

By right of Hudson's discoveries the Dutch claimed all the land
between Cape Cod and Chesapeake Bay, and, tempted by his glowing
descriptions, they very soon established trading ports upon the
Hudson which they called the North River.  The Delaware they called
the South River.

The English too claimed the same land, and it was not until some
years after the landing of the Pilgrim Fathers that the Dutch
settled in the country.  Then they formed a company and bought the
Island of Manhattan where New York now stands from the Indians for
about five pounds' worth of glass beads and other trifles.

Here they built a little fort which they called New Amsterdam in
1626.

The colony grew slowly.  For the life was by no means an easy one,
and the people of Holland lived in freedom and religious peace at
home, so they had no need to cross the Atlantic to seek them.  But
the company wanted settlers.  They therefore offered to give an
estate with eighteen miles' bay or river frontage to every man who
would bring, or send, fifty colonists.  Many people at once became
eager to win such a prize, and very soon there were little settlements
all along the shores of the Hudson.

The men who received these huge estates were called patroons,
which is the same word as our English patron, and they had power
not unlike the feudal lords of old time.  They were bound to supply
each of their settlers with a farm, and also to provide a minister
and a schoolmaster for every settlement.  But on the other hand they
had full power over the settlers.  They were the rulers and judges,
while the settlers were almost serfs, and were bound to stay for
ten years with their patroon, to grind their corn at his mills,
and pay him tribute.

Over the whole colony there was a Governor who was as a rule
autocratic and sometimes dishonest, and there was a good deal of
unrest in the colony.  The patroons were soon at loggerheads with
each other and with the Governor.  There were quarrels with the
Swedes, who had settled on the Delaware, and there was terrible
fighting with the Indians.

At length the state of the colony became so bad that the settlers
wrote home to Holland complaining of their Governor and blaming
him for all their troubles.  The people in Holland listened to this
complaint and a new Governor was sent out.  This was Peter Stuyvesant,
the last and most famous of the Governors of New Amsterdam.

Peter Stuyvesant, Governor from 1647-1664; He was a fiery old
fellow, with a great love of pomp, and a tremendous opinion of his
own importance.  He had lost a leg in the Spanish Wars, and now he
stamped about with a wooden one.  But as no plain wooden leg would
please his taste for grandeur he had it bound with silver.

The people were heartily tired of their old Governor, so they
hailed the coming of Stuyvesant with joy.  But no sooner had their
new Governor arrived than they began to wonder if after all the
change was a happy one.  For Stuyvesant seemed to look down upon
them all.  He landed with great state and pomp, and some of the chief
inhabitants who had come to meet him were left standing bareheaded
for several hours while he kept his hat on, as if he were Tsar of
all the Russias.

When he took over the direction of affairs from the late Governor,
he did it with great ceremony in presence of all the colonists.
And the late Governor, thinking to make a good impression before
he left, made a speech thanking the people for their faithfulness
to him.  But the stolid Dutchmen were not going to have any such
farce.  So they up and told him boldly that they would not thank
him, for they had no reason to do so.

Stuyvesant, however, would not have any wrangling; he loudly and
proudly declared that every one should have justice done to him,
and that he would be to them as a father to his children.  But his
bearing was so haughty that some of them went away shaking their
heads, and fearing that he would be but a harsh father.

And so it proved.  If the settlers' lot had been hard under the rule
of other governors, it was still harder under that of Stuyvesant.
He was autocratic and hectoring.  He stumped about with his wooden
leg, and shouted every one else down, and no one dared oppose him.
Some indeed, more brave than others, declared that they would write
home to Holland to complain of his tyranny.  But when Stuyvesant
heard it he got so angry that he foamed at the mouth. "If any one
appeals from my judgments," he shouted, "I shall make him a foot
shorter and send the pieces to Holland.  Let him appeal in that
way."

But Stuyvesant with all his faults was a far better Governor than
those who had gone before him.  And he had no easy post, for on every
side he found himself surrounded by other States, the inhabitants
of which were constantly encroaching on the borders of New Netherland.

The English, both from Massachusetts and Connecticut, seemed to
think that the Dutch had no rights at all.  Where they found good
land they settled, scoffing at the Dutch remonstrances.

Stuyvesant too was soon at loggerheads with the Swedes who had
settled on the Delaware.  The Dutch claimed both sides of the river
and the Swedes laughed at their claims.  They would sail up the river
past the Dutch fort without stopping and displaying their colours,
and when challenged, and asked for their reason, replied boldly
that they would certainly do it again.

Then the Dutch began to build a new fort on land which the Swedes
claimed, and the Swedes came and destroyed it.  So things went from
bad to worse, until at length Stuyvesant decided to put an end to
it.  He gathered an army of six hundred men, the largest army that
had ever been gathered in North America, and with seven ships
entered the Delaware.

Against a force like this the Swedes could not defend themselves,
so they yielded on condition that they should march out of their
forts with all the honours of war.  This was granted to them and
with colours flying, drums beating and trumpets playing the Swedes
marched out and the Dutch marched in.  Thus without a blow, after
seventeen years of occupation, New Sweden became part of New
Netherland.  Later on this land captured from the Swedes was to
become the State of Delaware.

From his triumph over the Swedes Stuyvesant was recalled by the
news that there was war with the Indians.  He soon brought that to
an end also.  But he was not always to be victorious, and at length
the time came when the power of the Dutch was to be swept away
before a still greater power.

Stuyvesant had ruled New Netherland for seventeen years.  The
colony had prospered, and the number of new settlers had steadily
increased.  During these same years Great Britain had been passing
through stormy times.  King Charles had been beheaded, the kingdom
had been declared a Commonwealth with Cromwell at its head, but
he was now dead, the Stuarts once more ruled, and King Charles II
sat upon the throne.  He cast a greedy eye upon New Netherland, for
he wanted it for his brother, the Duke of York.

There was peace between Holland and Britain, but Charles II cared
little about that.  So in 1664 he secretly granted all the land
lying between the Delaware and Connecticut rivers to his brother,
and sent a fleet of four ships and about four hundred soldiers
under Colonel Richard Nicolls to take possession of the country.

When Stuyvesant heard of it he made ready to resist.  He gathered
in what powder and shot be could from the surrounding settlements;
he mounted cannon, he ordered every able-bodied man to take his turn
at strengthening the fortifications and keeping guard.  And having
done all he could he sent a messenger to Nicolls asking why he had
come.

Nicolls' reply was a summons to surrender the town.  At the same
time he promised that any one who would submit quietly should be
protected by "his Majesty's laws and justice." "Any people from the
Netherlands may freely come and plant here," he wrote, "vessels of
their own country may freely come hither, and any of them may as
freely return home in vessels of their own country."

But Peter Stuyvesant was hot to fight.  So lest the easy terms should
make any of the settlers willing to give in he tried to keep them
secret.  But the Council would not have it so.

"All that regards the public welfare must be made public," they
said, and held to it.

Then, seeing he could not move them from their determination, in a
fit of passion Stuyvesant tore Nicolls' letter in pieces, swearing
that he would not be answerable for the consequences.

The people were growing impatient, and leaving their work upon
the fortifications they stormed into the Council Chamber.  In vain
Stuyvesant tried to persuade them to return to their work.  They
would not listen to him.  They replied to him only with curses and
groans.  Then from all sides came cries of, "The letter, the letter,
we will have the letter."

So at last Stuyvesant yielded; the torn fragments were gathered
together and a copy made.  And when the people heard the terms they
bade him yield.  Still he would not, and he sent another message to
Nicolls.

But Nicolls would not listen. "To-morrow," he said, "I will speak
with you at Manhattan."

"Friends will be welcome," replied the messenger, "if they come,
in friendly fashion."

"I shall come with my ships and my soldiers," answered Nicolls.
"Hoist the white flag of peace on the fort, and then something may
be considered."

When this answer was known terror seized the town.  Women and children
came to implore the Governor with tears to submit.

He would not listen to them.  Like the fierce old lion he was he
knit his brows and stamped with his wooden leg. "I would rather be
carried a corpse to my grave than give in," he cried.

But he alone had any desire to fight.  For in the whole fort there
was not enough powder to last one day, from the river front there
was absolutely no protection, and on the north there was only a
rickety fence three or four feet high.  There was little food within
the fort, and not a single well.  So all the chief inhabitants wrote
a letter to the Governor begging him to give in.

"You know, in your own conscience," they said, "that your fortress
is incapable of making head three days against so powerful an enemy.
And (God help us) whether we turn us for assistance to the north,
or to the south, to the east or to the west 'tis all in vain! On
all sides are we encompassed and hemmed in by our enemies.  Therefore
we humbly and in bitterness of heart, implore your Honour not to
reject the conditions of so generous a foe."

This letter was signed by all the most important people of the
town, even by Stuyvesant's own son.  With every one against him he
could hold out no longer.  So he yielded and at eight o'clock on
Monday morning, the 8th of September, 1664, he marched out of Fort
Amsterdam at the head of his soldiers.  With colours flying and drums
beating they marched down to the riverside where a ship awaited
them, and getting on board they set sail for Holland.

Then the Dutch flag was hauled down, the British flag was hoisted
in its place, and New Amsterdam became New York, a name given it
in honour of the King's brother, the Duke of York.

A few weeks later every other Dutch settlement had yielded to the
British.  Fort Orange became Fort Albany, so named for the Duke of
York's second title, and Dutch dominion in North America was at an
end.

As to Stuyvesant, he sailed home and was severely scolded by the
West India Company for his "scandalous surrender." He was, however,
able to defend himself, and prove to the directors that he had
done his best.  Then he returned to America and spent the rest of
his life quietly on his farm, or "bowery" as it was called in Dutch.

Those of you who are familiar with New York know that there is
still a part of it called The Bowery, and it may interest you to
learn that it is so called in memory of the farm where this arrogant
old lion of a Dutchman spent his last days.  He spent them peacefully
and happily.  Now that he was no longer a ruler he lost much of his
overbearing pride, and all that was kindly in his nature showed
itself.  Many who had feared and hated him came to love and admire
him.  Among others he made friends with the Englishman who had
ousted him, and many a jolly evening he and Nicolls spent together
cracking jokes and listening to each other's stories of the brave
days gone by.

Peter Stuyvesant died at the age of eighty, and was buried in what
is now St.  Mark's Church, where a tablet on the wall marks the spot
where he lies.

New York was now a proprietary colony like Maryland, its overlord
being the Duke of York, and when in 1685 he became King of England
New York became a Crown Colony.

The Dutch rule had been autocratic, the people having little say in
the government.  They had chafed against it and had hoped that the
change of ruler would bring a change of government, and that they
would be allowed freedom like the New England Colonies.  But James
was not the sort of man to allow freedom to people when he could
prevent it.  So the government of New York continued as autocratic
as before.

Meanwhile New York once more changed hands.  In a time of peace the
British had calmly and without a shadow of right taken the colony
from the Dutch.  Nine years later when the two countries were at
war the Dutch took it back again.

It was just the same nine-year-old story over again.  Only this time
it was the Dutch who marched in and hoisted the Dutch flag over
the fort.

Once more the names were changed; New York became New Orange, and
the province was once more New Amsterdam.

But this was only for a month or two.  The following year Holland
and Britain made peace, and by the Treaty of Westminster all Dutch
possessions in North America were given back to Britain, and Dutch
rule in North America was at an end for ever.

__________





Chapter 37 - How a German Ruled New York




When Sir Edmund Andros came to America, he had been made Governor
of New York as well as of all New England.  And while Massachusetts
was having its revolution upon the accession of William and Mary
there were exciting times in New York also.  When the news of the
imprisonment of Andros reached New York there was great agitation.
Almost at the same time came the news that the French had
declared war on England, which added to the people's excitement.
For they suspected Nicholson, whom Andros had left in charge as
Lieutenant-Governor, of being a Catholic; and a quite groundless
idea got about that he meant to betray the colony into the hands
of the French, or burn it to the ground.

There were very few Catholics in New York, and the Protestants had
little need to fear them.  But many of the Protestants were filled
with a burning zeal for their faith, and of these Jacob Leisler,
an honest, ignorant German, now became the leader.  He refused to
pay a tax because the tax collector was a "Papist," and therefore
no fit person to receive the money.  Other people followed his
example, and day by day excitement grew.

At length Leisler was at the head of a great following.  He got
command of the fort, and drew up a declaration which he forced
the captain of the militia and others to sign.  In this he declared
that the city was in danger, and that he would take possession of
it until King William should appoint a Governor.  Nicholson had no
grit.  He could not stand against a bold blusterer like Leisler,
so he ran away.  He went home "to render an account of the present
deplorable state of affairs" to King William.  But in order that
Nicholson should not have it all his own way at home Leisler on
his side sent an innkeeper, Joost Stoll, as his ambassador to King
William to explain matters from his point of view.

Leisler now became very autocratic.  He called himself Lieutenant-Governor,
he disarmed and arrested all the "Papists," and every one was a
"Papist" who did not yield readily to him.  He had enormous power in
his hands for good or evil, but he was far too ignorant and vain
to use it well.  Indeed he used it so badly that even some of the
men who had hailed him with delight turned against him.

Leisler by many signs knew his popularity was failing.  Then
his friend, the innkeeper, returned from England with the doleful
news that King William had taken not the slightest notice of him.
The King indeed would not deign to recognise the existence of the
upstart German "governor," and had appointed a new Governor who
would shortly arrive in New York.

This was bad news for Leisler, and it seemed to drive him crazy.
He grew more and more tyrannical.  At length his tyranny became so
bad that many of the chief people of New York wrote a letter to
the King and Queen complaining of it.

In this letter they told the King and Queen that they were sore
oppressed by "ill men" who ruled in New York "by the sword, at the
sole will of an insolent alien, assisted by some few, whom we can
give no better name than a rabble." From other parts of the colony
too letters were written calling Leisler a bold usurper, and begging
the King to do something "to break this heavy yoke of worse than
Egyptian bondage."

Nor did the people confine themselves to writing letters.  Leisler
found himself insulted at every turn.  He was mobbed, and stoned,
and called "Dog Driver," "General Hog" and other ugly names.

Meanwhile on the stormy seas the ships bringing out the new Governor
and Lieutenant-Governor were being tossed hither and thither.  The
waves dashed high, the wind drove the ships helplessly before it,
and the Archangel, which bore the Governor was separated from the
others, and driven far out of its course.  Thus it happened that
