seemed to be Irish, and made it pass for Greek with the captain, who,
looking at me with a contemptuous sneer, exclaimed, "Ah, ah! have you
caught a tartar?" I could not help smiling at the consummate assurance
of this Hibernian, and offered to refer the dispute to anybody on board
who understood the Greek alphabet. Upon which Morgan was brought back,
and, being made acquainted with the affair, took the book, and read a
whole page in English, without hesitation, deciding the controversy in
my favour. The doctor was so far from being out of countenance at this
detection, that he affirmed Morgan was in the secret, and repeated from
his own invention. Oakum said, "Ay, ay, I see they are both in a story;"
and dismissed my fellow-mate to his cockloft, although I proposed that
he and I should read and translate, separately, any chapter or verse in
the Greek Testament in his possession, by which it would appear whether
we or the surgeon spoke truth. Not being endued with eloquence enough
to convince the captain that there could be no juggle nor confederacy
in this expedient, I begged to be examined by some unconcerned person
on board, who understood Greek. Accordingly, the whole ship's company,
officers and all, were called upon deck, among whom it was proclaimed
that, if anyone of them could speak Greek, he or they so qualified
should ascend the quarter-deck immediately. After some pause, two
foremast men came up, and professed their skill in that language, which,
they said, they acquired during several voyages to the Levant, among the
Greeks of the Morea. The captain exulted much in this declaration, and
put my journal book into the hands of one of them, who candidly owned he
could neither read nor write; the other acknowledged the same degree of
ignorance, but pretended to speak the Greek lingo with any man on board;
and, addressing himself to me, pronounced some sentences of a barbarous
corrupted language, which I did not understand. I asserted that the
modern Greek was as different from that spoken and written by the
ancients, as the English used now from the old Saxon spoke in the time
of Hengist: and, as I had only learned the true original tongue, in
which Homer, Pindar, the Evangelists, and other great men of antiquity
wrote, it could not be supposed that I should know anything of an
imperfect Gothic dialect that rose on the ruins of the former, and
scarce retained any traces of the old expression: but, if Doctor
Mackshane, who pretended to be master of the Greek language, could
maintain a conversation with these seamen, I would retract what I had
said, and be content to suffer any punishment be should think proper to
inflict. I had no sooner uttered these words than the surgeon, knowing
one of the fellows to be his countryman, accosted him in Irish, and was
answered in the same brogue; then a dialogue ensued between them, which
they affirmed to be in Greek, after having secured the secrecy of
the other tar, who had his cue in the language of the Morea, from
his companion, before they would venture to assert such an intrepid
falsehood. "I thought," said Oakum, "we should discover the imposture at
last. Let the rascal be carried back to his confinement. I find he must
dangle." Having nothing further to urge in my own behalf, before a court
so prejudiced with spite, and fortified with ignorance against truth, I
suffered myself to be reconducted peaceably to my fellow-prisoner, who,
hearing the particulars of my trial, lifted up his hands and eyes to
Heaven, and uttered a dreadful groan: and, not daring to disburden his
thoughts to me by speech, lest he might be overheard by the sentinel,
burst forth into a Welsh song, which he accompanied with a thousand
contortions of face and violent gestures of body.






CHAPTER XXXI

I discover a subornation against me, by means of a quarrel between
two of the evidences; in consequence of which I am set at liberty,
and prevail upon Morgan to accept of his freedom on the same
terms--Mackshane's malice--we arrive at Jamaica, from whence in a
short time we beat up to Hispaniola, in conjunction with the West
India squadron--we take in water, sail again, and arrive at
Carthagena--Reflections on our conduct there

Meanwhile, a quarrel happening between the two modern Greeks, the one,
to be revenged of the other, came and discovered to us the mystery
of Mackshane's dialogue, as I have explained it above. This detection
coming to the ears of the doctor, who was sensible that (now we were in
sight of Jamaica) we should have an opportunity of clearing ourselves
before a court-martial, and, at the same time, of making his malice
and ignorance conspicuous, he interceded for us with the captain so
effectually, that in a few hours we were set at liberty, and ordered to
return to our duty. This was a happy event for me, my whole body being
blistered by the sun, and my limbs benumbed by want of motion: but I
could scarce persuade the Welshman to accept of this indulgence, he
persisted in his obstinacy to remain in irons, until he should be
discharged by a court-martial, which, he believed would also do him
justice on his enemies. At length I represented to him the precarious
issue of a trial, the power and interest of his adversaries, and
flattered his revenge with the hope of wreaking his resentment with his
own hands upon Mackshane after our return to England. This last argument
had more weight with him than all the rest, and prevailed upon him to
repair with me to the cockpit, which I no sooner entered, than the idea
of my departed friend presented itself to my remembrance, and filled my
eyes with tears. We discharged from our mess the boy who had acted so
perfidiously, notwithstanding his tears, intreaties, and of penitence
for what he had done; but not before he had confessed that the surgeon
had bribed him to give evidence against us, with a pair of stockings and
a couple of old check shirts, of which his servant had since plundered
him.

The keys of our chests and lockers being sent to us by the doctor,
we detained the messenger until we had examined the contents; and my
fellow-mate, finding all his Cheshire cheese consumed to a crust, his
brandy exhausted, and his onions gone, was seized with a fit of choler,
which he discharged on Mackshane's man in oaths and execrations,
threatening to prosecute him as a thief. The fellow swore in his turn,
that he never had the keys in his possession till that time, when he
received them from his master with orders to deliver them to us. "As Cot
is my judge," cried Morgan, "and my salfation, and my witness; whosoever
has pilfered my provisions is a lousy, peggarly, rascally knave! and by
the soul of my grandsire, I will impeach, and accuse, and indict him, of
a roppery, if I did but know who he is." Had this misfortune happened
at see, where we could not repair the loss, in all probability this
descendant of Caractacus would have lost his wits entirely; but, when I
observed how easy it would be to remedy this paltry mischance, he became
more calm, and reconciled himself to the occasion.

A little while after this transport the surgeon came into the birth,
under pretence of taking something out of the medicine chest, and, with
a smiling aspect, wished us joy of our deliverance, which, he said, he
had been at great pains to obtain of the captain, who was very justly
incensed at our behaviour; but he, the doctor, had passed his word for
our future conduct, and he hoped we should give him no cause to repent
of his kindness. He expected, no doubt, an acknowledgment from us for
this pretended piece of service, as well as a general amnesty of what
was past; but he had to do with people who were not quite so apt to
forgive injuries as he imagined, or to forget that, if our deliverance
was owing to his mediation, our calamity was occasioned by his malice;
I therefore sat silent, while my companion answered, "Ay, ay, 'tis no
matter, Cot knows the heart; there is a time for all things, as the wise
man saith; there is a time for throwing away stones, and to gather them
up." He seemed to be disconcerted at this reply, and went away in a pet,
muttering something about "Ingratitude," and "Fellows," of which we did
not think fit to take any notice.

Our fleet, having joined another that waited for us, lay at anchor
about a month in the harbour of Port Royal in Jamaica, during which time
something of consequence was certainly transacted; notwithstanding the
insinuations of some, who affirmed we had no business at all in that
place; that, in order to take the advantage of the season proper for our
enterprise, the West India squadron, which had previous notice of our
coming, ought to have joined us at the west end of Hispaniola, with
necessary stores and refreshments, from whence we could have sailed
directly for Carthagena, before the enemy could put themselves in a good
posture of defence, or, indeed, have an inkling of our design. Be this
as it will, we sailed from Jamaica, and, in ten days or a fortnight,
beat up against the wind as far as the Isle of Vache, with an intention,
as was said, to attack the French fleet, then supposed to be lying near
that place; but before we arrived, they had sailed for Europe, having
first dispatched an advice-boat to Carthagena, with an account of
our being in those seas, as also of our strength and destination. We
loitered here some days longer, taking in wood and brackish water, in
the use whereof, however, our admiral seemed to consult the health of
the men, by restricting each to a quart a day.

At length we set sail, and arrived in a bay to the windward of
Carthagena, where we came to an anchor, and lay at our ease ten days
longer. Here, again, certain malicious people took occasion to blame the
conduct of their superiors, by saying, that in so doing they not only
unprofitably wasted time, which was very precious, considering the
approach of the rainy season, but also allowed the Spaniards to
recollect themselves from a terror occasioned by the approach of an
English fleet, at least three times as numerous as ever appeared in that
part of the world before. But if I might be allowed to give my opinion
of the matter, I would ascribe this delay to the generosity of our
chiefs, who scorned to take any advantage that fortune might give them
even over an enemy. At last, however, we weighed, and anchored again
somewhat nearer the harbour's mouth, where we made shift to land our
marines, who encamped on the beach, in despite of the enemy's shot,
which knocked a good many of them on the head. This piece of conduct,
in choosing a camp under the walls of an enemy's fortification, which I
believe never happened before, was practised, I presume, with a view of
accustoming the soldiers to stand fire, who were not as yet much used
to discipline, most of them having been taken from the plough-tail a few
months before. This expedient, again, has furnished matter for censure
against the ministry, for sending a few raw recruits on such an
important enterprise, while so many veteran regiments lay inactive at
home. But surely our governors had their reasons for so doing, which
possibly may be disclosed with other secrets of the deep. Perhaps they
were loth to risk their best troops on such desperate service, or
the colonel and the field officers of the old corps, who, generally
speaking, enjoyed their commissions as sinecures or pensions, for some
domestic services rendered to the court, refused to embark in such a
dangerous and precarious undertaking; for which refusal, no doubt, they
are to be much commended.






CHAPTER XXXII

Our Land Forces being disembarked, erect a fascine battery-our ship is
ordered, with four more, to batter the port of Bocca Chica--Mackshane's
cowardice-the Chaplain's frenzy--honest Rattlin loses one hand--his
heroism and reflections on the battle--Crampley's behaviour to me during
the heat of the Fight

Our forces being landed and stationed as I have already mentioned, set
about erecting a fascine battery to cannonade the principal fort of the
enemy; and in something more than three weeks, it was ready to open.
That we might do the Spaniards as much honour as possible, it was
determined, in a council of war, that five of our largest ships should
attack the fort on one side, while the battery, strengthened by two
mortars and twenty-four cohorns, should ply it on the other.

Accordingly, the signal for our ship to engage, among others, was
hoisted, we being advertised, the night before, to make everything
clear for that purpose; and, in so doing, a difference happened between
Captain Oakum and his well-beloved cousin and counsellor Mackshane,
which had well nigh terminated in an open rupture. The doctor, who had
imagined there was no more danger of being hurt by the enemy's shot in
the cockpit than in the centre of the earth, was lately informed that a
surgeon's mate had been killed in that part of the ship by a cannon-ball
from two small redoubts that were destroyed before the disembarkation of
our soldiers; and therefore insisted upon having a platform raised for
the convenience of the sick and wounded in the after-hold, where he
deemed himself more secure than on the deck above. The captain, offended
at this extraordinary proposal, accused him of pusillanimity, and told
him, there was no room in the hold for such an occasion: or, if there
was, he could not expect to be indulged more than the rest of the
surgeons of the navy, who used the cockpit for that purpose. Fear
rendering Mackshane obstinate, he persisted in his demand, and showed
his instructions, by which it was authorised; the captain swore these
instructions were dictated by a parcel of lazy poltroons who were
never at sea; nevertheless he was obliged to comply, and sent for the
carpenter to give him orders about it. But, before any such measure
could be taken, our signal was thrown out, and the doctor compelled
to trust his carcass in the cockpit, where Morgan and I were busy in
putting our instruments and dressings in order.

Our ship, with others destined for this service, immediately weighed,
and in less than half-an-hour came to an anchor before the castle of
Bocca Chica, with a spring upon our cable, and the cannonading (which
indeed was dreadful) began. The surgeon, after having crossed himself,
fell flat on the deck; and the chaplain and purser, who were stationed
with us in quality of assistants, followed his example, while the
Welshman and I sat upon a chest looking at one another with great
discomposure, scarce able to refrain from the like prostration. And that
the reader may know it was not a common occasion that alarmed us thus, I
must inform him of the particulars of this dreadful din that astonished
us. The fire of the Spaniards proceeded from eighty-four great guns,
besides a mortar and small arms, in Bocca Chica; thirty-six in Fort St.
Joseph; twenty in two fascine batteries, and four men-of-war, mounting
sixty-four guns each. This was answered by our land-battery mounted with
twenty-one cannon, two mortars, and twenty-four cohorns, and five great
ships of seventy or eighty guns, that fired without intermission.

We had not been many minutes engaged, when one of the sailors brought
another on his back to the cockpit, where he tossed him down like a bag
of oats, and pulling out his pouch, put a large chew of tobacco in his
mouth without speaking a word. Morgan immediately examined the condition
of the wounded man, and cried out, "As I shall answer now, the man is as
dead as my great grandfather." "Dead," said his comrade; "he may be dead
now, for aught I know, but I'll be d--d if he was not alive when I took
him up." So saying, he was about to return to his quarters, when I bade
him carry the body along with him, and throw it overboard. "D--n the
body!" said he, "I think 'tis fair enough if I take care of my own." My
fellow mate, snatching up the amputation knife, pursued him half-way up
the cock-pit ladder, crying, "You lousy rascal, is this the churchyard,
or the charnel-house, or the sepulchre, or the golgotha, of the
ship?"--but was stopped in his career by one calling, "Yo he, avast
there--scaldings!" "Scaldings!" answered Morgan; "Cot knows 'tis hot
enough indeed: who are you?" "Here's one!" replied the voice; and I
immediately knew it to be that of my honest friend Jack Rattlin, who
coming towards me, told me, with great deliberation, he was come to be
docked at last, and discovered the remains of one hand, which had been
shattered to pieces with a grape shot. I lamented with unfeigned sorrow
his misfortune, which he bore with heroic courage, observing, that every
shot had its commission: "It was well it did not take him in the head!
or if it had, what then? he should have died bravely, fighting for his
king and country. Death was a debt which every man owed, and must
pay; and that now was as well as another time." I was much pleased
and edified with the maxims of this sea-philosopher, who endured the
amputation of his left hand without shrinking, the operation being
performed (at his request) by me, after Mackshane, who was with
difficulty prevailed to lift his head from the deck, had declared there
was a necessity for his losing the limb.

While I was employed in dressing the stump, I asked Jack's opinion
of the battle, who, shaking his head, frankly told me, he believed we
should do no good: "For why? because, instead of dropping anchor close
under shore, where we should have to deal with one corner of Bocca Chica
only, we had opened the harbour, and exposed ourselves to the whole fire
of the enemy from their shipping and Fort St. Joseph, as well as from
the castle we intended to cannonade; that, besides, we lay at too great
a distance to damage the walls, and three parts in four of our shot did
not take place; for there was scarce anybody on board who understood
the pointing of a gun. Ah! God help us!" continued he, "If your kinsman,
Lieutenant Bowling, had been here, we should have had other guess work."
By this time, our patients had increased to such a number, that we
did not know which to begin with; and the first mate plainly told the
surgeon, that if he did not get up immediately and perform his duty, he
would complain of his behaviour to the admiral, and make application
for his warrant. This remonstrance effectually roused Mackshane, who
was never deaf to an argument in which he thought his interest was
concerned; he therefore rose up, and in order to strengthen his
resolution, had recourse more than once to a case-bottle of rum, which
he freely communicated to the chaplain, and purser, who had as much need
of such extraordinary inspiration as himself. Being thus supported, he
went to work, and arms and legs were hewed down without mercy. The fumes
of the liquor mounting into the parson's brain, conspired, with his
former agitation of spirits, to make him quite delirious; he stripped
himself to the skin; and, besmearing his body with blood, could scarce
be withheld from running upon deck in that condition. Jack Rattlin,
scandalised at this deportment, endeavoured to allay his transports
with reason; but finding all he said ineffectual, and great confusion
occasioned by his frolics, he knocked him down with his right hand, and
by threats kept him quiet in that state of humiliation. But it was not
in the power of rum to elevate the purser, who sat on the floor
wringing his hands, and cursing the hour in which he left his peaceable
profession of a brewer in Rochester, to engage in such a life of terror
and disquiet.

While we diverted ourselves at the expense of this poor devil, a shot
happened to take us between wind and water, and (its course being
through the purser's store room) made a terrible havoc and noise among
the jars and bottles in its way, and disconcerted Mackshane so much,
that he dropped his scalpel, and falling down on his knees, pronounced
his Pater-noster aloud: the purser fell backward, and lay without sense
or motion; and the chaplain grew so outrageous, that Rattlin with one
hand could not keep him under; so that we were obliged to confine him
in the surgeon's cabin, where he was no doubt guilty of a thousand
extravagancies. Much about this time, my old antagonist, Crampley,
came down, with express orders, as he said, to bring me up to the
quarter-deck, to dress a slight wound the captain had received by a
splinter: his reason for honouring me in particular with this piece of
service, being, that in case I should be killed or disabled by the
way, my death or mutilation would be of less consequence to the ship's
company than that of the doctor or his first mate. At another time,
perhaps, I might have disputed this order, to which I was not bound to
pay the least regard; but as I thought my reputation depended upon
my compliance, I was resolved to convince my rival that I was no more
afraid than he of exposing myself to danger. With this view I provided
myself with dressings, and followed him immediately to the quarter-deck,
through a most infernal scene of slaughter, fire, smoke, and uproar.
Captain Oakum, who leaned against the mizen-mast, no sooner saw me
approach in my shirt, with the sleeves tucked up to my armpits, and my
hands dyed with blood, than he signified his displeasure by a frown, and
asked why the doctor himself did not come? I told him that Crampley
had singled me out, as if by express command; at which reply he seemed
surprised, and threatened to punish the midshipman for his presumption,
after the engagement. In the meantime, I was sent back to my
station, and ordered to tell Mackshane, that the captain expected him
immediately. I got safe back, and delivered my commission to the doctor,
who flatly refused to quit the post assigned to him by his instructions;
whereupon Morgan, who I believe, was jealous of my reputation for
courage, undertook the affair, and ascended with great intrepidity. The
captain, finding the surgeon obstinate, suffered himself to be dressed,
and swore he would confine Mackshane as soon as the service should be
over.






CHAPTER XXXIII

A breach being made in the walls, our soldiers give the assault, and
take the place without opposition--our sailors at the same time, become
masters of all the other strengths near Bocca Chica, and take possession
of the harbour--the good consequence of this success--we move nearer
the town--find two forts deserted, and the Channel blocked up with sunk
vessels; which however we find means to clear--land our soldiers at La
Quinta--repulse a body of militia--attack the castle of St. Lazar,
and are forced to retreat with great loss--the remains of our army are
re-embarked--an effort of the Admiral to take the town--the economy of
our expedition described

Having cannonaded the fort during the space of four hours, we were all
ordered to slip our cables, and sheer off; but next day the engagement
was renewed, and continued from the morning till the afternoon, when the
enemy's fire from Bocca Chica slackened, and towards evening was quite
silenced. A breach being made on the other side, by our land battery,
large enough to admit a middle-sized baboon, provided he could find
means to climb up to it, our general proposed to give the assault that
very night, and actually ordered a detachment on that duty. Providence
stood our friend upon this occasion, and put it into the hearts of
the Spaniards to abandon the fort, which might have been maintained by
resolute men till the day of judgment against all the force we could
exert in the attack. And while our soldiers took possession of the
enemy's ramparts without resistance, the same good luck attended a body
of sailors, who made themselves masters of Fort St. Joseph, the fascine
batteries, and one Spanish man-of-war; the other three being burnt or
sunk by the foe, that they might not fall into our hands. The taking of
these forts, in the strength of which the Spaniards chiefly confided,
made us masters of the outward harbour, and occasioned great joy among
us, as we laid our accounts at finding little or no opposition from the
town: and indeed, if a few great ships had sailed up immediately, before
they had recovered from the confusion and despair that our unexpected
success had produced among them, it is not impossible that we might have
finished the affair to our satisfaction, without any more bloodshed; but
this step our heroes disdained as a barbarous insult over the enemy's
distress, and gave them all the respite they could desire, in order to
recollect themselves. In the meantime, Mackshane, taking the advantage
of this general exultation, waited on our captain, and pleaded his own
cause so effectually that he was re-established in his good graces; and
as for Crampley, there was no more notice taken of his behaviour towards
me during the action. But of all the consequences of the victory, none
was more grateful than plenty of fresh water, after we had languished
five weeks on the allowance of a purser's quart per day for each man in
the Torrid Zone, where the sun was vertical, and the expense of bodily
fluid so great, that a gallon of liquor could scarce supply the waste of
twenty-four hours; especially as our provision consisted of putrid salt
beef, to which the sailors gave the name of Irish horse; salt pork, of
New England, which, though neither fish nor flesh, savoured of both;
bread from the same country, every biscuit whereof, like a piece of
clockwork, moved by its own internal impulse, occasioned by the myriads
of insects that dwelt within it; and butter served out by the gill, that
tasted like train oil thickened with salt. Instead of small beer,
each man was allowed three half-quarterns of brandy or rum, which were
distributed every morning, diluted with a certain quantity of his water,
without either sugar or fruit to render it palatable, for which reason,
this composition was by the sailors not ineptly styled Necessity. Nor
was this limitation of simple element owing to a scarcity of it on
board, for there was at this time water enough in the ship for a voyage
of six months, at the rate of half-a-gallon per day to each man: but
this fast must, I suppose, have been enjoined by way of penance on the
ship's company for their sins; or rather with a view to mortify them
into a contempt of life, that they might thereby become more resolute
and regardless of danger. How simply then do those people argue, who
ascribe the great mortality among us, to our bad provision and want
of water; and affirm, that a great many valuable lives might have been
saved, if the useless transports had been employed in fetching fresh
stock, turtle, fruit, and other refreshments from Jamaica and other
adjacent islands, for the use of the army and fleet! seeing it is to
be hoped, that those who died went to a better place, and those who
survived were the more easily maintained. After all, a sufficient number
remained to fall before the walls of St. Lazar, where they behaved like
their own country mastiffs, which shut their eyes, run into the jaws of
a bear, and have their heads crushed for their valour.

But to return to my narration. After having put garrisons into the forts
we had taken, and re-embarked our soldiers and artillery (a piece of
service that detained us more than a week), we ventured up to the mouth
of the inner harbour, guarded by a large fortification on one side, and
a small redoubt on the other, both of which were deserted before our
approach, and the entrance of the harbour blocked up by several old
galleons, and two men-of-war that the enemy had sunk in the channel. We
made shift, however, to open a passage for some ships, that favoured a
second landing of our troops at a place called La Quinta, not far from
the town, where, after a faint resistance from a body of Spaniards, who
opposed their disembarkation, they encamped with a design of besieging
the castle of St. Lazar, which overlooked and commanded the city.
Whether our renowned general had nobody in his army who knew how to
approach it in form, or that he trusted entirely to the fame of his
arms, I shall not determine; but, certain it is, a resolution was taken
in a council of war, to attack the place with musketry only. This was
put in execution, and succeeded accordingly; the enemy giving them such
a hearty reception, that the greatest part of their detachment took up
their everlasting residence on the spot.

Our chief, not relishing this kind of complaisance in the Spaniard's,
was wise enough to retreat on board with the remains of his army, which,
from eight thousand able men landed on the beach near Bocca Chica, was
now reduced to fifteen hundred fit for service. The sick and wounded
were squeezed into certain vessels, which thence obtained the name of
hospital ships, though methinks they scarce deserved such a creditable
title, seeing few of them could boast of their surgeon, nurse, or cook;
and the space between decks was so confined that the miserable patients
had not room to sit upright in their beds. Their wounds and stumps,
being neglected, contracted filth and putrefaction, and millions of
maggots were hatched amidst the corruption of their sores. This inhuman
disregard was imputed to the scarcity of surgeons; though it is well
known that every great ship in the fleet could have spared one at least
for this duty, an expedient which would have been more than sufficient
to remove this shocking inconvenience. But perhaps our general was too
much of a gentleman to ask a favour of this kind from his fellow chief,
who, on the other hand, would not derogate so much from his own dignity,
as to offer such assistance unasked; for, I may venture to affirm, that
by this time the Demon of Discord, with her sooty wings, had breathed
her influence upon our councils; and it might be said of these great men
(I hope they will pardon the comparison) as of Cesar and Pompey, the one
could not brook a superior, and the other was impatient of an equal; so
that, between the pride of one and insolence of another, the enterprise
miscarried, according to the proverb, "Between two stools the backside
falls to the ground." Not that I would be thought to liken any public
concern to that opprobrious part of the human body, though I might with
truth assert, if I durst use such a vulgar idiom, that the nation did
hang on arse at its disappointment on this occasion; neither would I
presume to compare the capacity of our heroic leaders to any such wooden
convenience as a joint-stool or a close-stool; but only to signify by
this simile, the mistake the people committed in trusting to the union
of two instruments that were never joined.

A day or two after the attempt on St. Lazar, the admiral ordered one of
the Spanish men-of-war we had taken to be mounted with sixteen guns,
and manned with detachments from our great ships, in order to batter the
town; accordingly, she was towed into the inner harbour in the night,
and moored within half a mile of the walls, against which she began
to fire at daybreak; and continued about six hours exposed to the
opposition of at least thirty pieces of cannon, which at length obliged
our men to set her on fire, and get off as well as they could in their
boats. This piece of conduct afforded matter of speculation to all the
wits, either in the army or navy, who were at last fain to acknowledge
it a stroke of policy above their comprehension. Some entertained such
an irreverent opinion of the admiral's understanding, as to think he
expected the town would surrender to his floating battery of sixteen
guns: others imagined his sole intention was to try the enemy's
strength, by which he should be able to compute the number of great
ships that would be necessary to force the town to a capitulation. But
this last conjecture soon appeared groundless, inasmuch as no ships of
any kind whatever were afterwards employed on that service. A third sort
swore, that no other cause could be assigned for this undertaking than
that which induced Don Quixote to attack the windmill. A fourth class
(and that the most numerous, though, without doubt, composed of the
sanguine and malicious), plainly taxed this commander with want of
honesty as well as sense; and alleged that he ought to have sacrificed
private pique to the interest of his country; that, where the lives of
so many brave fellow-citizens were concerned, he ought to have concurred
with the general without being solicited or even desired, towards their
preservation and advantage, that, if his arguments could not dissuade
him from a desperate enterprise, it was his duty to have rendered it as
practicable as possible, without running extreme hazard; that this could
have been done, with a good prospect of success, by ordering five or
six large ships to batter the town, while the land forces stormed the
castle; by these means a considerable diversion would have been made in
favour of those troops, who, in their march to the assault and in the
retreat, suffered much more from the town than from the castle! that the
inhabitants, seeing themselves vigorously attacked on all hands, would
have been divided, distracted, and confused, and in all probability,
unable to resist the assailants. But all these suggestions surely
proceeded from ignorance or malevolence, or else the admiral would not
have found it such an easy matter, at his return to England, to justify
his conduct to a ministry at once so upright and discerning. True it is,
that those who undertook to vindicate him on the spot, asserted, that
there was not water enough for our great ships near the town: though
this was a little unfortunately urged, because there happened to be
pilots in the fleet perfectly well acquainted with the soundings of the
harbour, who affirmed there was water enough for five eighty-gun ships
to lie abreast almost up to the very walls. The disappointments
we suffered occasioned a universal dejection, which was not at all
alleviated by the objects that daily and hourly entertained our eyes,
nor by the prospect of what must have inevitably happened, had we
remained much longer in this place. Such was the economy in some
ships that, rather than be at the trouble of interring the dead, their
commanders ordered their men to throw their bodies overboard, many
without either ballast or winding-sheet; so that numbers of human
carcases floated in the harbour, until they were devoured by sharks
and carrion crows, which afforded no agreeable spectacle to those who
survived. At the same time the wet season began, during which a deluge
of rain falls, from the rising to the setting sun, without intermission,
and that no sooner ceases than it begins to thunder, and lighten with
such continued flashing, that one can see to read a very small print by
the illumination.






CHAPTER XXXIV

An epidemic Fever rages among us--we abandon our Conquests--I am seized
with Distemper--write a Petition to the Captain, which is rejected--I am
in danger of Suffocation through the Malice of Crampley, and relieved
by a Serjeant--my Fever increases--the Chaplain wants to confess
me--I obtain a favourable Crisis-Morgan's Affection for me proved--the
Behaviour of Mackshane and Crampley towards me--Captain Oakum is removed
into another Ship with his beloved Doctor--our new Captain described--An
Adventure of Morgan

The change of the atmosphere, occasioned by this phenomenon, conspired,
with the stench that surrounded us, the heat of the climate, our own
constitutions, impoverished by bad provisions, and our despair, to
introduce the bilious fever among us, which raged with such violence,
that three-fourths of those whom it invaded died in a deplorable manner;
the colour of their skin being, by the extreme putrefaction of the
juices, changed into that of soot.

Our conductors, finding things in this situation, perceived it was high
to relinquish our conquests, and this we did, after having rendered
their artillery useless, and blown up their walls with gunpowder. Just
as we sailed from Bocca Chica, on our return to Jamaica, I found myself
threatened with the symptoms of this terrible distemper; and knowing
very well that I stood no chance for my life, if I should be obliged
to be in the cockpit, which by this time was grown intolerable, even to
people in health, by reason of the heat and unwholesome smell of decayed
provision, I wrote a petition to the captain, representing my case, and
humbly imploring his permission to be among the soldiers in the middle
deck, for the benefit of the air: but I might have spared myself the
