opened the door and announced in a loud tone, "Colonel Hector Campbell."

There was an exclamation of astonishment from the colonel and two or
three officers who were sitting with him.

"Why, Campbell," the former said, coming forward and warmly shaking his
hand, "you are changed indeed, and you have come back to us almost the
living image of your father when he first joined."

The officers all shook hands with him warmly, and the colonel went on,
"Macfarlane announced you as colonel, Hector, but surely you cannot have
gained that rank?"

"I only obtained it two days ago. You see it is a good thing to be a
prince's aide-de-camp. Turenne, wishing to give me every opportunity of
seeing service, sent me to Enghien with a message asking him to employ
me on his staff."

"And you were at Rocroi?" the colonel exclaimed. "What is the real news
of the battle? It was given out officially last night that we had won
a victory, and there are all sorts of rumours this morning in the
town--they say that three officers arrived last night with full
details."

"I was one of the three, colonel; and I have just now come from the
palace after handing my despatches to the queen."

"Then it was Enghien who made you colonel?"

"Yes."

"Well, then, you must have done something marked, or you could never
have got the rank. Why, he has half the young nobles of France in his
train--he has not made them all colonels, I suppose?"

"No, I suppose not; but we started early the next morning, and therefore
cannot say what promotions were made."

"Still they made yours, Campbell. When did they do that?"

"Just after the fight was over."

"Umph! and what for?"

"Well, I luckily discovered that the Spaniards had set an ambush."

"Come, come, let us hear all about it. Tell us the whole story of the
fight."

Hector gave all the details.

"Well, it certainly seems to have been an extraordinary battle. Everyone
appears to have been beaten in turn."

"Not Enghien's command, sir."

"Well, no; but when cavalry are repulsed three times with a loss, as
you say, of nearly half their numbers, it is pretty well equivalent to a
beating; and if Enghien had not been able to bring up the artillery and
reserves, I take it that the third charge would have been the last.
The ambush that you discovered was, I suppose, that of the thousand
musketeers Enghien charged at the beginning of the fight."

Hector nodded his assent.

"Well, it is as well they were found out and surprised before the other
part of the business began, or there is no saying how the battle would
have ended. We heard you had got your company. Turenne himself was good
enough, when he came here to confer with Richelieu that summer, to
call at the barracks and to give me an account of the service you had
rendered. We all agreed that the rank was well earned, and I have no
doubt that this new step has been just as honourably gained. And how do
you think matters are going?"

"I know nothing about it, sir, beyond the fact that it was not a secret
that Enghien and Gassion were both in favour of advancing at once into
Flanders, and capturing the Spanish strong places before they could
gather another army together."

"No doubt that would be the best way, but I should doubt very much if
Enghien will be allowed to carry out his plans. You see, the king's
will, appointing a council to act in concert with Conde, Orleans, and
the queen, has been set at nought. The queen is absolute regent, and
Mazarin is her minister--just as Richelieu was minister of Louis. Of
course this victory will put everyone in the best of temper, and make
the way easy for Mazarin just at first, but a defeat would set all the
cliques at work against him.

"It is quite true that the defeat would not be his fault, but for some
mysterious reason or other the French always hold the ministers, for
the time being, responsible for military disasters. So long as Mazarin
checks Enghien, and prevents his running any risks of disaster, things
are likely to go on smoothly here, and you may be sure that he will
give the prince no chance of either suffering a defeat or achieving a
victory. You see, the prince and his father together might be a great
deal too powerful for the cardinal. Everyone knows that Conde himself
has never cared much for anything but his own interests. Enghien has
the character of being the most impetuous and violent young noble of the
day, and the fact that he forced this fight when, as is generally known,
l'Hopital had the strictest orders not to risk a battle, makes it clear
that Enghien has but little regard for authority.

"You will see that Mazarin will not give him further opportunities of
becoming the idol of France until he has assured himself that he can
count upon his friendship. Mazarin is not Richelieu. The red cardinal
won his way to the leadership of France by proving himself able to
defeat all intrigues against him, and crush every enemy, even those of
the most exalted position. Mazarin has no such antecedents. He is not
even a Frenchman; he does not even look like a noble. That he is clever
we may be sure, or Richelieu would not have recommended him as his
successor. But I fancy that it is the cleverness of an adventurer, and
however adroit, an adventurer, and especially a foreign adventurer, will
not hold power in France very long without exciting the hatred of the
community and the hostility of the nobles. However, I suppose you are
remaining here for a time."

"That I do not know. I would rather return at once to the camp. But I
suppose I must wait for some intimation that I may do so. You see, I am
altogether out of my element in Paris, and I should feel particularly
uncomfortable at the court."

"Who would you rather go to, Enghien or Turenne?"

"Just at present there is more doing with Enghien than Turenne, and more
to learn, otherwise I would far rather be with Turenne. Enghien's camp
is too full of young nobles; and I should say that he would take but
little trouble in keeping order and repressing license. Turenne is by no
means unduly strict, but he enforces order, and sets us such an example
of earnestness and attention to work, himself, that he has a right to
expect the same, to some degree, of everyone under him."

"Where are you staying?"

"At the Hotel Conde. The prince was good enough this morning to ask me
to establish myself there while I remained in Paris, and I could not
very well decline his invitation."

"I should think not," one of the other officers laughed. "In these days
a powerful friend is of the greatest use. Without that one has not
much chance of advancement. Not that I want advancement; I would rather
remain as I am, a captain in the Scottish regiment, surrounded by good
and loyal friends and comrades, than be made a general. Still, one likes
to have a grumble sometimes at any rate."

"Well, Home," the colonel said, "Hector Campbell is a proof that even in
France merit will make its way. That Turenne should have taken a fancy
to him in the first place was fortunate. But Turenne would surely not
have promoted him to be a captain within three or four months of his
joining except for the marked bravery and diligence that he told us
he displayed at Turin; and I have no doubt that when we hear the
particulars we shall find that this promotion now has been equally well
deserved, for certainly Enghien is not likely to have gone out of his
way to promote one altogether a stranger to him when he had so many
young nobles round him, personal friends of his own, belonging to
families whom he would wish to oblige. Of course you will, as one of the
bearers of despatches, attend at the court this evening, Campbell?"

"Yes, the queen said that she would expect to see us."

"Of course; and you will be envied by every young courtier there. At the
present moment Paris is half wild over the victory of Rocroi, and as you
three will be the representatives of the army, specially selected
for the share you had in the battle, you may be sure that you will be
regarded with eyes of favour by every lady of the court."

"Well, I should think it would be a great nuisance," Hector said
gruffly. "Hitherto I have had nothing to do with ladies. There were very
few with the Duchess of Savoy, and whenever there were receptions or
state ceremonies of any kind, I was always ready to exchange with de
Lisle or Chavigny, my fellow aides-de-camp. So that during the whole
time I was there, I never but once or twice accompanied the general on
such occasions."

"Ah, you were younger then," Home laughed. "You have passed eighteen
now, and, as you must know yourself, are by no means bad looking, with
a certain air of freshness and simplicity that is so rare here in
Paris that it will be regarded as refreshing and delightful after the
flippancies of the court gallants."

Hector laughed uncomfortably. "I could not take up flippancies, I am
afraid. But what you say is true, Home; and if I had to remain at
court, I suppose I should have to set to work at once to cultivate some
affectation or other to counteract this simplicity of which you speak.
However, thank goodness, I do not suppose that I shall stay here long.
At any rate, it is lucky that I purchased a new court suit before I
started to join the Duke of Enghien. Coming from Viscount Turenne I
thought that I was bound to make a good figure among the crowd of young
nobles round Enghien, but it made a large hole in my savings."

"Do you mean to say that you had savings?" one of the other officers
exclaimed. "Who ever heard of such a thing? I never have a pistole left
in my pocket a week after I get my month's pay."

"It is a very different thing living in Susa to living in Paris," Hector
laughed. "I can assure you that I never spent more than half my pay;
but living was dearer down in Roussillon. Things have been in such a
disturbed state there for years that the country was well nigh a desert;
and though my two comrades and I messed together, the living cost twice
as much as it did at Susa. Shall I see any of you this evening at the
palace?"

"I shall be there," the colonel said, "and so will Home and Lesley.
It is always expected that three officers from each of the regiments
stationed in Paris, and five from the one that happens to be on guard
for the evening, should attend the royal receptions. It will be a
specially brilliant affair tonight, for the queen has held but few
receptions of late. It was only announced yesterday afternoon, after the
news of the battle arrived. Had it not been for that, the salons would
not have been opened for another month."

"I am very glad that there will be somebody there I shall know."

"Don't flatter yourself that you are going to consort with us," the
colonel laughed. "You will have to be presented to at least a score of
court dames. However, fortunately, they will not expect the usual amount
of compliments. They will be really wanting to hear of the battle, and
most of them will be interested in some special friend with the army,
and will want to inquire about him."

"It will not be so bad, then," Hector said. "If I only have to talk of
military matters I shall not mind, but it will be painful indeed if I
have to give news of the death of anyone dear to the lady I am speaking
to."

"I don't think that you need fear very much about that. Enghien is
pretty sure to have sent a list containing the names of any court
gallants that have fallen, and their relatives will at once have been
notified of it, and will not be present at the court. As to the others,
who have merely lost lovers, they will not break their hearts over it.
It is the fashion to change them so rapidly that probably not a few
of the ladies will have consoled themselves for their absence already.
However, to begin with, I daresay I shall be able to act as your mentor
and guide, and point out to you who is who, so that you can avoid
falling into serious errors. You see, there are half a dozen parties
at court already. There are Mazarin's friends, who, by the way, are
not numerous; there are the Duke of Beaufort's clique; there is Conde's
party.

"Madame Chevreuse's party consists largely of herself. She is a power,
but at present no one can say with whom she will ally herself. Hitherto
she has been simply anti-Richelieu, and was his most troublesome and
bitter enemy; and I should say that not improbably she will at once
begin to conspire against Mazarin as she did against him. She has been
the queen's greatest ally; but then the queen was always a bitter enemy
of Richelieu, whereas at present it is supposed that she is strongly
in favour of Mazarin. In a few months the situation will clear itself,
parties will become defined. No doubt Enghien's victory will add to the
power and importance of Conde, who is already dangerously strong; then
matters will become interesting. At present the situation is somewhat
chaotic, and politics will not be openly and generally discussed, simply
because no one knows what anyone else's opinion may be."

"Well, then, till the evening I will say goodbye, colonel. I am going
to have a chat with Sergeant MacIntosh, and shall then return to Conde's
hotel. I suppose I shall be expected to take my midday meal there."

"It would be as well to do so certainly, even though it is like enough
that he himself will not be there. He is the prince of schemers, and
doubtless at present his thoughts are concentrated on the manner in
which he and Enghien can best gain advantages from the victory."



CHAPTER X: AN ESTATE AND TITLE


On entering the Scottish Soldier, Hector found that, as he hoped, the
cabaret was deserted, for it was the hour at which the regiment was
assembled for drill. It would have been a little embarrassing for him
as a colonel to come upon a number of private soldiers at the cabaret.
Separately he might have chatted with each, but a general greeting when
a number of them were there together would have been embarrassing.

The old sergeant as he entered ran up to him. "Well done, my lad, well
done! 'Tis a delight to me indeed to know that you have so grandly made
your way, and already won the rank of colonel."

"Why, how did you know, MacIntosh?"

"The guard at the colonel's was changed just after you went into his
quarters, and you may be sure that they lost no time in spreading the
news that you had returned, and returned a colonel. In ten minutes this
place was as full as it would hold, and there was such a crowd outside
the door that a sergeant-de-ville came in to inquire what was the
matter, thinking, perhaps, that the regiment was in mutiny. I was right
glad when I heard the trumpet sound the assembly a few minutes ago, and
they had to rush off in a hurry, for I felt that it would be awkward for
you were you to come in when they were all so excited."

"Yes, I was glad myself when I found that they were gone. I regard every
soldier in the regiment as my friend, and would shake hands with them
now as heartily as I did when I went away near four years back, but I
myself felt that it would be somewhat embarrassing were I greeted by
them wine cup in hand. Here are twenty pistoles; say that I left them
here for them to drink my health on my promotion, but that I shall be
so busy during the day or two that I remain in Paris that I shall not be
able to pay another visit here. Now let us have a quiet talk together,
and give me all the news of the regiment."

"Perhaps, colonel--"

"Oh, you need not call me colonel, MacIntosh, when you and I are
together alone. I am what I was--Hector Campbell, the lad to whom you
showed so much kindness for his father's sake. Yes, I will tell you one
or two of my adventures, and you shall come round to me tomorrow morning
at seven o'clock at the Hotel Conde, and we will stroll out together,
and sit down in the gardens of the Palais Cardinal, and you shall then
tell me about the regiment, who have gone, and what changes there are."

"That will be best," the sergeant said. "We did hear something of how
you were made captain. Turenne was good enough to tell the colonel, and
so some of it came down to us, but of course it was very little. The
men would like to hear all about it and about this battle at Rocroi, at
which, of course, you must have in some way distinguished yourself to be
appointed colonel at your age."

Hector gave him a full account of the battle. "The special thing for
which I was promoted," he said, at the finish, "was that, the night
before, it struck me that there might be an ambush set in the copses
in the hollow between the two armies. So far as I could see, no efforts
whatever had been made either to occupy the woods or to find out if the
enemy had done so; so I went with my servant, who is a capital fellow,
and we made our way into them, and discovered a regiment of musketeers
hidden there. Of course I reported the fact to General Gassion, and
he told the prince. So, before attacking the enemy's lines, the prince
charged right along the wood and destroyed the musketeers there. If he
had not done so, they would have taken him in rear when he was hotly
engaged with the Spaniards, and might have changed the fate of the
battle."

"Certainly they might," the sergeant said. "A volley from a thousand
muskets from the rear would well shake even the best cavalry. It was a
happy thought of yours indeed."

"Any merit there is in it was due to Turenne, who had carefully
instructed me in everything that could be of importance when two hostile
armies faced each other; and as he would never have dreamt of retiring
to rest before having every place where an enemy could conceal himself
carefully searched, it seemed to me a matter of course that it should be
done. However, General Gassion and the prince were both good enough to
consider that the service was a vital one, and as soon as the battle was
over the prince gave me my promotion."

"And it was well earned, lad, well earned. And now about that affair at
Turin."

"It could not have been better done, Hector," the old soldier said in
high delight when the story was told. "I used to think that you spent
more time than was necessary in reading over accounts of battles and
sieges, but I see that the time was well spent. You may be sure that I
will be with you at seven tomorrow morning," he added as Hector rose to
leave, "though I expect I shall have a heavy night of it here, for there
will scarcely be a man in the regiment who won't come round and stay to
hear the news. I warrant that by this evening there will not be a sou
remaining out of the money you have left for them."

Hector arrived at the hotel just in time for the midday meal, and was
pleased to find that Conde himself was not present. He and his two
companions were placed at different points at the great table, so that
as many as possible could hear the story of the battle. After the meal
was over, Hector was glad to leave the salon, and in company with a
gentleman of the household, who had volunteered to be his guide, spent
the afternoon in visiting the principal sights of Paris, of which he had
seen but little when a boy in barracks. The hotels of the nobles, each a
fortress rather than a private building, interested him greatly, as
also the streets in which the principal traders lived; but he was
unfavourably impressed with the appearance of the population in all
other parts, and could well understand what his guide told him, that it
was dangerous in the extreme for a gentleman unattended to pass through
these quarters.

At six o'clock he sat down to the evening meal at Conde's, after which,
having attired himself in his new suit, he repaired with de Penthiere
and de Caussac to the Louvre. It was eight o'clock when they entered,
the reception rooms were already full, and the brilliancy of the
attire, both of the courtiers and ladies, seen by the light of great
chandeliers, was impressive in the extreme to one who had never seen any
gathering of the kind before. There was a little pause in the buzz of
conversation as the three officers entered, and Hector's two companions
were at once surrounded by friends, while he himself was joined by
Colonel Maclvor and the other two officers.

"You are the heroes of the evening, Campbell," the former said with a
laugh. "A dozen ladies have already asked me to present you to them."

"Well, please don't do so just now, colonel; let me look round first."

"That is but fair, Campbell. First, though, I will tell you a piece of
news that I have just heard. The queen sent off a messenger two days
ago to Turenne, and it is believed that he is to have the command of the
army on the Rhine."

"That is good news indeed," Hector exclaimed. "It is high time that he
should be given a command, instead of being always put under men less
capable than himself. Still, it is unexpected at the present moment."

"I know that the queen always had the greatest liking for Turenne," the
colonel said, "but of course until now she has had no power. Moreover,
I fancy that the appointment is to some extent dictated by policy. Conde
is already dangerously powerful; Enghien's victory will, of course,
largely add to his influence. No doubt some large estates will be given
to the latter, such a service cannot be ungenerously rewarded, but
it will be thought unadvisable to give him at present further
opportunities. Conde is old, and his son, who is certainly ambitious and
hotheaded now, will be even more powerful than his father has been. Were
he to win more victories, and to become a popular idol, his power might
well overshadow that of the throne. Therefore it is likely enough that
my news is true. Turenne has proved that military duty is with him
supreme, for he held aloof from all the troubles in which his brother
the duke has involved himself, and he may act as a counterpoise to
Enghien. I fancy that the latter's plan, which, as you have told me,
would lead to a conquest of Flanders, will not be adopted. It would not
have been so in Richelieu's time. The red cardinal would not have lost a
moment in ordering him to march into Flanders, thinking only of the good
of France, and disregarding the fact that continued successes might lead
to his own power being shaken."

"And you do not think that Mazarin will act in the same way?"

"I think not. Of course at present not much is known about him. He
affects the greatest humility, is almost obsequious to the great nobles,
and even professes to be anxious to return to Italy as soon as his
services here can be dispensed with. But I expect that he will in time
occupy as great a position as that of Richelieu, but that he will hold
it by craft rather than strength is, from the look of the man, likely
enough. For myself I should say that it is infinitely better for France
that an ecclesiastic like Richelieu or Mazarin should be at the head of
affairs, than that the great nobles should all struggle and intrigue for
power, ready as they have shown themselves over and over again to plunge
France into civil war for the attainment of their aims. Ah, here comes
the queen!"

The door at the end of the salon opened and Anne entered. By her side
walked the young king, a little behind were Orleans and Conde, Beaufort
and Bouillon, while, following them, with an air that was almost humble,
came Mazarin. The queen and the young king were dressed in violet, the
mourning colour of the court, and the ladies present all wore shades of
