'The same.'

'Young gentleman, I am extremely sorry that this painful duty has
fallen to my lot.'

'Duty, Major Melville, renders apologies superfluous.'

'True, sir; permit me, therefore, to ask you how your time has been
disposed of since you obtained leave of absence from your regiment,
several weeks ago, until the present moment?'

'My reply,' said Waverley, 'to so general a question must be guided by
the nature of the charge which renders it necessary. I request to know
what that charge is, and upon what authority I am forcibly detained to
reply to it?'

'The charge, Mr. Waverley, I grieve to say, is of a very high nature,
and affects your character both as a soldier and a subject. In the
former capacity you are charged with spreading mutiny and rebellion
among the men you commanded, and setting them the example of desertion,
by prolonging your own absence from the regiment, contrary to the
express orders of your commanding officer. The civil crime of which you
stand accused is that of high treason and levying war against the king,
the highest delinquency of which a subject can be guilty.'

'And by what authority am I detained to reply to such heinous
calumnies?'

'By one which you must not dispute, nor I disobey.'

He handed to Waverley a warrant from the Supreme Criminal Court of
Scotland, in full form, for apprehending and securing the person of
Edward Waverley, Esq., suspected of treasonable practices and other
high crimes and misdemeanours.

The astonishment which Waverley expressed at this communication was
imputed by Major Melville to conscious guilt, while Mr. Morton was
rather disposed to construe it into the surprise of innocence unjustly
suspected. There was something true in both conjectures; for although
Edward's mind acquitted him of the crime with which he was charged, yet
a hasty review of his own conduct convinced him he might have great
difficulty in establishing his innocence to the satisfaction of others.

'It is a very painful part of this painful business,' said Major
Melville, after a pause, 'that, under so grave a charge, I must
necessarily request to see such papers as you have on your person.'

'You shall, sir, without reserve,' said Edward, throwing his
pocket-book and memorandums upon the table; 'there is but one with
which I could wish you would dispense.'

'I am afraid, Mr. Waverley, I can indulge you with no reservation,'

'You shall see it then, sir; and as it can be of no service, I beg it
may be returned.'

He took from his bosom the lines he had that morning received, and
presented them with the envelope. The Major perused them in silence,
and directed his clerk to make a copy of them. He then wrapped the copy
in the envelope, and placing it on the table before him, returned the
original to Waverley, with an air of melancholy gravity.

After indulging the prisoner, for such our hero must now be considered,
with what he thought a reasonable time for reflection, Major Melville
resumed his examination, premising that, as Mr. Waverley seemed to
object to general questions, his interrogatories should be as specific
as his information permitted. He then proceeded in his investigation,
dictating, as he went on, the import of the questions and answers to
the amanuensis, by whom it was written down.

'Did Mr. Waverley know one Humphry Houghton, a non-commissioned officer
in Gardiner's dragoons?'

'Certainly; he was sergeant of my troop, and son of a tenant of my
uncle.'

'Exactly--and had a considerable share of your confidence, and an
influence among his comrades?'

'I had never occasion to repose confidence in a person of his
description,' answered Waverley. 'I favoured Sergeant Houghton as a
clever, active young fellow, and I believe his fellow-soldiers
respected him accordingly.'

'But you used through this man,' answered Major Melville, 'to
communicate with such of your troop as were recruited upon
Waverley-Honour?'

'Certainly; the poor fellows, finding themselves in a regiment chiefly
composed of Scotch or Irish, looked up to me in any of their little
distresses, and naturally made their countryman and sergeant their
spokesman on such occasions.'

'Sergeant Houghton's influence,' continued the Major, 'extended, then,
particularly over those soldiers who followed you to the regiment from
your uncle's estate?'

'Surely; but what is that to the present purpose?'

'To that I am just coming, and I beseech your candid reply. Have you,
since leaving the regiment, held any correspondence, direct or
indirect, with this Sergeant Houghton?'

'I!--I hold correspondence with a man of his rank and situation! How,
or for what purpose?'

'That you are to explain. But did you not, for example, send to him for
some books?'

'You remind me of a trifling commission,' said Waverley, 'which I gave
Sergeant Houghton, because my servant could not read. I do recollect I
bade him, by letter, select some books, of which I sent him a list, and
send them to me at Tully-Veolan.'

'And of what description were those books?'

'They related almost entirely to elegant literature; they were designed
for a lady's perusal.'

'Were there not, Mr. Waverley, treasonable tracts and pamphlets among
them?'

'There were some political treatises, into which I hardly looked. They
had been sent to me by the officiousness of a kind friend, whose heart
is more to be esteemed than his prudence or political sagacity; they
seemed to be dull compositions.'

'That friend,' continued the persevering inquirer, 'was a Mr. Pembroke,
a nonjuring clergyman, the author of two treasonable works, of which
the manuscripts were found among your baggage?'

'But of which, I give you my honour as a gentleman,' replied Waverley,
'I never read six pages.'

'I am not your judge, Mr. Waverley; your examination will be
transmitted elsewhere. And now to proceed. Do you know a person that
passes by the name of Wily Will, or Will Ruthven?'

'I never heard of such a name till this moment.'

'Did you never through such a person, or any other person, communicate
with Sergeant Humphry Houghton, instigating him to desert, with as many
of his comrades as he could seduce to join him, and unite with the
Highlanders and other rebels now in arms under the command of the Young
Pretender?'

'I assure you I am not only entirely guiltless of the plot you have
laid to my charge, but I detest it from the very bottom of my soul, nor
would I be guilty of such treachery to gain a throne, either for myself
or any other man alive.'

'Yet when I consider this envelope in the handwriting of one of those
misguided gentlemen who are now in arms against their country, and the
verses which it enclosed, I cannot but find some analogy between the
enterprise I have mentioned and the exploit of Wogan, which the writer
seems to expect you should imitate.'

Waverley was struck with the coincidence, but denied that the wishes or
expectations of the letter-writer were to be regarded as proofs of a
charge otherwise chimerical.

'But, if I am rightly informed, your time was spent, during your
absence from the regiment, between the house of this Highland Chieftain
and that of Mr. Bradwardine of Bradwardine, also in arms for this
unfortunate cause?'

'I do not mean to disguise it; but I do deny, most resolutely, being
privy to any of their designs against the government.'

'You do not, however, I presume, intend to deny that you attended your
host Glennaquoich to a rendezvous, where, under a pretence of a general
hunting match, most of the accomplices of his treason were assembled to
concert measures for taking arms?'

'I acknowledge having been at such a meeting,' said Waverley; 'but I
neither heard nor saw anything which could give it the character you
affix to it.'

'From thence you proceeded,' continued the magistrate, 'with
Glennaquoich and a part of his clan to join the army of the Young
Pretender, and returned, after having paid your homage to him, to
discipline and arm the remainder, and unite them to his bands on their
way southward?'

'I never went with Glennaquoich on such an errand. I never so much as
heard that the person whom you mention was in the country.'

He then detailed the history of his misfortune at the hunting match,
and added, that on his return he found himself suddenly deprived of his
commission, and did not deny that he then, for the first time, observed
symptoms which indicated a disposition in the Highlanders to take arms;
but added that, having no inclination to join their cause, and no
longer any reason for remaining in Scotland, he was now on his return
to his native country, to which he had been summoned by those who had a
right to direct his motions, as Major Melville would perceive from the
letters on the table.

Major Melville accordingly perused the letters of Richard Waverley, of
Sir Everard, and of Aunt Rachel; but the inferences he drew from them
were different from what Waverley expected. They held the language of
discontent with government, threw out no obscure hints of revenge, and
that of poor Aunt Rachel, which plainly asserted the justice of the
Stuart cause, was held to contain the open avowal of what the others
only ventured to insinuate.

'Permit me another question, Mr. Waverley,' said Major Melville. 'Did
you not receive repeated letters from your commanding officer, warning
you and commanding you to return to your post, and acquainting you with
the use made of your name to spread discontent among your soldiers?'

'I never did, Major Melville. One letter, indeed, I received from him,
containing a civil intimation of his wish that I would employ my leave
of absence otherwise than in constant residence at Bradwardine, as to
which, I own, I thought he was not called on to interfere; and,
finally, I received, on the same day on which I observed myself
superseded in the "Gazette," a second letter from Colonel Gardiner,
commanding me to join the regiment, an order which, owing to my
absence, already mentioned and accounted for, I received too late to be
obeyed. If there were any intermediate letters, and certainly from the
Colonel's high character I think it probable that there were, they have
never reached me.'

'I have omitted, Mr. Waverley,' continued Major Melville, 'to inquire
after a matter of less consequence, but which has nevertheless been
publicly talked of to your disadvantage. It is said that a treasonable
toast having been proposed in your hearing and presence, you, holding
his Majesty's commission, suffered the task of resenting it to devolve
upon another gentleman of the company. This, sir, cannot be charged
against you in a court of justice; but if, as I am informed, the
officers of your regiment requested an explanation of such a rumour, as
a gentleman and soldier I cannot but be surprised that you did not
afford it to them.'

This was too much. Beset and pressed on every hand by accusations, in
which gross falsehoods were blended with such circumstances of truth as
could not fail to procure them credit,--alone, unfriended, and in a
strange land, Waverley almost gave up his life and honour for lost,
and, leaning his head upon his hand, resolutely refused to answer any
further questions, since the fair and candid statement he had already
made had only served to furnish arms against him.

Without expressing either surprise or displeasure at the change in
Waverley's manner, Major Melville proceeded composedly to put several
other queries to him.

'What does it avail me to answer you?' said Edward sullenly. 'You
appear convinced of my guilt, and wrest every reply I have made to
support your own preconceived opinion. Enjoy your supposed triumph,
then, and torment me no further. If I am capable of the cowardice and
treachery your charge burdens me with, I am not worthy to be believed
in any reply I can make to you. If I am not deserving of your
suspicion--and God and my own conscience bear evidence with me that it
is so--then I do not see why I should, by my candour, lend my accusers
arms against my innocence. There is no reason I should answer a word
more, and I am determined to abide by this resolution.'

And again he resumed his posture of sullen and determined silence.

'Allow me,' said the magistrate, 'to remind you of one reason that may
suggest the propriety of a candid and open confession. The inexperience
of youth, Mr. Waverley, lays it open to the plans of the more designing
and artful; and one of your friends at least--I mean Mac-Ivor of
Glennaquoich--ranks high in the latter class, as, from your apparent
ingenuousness, youth, and unacquaintance with the manners of the
Highlands, I should be disposed to place you among the former. In such
a case, a false step or error like yours, which I shall be happy to
consider as involuntary, may be atoned for, and I would willingly act
as intercessor. But, as you must necessarily be acquainted with the
strength of the individuals in this country who have assumed arms, with
their means and with their plans, I must expect you will merit this
mediation on my part by a frank and candid avowal of all that has come
to your knowledge upon these heads; in which case, I think I can
venture to promise that a very short personal restraint will be the
only ill consequence that can arise from your accession to these
unhappy intrigues.'

Waverley listened with great composure until the end of this
exhortation, when, springing from his seat with an energy he had not
yet displayed, he replied, 'Major Melville, since that is your name, I
have hitherto answered your questions with candour, or declined them
with temper, because their import concerned myself alone; but, as you
presume to esteem me mean enough to commence informer against others,
who received me, whatever may be their public misconduct, as a guest
and friend, I declare to you that I consider your questions as an
insult infinitely more offensive than your calumnious suspicions; and
that, since my hard fortune permits me no other mode of resenting them
than by verbal defiance, you should sooner have my heart out of my
bosom than a single syllable of information on subjects which I could
only become acquainted with in the full confidence of unsuspecting
hospitality.'

Mr. Morton and the Major looked at each other; and the former, who, in
the course of the examination, had been repeatedly troubled with a
sorry rheum, had recourse to his snuff-box and his handkerchief.

'Mr. Waverley,' said the Major, 'my present situation prohibits me
alike from giving or receiving offence, and I will not protract a
discussion which approaches to either. I am afraid I must sign a
warrant for detaining you in custody, but this house shall for the
present be your prison. I fear I cannot persuade you to accept a share
of our supper?--(Edward shook his head)--but I will order refreshments
in your apartment.'

Our hero bowed and withdrew, under guard of the officers of justice, to
a small but handsome room, where, declining all offers of food or wine,
he flung himself on the bed, and, stupified by the harassing events and
mental fatigue of this miserable day, he sunk into a deep and heavy
slumber. This was more than he himself could have expected; but it is
mentioned of the North-American Indians, when at the stake of torture,
that on the least intermission of agony they will sleep until the fire
is applied to awaken them.





CHAPTER XXXII

A CONFERENCE AND THE CONSEQUENCE


Major Melville had detained Mr. Morton during his examination of
Waverley, both because he thought he might derive assistance from his
practical good sense and approved loyalty, and also because it was
agreeable to have a witness of unimpeached candour and veracity to
proceedings which touched the honour and safety of a young Englishman
of high rank and family, and the expectant heir of a large fortune.
Every step he knew would be rigorously canvassed, and it was his
business to place the justice and integrity of his own conduct beyond
the limits of question.

When Waverley retired, the laird and clergyman of Cairnvreckan sat down
in silence to their evening meal. While the servants were in attendance
neither chose to say anything on the circumstances which occupied their
minds, and neither felt it easy to speak upon any other. The youth and
apparent frankness of Waverley stood in strong contrast to the shades
of suspicion which darkened around him, and he had a sort of naivete
and openness of demeanour that seemed to belong to one unhackneyed in
the ways of intrigue, and which pleaded highly in his favour.

Each mused over the particulars of the examination, and each viewed it
through the medium of his own feelings. Both were men of ready and
acute talent, and both were equally competent to combine various parts
of evidence, and to deduce from them the necessary conclusions. But the
wide difference of their habits and education often occasioned a great
discrepancy in their respective deductions from admitted premises.

Major Melville had been versed in camps and cities; he was vigilant by
profession and cautious from experience, had met with much evil in the
world, and therefore, though himself an upright magistrate and an
honourable man, his opinions of others were always strict, and
sometimes unjustly severe. Mr. Morton, on the contrary, had passed from
the literary pursuits of a college, where he was beloved by his
companions and respected by his teachers, to the ease and simplicity of
his present charge, where his opportunities of witnessing evil were
few, and never dwelt upon but in order to encourage repentance and
amendment; and where the love and respect of his parishioners repaid
his affectionate zeal in their behalf by endeavouring to disguise from
him what they knew would give him the most acute pain, namely, their
own occasional transgressions of the duties which it was the business
of his life to recommend. Thus it was a common saying in the
neighbourhood (though both were popular characters), that the laird
knew only the ill in the parish and the minister only the good.

A love of letters, though kept in subordination to his clerical studies
and duties, also distinguished the pastor of Cairnvreckan, and had
tinged his mind in earlier days with a slight feeling of romance, which
no after incidents of real life had entirely dissipated. The early loss
of an amiable young woman whom he had married for love, and who was
quickly followed to the grave by an only child, had also served, even
after the lapse of many years, to soften a disposition naturally mild
and contemplative. His feelings on the present occasion were therefore
likely to differ from those of the severe disciplinarian, strict
magistrate, and distrustful man of the world.

When the servants had withdrawn, the silence of both parties continued,
until Major Melville, filling his glass and pushing the bottle to Mr.
Morton, commenced--

'A distressing affair this, Mr. Morton. I fear this youngster has
brought himself within the compass of a halter.'

'God forbid!' answered the clergyman.

'Marry, and amen,' said the temporal magistrate; 'but I think even your
merciful logic will hardly deny the conclusion.'

'Surely, Major,' answered the clergyman, 'I should hope it might be
averted, for aught we have heard tonight?'

'Indeed!' replied Melville. 'But, my good parson, you are one of those
who would communicate to every criminal the benefit of clergy.'

'Unquestionably I would. Mercy and long-suffering are the grounds of
the doctrine I am called to teach.'

'True, religiously speaking; but mercy to a criminal may be gross
injustice to the community. I don't speak of this young fellow in
particular, who I heartily wish may be able to clear himself, for I
like both his modesty and his spirit. But I fear he has rushed upon his
fate.'

'And why? Hundreds of misguided gentlemen are now in arms against the
government, many, doubtless, upon principles which education and early
prejudice have gilded with the names of patriotism and heroism;
Justice, when she selects her victims from such a multitude (for surely
all will not be destroyed), must regard the moral motive. He whom
ambition or hope of personal advantage has led to disturb the peace of
a well-ordered government, let him fall a victim to the laws; but
surely youth, misled by the wild visions of chivalry and imaginary
loyalty, may plead for pardon.'

'If visionary chivalry and imaginary loyalty come within the
predicament of high treason,' replied the magistrate, 'I know no court
in Christendom, my dear Mr. Morton, where they can sue out their Habeas
Corpus.'

'But I cannot see that this youth's guilt is at all established to my
satisfaction,' said the clergyman.

'Because your good-nature blinds your good sense,' replied Major
Melville. 'Observe now: This young man, descended of a family of
hereditary Jacobites, his uncle the leader of the Tory interest in the
county of ----, his father a disobliged and discontented courtier, his
tutor a nonjuror and the author of two treasonable volumes--this youth,
I say, enters into Gardiner's dragoons, bringing with him a body of
young fellows from his uncle's estate, who have not stickled at avowing
in their way the High-Church principles they learned at
Waverley-Honour, in their disputes with their comrades. To these young
men Waverley is unusually attentive; they are supplied with money
beyond a soldier's wants and inconsistent with his discipline; and are
under the management of a favourite sergeant, through whom they hold an
unusually close communication with their captain, and affect to
consider themselves as independent of the other officers, and superior
to their comrades.'

'All this, my dear Major, is the natural consequence of their
attachment to their young landlord, and of their finding themselves in
a regiment levied chiefly in the north of Ireland and the west of
Scotland, and of course among comrades disposed to quarrel with them,
both as Englishmen and as members of the Church of England.'

'Well said, parson!' replied the magistrate. 'I would some of your
synod heard you. But let me go on. This young man obtains leave of
absence, goes to Tully-Veolan--the principles of the Baron of
Bradwardine are pretty well known, not to mention that this lad's uncle
brought him off in the year fifteen; he engages there in a brawl, in
which he is said to have disgraced the commission he bore; Colonel
Gardiner writes to him, first mildly, then more sharply--I think you
will not doubt his having done so, since he says so; the mess invite
him to explain the quarrel in which he is said to have been involved;
he neither replies to his commander nor his comrades. In the meanwhile
his soldiers become mutinous and disorderly, and at length, when the
rumour of this unhappy rebellion becomes general, his favourite
Sergeant Houghton and another fellow are detected in correspondence
with a French emissary, accredited, as he says, by Captain Waverley,
who urges him, according to the men's confession, to desert with the
troop and join their captain, who was with Prince Charles. In the
meanwhile this trusty captain is, by his own admission, residing at
Glennaquoich with the most active, subtle, and desperate Jacobite in
Scotland; he goes with him at least as far as their famous hunting
rendezvous, and I fear a little farther. Meanwhile two other summonses
are sent him; one warning him of the disturbances in his troop, another
peremptorily ordering him to repair to the regiment, which, indeed,
common sense might have dictated, when he observed rebellion thickening
all round him. He returns an absolute refusal, and throws up his
commission.'

'He had been already deprived of it,' said Mr. Morton.

'But he regrets,' replied Melville, 'that the measure had anticipated
his resignation. His baggage is seized at his quarters and at
Tully-Veolan, and is found to contain a stock of pestilent Jacobitical
pamphlets, enough to poison a whole country, besides the unprinted
lucubrations of his worthy friend and tutor Mr. Pembroke.'

'He says he never read them,' answered the minister.

'In an ordinary case I should believe him,' replied the magistrate,
'for they are as stupid and pedantic in composition as mischievous in
their tenets. But can you suppose anything but value for the principles
they maintain would induce a young man of his age to lug such trash
about with him? Then, when news arrive of the approach of the rebels,
he sets out in a sort of disguise, refusing to tell his name; and, if
yon old fanatic tell truth, attended by a very suspicious character,
and mounted on a horse known to have belonged to Glennaquoich, and
bearing on his person letters from his family expressing high rancour
against the house of Brunswick, and a copy of verses in praise of one
Wogan, who abjured the service of the Parliament to join the Highland
insurgents, when in arms to restore the house of Stuart, with a body of
English cavalry--the very counterpart of his own plot--and summed up
with a "Go thou and do likewise" from that loyal subject, and most safe
and peaceable character, Fergus Mac-Ivor of Glennaquoich, Vich Ian
Vohr, and so forth. And, lastly,' continued Major Melville, warming in
the detail of his arguments, 'where do we find this second edition of
Cavalier Wogan? Why, truly, in the very track most proper for execution
of his design, and pistolling the first of the king's subjects who
ventures to question his intentions.'

Mr. Morton prudently abstained from argument, which he perceived would
only harden the magistrate in his opinion, and merely asked how he
intended to dispose of the prisoner?

'It is a question of some difficulty, considering the state of the
country,' said Major Melville.

'Could you not detain him (being such a gentleman-like young man) here
in your own house, out of harm's way, till this storm blow over?'

'My good friend,' said Major Melville, 'neither your house nor mine
will be long out of harm's way, even were it legal to confine him here.
I have just learned that the commander-in-chief, who marched into the
Highlands to seek out and disperse the insurgents, has declined giving
them battle at Coryarrick, and marched on northward with all the
disposable force of government to Inverness, John-o'-Groat's House, or
the devil, for what I know, leaving the road to the Low Country open
and undefended to the Highland army.'

'Good God!' said the clergyman. 'Is the man a coward, a traitor, or an
idiot?'

'None of the three, I believe,' answered Melville. 'Sir John has the
commonplace courage of a common soldier, is honest enough, does what he
is commanded, and understands what is told him, but is as fit to act
for himself in circumstances of importance as I, my dear parson, to
occupy your pulpit.'

This important public intelligence naturally diverted the discourse
from Waverley for some time; at length, however, the subject was
resumed.

'I believe,' said Major Melville, 'that I must give this young man in
charge to some of the detached parties of armed volunteers who were
lately sent out to overawe the disaffected districts. They are now
recalled towards Stirling, and a small body comes this way to-morrow or
next day, commanded by the westland man--what's his name? You saw him,
and said he was the very model of one of Cromwell's military saints.'

'Gilfillan, the Cameronian,' answered Mr. Morton. 'I wish the young
gentleman may be safe with him. Strange things are done in the heat and
hurry of minds in so agitating a crisis, and I fear Gilfillan is of a
sect which has suffered persecution without learning mercy.'

'He has only to lodge Mr. Waverley in Stirling Castle,' said the Major;
'I will give strict injunctions to treat him well. I really cannot
devise any better mode for securing him, and I fancy you would hardly
advise me to encounter the responsibility of setting him at liberty.'

'But you will have no objection to my seeing him tomorrow in private?'
said the minister.

'None, certainly; your loyalty and character are my warrant. But with
what view do you make the request?'

'Simply,' replied Mr. Morton, 'to make the experiment whether he may
not be brought to communicate to me some circumstances which may
hereafter be useful to alleviate, if not to exculpate, his conduct.'

The friends now parted and retired to rest, each filled with the most
anxious reflections on the state of the country.





CHAPTER XXXIII

A CONFIDANT


Waverley awoke in the morning from troubled dreams and unrefreshing
slumbers to a full consciousness of the horrors of his situation. How
it might terminate he knew not. He might be delivered up to military
law, which, in the midst of civil war, was not likely to be scrupulous
in the choice of its victims or the quality of the evidence. Nor did he
feel much more comfortable at the thoughts of a trial before a Scottish
court of justice, where he knew the laws and forms differed in many
respects from those of England, and had been taught to believe, however
erroneously, that the liberty and rights of the subject were less
carefully protected. A sentiment of bitterness rose in his mind against
the government, which he considered as the cause of his embarrassment
and peril, and he cursed internally his scrupulous rejection of
Mac-Ivor's invitation to accompany him to the field.

'Why did not I,' he said to himself, 'like other men of honour, take
the earliest opportunity to welcome to Britain the descendant of her
ancient kings and lineal heir of her throne? Why did not I--

    Unthread the rude eye of rebellion,
    And welcome home again discarded faith,
    Seek out Prince Charles, and fall before his feet?

All that has been recorded of excellence and worth in the house of
Waverley has been founded upon their loyal faith to the house of
Stuart. From the interpretation which this Scotch magistrate has put
upon the letters of my uncle and father, it is plain that I ought to
have understood them as marshalling me to the course of my ancestors;
and it has been my gross dulness, joined to the obscurity of expression
which they adopted for the sake of security, that has confounded my
judgment. Had I yielded to the first generous impulse of indignation
when I learned that my honour was practised upon, how different had
been my present situation! I had then been free and in arms fighting,
like my forefathers, for love, for loyalty, and for fame. And now I am
here, netted and in the toils, at the disposal of a suspicious, stern,
and cold-hearted man, perhaps to be turned over to the solitude of a
dungeon or the infamy of a public execution. O, Fergus! how true has
your prophecy proved; and how speedy, how very speedy, has been its
accomplishment!'

While Edward was ruminating on these painful subjects of contemplation,
and very naturally, though not quite so justly, bestowing upon the
reigning dynasty that blame which was due to chance, or, in part at
least, to his own unreflecting conduct, Mr. Morton availed himself of
Major Melville's permission to pay him an early visit.

Waverley's first impulse was to intimate a desire that he might not be
disturbed with questions or conversation; but he suppressed it upon
observing the benevolent and reverend appearance of the clergyman who
had rescued him from the immediate violence of the villagers.

'I believe, sir,' said the unfortunate young man,'that in any other
circumstances I should have had as much gratitude to express to you as
the safety of my life may be worth; but such is the present tumult of
my mind, and such is my anticipation of what I am yet likely to endure,
that I can hardly offer you thanks for your interposition.'

Mr. Morton replied, that, far from making any claim upon his good
opinion, his only wish and the sole purpose of his visit was to find
out the means of deserving it. 'My excellent friend, Major Melville,'
he continued, 'has feelings and duties as a soldier and public
functionary by which I am not fettered; nor can I always coincide in
opinions which he forms, perhaps with too little allowance for the
imperfections of human nature.' He paused and then proceeded: 'I do not
intrude myself on your confidence, Mr. Waverley, for the purpose of
learning any circumstances the knowledge of which can be prejudicial
either to yourself or to others; but I own my earnest wish is that you
would intrust me with any particulars which could lead to your
exculpation. I can solemnly assure you they will be deposited with a
faithful and, to the extent of his limited powers, a zealous agent.'

'You are, sir, I presume, a Presbyterian clergyman?' Mr. Morton bowed.
'Were I to be guided by the prepossessions of education, I might
distrust your friendly professions in my case; but I have observed that
similar prejudices are nourished in this country against your
professional brethren of the Episcopal persuasion, and I am willing to
believe them equally unfounded in both cases.'

'Evil to him that thinks otherwise,' said Mr. Morton; 'or who holds
church government and ceremonies as the exclusive gage of Christian
faith or moral virtue.'

'But,' continued Waverley, 'I cannot perceive why I should trouble you
with a detail of particulars, out of which, after revolving them as
carefully as possible in my recollection, I find myself unable to
explain much of what is charged against me. I know, indeed, that I am
innocent, but I hardly see how I can hope to prove myself so.'

'It is for that very reason, Mr. Waverley,' said the clergyman, 'that I
venture to solicit your confidence. My knowledge of individuals in this
country is pretty general, and can upon occasion be extended. Your
situation will, I fear, preclude your taking those active steps for
recovering intelligence or tracing imposture which I would willingly
undertake in your behalf; and if you are not benefited by my exertions,
at least they cannot be prejudicial to you.'

Waverley, after a few minutes' reflection, was convinced that his
reposing confidence in Mr. Morton, so far as he himself was concerned,
could hurt neither Mr. Bradwardine nor Fergus Mac-Ivor, both of whom
had openly assumed arms against the government, and that it might
possibly, if the professions of his new friend corresponded in
sincerity with the earnestness of his expression, be of some service to
himself. He therefore ran briefly over most of the events with which
the reader is already acquainted, suppressing his attachment to Flora,
and indeed neither mentioning her nor Rose Bradwardine in the course of
his narrative.

Mr. Morton seemed particularly struck with the account of Waverley's
visit to Donald Bean Lean. 'I am glad,' he said, 'you did not mention
this circumstance to the Major. It is capable of great misconstruction
on the part of those who do not consider the power of curiosity and the
influence of romance as motives of youthful conduct. When I was a young
man like you, Mr. Waverley, any such hair-brained expedition (I beg
your pardon for the expression) would have had inexpressible charms for
me. But there are men in the world who will not believe that danger and
fatigue are often incurred without any very adequate cause, and
therefore who are sometimes led to assign motives of action entirely
foreign to the truth. This man Bean Lean is renowned through the
country as a sort of Robin Hood, and the stories which are told of his
address and enterprise are the common tales of the winter fireside. He
certainly possesses talents beyond the rude sphere in which he moves;
and, being neither destitute of ambition nor encumbered with scruples,
he will probably attempt, by every means, to distinguish himself during
the period of these unhappy commotions.' Mr. Morton then made a careful
memorandum of the various particulars of Waverley's interview with
Donald Bean Lean and the other circumstances which he had communicated.

The interest which this good man seemed to take in his misfortunes,
above all, the full confidence he appeared to repose in his innocence,
had the natural effect of softening Edward's heart, whom the coldness
of Major Melville had taught to believe that the world was leagued to
oppress him. He shook Mr. Morton warmly by the hand, and, assuring him
that his kindness and sympathy had relieved his mind of a heavy load,
told him that, whatever might be his own fate, he belonged to a family
who had both gratitude and the power of displaying it. The earnestness
of his thanks called drops to the eyes of the worthy clergyman, who was
doubly interested in the cause for which he had volunteered his
services, by observing the genuine and undissembled feelings of his
young friend.

Edward now inquired if Mr. Morton knew what was likely to be his
destination.

'Stirling Castle,' replied his friend; 'and so far I am well pleased
for your sake, for the governor is a man of honour and humanity. But I
am more doubtful of your treatment upon the road; Major Melville is
involuntarily obliged to intrust the custody of your person to another.'

'I am glad of it,' answered Waverley. 'I detest that cold-blooded
calculating Scotch magistrate. I hope he and I shall never meet more.
He had neither sympathy with my innocence nor with my wretchedness; and
the petrifying accuracy with which he attended to every form of
civility, while he tortured me by his questions, his suspicions, and
his inferences, was as tormenting as the racks of the Inquisition. Do
not vindicate him, my dear sir, for that I cannot bear with patience;
tell me rather who is to have the charge of so important a state
prisoner as I am.'

'I believe a person called Gilfillan, one of the sect who are termed
Cameronians.'

'I never heard of them before.'

'They claim,' said the clergyman, 'to represent the more strict and
severe Presbyterians, who, in Charles Second's and James Second's days,
refused to profit by the Toleration, or Indulgence, as it was called,
which was extended to others of that religion. They held conventicles
in the open fields, and, being treated with great violence and cruelty
by the Scottish government, more than once took arms during those
reigns. They take their name from their leader, Richard Cameron.'

'I recollect,' said Waverley; 'but did not the triumph of Presbytery at
the Revolution extinguish that sect?'

'By no means,' replied Morton; 'that great event fell yet far short of
what they proposed, which was nothing less than the complete
establishment of the Presbyterian Church upon the grounds of the old
Solemn League and Covenant. Indeed, I believe they scarce knew what
they wanted; but being a numerous body of men, and not unacquainted
with the use of arms, they kept themselves together as a separate party
in the state, and at the time of the Union had nearly formed a most
unnatural league with their old enemies the Jacobites to oppose that
important national measure. Since that time their numbers have
gradually diminished; but a good many are still to be found in the
western counties, and several, with a better temper than in 1707, have
