nobody has scented; that's a' you're good for now.'

'Is that a' I am good for now?' said the indignant matron. 'I was good
for mair than that in the great fight between our folk and Patrico
Salmon's; if I had not helped you with these very fambles (holding up
her hands), Jean Baillie would have frummagem'd you, ye feckless
do-little!'

There was here another laugh at the expense of the hero who had
received this amazon's assistance.

'Here, mother,' said one of the sailors, 'here's a cup of the right for
you, and never mind that bully-huff.'

Meg drank the spirits, and, withdrawing herself from farther
conversation, sat down before the spot where Brown lay hid, in such a
posture that it would have been difficult for any one to have
approached it without her rising. The men, however, showed no
disposition to disturb her.

They closed around the fire and held deep consultation together; but
the low tone in which they spoke, and the cant language which they
used, prevented Brown from understanding much of their conversation. He
gathered in general that they expressed great indignation against some
individual. 'He shall have his gruel,' said one, and then whispered
something very low into the ear of his comrade.

'I'll have nothing to do with that,' said the other.

'Are you turned hen-hearted, Jack?'

'No, by G-d, no more than yourself, but I won't. It was something like
that stopped all the trade fifteen or twenty years ago. You have heard
of the Loup?'

'I have heard HIM (indicating the corpse by a jerk of his head) tell
about that job. G-d, how he used to laugh when he showed us how he
fetched him off the perch!'

'Well, but it did up the trade for one while,' said Jack.

'How should that be?' asked the surly villain.

'Why,' replied Jack, 'the people got rusty about it, and would not
deal, and they had bought so many brooms that--'

'Well, for all that,' said the other, 'I think we should be down upon
the fellow one of these darkmans and let him get it well.'

'But old Meg's asleep now,' said another; 'she grows a driveller, and
is afraid of her shadow. She'll sing out, some of these
odd-come-shortlies, if you don't look sharp.'

'Never fear,' said the old gipsy man; 'Meg's true-bred; she's the last
in the gang that will start; but she has some queer ways, and often
cuts queer words.'

With more of this gibberish they continued the conversation, rendering
it thus, even to each other, a dark obscure dialect, eked out by
significant nods and signs, but never expressing distinctly, or in
plain language, the subject on which it turned. At length one of them,
observing Meg was still fast asleep, or appeared to be so, desired one
of the lads 'to hand in the black Peter, that they might flick it
open.' The boy stepped to the door and brought in a portmanteau, which
Brown instantly recognised for his own. His thoughts immediately turned
to the unfortunate lad he had left with the carriage. Had the ruffians
murdered him? was the horrible doubt that crossed his mind. The agony
of his attention grew yet keener, and while the villains pulled out and
admired the different articles of his clothes and linen, he eagerly
listened for some indication that might intimate the fate of the
postilion. But the ruffians were too much delighted with their prize,
and too much busied in examining its contents, to enter into any detail
concerning the manner in which they had acquired it. The portmanteau
contained various articles of apparel, a pair of pistols, a leathern
case with a few papers, and some money, etc., etc. At any other time it
would have provoked Brown excessively to see the unceremonious manner
in which the thieves shared his property, and made themselves merry at
the expense of the owner. But the moment was too perilous to admit any
thoughts but what had immediate reference to self-preservation.

After a sufficient scrutiny into the portmanteau, and an equitable
division of its contents, the ruffians applied themselves more closely
to the serious occupation of drinking, in which they spent the greater
part of the night. Brown was for some time in great hopes that they
would drink so deep as to render themselves insensible, when his escape
would have been an easy matter. But their dangerous trade required
precautions inconsistent with such unlimited indulgence, and they
stopped short on this side of absolute intoxication. Three of them at
length composed themselves to rest, while the fourth watched. He was
relieved in this duty by one of the others after a vigil of two hours.
When the second watch had elapsed, the sentinel awakened the whole,
who, to Brown's inexpressible relief, began to make some preparations
as if for departure, bundling up the various articles which each had
appropriated. Still, however, there remained something to be done. Two
of them, after some rummaging which not a little alarmed Brown,
produced a mattock and shovel; another took a pickaxe from behind the
straw on which the dead body was extended. With these implements two of
them left the hut, and the remaining three, two of whom were the
seamen, very strong men, still remained in garrison.

After the space of about half an hour, one of those who had departed
again returned, and whispered the others. They wrapped up the dead body
in the sea cloak which had served as a pall, and went out, bearing it
along with them. The aged sibyl then arose from her real or feigned
slumbers. She first went to the door, as if for the purpose of watching
the departure of her late inmates, then returned, and commanded Brown,
in a low and stifled voice, to follow her instantly. He obeyed; but, on
leaving the hut, he would willingly have repossessed himself of his
money, or papers at least, but this she prohibited in the most
peremptory manner. It immediately occurred to him that the suspicion of
having removed anything of which he might repossess himself would fall
upon this woman, by whom in all probability his life had been saved. He
therefore immediately desisted from his attempt, contenting himself
with seizing a cutlass, which one of the ruffians had flung aside among
the straw. On his feet, and possessed of this weapon, he already found
himself half delivered from the dangers which beset him. Still,
however, he felt stiffened and cramped, both with the cold and by the
constrained and unaltered position which he had occupied all night.
But, as he followed the gipsy from the door of the hut, the fresh air
of the morning and the action of walking restored circulation and
activity to his benumbed limbs.

The pale light of a winter's morning was rendered more clear by the
snow, which was lying all around, crisped by the influence of a severe
frost. Brown cast a hasty glance at the landscape around him, that he
might be able again to know the spot. The little tower, of which only a
single vault remained, forming the dismal apartment in which he had
spent this remarkable night, was perched on the very point of a
projecting rock overhanging the rivulet. It was accessible only on one
side, and that from the ravine or glen below. On the other three sides
the bank was precipitous, so that Brown had on the preceding evening
escaped more dangers than one; for, if he had attempted to go round the
building, which was once his purpose, he must have been dashed to
pieces. The dell was so narrow that the trees met in some places from
the opposite sides. They were now loaded with snow instead of leaves,
and thus formed a sort of frozen canopy over the rivulet beneath, which
was marked by its darker colour, as it soaked its way obscurely through
wreaths of snow. In one place, where the glen was a little wider,
leaving a small piece of flat ground between the rivulet and the bank,
were situated the ruins of the hamlet in which Brown had been involved
on the preceding evening. The ruined gables, the insides of which were
japanned with turf-smoke, looked yet blacker contrasted with the
patches of snow which had been driven against them by the wind, and
with the drifts which lay around them.

Upon this wintry and dismal scene Brown could only at present cast a
very hasty glance; for his guide, after pausing an instant as if to
permit him to indulge his curiosity, strode hastily before him down the
path which led into the glen. He observed, with some feelings of
suspicion, that she chose a track already marked by several feet, which
he could only suppose were those of the depredators who had spent the
night in the vault. A moment's recollection, however, put his
suspicions to rest. It was not to be thought that the woman, who might
have delivered him up to her gang when in a state totally defenceless,
would have suspended her supposed treachery until he was armed and in
the open air, and had so many better chances of defence or escape. He
therefore followed his guide in confidence and silence. They crossed
the small brook at the same place where it previously had been passed
by those who had gone before. The footmarks then proceeded through the
ruined village, and from thence down the glen, which again narrowed to
a ravine, after the small opening in which they were situated. But the
gipsy no longer followed the same track; she turned aside, and led the
way by a very rugged and uneven path up the bank which overhung the
village. Although the snow in many places hid the pathway, and rendered
the footing uncertain and unsafe, Meg proceeded with a firm and
determined step, which indicated an intimate knowledge of the ground
she traversed. At length they gained the top of the bank, though by a
passage so steep and intricate that Brown, though convinced it was the
same by which he had descended on the night before, was not a little
surprised how he had accomplished the task without breaking his neck.
Above, the country opened wide and uninclosed for about a mile or two
on the one hand, and on the other were thick plantations of
considerable extent.

Meg, however, still led the way along the bank of the ravine out of
which they had ascended, until she heard beneath the murmur of voices.
She then pointed to a deep plantation of trees at some distance. 'The
road to Kippletringan,' she said, 'is on the other side of these
inclosures. Make the speed ye can; there's mair rests on your life than
other folk's. But you have lost all--stay.' She fumbled in an immense
pocket, from which she produced a greasy purse--'Many's the awmous your
house has gi'en Meg and hers; and she has lived to pay it back in a
small degree;' and she placed the purse in his hand.

'The woman is insane,' thought Brown; but it was no time to debate the
point, for the sounds he heard in the ravine below probably proceeded
from the banditti. 'How shall I repay this money,' he said, 'or how
acknowledge the kindness you have done me?'

'I hae twa boons to crave,' answered the sibyl, speaking low and
hastily: 'one, that you will never speak of what you have seen this
night; the other, that you will not leave this country till you see me
again, and that you leave word at the Gordon Arms where you are to be
heard of, and when I next call for you, be it in church or market, at
wedding or at burial, Sunday or Saturday, mealtime or fasting, that ye
leave everything else and come with me.'

'Why, that will do you little good, mother.'

'But 'twill do yoursell muckle, and that's what I'm thinking o'. I am
not mad, although I have had eneugh to make me sae; I am not mad, nor
doating, nor drunken. I know what I am asking, and I know it has been
the will of God to preserve you in strange dangers, and that I shall be
the instrument to set you in your father's seat again. Sae give me your
promise, and mind that you owe your life to me this blessed night.'

'There's wildness in her manner, certainly,' thought Brown, 'and yet it
is more like the wildness of energy than of madness.'--'Well, mother,
since you do ask so useless and trifling a favour, you have my promise.
It will at least give me an opportunity to repay your money with
additions. You are an uncommon kind of creditor, no doubt, but--'

'Away, away, then!' said she, waving her hand. 'Think not about the
goud, it's a' your ain; but remember your promise, and do not dare to
follow me or look after me.' So saying, she plunged again into the
dell, and descended it with great agility, the icicles and snow-wreaths
showering down after her as she disappeared.

Notwithstanding her prohibition, Brown endeavoured to gain some point
of the bank from which he might, unseen, gaze down into the glen; and
with some difficulty (for it must be conceived that the utmost caution
was necessary) he succeeded. The spot which he attained for this
purpose was the point of a projecting rock, which rose precipitously
from among the trees. By kneeling down among the snow and stretching
his head cautiously forward, he could observe what was going on in the
bottom of the dell. He saw, as he expected, his companions of the last
night, now joined by two or three others. They had cleared away the
snow from the foot of the rock and dug a deep pit, which was designed
to serve the purpose of a grave. Around this they now stood, and
lowered into it something wrapped in a naval cloak, which Brown
instantly concluded to be the dead body of the man he had seen expire.
They then stood silent for half a minute, as if under some touch of
feeling for the loss of their companion. But if they experienced such,
they did not long remain under its influence, for all hands went
presently to work to fill up the grave; and Brown, perceiving that the
task would be soon ended, thought it best to take the gipsy woman's
hint and walk as fast as possible until he should gain the shelter of
the plantation.

Having arrived under cover of the trees, his first thought was of the
gipsy's purse. He had accepted it without hesitation, though with
something like a feeling of degradation, arising from the character of
the person by whom he was thus accommodated. But it relieved him from a
serious though temporary embarrassment. His money, excepting a very few
shillings, was in his portmanteau, and that was in possession of Meg's
friends. Some time was necessary to write to his agent, or even to
apply to his good host at Charlie's Hope, who would gladly have
supplied him. In the meantime he resolved to avail himself of Meg's
subsidy, confident he should have a speedy opportunity of replacing it
with a handsome gratuity. 'It can be but a trifling sum,' he said to
himself, 'and I daresay the good lady may have a share of my banknotes
to make amends.'

With these reflections he opened the leathern purse, expecting to find
at most three or four guineas. But how much was he surprised to
discover that it contained, besides a considerable quantity of gold
pieces, of different coinages and various countries, the joint amount
of which could not be short of a hundred pounds, several valuable rings
and ornaments set with jewels, and, as appeared from the slight
inspection he had time to give them, of very considerable value.

Brown was equally astonished and embarrassed by the circumstances in
which he found himself, possessed, as he now appeared to be, of
property to a much greater amount than his own, but which had been
obtained in all probability by the same nefarious means through which
he had himself been plundered. His first thought was to inquire after
the nearest justice of peace, and to place in his hands the treasure of
which he had thus unexpectedly become the depositary, telling at the
same time his own remarkable story. But a moment's consideration
brought several objections to this mode of procedure In the first
place, by observing this course he should break his promise of silence,
and might probably by that means involve the safety, perhaps the life,
of this woman, who had risked her own to preserve his, and who had
voluntarily endowed him with this treasure--a generosity which might
thus become the means of her ruin. This was not to be thought of.
Besides, he was a stranger, and for a time at least unprovided with
means of establishing his own character and credit to the satisfaction
of a stupid or obstinate country magistrate. 'I will think over the
matter more maturely,' he said; 'perhaps there may be a regiment
quartered at the county town, in which case my knowledge of the service
and acquaintance with many officers of the army cannot fail to
establish my situation and character by evidence which a civil judge
could not sufficiently estimate. And then I shall have the commanding
officer's assistance in managing matters so as to screen this unhappy
madwoman, whose mistake or prejudice has been so fortunate for me. A
civil magistrate might think himself obliged to send out warrants for
her at once, and the consequence, in case of her being taken, is pretty
evident. No, she has been upon honour with me if she were the devil,
and I will be equally upon honour with her. She shall have the
privilege of a court-martial, where the point of honour can qualify
strict law. Besides, I may see her at this place, Kipple--Couple--what
did she call it? and then I can make restitution to her, and e'en let
the law claim its own when it can secure her. In the meanwhile,
however, I cut rather an awkward figure for one who has the honour to
bear his Majesty's commission, being little better than the receiver of
stolen goods.'

With these reflections, Brown took from the gipsy's treasure three or
four guineas, for the purpose of his immediate expenses, and, tying up
the rest in the purse which contained them, resolved not again to open
it until he could either restore it to her by whom it was given, or put
it into the hands of some public functionary. He next thought of the
cutlass, and his first impulse was to leave it in the plantation. But,
when he considered the risk of meeting with these ruffians, he could
not resolve on parting with his arms. His walking-dress, though plain,
had so much of a military character as suited not amiss with his having
such a weapon. Besides, though the custom of wearing swords by persons
out of uniform had been gradually becoming antiquated, it was not yet
so totally forgotten as to occasion any particular remark towards those
who chose to adhere to it. Retaining, therefore, his weapon of defence,
and placing the purse of the gipsy in a private pocket, our traveller
strode gallantly on through the wood in search of the promised highroad.




CHAPTER XXIX

    All school day's friendship childhood innocence'
     We Hermia like two artificial gods
     Have with our needles created both one flower,
     Both on one sampler sitting on one cushion,
     Both warbling of one song both in one key
     As if our hands our sides, voices and minds
     Had been incorporate

          A Midsummer Night's Dream


JULIA MANNERING TO MATILDA MARCHMONT

'How can you upbraid me, my dearest Matilda, with abatement in
friendship or fluctuation in affection? Is it possible for me to forget
that you are the chosen of my heart, in whose faithful bosom I have
deposited every feeling which your poor Julia dares to acknowledge to
herself? And you do me equal injustice in upbraiding me with exchanging
your friendship for that of Lucy Bertram. I assure you she has not the
materials I must seek for in a bosom confidante. She is a charming
girl, to be sure, and I like her very much, and I confess our forenoon
and evening engagements have left me less time for the exercise of my
pen than our proposed regularity of correspondence demands. But she is
totally devoid of elegant accomplishments, excepting the knowledge of
French and Italian, which she acquired from the most grotesque monster
you ever beheld, whom my father has engaged as a kind of librarian, and
whom he patronises, I believe, to show his defiance of the world's
opinion. Colonel Mannering seems to have formed a determination that
nothing shall be considered as ridiculous so long as it appertains to
or is connected with him. I remember in India he had picked up
somewhere a little mongrel cur, with bandy legs, a long back, and huge
flapping ears. Of this uncouth creature he chose to make a favourite,
in despite of all taste and opinion; and I remember one instance which
he alleged, of what he called Brown's petulance, was, that he had
criticised severely the crooked legs and drooping ears of Bingo. On my
word, Matilda, I believe he nurses his high opinion of this most
awkward of all pedants upon a similar principle. He seats the creature
at table, where he pronounces a grace that sounds like the scream of
the man in the square that used to cry mackerel, flings his meat down
his throat by shovelfuls, like a dustman loading his cart, and
apparently without the most distant perception of what he is
swallowing, then bleats forth another unnatural set of tones by way of
returning thanks, stalks out of the room, and immerses himself among a
parcel of huge worm-eaten folios that are as uncouth as himself! I
could endure the creature well enough had I anybody to laugh at him
along with me; but Lucy Bertram, if I but verge on the border of a jest
affecting this same Mr. Sampson (such is the horrid man's horrid name),
looks so piteous that it deprives me of all spirit to proceed, and my
father knits his brow, flashes fire from his eye, bites his lip, and
says something that is extremely rude and uncomfortable to my feelings.

'It was not of this creature, however, that I meant to speak to you,
only that, being a good scholar in the modern as well as the ancient
languages, he has contrived to make Lucy Bertram mistress of the
former, and she has only, I believe, to thank her own good sense, or
obstinacy, that the Greek, Latin (and Hebrew, for aught I know), were
not added to her acquisitions. And thus she really has a great fund of
information, and I assure you I am daily surprised at the power which
she seems to possess of amusing herself by recalling and arranging the
subjects of her former reading. We read together every morning, and I
begin to like Italian much better than when we were teased by that
conceited animal Cicipici. This is the way to spell his name, and not
Chichipichi; you see I grow a connoisseur.

'But perhaps I like Miss Bertram more for the accomplishments she wants
than for the knowledge she possesses. She knows nothing of music
whatever, and no more of dancing than is here common to the meanest
peasants, who, by the way, dance with great zeal and spirit. So that I
am instructor in my turn, and she takes with great gratitude lessons
from me upon the harpsichord; and I have even taught her some of La
Pique's steps, and you know he thought me a promising scholar.

'In the evening papa often reads, and I assure you he is the best
reader of poetry you ever heard; not like that actor who made a kind of
jumble between reading and acting,--staring, and bending his brow, and
twisting his face, and gesticulating as if he were on the stage and
dressed out in all his costume. My father's manner is quite different;
it is the reading of a gentleman, who produces effect by feeling,
taste, and inflection of voice, not by action or mummery. Lucy Bertram
rides remarkably well, and I can now accompany her on horseback, having
become emboldened by example. We walk also a good deal in spite of the
cold. So, upon the whole, I have not quite so much time for writing as
I used to have.

'Besides, my love, I must really use the apology of all stupid
correspondents, that I have nothing to say. My hopes, my fears, my
anxieties about Brown are of a less interesting cast since I know that
he is at liberty and in health. Besides, I must own I think that by
this time the gentleman might have given me some intimation what he was
doing. Our intercourse may be an imprudent one, but it is not very
complimentary to me that Mr. Vanbeest Brown should be the first to
discover that such is the case, and to break off in consequence. I can
promise him that we might not differ much in opinion should that happen
to be his, for I have sometimes thought I have behaved extremely
foolishly in that matter. Yet I have so good an opinion of poor Brown,
that I cannot but think there is something extraordinary in his silence.

'To return to Lucy Bertram. No, my dearest Matilda, she can never,
never rival you in my regard, so that all your affectionate jealousy on
that account is without foundation. She is, to be sure, a very pretty,
a very sensible, a very affectionate girl, and I think there are few
persons to whose consolatory friendship I could have recourse more
freely in what are called the real evils of life. But then these so
seldom come in one's way, and one wants a friend who will sympathise
with distresses of sentiment as well as with actual misfortune. Heaven
knows, and you know, my dearest Matilda, that these diseases of the
heart require the balm of sympathy and affection as much as the evils
of a more obvious and determinate character. Now Lucy Bertram has
nothing of this kindly sympathy, nothing at all, my dearest Matilda.
Were I sick of a fever, she would sit up night after night to nurse me
with the most unrepining patience; but with the fever of the heart,
which my Matilda has soothed so often, she has no more sympathy than
her old tutor. And yet what provokes me is, that the demure monkey
actually has a lover of her own, and that their mutual affection (for
mutual I take it to be) has a great deal of complicated and romantic
interest. She was once, you must know, a great heiress, but was ruined
by the prodigality of her father and the villainy of a horrid man in
whom he confided. And one of the handsomest young gentlemen in the
country is attached to her; but, as he is heir to a great estate, she
discourages his addresses on account of the disproportion of their
fortune.

'But with all this moderation, and self-denial, and modesty, and so
forth, Lucy is a sly girl. I am sure she loves young Hazlewood, and I
am sure he has some guess of that, and would probably bring her to
acknowledge it too if my father or she would allow him an opportunity.
But you must know the Colonel is always himself in the way to pay Miss
Bertram those attentions which afford the best indirect opportunities
for a young gentleman in Hazlewood's situation. I would have my good
papa take care that he does not himself pay the usual penalty of
meddling folks. I assure you, if I were Hazlewood I should look on his
compliments, his bowings, his cloakings, his shawlings, and his
handings with some little suspicion; and truly I think Hazlewood does
so too at some odd times. Then imagine what a silly figure your poor
Julia makes on such occasions! Here is my father making the agreeable
to my friend; there is young Hazlewood watching every word of her lips,
and every motion of her eye; and I have not the poor satisfaction of
interesting a human being, not even the exotic monster of a parson, for
even he sits with his mouth open, and his huge round goggling eyes
fixed like those of a statue, admiring Mess Baartram!

'All this makes me sometimes a little nervous, and sometimes a little
mischievous. I was so provoked at my father and the lovers the other
day for turning me completely out of their thoughts and society, that I
began an attack upon Hazlewood, from which it was impossible for him,
in common civility, to escape. He insensibly became warm in his
defence,--I assure you, Matilda, he is a very clever as well as a very
handsome young man, and I don't think I ever remember having seen him
to the same advantage,--when, behold, in the midst of our lively
conversation, a very soft sigh from Miss Lucy reached my not
ungratified ears. I was greatly too generous to prosecute my victory
any farther, even if I had not been afraid of papa. Luckily for me, he
had at that moment got into a long description of the peculiar notions
and manners of a certain tribe of Indians who live far up the country,
and was illustrating them by making drawings on Miss Bertram's
work-patterns, three of which he utterly damaged by introducing among
the intricacies of the pattern his specimens of Oriental costume. But I
believe she thought as little of her own gown at the moment as of the
Indian turbands and cummerbands. However, it was quite as well for me
that he did not see all the merit of my little manoeuvre, for he is as
sharp-sighted as a hawk, and a sworn enemy to the slightest shade of
coquetry.

'Well, Matilda, Hazlewood heard this same halfaudible sigh, and
instantly repented his temporary attentions to such an unworthy object
as your Julia, and, with a very comical expression of consciousness,
drew near to Lucy's work-table. He made some trifling observation, and
her reply was one in which nothing but an ear as acute as that of a
lover, or a curious observer like myself, could have distinguished
anything more cold and dry than usual. But it conveyed reproof to the
self-accusing hero, and he stood abashed accordingly. You will admit
that I was called upon in generosity to act as mediator. So I mingled
in the conversation, in the quiet tone of an unobserving and
uninterested third party, led them into their former habits of easy
chat, and, after having served awhile as the channel of communication
through which they chose to address each other, set them down to a
pensive game at chess, and very dutifully went to tease papa, who was
still busied with his drawings. The chess-players, you must observe,
were placed near the chimney, beside a little work-table, which held
the board and men, the Colonel at some distance, with lights upon a
library table; for it is a large old-fashioned room, with several
recesses, and hung with grim tapestry, representing what it might have
puzzled the artist himself to explain.

'"Is chess a very interesting game, papa?"

'"I am told so," without honouring me with much of his notice.

'"I should think so, from the attention Mr. Hazlewood and Lucy are
bestowing on it."

'He raised his head "hastily and held his pencil suspended for an
instant. Apparently he saw nothing that excited his suspicions, for he
was resuming the folds of a Mahratta's turban in tranquillity when I
interrupted him with--"How old is Miss Bertram, sir?"

"'How should I know, Miss? About your own age, I suppose."

'"Older, I should think, sir. You are always telling me how much more
decorously she goes through all the honours of the tea-table. Lord,
papa, what if you should give her a right to preside once and for ever!"

'"Julia, my dear," returned papa, "you are either a fool outright or
you are more disposed to make mischief than I have yet believed you."

'"Oh, my dear sir! put your best construction upon it; I would not be
thought a fool for all the world."

'"Then why do you talk like one?" said my father.

'"Lord, sir, I am sure there is nothing so foolish in what I said just
now. Everybody knows you are a very handsome man" (a smile was just
visible), "that is, for your time of life" (the dawn was overcast),
"which is far from being advanced, and I am sure I don't know why you
should not please yourself, if you have a mind. I am sensible I am but
a thoughtless girl, and if a graver companion could render you more
happy--"

'There was a mixture of displeasure and grave affection in the manner
in which my father took my hand, that was a severe reproof to me for
trifling with his feelings. "Julia," he said, "I bear with much of your
petulance because I think I have in some degree deserved it, by
neglecting to superintend your education sufficiently closely. Yet I
would not have you give it the rein upon a subject so delicate. If you
do not respect the feelings of your surviving parent towards the memory
of her whom you have lost, attend at least to the sacred claims of
misfortune; and observe, that the slightest hint of such a jest
reaching Miss Bertram's ears would at once induce her to renounce her
present asylum, and go forth, without a protector, into a world she has
already felt so unfriendly."

'What could I say to this, Matilda? I only cried heartily, begged
pardon, and promised to be a good girl in future. And so here am I
neutralised again, for I cannot, in honour or common good-nature, tease
poor Lucy by interfering with Hazlewood, although she has so little
confidence in me; and neither can I, after this grave appeal, venture
again upon such delicate ground with papa. So I burn little rolls of
paper, and sketch Turks' heads upon visiting cards with the blackened
end--I assure you I succeeded in making a superb Hyder-Ally last
night--and I jingle on my unfortunate harpsichord, and begin at the end
of a grave book and read it backward. After all, I begin to be very
much vexed about Brown's silence. Had he been obliged to leave the
country, I am sure he would at least have written to me. Is it possible
that my father can have intercepted his letters? But no, that is
contrary to all his principles; I don't think he would open a letter
addressed to me to-night, to prevent my jumping out of window
to-morrow. What an expression I have suffered to escape my pen! I
should be ashamed of it, even to you, Matilda, and used in jest. But I
need not take much merit for acting as I ought to do. This same Mr.
Vanbeest Brown is by no means so very ardent a lover as to hurry the
object of his attachment into such inconsiderate steps. He gives one
full time to reflect, that must be admitted. However, I will not blame
him unheard, nor permit myself to doubt the manly firmness of a
character which I have so often extolled to you. Were he capable of
doubt, of fear, of the shadow of change, I should have little to regret.

'And why, you will say, when I expect such steady and unalterable
constancy from a lover, why should I be anxious about what Hazlewood
does, or to whom he offers his attentions? I ask myself the question a
hundred times a day, and it only receives the very silly answer that
one does not like to be neglected, though one would not encourage a
serious infidelity.

'I write all these trifles because you say that they amuse you, and yet
I wonder how they should. I remember, in our stolen voyages to the
world of fiction, you always admired the grand and the romantic,--tales
of knights, dwarfs, giants, and distressed damsels, oothsayers,
visions, beckoning ghosts, and bloody hands; whereas I was partial to
the involved intrigues of private life, or at farthest to so much only
of the supernatural as is conferred by the agency of an Eastern genie
or a beneficent fairy. YOU would have loved to shape your course of
life over the broad ocean, with its dead calms and howling tempests,
its tornadoes, and its billows mountain-high; whereas I should like to
trim my little pinnace to a brisk breeze in some inland lake or
tranquil bay, where there was just difficulty of navigation sufficient
to give interest and to require skill without any sensible degree of
danger. So that, upon the whole, Matilda, I think you should have had
my father, with his pride of arms and of ancestry, his chivalrous point
of honour, his high talents, and his abstruse and mystic studies. You
should have had Lucy Bertram too for your friend, whose fathers, with
names which alike defy memory and orthography, ruled over this romantic
country, and whose birth took place, as I have been indistinctly
informed, under circumstances of deep and peculiar interest. You should
have had, too, our Scottish residence, surrounded by mountains, and our
lonely walks to haunted ruins. And I should have had, in exchange, the
lawns and shrubs, and green-houses and conservatories, of Pine Park,
with your good, quiet, indulgent aunt, her chapel in the morning, her
nap after dinner, her hand at whist in the evening, not forgetting her
fat coach-horses and fatter coachman. Take notice, however, that Brown
is not included in this proposed barter of mine; his good-humour,
lively conversation, and open gallantry suit my plan of life as well as
his athletic form, handsome features, and high spirit would accord with
a character of chivalry. So, as we cannot change altogether out and
out, I think we must e'en abide as we are.'




CHAPTER XXX

     I renounce your defiance; if you parley so roughly I'll
     barricade my gates against you. Do you see yon bay window?
     Storm, I care not, serving the good Duke of Norfolk

          Merry Devil of Edmonton.


JULIA MANNERING to MATILDA MARCHMONT

'I rise from a sick-bed, my dearest Matilda, to communicate the strange
and frightful scenes which have just passed. Alas! how little we ought
to jest with futurity! I closed my letter to you in high spirits, with
some flippant remarks on your taste for the romantic and extraordinary
in fictitious narrative. How little I expected to have had such events
to record in the course of a few days! And to witness scenes of terror,
or to contemplate them in description, is as different, my dearest
Matilda, as to bend over the brink of a precipice holding by the frail
tenure of a half-rooted shrub, or to admire the same precipice as
represented in the landscape of Salvator. But I will not anticipate my
narrative.

'The first part of my story is frightful enough, though it had nothing
to interest my feelings. You must know that this country is
particularly favourable to the commerce of a set of desperate men from
the Isle of Man, which is nearly opposite. These smugglers are
numerous, resolute, and formidable, and have at different times become
the dread of the neighbourhood when any one has interfered with their
contraband trade. The local magistrates, from timidity or worse
motives, have become shy of acting against them, and impunity has
