the Son, is to me? All, and more than all, is the answer; I live and
breathe in my Saviour Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, to-day, and
throughout eternity."

The young theologian raised his sparkling eyes heavenward as he spoke,
and continued: "Our doctrine is founded on him, his word, his love
alone; and who among the enthusiastic heralds of Christianity in ancient
times grasped faith in him with warmer sincerity than the very Martin
Luther whom you would have led to the stake had not the Emperor
Charles's plighted word been dearer to him than the approval of Rome?
Oh, my friend, our young faith can also show its martyrs. Think of the
Bohemian John Huss and the true Christians who, in the Netherlands and
Spain, were burned at the stake and bled upon the scaffold because they
read the Bible, the Word of God and their Saviour, and would rather die
than deny it. If it should come to the worst, thousands here would also
be ready to ascend the funeral pyre, and I at their head. If war is
declared now, the Emperor Charles will gain the victory; and if he does
not wish to withdraw in earnest from Romish influences, who can tell
what will then await us Protestants? But I am not anxious about what may
come. We German citizens, who are accustomed to guide our own destinies
and maintain the system of government we arranged for ourselves, who
built by our own strength our solid, comfortable, gable-roofed houses
and noble, towering cathedrals, will also independently maintain the
life of our minds and our souls. Rome, with her legions of priests,
claimed the right not only to interfere in our civil life, but also
to intrude into our houses, our married lives, and our nurseries. What
could she not decide for the individual by virtue of the power she
arrogates to bind and to loose, to forgive sins, and to open or to close
the door of heaven for the dying? What she has done with the Church's
gifts of grace we know.

"There is a deep, beautiful meaning underlying this idea. But it has
degenerated into a base traffic in indulgences. We have sincere natures.
For a long time we believed that salvation is gained by works--gifts
to the Church, fasts, scourgings, seclusion from the world,
self-confinement in a cell--and our wealth went to Rome. Rarely do we
look vainly in the most beautiful sites on mountain or by river for a
monastery! But at last the sound sense of Germany rebelled, and when
Luther saw in Rome poor sufferers from gout and cripples ascending the
stairs of the Lateran on their knees, a voice within cried out to him
the great 'sola fide' on which our faith is founded. On it alone, on
devotion to Jesus Christ, depends our salvation."

"Then," asked Wolf, "you boldly deny any saving power to good works?"

"Yes," was the firm reply, "so far as they do not proceed from faith."

"As if the Church did not impose the same demand!" replied Wolf in a
more animated tone. "True, base wrong has been done in regard to the
sale of indulgences, but at the Council of Trent opposition will be made
to it. No estimable priest holds the belief that money can atone for
a sin or win the mercy of Heaven. With us also sincere repentance or
devout faith must accompany the gift, the fasting, and whatever else the
believer imposes upon himself here below. Man is so constituted that the
only things which make a deep impression are those that the body also
feels. The teacher's blow has a greater effect than his words, a gift
produces more willingness than an entreaty, and the tendency toward
asceticism and penance is genuinely Christian, and belongs to many
a people of a different faith. Your Erasmus said that his heart was
Catholic, but his stomach desired to be Protestant. You have an easier
task than we."

"On the contrary," the young theologian burst forth. "It is mere child's
play for you to obtain forgiveness by acts which really do not cut
deeply into the flesh; but if one of us errs, how hard must be the
conflict in his own breast ere he attains the conviction that his guilt
is expiated by deep repentance and better deeds!"

"I can answer for that," here interposed old Ursel, who from her
arm-chair had listened to the conversation between the two with intense
interest.

"Good heavens! One went forth from the confessional as pure as a white
dove after absolution had been received and the penance performed; but
now that I belong to the Protestants, it is hard to reach a perfect
understanding with the dear Saviour and one's self."

"And ought that to redound to the discredit of my faith?" asked Wolf.
"So far as I have learned to know men, the majority, at least, will not
hasten to attain our Ursel's complete understanding with one's self.
I should even fear that there are many among you who no longer feel a
desire to heed little sins and their forgiveness----"

Here Ursel again interrupted him with an exclamation of dissent,
accompanied by a gesture of denial from her thin old hand; but Wolf
glanced at the clock which the precentor had received as a testimonial
of affection from the members of the cathedral choir, which he had led
for years.

It was already half past one, and for the sake of Ursel, who was still
obliged to take care of herself, he urged departure, adding gaily that
he had not the ability to "defend himself against two." Erasmus, too,
was surprised to find it so late, and, after shaking hands with the
old woman and promising to visit her soon again, seized his cap. Wolf
accompanied him.

The May night was sultry, and the air in the low room had been hot and
oppressive.

He would gladly have dropped the useless discussion, but Erasmus's heart
was set upon winning his schoolmate to the doctrine which he believed
with his whole soul. He toiled with the utmost zeal, but during their
nocturnal walk also he failed to convince his opponent. Both were true
to their religion. Erasmus saw in his faith the return to the pure
teachings of Christ and the liberation of the human soul from ancient
fetters; Wolf, who had had them pointed out to him at school by a
Protestant teacher, by no means denied the abuses that had crept into
his, but he clung with warm love to Holy Church, which offered his soul
an abundance of what it needed.

His art certainly also owed to her its best development--from the
inexhaustible spring of faith which is formed from thousands of rivulets
and tributaries in the holy domain of the Catholic Church, and in it
alone, the most sublime of all material flowed to the musician, and not
to him only, but to the artist, the architect, and the sculptor. The
fullest stream--he was well aware of it--came from ancient pagan times,
but from whatever sources the spring was fed, the Church had understood
how to assimilate, preserve, and sanctify it.

Erasmus listened silently while Wolf eagerly made these statements; but
when the latter closed with the declaration that the evangelical faith
would never attain the same power of elevating hearts, he interrupted
the knight with the exclamation, "We shall have to wait for that!"

Luther, he went on, had given the most powerful encouragement to music,
and the German Protestant composers even now were not so very far behind
the Netherland ones. The Catholic Church could no longer claim the great
Albrecht Durer, and, if art ceased to create images of the saints, with
which the childish minds of the common people practised idolatry, so
much the better. The Infinite and Eternal was no subject for the artist.
The humanization of God only belittled his infinite and illimitable
nature. Earthly life offered art material enough. Man himself would
be the worthiest model for imitation, and perhaps no earlier epoch had
created handsomer likenesses of men and women than would now be produced
by evangelical artists.

To their own surprise, during this conversation they had reached the
Hiltner house, and Erasmus invited his friend to come to his room and
over a glass of wine answer him, as he had had the last word. But Wolf
had already drunk at his own home more of the fiery Wurzburg from the
precentor's cellar than usual. Besides, much as he still had to say in
reply to Erasmus, the sensible young man deemed it advisable to avoid
the syndic's house for the present. The confessor's suspicion had been
aroused, and De Soto was a Dominican, who certainly did not stand far
from the Holy Inquisition.

Therefore while Erasmus, with burning head and great excitement, was
still urging his friend to come in, Wolf unexpectedly bade him a hasty
and resolute farewell.




CHAPTER XXIII.

Wolf left the Hiltner house behind him with the feeling that he had
upheld the cause of his Church against the learned opponent to the
best of his ability, and had not been defeated. Yet he was not entirely
satisfied. In former years he had read the Hutten dialogues, and, though
he disapproved of their assaults upon the Holy Father in Rome, he had
warmly sympathized with the fiery knight's love for his native land.

Far as, at the court of Charles, the German ranked below the
Netherlander, the Spaniard, and the Italian, Wolf was proud of being a
German, and it vexed him that he had not at least made the attempt to
repel the theologian's charge that the Catholic, to whom the authority
of Rome was the highest, would be inferior to the Protestant in
patriotism.

But he would have succeeded no better in convincing Erasmus than the
learned theologians who, at the Emperor's instance, had held an earnest
religious discussion in Ratisbon a short time before, had succeeded in
arriving at even a remote understanding.

As he reached the Haidplatz new questions of closer interest were
casting these of supreme importance into the shade.

He was to enter his home directly, and then the woman whom he loved
would rest above him, and alone, unwatched, and unguarded, perhaps dream
of another.

Who was the man for whose sake she withdrew from him the heart to whose
possession he had the best and at any rate the oldest right?

Certainly not Baron Malfalconnet.

Neither could he believe it to be Peter Schlumperger or young Crafft.

Yet perhaps the fortunate man belonged to the court. If that was the
case, how easy would the game now be made for him with the girl, who was
guarded by no faithful eye!

His heart throbbed faster as he entered Red Cock Street.

The moon was still in the cloudless, starry sky, shining with her calm,
silver radiance upon one side of the street. Barbara's bow-window
was touched by it, and--what did it mean?--a small lamp must still be
burning in her room, for the window was illuminated, though but dimly.
Perhaps she had kept the light because she felt timid in her lonely
chamber. Now Wolf crossed obliquely toward his house.

Just at that moment he saw the tall figure of a man.

What was he doing there at this hour? Was it a thief or a burglar? There
was no lack of evil-disposed folk in this time of want.

Wolf still wore his court costume, and the short dress sword which
belonged to it hung in its sheath.

His heart beat quicker as he loosed the blade and advanced toward the
suspicious night-bird.

Just then he saw the other calmly turn the big key and take it out of
the door.

That could be no thief! No, certainly not!

It was a gentleman of tall stature, whose aristocratic figure and
Spanish court costume were partially covered by a long cloak.

There was no doubt! Wolf could not be mistaken, for, while the former
was putting the key in his pocket, the mantle had slipped from one
shoulder.

"Malfalconnet," muttered Wolf, grasping the hilt of his short sword more
firmly.

But at the same moment the moonlight showed him the Spaniard's face.
A chill ran through his frame, followed by a feverish heat, for the
nocturnal intruder into his house was not the baron, but Quijada, the
noble Don Luis, his patron, who had just been lauding to the skies the
virtues, the beauty, the goodness of the peerless Dona Magdalena de
Ulloa, his glorious wife. He had intended to send Wolf, the friend
and housemate of his victim, to Spain to become the instructor of his
deceived wife.

He saw through the game, and it seemed as if he could not help laughing
aloud in delight at his own penetration, in rage and despair.

How clearly, and yet how coarsely and brutally, it had all been planned!

The infamous scoundrel, who possessed so much influence over the
Emperor, had first sent old Blomberg away; now he, Wolf, was to follow,
that no one might stand between the game and the pursuer.

Barbara's lover must be Quijada. For the Spaniard's sake she had given
him up, and perhaps even played the part of adviser in this abominable
business. It must be so, for who else could know what she was to him?

Yet no! He himself had aided the guilty passion of this couple, for how
warmly he had sung Barbara's praises to Don Luis! And then in how many a
conversation with Barbara had Quijada's name been mentioned, and he had
always spoken of this man with warm regard. Hence her remark that he
himself deemed her lover worthy of esteem.

In a few seconds these thoughts darted through his heated brain with the
speed of lightning.

The street began to whirl around him, and a deep loathing of the base
traitor, a boundless hatred of the destroyer of his happiness, of the
betrayed girl, and the life which led through such abysses overpowered
the deluded man.

The infamous girl had just left her lover's arms, her kiss was doubtless
still glowing on his faithless lips!

Wolf groaned aloud like a sorely stricken deer, and for a moment it
seemed to him that the best course would be to put an end to his own
ruined life. But rage and hate urged him upon another victim, and,
unable to control himself, he rushed with uplifted blade upon the
hypocritical seducer.

This utterly unexpected attack did not give Don Luis time to draw his
sword, but, with ready presence of mind, he forced the hand wielding the
weapon aside, and, while he felt a sharp pain in his left arm, seized
the assassin with his right hand, swung his light figure upward, and
with the strength and skill peculiar to him hurled it with all his might
upon the stone steps of the dwelling.

Not a single word, only a savage cry of fury, followed by a piteous
moan, had escaped Wolf's lips during this swift deed of violence.

The Spaniard scornfully thrust aside with his foot the inert body lying
on the ground. His arrogance did not deem it worth while to ascertain
what had befallen the murderer who had been punished. He had more
important things to do, for his own blood was flowing in a hot, full
stream over his hand.

Accustomed in bull fighting and in battle to maintain his calmness and
caution even in the most difficult situation, he said to himself that,
if his wound should be connected with the murder before this house it
would betray his master's secret to the Ratisbon courts of justice, and
thereby to the public.

He had heard the skull of the lurking thief strike against the granite
steps of the house. So the dark, motionless mass before him was probably
a corpse. There was no hurry about that, but his own condition compelled
him to take care of himself. Entering the shadow of a tall building
opposite the dwelling, he assured himself that the street was entirely
empty, and then, drawing the aching arm from the doublet, he examined
the wound as well as the dim light would permit. It was deep, it is
true, but the robber's weapon appeared merely to have cut the flesh.

A jerk, and Quijada had stripped the ruff from his neck, and, as this
did not suffice, he cut with his sword blade and his teeth a piece of
fine linen from his shirt.

This would do for the first bandage. The skilful hand which, in battle,
had aided many a bleeding comrade soon completed the task.

Then he flung his uninjured cloak around him again, and turned toward
the lifeless body at the foot of the steps.

There lay the murderer's weapon--a delicately fashioned short dress
sword, with an ivory hilt, not the knife of a common highwayman.

That was the reason the wound was so narrow.

But who had sought his life with this dainty steel blade?

There were few at court who envied him the Emperor's favour--his office
often compelled him to deny even persons of higher rank access to his
Majesty; but he had never--this he could assure himself--treated even
men of humble station harshly or unjustly. If he had offended any one by
haughty self-confidence, it had been unintentional. He was not to blame
for the manner natural to the Castilian.

Besides, he had little time for reflection; scarcely had he hastily
wiped off with the little cloak that lay beside him the blood which
covered the face of the prostrate man than he started back in horror,
for the person who had sought his life was the very one whom he had
honoured with his highest confidence, and had chosen as the teacher and
companion of the wife who was dearer than his own existence.

Some cruel misunderstanding, some pitiable mistake must have been at
work here, and he came upon the right trail speedily enough.

The hapless knight loved Barbara, and had taken him, Luis, for her
betrayer and nocturnal visitor.

Fatal error of the Emperor, whose lamentable consequences were already
beginning!

With sincere repentance for his needlessly violent act of defence, he
bent over the severely injured man. His heart was still beating, but
doubtless on account of the great loss of blood--it throbbed with
alarming weakness. Don Luis also soon found a wound in the skull, which
appeared to be fractured.

If speedy aid was not rendered, the unfortunate man was lost.

Quijada laid Wolf's head quickly and carefully on his cloak, which he
placed in a roll beneath it, and then hurried to the Red Cock, where
one servant was just opening the door and another was leading out two
horses. The latter was Jan, Wolf's Netherland servant, who wanted to
water the animals before starting on the journey.

He instantly recognised the nobleman; but the latter had resolved to
keep the poor musician's attack a secret.

As Jan bowed respectfully to him, he ordered him and the servant of the
Red Cock to leave everything and follow him. He had found a dead man in
the street.

A few minutes after the three were standing at the steps of the house,
before the object of their solicitude.

The groom of the Red Cock, who still held a lantern in his hand, though
dawn was already beginning to glimmer faintly in the east, threw the
light upon the face of the bleeding form, and Jan exclaimed in grief and
terror that the injured man was his master.

The Brabant lad wailed, and the German, who had known the "precentor
cavalier" all his life, joined in the lamentation; but Quijada induced
them both to think only of saving the wounded nobleman.

The old groom, with savage imprecations upon the scoundrels who now
infested their quiet streets, raised the wounded man's head and told
Jan to lift his feet. Both were familiar with the house, and, while
the servants bore Wolf up the narrow stairs, the proud Spanish grandee
lighted their way with the lantern, supporting the wounded man's injured
head, with his free hand. At the door of the young knight's rooms he
told the servants to attend to his needs, and then hurried back to the
Golden Cross.

He found a great bustle prevailing there. Tilted wagons were being
loaded with the regent's luggage, couriers and servants were rushing to
and fro, and in the courtyard men were currying the horses which were to
be ridden on the journey.

Don Luis paid no heed to all this, hastening first to the chapel to
ask a young German chaplain to administer the sacrament to Sir Wolf
Hartschwert, to whose house he hurriedly directed him. Then going
swiftly to the third story, he waked Dr. Mathys, the Emperor's leech.

The portly physician rubbed his eyes angrily; but as soon as he learned
for whom he was wanted and how serious was the injury, he showed the
most praiseworthy haste and, with the attendant who carried his surgical
instruments and medicines, was standing beside the sufferer's couch
almost as soon as the wounded man.

The result of his examination was anything but gratifying.

He would gladly do all that his skill would permit for the knight, but
in so serious a fracture of the skull only the special mercy of Heaven
could preserve life.

Dr. Doll, the best physician in Ratisbon, assisted him with the
bandaging, and old Ursel had suddenly recovered her lost strength.

When the maid-servant asked timidly if she should not call Wawerl down
from upstairs, she shrugged her shoulders with a movement which the
one-eyed girl understood, and which signified anything but acceptance of
the proposal.

Yet Barbara would perhaps have rendered most efficacious assistance.

True, she was still sleeping the sound slumber of wearied youth.
Directly after her return from her imperial lover, she had gone to rest
in the little chamber behind the bow-windowed room. It looked out upon
the courtyard, and was protected from the noise of the street. When she
heard sounds in the house, she thought that old Ursel was ill and they
were summoning the doctor. For a moment she felt an impulse to rise
and go downstairs, but she did not like to leave her warm bed, and Wolf
would manage without her. She had always lacked patience to wait upon
the sick, and Ursel had grown so harsh and disagreeable since she
joined the Protestants. Finally, Barbara had brought home exquisite
recollections of her illustrious lover, which must not be clouded by the
suffering of the old woman, whom, besides, she could rarely please.

She did not learn what had happened until she went to mass, and then
it weighed heavily upon her heart that she had not given Wolf her
assistance, especially as she suspected, with strange certainty, that
she herself was connected with this terrible misfortune.

Now--ah, how gladly!--she would have helped Ursel with the nursing, but
she forbade her to enter the sick-room. The most absolute quiet must
reign there. No one was permitted to cross the threshold except herself
and an elderly nun, whom the Clares had sent for the sake of the wounded
man's dead mother. A Dominican also soon came, whom the old woman could
not shut out because he was despatched by the Queen of Hungary, and the
violinist Massi, whom she gladly welcomed as a good friend of her Wolf.
He proved himself loyal, and devoted every leisure hour of the night
to the sufferer. Barbara knocked at the door very often, but Ursel
persisted in refusing admittance. She knew that the girl had rejected
her darling's proposal, and it was a satisfaction to her when, toward
noon, the former told her that she was about to leave the house to go to
Prebrunn.

A cart would convey her luggage, but it would be only lightly laden.
Fran Lerch went with the baggage.

An hour later Barbara herself moved into the little castle, which had
been refurnished for her. Mounted upon a spirited bay horse from her
Prebrunn stables, she rode beside the Marquise de Leria's huge litter to
her new home.




CHAPTER XXIV.

The very harsh execrations which the regent bestowed upon pleasant
Ratisbon when she learned what had befallen Sir Wolf Hartschwert were
better suited to the huntress than to the queen and sister of a mighty
emperor.

Murderous knaves who, in the heart of the city, close to the imperial
precincts, endangered the lives of peaceful people at night! It was
unprecedented, and yet evidently only a result of the heretical abuses.

She had sprung into the saddle--she always travelled on horseback--in
the worst possible mood, but had urged all who were near the Emperor
Charles's person, and also the almoner Pedro de Soto, to remember the
wounded man and do everything possible to aid his recovery.

She did not mention Barbara, even by a single word, in her farewell to
her royal brother.

The latter had intended to accompany her a portion of the way, but a
great quantity of work--not least in consequence of the loss of time
occasioned by the new love life--had accumulated, and he therefore
preferred to take leave of his sister in the courtyard of the Golden
Cross.

There, with his assistance, she mounted her horse.

Quijada, who usually rendered her this service, stood aloof, silent and
pale. The regent had noticed it, and attributed his appearance to grief
for her departure. No one at court held a higher place in her regard,
and it pleased her that he, too, found it so hard to do without her.

As her horse started, her last salute was to the monarch and to him.

Malfalconnet, whose eyes were everywhere, noticed it, and whispered to
the Marquise de Leria, who was standing beside him: "Either Don Luis
would do well to intrust himself to our Mathys's treatment, or this
gentleman is an accomplished actor, or our most gracious lady has
tampered with the fidelity of this most loyal husband, and the
paternosters and pilgrimages of Dona Magdalena de Ulloa have been vain."

A few minutes after, the Emperor Charles was sitting at the writing
table examining, with the Bishop of Arras, a mountain of reports and
documents. Two or three hours elapsed ere he received ambassadors and
gave audiences, and during that time Quijada was not needed by his royal
master.

He had previously had leisure only to provide for the wounded man,
cleanse himself from blood, change his dress, bid Queen Mary farewell,
and bandage the hurt afresh. He had done this with his own hands because
he distrusted the reticence of his extremely skilful but heedless French
valet.

When he returned to his lodgings, Master Adrian followed him, and
modestly, yet with all the warmth of affection which he felt for this
true friend of his master, entreated him to permit him to speak freely.
He had perceived, not only by the pallor of Don Luis's cheeks, but other
signs, that he was suffering, and in the name of his wife, who, when her
husband was summoned from her side, had urged him with the earnestness
of anxious love to watch over him, begged him not to force himself
beyond his strength to perform his service, if his sufferings
corresponded with his appearance.

Don Luis looked sharply into the faithful face, and what he found there
induced him to admit that he was concealing a wound. Adrian silently
beckoned to him, and led the way into his own room, where he entreated
Don Luis to show him the injury. When he saw it, his by no means mobile
features blanched.

He knew that Quijada had accompanied Barbara home that night. On this
errand, he was sure of it, Don Luis must have received this serious
wound at the same time as Wolf, or even obtained it from the young
knight himself. Besides, he felt certain that the object of the
Emperor's love was connected with both disasters. Yet not a word which
could have resembled a question escaped his beardless lips while he
examined, sewed, and bandaged the deep sword thrust with the skill and
care of a surgeon.

When he had finished his task, he thanked Don Luis for the confidence
reposed in him.

Quijada pressed his hand gratefully, and begged him to do his best that
no one, not even the Emperor, should learn anything about this vexatious
mischance. Then, not from curiosity, for grave motives, he desired to
know what relations existed between Sir Wolf Hartschwert and Barbara.

The answer was somewhat delayed, for Wolf had won the affection of the
influential valet, and what Master Adrian had learned concerning the
young knight's personal affairs from himself, his own wife in Brussels,
and the violinist Massi, he would have confided to no one on earth
except Quijada, and perhaps not even to him had he not accompanied his
inquiry with the assurance that what he intrusted to him would remain
buried in his soul, and be used only for Wolf's advantage.

This promise loosed the cautious valet's tongue. He knew his man, and,
when Don Luis also desired to learn whether the knight had already
discovered that Barbara was now the Emperor's love, he thought he could
answer in the negative.

What he had heard of Wolf's relation to Barbara was only that the two
had spent their early youth in the same house, that the knight loved the
singer, but that she had rejected his suit.

This avowal appeared to satisfy Quijada, and it really did calm him.
He now believed that Wolf had misjudged him, and, supposing that he
was coming from a meeting with the girl he loved, had drawn his sword
against him. The manner in which he had attempted to rid himself of
the rival seemed criminal enough, yet the nocturnal attack had scarcely
concerned him personally, and he would not condemn the man who was
usually so calm and sensible without having heard him.

If Wolf lived--and he desired it from his heart--this act, which he
appeared to have committed in a fit of blind jealousy, should do him no
injury.

With a warm clasp of the hand, which united these two men more firmly
than a long period of mutual intercourse, each went his way in quiet
content.

In the afternoon Master Adrian was sent out to Prebrunn to announce to
Barbara a visit from the Emperor after vespers.

Wolf, it is true, had told her many things about Adrian Dubois, and
informed her how much pleasure he had had at Brussels in visiting him
and his sensible, cheerful wife, how implicitly the Emperor trusted him,
how faithfully he served him, how highly the ambassadors and the most
aristocratic gentlemen esteemed him, and how great an advantage it had
been to him, Wolf, to possess his friendship; yet she thought proper
to treat the valet with the haughty reserve which beseemed her as the
Emperor's favourite, and which yesterday evening had won the approval of
the Wittenberg theologian and of Wolf.

But Master Adrian appeared to take no notice of her manner, and
performed his errand with businesslike composure.

The Emperor Charles wished to know how she liked her new home.

In reality she had found its beauty and comfort far beyond her
expectations, had clapped her hands in surprise when she was conducted
by the marquise through the new abode, and, under the guidance of the
house steward Steen, had been shown the kitchen, the stable, the four
horses, and the garden. In her reception-room she found a lute and a
harp of exquisitely beautiful workmanship, and a small Milan cabinet
made of ebony inlaid with ivory, in which was a heavy casket bound with
silver. The key had been given to her the evening before by the regent
herself, and when Barbara opened it she discovered so many shining
zecchins and ducats that a long time was occupied when she obeyed Fran
Lerch's request to count them.

The dressmaker from the Grieb was already in her service, and had been
a witness of her sincere delight and grateful pleasure. The second hour
after their arrival she had helped her to employ Frau Lamperi, the maid
whom the steward called the 'garde-robiere', and had already been to the
city herself to buy, for her fortunate "darling" costly but, on account
of the approach of summer, light materials. But she had seen Master
Adrian corning, and, while he was passing through the garden, gave her
the advice by no means to praise what she found here, but to appear as
though she had been accustomed to such surroundings, and found this and
that not quite worthy of her, but needing addition and improvement.

At first Barbara had succeeded in assuming the airs of the spoiled lady,
but when Adrian, with prosaic definiteness, asked for details, and she
saw herself compelled to begin the game of dissimulation anew, it grew
repugnant to her.

To her artist nature every restraint soon became irksome, especially so
unpleasant a one, which was opposed to her character, and ere she was
her self aware of it she was again the vivacious Wawerl, and frankly and
freely expressed her pleasure in the beautiful new things she owed to
her lover's kindness.

A smile, so faint and brief that Barbara did not perceive it, was
hovering meanwhile around the valet's thin lips. The causes of this
strange change of opinion and mood would have been sufficiently
intelligible to him, even had he not perceived one of the reproving
glances which Frau Lerch cast at Barbara.

She, too, had met one; but since she had once obeyed the impulse of
her own nature, and felt content in doing so, she troubled herself no
further about the monitor, and there was nothing in her new home which
was not far more beautiful than what she had had in the precentor's
modest house.

The marquise displeased her most deeply, and this also she plainly told
Master Adrian, and begged him to inform his Majesty, with her dutiful
greeting. His best gift was the precaution which he had taken that she
should live apart from the old monkey.

The valet received this commission, like all the former ones, with a
slight, grave bow.

On the whole, the experienced man was not ill-pleased with her, only
it seemed to him strange that Barbara did not mention the serious
misfortune which had befallen Wolf; yet she knew from his own lips
that he loved the knight, and had learned that the latter's life was in
serious danger.

So he turned the conversation to his young friend, and in an instant
a remarkable change took place in Barbara. Wolf's sorrowful fate and
severe wound had weighed heavily upon her heart, but what the present
brought was so novel and varied that it had crowded the painful event,
near as was the past to which it belonged, into the shadow.

She now desired to know who the murderer was who had attacked him, and
cursed him with impetuous wrath. She thought it base and shameful that
she had been denied access to his couch.

Poor, poor Wolf!

Of all the men on earth, he was the best! Meanwhile tears of genuine
compassion flowed from her eyes and, with passionate vehemence, she
declared that no power in the world should keep her from him. The mere
sound of her voice, she knew, would be a cordial to him.

So Master Adrian had not been mistaken.

It was not only in song that she was capable of deep feeling, and
the love which had seized the Emperor Charles so late, and yet so
powerfully, had not gone far astray.

He could scarcely have bestowed it upon a more beautiful woman. While
pleasure in her new surroundings held sway over her, it was a real
pleasure to see her face. But this creature, so richly gifted by the
grace of God, was not suited for his modest young friend; this had
become especially evident to him when an almost evil expression escaped
her lips while she emptied the vial of her wrath upon Wolf's murderer.

If she deemed herself worthy of his master's love, she would not lack
Adrian's protection, which was the more effective the more persistently
he refrained from asking of the Emperor's favour even the slightest
thing for himself, his wife, or others; that the time would come when
she would need it, he was certain.

No one knew the Emperor so well as he, and he saw before him the cliffs
which threatened to shatter the little ship of this love bond. Already
an imprudent violation of his extreme sense of the dignity of majesty,
or of the confidence which he bestowed upon her, might become fatal to
it.

But, ardently as she might return his love, loyal and discreet as her
conduct might be, there were other grave perils menacing the tie which
united the Emperor to Barbara.

Charles was a man of action, of work, of fulfilment of duty. The moment
that he perceived this love bond would impede his progress toward the
lofty goals to which he aspired might easily mark the beginning of its
end.

Now, in the midst of peace, such a result was scarcely to be feared; but
if it came to fighting--and many a sign showed Adrian that war was not
far distant--a great change would take place in his master's character;
the general would assert his rights. Every other consideration would
then be pitilessly thrust aside and, if Charles still remained loyal
to his affection, he would have fallen under the spell of one of those
great passions which defy every assault of time and circumstance and
find an end only in death. But the sharp-sighted man could not believe
in such love on his master's part; in his nature the claims of reason
threw those of the heart too far into the shade. If Barbara was wise,
her daily prayer should be for the maintenance of peace.

To speak of these fears to the care-free girl would have been cruel, but
he could probably give her a useful hint as opportunity offered.

Accustomed to perform his duty silently and, where speech was necessary,
to study the utmost brevity, he had not learned the art of clothing his
thoughts in pleasing forms. So, without circumlocution, he whispered
to Barbara the advice to send away Frau Lerch, who was not fit for her
