
"You say the little boat sails fast, master?" queried Martin.

"She sails fast, but perhaps others are as swift. Moreover, it may
happen that you will find the mouth of the canal blocked by the
guardship, which was sent there a week ago with orders to search every
craft that passes from stem to stern. Or--you may slip past her."

"My master and I are not afraid of a few blows," said Martin, "and we
are ready to take our risks like brave men; still, Mynheer Brant, this
seems to me a hazardous business, and one in which your money may well
get itself lost. Now, I ask you, would it not be better to take this
treasure out of the boat where you have hidden it, and bury it, and
convey it away by land?"

Brant shook his head. "I have thought of that," he said, "as I have
thought of everything, but it cannot now be done; also there is no time
to make fresh plans."

"Why?" asked Foy.

"Because day and night men are watching the boats which are known to
belong to me, although they are registered in other names, and only this
evening an order was signed that they must be searched within an hour
of dawn. My information is good, as it should be since I pay for it
dearly."

"Then," said Foy, "there is nothing more to be said. We will try to get
to the boat and try to get her away; and if we can get her away we will
try to hide the treasure, and if we can't we will try to blow her up
as you direct and try to escape ourselves. Or--" and he shrugged his
shoulders.

Martin said nothing, only he shook his great red head, nor did the
silent pilot at the table speak at all.

Hendrik Brant looked at them, and his pale, careworn face began to work.
"Have I the right?" he muttered to himself, and for an instant or two
bent his head as though in prayer. When he lifted it again his mind
seemed to be made up.

"Foy van Goorl," he said, "listen to me, and tell your father, my cousin
and executor, what I say, since I have no time to write it; tell him
word for word. You are wondering why I do not let this pelf take its
chance without risking the lives of men to save it. It is because
something in my heart pushes me to another path. It may be imagination,
but I am a man standing on the edge of the grave, and to such I have
known it given to see the future. I think that you will win through with
the treasure, Foy, and that it will be the means of bringing some wicked
ones to their doom. Yes, and more, much more, but what it is I cannot
altogether see. Yet I am quite certain that thousands and tens of
thousands of our folk will live to bless the gold of Hendrik Brant, and
that is why I work so hard to save it from the Spaniards. Also that is
why I ask you to risk your lives to-night; not for the wealth's sake,
for wealth is dross, but for what the wealth will buy in days to come."

He paused a while, then went on: "I think also, cousin, that being, they
tell me, unaffianced, you will learn to love, and not in vain, that dear
child of mine, whom I leave in your father's keeping and in yours. More,
since time is short and we shall never meet again, I say to you plainly,
that the thought is pleasing to me, young cousin Foy, for I have a good
report of you and like your blood and looks. Remember always, however
dark may be your sky, that before he passed to doom Hendrik Brant had
this vision concerning you and the daughter whom he loves, and whom you
will learn to love as do all who know her. Remember also that priceless
things are not lightly won, and do not woo her for her fortune, since,
I tell you, this belongs not to her but to our people and our cause, and
when the hour comes, for them it must be used."

Foy listened, wondering, but he made no answer, for he knew not what to
say. Yet now, on the edge of his first great adventure, these words were
comfortable to him who had found already that Elsa's eyes were bright.
Brant next turned towards Martin, but that worthy shook his red head and
stepped back a pace.

"Thank you kindly, master," he said, "but I will do without the
prophecies, which, good or ill, are things that fasten upon a man's
mind. Once an astrologer cast my nativity, and foretold that I should
be drowned before I was twenty-five. I wasn't, but, my faith! the miles
which I have walked round to bridges on account of that astrologer."

Brant smiled. "I have no foresight concerning you, good friend, except
that I judge your arm will be always strong in battle; that you will
love your masters well, and use your might to avenge the cause of God's
slaughtered saints upon their murderers."

Martin nodded his head vigorously, and fumbled at the handle of the
sword Silence, while Brant went on:

"Friend, you have entered on a dangerous quarrel on behalf of me and
mine, and if you live through it you will have earned high pay."

Then he went to the table, and, taking writing materials, he wrote as
follows: "To the Heer Dirk van Goorl and his heirs, the executors of my
will, and the holders of my fortune, which is to be used as God shall
show them. This is to certify that in payment of this night's work
Martin, called the Red, the servant of the said Dirk van Goorl, or
those heirs whom he may appoint, is entitled to a sum of five thousand
florins, and I constitute such sum a first charge upon my estate, to
whatever purpose they may put it in their discretion." This document he
dated, signed, and caused the pilot Hans to sign also as a witness.
Then he gave it to Martin, who thanked him by touching his forehead,
remarking at the same time--

"After all, fighting is not a bad trade if you only stick to it long
enough. Five thousand florins! I never thought to earn so much."

"You haven't got it yet," interrupted Foy. "And now, what are you going
to do with that paper?"

Martin reflected. "Coat?" he said, "no, a man takes off his coat if it
is hot, and it might be left behind. Boots?--no, that would wear it
out, especially if they got wet. Jersey?--sewn next the skin, no, same
reason. Ah! I have it," and, drawing out the great sword Silence, he
took the point of his knife and began to turn a little silver screw in
the hilt, one of many with which the handle of walrus ivory was fastened
to its steel core. The screw came out, and he touched a spring, whereon
one quarter of the ivory casing fell away, revealing a considerable
hollow in the hilt, for, although Martin grasped it with one hand, the
sword was made to be held by two.

"What is that hole for?" asked Foy.

"The executioner's drug," replied Martin, "which makes a man happy
while he does his business with him, that is, if he can pay the fee. He
offered his dose to me, I remember, before--" Here Martin stopped, and,
having rolled up the parchment, hid it in the hollow.

"You might lose your sword," suggested Foy.

"Yes, master, when I lose my life and exchange the hope of florins for a
golden crown," replied Martin with a grin. "Till then I do not intend to
part with Silence."

Meanwhile Hendrik Brant had been whispering to the quiet man at the
table, who now rose and said:

"Foster-brother, do not trouble about me; I take my chance and I do
not wish to survive you. My wife is burnt, one of my girls out there is
married to a man who knows how to protect them both, also the dowries
you gave them are far away and safe. Do not trouble about me who
have but one desire--to snatch the great treasure from the maw of the
Spaniard that in a day to come it may bring doom upon the Spaniard."
Then he relapsed into a silence, which spread over the whole company.

"It is time to be stirring," said Brant presently. "Hans, you will lead
the way. I must bide here a while before I go abroad and show myself."

The pilot nodded. "Ready?" he asked, addressing Foy and Martin. Then
he went to the door and whistled, whereon Red Bow with her pretended
servant entered the vault. He spoke a word or two to them and kissed
them each upon the brow. Next he went to Hendrik Brant, and throwing
his arms about him, embraced him with far more passion than he had shown
towards his own daughters.

"Farewell, foster-brother," he said, "till we meet again here or
hereafter--it matters little which. Have no fear, we will get the stuff
through to England if may be, or send it to hell with some Spaniards to
seek it there. Now, comrades, come on and stick close to me, and if any
try to stop us cut them down. When we reach the boat do you take the
oars and row while I steer her. The girls come with us to the canal,
arm-in-arm with the two of you. If anything happens to me either of them
can steer you to the skiff called _Swallow_, but if naught happens we
will put them ashore at the next wharf. Come," and he led the way from
the cellar.

At the threshold Foy turned to look at Hendrik Brant. He was standing by
the table, the light shining full upon his pale face and grizzled head,
about which it seemed to cast a halo. Indeed, at that moment, wrapped in
his long, dark cloak, his lips moving in prayer, and his arms uplifted
to bless them as they went, he might well have been, not a man, but some
vision of a saint come back to earth. The door closed and Foy never
saw him again, for ere long the Inquisition seized him and a while
afterwards he died beneath their cruel hands. One of the charges against
him was, that more than twenty years before, he had been seen reading
the Bible at Leyden by Black Meg, who appeared and gave the evidence.
But they did not discover where his treasure was hidden away. To win an
easier death, indeed, he made them a long confession that took them a
still longer journey, but of the truth of the matter he knew nothing,
and therefore could tell them nothing.

Now this scene, so strange and pathetic, ended at last, the five of them
were in the darkness of the street. Here once more Foy and Red Bow clung
to each other, and once more the arm of Martin was about the neck of her
who seemed to be the serving-maid, while ahead, as though he were paid
to show the way, went the pilot. Soon footsteps were heard, for folk
were after them. They turned once, they turned twice, they reached the
bank of a canal, and Hans, followed by Red Bow and her sister, descended
some steps and climbed into a boat which lay there ready. Next came
Martin, and, last of all, Foy. As he set foot upon the first step, a
figure shot out of the gloom towards him, a knife gleamed in the air and
a blow took him between the shoulders that sent him stumbling headlong,
for he was balanced upon the edge of the step.

But Martin had heard and seen. He swung round and struck out with the
sword Silence. The assassin was far from him, still the tip of the long
steel reached the outstretched murderous hand, and from it fell a broken
knife, while he who held it sped on with a screech of pain. Martin
darted back and seized the knife, then he leapt into the boat and pushed
off. At the bottom of it lay Foy, who had fallen straight into the arms
of Red Bow, dragging her down with him.

"Are you hurt, master?" asked Martin.

"Not a bit," replied Foy, "but I am afraid the lady is. She went
undermost."

"Mother's gifts are good gifts!" muttered Martin as he pulled him and
the girl, whose breath had been knocked out of her, up to a seat. "You
ought to have an eight-inch hole through you, but that knife broke upon
the shirt. Look here," and he threw the handle of the dagger on to his
knees and snatched at the sculls.

Foy examined it in the faint light, and there, still hooked above the
guard, was a single severed finger, a long and skinny finger, to which
the point of the sword Silence had played surgeon, and on it a gold
ring. "This may be useful," thought Foy, as he slipped handle and finger
into the pocket of his cloak.

Then they all took oars and rowed till presently they drew near a wharf.

"Now, daughters, make ready," said Hans, and the girls stood up. As they
touched the wharf Red Bow bent down and kissed Foy.

"The rest were in play, this is in earnest," she said, "and for luck.
Good-night, companion, and think of me sometimes."

"Good-night, companion," answered Foy, returning the kiss. Then she
leapt ashore. They never met again.

"You know what to do, girls," said Hans; "do it, and in three days you
should be safe in England, where, perhaps, I may meet you, though do not
count on that. Whatever happens, keep honest, and remember me till we
come together again, here or hereafter, but, most of all, remember your
mother and your benefactor Hendrik Brant. Farewell."

"Farewell, father," they answered with a sob, and the boat drifted
off down the dark canal, leaving the two of them alone upon the wharf.
Afterwards Foy discovered that it was the short sister who walked with
Martin that was married. Gallant little Red Bow married also, but later.
Her husband was a cloth merchant in London, and her grandson became Lord
Mayor of that city.

And now, having played their part in it, these two brave girls are out
of the story.



CHAPTER XIV

SWORD SILENCE RECEIVES THE SECRET

For half an hour or more they glided down the canal unmolested and
in silence. Now it ran into a broader waterway along which they slid
towards the sea, keeping as much as possible under the shadow of one
bank, for although the night was moonless a faint grey light lay upon
the surface of the stream. At length Foy became aware that they were
bumping against the sides of a long line of barges and river boats laden
with timber and other goods. To one of these--it was the fourth--the
pilot Hans made fast, tying their row-boat to her stern. Then he climbed
to the deck, whispering to them to follow.

As they scrambled on board, two grey figures arose and Foy saw the flash
of steel. Then Hans whistled like a plover, and, dropping their swords
they came to him and fell into talk. Presently Hans left them, and,
returning to Foy and Martin, said:

"Listen: we must lie here a while, for the wind is against us, and it
would be too dangerous for us to try to row or pole so big a boat down
to the sea and across the bar in the darkness, for most likely we should
set her fast upon a shoal. Before dawn it will turn, and, if I read the
sky aright, blow hard off land."

"What have the bargemen to say?" asked Foy.

"Only that for these four days they have been lying here forbidden to
move, and that their craft are to be searched to-morrow by a party of
soldiers, and the cargo taken out of them piecemeal."

"So," said Foy, "well, I hope that by then what they seek will be far
away. Now show us this ship."

Then Hans took them down the hatchway, for the little vessel was decked,
being in shape and size not unlike a modern Norfolk herring boat, though
somewhat more slightly built. Then having lit a lantern, he showed them
the cargo. On the top were bags of salt. Dragging one or two of these
aside, Hans uncovered the heads of five barrels, each of them marked
with the initial _B_ in white paint.

"That is what men will die for before to-morrow night," he said.

"The treasure?" asked Foy.

He nodded. "These five, none of the others." Then still lower down
he pointed out other barrels, eight of them, filled with the best
gunpowder, and showed them too where the slow matches ran to the little
cabin, the cook's galley, the tiller and the prow, by means of any one
of which it could be fired. After this and such inspection of the ropes
and sails as the light would allow, they sat in the cabin waiting till
the wind should change, while the two watching men unmoored the vessel
and made her sails ready for hoisting. An hour passed, and still the
breeze blew from the sea, but in uncertain chopping gusts. Then it fell
altogether.

"Pray God it comes soon," said Martin, "for the owner of that finger
in your pocket will have laid the hounds on to our slot long ago, and,
look! the east grows red."

The silent, hard-faced Hans leant forward and stared up the darkling
water, his hand behind his ear.

"I hear them," he said presently.

"Who?" asked Foy.

"The Spaniards and the wind--both," he answered. "Come, up with the
mainsail and pole her out to midstream."

So the three of them took hold of the tackle and ran aft with it, while
the rings and booms creaked and rattled as the great canvas climbed the
mast. Presently it was set, and after it the jib. Then, assisted by
the two watchmen thrusting from another of the boats, they pushed the
_Swallow_ from her place in the line out into mid-stream. But all this
made noise and took time, and now men appeared upon the bank, calling to
know who dared to move the boats without leave. As no one gave them any
answer, they fired a shot, and presently a beacon began to burn upon a
neighbouring mound.

"Bad business," said Hans, shrugging his shoulders. "They are warning
the Government ship at the harbour mouth. Duck, masters, duck; here
comes the wind," and he sprang to the tiller as the boom swung over and
the little vessel began to gather way.

"Yes," said Martin, "and here with it come the Spaniards."

Foy looked. Through the grey mist that was growing lighter every moment,
for the dawn was breaking, he caught sight of a long boat with her
canvas spread which was sweeping round the bend of the stream towards
them and not much more than a quarter of a mile away.

"They had had to pole down stream in the dark, and that is why they have
been so long in coming," said Hans over his shoulder.

"Well, they are here now at any rate," answered Foy, "and plenty of
them," he added, as a shout from a score of throats told them that they
were discovered.

But now the _Swallow_ had begun to fly, making the water hiss upon
either side of her bows.

"How far is it to the sea?" asked Foy.

"About three miles," Hans called back from the tiller. "With this wind
we should be there in fifteen minutes. Master," he added presently, "bid
your man light the fire in the galley."

"What for," asked Foy, "to cook breakfast?"

The pilot shrugged his shoulders and muttered, "Yes, if we live to eat
it." But Foy saw that he was glancing at the slow-match by his side, and
understood.

Ten minutes passed, and they had swept round the last bend and were in
the stretch of open water which ran down to the sea. By now the light
was strong, and in it they saw that the signal fire had not been lit in
vain. At the mouth of the cutting, just where the bar began, the channel
was narrowed in with earth to a width of not more than fifty paces, and
on one bank of it stood a foot armed with culverins. Out of the little
harbour of this fort a large open boat was being poled, and in it a
dozen or fifteen soldiers were hastily arming themselves.

"What now?" cried Martin. "They are going to stop the mouth of the
channel."

The hard-featured Hans set his teeth and made no answer. Only he
looked backward at his pursuers and onward at those who barred the way.
Presently he called aloud:

"Under hatches, both of you. They are going to fire from the fort," and
he flung himself upon his back, steering with his uplifted arms.

Foy and Martin tumbled down the hatchway, for they could do no good on
deck. Only Foy kept one eye above its level.

"Look out!" he said, and ducked.

As he spoke there was a puff of white smoke from the fort, followed by
the scream of a shot which passed ahead of them. Then came another puff
of smoke, and a hole appeared in their brown sail. After this the fort
did not fire again, for the gunners found no time to load their pieces,
only some soldiers who were armed with arquebuses began to shoot as the
boat swept past within a few yards of them. Heedless of their bullets,
Hans the pilot rose to his feet again, for such work as was before him
could not be done by a man lying on his back. By now the large open boat
from the fort was within two hundred yards of them, and, driven by the
gathering pale, the _Swallow_ rushed towards it with the speed of a
dart. Foy and Martin crawled from the hatchway and lay down near the
steersman under the shelter of the little bulwarks, watching the enemy's
boat, which was in midstream just where the channel was narrowest, and
on the hither side of the broken water of the bar.

"See," said Foy, "they are throwing out anchors fore and aft. Is there
room to go past them?"

"No," answered Hans, "the water is too shallow under the bank, and they
know it. Bring me a burning brand."

Foy crept forward, and returned with the fire.

"Now light the slow-match, master."

Foy opened his blue eyes and a cold shiver went down his back. Then he
set his teeth and obeyed. Martin looked at Hans, muttering,

"Good for a young one!"

Hans nodded and said, "Have no fear. Till that match burns to the level
of the deck we are safe. Now, mates, hold fast. I can't go past that
boat, so I am going through her. We may sink on the other side, though I
am sure that the fire will reach the powder first. In that case you can
swim for it if you like, but I shall go with the _Swallow_."

"I will think about it when the time comes. Oh! that cursed astrologer,"
growled Martin, looking back at the pursuing ship, which was not more
than seven or eight hundred yards away.

Meanwhile the officer in command of the boat, who was armed with a
musket, was shouting to them to pull down their sail and surrender;
indeed, not until they were within fifty yards of him did he seem to
understand their desperate purpose. Then some one in the boat called
out: "The devils are going to sink us," and there was a rush to bow and
stern to get up the anchors. Only the officer stood firm, screaming at
them like a madman. It was too late; a strong gust of wind caught the
_Swallow_, causing her to heel over and sweep down on the boat like a
swooping falcon.

Hans stood and shifted the tiller ever so little, calculating all things
with his eye. Foy watched the boat towards which they sprang like a
thing alive, and Martin, lying at his side, watched the burning match.

Suddenly the Spanish officer, when their prow was not more than twenty
paces from him, ceased to shout, and lifting his piece fired. Martin,
looking upwards with his left eye, thought that he saw Hans flinch, but
the pilot made no sound. Only he did something to the tiller, putting
all his strength on to it, and it seemed to the pair of them as though
the _Swallow_ was for an instant checked in her flight--certainly her
prow appeared to lift itself from the water. Suddenly there was a sound
of something snapping--a sound that could be heard even through the yell
of terror from the soldiers in the boat. It was the bowsprit which had
gone, leaving the jib flying loose like a great pennon.

Then came the crash. Foy shut his eyes for a moment, hanging on with
both hands till the scraping and the trembling were done with. Now he
opened again, and the first thing he saw was the body of the Spanish
officer hanging from the jagged stump of the bowsprit. He looked behind.
The boat had vanished, but in the water were to be seen the heads of
three or four men swimming. As for themselves they seemed to be clear
and unhurt, except for the loss of their bowsprit; indeed, the little
vessel was riding over the seas on the bar like any swan. Hans glanced
at the slow-match which was smouldering away perilously near to the
deck, whereon Martin stamped upon it, saying:

"If we sink now it will be in deep water, so there is no need to fly up
before we go down."

"Go and see if she leaks," said Hans.

They went and searched the forehold but could not find that the
_Swallow_ had taken any harm worth noting. Indeed, her massive oaken
prow, with the weight of the gale-driven ship behind it, had crashed
through the frail sides of the open Spanish boat like a knife through an
egg.

"That was good steering," said Foy to Hans, when they returned, "and
nothing seems to be amiss."

Hans nodded. "I hit him neatly," he muttered. "Look. He's gone." As he
spoke the _Swallow_ gave a sharp pitch, and the corpse of the Spaniard
fell with a heavy splash into the sea.

"I am glad it has sunk," said Foy; "and now let's have some breakfast,
for I am starving. Shall I bring you some, friend Hans?"

"No, master, I want to sleep."

Something in the tone of the man's voice caused Foy to scrutinise his
face. His lips were turning blue. He glanced at his hands. Although
they still grasped the tiller tightly, these also were turning blue, as
though with cold; moreover, blood was dropping on the deck.

"You are hit," he said. "Martin, Martin, Hans is hit!"

"Yes," replied the man, "he hit me and I hit him, and perhaps presently
we shall be talking it over together. No, don't trouble, it is through
the body and mortal. Well, I expected nothing less, so I can't complain.
Now, listen, while my strength holds. Can you lay a course for Harwich
in England?"

Martin and Foy shook their heads. Like most Hollanders they were good
sailormen, but they only knew their own coasts.

"Then you had best not try it," said Hans, "for there is a gale brewing,
and you will be driven on the Goodwin Sands, or somewhere down that
shore, and drowned and the treasure lost. Run up to the Haarlem Mere,
comrades. You can hug the land with this small boat, while that big
devil after you," and he nodded towards the pursuing vessel, which by
now was crossing the bar, "must stand further out beyond the shoals.
Then slip up through the small gut--the ruined farmstead marks it--and
so into the mere. You know Mother Martha, the mad woman who is nicknamed
the Mare? She will be watching at the mouth of it; she always is.
Moreover, I caused her to be warned that we might pass her way, and if
you hoist the white flag with a red cross--it lies in the locker--or,
after nightfall, hang out four lamps upon your starboard side, she will
come aboard to pilot you, for she knows this boat well. To her also you
can tell your business without fear, for she will help you, and be as
secret as the dead. Then bury the treasure, or sink it, or blow it up,
or do what you can, but, in the name of God, to whom I go, I charge you
do not let it fall into the hands of Ramiro and his Spanish rats who are
at your heels."

As Hans spoke he sank down upon the deck. Foy ran to support him, but he
pushed him aside with a feeble hand. "Let me be," he whispered. "I wish
to pray. I have set you a course. Follow it to the end."

Then Martin took the tiller while Foy watched Hans. In ten minutes he
was dead.

Now they were running northwards with a fierce wind abeam of them, and
the larger Spanish ship behind, but standing further out to sea to avoid
the banks. Half an hour later the wind, which was gathering to a gale,
shifted several points to the north, so that they must beat up against
it under reefed canvas. Still they held on without accident, Foy
attending to the sail and Martin steering. The _Swallow_ was a good sea
boat, and if their progress was slow so was that of their pursuer, which
dogged them continually, sometimes a mile away and sometimes less. At
length, towards evening, they caught sight of a ruined house that marked
the channel of the little gut, one of the outlets of the Haarlem Mere.

"The sea runs high upon the bar and it is ebb tide," said Foy.

"Even so we must try it, master," answered Martin. "Perhaps she will
scrape through," and he put the _Swallow_ about and ran for the mouth of
the gut.

Here the waves were mountainous and much water came aboard. Moreover,
three times they bumped upon the bar, till at length, to their joy, they
found themselves in the calm stream of the gut, and, by shifting the
sail, were able to draw it up, though very slowly.

"At least we have got a start of them," said Foy, "for they can never
get across until the tide rises."

"We shall need it all," answered Martin; "so now hoist the white flag
and let us eat while we may."

While they ate the sun sank, and the wind blew so that scarcely could
they make a knot an hour, shift the sail as they might. Then, as there
was no sign of Mother Martha, or any other pilot, they hung out the four
lamps upon the starboard side, and, with a flapping sail, drifted on
gradually, till at length they reached the mouth of the great mere, an
infinite waste of waters--deep in some places, shallow in others,
and spotted everywhere with islets. Now the wind turned against them
altogether, and, the darkness closing in, they were forced to drop
anchor, fearing lest otherwise they should go ashore. One comfort they
had, however: as yet nothing could be seen of their pursuers.

Then, for the first time, their spirits failed them a little, and they
stood together near the stern wondering what they should do. It was
while they rested thus that suddenly a figure appeared before them
as though it had risen from the deck of the ship. No sound of oars or
footsteps had reached their ears, yet there, outlined against the dim
sky, was the figure.

"I think that friend Hans has come to life again," said Martin with a
slight quaver in his voice, for Martin was terribly afraid of ghosts.

