in his turn; "I hold with old Caius, and profess to fear judgment, to
fight where I cannot choose, and to eat no fish."

The stranger cast a startled look around him at this observation, which
Julian had thrown out, on purpose to ascertain, if possible, the quality
of his companion, whose present language was so different from the
character he had assumed at Bridlesley's. His countenance, too, although
the features were of an ordinary, not to say mean cast, had that
character of intelligence which education gives to the most homely face;
and his manners were so easy and disembarrassed, as plainly showed a
complete acquaintance with society, as well as the habit of mingling
with it in the higher stages. The alarm which he had evidently shown at
Peveril's answer, was but momentary; for he almost instantly replied,
with a smile, "I promise you, sir, that you are in no dangerous company;
for notwithstanding my fish dinner, I am much disposed to trifle with
some of your savoury mess, if you will indulge me so far."

Peveril accordingly reinforced the stranger's trencher with what
remained of the bacon and eggs, and saw him swallow a mouthful or two
with apparent relish; but presently after began to dally with his knife
and fork, like one whose appetite was satiated; and then took a long
draught of the black jack, and handed his platter to the large mastiff
dog, who, attracted by the smell of the dinner, had sat down before
him for some time, licking his chops, and following with his eye every
morsel which the guest raised to his head.

"Here, my poor fellow," said he, "thou hast had no fish, and needest
this supernumerary trencher-load more than I do. I cannot withstand thy
mute supplication any longer."

The dog answered these courtesies by a civil shake of the tail, while he
gobbled up what was assigned him by the stranger's benevolence, in the
greater haste, that he heard his mistress's voice at the door.

"Here is the canary, gentlemen," said the landlady; "and the goodman
has set off the mill, to come to wait on you himself. He always does so,
when company drink wine."

"That he may come in for the host's, that is, for the lion's share,"
said the stranger, looking at Peveril.

"The shot is mine," said Julian; "and if mine host will share it, I will
willingly bestow another quart on him, and on you, sir. I never break
old customs."

These sounds caught the ear of Gaffer Whitecraft, who had entered the
room, a strapping specimen of his robust trade, prepared to play
the civil, or the surly host, as his company should be acceptable or
otherwise. At Julian's invitation, he doffed his dusty bonnet--brushed
from his sleeve the looser particles of his professional dust--and
sitting down on the end of a bench, about a yard from the table, filled
a glass of canary, and drank to his guests, and "especially to this
noble gentleman," indicating Peveril, who had ordered the canary.

Julian returned the courtesy by drinking his health, and asking what
news were about in the country?

"Nought, sir, I hears on nought, except this Plot, as they call it, that
they are pursuing the Papishers about; but it brings water to my mill,
as the saying is. Between expresses hurrying hither and thither,
and guards and prisoners riding to and again, and the custom of the
neighbours, that come to speak over the news of an evening, nightly, I
may say, instead of once a week, why, the spigot is in use, gentlemen,
and your land thrives; and then I, serving as constable, and being a
known Protestant, I have tapped, I may venture to say, it may be ten
stands of ale extraordinary, besides a reasonable sale of wine for a
country corner. Heaven make us thankful, and keep all good Protestants
from Plot and Popery."

"I can easily conceive, my friend," said Julian, "that curiosity is
a passion which runs naturally to the alehouse; and that anger,
and jealousy, and fear, are all of them thirsty passions, and great
consumers of home-brewed. But I am a perfect stranger in these parts;
and I would willingly learn, from a sensible man like you, a little
of this same Plot, of which men speak so much, and appear to know so
little."

"Learn a little of it?--Why, it is the most horrible--the most damnable,
bloodthirsty beast of a Plot--But hold, hold, my good master; I hope,
in the first place, you believe there is a Plot; for, otherwise,
the Justice must have a word with you, as sure as my name is John
Whitecraft."

"It shall not need," said Peveril; "for I assure you, mine host, I
believe in the Plot as freely and fully as a man can believe in anything
he cannot understand."

"God forbid that anybody should pretend to understand it," said the
implicit constable; "for his worship the Justice says it is a mile
beyond him; and he be as deep as most of them. But men may believe,
though they do not understand; and that is what the Romanists say
themselves. But this I am sure of, it makes a rare stirring time for
justices, and witnesses, and constables.--So here's to your health
again, gentlemen, in a cup of neat canary."

"Come, come, John Whitecraft," said the wife, "do not you demean
yourself by naming witnesses along with justices and constables. All the
world knows how they come by their money."

"Ay, but all the world knows that they _do_ come by it, dame; and that
is a great comfort. They rustle in their canonical silks, and swagger
in their buff and scarlet, who but they?--Ay, ay, the cursed fox
thrives--and not so cursed neither. Is there not Doctor Titus Oates, the
saviour of the nation--does he not live at Whitehall, and eat off plate,
and have a pension of thousands a year, for what I know? and is he not
to be Bishop of Litchfield, so soon as Dr. Doddrum dies?"

"Then I hope Dr. Doddrum's reverence will live these twenty years; and I
dare say I am the first that ever wished such a wish," said the hostess.
"I do not understand these doings, not I; and if a hundred Jesuits came
to hold a consult at my house, as they did at the White Horse Tavern,
I should think it quite out of the line of business to bear witness
against them, provided they drank well, and paid their score."

"Very true, dame," said her elder guest; "that is what I call keeping a
good publican conscience; and so I will pay my score presently, and be
jogging on my way."

Peveril, on his part, also demanded a reckoning, and discharged it
so liberally, that the miller flourished his hat as he bowed, and the
hostess courtesied down to the ground.

The horses of both guests were brought forth; and they mounted, in order
to depart in company. The host and hostess stood in the doorway, to see
them depart. The landlord proffered a stirrup-cup to the elder guest,
while the landlady offered Peveril a glass from her own peculiar bottle.
For this purpose, she mounted on the horse-block, with flask and glass
in hand; so that it was easy for the departing guest, although on
horse-back, to return the courtesy in the most approved manner, namely,
by throwing his arm over his landlady's shoulder, and saluting her at
parting.

Dame Whitecraft did not decline this familiarity; for there is no room
for traversing upon a horse-block, and the hands which might have served
her for resistance, were occupied with glass and bottle--matters too
precious to be thrown away in such a struggle. Apparently, however, she
had something else in her head; for as, after a brief affectation of
reluctance, she permitted Peveril's face to approach hers, she whispered
in his ear, "Beware of trepans!"--an awful intimation, which, in
those days of distrust, suspicion, and treachery, was as effectual
in interdicting free and social intercourse, as the advertisement of
"man-traps and spring-guns," to protect an orchard. Pressing her hand,
in intimation that he comprehended her hint, she shook his warmly in
return, and bade God speed him. There was a cloud on John Whitecraft's
brow; nor did his final farewell sound half so cordial as that which
had been spoken within doors. But then Peveril reflected, that the same
guest is not always equally acceptable to landlord and landlady; and
unconscious of having done anything to excite the miller's displeasure,
he pursued his journey without thinking farther of the matter.

Julian was a little surprised, and not altogether pleased, to find that
his new acquaintance held the same road with him. He had many reasons
for wishing to travel alone; and the hostess's caution still rung in his
ears. If this man, possessed of so much shrewdness as his countenance
and conversation intimated, versatile, as he had occasion to remark, and
disguised beneath his condition, should prove, as was likely, to be a
concealed Jesuit or seminary-priest, travelling upon their great task
of the conversion of England, and rooting out of the Northern heresy,--a
more dangerous companion, for a person in his own circumstances,
could hardly be imagined; since keeping society with him might seem to
authorise whatever reports had been spread concerning the attachment
of his family to the Catholic cause. At the same time, it was very
difficult, without actual rudeness, to shake off the company of one who
seemed so determined, whether spoken to or not, to remain alongside of
him.

Peveril tried the experiment of riding slow; but his companion,
determined not to drop him, slackened his pace, so as to keep close
by him. Julian then spurred his horse to a full trot; and was soon
satisfied, that the stranger, notwithstanding the meanness of his
appearance, was so much better mounted than himself, as to render
vain any thought of outriding him. He pulled up his horse to a more
reasonable pace, therefore, in a sort of despair. Upon his doing so, his
companion, who had been hitherto silent, observed, that Peveril was not
so well qualified to try speed upon the road, as he would have been had
he abode by his first bargain of horse-flesh that morning.

Peveril assented dryly, but observed, that the animal would serve his
immediate purpose, though he feared it would render him indifferent
company for a person better mounted.

"By no means," answered his civil companion; "I am one of those who have
travelled so much, as to be accustomed to make my journey at any rate of
motion which may be most agreeable to my company."

Peveril made no reply to this polite intimation, being too sincere to
tender the thanks which, in courtesy, were the proper answer.--A second
pause ensued, which was broken by Julian asking the stranger whether
their roads were likely to lie long together in the same direction.

"I cannot tell," said the stranger, smiling, "unless I knew which way
you were travelling."

"I am uncertain how far I shall go to-night," said Julian, willingly
misunderstanding the purport of the reply.

"And so am I," replied the stranger; "but though my horse goes better
than yours, I think it will be wise to spare him; and in case our road
continues to lie the same way, we are likely to sup, as we have dined
together."

Julian made no answer whatever to this round intimation, but continued
to ride on, turning, in his own mind, whether it would not be wisest to
come to a distinct understanding with his pertinacious attendant, and
to explain, in so many words, that it was his pleasure to travel alone.
But, besides that the sort of acquaintance which they had formed during
dinner, rendered him unwilling to be directly uncivil towards a person
of gentleman-like manners, he had also to consider that he might very
possibly be mistaken in this man's character and purpose; in which case,
the cynically refusing the society of a sound Protestant, would afford
as pregnant matter of suspicion, as travelling in company with a
disguised Jesuit.

After brief reflection, therefore, he resolved to endure the encumbrance
of the stranger's society, until a fair opportunity should occur to rid
himself of it; and, in the meantime, to act with as much caution as he
possibly could, in any communication that might take place between them;
for Dame Whitecraft's parting caution still rang anxiously in his ears,
and the consequences of his own arrest upon suspicion, must deprive him
of every opportunity of serving his father, or the countess, or Major
Bridgenorth, upon whose interest, also, he had promised himself to keep
an eye.

While he revolved these things in his mind, they had journeyed several
miles without speaking; and now entered upon a more waste country, and
worse roads, than they had hitherto found, being, in fact, approaching
the more hilly district of Derbyshire. In travelling on a very stony and
uneven lane, Julian's horse repeatedly stumbled; and, had he not been
supported by the rider's judicious use of the bridle, must at length
certainly have fallen under him.

"These are times which crave wary riding, sir," said his companion;
"and by your seat in the saddle, and your hand on the rein, you seem to
understand it to be so."

"I have been long a horseman, sir," answered Peveril.

"And long a traveller, too, sir, I should suppose; since by the great
caution you observe, you seem to think the human tongue requires a curb,
as well as the horse's jaws."

"Wiser men than I have been of opinion," answered Peveril, "that it
were a part of prudence to be silent, when men have little or nothing to
say."

"I cannot approve of their opinion," answered the stranger. "All
knowledge is gained by communication, either with the dead, through
books, or, more pleasingly, through the conversation of the living. The
_deaf and dumb_, alone, are excluded from improvement; and surely their
situation is not so enviable that we should imitate them."

At this illustration, which awakened a startling echo in Peveril's
bosom, the young man looked hard at his companion; but in the composed
countenance, and calm blue eye, he read no consciousness of a farther
meaning than the words immediately and directly implied. He paused a
moment, and then answered, "You seem to be a person, sir, of shrewd
apprehension; and I should have thought it might have occurred to you,
that in the present suspicious times, men may, without censure, avoid
communication with strangers. You know not me; and to me you are totally
unknown. There is not room for much discourse between us, without
trespassing on the general topics of the day, which carry in them seeds
of quarrel between friends, much more betwixt strangers. At any other
time, the society of an intelligent companion would have been most
acceptable upon my solitary ride; but at present----"

"At present!" said the other, interrupting him. "You are like the old
Romans, who held that _hostis_ meant both a stranger and an enemy.
I will therefore be no longer a stranger. My name is Ganlesse--by
profession I am a Roman Catholic priest--I am travelling here in dread
of my life--and I am very glad to have you for a companion."

"I thank you for the information with all my heart," said Peveril; "and
to avail myself of it to the uttermost, I must beg you to ride forward,
or lag behind, or take a side-path, at your own pleasure; for as I am
no Catholic, and travel upon business of high concernment, I am exposed
both to risk and delay, and even to danger, by keeping such suspicious
company. And so, Master Ganlesse, keep your own pace, and I will keep
the contrary; for I beg leave to forbear your company."

As Peveril spoke thus, he pulled up his horse, and made a full stop.

The stranger burst out a-laughing. "What!" he said, "you forbear my
company for a trifle of danger? Saint Anthony! How the warm blood of
the Cavaliers is chilled in the young men of the present day! This
young gallant, now, has a father, I warrant, who has endured as many
adventures for hunting priests, as a knight-errant for distressed
damsels."

"This raillery avails nothing, sir," said Peveril. "I must request you
will keep your own way."

"My way is yours," said the pertinacious Master Ganlesse, as he called
himself; "and we will both travel the safer, that we journey in company.
I have the receipt of fern-seed, man, and walk invisible. Besides, you
would not have me quit you in this lane, where there is no turn to right
or left?"

Peveril moved on, desirous to avoid open violence--for which the
indifferent tone of the traveller, indeed, afforded no apt pretext--yet
highly disliking his company, and determined to take the first
opportunity to rid himself of it.

The stranger proceeded at the same pace with him, keeping cautiously on
his bridle hand, as if to secure that advantage in case of a struggle.
But his language did not intimate the least apprehension. "You do me
wrong," he said to Peveril, "and you equally wrong yourself. You are
uncertain where to lodge to-night--trust to my guidance. Here is an
ancient hall, within four miles, with an old knightly Pantaloon for its
lord--an all-be-ruffed Dame Barbara for the lady gay--a Jesuit, in a
butler's habit, to say grace--an old tale of Edgehill and Worster fights
to relish a cold venison pasty, and a flask of claret mantled with
cobwebs--a bed for you in the priest's hiding-hole--and, for aught I
know, pretty Mistress Betty, the dairy-maid, to make it ready."

"This has no charms for me, sir," said Peveril, who, in spite of
himself, could not but be amused with the ready sketch which the
stranger gave of many an old mansion in Cheshire and Derbyshire, where
the owners retained the ancient faith of Rome.

"Well, I see I cannot charm you in this way," continued his companion;
"I must strike another key. I am no longer Ganlesse, the seminary
priest, but (changing his tone, and snuffling in the nose) Simon Canter,
a poor preacher of the Word, who travels this way to call sinners to
repentance; and to strengthen, and to edify, and to fructify among the
scattered remnant who hold fast the truth.--What say you to this, sir?"

"I admire your versatility, sir, and could be entertained with it at
another time. At present sincerity is more in request."

"Sincerity!" said the stranger;--"a child's whistle, with but two notes
in it--yea, yea, and nay, nay. Why, man, the very Quakers have renounced
it, and have got in its stead a gallant recorder, called Hypocrisy, that
is somewhat like Sincerity in form, but of much greater compass, and
combines the whole gamut. Come, be ruled--be a disciple of Simon Canter
for the evening, and we will leave the old tumble-down castle of the
knight aforesaid, on the left hand, for a new brick-built mansion,
erected by an eminent salt-boiler from Namptwich, who expects the said
Simon to make a strong spiritual pickle for the preservation of a soul
somewhat corrupted by the evil communications of this wicked world.
What say you? He has two daughters--brighter eyes never beamed under a
pinched hood; and for myself, I think there is more fire in those who
live only to love and to devotion, than in your court beauties, whose
hearts are running on twenty follies besides. You know not the pleasure
of being conscience-keeper to a pretty precisian, who in one breath
repeats her foibles, and in the next confesses her passion. Perhaps,
though, you may have known such in your day? Come, sir, it grows too
dark to see your blushes; but I am sure they are burning on your cheek."

"You take great freedom, sir," said Peveril, as they now approached the
end of the lane, where it opened on a broad common; "and you seem rather
to count more on my forbearance, than you have room to do with safety.
We are now nearly free of the lane which has made us companions for this
late half hour. To avoid your farther company, I will take the turn to
the left, upon that common; and if you follow me, it shall be at your
peril. Observe, I am well armed; and you will fight at odds."

"Not at odds," returned the provoking stranger, "while I have my brown
jennet, with which I can ride round and round you at pleasure; and this
text, of a handful in length (showing a pistol which he drew from his
bosom), which discharges very convincing doctrine on the pressure of a
forefinger, and is apt to equalise all odds, as you call them, of youth
and strength. Let there be no strife between us, however--the moor lies
before us--choose your path on it--I take the other."

"I wish you good night, sir," said Peveril to the stranger. "I ask your
forgiveness, if I have misconstrued you in anything; but the times
are perilous, and a man's life may depend on the society in which he
travels."

"True," said the stranger; "but in your case, the danger is already
undergone, and you should seek to counteract it. You have travelled in
my company long enough to devise a handsome branch of the Popish Plot.
How will you look, when you see come forth, in comely folio form, The
Narrative of Simon Canter, otherwise called Richard Ganlesse, concerning
the horrid Popish Conspiracy for the Murder of the King, and Massacre
of all Protestants, as given on oath to the Honourable House of Commons;
setting forth, how far Julian Peveril, younger of Martindale Castle, is
concerned in carrying on the same----"

"How, sir? What mean you?" said Peveril, much startled.

"Nay, sir," replied his companion, "do not interrupt my title-page.
Now that Oates and Bedloe have drawn the great prizes, the subordinate
discoverers get little but by the sale of their Narrative; and Janeway,
Newman, Simmons, and every bookseller of them, will tell you that the
title is half the narrative. Mine shall therefore set forth the various
schemes you have communicated to me, of landing ten thousand soldiers
from the Isle of Man upon the coast of Lancashire; and marching into
Wales, to join the ten thousand pilgrims who are to be shipped from
Spain; and so completing the destruction of the Protestant religion,
and of the devoted city of London. Truly, I think such a Narrative, well
spiced with a few horrors, and published _cum privilegio parliamenti_,
might, though the market be somewhat overstocked, be still worth some
twenty or thirty pieces."

"You seem to know me, sir," said Peveril; "and if so, I think I may
fairly ask you your purpose in thus bearing me company, and the meaning
of all this rhapsody. If it be mere banter, I can endure it within
proper limit; although it is uncivil on the part of a stranger. If you
have any farther purpose, speak it out; I am not to be trifled with."

"Good, now," said the stranger, laughing, "into what an unprofitable
chafe you have put yourself! An Italian _fuoruscito_, when he desires
a parley with you, takes aim from behind a wall, with his long gun, and
prefaces his conference with _Posso tirare_. So does your man-of-war
fire a gun across the bows of a Hansmogan Indiaman, just to bring her
to; and so do I show Master Julian Peveril, that, if I were one of the
honourable society of witnesses and informers, with whom his imagination
has associated me for these two hours past, he is as much within my
danger now, as what he is ever likely to be." Then, suddenly changing
his tone to serious, which was in general ironical, he added, "Young
man, when the pestilence is diffused through the air of a city, it is in
vain men would avoid the disease, by seeking solitude, and shunning the
company of their fellow-sufferers."

"In what, then, consists their safety?" said Peveril, willing to
ascertain, if possible, the drift of his companion's purpose.

"In following the counsels of wise physicians;" such was the stranger's
answer.

"And as such," said Peveril, "you offer me your advice?"

"Pardon me, young man," said the stranger haughtily, "I see no reason
I should do so.--I am not," he added, in his former tone, "your fee'd
physician--I offer no advice--I only say it would be wise that you
sought it."

"And from whom, or where, can I obtain it?" said Peveril. "I wander in
this country like one in a dream; so much a few months have changed it.
Men who formerly occupied themselves with their own affairs, are now
swallowed up in matters of state policy; and those tremble under the
apprehension of some strange and sudden convulsion of empire, who were
formerly only occupied by the fear of going to bed supperless. And to
sum up the matter, I meet a stranger apparently well acquainted with my
name and concerns, who first attaches himself to me, whether I will or
no; and then refuses me an explanation of his business, while he menaces
me with the strangest accusations."

"Had I meant such infamy," said the stranger, "believe me, I had not
given you the thread of my intrigue. But be wise, and come one with
me. There is, hard by, a small inn, where, if you can take a stranger's
warrant for it, we shall sleep in perfect security."

"Yet, you yourself," said Peveril, "but now were anxious to avoid
observation; and in that case, how can you protect me?"

"Pshaw! I did but silence that tattling landlady, in the way in which
such people are most readily hushed; and for Topham, and his brace
of night owls, they must hawk at other and lesser game than I should
prove."

Peveril could not help admiring the easy and confident indifference
with which the stranger seemed to assume a superiority to all the
circumstances of danger around him; and after hastily considering the
matter with himself, came to the resolution to keep company with him for
this night at least; and to learn, if possible, who he really was, and
to what party in the estate he was attached. The boldness and freedom
of his talk seemed almost inconsistent with his following the perilous,
though at that time the gainful trade of an informer. No doubt, such
persons assumed every appearance which could insinuate them into the
confidence of their destined victims; but Julian thought he discovered
in this man's manner, a wild and reckless frankness, which he could not
but connect with the idea of sincerity in the present case. He therefore
answered, after a moment's recollection, "I embrace your proposal, sir;
although, by doing so, I am reposing a sudden, and perhaps an unwary,
confidence."

"And what am I, then, reposing in you?" said the stranger. "Is not our
confidence mutual?"

"No; much the contrary. I know nothing of you whatever--you have named
me; and, knowing me to be Julian Peveril, know you may travel with me in
perfect security."

"The devil I do!" answered his companion. "I travel in the same security
as with a lighted petard, which I may expect to explode every moment.
Are you not the son of Peveril of the Peak, with whose name Prelacy
and Popery are so closely allied, that no old woman of either sex in
Derbyshire concludes her prayer without a petition to be freed from all
three? And do you not come from the Popish Countess of Derby, bringing,
for aught I know, a whole army of Manxmen in your pocket, with
full complement of arms, ammunition, baggage, and a train of field
artillery?"

"It is not very likely I should be so poorly mounted," said Julian,
laughing, "if I had such a weight to carry. But lead on, sir. I see I
must wait for your confidence, till you think proper to confer it; for
you are already so well acquainted with my affairs, that I have nothing
to offer you in exchange for it."

"_Allons_, then," said his companion; "give your horse the spur, and
raise the curb rein, lest he measure the ground with his nose instead of
his paces. We are not now more than a furlong or two from the place of
entertainment."

They mended their pace accordingly, and soon arrived at the small
solitary inn which the traveller had mentioned. When its light began to
twinkle before them, the stranger, as if recollecting something he had
forgotten, "By the way, you must have a name to pass by; for it may be
ill travelling under your own, as the fellow who keeps this house is
an old Cromwellian. What will you call yourself?--My name is--for the
present--Ganlesse."

"There is no occasion to assume a name at all," answered Julian. "I do
not incline to use a borrowed one, especially as I may meet with some
one who knows my own."

"I will call you Julian, then," said Master Ganlesse; "for Peveril will
smell, in the nostrils of mine host, of idolatry, conspiracy, Smithfield
faggots, fish on Fridays, the murder of Sir Edmondsbury Godfrey, and the
fire of purgatory."

As he spoke thus, they alighted under the great broad-branched oak tree,
that served to canopy the ale-bench, which, at an earlier hour, had
groaned under the weight of a frequent conclave of rustic politicians.
Ganlesse, as he dismounted, whistled in a particularly shrill note, and
was answered from within the house.




CHAPTER XXII

           He was a fellow in a peasant's garb;
           Yet one could censure you a woodcock's carving.
           Like any courtier at the ordinary.
                                                --THE ORDINARY.

The person who appeared at the door of the little inn to receive
Ganlesse, as we mentioned in our last chapter, sung, as he came forward,
this scrap of an old ballad,--

 "Good even to you, Diccon;
    And how have you sped;
  Bring you the bonny bride
    To banquet and bed?"

To which Ganlesse answered, in the same tone and tune,--

 "Content thee, kind Robin;
    He need little care,
  Who brings home a fat buck
    Instead of a hare."

"You have missed your blow, then?" said the other, in reply.

"I tell you I have not," answered Ganlesse; "but you will think of
nought but your own thriving occupation--May the plague that belongs to
it stick to it! though it hath been the making of thee."

"A man must live, Diccon Ganlesse," said the other.

"Well, well," said Ganlesse, "bid my friend welcome, for my sake. Hast
thou got any supper?"

"Reeking like a sacrifice--Chaubert has done his best. That fellow is a
treasure! give him a farthing candle, and he will cook a good supper
out of it.--Come in, sir. My friend's friend is welcome, as we say in my
country."

"We must have our horses looked to first," said Peveril, who began to
be considerably uncertain about the character of his companions--"that
done, I am for you."

Ganlesse gave a second whistle; a groom appeared, who took charge of
both their horses, and they themselves entered the inn.

The ordinary room of a poor inn seemed to have undergone some
alterations, to render it fit for company of a higher description. There
were a beaufet, a couch, and one or two other pieces of furniture, of
a style inconsistent with the appearance of the place. The tablecloth,
which was already laid, was of the finest damask; and the spoons,
forks, &c., were of silver. Peveril looked at this apparatus with some
surprise; and again turning his eyes attentively upon his travelling
companion, Ganlesse, he could not help discovering (by the aid of
imagination, perhaps), that though insignificant in person, plain in
features, and dressed like one in indigence, there lurked still about
his person and manners, that indefinable ease of manner which belongs
only to men of birth and quality, or to those who are in the constant
habit of frequenting the best company. His companion, whom he called
Will Smith, although tall and rather good-looking, besides being
much better dressed, had not, nevertheless, exactly the same ease of
demeanour; and was obliged to make up for the want, by an additional
proportion of assurance. Who these two persons could be, Peveril could
not attempt even to form a guess. There was nothing for it but to watch
their manner and conversation.

After speaking a moment in whispers, Smith said to his companion, "We
must go look after our nags for ten minutes, and allow Chaubert to do
his office."

"Will not he appear, and minister before us, then?" said Ganlesse.

"What! he?--he shift a trencher--he hand a cup?--No, you forget whom
you speak of. Such an order were enough to make him fall on his own
sword--he is already on the borders of despair, because no craw-fish are
to be had."

"Alack-a day!" replied Ganlesse. "Heaven forbid I should add to such
a calamity! To stable, then, and see we how our steeds eat their
provender, while ours is getting ready."

They adjourned to the stable accordingly, which, though a poor one, had
been hastily supplied with whatever was necessary for the accommodation
of four excellent horses; one of which, that from which Ganlesse was
just dismounted, the groom we have mentioned was cleaning and dressing
by the light of a huge wax-candle.

"I am still so far Catholic," said Ganlesse, laughing, as he saw that
Peveril noticed this piece of extravagance. "My horse is my saint, and I
dedicate a candle to him."

"Without asking so great a favour for mine, which I see standing behind
yonder old hen-coop," replied Peveril, "I will at least relieve him of
his saddle and bridle."

"Leave him to the lad of the inn," said Smith; "he is not worthy of any
other person's handling; and I promise you, if you slip a single buckle,
you will so flavour of that stable duty, that you might as well eat
roast-beef as ragouts, for any relish you will have of them."

"I love roast-beef as well as ragouts, at any time," said Peveril,
adjusting himself to a task which every young man should know how to
perform when need is; "and my horse, though it be but a sorry jade, will
champ better on hay and corn, than on an iron bit."

While he was unsaddling his horse, and shaking down some litter for the
poor wearied animal, he heard Smith observe to Ganlesse,--"By my faith,
Dick, thou hast fallen into poor Slender's blunder; missed Anne Page,
and brought us a great lubberly post-master's boy."

"Hush, he will hear thee," answered Ganlesse; "there are reasons for all
things--it is well as it is. But, prithee, tell thy fellow to help the
youngster."

"What!" replied Smith, "d'ye think I am mad?--Ask Tom Beacon--Tom of
Newmarket--Tom of ten thousand, to touch such a four-legged brute as
that?--Why, he would turn me away on the spot--discard me, i'faith. It
was all he would do to take in hand your own, my good friend; and if you
consider him not the better, you are like to stand groom to him yourself
to-morrow."

"Well, Will," answered Ganlesse, "I will say that for thee, thou hast a
set of the most useless, scoundrelly, insolent vermin about thee, that
ever ate up a poor gentleman's revenues."

"Useless? I deny it," replied Smith. "Every one of my fellows does
something or other so exquisitely, that it were sin to make him do
anything else--it is your jacks-of-all-trades who are masters of
none.--But hark to Chaubert's signal. The coxcomb is twangling it on the
lute, to the tune of _Eveillez-vous, belle endormie_.--Come, Master What
d'ye call (addressing Peveril),--get ye some water, and wash this filthy
witness from your hand, as Betterton says in the play; for Chaubert's
cookery is like Friar Bacon's Head--time is--time was--time will soon be
no more."

So saying, and scarce allowing Julian time to dip his hands in a bucket,
and dry them on a horse-cloth, he hurried him from the stable back to
the supper-chamber.

Here all was prepared for their meal, with an epicurean delicacy, which
rather belonged to the saloon of a palace, than the cabin in which it
was displayed. Four dishes of silver, with covers of the same metal,
smoked on the table; and three seats were placed for the company.
Beside the lower end of the board, was a small side-table, to answer
the purpose of what is now called a dumb waiter; on which several flasks
reared their tall, stately, and swan-like crests, above glasses and
rummers. Clean covers were also placed within reach; and a small
travelling-case of morocco, hooped with silver, displayed a number of
bottles, containing the most approved sauces that culinary ingenuity had
then invented.

Smith, who occupied the lower seat, and seemed to act as president of
the feast, motioned the two travellers to take their places and begin.
"I would not stay a grace-time," he said, "to save a whole nation from
perdition. We could bring no chauffettes with any convenience; and even
Chaubert is nothing, unless his dishes are tasted in the very moment
of projection. Come, uncover, and let us see what he has done for
us.--Hum!--ha!--ay--squab-pigeons--wildfowl--young chickens--venison
cutlets--and a space in the centre, wet, alas! by a gentle tear from
Chaubert's eye, where should have been the _soupe aux ecrevisses_.
The zeal of that poor fellow is ill repaid by his paltry ten louis per
month."

"A mere trifle," said Ganlesse; "but, like yourself, Will, he serves a
generous master."

The repast now commenced; and Julian, though he had seen his young
friend the Earl of Derby, and other gallants, affect a considerable
degree of interest and skill in the science of the kitchen, and was not
himself either an enemy or a stranger to the pleasures of a good table,
found that, on the present occasion, he was a mere novice. Both his
companions, but Smith in especial, seemed to consider that they were now
engaged in the only true business of life; and weighed all its minutiae
with a proportional degree of accuracy. To carve the morsel in the most
delicate manner--and to apportion the proper seasoning with the accuracy
of the chemist,--to be aware, exactly, of the order in which one dish
should succeed another, and to do plentiful justice to all--was a
minuteness of science to which Julian had hitherto been a stranger.
Smith accordingly treated him as a mere novice in epicurism, cautioning
him to eat his soup before the bouilli, and to forget the Manx custom
of bolting the boiled meat before the broth, as if Cutlar MacCulloch and
all his whingers were at the door. Peveril took the hint in good part,
and the entertainment proceeded with animation.

At length Ganlesse paused, and declared the supper exquisite. "But, my
friend Smith," he added, "are your wines curious? When you brought all
that trash of plates and trumpery into Derbyshire, I hope you did not
leave us at the mercy of the strong ale of the shire, as thick and muddy
as the squires who drink it?"

"Did I not know that _you_ were to meet me, Dick Ganlesse?" answered
their host. "And can you suspect me of such an omission? It is true,
you must make champagne and claret serve, for my burgundy would not bear
travelling. But if you have a fancy for sherry, or Vin de Cahors, I
have a notion Chaubert and Tom Beacon have brought some for their own
drinking."

"Perhaps the gentlemen would not care to impart," said Ganlesse.

"Oh, fie!--anything in the way of civility," replied Smith. "They are,
in truth, the best-natured lads alive, when treated respectfully; so
that if you would prefer----"

"By no means," said Ganlesse--"a glass of champagne will serve in a
scarcity of better."

 "The cork shall start obsequious to my thumb."

said Smith; and as he spoke, he untwisted the wire, and the cork struck
the roof of the cabin. Each guest took a large rummer glass of the
sparkling beverage, which Peveril had judgment and experience enough to
pronounce exquisite.

"Give me your hand, sir," said Smith; "it is the first word of sense you
have spoken this evening."

"Wisdom, sir," replied Peveril, "is like the best ware in the pedlar's
pack, which he never produces till he knows his customer."

"Sharp as mustard," returned the _bon vivant_; "but be wise, most noble
pedlar, and take another rummer of this same flask, which you see I
have held in an oblique position for your service--not permitting it
to retrograde to the perpendicular. Nay, take it off before the bubble
bursts on the rim, and the zest is gone."

"You do me honour, sir," said Peveril, taking the second glass. "I wish
you a better office than that of my cup-bearer."

"You cannot wish Will Smith one more congenial to his nature," said
Ganlesse. "Others have a selfish delight in the objects of sense, Will
thrives, and is happy by imparting them to his friends."

"Better help men to pleasures than to pains, Master Ganlesse," answered
Smith, somewhat angrily.

"Nay, wrath thee not, Will," said Ganlesse; "and speak no words in
haste, lest you may have cause to repent at leisure. Do I blame thy
social concern for the pleasures of others? Why, man, thou dost therein
most philosophically multiply thine own. A man has but one throat, and
can but eat, with his best efforts, some five or six times a day; but
thou dinest with every friend that cuts a capon, and art quaffing wine
in other men's gullets, from morning to night--_et sic de caeteris_."

"Friend Ganlesse," returned Smith, "I prithee beware--thou knowest I can
cut gullets as well as tickle them."

"Ay, Will," answered Ganlesse carelessly; "I think I have seen thee wave
thy whinyard at the throat of a Hogan-Mogan--a Netherlandish
weasand, which expanded only on thy natural and mortal objects of
aversion,--Dutch cheese, rye-bread, pickled herring, onion, and Geneva."

"For pity's sake, forbear the description!" said Smith; "thy words
overpower the perfumes, and flavour the apartment like a dish of
salmagundi!"

"But for an epiglottis like mine," continued Ganlesse, "down which the
most delicate morsels are washed by such claret as thou art now pouring
out, thou couldst not, in thy bitterest mood, wish a worse fate than to
be necklaced somewhat tight by a pair of white arms."

"By a tenpenny cord," answered Smith; "but not till you were dead; that
thereafter you be presently embowelled, you being yet alive; that
your head be then severed from your body, and your body divided into
quarters, to be disposed of at his Majesty's pleasure.--How like you
that, Master Richard Ganlesse?"

"E'en as you like the thoughts of dining on bran-bread and
milk-porridge--an extremity which you trust never to be reduced to.
But all this shall not prevent me from pledging you in a cup of sound
claret."

As the claret circulated, the glee of the company increased; and Smith
placing the dishes which had been made use of upon the side-table,
stamped with his foot on the floor, and the table sinking down a trap,
again rose, loaded with olives, sliced neat's tongue, caviare, and other
