the iron-grate in the inside of the lock. In short, the retreat had been
made with scrupulous attention to the security of the garrison, and so
far Christie left them nothing to complain of.

The safety of the premises was ascertained by Halbert, who instead of
catching up a gun or cross-bow, and sallying out for the day as had been
his frequent custom, now, with a gravity beyond his years, took a survey
of all around the tower, and then returned to the spence, or public
apartment, in which, at the early hour of seven, the morning meal was
prepared.

There he found the Euphuist in the same elegant posture of abstruse
calculation which he had exhibited on the preceding evening, his arms
folded in the same angle, his eyes turned up to the same cobwebs, and
his heels resting on the ground as before. Tired of this affectation of
indolent importance, and not much flattered with his guest's persevering
in it to the last, Halbert resolved at once to break the ice, being
determined to know what circumstance had brought to the tower of
Glendinning a guest at once so supercilious and so silent.

"Sir Knight," he said with some firmness, "I have twice given you good
morning, to which the absence of your mind hath, I presume, prevented
you from yielding attention, or from making return. This exchange of
courtesy is at your pleasure to give or withhold--But, as what I have
further to say concerns your comfort and your motions in an especial
manner, I will entreat you to give me some signs of attention, that I
may be sure I am not wasting my words on a monumental image."

At this unexpected address, Sir Piercie Shafton opened his eyes, and
afforded the speaker a broad stare; but as Halbert returned the glance
without either confusion or dismay, the knight thought proper to
change his posture, draw in his legs, raise his eyes, fix them on young
Glendinning, and assume the appearance of one who listens to what is
said to him. Nay, to make his purpose more evident, he gave voice to his
resolution in these words, "Speak! we do hear."

"Sir Knight," said the youth, "it is the custom of this Halidome, or
patrimony of St. Mary's, to trouble with inquiries no guests who receive
our hospitality, providing they tarry in our house only for a single
revolution of the sun. We know that both criminals and debtors come
hither for sanctuary, and we scorn to extort from the pilgrim, whom
chance may make our guest, an avowal of the cause of his pilgrimage and
penance. But when one so high above our rank as yourself, Sir Knight,
and especially one to whom the possession of such pre-eminence is not
indifferent, shows his determination to be our guest for a longer time,
it is our usage to inquire of him whence he comes, and what is the cause
of his journey?"

The English knight gaped twice or thrice before he answered, and then
replied in a bantering tone, "Truly, good villagio, your question hath
in it somewhat of embarrassment, for you ask me of things concerning
which I am not as yet altogether determined what answer I may find it
convenient to make. Let it suffice thee, kind juvenal, that thou hast
the Lord Abbot's authority for treating me to the best of that power
of thine, which, indeed, may not always so well suffice for my
accommodation as either of us would desire."

"I must have a more precise answer than this, Sir Knight," said the
young Glendinning.

"Friend," said the knight, "be not outrageous. It may suit your northern
manners thus to press harshly upon the secrets of thy betters; but
believe me, that even as the lute, struck by an unskilful hand, doth
produce discords, so----" At this moment the door of the apartment
opened, and Mary Avenel presented herself--"But who can talk of
discords," said the knight, assuming his complimentary vein and humour,
"when the soul of harmony descends upon us in the presence of surpassing
beauty! For even as foxes, wolves, and other animals void of sense and
reason, do fly from the presence of the resplendent sun of heaven when
he arises in his glory, so do strife, wrath, and all ireful passions
retreat, and, as it were, scud away, from the face which now beams upon
us, with power to compose our angry passions, illuminate our errors and
difficulties, soothe our wounded minds, and lull to rest our disorderly
apprehensions; for as the heat and warmth of the eye of day is to the
material and physical world, so is the eye which I now bow down before
to that of the intellectual microcosm."

He concluded with a profound bow; and Mary Avenel, gazing from one to
the other, and plainly seeing that something was amiss, could only say,
"For heaven's sake, what is the meaning of this?"

The newly-acquired tact and intelligence of her foster-brother was as
yet insufficient to enable him to give an answer. He was quite uncertain
how he ought to deal with a guest, who preserving a singularly high tone
of assumed superiority and importance, seemed nevertheless so little
serious in what he said, that it was quite impossible to discern with
accuracy whether he was in jest or earnest.

Forming, however, the internal resolution to bring Sir Piercie Shafton
to a reckoning at a more fit place and season, he resolved to prosecute
the matter no farther at present; and the entrance of his mother with
the damsel of the Mill, and the return of the honest Miller from the
stack-yard, where he had been numbering and calculating the probable
amount of the season's grist, rendered farther discussion impossible for
the moment.

In the course of the calculation it could not but strike the man of meal
and grindstones, that after the church's dues were paid, and after all
which he himself could by any means deduct from the crop, still the
residue which must revert to Dame Glendinning could not be less than
considerable. I wot not if this led the honest Miller to nourish any
plans similar to those adopted by Elspeth; but it is certain that he
accepted with grateful alacrity an invitation which the dame gave to his
daughter, to remain a week or two as her guest at Glendearg.

The principal persons being thus in high good humour with each other,
all business gave place to the hilarity of the morning repast; and so
much did Sir Piercie appear gratified by the attention which was paid to
every word that he uttered by the nut-brown Mysie, that, notwithstanding
his high birth and distinguished quality, he bestowed on her some of the
more ordinary and second-rate tropes of his elocution.

Mary Avenel, when relieved from the awkwardness of feeling the full
weight of his conversation addressed to herself, enjoyed it much
more; and the good knight, encouraged by those conciliating marks of
approbation from the sex, for whose sake he cultivated his oratorical
talents, made speedy intimation of his purpose to be more communicative
than he had shown himself in his conversation with Halbert Glendinning,
and gave them to understand, that it was in consequence of some pressing
danger that he was at present their involuntary guest.

The conclusion of the breakfast was a signal for the separation of the
company. The Miller went to prepare for his departure; his daughter
to arrange matters for her unexpected stay; Edward was summoned to
consultation by Martin concerning some agricultural matter, in which
Halbert could not be brought to interest himself; the dame left the room
upon her household concerns, and Mary was in the act of following her,
when she suddenly recollected, that if she did so, the strange knight
and Halbert must be left alone together, at the risk of another quarrel.

The maiden no sooner observed this circumstance, than she instantly
returned from the door of the apartment, and, seating herself in a small
stone window-seat, resolved to maintain that curb which she was sensible
her presence imposed on Halbert Glendinning, of whose quick temper she
had some apprehensions.

The stranger marked her motions, and, either interpreting them as
inviting his society, or obedient to those laws of gallantry which
permitted him not to leave a lady in silence and solitude, he instantly
placed himself near to her side and opened the conversation as
follows:--

"Credit me, fair lady" he said, addressing Mary Avenel, "it much
rejoiceth me, being, as I am, a banished man from the delights of mine
own country, that I shall find here in this obscure and silvan cottage
of the north, a fair form and a candid soul, with whom I may explain my
mutual sentiments. And let me pray you in particular, lovely lady, that,
according to the universal custom now predominant in our court, the
garden of superior wits, you will exchange with me some epithet whereby
you may mark my devotion to your service. Be henceforward named, for
example, my Protection, and let me be your Affability."

"Our northern and country manners, Sir Knight, do not permit us to
exchange epithets with those to whom we are strangers," replied Mary
Avenel.

"Nay, but see now," said the knight, "how you are startled! even as the
unbroken steed, which swerves aside from the shaking of a handkerchief,
though he must in time encounter the waving of a pennon. This courtly
exchange of epithets of honour, is no more than the compliments which
pass between valour and beauty, wherever they meet, and under whatever
circumstances. Elizabeth of England herself calls Philip Sydney
her Courage, and he in return calls that princess his Inspiration.
Wherefore, my fair Protection, for by such epithet it shall be mine to
denominate you--"

"Not without the young lady's consent, sir!" interrupted Halbert; "most
truly do I hope your courtly and quaint breeding will not so far prevail
over the more ordinary rules of civil behaviour."

"Fair tenant of an indifferent copyhold," replied the knight, with the
same coolness and civility of mien, but in a tone somewhat more lofty
than he used to the young lady, "we do not in the southern parts, much
intermingle discourse, save with those with whom we may stand on some
footing of equality; and I must, in all discretion, remind you, that the
necessity which makes us inhabitants of the same cabin, doth not place
us otherwise on a level with each other."

"By Saint Mary," replied young Glendinning, "it is my thought that it
does; for plain men hold, that he who asks the shelter is indebted to
him who gives it; and so far, therefore, is our rank equalized while
this roof covers us both."

"Thou art altogether deceived," answered Sir Piercie; "and that thou
mayst fully adapt thyself to our relative condition, know that I account
not myself thy guest, but that of thy master, the Lord Abbot of Saint
Mary's, who, for reasons best known to himself and me, chooseth to
administer his hospitality to me through the means of thee, his servant
and vassal, who art, therefore, in good truth, as passive an instrument
of my accommodation as this ill-made and rugged joint-stool on which
I sit, or as the wooden trencher from which I eat my coarse commons.
Wherefore," he added, turning to Mary, "fairest mistress, or rather,
as I said before, most lovely Protection--" [Footnote: There are many
instances to be met with in the ancient dramas of this whimsical and
conceited custom of persons who formed an intimacy, distinguishing:
each, other by some quaint epithet. In _Every Man out of his Humour_,
there is a humorous debate upon names most fit to bind the relation
betwixt Sogliardo and Cavaliero Shift, which ends by adopting those of
Countenance and Resolution. What is more to the point is in the speech
of Hedon, a voluptuary and a courtier in _Cynthia's Revels_. "you
know that I call Madam Plilantia my _Honour,_ and she calls me her
_Ambition._ Now, when I meet her in the presence, anon, I will come to
her and say, 'Sweet Honour, I have hitherto contented my sense with the
lilies of your hand, and now I will taste the roses of your lip.' To
which she cannot but blushing answer, 'Nay, now you are too ambitious;'
and then do I reply, 'I cannot be too ambitious of Honour, sweet lady.
Wilt not be good?'"--I think there is some remnant of this foppery
preserved in masonic lodges, where each brother is distinguished by a
name in the Lodge, signifying some abstract quality as Discretion, or
the like. See the poems of Gavin Wilson.]

Mary Avenel was about to reply to him, when the stern, fierce, and
resentful expression of voice and countenance with which Halbert
exclaimed, "not from the King of Scotland, did he live, would I brook
such terms!" induced her to throw herself between him and the stranger,
exclaiming, "for God's sake, Halbert, beware what you do!"

"Fear not, fairest Protection," replied Sir Piercie, with the utmost
serenity, "that I can be provoked by this rustical and mistaught juvenal
to do aught misbecoming your presence or mine own dignity; for as soon
shall the gunner's linstock give fire unto the icicle, as the spark of
passion inflame my blood, tempered as it is to serenity by the respect
due to the presence of my gracious Protection."

"You may well call her your protection, Sir Knight" said Halbert; "by
Saint Andrew, it is the only sensible word I have heard you speak! But
we may meet where her protection shall no longer afford you shelter."

"Fairest Protection," continued the courtier, not even honouring with a
look, far less with a direct reply, the threat of the incensed Halbert,
"doubt not that thy faithful Affability will be more commoved by the
speech of this rudesby, than the bright and serene moon is perturbed by
the baying of the cottage-cur, proud of the height of his own dunghill,
which, in his conceit, lifteth him nearer unto the majestic luminary."

To what lengths so unsavoury a simile might have driven Halbert's
indignation, is left uncertain; for at that moment Edward rushed into
the apartment with the intelligence that two most important officers
of the Convent, the Kitchener and Refectioner, were just arrived with
a sumpter-mule, loaded with provisions, announcing that the Lord
Abbot, the Sub-Prior, and the Sacristan, were on their way thither. A
circumstance so very extraordinary had never been recorded in the annals
of Saint Mary's, or in the traditions of Glendearg, though there was a
faint legendary report that a certain Abbot had dined there in old days,
after having been bewildered in a hunting expedition amongst the wilds
which lie to the northward. But that the present Lord Abbot should
have taken a voluntary journey to so wild and dreary a spot, the very
Kamtschatka of the Halidome, was a thing never dreamt of; and the news
excited the greatest surprise in all the members of the family saving
Halbert alone.

This fiery youth was too full of the insult he had received to think of
anything as unconnected with it. "I am glad of it," he exclaimed; "I
am glad the Abbot comes hither. I will know of him by what right this
stranger is sent hither to domineer over us under our father's roof, as
if we were slaves and not freemen. I will tell the proud priest to his
beard--"

"Alas! alas! my brother," said Edward, "think what these words may cost
thee!"

"And what will, or what can they cost me," said Halbert, "that I should
sacrifice my human feelings and my justifiable resentment to the fear of
what the Abbot can do?"

"Our mother--our mother!" exclaimed Edward; "think, if she is deprived
of her home, expelled from her property, how can you amend what your
rashness may ruin?"

"It is too true, by Heaven!" said Halbert, striking his forehead. Then,
stamping his foot against the floor to express the full energy of the
passion to which he dared no longer give vent, he turned round and left
the apartment.

Mary Avenel looked at the stranger knight, while she was endeavouring to
frame a request that he would not report the intemperate violence of her
foster-brother to the prejudice of his family, in the mind of the Abbot.
But Sir Piercie, the very pink of courtesy, conjectured her meaning from
her embarrassment, and waited not to be entreated.

"Credit me, fairest Protection," said he, "your Affability is less than
capable of seeing or hearing, far less of reciting or reiterating, aught
of an unseemly nature which may have chanced while I enjoyed the Elysium
of your presence. The winds of idle passion may indeed rudely agitate
the bosom of the rude; but the heart of the courtier is polished to
resist them. As the frozen lake receives not the influence of the
breeze, even so--"

The voice of Dame Glendinning, in shrill summons, here demanded Mary
Avenel's attendance, who instantly obeyed, not a little glad to escape
from the compliments and similes of this courtlike gallant. Nor was it
apparently less a relief on his part; for no sooner was she past
the threshold of the room, than he exchanged the look of formal and
elaborate politeness which had accompanied each word he had uttered
hitherto, for an expression of the utmost lassitude and ennui; and after
indulging in one or two portentous yawns, broke forth into a soliloquy.

"What the foul fiend sent this wench hither? As if it were not
sufficient plague to be harboured in a hovel that would hardly serve for
a dog's kennel in England, baited by a rude peasant-boy, and dependent
on the faith of a mercenary ruffian, but I cannot even have time to
muse over my own mishap, but must come aloft, frisk, fidget, and make
speeches, to please this pale hectic phantom, because she has gentle
blood in her veins? By mine honour, setting prejudice aside, the
mill-wench is the more attractive of the two--But patienza, Piercie
Shafton; thou must not lose thy well-earned claim to be accounted
a devout servant of the fair sex, a witty-brained, prompt, and
accomplished courtier. Rather thank heaven, Piercie Shafton, which hath
sent thee a subject, wherein, without derogating from thy rank, (since
the honours of the Avenel family are beyond dispute,) thou mayest find
a whetstone for thy witty compliments, a strop whereon to sharpen thine
acute engine, a butt whereat to shoot the arrows of thy gallantry. For
even as a Bilboa blade, the more it is rubbed, the brighter and the
sharper will it prove, so--But what need I waste my stock of similitudes
in holding converse with myself?--Yonder comes the monkish retinue, like
some half score of crows winging their way slowly up the valley--I hope,
a'gad, they have not forgotten my trunk-mails of apparel amid the ample
provision they have made for their own belly-timber--Mercy, a'gad, I
were finely helped up if the vesture has miscarried among the thievish
Borderers!"

Stung by this reflection, he ran hastily down stairs, and caused his
horse to be saddled, that he might, as soon as possible, ascertain this
important point, by meeting the Lord Abbot and his retinue as they came
up the glen. He had not ridden a mile before he met them advancing
with the slowness and decorum which became persons of their dignity and
profession. The knight failed not to greet the Lord Abbot with all
the formal compliments with which men of rank at that period exchanged
courtesies. He had the good fortune to find that his mails were numbered
among the train of baggage which attended upon the party; and, satisfied
in that particular, he turned his horse's head, and accompanied the
Abbot to the Tower of Glendearg.

Great, in the meanwhile, had been the turmoil of the good Dame Elspeth
and her coadjutors, to prepare for the fitting reception of the Father
Lord Abbot and his retinue. The monks had indeed taken care not to trust
too much to the state of her pantry; but she was not the less anxious
to make such additions as might enable her to claim the thanks of her
feudal lord and spiritual father. Meeting Halbert, as, with his blood on
fire, he returned from his altercation with her guest, she commanded him
instantly to go forth to the hill, and not to return without venison;
reminding him that he was apt enough to go thither for his own pleasure,
and must now do so for the credit of the house.

The Miller, who was now hastening his journey homewards, promised to
send up some salmon by his own servant. Dame Elspeth, who by this time
thought she had guests enough, had begun to repent of her invitation
to poor Mysie, and was just considering by what means, short of giving
offence, she could send off the Maid of the Mill behind her father, and
adjourn all her own aerial architecture till some future opportunity,
when this unexpected generosity on the part of the sire rendered
any present attempt to return his daughter on his hands too highly
ungracious to be farther thought on. So the Miller departed alone on his
homeward journey.

Dame Elspeth's sense of hospitality proved in this instance its own
reward; for Mysie had dwelt too near the Convent to be altogether
ignorant of the noble art of cookery, which her father patronized to the
extent of consuming on festival days such dainties as his daughter could
prepare in emulation of the luxuries of the Abbot's kitchen. Laying
aside, therefore, her holiday kirtle, and adopting a dress more suitable
to the occasion, the good-humored maiden bared her snowy arms above the
elbows; and, as Elspeth acknowledged, in the language of the time and
country, took "entire and aefauld part with her" in the labours of the
day; showing unparalleled talent, and indefatigable industry, in
the preparation of _mortreux_, _blanc-manger_, and heaven knows what
delicacies besides, which Dame Glendinning, unassisted by her skill,
dared not even have dreamt of presenting. Leaving this able substitute
in the kitchen, and regretting that Mary Avenel was so brought up, that
she could intrust nothing to her care, unless it might be seeing the
great chamber strewed with rushes, and ornamented with such flowers and
branches as the season afforded, Dame Elspeth hastily donned her best
attire, and with a beating heart presented herself at the door of her
little tower, to make her obeisance to the Lord Abbot as he crossed
her humble threshold. Edward stood by his mother, and felt the same
palpitation, which his philosophy was at a loss to account for. He was
yet to learn how long it is ere our reason is enabled to triumph over
the force of external circumstances, and how much our feelings are
affected by novelty, and blunted by use and habit.

On the present occasion, he witnessed with wonder and awe the approach
of some half-score of riders, sober men upon sober palfreys, muffled in
their long black garments, and only relieved by their white scapularies,
showing more like a funeral procession than aught else, and not
quickening their pace beyond that which permitted easy conversation and
easy digestion. The sobriety of the scene was indeed somewhat enlivened
by the presence of Sir Piercie Shafton, who, to show that his skill
in the manege was not inferior to his other accomplishments, kept
alternately pressing and checking his gay courser, forcing him to
piaffe, to caracole, to passage, and to do all the other feats of the
school, to the great annoyance of the Lord Abbot, the wonted sobriety
of whose palfrey became at length discomposed by the vivacity of its
companion, while the dignitary kept crying out in bodily alarm, "I do
pray you--Sir Knight--good now, Sir Piercie--Be quiet, Benedict, there
is a good steed--soh, poor fellow" and uttering all the other precatory
and soothing exclamations by which a timid horseman usually bespeaks the
favour of a frisky companion, or of his own unquiet nag, and concluding
the bead-roll with a sincere _Deo gratias_ so soon as he alighted in the
court-yard of the Tower of Glendearg.

The inhabitants unanimously knelt down to kiss the hand of the Lord
Abbot, a ceremony which even the monks were often condemned to. Good
Abbot Boniface was too much fluttered by the incidents of the latter
part of his journey, to go through this ceremony with much solemnity,
or indeed with much patience. He kept wiping his brow with a snow-white
handkerchief with one hand, while another was abandoned to the homage of
his vassals; and then signing the cross with his outstretched arm,
and exclaiming, "Bless ye--bless ye, my children" he hastened into the
house, and murmured not a little at the darkness and steepness of the
rugged winding stair, whereby he at length scaled the spence destined
for his entertainment, and, overcome with fatigue, threw himself, I do
not say into an easy chair, but into the easiest the apartment afforded.




Chapter the Sixteenth.


     A courtier extraordinary, who by diet
     Of meats and drinks, his temperate exercise,
     Choice music, frequent bath, his horary shifts
     Of shirts and waistcoats, means to immortalize
     Mortality itself, and makes the essence
     Of his whole happiness the trim of court.
                                         MAGNETIC LADY.


When the Lord Abbot had suddenly and superciliously vanished from
the eyes of his expectant vassals, the Sub-Prior made amends for the
negligence of his principal, by the kind and affectionate greeting
which he gave to all the members of the family, but especially to Dame
Elspeth, her foster-daughter, and her son Edward. "Where," he even
condescended to inquire, "is that naughty Nimrod, Halbert?--He hath
not yet, I trust, turned, like his great prototype, his hunting-spear
against man!"

"O no, an it please your reverence," said Dame Glendinning, "Halbert
is up at the glen to get some venison, or surely he would not have been
absent when such a day of honour dawned upon me and mine."

"Oh, to get savoury meat, such as our soul loveth," muttered the
Sub-Prior; "it has been at times an acceptable gift.--I bid you good
morrow, my good dame, as I must attend upon his lordship the Father
Abbot."

"And O, reverend sir," said the good widow, detaining him, "if it might
be your pleasure to take part with us if there is any thing wrong; and
if there is any thing wanted, to say that it is just coming, or to make
some excuses your learning best knows how. Every bit of vassail and
silver work have we been spoiled of since Pinkie Cleuch, when I lost
poor Simon Glendinning, that was the warst of a'."

"Never mind--never fear," said the Sub-Prior, gently extricating his
garment from the anxious grasp of Dame Elspeth, "the Refectioner has
with him the Abbot's plate and drinking cups; and I pray you to believe
that whatever is short in your entertainment will be deemed amply made
up in your good-will."

So saying, he escaped from her and went into the spence, where such
preparations as haste permitted were making for the noon collation of
the Abbot and the English knight. Here he found the Lord Abbot, for whom
a cushion, composed of all the plaids in the house, had been unable to
render Simon's huge elbow-chair a soft or comfortable place of rest.

"Benedicite!" said Abbot Boniface, "now marry fie upon these hard
benches with all my heart--they are as uneasy as the _scabella_ of our
novices. Saint Jude be with us, Sir Knight, how have you contrived to
pass over the night in this dungeon? An your bed was no softer than your
seat, you might as well have slept on the stone couch of Saint Pacomius.
After trotting a full ten miles, a man needs a softer seat than has
fallen to my hard lot."

With sympathizing faces, the Sacristan and the Refectioner ran to raise
the Lord Abbot, and to adjust his seat to his mind, which was at length
accomplished in some sort, although he continued alternately to bewail
his fatigue, and to exult in the conscious sense of having discharged
an arduous duty. "You errant cavaliers," said he, addressing the knight,
"may now perceive that others have their travail and their toils to
undergo as well as your honoured faculty. And this I will say for myself
and the soldiers of Saint Mary, among whom I may be termed captain,
that it is not our wont to flinch from the heat of the service, or to
withdraw from the good fight. No, by Saint Mary!--no sooner did I
learn that you were here, and dared not for certain reasons come to the
Monastery, where, with as good will, and with more convenience, we might
have given you a better reception, than, striking the table with
my hammer, I called a brother--Timothy, said I, let them saddle
Benedict--let them saddle my black palfrey, and bid the Sub-Prior and
some half-score of attendants be in readiness tomorrow after matins--we
would ride to Glendearg.--Brother Timothy stared, thinking, I imagine,
that his ears had scarce done him justice--but I repeated my commands,
and said, Let the Kitchener and Refectioner go before to aid the poor
vassals to whom the place belongs in making a suitable collation. So
that you will consider, good Sir Piercie, our mutual in commodities, and
forgive whatever you may find amiss."

"By my faith," said Sir Piercie Shafton, "there is nothing to
forgive--If you spiritual warriors have to submit to the grievous
incommodities which your lordship narrates, it would ill become me,
a sinful and secular man, to complain of a bed as hard as a board, of
broth which relished as if made of burnt wool, of flesh, which, in
its sable and singed shape, seemed to put me on a level with Richard
Coeur-de-Lion,--when he ate up the head of a Moor carbonadoed, and of
other viands savouring rather of the rusticity of this northern region."

"By the good Saints, sir," said the Abbot, somewhat touched in point of
his character for hospitality, of which he was in truth a most faithful
and zealous professor, "it grieves me to the heart that you have found
our vassals no better provided for your reception--Yet I crave leave
to observe, that if Sir Piercie Shafton's affairs had permitted him to
honour with his company our poor house of Saint Mary's, he might have
had less to complain of in respect of easements."

"To give your lordship the reasons," said Sir Piercie Shafton, "why I
could not at this present time approach your dwelling, or avail myself
of its well-known and undoubted hospitality, craves either some delay,
or," looking around him, "a limited audience."

The Lord Abbot immediately issued his mandate to the Refectioner: "Hie
thee to the kitchen, Brother Hilarius, and there make inquiry of our
brother the Kitchener, within what time he opines that our collation may
be prepared, since sin and sorrow it were, considering the hardships of
this noble and gallant knight, no whit mentioning or--weighing those we
ourselves have endured, if we were now either to advance or retard the
hour of refection beyond the time when the viands are fit to be set
before us."

Brother Hilarius parted with an eager alertness to execute the will of
his Superior, and returned with the assurance, that punctually at one
afternoon would the collation be ready.

"Before that time," said the accurate Refectioner, "the wafers, flamms,
and pastry-meat, will scarce have had the just degree of fire which
learned pottingers prescribe as fittest for the body; and if it should
be past one o'clock, were it but ten minutes, our brother the Kitchener
opines, that the haunch of venison would suffer in spite of the skill of
the little turn-broche whom he has recommended to your holiness by his
praises."

"How!" said the Abbot, "a haunch of venison!--from whence comes that
dainty? I remember not thou didst intimate its presence in thy hamper of
vivers."

"So please your holiness and lordship," said the Refectioner, "he is a
son of the woman of the house who has shot it and sent it in--killed
but now; yet, as the animal heat hath not left the body, the Kitchener
undertakes it shall eat as tender as a young chicken--and this youth
hath a special gift in shooting deer, and never misses the heart or the
brain; so that the blood is not driven through the flesh, as happens
too often with us. It is a hart of grease--your holiness has seldom seen
such a haunch."

"Silence, Brother Hilarius," said the Abbot, wiping his mouth; "it is
not beseeming our order to talk of food so earnestly, especially as we
must oft have our animal powers exhausted by fasting, and be accessible
(as being ever mere mortals) to those signs of longing" (he again
wiped his mouth) "which arise on the mention of victuals to an hungry
man.--Minute down, however, the name of that youth--it is fitting merit
should be rewarded, and he shall hereafter be a _frater ad succurrendum_
in the kitchen and buttery."

"Alas! reverend Father and my good lord," replied the Refectioner,
"I did inquire after the youth, and I learn he is one who prefers the
casque to the cowl, and the sword of the flesh to the weapons of the
spirit."

"And if it be so," said the Abbot, "see that thou retain him as
a deputy-keeper and man-at-arms, and not as a lay brother of the
Monastery--for old Tallboy, our forester, waxes dim-eyed, and hath twice
spoiled a noble buck, by hitting him unwarily on the haunch. Ah! 'tis a
foul fault, the abusing by evil-killing, evil-dressing, evil-appetite,
or otherwise, the good creatures indulged to us for our use. Wherefore,
secure us the service of this youth, Brother Hilarius, in the way that
may best suit him.--And now, Sir Piercie Shafton, since the fates have
assigned us a space of well-nigh an hour, ere we dare hope to enjoy
more than the vapour or savour of our repast, may I pray you, of your
courtesy, to tell me the cause of this visit; and, above all, to inform
us, why you will not approach our more pleasant and better furnished
_hospitium_?"

"Reverend Father, and my very good lord," said Sir Piercie Shafton,
"it is well known to your wisdom, that there are stone walls which have
ears, and that secrecy is to be looked to in matters which concern
a man's head." The Abbot signed to his attendants, excepting the
Sub-Prior, to leave the room, and then said, "Your valour, Sir Piercie,
may freely unburden yourself before our faithful friend and counsellor
Father Eustace, the benefits of whose advice we may too soon lose,
inasmuch as his merits will speedily recommend him to an higher station,
in which we trust he may find the blessing of a friend and adviser as
valuable as himself, since I may say of him, as our claustral rhyme
goeth,[Footnote: The rest of this doggerel rhyme may be found in
Fosbrooke's Learned work on British Monachism.]

  'Dixit Abbas ad Prioris,
  Tu es homo boni moris,
  Quia semper sanioris
  Mihi das concilia.'

Indeed," he added, "the office of Sub-Prior is altogether beneath our
dear brother; nor can we elevate him unto that of Prior, which, for
certain reasons, is at present kept vacant amongst us. Howbeit, Father
Eustace is fully possessed of my confidence, and worthy of yours, and
well may it be said of him, _Intravit in secretis nostris_."

Sir Piercie Shafton bowed to the reverend brethren, and, heaving a sigh,
as if he would burst his steel cuirass, he thus commenced his speech:--

"Certes, reverend sirs, I may well heave such a suspiration, who have,
as it were, exchanged heaven for purgatory, leaving the lightsome sphere
of the royal court of England for a remote nook in this inaccessible
desert--quitting the tilt-yard, where I was ever ready among my compeers
to splinter a lance, either for the love of honour, or for the honour
of love, in order to couch my knightly spear against base and pilfering
besognios and marauders--exchanging the lighted halls, wherein I used
nimbly to pace the swift coranto, or to move with a loftier grace in the
stately galliard, for this rugged and decayed dungeon of rusty-coloured
stone--quitting the gay theatre, for the solitary chimney-nook of a
Scottish dog-house--bartering the sounds of the soul-ravishing lute, and
the love-awaking viol-de-gamba, for the discordant squeak of a northern
