"That's the laughing side, this day. Good evening."

And with that he went off as fast as he came.

'Twas, may be, an hour after, that another came in through the same
gap: this time a lean, hawk-eyed man, with a pinch'd face and two ugly
gashes--one across the brow from left eye to the roots of his hair, the
other in his leg below the knee, that had sliced through boot and flesh
like a scythe-cut. His face was smear'd with blood, and he carried a
musket.

"Water!" he bark'd out as he came trailing into the yard. "Give me
water--I'm a dead man!"

He was stepping over me to enter the kitchen, when he halted and said---

"Art a malignant, for certain!"

And before I had a chance to reply, his musket was swung up, and I felt
my time was come to die.

But now the old savage, that had been sitting all day before his fire,
without so much as a sign to show if he noticed aught that was passing,
jump'd up with a yell and leap'd toward us. He and the cat were on the
poor wretch together, tearing and clawing. I can hear their hellish
outcries to this day: but at the moment they turn'd me faint. And the
next thing I recall is being dragged inside by the old man, who shut the
door after me and slipp'd the bolt, leaving the wounded trooper on the
other side. He beat against it for some time, sobbing piteously for
water: and then I heard him groaning at intervals, till he died. At
least, the groans ceased; and next day he was found with his back
against the cottage wall, stark and dead.

Having pulled me inside, Joan's father must have thought he had done
enough: for on the floor I lay for hours, and passed from one swoon into
another. He and the cat had gone back to the fire again, and long before
evening both were sound asleep.

So there I lay helpless, till, at nightfall, there came the trampling of
a horse outside, and then a rap on the door. The old man started up and
opened it: and in rushed Joan, her eyes lit up, her breast heaving, and
in her hand a naked sword.

"Church and King, Jack!" she cried, and flung the blade with a clang on
to the table. "Church and King! O brave day's work, lad--O bloody work
this day!"

And I swooned again.




CHAPTER XIII.

I BUY A LOOKING GLASS AT BODMIN FAIR: AND MEET WITH MR. HANNIBAL
TINGCOMB.


There had, indeed, been brave work on Braddock Down that 19th of
January. For Sir Ralph Hopton with the Cornish grandees had made short
business of Ruthen's army--driving it headlong back on Liskeard at the
first charge, chasing it through that town, and taking 1,200 prisoners
(including Sir Shilston Calmady), together with many colors, all the
rebel ordnance and ammunition, and most of their arms. At Liskeard,
after refreshing their men, and holding next day a solemn thanksgiving
to God, they divided--the Lord Mohun with Sir Ralph Hopton and Colonel
Godolphin marching with the greater part of the army upon Saltash,
whither Ruthen had fled and was entrenching himself; while Sir John
Berkeley and Colonel Ashburnham, with a small party of horse and
dragoons and the voluntary regiments of Sir Bevill Grenville, Sir
Nich. Slanning, and Colonel Trevanion, turned to the northeast, toward
Launceston and Tavistock, to see what account they might render of the
Earl of Stamford's army; that, however, had no stomach to await them,
but posted out of the county into Plymouth and Exeter.

'Twas on this expedition that two or three of the captains I have
mentioned halted for an hour or more at Temple, as well to recognize
Joan's extreme meritorious service, as to thank me for the part I had
in bringing news of the Earl of Stamford's advance. For 'twas this, they
own'd, had saved them--the King's message being but an exhortation
and an advertisement upon some lesser matters, the most of which were
already taken out of human hands by the turn of events.

But though, as I learn'd, these gentlemen were full of compliments and
professions of esteem, I neither saw nor heard them, being by this time
delirious of a high fever that followed my wound. And not till three
good weeks after, was I recover'd enough to leave my bed, nor, for many
more, did my full strength return to me. No mother could have made a
tenderer nurse than was Joan throughout this time. 'Tis to her I owe it
that I am alive to write these words: and if the tears scald my eyes as
I do so, you will pardon them, I promise, before the end of my tail is
reach'd.

In the first days of my recovery, news came to us (I forget how) that
a solemn sacrament had been taken between the parties in Devon and
Cornwall, and the country was a peace. Little I cared, at the time: but
was content--now spring was come--to loiter about the tors, and while
watching Joan at her work, to think upon Delia. For, albeit I had little
hope to see her again, my late pretty comrade held my thoughts the day
long. I shared them with nobody: for tho' 'tis probable I had let some
words fall in my delirium, Joan never hinted at this, and I never found
out.

To Joan's company I was left: for her father, after saving my life that
afternoon, took no further notice of me by word or deed; and the cat,
Jan Tergagle (nam'd after a spirit that was said to haunt the moors
hereabouts), was as indifferent. So with Joan I passed the days idly,
tending the sheep, or waiting on her as she ploughed, or lying full
length on the hillside and talking with her of war and battles. 'Twas
the one topic on which she was curious (scoffing at me when I offered to
teach her to read print), and for hours she would listen to stories
of Alexander and Hannibal, Caesar and Joan of Arc, and other great
commanders whose history I remember'd.

One evening--'twas early in May--we had climb'd to the top of the
grey tor above Temple, whence we could spy the white sails of the two
Channels moving, and, stretch'd upon the short turf there, I was telling
my usual tale. Joan lay beside me, her chin propp'd on one earth-stain'd
hand, her great solemn eyes wide open as she listened. Till that moment
I had regarded her rather as a man comrade than a girl, but now some
feminine trick of gesture awoke me perhaps, for my fancy began to
contrast her with Delia, and I broke off my story and sigh'd.

"Art longing to be hence?" she asked.

I felt ashamed to be thus caught, and was silent. She look'd at me and
went on--

"Speak out, lad."

"Loth would I be to leave you, Joan."

"And why?"

"Why, we are good friends, I hope: and I am grateful."

"Oh, aye--wish thee'd learn to speak the truth, Jack. Art longing to be
hence, and shalt--soon."

"Why, Joan, you would not have me dwell here always?"

She made no answer for a while, and then with a change of tone--

"Shalt ride wi' me to Bodmin Fair to-morrow for a treat, an' see the
Great Turk and the Fat 'Ooman and hocus-pocus. So tell me more 'bout
Joan the Frenchwoman."

On the morrow, about nine in the morning, we set off--Joan on the
strawberry, balanced easily on an old sack, which was all her saddle;
and I on Molly, that now was sound again and chafing to be so idle. As
we set out, Joan's father for the first time took some notice of me,
standing at the door to see us off and shouting after us to bring home
some account of the wrestling. Looking back at a quarter mile's distance
I saw him still fram'd in the doorway, with the cat perch'd on his
shoulder.

Bodmin town is naught but a narrow street, near on a mile long, and
widening toward the western end. It lies mainly along the south side of
a steep vale, and this May morning as Joan and I left the moors and rode
down to it from northward, already we could hear trumpets blowing, the
big drum sounding, and all the bawling voices and hubbub of the fair.
Descending, we found the long street lin'd with booths and shows, and
nigh blocked with the crowd: for the revel began early and was now in
full swing. And the crew of gipsies, whifflers, mountebanks, fortune
tellers, cut-purses and quacks, mix'd up with honest country faces, beat
even the rabble I had seen at Wantage.

Now my own first business was with a tailor: for the clothes I wore
when I rode into Temple, four months back, had been so sadly messed with
blood, and afterward cut, to free them from my wound, that now all the
tunic I wore was of sackcloth, contrived and stitch'd together by Joan.
So I made at once for a decent shop, where luckily I found a suit to
fit me, one taken (the tailor said) off a very promising young gentleman
that had the misfortune to be kill'd on Braddock Down. Arrayed in this,
I felt myself again, and offered to take Joan to see the Fat Woman.

We saw her, and the Aethiop, and the Rhinoceros (which put me in mind
of poor Anthony Killigrew), and the Pig-fac'd Baby, and the Cudgel play;
and presently halted before a Cheap Jack, that was crying his wares in a
prodigious loud voice, near the town wall.

'Twas a meagre, sharp-visag'd fellow with a grey chin beard like a billy
goat's; and (as fortune would have it) spying our approach, he
picked out a mirror from his stock and holding it aloft, addressed us
straight--

"What have we here," cries he, "but a pair o' lovers coming? and what
i' my hand but a lover's hourglass? Sure the stars of heav'n must have a
hand in this conjuncture--and only thirteen pence, my pretty fellow, for
a glass that will tell the weather i' your sweetheart's face, and help
make it fine."

There were many country fellows with their maids in the crowd, that
turned their heads at this address; and as usual the women began.

"Tis Joan o' the Tor!"

"Joan's picked up wi' a sweetheart--tee-hee!--an' us reckoned her'd
forsworn mankind!"

"Who is he?"

"Some furriner, sure: that likes garlic."

"He's bought her no ribbons yet."

"How should he, poor lad; that can find no garments upon her to fasten
'em to?"

And so on, with a deal of spiteful laughter. Some of these sayings
were half truth, no doubt: but the truthfullest word may be infelix.
So noting a dark flush on Joan's cheek, I thought to end the scene by
taking the Cheap Jack's mirror on the spot, to stop his tongue, and then
drawing her away.

But in this I was a moment too late; for just as I reached up my hand
with the thirteen pence, and the grinning fellow on the platform bent
forward with his mirror, I heard a coarser jest, a rush in the crowd,
and two heads go _crack!_ together like eggs. 'Twas two of Joan's
tormentors she had taken by the hair and served so: and dropping them
the next instant had caught the Cheap Jack's beard, as you might a bell
rope, and wrench'd him head-foremost off his stand, my thirteen pence
flying far and wide. Plump he fell into the crowd, that scatter'd on all
hands as Joan pummelled him: and _whack, whack!_ fell the blows on the
poor idiot's face, who scream'd for mercy, as though Judgment Day were
come.

No one, for the minute, dared to step between them: and presently Joan
looking up, with arm raised for another buffet, spied a poor Astrologer
close by, in a red and yellow gown, that had been reading fortunes in a
tub of black water beside him, but was now broken off, dismayed at the
hubbub. To this tub she dragged the Cheap Jack and sent him into it with
a round souse. The black water splashed right and left over the crowd.
Then, her wrath sated, Joan faced the rest, with hands on hips, and
waited for them to come on.

Not a word had she spoken, from first to last: but stood now with hot
cheeks and bosom heaving. Then, finding none to take up her challenge,
she strode out through the folk, and I after her, with the mirror in my
hand; while the Cheap Jack picked himself out of the tub, whining, and
the Astrologer wip'd his long white beard and soil'd robe.

Outside the throng was a carriage, stopp'd for a minute by this tumult,
and a servant at the horses' heads. By the look of it, 'twas the coach
of some person of quality; and glancing at it I saw inside an old
gentleman with a grave venerable face, seated. For the moment it flash'd
on me I had seen him before, somewhere: and cudgell'd my wits to
think where it had been. But a second and longer gaze assured me I was
mistaken, and I went on down the street after Joan.

She was walking fast and angry; nor when I caught her up and tried to
soothe, would she answer me but in the shortest words. Woman's justice,
as I had just learn'd, has this small defect--it goes straight enough,
but mainly for the wrong object. Which now I proved in my own case.

"Where are you going, Joan?"

"To 'Fifteen Balls'' stable, for my horse."

"Art not leaving the fair yet, surely!"

"That I be, tho'. Have had fairing enow--wi' a man!"

Nor for a great part of the way home would she speak to me. But meeting,
by Pound Scawens (a hamlet close to the road), with some friends going
to the fair, she stopp'd for a while to chat with them, whilst I rode
forward: and when she overtook me, her brow was clear again.

"Am a hot headed fool, Jack, and have spoil'd thy day for thee."

"Nay, that you have not," said I, heartily glad to see her humble, for
the first time in our acquaintance: "but if you have forgiven me that
which I could not help, you shall take this that I bought for you, in
proof."

And pulling out the mirror, I lean'd over and handed it to her.

"What i' the world be this?" she ask'd, taking and looking at it
doubtfully.

"Why, a mirror."

"What's that?"

"A glass to see your face in," I explained.

"Be this my face?" She rode forward, holding up the glass in front
of her. "Why, what a handsome looking gal I be, to be sure! Jack, art
certain 'tis my very own face?"

"To be sure," said I amazed.

"Well!" There was silence for a full minute, save for our horses' tread
on the high road. And then--

"Jack, I be powerful dirty!"

This was true enough, and it made me laugh. She looked up solemnly at my
mirth (having no sense of a joke, then or ever) and bent forward to the
glass again.

"By the way," said I, "did you mark a carriage just outside the crowd,
by the Cheap Jack's booth?--with a white-hair'd gentleman seated
inside?"

Joan nodded. "Master Hannibal Tingcomb: steward o' Gleys."

"What!"

I jumped in my saddle, and with a pull at the bridle brought Molly to a
standstill.

"Of Gleys?" I cried. "Steward of Sir Deakin Killigrew that was?"

"Right, lad, except the last word. 'That _is_,' should'st rather say."

"Then you are wrong, Joan: for he's dead and buried, these five months.
Where is this house of Gleys? for to-morrow I must ride there."

"'Tis easy found, then: for it stands on the south coast yonder, and
no house near it: five mile from anywhere, and sixteen from Temple, due
south. Shall want thee afore thou startest, Jack. Dear, now! who'd ha'
thought I was so dirty?"

The cottage door stood open as we rode into the yard, and from it a
faint smoke came curling, with a smell of peat. Within I found the
smould'ring turves scattered about as on the day of my first arrival,
and among them Joan's father stretch'd, flat on his face: only this time
the eat was curl'd up quietly, and lying between the old man's shoulder
blades.

"Drunk again," said Joan shortly.

But looking more narrowly, I marked a purplish stain on the ground by
the old man's mouth, and turned him softly over.

"Joan," said I, "he's not drunk--he's dead!"

She stood above us and looked down, first at the corpse, then at me,
without speaking for a time: at last---

"Then I reckon he may so well be buried."

"Girl," I call'd out, being shocked at this callousness, "'tis your
father--and he is dead!"

"Why that's so, lad. An he were alive, shouldn't trouble thee to bury
'n."

And so, before night, we carried him up to the bleak tor side, and dug
his grave there; the black cat following us to look. Five feet deep we
laid him, having dug down to solid rock; and having covered him over,
went silently back to the hovel. Joan had not shed a single tear.




CHAPTER XIV.

I DO NO GOOD IN THE HOUSE OF GLEYS.


Very early next morning I awoke, and hearing no sound in the loft above
(whither, since my coming, Joan had carried her bed), concluded her to
be still asleep. But in this I was mistaken: for going to the well at
the back to wash, I found her there, studying her face in the mirror.

"Luckily met, Jack," she said, when I was cleansed and freshly glowing:
"Now fill another bucket and sarve me the same."

"Cannot you wash yourself?" I ask'd, as I did so.

"Lost the knack, I reckon. Stand thee so, an' slush the water over me."

"But your clothes!" I cried out, "they'll be soaking wet!"

"Clothes won't be worse for a wash, neither. So slush away."

Therefore, standing at three paces' distance, I sent a bucketful over
her, and then another and another. Six times I filled and emptied the
bucket in all: and at the end she was satisfied, and went, dripping,
back to the kitchen to get me my breakfast.

"Art early abroad," she said, as we sat together over the meal.

"Yes, for I must ride to Gleys this morning."

"Shan't be sorry to miss thee for a while. Makes me feel so shy--this
cleanliness." So, promising to be back by nightfall, I went presently to
saddle Molly: and following Joan's directions and her warnings against
quags and pitfalls, was soon riding south across the moor and well on my
road to the House of Gleys.

My way leading me by Braddock Down, I turned aside for a while to
examine the ground of the late fight (tho' by now little was to be seen
but a piece of earthwork left unfinish'd by the rebels, and the fresh
mounds where the dead were laid); and so 'twas high noon--and a dull,
cheerless day--before the hills broke and let me have sight of the sea.
Nor, till the noise of the surf was in my ears, did I mark the chimneys
and naked grey walls of the house I was bound for.

'Twas a gloomy, savage pile of granite, perch'd at the extremity of a
narrow neck of land, where every wind might sweep it, and the waves beat
on three sides the cliff below. The tide was now at the full, almost,
and the spray flying in my face, as we crossed the head of a small
beach, forded a stream, and scrambled up the rough road to the entrance
gate.

A thin line of smoke blown level from one chimney was all the sign of
life in the building: for the narrow lights of the upper story were
mostly shuttered, and the lower floor was hid from me by a high wall
enclosing a courtlage in front. One stunted ash, with boughs tortured
and bent toward the mainland, stood by the gate, which was lock'd. A
smaller door, also lock'd, was let into the gate, and in this again a
shuttered iron grating. Hard by, dangled a rusty bell-pull, at which I
tugg'd sturdily.

On this, a crack'd bell sounded, far in the house, and scared a flock of
starlings out of a disused chimney. Their cries died away presently, and
left no sound but that of the gulls wailing about the cliff at my feet.
This was all the answer I won.

I rang again, and a third time: and now at last came the sound of
footsteps shuffling across the court within. The shutter of the grating
was slipp'd back, and a voice, crack'd as the bell, asked my business.

"To see Master Hannibal Tingcomb," answered I.

"Thy name?"

"He shall hear it in time. Say that I come on business concerning the
estate."

The voice mutter'd something, and the footsteps went back. I had been
kicking my heels there for twenty minutes or more when they returned,
and the voice repeated the question---

"Thy name?"

Being by this time angered, I did a foolish thing; which was, to clap
the muzzle of my pistol against the grating, close to the fellow's nose.
Singular to say, the trick serv'd me. A bolt was slipp'd hastily back
