fell into a sound sleep, from which she did not wake up until a late
hour of the morning, when she summoned her usual attendant, who arrived
with her ladyship's morning dish of tea. If I told you she took a dram
with it, you would be shocked. Some of our great-grandmothers used to
have cordials in their "closets." Have you not read of the fine lady in
Walpole, who said, "If I drink more, I shall be 'muckibus!'?" As surely
as Mr. Gough is alive now, our ancestresses were accustomed to partake
pretty freely of strong waters.

So, having tipped off the cordial, Madame Bernstein rouses and asks Mrs.
Brett the news.

"He can give it you," says the waiting-woman, sulkily.

"He? Who?"

Mrs. Brett names Harry, and says Mr. Warrington arrived about midnight
yesterday--and Betty, my Lady Maria's maid, was with him. "And my Lady
Maria sends your ladyship her love and duty, and hopes you slept well,"
says Brett.

"Excellently, poor thing! Is Betty gone to her?"

"No; she is here," says Mrs. Brett.

"Let me see her directly," cries the old lady.

"I'll tell her," replies the obsequious Brett, and goes away upon
her mistress's errand, leaving the old lady placidly reposing on her
pillows. Presently, two pairs of high-heeled shoes are heard pattering
over the deal floor of the bedchamber. Carpets were luxuries scarcely
known in bedrooms of those days.

"So, Mrs. Betty, you were in London yesterday?" calls Bernstein from her
curtains.

"It is not Betty--it is I! Good morning, dear aunt! I hope you slept
well?" cries a voice which made old Bernstein start on her pillow. It
was the voice of Lady Maria, who drew the curtains aside, and dropped
her aunt a low curtsey. Lady Maria looked very pretty, rosy, and happy.
And with the little surprise incident at her appearance through Madame
Bernstein's curtains, I think we may bring this chapter to a close.




CHAPTER XXXIX. Harry to the Rescue


"My dear Lord March" (wrote Mr. Warrington from Tunbridge Wells, on
Saturday morning, the 25th August, 1756): "This is to inform you (with
satisfaction) that I have one all our three betts. I was at Bromley two
minutes within the hour; my new horses kep a-going at a capital rate. I
drove them myself, having the postilion by me to show me the way, and
my black man inside with Mrs. Betty. Hope they found the drive very
pleasant. We were not stopped on Blackheath, though two fellows on
horseback rode up to us, but not liking the looks of our countenantses,
rode off again; and we got into Tunbridge Wells (where I transacted my
business) at forty-five minutes after eleven. This makes me quitts with
your lordship after yesterday's piquet, which I shall be very happy to
give your revenge, and am--Your most obliged, faithful servant,                                                H. ESMOND WARRINGTON."


And now, perhaps, the reader will understand by what means Lady Maria
Esmond was enabled to surprise her dear aunt in her bed on Saturday
morning, and walk out of the house of captivity. Having despatched Mrs.
Betty to London, she scarcely expected that her emissary would return
on the day of her departure; and she and the chaplain were playing their
cards at midnight, after a small refection which the bailiff's wife
had provided for them, when the rapid whirling of wheels was heard
approaching their house, and caused the lady to lay her trumps down,
and her heart to beat with more than ordinary emotion. Whirr came the
wheels--the carriage stopped at the very door: there was a parley at the
gate: then appeared Mrs. Betty, with a face radiant with joy, though her
eyes were full of tears; and next, who is that tall young gentleman who
enters? Can any of my readers guess? Will they be very angry if I say
that the chaplain slapped down his cards with a huzzay, whilst Lady
Maria, turning as white as a sheet, rose up from her chair, tottered
forward a step or two, and, with an hysterical shriek, flung herself in
her cousin's arms? How many kisses did he give her? If they were mille,
deinde centum, dein mille altera, dein secunda centum, and so on, I am
not going to cry out. He had come to rescue her. She knew he would; he
was her champion, her preserver from bondage and ignominy. She wept a
genuine flood of tears upon his shoulder, and as she reclines there,
giving way to a hearty emotion, I protest I think she looks handsomer
than she has looked during the whole course of this history. She did not
faint this time; she went home, leaning lovingly on her cousin's arm,
and may have had one or two hysterical outbreaks in the night; but
Madame Bernstein slept soundly, and did not hear her.

"You are both free to go home," were the first words Harry said. "Get
my lady's hat and cardinal, Betty, and, Chaplain, we'll smoke a pipe
together at our lodgings, it will refresh me after my ride." The
chaplain, who, too, had a great deal of available sensibility, was very
much overcome; he burst into tears as he seized Harry's hand, and
kissed it, and prayed God to bless his dear, generous, young patron. Mr.
Warrington felt a glow of pleasure thrill through his frame. It is good
to be able to help the suffering and the poor; it is good to be able
to turn sorrow into joy. Not a little proud and elated was our young
champion, as, with his hat cocked, he marched by the side of his rescued
princess. His feelings came out to meet him, as it were, and beautiful
happinesses with kind eyes and smiles danced before him, and clad him in
a robe of honour, and scattered flowers on his path, and blew trumpets
and shawms of sweet gratulation, calling, "Here comes the conqueror!
Make way for the champion!" And so they led him up to the king's house,
and seated him in the hall of complacency, upon the cushions of comfort.
And yet it was not much he had done. Only a kindness. He had but to put
his hand in his pocket, and with an easy talisman, drive off the dragon
which kept the gate, and cause the tyrant to lay down his axe, who had
got Lady Maria in execution. Never mind if his vanity is puffed up; he
is very good-natured; he has rescued two unfortunate people, and pumped
tears of goodwill and happiness out of their eyes:--and if he brags a
little to-night, and swaggers somewhat to the chaplain, and talks about
London, and Lord March, and White's, and Almack's, with the air of a
macaroni, I don't think we need like him much the less.

Sampson continued to be prodigiously affected. This man had a nature
most easily worked upon, and extraordinarily quick to receive pain
and pleasure, to tears, gratitude, laughter, hatred, liking. In his
preaching profession he had educated and trained his sensibilities so
that they were of great use to him; he was for the moment what he acted.
He wept quite genuine tears, finding that he could produce them freely.
He loved you whilst he was with you; he had a real pang of grief as he
mingled his sorrow with the widow or orphan; and, meeting Jack as he
came out of the door, went to the tavern opposite, and laughed and
roared over the bottle. He gave money very readily, but never repaid
when he borrowed. He was on this night in a rapture of gratitude and
flattery towards Harry Warrington. In all London, perhaps, the unlucky
Fortunate Youth could not have found a more dangerous companion.

To-night he was in his grateful mood, and full of enthusiasm for the
benefactor who had released him from durance. With each bumper his
admiration grew stronger. He exalted Harry as the best and noblest of
men, and the complacent young simpleton, as we have said, was disposed
to take these praises as very well deserved. "The younger branch of our
family," said Mr. Harry, with a superb air, "have treated you scurvily;
but, by Jove, Sampson my boy, I'll stand by you!" At a certain period of
Burgundian excitement Mr. Warrington was always very eloquent respecting
the splendour of his family. "I am very glad I was enabled to help you
in your strait. Count on me whenever you want me, Sampson. Did you not
say you had a sister at boarding-school? You will want money for her,
sir. Here is a little bill which may help to pay her schooling." And the
liberal young fellow passed a bank-note across to the chaplain.

Again the man was affected to tears. Harry's generosity smote him.

"Mr. Warrington," he said, putting the bank-note a short distance from
him, "I--I don't deserve your kindness--by George, I don't!" and he
swore an oath to corroborate his passionate assertion.

"Psha!" says Harry. "I have plenty more of 'em. There was no money in
that confounded pocket-book which I lost last week."

"No, sir. There was no money!" says Mr. Sampson, dropping his head.

"Hallo! How do you know, Mr. Chaplain?" asks the young gentleman.

"I know because I am a villain, sir. I am not worthy of your kindness.
I told you so. I found the book, sir, that night, when you had too much
wine at Barbeau's."

"And read the letters?" asked Mr. Warrington, starting up and turning
very red.

"They told me nothing I did not know, sir," said the chaplain "You have
had spies about you whom you little suspect--from whom you are much too
young and simple to be able to keep your secret."

"Are those stories about Lady Fanny, and my cousin Will and his doings,
true then?" inquired Harry.

"Yes, they are true," sighed the chaplain. "The house of Castlewood has
not been fortunate, sir, since your honour's branch, the elder branch,
left it."

"Sir, you don't dare for to breathe a word against my Lady Maria?" Harry
cried out.

"Oh, not for worlds!" says Mr. Sampson, with a queer look at his young
friend. "I may think she is too old for your honour, and that 'tis a
pity you should not have a wife better suited to your age, though
I admit she looks very young for hers, and hath every virtue and
accomplishment."

"She is too old, Sampson, I know she is," says Mr. Warrington, with much
majesty; "but she has my word, and you see, sir, how fond she is of
me. Go bring me the letters, sir, which you found, and let me try and
forgive you for having seized upon them."

"My benefactor, let me try and forgive myself!" cries Mr. Sampson, and
departed towards his chamber, leaving his young patron alone over his
wine.

Sampson returned presently, looking very pale. "What has happened, sir?"
says Harry, with an imperious air.

The chaplain held out a pocket-book. "With your name in it, sir," he
said.

"My brother's name in it," says Harry; "it was George who gave it to
me."

"I kept it in a locked chest, sir, in which I left it this morning
before I was taken by those people. Here is the book, sir, but the
letters are gone. My trunk and valise have also been tampered with. And
I am a miserable, guilty man, unable to make you the restitution which
I owe you." Sampson looked the picture of woe as he uttered these
sentiments. He clasped his hands together, and almost knelt before Harry
in an attitude the most pathetic.

Who had been in the rooms in Mr. Sampson's and Mr. Warrington's absence?
The landlady was ready to go on her knees, and declare that nobody
had come in: nor, indeed, was Mr. Warrington's chamber in the least
disturbed, nor anything abstracted from Mr. Sampson's scanty wardrobe
and possessions, except those papers of which he deplored the absence.

Whose interest was it to seize them? Lady Maria's? The poor woman
had been a prisoner all day, and during the time when the capture was
effected.

She certainly was guiltless of the rape of the letters. The sudden
seizure of the two--Case, the house-steward's secret journey to
London,--Case, who knew the shoemaker at whose house Sampson lodged in
London, and all the secret affairs of the Esmond family,--these points,
considered together and separately, might make Mr. Sampson think that
the Baroness Bernstein was at the bottom of this mischief. But why
arrest Lady Maria? The chaplain knew nothing as yet about that letter
which her ladyship had lost; for poor Maria had not thought it necessary
to confide her secret to him.

As for the pocket-book and its contents, Mr. Harry was so swollen up
with self-satisfaction that evening, at winning his three bets, at
rescuing his two friends, at the capital premature cold supper of
partridges and ancient Burgundy which obsequious Monsieur Barbeau had
sent over to the young gentleman's lodgings, that he accepted Sampson's
vows of contrition, and solemn promises of future fidelity, and reached
his gracious hand to the chaplain, and condoned his offence. When the
latter swore his great gods, that henceforth he would be Harry's truest,
humblest friend and follower, and at any moment would be ready to die
for Mr. Warrington, Harry said, majestically, "I think, Sampson, you
would; I hope you would. My family--the Esmond family--has always been
accustomed to have faithful friends round about 'em--and to reward 'em
too. The wine's with you, Chaplain. What toast do you call, sir?"

"I call a blessing on the house of Esmond-Warrington!" cries the
chaplain, with real tears in his eyes.

"We are the elder branch, sir. My grandfather was the Marquis of
Esmond," says Mr. Harry, in a voice noble but somewhat indistinct.
"Here's to you, Chaplain--and I forgive you, sir--and God bless you,
sir--and if you had been took for three times as much, I'd have paid
it. Why, what's that I see through the shutters? I am blest if the sun
hasn't risen again! We have no need of candles to go to bed, ha, ha!"
And once more extending his blessing to his chaplain, the young fellow
went off to sleep.

About noon Madame de Bernstein sent over a servant to say that she would
be glad if her nephew would come over and drink a dish of chocolate with
her, whereupon our young friend rose and walked to his aunt's lodgings.
She remarked, not without pleasure, some alteration in his toilette: in
his brief sojourn in London he had visited a tailor or two, and had
been introduced by my Lord March to some of his lordship's purveyors and
tradesmen.

Aunt Bernstein called him "my dearest child," and thanked him for his
noble, his generous behaviour to dear Maria. What a shock that seizure
in church had been to her! A still greater shock that she had lost three
hundred only on the Wednesday night to Lady Yarmouth, and was quite a
sec. "Why," said the Baroness, "I had to send Case to London to my agent
to get me money to pay--I could not leave Tunbridge in her debt."

"So Case did go to London?" says Mr. Harry.

"Of course he did: the Baroness de Bernstein can't afford to say she is
court d'argent. Canst thou lend me some, child?"

"I can give your ladyship twenty-two pounds," said Harry, blushing very
red: "I have but forty-four left till I get my Virginian remittances. I
have bought horses and clothes, and been very extravagant, aunt."

"And rescued your poor relations in distress, you prodigal good boy.
No, child, I do not want thy money. I can give thee some. Here is a note
upon my agent for fifty pounds, vaurien! Go and spend it, and be merry!
I dare say thy mother will repay me, though she does not love me." And
she looked quite affectionate, and held out a pretty hand, which the
youth kissed.

"Your mother did not love me, but your mother's father did once. Mind,
sir, you always come to me when you have need of me."

When bent on exhibiting them, nothing could exceed Beatrix Bernstein's
grace or good-humour. "I can't help loving you, child," she continued,
"and yet I am so angry with you that I have scarce the patience to speak
to you. So you have actually engaged yourself to poor Maria, who is
as old as your mother? What will Madam Esmond say? She may live three
hundred years, and you will not have wherewithal to support yourselves."

"I have ten thousand pounds from my father, of my own, now my poor
brother is gone," said Harry, "that will go some way."

"Why, the interest will not keep you in card-money."

"We must give up cards," says Harry.

"It is more than Maria is capable of. She will pawn the coat off your
back to play. The rage for it runs in all my brother's family--in me
too, I own it. I warned you. I prayed you not to play with them, and
now a lad of twenty to engage himself to a woman of forty-two!--to write
letters on his knees and signed with his heart's blood (which he spells
like hartshorn), and say that he will marry no other woman than his
adorable cousin, Lady Maria Esmond. Oh! it's cruel--cruel!"

"Great heavens! madam, who showed you my letter?" asked Harry, burning
with a blush again.

"An accident. She fainted when she was taken by those bailiffs. Brett
cut her laces for her; and when she was carried off, poor thing, we
found a little sachet on the floor, which I opened, not knowing in the
least what it contained. And in it was Mr. Harry Warrington's precious
letter. And here, sir, is the case."

A pang shot through Harry's heart. "Great heavens! why didn't she
destroy it?" he thought.

"I--I will give it back to Maria," he said, stretching out his hand for
the little locket.

"My dear, I have burned the foolish letter," said the old lady.

"If you choose to betray me I must take the consequence. If you choose
to write another, I cannot help thee. But, in that case, Harry Esmond,
I had rather never see thee again. Will you keep my secret? Will you
believe an old woman who loves you and knows the world better than you
do? I tell you, if you keep that foolish promise, misery and ruin are
surely in store for you. What is a lad like you in the hands of a wily
woman of the world, who makes a toy of you? She has entrapped you into a
promise, and your old aunt has cut the strings and set you free. Go back
again! Betray me if you will, Harry."

"I am not angry with you, aunt--I wish I were," said Mr. Warrington,
with very great emotion. "I--I shall not repeat what you told me."

"Maria never will, child--mark my words!" cried the old lady, eagerly.
"She will never own that she has lost that paper. She will tell you that
she has it."

"But I am sure she--she is very fond of me; you should have seen her
last night," faltered Harry.

"Must I tell more stories against my own flesh and blood?" sobs out the
Baroness. "Child, you do not know her past life!"

"And I must not, and I will not!" cries Harry, starting up. "Written or
said--it does not matter which! But my word is given; they may play with
such things in England, but we gentlemen of Virginia don't break 'em.
If she holds me to my word, she shall have me. If we are miserable, as
I dare say we shall be, I'll take a firelock, and go join the King of
Prussia, or let a ball put an end to me."

"I--I have no more to say. Will you be pleased to ring that bell? I--I
wish you a good morning, Mr. Warrington," and dropping a very stately
curtsey, the old lady rose on her tortoiseshell stick, and turned
towards the door. But, as she made her first step, she put her hand
to her heart, sank on the sofa again, an shed the first tears that had
dropped for long years from Beatrix Esmond's eyes.

Harry was greatly moved, too. He knelt down by her. He seized her cold
hand, and kissed it. He told her, in his artless way, how very keenly he
had felt her love for him, and how, with all his heart, he returned it.
"Ah, aunt!" said he, "you don't know what a villain I feel myself. When
you told me, just now how that paper was burned--oh! I was ashamed to
think how glad I was." He bowed his comely head over her hand. She felt
hot drops from his eyes raining on it. She had loved this boy. For half
a century past--never, perhaps, in the course of her whole worldly
life, had she felt a sensation so tender and so pure. The hard heart was
wounded now, softened, overcome. She put her two hands on his shoulders,
and lightly kissed his forehead.

"You will not tell her what I have done, child?" she said.

He declared never! never! And demure Mrs. Brett, entering at her
mistress's summons, found the nephew and aunt in this sentimental
attitude.




CHAPTER XL. In which Harry pays off an Old Debt, and incurs some New
Ones


Our Tunbridge friends were now weary of the Wells, and eager to take
their departure. When the autumn should arrive, Bath was Madame de
Bernstein's mark. There were more cards, company, life, there. She
would reach it after paying a few visits to her country friends. Harry
promised, with rather a bad grace, to ride with Lady Maria and the
chaplain to Castlewood. Again they passed by Oakhurst village, and the
hospitable house where Harry had been so kindly entertained. Maria
made so many keen remarks about the young ladies of Oakhurst, and their
setting their caps at Harry, and the mother's evident desire to catch
him for one of them, that, somewhat in a pet, Mr. Warrington said he
would pass his friends' door, as her ladyship disliked and abused
them; and was very haughty and sulky that evening at the inn where they
stopped, some few miles farther on the road. At supper, my Lady Maria's
smiles brought no corresponding good-humour to Harry's face; her tears
(which her ladyship had at command) did not seem to create the least
sympathy from Mr. Warrington; to her querulous remarks he growled a
surly reply; and my lady was obliged to go to bed at length without
getting a single tete-a-tete with her cousin,--that obstinate chaplain,
as if by order, persisting in staying in the room. Had Harry given
Sampson orders to remain? She departed with a sigh. He bowed her to the
door with an obstinate politeness, and consigned her to the care of the
landlady and her maid.

What horse was that which galloped out of the inn-yard ten minutes after
Lady Maria had gone to her chamber? An hour after her departure
from their supper-room, Mrs. Betty came in for her lady's bottle of
smelling-salts, and found Parson Sampson smoking a pipe alone.
Mr. Warrington was gone to bed--was gone to fetch a walk in the
moonlight--how should he know where Mr. Harry was? Sampson answered,
in reply to the maid's interrogatories. Mr. Warrington was ready to set
forward the next morning, and took his place by the side of Lady Maria's
carriage. But his brow was black--the dark spirit was still on him. He
hardly spoke to her during the journey. "Great heavens! she must have
told him that she stole it!" thought Lady Maria within her own mind.

The fact is, that, as they were walking up that steep hill which lies
about three miles from Oakhurst, on the Westerham road, Lady Maria
Esmond, leaning on her fond youth's arm, and indeed very much in love
with him, had warbled into his ear the most sentimental vows, protests,
and expressions of affection. As she grew fonder, he grew colder. As she
looked up in his face, the sun shone down upon hers, which, fresh and
well-preserved as it was, yet showed some of the lines and wrinkles of
twoscore years; and poor Harry, with that arm leaning on his, felt it
intolerably weighty, and by no means relished his walk up the hill. To
think that all his life, that drag was to be upon him! It was a dreary
look forward and he cursed the moonlight walk, and the hot evening, and
the hot wine which had made him give that silly pledge by which he was
fatally bound.

Maria's praises and raptures annoyed Harry beyond measure. The poor
thing poured out scraps of the few plays which she knew that had
reference to her case, and strove with her utmost power to charm her
young companion. She called him, over and over again, her champion, her
Henrico, her preserver, and vowed that his Molinda would be ever, ever
faithful to him. She clung to him. "Ah, child! have I not thy precious
image, thy precious hair, thy precious writing here?" she said, looking
in his face. "Shall it not go with me to the grave? It would, sir, were
I to meet with unkindness from my Henrico!" she sighed out.

Here was a strange story! Madame Bernstein had given him the little
silken case--she had burned the hair and the note which the case
contained, and Maria had it still on her heart! It was then, at the
start which Harry gave, as she was leaning on his arm--at the sudden
movement as if he would drop hers--that Lady Maria felt her first pang
of remorse that she had told a fib, or rather, that she was found out in
telling a fib, which is a far more cogent reason for repentance. Heaven
help us! if some people were to do penance for telling lies, would they
ever be out of sackcloth and ashes?

Arrived at Castlewood, Mr. Harry's good-humour was not increased. My
lord was from home; the ladies also were away; the only member of
the family whom Harry found, was Mr. Will, who returned from
partridge-shooting just as the chaise and cavalcade reached the gate,
and who turned very pale when he saw his cousin, and received a sulky
scowl of recognition from the young Virginian.

Nevertheless, he thought to put a good face on the matter, and they met
at supper, where, before my Lady Maria, their conversation was at first
civil, but not lively. Mr. Will had been to some races? To several. He
had been pretty successful in his bets? Mr. Warrington hopes. Pretty
well. "And you have brought back my horse sound?" asked Mr. Warrington.

"Your horse! what horse?" asked Mr. Will.

"What horse? my horse!" says Mr. Harry, curtly.

"Protest I don't understand you," says Will.

"The brown horse for which I played you, and which I won of you the
night before you rode away upon it," says Mr. Warrington, sternly. "You
remember the horse, Mr. Esmond."

"Mr. Warrington, I perfectly well remember playing you for a horse,
which my servant handed over to you on the day of your departure."

"The chaplain was present at our play. Mr. Sampson, will you be umpire
between us?" Mr. Warrington said, with much gentleness.

"I am bound to decide that Mr. Warrington played for the brown horse,"
says Mr. Sampson.

"Well, he got the other one," said sulky Mr. Will, with a grin.

"And sold it for thirty shillings!" said Mr. Warrington, always
preserving his calm tone.

Will was waggish. "Thirty shillings? and a devilish good price, too, for
the broken-kneed old rip. Ha, ha!"

"Not a word more. 'Tis only a question about a bet, my dear Lady Maria.
Shall I serve you some more chicken?" Nothing could be more studiously
courteous and gay than Mr. Warrington was, so long as the lady remained
in the room. When she rose to go, Harry followed her to the door, and
closed it upon her with the most courtly bow of farewell. He stood at
the closed door for a moment, and then he bade the servants retire. When
those menials were gone, Mr. Warrington locked the heavy door before
them, and pocketed the key.

As it clicked in the lock, Mr. Will, who had been sitting over his
punch, looking now and then askance at his cousin, asked, with one
of the oaths which commonly garnished his conversation, what the--Mr.
Warrington meant by that?

"I guess there's going to be a quarrel," said Mr. Warrington, blandly,
"and there is no use in having these fellows look on at rows between
their betters."

"Who is going to quarrel here, I should like to know?" asked Will,
looking very pale, and grasping a knife.

"Mr. Sampson, you were present when I played Mr. Will fifty guineas
against his brown horse?"

"Against his horse!" bawls out Mr. Will.

"I am not such a something fool as you take me for," says Mr.
Warrington, "although I do come from Virginia!" And he repeated his
question: "Mr. Sampson, you were here when I played the Honourable
William Esmond, Esquire, fifty guineas against his brown horse?"

"I must own it, sir," says the chaplain, with a deprecatory look towards
his lord's brother.

"I don't own no such a thing," says Mr. Will, with rather a forced
laugh.

"No, sir: because it costs you no more pains to lie than to cheat," said
Mr. Warrington, walking up to his cousin. "Hands off, Mr. Chaplain, and
see fair play! Because you are no better than a--ha!----"

No better than a what we can't say, and shall never know, for as Harry
uttered the exclamation, his dear cousin flung a wine bottle at Mr.
Warrington's head, who bobbed just in time, so that the missile flew
across the room, and broke against the wainscot opposite, breaking
the face of a pictured ancestor of the Esmond family, and then itself
against the wall, whence it spirted a pint of good port wine over the
chaplain's face and flowered wig. "Great heavens, gentlemen, I pray you
to be quiet!" cried the parson, dripping with gore.

But gentlemen are not inclined at some moments to remember the commands
of the Church. The bottle having failed, Mr. Esmond seized the large
silver-handled knife and drove at his cousin. But Harry caught up
the other's right hand with his left, as he had seen the boxers do at
Marybone; and delivered a rapid blow upon Mr. Esmond's nose, which sent
him reeling up against the oak panels, and I dare say caused him to see
ten thousand illuminations. He dropped his knife in his retreat against
the wall, which his rapid antagonist kicked under the table.

Now Will, too, had been at Marybone and Hockley-in-the-Hole, and after
a gasp for breath and a glare over his bleeding nose at his enemy, he
dashed forward his head as though it had been a battering-ram, intending
to project it into Mr. Henry Warrington's stomach.

This manoeuvre Harry had seen, too, on his visit to Marybone, and
amongst the negroes upon the maternal estate, who would meet in combat
like two concutient cannon-balls, each harder than the other. But Harry
had seen and marked the civilised practice of the white man. He skipped
aside, and, saluting his advancing enemy with a tremendous blow on the
right ear, felled him, so that he struck his head against the heavy oak
table and sank lifeless to the ground.

"Chaplain, you will bear witness that it has been a fair fight!" said
Mr. Warrington, still quivering with the excitement of the combat, but
striving with all his might to restrain himself and look cool. And he
drew the key from his pocket and opened the door in the lobby, behind
which three or four servants were gathered. A crash of broken glass, a
cry, a shout, an oath or two, had told them that some violent scene was
occurring within, and they entered, and behold two victims bedabbled
with red--the chaplain bleeding port wine, and the Honourable William
Esmond, Esquire, stretched in his own gore.

"Mr. Sampson will bear witness that I struck fair, and that Mr.
Esmond hit the first blow," said Mr. Warrington. "Undo his neckcloth,
somebody--he may be dead; and get a fleam, Gumbo, and bleed him. Stop!
He is coming to himself! Lift him up, you, and tell a maid to wash the
floor."

Indeed, in a minute, Mr. Will did come to himself. First his eyes rolled
about, or rather, I am ashamed to say, his eye, one having been closed
by Mr. Warrington's first blow. First, then, his eye rolled about; then
he gasped and uttered an inarticulate moan or two, then he began to
swear and curse very freely and articulately.

"He is getting well," said Mr. Warrington.

"Oh, praise be Mussy!" sighs the sentimental Betty.

"Ask him, Gumbo, whether he would like any more?" said Mr. Warrington,
with a stern humour.

"Massa Harry say, wool you like any maw?" asked obedient Gumbo, bowing
over the prostrate gentleman.

"No, curse you, you black devil!" says Mr. Will, hitting up at the black
object before him. ("So he nearly cut my tongue in to in my mouf!" Gumbo
explained to the pitying Betty.) "No, that is, yes! You infernal Mohock!
Why does not somebody kick him out of the place?"

"Because nobody dares, Mr. Esmond," says Mr. Warrington, with great
state, arranging his ruffles--his ruffled ruffles.

"And nobody won't neither," growled the men. They had all grown to love
Harry, whereas Mr. Will had nobody's good word.

"We know all's fair, sir. It ain't the first time Master William have
been served so."

"And I hope it won't be the last," cries shrill Betty. "To go for to
strike a poor black gentleman so!"

Mr. Will had gathered himself up by this time, had wiped his bleeding
face with a napkin, and was skulking off to bed.

"Surely it's manners to say good night to the company. Good night, Mr.
Esmond," says Mr. Warrington, whose jokes, though few, were not very
brilliant; but the honest lad relished the brilliant sally and laughed
at it inwardly.

"He's ad his zopper, and he goes to baid!" says Betty, in her native
dialect, at which everybody laughed outright, except Mr. William, who
went away leaving a black fume of curses, as it were, rolling out of
that funnel, his mouth.

It must be owned that Mr. Warrington continued to be witty the next
morning. He sent a note to Mr. Will begging to know whether he was for
a ride to town or anywheres else. If he was for London, that he would
friten the highwaymen on Hounslow Heath, and look a very genteel figar
at the Chocolate House. Which letter, I fear, Mr. Will received with his
usual violence, requesting the writer to go to some place--not Hounslow.

And, besides the parley between Will and Harry, there comes a maiden
simpering to Mr. Warrington's door, and Gumbo advances, holding
something white and triangular in his ebon fingers.

Harry knew what it was well enough. "Of course it's a letter," groans
he. Molinda greets her Enrico, etc. etc. etc. No sleep has she known
that night, and so forth, and so forth, and so forth. Has Enrico slept
well in the halls of his fathers? und so weiter, und so weiter. He must
never never quaril and be so cruel again. Kai ta loipa. And I protest I
shan't quote any more of this letter. Ah, tablets, golden once,--are ye
now faded leaves? Where is the juggler who transmuted you, and why is
the glamour over?

After the little scandal with cousin Will, Harry's dignity would not
allow him to stay longer at Castlewood: he wrote a majestic letter
to the lord of the mansion, explaining the circumstances which had
occurred, and, as he called in Parson Sampson to supervise the document,
no doubt it contained none of those eccentricities in spelling which
figured in his ordinary correspondence at this period. He represented to
poor Maria, that after blackening the eye and damaging the nose of a son
of the house, he should remain in it with a very bad grace; and she was
forced to acquiesce in the opinion that, for the present, his absence
would best become him. Of course, she wept plentiful tears at parting
with him. He would go to London, and see younger beauties: he would find
none, none who would love him like his fond Maria. I fear Mr. Warrington
did not exhibit any profound emotion on leaving her: nay, he cheered
up immediately after he crossed Castlewood Bridge, and made his horses
whisk over the road at ten miles an hour: he sang to them to go along:
he nodded to the pretty girls by the roadside: he chucked my landlady
under the chin: he certainly was not inconsolable. Truth is, he
longed to be back in London again, to make a figure at St. James's,
at Newmarket, wherever the men of fashion congregated. All that petty
Tunbridge society of women and card-playing seemed child's-play to him
now he had tasted the delight of London life.

By the time he reached London again, almost all the four-and-forty
pounds which we have seen that he possessed at Tunbridge had slipped out
of his pocket, and further supplies were necessary. Regarding these he
made himself presently easy. There were the two sums of 5000 pounds in
his own and his brother's name, of which he was the master. He would
take up a little money, and with a run or two of good luck at play he
could easily replace it. Meantime he must live in a manner becoming his
station, and it must be explained to Madam Esmond that a gentleman
of his rank cannot keep fitting company, and appear as becomes him in
society, upon a miserable pittance of two hundred a year.

Mr. Warrington sojourned at the Bedford Coffee-House as before, but only
for a short while. He sought out proper lodgings at the Court end of the
town, and fixed on some apartments in Bond Street, where he and
Gumbo installed themselves, his horses standing at a neighbouring
livery-stable. And now tailors, mercers, and shoemakers were put in
requisition. Not without a pang of remorse, he laid aside his mourning
and figured in a laced hat and waistcoat. Gumbo was always dexterous in
the art of dressing hair, and with a little powder flung into his fair
locks Mr. Warrington's head was as modish as that of any gentleman in
the Mall. He figured in the Ring in his phaeton. Reports of his great
wealth had long since preceded him to London, and not a little curiosity
was excited about the fortunate Virginian.

Until our young friend could be balloted for at the proper season,
my Lord March had written down his name for the club at White's
Chocolate-House, as a distinguished gentleman from America. There were
as yet but few persons of fashion in London, but with a pocket full of
money at one-and-twenty, a young fellow can make himself happy even out
of the season; and Mr. Harry was determined to enjoy.

He ordered Mr. Draper, then, to sell five hundred pounds of his stock.
What would his poor mother have said had she known that the young
spendthrift was already beginning to dissipate his patrimony? He dined
at the tavern, he supped at the club, where Jack Morris introduced him,
with immense eulogiums, to such gentlemen as were in town. Life and
youth and pleasure were before him, the wine was set a-running, and the
eager lad was greedy to drink. Do you see, far away in the west yonder,
the pious widow at her prayers for her son? Behind the trees at Oakhurst
a tender little heart, too, is beating for him, perhaps. When the
Prodigal Son was away carousing, were not love and forgiveness still on
the watch for him?

Amongst the inedited letters of the late Lord Orford, there is one which
the present learned editor, Mr. Peter Cunningbam, has omitted from his
collection, doubting possibly the authenticity of the document. Nay,
I myself have only seen a copy of it in the Warrington papers in Madam
Esmond's prim handwriting, and noted "Mr. H. Walpole's account of my son
Henry at London, and of Baroness Tusher,--wrote to General Conway."


"ARLINGTON STREET, Friday Night.

"I have come away, child, for a day or two from my devotions to our Lady
of Strawberry. Have I not been on my knees to her these three weeks,
and aren't the poor old joints full of rheumatism? A fit took me that
I would pay London a visit, that I would go to Vauxhall and Ranelagh.
Quoi! May I not have my rattle as well as other elderly babies? Suppose,
after being so long virtuous, I take a fancy to cakes and ale, shall
your reverence say nay to me? George Selwyn and Tony Storer and
your humble servant took boat at Westminster t'other night. Was it
Tuesday?--no, Tuesday I was with their Graces of Norfolk, who are just
from Tunbridge--it was Wednesday. How should I know? Wasn't I dead drunk
with a whole pint of lemonade I took at White's?

"The Norfolk folk had been entertaining me on Tuesday with the account
of a young savage Iroquois, Choctaw, or Virginian, who has lately been
making a little noise in our quarter of the globe. He is an offshoot of
that disreputable family of Esmond, Castlewood, of whom all the men are
gamblers and spendthrifts, and all the women--well, I shan't say the
word, lest Lady Ailesbury should be looking over your shoulder. Both the
late lords, my father told me, were in his pay, and the last one, a beau
of Queen Anne's reign, from a viscount advanced to be an earl through
the merits and intercession of his notorious old sister Bernstein, late
Tusher, nee Esmond--a great beauty, too, of her day, a favourite of the
old Pretender. She sold his secrets to my papa, who paid her for them;
and being nowise particular in her love for the Stuarts, came over to
the august Hanoverian house at present reigning over us. 'Will Horace
Walpole's tongue never stop scandal?' says your wife over your shoulder.
I kiss your ladyship's hand. I am dumb. The Bernstein is a model of
virtue. She had no good reasons for marrying her father's chaplain.
Many of the nobility omit the marriage altogether. She wasn't ashamed
of being Mrs. Tusher, and didn't take a German Baroncino for a second
husband, whom nobody out of Hanover ever saw. The Yarmouth bears no
malice. Esther and Vashti are very good friends, and have been cheating
each other at Tunbridge at cards all the summer.

"'And what has all this to do with the Iroquois?' says your ladyship.
The Iroquois has been at Tunbridge, too--not cheating, perhaps, but
winning vastly. They say he has bled Lord March of thousands--Lord
March, by whom so much blood hath been shed, that he has quarrelled with
everybody, fought with everybody, rode over everybody, been fallen in
love with by everybody's wife except Mr. Conway's, and not excepting her
present Majesty, the Countess of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Queen of Walmoden and Yarmouth, whom Heaven preserve to us.

"You know an offensive little creature, de par le monde, one Jack
Morris, who skips in and out of all the houses of London. When we were
at Vauxhall, Mr. Jack gave us a nod under the shoulder of a pretty young
fellow enough, on whose arm he was leaning, and who appeared hugely
delighted with the enchantments of the garden. Lord, how he stared
at the fireworks! Gods, how he huzzayed at the singing of a horrible
painted wench who shrieked the ears off my head! A twopenny string of
glass beads and a strip of tawdry cloth are treasures in Iroquois-land,
and our savage valued them accordingly.

"A buzz went about the place that this was the fortunate youth. He won
three hundred at White's last night very genteelly from Rockingham and
my precious nephew, and here he was bellowing and huzzaying over the
music so as to do you good to hear. I do not love a puppet-show, but I
love to treat children to one, Miss Conway! I present your ladyship my
compliments, and hope we shall go and see the dolls together.

"When the singing woman came down from her throne, Jack Morris must
introduce my Virginian to her. I saw him blush up to the eyes, and make
her, upon my word, a very fine bow, such as I had no idea was practised
in wigwams. 'There is a certain jenny squaw about her, and that's why
the savage likes her,' George said--a joke certainly not as brilliant as
a firework. After which it seemed to me that the savage and the savages
retired together.

"Having had a great deal too much to eat and drink three hours before,
my partners must have chicken and rack-punch at Vauxhall, where George
fell asleep straightway, and for my sins I must tell Tony Storer what
I knew about this Virginian's amiable family, especially some of the
Bernstein's antecedents, and the history of another elderly beauty of
the family, a certain Lady Maria, who was au mieux with the late Prince
of Wales. What did I say? I protest not half of what I knew, and of
course not a tenth part of what I was going to tell, for who should
start out upon us but my savage, this time quite red in the face; and in
his war paint. The wretch had been drinking fire-water in the next box!

"He cocked his hat, clapped his hand to his sword, asked which of the
gentleman was it that was maligning his family? so that I was obliged to
entreat him not to make such a noise, lest he should wake my friend, Mr.
George Selwyn. And I added, 'I assure you, sir, I had no idea that you
were near me, and most sincerely apologise for giving you pain.'

"The Huron took his hand off his tomahawk at this pacific rejoinder,
made a bow not ungraciously, said he could not, of course, ask more than
an apology from a gentleman of my age (Merci, monsieur!), and, hearing
the name of Mr. Selwyn, made another bow to George, and said he had
a letter to him from Lord March, which he had had the ill-fortune to
mislay. George has put him up for the club, it appears, in conjunction
with March, and no doubt these three lambs will fleece each other.
Meanwhile, my pacified savage sate down with us, and buried the hatchet
in another bowl of punch, for which these gentlemen must call. Heaven
help us! 'Tis eleven o'clock, and here comes Bedson with my gruel! H. W.

"To the Honourable. H. S. Conway."




CHAPTER XLI. Rake's Progress


People were still very busy in Harry Warrington's time (not that our
young gentleman took much heed of the controversy) in determining
the relative literary merits of the ancients and the moderns; and the
learned, and the world with them, indeed, pretty generally pronounced in
favour of the former. The moderns of that day are the ancients of
ours, and we speculate upon them in the present year of grace, as our
grandchildren, a hundred years hence, will give their judgment about us.
As for your book-learning, O respectable ancestors (though, to be sure,
you have the mighty Gibbon with you), I think you will own that you
are beaten, and could point to a couple of professors at Cambridge and
Glasgow who know more Greek than was to be had in your time in all
the universities of Europe, including that of Athens, if such an one
existed. As for science, you were scarce more advanced than those
heathen to whom in literature you owned yourselves inferior. And in
public and private morality? Which is the better, this actual year 1858,
or its predecessor a century back? Gentlemen of Mr. Disraeli's House of
Commons! has every one of you his price, as in Walpole's or Newcastle's
time,--or (and that is the delicate question) have you almost all of you
had it? Ladies, I do not say that you are a society of Vestals--but the
chronicle of a hundred years since contains such an amount of scandal,
that you may be thankful you did not live in such dangerous times. No:
on my conscience, I believe that men and women are both better; not only
that the Susannas are more numerous, but that the Elders are not nearly
so wicked. Did you ever hear of such books as Clarissa, Tom Jones,
Roderick Random; paintings by contemporary artists, of the men and
women, the life and society, of their day? Suppose we were to describe
the doings of such a person as Mr. Lovelace or my Lady Bellaston, or
that wonderful "Lady of Quality" who lent her memoirs to the author of
Peregrine Pickle. How the pure and outraged Nineteenth Century would
blush, scream, run out of the room, call away the young ladies, and
order Mr. Mudie never to send one of that odious author's books again!
You are fifty-eight years old, madam, and it may be that you are too
squeamish, that you cry out before you are hurt, and when nobody had
any intention of offending your ladyship. Also, it may be that the
novelist's art is injured by the restraints put upon him as many an
honest, harmless statue at St. Peter's and the Vatican is spoiled by the
tin draperies in which ecclesiastical old women have swaddled the fair
limbs of the marble. But in your prudery there is reason. So there is in
the state censorship of the Press. The page may contain matter dangerous
to bonos mores. Out with your scissors, censor, and clip off the
prurient paragraph! We have nothing for it but to submit. Society, the
despot, has given his imperial decree. We may think the statue had been
seen to greater advantage without the tin drapery; we may plead that the
moral were better might we recite the whole fable. Away with him--not a
word! I never saw the pianofortes in the United States with the frilled
muslin trousers on their legs; but, depend on it, the muslin covered
some of the notes as well as the mahogany, muffled the music, and
stopped the player.

To what does this prelude introduce us? I am thinking of Harry
Warrington, Esquire, in his lodgings in Bond Street, London, and of the
life which he and many of the young bucks of fashion led in those times,
and how I can no more take my faire young reader into them, than
Lady Squeams can take her daughter to Cremorne Gardens on an ordinary
evening. My dear Miss Diana (psha! I know you are eight-and-thirty,
although you are so wonderfully shy, and want to make us believe
you have just left off schoolroom dinners and a pinafore), when your
grandfather was a young man about town, and a member of one of the clubs
at White's, and dined at Pontac's off the feasts provided by Braund and
Lebeck, and rode to Newmarket with March and Rockingham, and toasted
the best in England with Gilly Williams and George Selwyn (and didn't
understand George's jokes, of which, indeed, the flavour has very much
evaporated since the bottling)--the old gentleman led a life of which
your noble aunt (author of Legends of the Squeams's; or, Fair Fruits of
a Family Tree) has not given you the slightest idea.

It was before your grandmother adopted those serious views for which
she was distinguished during her last long residence at Bath, and after
Colonel Tibbalt married Miss Lye, the rich soap-boiler's heiress, that
her ladyship's wild oats were sown. When she was young, she was as giddy
as the rest of the genteel world. At her house in Hill Street, she had
ten card-tables on Wednesdays and Sunday evenings, except for a short
time when Ranelagh was open on Sundays. Every night of her life she
gambled for eight, nine, ten hours. Everybody else in society did the
like. She lost; she won; she cheated; she pawned her jewels; who knows
what else she was not ready to pawn, so as to find funds to supply her
fury for play? What was that after-supper duel at the Shakspeare's Head
in Covent Garden, between your grandfather and Colonel Tibbalt: where
they drew swords and engaged only in the presence of Sir John Screwby,
who was drunk under the table? They were interrupted by Mr. John
Fielding's people, and your grandfather was carried home to Hill Street
wounded in a chair. I tell you those gentlemen in powder and ruffles,
who turned out the toes of their buckled pumps so delicately, were
terrible fellows. Swords were perpetually being drawn; bottles
after bottles were drunk; oaths roared unceasingly in conversation;
tavern-drawers and watchmen were pinked and maimed; chairmen belaboured;
citizens insulted by reeling pleasure-hunters. You have been to Cremorne
with proper "vouchers" of course? Do you remember our great theatres
thirty years ago? You were too good to go to a play. Well, you have
no idea what the playhouses were, or what the green boxes were, when
Garrick and Mrs. Pritchard were playing before them! And I, for my
children's sake, thank that good Actor in his retirement who was
the first to banish that shame from the theatre. No, madam, you are
mistaken; I do not plume myself on my superior virtue. I do not say you
are naturally better than your ancestress in her wild, rouged, gambling,
flaring tearing days; or even than poor Polly Fogle, who is just taken
up for shoplifting, and would have been hung for it a hundred years ago.
Only, I am heartily thankful that my temptations are less, having quite
enough to do with those of the present century.

So, if Harry Warrington rides down to Newmarket to the October meeting,
and loses or wins his money there; if he makes one of a party at the
Shakspeare or Bedford Head; if he dines at White's ordinary, and sits
down to macco and lansquenet afterwards; if he boxes the watch, and
makes his appearance at the Roundhouse; if he turns out for a short
space a wild dissipated, harum-scarum young Harry Warrington; I, knowing
the weakness of human nature, am not going to be surprised; and, quite
aware of my own shortcomings, don't intend to be very savage at my
neighbour's. Mr. Sampson was: in his chapel in Long Acre he whipped Vice
tremendously; gave Sin no quarter; out-cursed Blasphemy with superior
Anathemas; knocked Drunkenness down, and trampled on the prostrate brute
wallowing in the gutter; dragged out conjugal Infidelity, and pounded
her with endless stones of rhetoric--and, after service, came to dinner
at the Star and Garter, made a bowl of punch for Harry and his friends
at the Bedford Head, or took a hand at whist at Mr. Warrington's
lodgings or my Lord March's, or wherever there was a supper and good
company for him.

I often think, however, in respect of Mr. Warrington's doings at this
period of his coming to London, that I may have taken my usual degrading
and uncharitable views of him--for, you see, I have not uttered a single
word of virtuous indignation against his conduct, and if it was not
reprehensible, have certainly judged him most cruelly. O the Truthful,
O the Beautiful, O Modesty, O Benevolence, O Pudor, O Mores, O Blushing
Shame, O Namby Pamby--each with your respective capital letters to your
honoured names! O Niminy, O Piminy! how shall I dare for to go for to
say that a young man ever was a young man?

No doubt, dear young lady, I am calumniating Mr. Warrington according to
my heartless custom. As a proof here is a letter out of the Warrington
collection, from Harry to his mother in which there is not a single word
that would lead you to suppose he was leading a wild life. And such a
letter from an only son to a fond and exemplary parent, we know must be
true:--


"BOND STREET, LONDON, October 25, 1756.

"HONORD MADAM--I take up my pen to acknowledge your honored favor of 10
July per Lively Virginia packet, which has duly come to hand, forwarded
by our Bristol agent, and rejoice to hear that the prospect of the crops
is so good. 'Tis Tully who says that agriculture is the noblest pursuit;
how delightful when that pursuit is also prophetable!

"Since my last, dated from Tunbridge Wells, one or two insadence have
occurred of which it is nessasery [This word has been much operated
upon with the penknife, but is left sic, no doubt to the writer's
satisfaction.] I should advise my honored Mother. Our party there broke
up end of August: the partridge-shooting commencing. Baroness Bernstein,
whose kindness to me has been most invariable, has been to Bath, her
usual winter resort, and has made me a welcome present of a fifty-pound
bill. I rode back with Rev. Mr. Sampson, whose instruction I find
most valluble, and my cousin, Lady Maria, to Castlewood. [Could Parson
Sampson have been dictating the above remarks to Mr. Warrington?] I paid
a flying visit on the way to my dear kind friends Col. and Mrs. Lambert,
Oakhurst House, who send my honored mother their most affectionate
remembrances. The youngest Miss Lambert, I grieve to say, was dellicate;
and her parents in some anxiety.

"At Castlewood I lament to state my stay was short, owing to a quarrel
with my cousin William. He is a young man of violent passions, and alas!
addicted to liquor, when he has no controul over them. In a triffling
dispute about a horse, high words arose between us, and he aymed a blow
at me or its equivulent--which my Grandfathers my honored mothers child
could not brook. I rejoyned, and feld him to the ground, whents he was
carried almost sencelis to bed. I sent to enquire after his health in
the morning: but having no further news of him, came away to London
where I have been ever since with brief intavles of absence.

"Knowing you would wish me to see my dear Grandfathers University of
Cambridge, I rode thither lately in company with some friends, passing
through part of Harts, and lying at the famous bed of Ware. The October
meeting was just begun at Cambridge when I went. I saw the students in
their gownds and capps, and rode over to the famous Newmarket Heath,
where there happened to be some races--my friend Lord Marchs horse
Marrowbones by Cleaver coming off winner of a large steak. It was an
amusing day--the jockeys, horses, etc., very different to our poor races
at home--the betting awful--the richest noblemen here mix with the jox,
and bett all round. Cambridge pleased me: especially King's College
Chapel, of a rich but elegant Gothick.

"I have been out into the world, and am made member of the Club
at White's, where I meet gentlemen of the first fashion. My Lords
Rockingham, Carlisle, Orford, Bolingbroke, Coventry are of my friends,
introduced to me by my Lord March, of whom I have often wrote before.
Lady Coventry is a fine woman, but thinn. Every lady paints here, old
and young; so, if you and Mountain and Fanny wish to be in fashion,
I must send you out some roogepots: everybody plays--eight, ten,
card-tables at every house on every receiving-night. I am sorry to say
all do not play fair, and some do not pay fair. I have been obliged
to sit down, and do as Rome does, and have actually seen ladies whom I
could name take my counters from before my face!

"One day, his regiment the 20th being paraded in St. James's Park, a
friend of mine, Mr. Wolfe, did me the honour to present me to his
Royal Highness the Captain-General, who was most gracious; a fat, jolly
Prince, if I may speak so without disrespect, reminding me in his manner
of that unhappy General Braddock; whom we knew to our sorrow last year.
When he heard my name, and how dearest George had served and fallen in
Braddock's unfortunate campaign, he talked a great deal with me; asked
why a young fellow like me did not serve too; why I did not go to the
King of Prussia, who was a great General, and see a campaign or two;
and whether that would not be better than dawdling about at routs and
card-parties in London? I said, I would like to go with all my heart,
but was an only son now, on leave from my mother, and belonged to our
estate in Virginia. His Royal Highness said, Mr. Braddock had wrote home
accounts of Mrs. Esmond's loyalty, and that he would gladly serve me.
Mr. Wolfe and I have waited on him since, at his Royal Highness's house
in Pall Mall. The latter, who is still quite a young man, made the Scots
campaign with his Highness, whom Mr. Dempster loves so much at home. To
be sure, he was too severe: if anything can be top severe against rebels
in arms.

"Mr. Draper has had half the Stock, my late Papa's property, transferred
to my name. Until there can be no doubt of that painful loss in our
family which I would give my right hand to replace, the remaining stock
must remain in the trustees' name in behalf of him who inherited it.
Ah, dear mother! There is no day, scarce any hour, when I don't think of
him. I wish he were by me often. I feel like as if I was better when I
am thinking of him, and would like, for the honour of my family, that he
was representing of it here instead of--Honored madam, your dutiful and
affectionate son, HENRY ESMOND WARRINGTON."

"P.S.--I am like your sex, who always, they say, put their chief news in
a poscrip. I had something to tell you about a person to whom my heart
is engaged. I shall write more about it, which there is no hurry. Safice
she is a nobleman's daughter, and her family as good as our own."


"CLARGIS STREET, LONDON, October 23, 1756.

"I think, my good sister, we have been all our lives a little more than
kin and less than kind, to use the words of a poet whom your dear father
loved dearly. When you were born in our Western Principallitie, my
mother was not as old as Isaac's; but even then I was much more than old
enough to be yours. And though she gave you all she could leave or give,
including the little portion of love that ought to have been my share,
yet, if we can have good will for one another, we may learn to do
without affection: and some little kindness you owe me, for your son's
sake; as well as your father's, whom I loved and admired more than any
man I think ever I knew in this world: he was greater than almost all,
though he made no noyse in it. I have seen very many who have, and,
believe me, have found but few with such good heads and good harts as
Mr. Esmond.

"Had we been better acquainted, I might have given you some advice
regarding your young gentleman's introduction to Europe, which you would
have taken or not, as people do in this world. At least you would have
sed afterwards, 'What she counselled me was right, and had Harry done as
Madam Beatrix wisht, it had been better for him.' My good sister, it was
not for you to know, or for me to whom you never wrote to tell you,
but your boy in coming to England and Castlewood found but ill friends
there; except one, an old aunt, of whom all kind of evil hath been
spoken and sed these fifty years past--and not without cawse too,
perhaps.

"Now, I must tell Harry's mother what will doubtless scarce astonish
her, that almost everybody who knows him loves him. He is prudent of
his tongue, generous of his money, as bold as a lyon, with an imperious
domineering way that sets well upon him; you know whether he is handsome
or not: my dear, I like him none the less for not being over witty or
wise, and never cared for your sett-the-Thames afire gentlemen, who are
so much more clever than their neighbours. Your father's great friend,
Mr. Addison, seemed to me but a supercillious prig, and his follower,
Sir Dick Steele, was not pleasant in his cupps, nor out of 'em. And
(revenons a luy) your Master Harry will certainly, pot burn the river
up with his wits. Of book-learning he is as ignorant as any lord in
England, and for this I hold him none the worse. If Heaven have not
given him a turn that way, 'tis of no use trying to bend him.

"Considering the place he is to hold in his own colony when he returns,
and the stock he comes from, let me tell you, that he hath not means
enough allowed him to support his station, and is likely to make the
more depence from the narrowness of his income--from sheer despair
breaking out of all bounds, and becoming extravagant, which is not his
turn. But he likes to live as well as the rest of his company, and,
between ourselves, has fell into some of the finist and most rakish in
England. He thinks 'tis for the honour of the family not to go back, and
many a time calls for ortolans and champaign when he would as leaf dine
with a stake and a mugg of beer. And in this kind of spirit I have no
doubt from what he hath told me in his talk (which is very naif, as the
French say), that his mamma hath encouraged him in his high opinion of
himself. We women like our belongings to have it, however little we love
to pay the cost. Will you have your ladd make a figar in London? Trebble
his allowance at the very least, and his Aunt Bernstein (with his
honored mamma's permission) will add a little more on to whatever summ
you give him. Otherwise he will be spending the little capital I learn
he has in this country, which, when a ladd once begins to manger, there
is very soon an end to the loaf. Please God, I shall be able to leave
Henry Esmond's grandson something at my death; but my savings are small,
and the pension with which my gracious Sovereign hath endowed me dies
with me. As for feu M. de Bernstein, he left only debt at his decease:
the officers of his Majesty's Electoral Court of Hannover are but
scantily paid.

"A lady who is at present very high in his Majesty's confidence hath
taken a great phancy to your ladd, and will take an early occasion to
bring him to the Sovereign's favorable notice. His Royal Highness the
Duke he hath seen. If live in America he must, why should not Mr. Esmond
Warrington return as Governor of Virginia, and with a title to his name?
That is what I hope for him.

"Meanwhile, I must be candid with you, and tell you I fear he hath
entangled himself here in a very silly engagement. Even to marry an
old woman for money is scarce pardonable--the game ne valant gueres la
chandelle--Mr. Bernstein, when alive, more than once assured me of this
fact, and I believe him, poor gentleman! to engage yourself to an old
woman without money, and to marry her merely because you have promised
her, this seems to me a follie which only very young lads fall into,
and I fear Mr. Warrington is one. How, or for what consideration, I know
not, but my niece Maria Esmond hath escamote a promise from Harry. He
knows nothing of her antecedens, which I do. She hath laid herself out
for twenty husbands these twenty years past. I care not how she hath
got the promise from him. 'Tis a sin and a shame that a woman more than
forty years old should surprize the honour of a child like that, and
hold him to his word. She is not the woman she pretends to be. A horse
jockey (he saith) cannot take him in--but a woman!

"I write this news to you advisedly, displeasant as it must be. Perhaps
'twill bring you to England: but I would be very cautious, above all,
very gentle, for the bitt will instantly make his high spirit restive.
I fear the property is entailed, so that threats of cutting him off from
it will not move Maria. Otherwise I know her to be so mercenary that
(though she really hath a great phancy for this handsome ladd) without
money she would not hear of him. All I could, and more than I ought, I
have done to prevent the match. What and more I will not say in writing;
but that I am, for Henry Esmond's sake, his grandson's sincerest friend,
and madam,--Your faithful sister and servant, BEATRIX BARONESS DE
BERNSTEIN.

"To Mrs. Esmond Warrington of Castlewood, in Virginia."


On the back of this letter is written, in Madam Esmond's hand, "My
sister Bernstein's letter, received with Henry's December 24 on receipt
of which it was determined my son should instantly go home."




CHAPTER XLII. Fortunatus Nimium


Though Harry Warrington persisted in his determination to keep that
dismal promise which his cousin had extracted from him, we trust no
benevolent reader will think so ill of him as to suppose that the
engagement was to the young fellow's taste, and that he would not be
heartily glad to be rid of it. Very likely the beating administered to
poor Will was to this end; and Harry may have thought, "A boxing-match
between us is sure to bring on a quarrel with the family; in the quarrel
with the family, Maria may take her brother's side. I, of course,
will make no retraction or apology. Will, in that case, may call me to
account, when I know which is the better man. In the midst of the feud,
