  Have Zeus upon his shield, a saving sign.

CHORUS

  High faith is mine that he whose shield
  Bears, against Zeus, the thing of hate.
  The giant Typhon, thus revealed,
  A monster loathed of gods eterne
  And mortal men--this doom shall earn
  A shattered skull, before the gate!

THE SPY

  Heaven send it so!
  A fifth assailant now
  Is set against our fifth, the northern, gate,
  Fronting the death-mound where Amphion lies
  The child of Zeus.

  This foeman vows his faith,
  Upon a mystic spear-head which he deems
  More holy than a godhead and more sure
  To find its mark than any glance of eye,
  That, will they, nill they, he will storm and sack
  The hold of the Cadmeans. Such his oath--
  His, the bold warrior, yet of childish years,
  A bud of beauty's foremost flower, the son
  Of Zeus and of the mountain maid. I mark
  How the soft down is waxing on his cheek,
  Thick and close-growing in its tender prime--
  In name, not mood, is he a maiden's child--
  Parthenopaeus; large and bright his eyes
  But fierce the wrath wherewith he fronts the gate:
  Yet not unheralded he takes his stand
  Before the portal; on his brazen shield,
  The rounded screen and shelter of his form,
  I saw him show the ravening Sphinx, the fiend
  That shamed our city--how it glared and moved,
  Clamped on the buckler, wrought in high relief!
  And in its claws did a Cadmean bear--
  Nor heretofore, for any single prey,
  Sped she aloft, through such a storm of darts
  As now awaits her. So our foe is here--
  Like, as I deem, to ply no stinted trade
  In blood and broil, but traffick as is meet
  In fierce exchange for his long wayfaring!

ETEOCLES

  Ah, may they meet the doom they think to bring--
  They and their impious vaunts--from those on high!
  So should they sink, hurled down to deepest death!
  This foe, at least, by thee Arcadian styled,
  Is faced by one who bears no braggart sign,
  But his hand sees to smite, where blows avail--
  Actor, own brother to Hyperbius!
  He will not let a boast without a blow
  Stream through our gates and nourish our despair,
  Nor give him way who on his hostile shield
  Bears the brute image of the loathly Sphinx!
  Blocked at the gate, she will rebuke the man
  Who strives to thrust her forward, when she feels
  Thick crash of blows, up to the city wall.
  With Heaven's goodwill, my forecast shall be true.

CHORUS

  Home to my heart the vaunting goes,
    And, quick with terror, on my head
  Rises my hair, at sound of those
    Who wildly, impiously rave!
  If gods there be, to them I plead--
    _Give them to darkness and the grave_.

THE SPY

  Fronting the sixth gate stands another foe,
  Wisest of warriors, bravest among seers--
  Such must I name Amphiaraus: he,
  Set steadfast at the Homoloid gate,
  Berates strong Tydeus with reviling words--
  _The man of blood, the bane of state and home,
  To Argos, arch-allurer to all ill,
  Evoker of the fury-fiend of hell,
  Death's minister, and counsellor of wrong
  Unto Adrastus in this fatal field_.
  Ay, and with eyes upturned and mien of scorn
  He chides thy brother Polynices too
  At his desert, and once and yet again
  Dwells hard and meaningly upon his name
  Where it saith _glory_ yet importeth _feud_.
  _Yea, such thou art in act, and such thy grace
  In sight of Heaven, and such in aftertime
  Thy fame, for lips and ears of mortal men!
  "He strove to sack the city of his sires
  And temples of her gods, and brought on her
  An alien armament of foreign foes.
  The fountain of maternal blood outpoured
  What power can staunch? even so, thy fatherland
  Once by thine ardent malice stormed and ta'en,
  Shall ne'er join force with thee."    For me, I know
  It doth remain to let my blood enrich
  The border of this land that loves me not--
  Blood of a prophet, in a foreign grave!
  Now, for the battle! I foreknow my doom,
  Yet it shall be with honour_. So he spake,
  The prophet, holding up his targe of bronze
  Wrought without blazon, to the ears of men
  Who stood around and heeded not his word.
  For on no bruit and rumour of great deeds,
  But on their doing, is his spirit set,
  And in his heart he reaps a furrow rich,
  Wherefrom the foison of good counsel springs.
  Against him, send brave heart and hand of might,
  For the god-lover is man's fiercest foe.

ETEOCLES

  Out on the chance that couples mortal men,
  Linking the just and impious in one!
  In every issue, the one curse is this--
  Companionship with men of evil heart!
  A baneful harvest, let none gather it!
  The field of sin is rank, and brings forth death
  At whiles a righteous man who goes aboard
  With reckless mates, a horde of villainy,
  Dies by one death with that detested crew;
  At whiles the just man, joined with citizens
  Ruthless to strangers, recking nought of Heaven,
  Trapped, against nature, in one net with them,
  Dies by God's thrust and all-including blow.
  So will this prophet die, even Oecleus' child,
  Sage, just, and brave, and loyal towards Heaven,
  Potent in prophecy, but mated here
  With men of sin, too boastful to be wise!
  Long is their road, and they return no more,
  And, at their taking-off, by hand of Zeus,
  The prophet too shall take the downward way.
  He will not--so I deem--assail the gate--
  Not as through cowardice or feeble will,
  But as one knowing to what end shall be
  Their struggle in the battle, if indeed
  Fruit of fulfilment lie in Loxias' word.
  He speaketh not, unless to speak avails!
  Yet, for more surety, we will post a man,
  Strong Lasthenes, as warder of the gate,
  Stern to the foeman; he hath age's skill,
  Mated with youthful vigour, and an eye
  Forward, alert; swift too his hand, to catch
  The fenceless interval 'twixt shield and spear!
  Yet man's good fortune lies in hand of Heaven.

CHORUS

  Unto our loyal cry, ye gods, give ear!
  Save, save the city! turn away the spear,
    Send on the foemen fear!
  Outside the rampart fall they, rent and riven
    Beneath the bolt of heaven!

THE SPY

  Last, let me name yon seventh antagonist,
  Thy brother's self, at the seventh portal set--
  Hear with what wrath he imprecates our doom,
  Vowing to mount the wall, though banished hence,
  And peal aloud the wild exulting cry--
  _The town is ta'en_--then clash his sword with thine,
  Giving and taking death in close embrace,
  Or, if thou 'scapest, flinging upon thee,
  As robber of his honour and his home,
  The doom of exile such as he has borne.
  So clamours he and so invokes the gods
  Who guard his race and home, to hear and heed
  The curse that sounds in Polynices' name!
  He bears a round shield, fresh from forge and fire,
  And wrought upon it is a twofold sign--
  For lo, a woman leads decorously
  The figure of a warrior wrought in gold;
  And thus the legend runs--_I Justice am,
  And I will bring the hero home again,
  To hold once more his place within this town,
  Once more to pace his sire's ancestral hall_.
  Such are the symbols, by our foemen shown--
  Now make thine own decision, whom to send
  Against this last opponent! I have said--
  Nor canst thou in my tidings find a flaw--
  Thine is it, now, to steer the course aright.

ETEOCLES

  Ah me, the madman, and the curse of Heaven!
  And woe for us, the lamentable line
  Of Oedipus, and woe that in this house
  Our father's curse must find accomplishment!
  But now, a truce to tears and loud lament,
  Lest they should breed a still more rueful wail!
  As for this Polynices, named too well,
  Soon shall we know how his device shall end--
  Whether the gold-wrought symbols on his shield,
  In their mad vaunting and bewildered pride,
  Shall guide him as a victor to his home!
  For had but Justice, maiden-child of Zeus,
  Stood by his act and thought, it might have been!
  Yet never, from the day he reached the light
  Out of the darkness of his mother's womb,
  Never in childhood, nor in youthful prime,
  Nor when his chin was gathering its beard,
  Hath Justice hailed or claimed him as her own.
  Therefore I deem not that she standeth now
  To aid him in this outrage on his home!
  Misnamed, in truth, were Justice, utterly,
  If to impiety she lent her hand.
  Sure in this faith, I will myself go forth
  And match me with him; who hath fairer claim?
  Ruler, against one fain to snatch the rule,
  Brother with brother matched, and foe with foe,
  Will I confront the issue. To the wall!

CHORUS

  O thou true heart, O child of Oedipus,
  Be not, in wrath, too like the man whose name
  Murmurs an evil omen! 'Tis enough
  That Cadmus' clan should strive with Argos' host,
  For blood there is that can atone that stain!
  But--brother upon brother dealing death--
  Not time itself can expiate the sin!

ETEOCLES

  If man find hurt, yet clasp his honour still,
  'Tis well; the dead have honour, nought beside.
  Hurt, with dishonour, wins no word of praise!

CHORUS

      Ah, what is thy desire?
    Let not the lust and ravin of the sword
    Bear thee adown the tide accursed, abhorred!
  Fling off thy passion's rage, thy spirit's prompting dire!

ETEOCLES

  Nay--since the god is urgent for our doom,
  Let Laius' house, by Phoebus loathed and scorned,
  Follow the gale of destiny, and win
  Its great inheritance, the gulf of hell!

CHORUS

    Ruthless thy craving is--
  Craving for kindred and forbidden blood
    To be outpoured--a sacrifice imbrued
  With sin, a bitter fruit of murderous enmities!

ETEOCLES

  Yea, my own father's fateful Curse proclaims--
  A ghastly presence, and her eyes are dry--
  _Strike! honour is the prize, not life prolonged_!

CHORUS

  Ah, be not urged of her! for none shall dare
  To call thee _coward_, in thy throned estate!
  Will not the Fury in her sable pall
  Pass outward from these halls, what time the gods
  Welcome a votive offering from our hands?

ETEOCLES

  The gods! long since they hold us in contempt,
  Scornful of gifts thus offered by the lost!
  Why should we fawn and flinch away from doom?

CHORUS

  Now, when it stands beside thee! for its power
  May, with a changing gust of milder mood,
  Temper the blast that bloweth wild and rude
    And frenzied, in this hour!

ETEOCLES

  Ay, kindled by the curse of Oedipus--
  All too prophetic, out of dreamland came
  The vision, meting out our sire's estate!

CHORUS

  Heed women's voices, though thou love them not!

ETEOCLES

  Say aught that may avail, but stint thy words.

CHORUS

  Go not thou forth to guard the seventh gate!

ETEOCLES

  Words shall not blunt the edge of my resolve.

CHORUS

  Yet the god loves to let the weak prevail.

ETEOCLES

  That to a swordsman, is no welcome word!

CHORUS

  Shall thine own brother's blood be victory's palm?

ETEOCLES

  Ill which the gods have sent thou canst not shun!
                                            [_Exit_ ETEOCLES. CHORUS

  I shudder in dread of the power,
      abhorred by the gods of high heaven,
  The ruinous curse of the home
      till roof-tree and rafter be riven!
  Too true are the visions of ill,
      too true the fulfilment they bring
  To the curse that was spoken of old
      by the frenzy and wrath of the king!
  Her will is the doom of the children,
      and Discord is kindled amain,
  And strange is the Lord of Division,
      who cleaveth the birthright in twain,--
  The edged thing, born of the north,
      the steel that is ruthless and keen,
  Dividing in bitter division
      the lot of the children of teen!
  Not the wide lowland around,
      the realm of their sire, shall they have,
  Yet enough for the dead to inherit,
      the pitiful space of a grave!

  Ah, but when kin meets kin, when sire and child,
    Unknowing, are defiled
  By shedding common blood, and when the pit
    Of death devoureth it,
  Drinking the clotted stain, the gory dye--
    Who, who can purify?
  Who cleanse pollution, where the ancient bane
    Rises and reeks again?
  Whilome in olden days the sin was wrought,
    And swift requital brought--
  Yea on the children of the child came still
    New heritage of ill!
  For thrice Apollo spoke this word divine,
    From Delphi's central shrine,
  To Laius--_Die thou childless_! thus alone
    Can the land's weal be won!
  But vainly with his wife's desire he strove,
    And gave himself to love,
  Begetting Oedipus, by whom he died,
    The fateful parricide!
  The sacred seed-plot, his own mother's womb,
    He sowed, his house's doom,
  A root of blood! by frenzy lured, they came
    Unto their wedded shame.
  And now the waxing surge, the wave of fate,
    Rolls on them, triply great--
  One billow sinks, the next towers, high and dark,
    Above our city's bark--
  Only the narrow barrier of the wall
    Totters, as soon to fall;
  And, if our chieftains in the storm go down,
    What chance can save the town?
  Curses, inherited from long ago,
    Bring heavy freight of woe:
  Rich stores of merchandise o'erload the deck,
    Near, nearer comes the wreck--
  And all is lost, cast out upon the wave,
    Floating, with none to save!

  Whom did the gods, whom did the chief of men,
    Whom did each citizen
  In crowded concourse, in such honour hold,
    As Oedipus of old,
  When the grim fiend, that fed on human prey,
    He took from us away?

  But when, in the fulness of days,
      he knew of his bridal unblest,
  A twofold horror he wrought,
