England. All this march we could neither see Savage nor Towne."*

     * Percy's "Discourse."

The ships now stood into those waters which we call Hampton Roads.
Finding a good channel and taking heart therefrom, they named a horn
of land Point Comfort. Now we call it Old Point Comfort. Presently they
began to go up a great river which they christened the James. To English
eyes it was a river hugely wide. They went slowly, with pauses and
waitings and adventures. They consulted their paper of instructions;
they scanned the shore for good places for their fort, for their
town. It was May, and all the rich banks were in bloom. It seemed a
sweet-scented world of promise. They saw Indians, but had with these
no untoward encounters. Upon the twelfth of May they came to a point
of land which they named Archer's Hope. Landing here, they saw "many
squirels, conies, Black Birds with crimson wings, and divers other
Fowles and Birds of divers and sundrie colours of crimson, watchet,
Yellow, Greene, Murry, and of divers other hewes naturally without any
art using... store of Turkie nests and many Egges." They liked this
place, but for shoal water the ships could not come near to land. So on
they went, eight miles up the river.

Here, upon the north side, thirty-odd miles from the mouth, they came to
a certain peninsula, an island at high water. Two or three miles long,
less than a mile and a half in breadth, at its widest place composed of
marsh and woodland, it ran into the river, into six fathom water, where
the ships might be moored to the trees. It was this convenient deep
water that determined matters. Here came to anchor the Susan Constant,
the Goodspeed, and the Discovery. Here the colonists went ashore. Here
the members of the Council were sworn, and for the first President was
chosen Edward-Maria Wingfield. Here, the first roaming and excitement
abated, they began to unlade the ships, and to build the fort and also
booths for their present sleeping. A church, too, they must have at
once, and forthwith made it with a stretched sail for roof and a board
between two trees whereon to rest Bible and Book of Prayer. Here, for
the first time in all this wilderness, rang English axe in American
forest, here was English law and an English town, here sounded English
speech. Here was placed the germ of that physical, mental, and,
spiritual power which is called the United States of America.



CHAPTER III. JAMESTOWN

In historians' accounts of the first months at Jamestown, too much,
perhaps, has been made of faction and quarrel. All this was there. Men
set down in a wilderness, amid Virginian heat, men, mostly young, of the
active rather than the reflective type, men uncompanioned by women and
children, men beset with dangers and sufferings that were soon to tag
heavily their courage and patience--such men naturally quarreled and
made up, quarreled again and again made up, darkly suspected each the
other, as they darkly suspected the forest and the Indian; then, need of
friendship dominating, embraced each the other, felt the fascination
of the forest, and trusted the Indian. However much they suspected
rebellion, treacheries, and desertions, they practiced fidelities,
though to varying degrees, and there was in each man's breast more or
less of courage and good intent. They were prone to call one another
villain, but actual villainy--save as jealousy, suspicion, and hatred
are villainy--seems rarely to have been present. Even one who was judged
a villain and shot for his villainy seems hardly to have deserved such
fate. Jamestown peninsula turned out to be feverous; fantastic
hopes were matched by strange fears; there were homesickness,
incompatibilities, unfamiliar food and water and air, class differences
in small space, some petty tyrannies, and very certain dangers. The
worst summer heat was not yet, and the fort was building. Trees must be
felled, cabins raised, a field cleared for planting, fishing and hunting
carried on. And some lading, some first fruits, must go back in the
ships. No gold or rubies being as yet found, they would send instead
cedar and sassafras--hard work enough, there at Jamestown, in the
Virginian low-country, with May warm as northern midsummer, and all the
air charged with vapor from the heated river, with exhalations from the
rank forest, from the many marshes.

"The first night of our landing, about midnight," says George Percy in
his "Discourse", "there came some Savages sayling close to our quarter;
presently there was an alarm given; upon that the savages ran away....
Not long after there came two Savages that seemed to be Commanders,
bravely dressed, with Crownes of coloured haire upon their heads, which
came as Messengers from the Werowance of Paspihe, telling us that their
Werowance was comming and would be merry with us with a fat Deere. The
eighteenth day the Werowance of Paspihe came himselfe to our quarter,
with one hundred Savages armed which guarded him in very warlike manner
with Bowes and Arrowes." Some misunderstanding arose. "The Werowance,
[seeing] us take to our armes, went suddenly away with all his company
in great anger." The nineteenth day Percy with several others going into
the woods back of the peninsula met with a narrow path traced through
the forest. Pursuing it, they came to an Indian village. "We Stayed
there a while and had of them strawberries and other thinges.... One
of the Savages brought us on the way to the Woodside where there was a
Garden of Tobacco and other fruits and herbes; he gathered Tobacco and
distributed to every one of us, so wee departed."

It is evident that neither race yet knew if it was to be war or peace.
What the white man thought and came to think of the red man has been set
down often enough; there is scantier testimony as to what was the red
man's opinion of the white man. Here imagination must be called upon.

Newport's instructions from the London Council included exploration
before he should leave the colonists and bring the three ships back to
England. Now, with the pinnace and a score of men, among whom was John
Smith, he went sixty miles up the river to where the flow is broken by
a world of boulders and islets, to the hills crowned today by Richmond,
capital of Virginia. The first adventurers called these rapid and
whirling waters the Falls of the Farre West. To their notion they must
lie at least half-way across the breadth of America. Misled by Indian
stories, they believed and wrote that five or six days' march from the
Falls of the Farre West, even through the thick forest, would bring them
to the South Sea. The Falls of the Farre West, where at Richmond the
James goes with a roaring sound around tree-crowned islet--it is strange
to think that they once marked our frontier! How that frontier has been
pushed westward is a romance indeed. And still, today, it is but a five
or six days' journey to that South Sea sought by those early Virginians.
The only condition for us is that we shall board a train. Tomorrow, with
the airship, the South Sea may come nearer yet!

The Indians of this part of the earth were of the great Algonquin
family, and the tribes with which the colonists had now to do
were drawn, probably by a polity based on blood ties, into a loose
confederation within the larger mass. Newport was "told that the name of
the river was Powhatan, the name of the chief Powhatan, and the name of
the people Powhatans." But it seemed that the chief Powhatan was not at
this village but at another and a larger place named Werowocomoco, on
a second great river in the back country to the north and east of
Jamestown. Newport and his men were "well entreated" by the Indians.
"But yet," says Percy, "the Savages murmured at our planting in the
Countrie."

The party did not tarry up the river. Back came their boat through the
bright weather, between the verdurous banks, all green and flower-tinted
save where might be seen the brown of Indian clearings with bark-covered
huts and thin, up-curling blue smoke. Before them once more rose
Jamestown, palisaded now, and riding before it the three ships. And
here there barked an English dog, and here were Englishmen to welcome
Englishmen. Both parties had news to tell, but the town had most. On the
26th of May, Indians had made an attack four hundred of them with the
Werowance of Paspihe. One Englishman had been killed, a number wounded.
Four of the Council had each man his wound.

Newport must now lift anchor and sail away to England. He left at
Jamestown a fort "having three Bulwarkes at every corner like a halfe
Moone, and foure or five pieces of Artillerie mounted in them," a street
or two of reed-thatched cabins, a church to match, a storehouse, a
market-place and drill ground, and about all a stout palisade with a
gate upon the river side. He left corn sown and springing high, and some
food in the storehouse. And he left a hundred Englishmen who had now
tasted of the country fare and might reasonably fear no worse chance
than had yet befallen. Newport promised to return in twenty weeks with
full supplies.

John Smith says that his enemies, chief amongst whom was Wingfield,
would have sent him with Newport to England, there to stand trial for
attempted mutiny, whereupon he demanded a trial in Virginia, and got it
and was fully cleared. He now takes his place in the Council, beforetime
denied him. He has good words only for Robert Hunt, the chaplain, who,
he says, went from one to the other with the best of counsel. Were they
not all here in the wilderness together, with the savages hovering about
them like the Philistines about the Jews of old? How should the English
live, unless among themselves they lived in amity? So for the moment
factions were reconciled, and all went to church to partake of the Holy
Communion.

Newport sailed, having in the holds of his ships sassafras and valuable
woods but no gold to meet the London Council's hopes, nor any certain
news of the South Sea. In due time he reached England, and in due time
he turned and came again to Virginia. But long was the sailing to and
fro between the daughter country and the mother country and the lading
and unlading at either shore. It was seven months before Newport came
again.

While he sails, and while England-in-America watches for him longingly,
look for a moment at the attitude of Spain, falling old in the
procession of world-powers, but yet with grip and cunning left. Spain
misliked that English New World venture. She wished to keep these seas
for her own; only, with waning energies, she could not always enforce
what she conceived to be her right. By now there was seen to be much
clay indeed in the image. Philip the Second was dead; and Philip the
Third, an indolent king, lived in the Escurial.

Pedro de Zuniga is the Spanish Ambassador to the English Court. He has
orders from Philip to keep him informed, and this he does, and from time
to time suggests remedies. He writes of Newport and the First Supply.
"Sire.... Captain Newport makes haste to return with some people--and
there have combined merchants and other persons who desire to establish
themselves there; because it appears to them the most suitable place
that they have discovered for privateering and making attacks upon
the merchant fleets of Your Majesty. Your Majesty will command to see
whether they will be allowed to remain there.... They are in a great
state of excitement about that place, and very much afraid lest Your
Majesty should drive them out of it.... And there are so many... who
speak already of sending people to that country, that it is advisable
not to be too slow; because they will soon be found there with large
numbers of people."* In Spain the Council of State takes action upon
Zuniga's communications and closes a report to the King with these
words: "The actual taking possession will be to drive out of Virginia
all who are there now, before they are reenforced, and.... it will be
well to issue orders that the small fleet stationed to the windward,
which for so many years has been in state of preparation, should be
instantly made ready and forthwith proceed to drive out all who are now
in Virginia, since their small numbers will make this an easy task, and
this will suffice to prevent them from again coming to that place." Upon
this is made a Royal note: "Let such measures be taken in this business
as may now and hereafter appear proper."

     * Brown's "Genesis of the United States", vol. 1, pp. 116-118.


It would seem that there was cause indeed for watching down the river
by that small, small town that was all of the United States! But there
follows a Spanish memorandum. "The driving out... by the fleet stationed
to the windward will be postponed for a long time because delay will
be caused by getting it ready."* Delay followed delay, and old
Spain--conquistador Spain--grew older, and the speech on Jamestown
Island is still English.

     * Op. cit., vol. 1, p. 127.


Christopher Newport was gone; no ships--the last refuges, the last
possibilities for home-turning, should the earth grow too hard and the
sky too black--rode upon the river before the fort. Here was the summer
heat. A heavy breath rose from immemorial marshes, from the ancient
floor of the forest. When clouds gathered and storms burst, they amazed
the heart with their fearful thunderings and lightnings. The colonists
had no well, but drank from the river, and at neither high nor low tide
found the water wholesome. While the ships were here they had help of
ship stores, but now they must subsist upon the grain that they had in
the storehouse, now scant and poor enough. They might fish and hunt, but
against such resources stood fever and inexperience and weakness, and in
the woods the lurking savages. The heat grew greater, the water
worse, the food less. Sickness began. Work became toil. Men pined from
homesickness, then, coming together, quarreled with a weak violence,
then dropped away again into corners and sat listlessly with hanging
heads.

"The sixth of August there died John Asbie of the bloodie Flixe. The
ninth day died George Flowre of the swelling. The tenth day died William
Bruster gentleman, of a wound given by the Savages.... The fourteenth
day Jerome Alikock, Ancient, died of a wound, the same day Francis
Mid-winter, Edward Moris, Corporall, died suddenly. The fifteenth day
their died Edward Browne and Stephen Galthrope. The sixteenth day their
died Thomas Gower gentleman. The seventeenth day their died Thomas
Mounslie. The eighteenth day theer died Robert Pennington and John
Martine gentlemen. The nineteenth day died Drue Piggase gentleman.

"The two and twentieth day of August there died Captain Bartholomew
Gosnold one of our Councell, he was honourably buried having all the
Ordnance in the Fort shot off, with many vollies of small shot....

"The foure and twentieth day died Edward Harrington and George Walker
and were buried the same day. The six and twentieth day died Kenelme
Throgmortine. The seven and twentieth day died William Roods. The eight
and twentieth day died Thomas Stoodie, Cape Merchant. The fourth day of
September died Thomas Jacob, Sergeant. The fifth day there died Benjamin
Beast...."*

     * Percy's "Discourse."

Extreme misery makes men blind, unjust, and weak of judgment. Here was
gross wretchedness, and the colonists proceeded to blame A and B and
C, lost all together in the wilderness. It was this councilor or that
councilor, this ambitious one or that one, this or that almost certainly
ascertained traitor! Wanting to steal the pinnace, the one craft left by
Newport, wanting to steal away in the pinnace and leave the mass--small
enough mass now!--without boat or raft or straw to cling to, made the
favorite accusation. Upon this count, early in September, Wingfield
was deposed from the presidency. Ratcliffe succeeded him, but presently
Ratcliffe fared no better. One councilor fared worse, for George
Kendall, accused of plotting mutiny and pinnace stealing, was given
trial, found guilty, and shot.

"The eighteenth day [of September] died one Ellis Kinistone.... The same
day at night died one Richard Simmons. The nineteenth day there died one
Thomas Mouton...."

What went on, in Virginia, in the Indian mind, can only be conjectured.
As little as the white mind could it foresee the trend of events or
the ultimate outcome of present policy. There was exhibited a see-saw
policy, or perhaps no policy at all, only the emotional fit as it came
hot or cold. The friendly act trod upon the hostile, the hostile upon
the friendly. Through the miserable summer the hostile was uppermost;
then with the autumn appeared the friendly mood, fortunate enough for
"the most feeble wretches" at Jamestown. Indians came laden with maize
and venison. The heat was a thing of the past; cool and bracing weather
appeared; and with it great flocks of wild fowl, "swans, geese, ducks
and cranes." Famine vanished, sickness decreased. The dead were dead.
Of the hundred and four persons left by Newport less than fifty had
survived. But these may be thought of as indeed seasoned.



CHAPTER IV. JOHN SMITH

With the cool weather began active exploration, the object in chief the
gathering from the Indians, by persuasion or trade or show of force,
food for the approaching winter. Here John Smith steps forward as
leader.

There begins a string of adventures of that hardy and romantic
individual. How much in Smith's extant narrations is exaggeration,
how much is dispossession of others' merits in favor of his own, it is
difficult now to say.* A thing that one little likes is his persistent
depreciation of his fellows. There is but one Noble Adventurer, and that
one is John Smith. On the other hand evident enough are his courage and
initiative, his ingenuity, and his rough, practical sagacity. Let us
take him at something less than his own valuation, but yet as valuable
enough. As for his adventures, real or fictitious, one may see in
them epitomized the adventures of many and many men, English,
French, Spanish, Dutch, blazers of the material path for the present
civilization.

     * Those who would strike John Smith from the list of
     historians will commend the author's caution to the reader
     before she lets the Captain tell his own tale. Whatever
     Smith may not have been, he was certainly a consummate
     raconteur. He belongs with the renowned story-tellers of the
     world, if not with the veracious chroniclers.--Editor.

In December, rather autumn than winter in this region, he starts with
the shallop and a handful of men up a tributary river that they have
learned to call the Chickahominy. He is going for corn, but there is
also an idea that he may hear news of that wished-for South Sea.

The Chickahominy proved itself a wonderland of swamp and tree-choked
streams. Somewhere up its chequered reaches Smith left the shallop with
men to guard it, and, taking two of the party with two Indian guides,
went on in a canoe up a narrower way. Presently those left with the
boat incautiously go ashore and are attacked by Indians. One is taken,
tortured, and slain. The others get back to their boat and so away, down
the Chickahominy and into the now somewhat familiar James. But Smith
with his two men, Robinson and Emry, are now alone in the wilderness, up
among narrow waters, brown marshes, fallen and obstructing tree trunks.
Now come the men-hunting Indians--the King of Pamaunck, says Smith, with
two hundred bowmen. Robinson and Emry are shot full of arrows. Smith
is wounded, but with his musket deters the foe, killing several of the
savages. His eyes upon them, he steps backward, hoping he may beat them
off till he shall recover the shallop, but meets with the ill chance of
a boggy and icy stream into which he stumbles, and here is taken.

See him now before "Opechancanough, King of Pamaunck!" Savages and
procedures of the more civilized with savages have, the world over, a
family resemblance. Like many a man before him and after, Smith casts
about for a propitiatory wonder. He has with him, so fortunately, "a
round ivory double-compass dial." This, with a genial manner, he would
present to Opechancanough. The savages gaze, cannot touch through the
glass the moving needle, grunt their admiration. Smith proceeds,
with gestures and what Indian words he knows, to deliver a scientific
lecture. Talking is best anyhow, will give them less time in which to
think of those men he shot. He tells them that the world is round, and
discourses about the sun and moon and stars and the alternation of day
and night. He speaks with eloquence of the nations of the earth, of
white men, yellow men, black men, and red men, of his own country and
its grandeurs, and would explain antipodes.

Apparently all is waste breath and of no avail, for in an hour see him
bound to a tree, a sturdy figure of a man, bearded and moustached, with
a high forehead, clad in shirt and jerkin and breeches and hosen and
shoon, all by this time, we may be sure, profoundly in need of repair.
The tree and Smith are ringed by Indians, each of whom has an arrow
fitted to his bow. Almost one can hear a knell ringing in the forest!
But Opechancanough, moved by the compass, or willing to hear more of
seventeenth-century science, raises his arm and stops the execution.
Unbinding Smith, they take him with them as a trophy. Presently all
reach their town of Orapaks.

Here he was kindly treated. He saw Indian dances, heard Indian orations.
The women and children pressed about him and admired him greatly. Bread
and venison were given him in such quantity that he feared that they
meant to fatten and eat him. It is, moreover, dangerous to be considered
powerful where one is scarcely so. A young Indian lay mortally ill, and
they took Smith to him and demanded that forthwith he be cured. If the
white man could kill--how they were not able to see--he could likewise
doubtless restore life. But the Indian presently died. His father,
crying out in fury, fell upon the stranger who could have done so much
and would not! Here also coolness saved the white man.

Smith was now led in triumph from town to town through the winter woods.
The James was behind him, the Chickahominy also; he was upon new great
rivers, the Pamunkey and the Rappahannock. All the villages were much
alike, alike the still woods, the sere patches from which the corn had
been taken, the bear, the deer, the foxes, the turkeys that were
met with, the countless wild fowl. Everywhere were the same curious,
crowding savages, the fires, the rustic cookery, the covering skins
of deer and fox and otter, the oratory, the ceremonial dances, the
manipulations of medicine men or priests--these last, to the Englishmen,
pure "devils with antique tricks." Days were consumed in this going from
place to place. At one point was produced a bag of gunpowder, gained
in some way from Jamestown. It was being kept with care to go into the
earth in the spring and produce, when summer came, some wonderful crop.

Opechancanough was a great chief, but higher than he moved Powhatan,
chief of chiefs. This Indian was yet a stranger to the English in
Virginia. Now John Smith was to make his acquaintance.

Werowocomoco stood upon a bluff on the north side of York River. Here
came Smith and his captors, around them the winter woods, before them
the broad blue river. Again the gathered Indians, men and women, again
the staring, the handling, the more or less uncomplimentary remarks;
then into the Indian ceremonial lodge he was pushed. Here sat the chief
of chiefs, Powhatan, and he had on a robe of raccoon skins with all
the tails hanging. About him sat his chief men, and behind these were
gathered women. All were painted, head and shoulders; all wore, bound
about the head, adornments meant to strike with beauty or with terror;
all had chains of beads. Smith does not report what he said to Powhatan,
or Powhatan to him. He says that the Queen of Appamatuck brought him
water for his hands, and that there was made a great feast. When this
was over, the Indians held a council. It ended in a death decree.
Incontinently Smith was seized, dragged to a great stone lying before
Powhatan, forced down and bound. The Indians made ready their clubs;
meaning to batter his brains out. Then, says Smith, occurred the
miracle.

A child of Powhatan's, a very young girl called Pocahontas, sprang from
among the women, ran to the stone, and with her own body sheltered that
of the Englishman....*

     * A vast amount of erudition has been expended by historical
     students to establish the truth or falsity of this
     Pocahontas story. The author has refrained from entering the
     controversy, preferring to let the story stand as it was
     told by Captain Smith in his "General History" (1624).--
     Editor.

What, in Powhatan's mind, of hesitation, wiliness, or good nature backed
his daughter's plea is not known. But Smith did not have his brains
beaten out. He was released, taken by some form of adoption into the
tribe, and set to using those same brains in the making of hatchets and
ornaments. A few days passed and he was yet further enlarged. Powhatan
longed for two of the great guns possessed by the white men and for a
grindstone. He would send Smith back to Jamestown if in return he
was sure of getting those treasures. It is to be supposed that Smith
promised him guns and grindstones as many as could be borne away.

So Werowocomoco saw him depart, twelve Indians for escort. He had
leagues to go, a night or two to spend upon the march. Lying in the
huge winter woods, he expected, on the whole, death before morning.
But "Almighty God mollified the hearts of those sterne barbarians with
compassion." And so he was restored to Jamestown, where he found more
dead than when he left. Some there undoubtedly welcomed him as a strong
man restored when there was need of strong men. Others, it seems, would
as lief that Pocahontas had not interfered.

The Indians did not get their guns and grindstones. But Smith loaded a
demi-culverin with stones and fired upon a great tree, icicle-hung. The
gun roared, the boughs broke, the ice fell rattling, the smoke spread,
the Indians cried out and cowered away. Guns and grindstone, Smith told
them, were too violent and heavy devils for them to carry from river to
river. Instead he gave them, from the trading store, gifts enticing to
the savage eye, and not susceptible of being turned against the donors.

Here at Jamestown in midwinter were more food and less mortal sickness
than in the previous fearful summer, yet no great amount of food, and
now suffering, too, from bitter cold. Nor had the sickness ended, nor
dissensions. Less than fifty men were all that held together England
and America--a frayed cord, the last strands of which might presently
part....

Then up the river comes Christopher Newport in the Francis and John, to
be followed some weeks later by the Phoenix. Here is new life--stores
for the settlers and a hundred new Virginians! How certain, at any
rate, is the exchange of talk of home and hair-raising stories of this
wilderness between the old colonists and the new! And certain is
the relief and the renewed hopes. Mourning turns to joy. Even a
conflagration that presently destroys the major part of the town can not
blast that felicity.

Again Newport and Smith and others went out to explore the country. They
went over to Werowocomoco and talked with Powhatan. He told them things
which they construed to mean that the South Sea was near at hand, and
they marked this down as good news for the home Council--still impatient
for gold and Cathay. On their return to Jamestown they found under way
new and stouter houses. The Indians were again friendly; they brought
venison and turkeys and corn. Smith says that every few days came
Pocahontas and attendant women bringing food.

Spring came again with the dogwood and the honeysuckle and the
strawberries, the gay, returning birds, the barred and striped and
mottled serpents. The colony was one year old. Back to England sailed
the Francis and John and the Phoenix, carrying home Edward-Maria
Wingfield, who has wearied of Virginia and will return no more.

What rests certain and praiseworthy in Smith is his thoroughness and
daring in exploration. This summer he went with fourteen others down the
river in an open boat, and so across the great bay, wide as a sea, to
what is yet called the Eastern Shore, the counties now of Accomac and
Northampton. Rounding Cape Charles these indefatigable explorers came
upon islets beaten by the Atlantic surf. These they named Smith's
Islands. Landing upon the main shore, they met "grimme and stout"
savages, who took them to the King of Accomac, and him they found civil
enough. This side of the great bay, with every creek and inlet, Smith
examined and set down upon the map he was making. Even if he could find
no gold for the Council at home, at least he would know what places were
suited for "harbours and habitations." Soon a great storm came up, and
they landed again, met yet other Indians, went farther, and were in
straits for fresh water. The weather became worse; they were in danger
of shipwreck--had to bail the boat continually. Indians gathered upon
the shore and discharged flights of arrows, but were dispersed by a
volley from the muskets. The bread the English had with them went bad.
Wind and weather were adverse; three or four of the fifteen fell ill,
but recovered. The weather improved; they came to the seven-mile-wide
mouth of "Patawomeck"--the Potomac. They turned their boat up this vast
stream. For a long time they saw upon the woody banks no savages. Then
without warning they came upon ambuscades of great numbers "so strangely
painted, grimed and disguised, shouting, yelling and crying, as we
rather supposed them so many divils." Smith, in midstream, ordered
musket-fire, and the balls went grazing over the water, and the terrible
sound echoed through the woods. The savages threw down their bows and
arrows and made signs of friendliness. The English went ashore, hostages
were exchanged, and a kind of amicableness ensued. After such sylvan
entertainment Smith and his men returned to the boat. The oars dipped
and rose, the bright water broke from them; and these Englishmen in Old
Virginia proceeded up the Potomac. Could they have seen--could they but
have seen before them, on the north bank, rising, like the unsubstantial
fabric of a dream, there above the trees, a vast, white Capitol shining
in the sunlight!

Far up the river, they noticed that the sand on the shore gleamed with
yellow spangles. They looked and saw high rocks, and they thought that
from these the rain had washed the glittering dust. Gold? Harbors they
had found--but what of gold? What, even, of Cathay?

Going down stream, they sought again those friendly Indians. Did they
know gold or silver? The Indians looked wise, nodded heads, and took
the visitors up a little tributary river to a rocky hill in which
"with shells and hatchets" they had opened as it were a mine. Here they
gathered a mineral which, when powdered, they sprinkled over themselves
and their idols "making them," says the relation, "like blackamoors
dusted over with silver." The white men filled their boat with as much
of this ore as they could carry. High were their hopes over it, but
when it was subsequently sent to London and assayed, it was found to be
worthless.

The fifteen now started homeward, out of Potomac and down the westward
