send two letters to summon you.[n] But he did not intend you really to
march from Athens. Not a bit of it! For he would not have waited to
summon you until he had seen the time go by in which you could have set
out; nor would he have tried to prevent me, when I wished to set sail
and return hither; nor would he have instructed Aeschines to speak to
you in the terms which would be least likely to cause you to march. No!
he intended that you should fancy that he was about to fulfil your
desires, and in that belief should abstain from any resolution adverse
to him; and that the Phocians should, in consequence, make no defence
or resistance, in reliance upon any hopes inspired by you, but should
put themselves into his hands in utter despair. (_To the clerk._) Read
to the jury the letters of Philip.

[_The letters are read._]

{52} Now these letters summon you, and that, forsooth, instantly; and
it was surely for Aeschines and his party, if the proceeding was in any
way genuine, to support the summons, to urge you to march, and to
propose that Proxenus, whom they knew to be in those parts, should
render assistance at once. Yet it is plain that their action was of
precisely the opposite character; and naturally so. For they did not
attend to the terms of the letter, but to the intention with which
Philip wrote it. {53} With this intention they co-operated, and to this
they strove to give effect. As soon as the Phocians had learned the
news of your proceedings in the Assembly, and had received this decree
of Philocrates, and heard the defendant's announcement and his
promises, everything combined to effect their doom. Consider the
circumstances. There were some of them who had the wisdom to distrust
Philip. These were induced to trust him. And why? Because they believed
that even if Philip were trying to deceive them ten times over, the
ambassadors of Athens, at least, would never dare to deceive their own
countrymen. This report which Aeschines had made to you must therefore
be true: it was the Thebans, and not themselves, whose hour had come.
{54} There were others who advocated resistance at all hazards; but
these too were weakened in their resolution, now that they were
persuaded that they could count upon Philip's favour, and that, unless
they did as they were bidden, you, whose assistance they were hoping
for, would march against them. There was also a third party, who
thought that you repented of having made the Peace with Philip; but to
these they pointed out that you had decreed that the same Peace should
hold good for posterity also; so that on every ground, all assistance
from you was despaired of. That is why they crowded all these points
into one decree. {55} And in this lies, I think, the very greatest of
all their crimes against you. To have made a Peace with a mortal man,
whose power was due to the accidents of the moment--a Peace, whereby
they covenanted that the disgrace brought upon the city should be
everlasting; to have robbed the city, not only of all beside, but even
of the benefits that Fortune might hereafter bestow: to have displayed
such superabundant villany as to have done this wicked wrong not only
to their countrymen now living, but also to all those who should ever
thereafter be born--is it not utterly atrocious? {56} And this last
clause, by which the Peace was extended to your descendants, you would
certainly never have allowed to be added to the conditions of peace had
you not then placed your trust in the promises announced by Aeschines,
as the Phocians placed their trust in them and perished. For, as you
know, they delivered themselves up to Philip; they gave their cities
into his hands; and the consequences which befell them were the exact
opposite of all that Aeschines had predicted to you.

{57} That you may realize plainly that this calamity was brought about
in the manner that I have described, and that they are responsible for
it, I will go through the dates at which each separate event occurred;
and if any one can contradict me on any point, I invite him to rise and
speak in the time allotted to me. The Peace was made on the 19th of
Elaphebolion, and we were away on the mission which was sent to receive
the oaths three whole months. {58} All this time the Phocians remained
unharmed. We returned from that mission on the 13th of Scirophorion.
Philip had already appeared at Thermopylae, and was making promises to
the Phocians, none of which they believed--as is proved, when you
consider that otherwise they would not have appealed to you. Then
followed the Assembly, at which, by their falsehoods and by the
deception which they practised upon you, Aeschines and his party ruined
the whole cause. {59} That was on the 16th of Scirophorion. Now I
calculate that it was on the fifth day that the report of your
proceedings reached the Phocians: for the Phocian envoys were here on
the spot, and were deeply concerned to know what report these men would
make, and what your resolution would be. That gives us the 20th as the
date on which, as we calculate, the Phocians heard of your proceedings;
for, counting from the 16th, the 20th is the fifth day. Then followed
the 21st, the 22nd, and the 23rd. {60} On the latter day the truce was
made, and the ruin of the Phocians was finally sealed. This can be
proved as follows. On the 27th you were holding an Assembly in the
Peiraeus, to discuss the business connected with the dockyards, when
Dercylus arrived from Chalcis with the news that Philip had put
everything into the hands of the Thebans, and that this was the fifth
day since the truce had been made. 23rd, 24th, 25th, 26th, 27th--the
27th is the fifth day precisely. Thus the dates, and their reports and
their proposals--everything, in short, convicts them of having
co-operated with Philip, and of sharing with him the responsibility for
the overthrow of the Phocians. {61} Again, the fact that none of the
towns in Phocis was taken by siege or by an attack in force, and that
the utter ruin of them all was the direct consequence of their truce
with Philip, affords the strongest evidence that it was the belief
inspired in the Phocians by these men, that they would be preserved
from destruction by Philip, which was the cause of their fate. Philip
himself they knew well enough. (_To the clerk._) Bring me our treaty of
alliance with the Phocians, and the decrees under which they demolished
their walls. (_To the jury._) You will then realize what were the
relations between themselves and you, upon which they relied, and what
nevertheless was the fate which befell them through the action of these
accursed men. (_To the clerk._) Read.

[_The Treaty of Alliance between the Athenians and Phocians is read._]

{62} These, then, were the things for which they relied upon
you--friendship, alliance, and assistance. Now listen to what befell
them, because Aeschines prevented your going to their assistance. (_To
the clerk._) Read.

 [_The Agreement between Philip and the Phocians is read._]

You hear it, men of Athens. 'An Agreement between Philip and the
Phocians,' it runs--not between the Thebans and the Phocians, nor the
Thessalians and the Phocians, nor the Locrians, nor any one else who
was there. Again, 'the Phocians shall deliver up their cities to
Philip'--not to the Thebans or Thessalians or any one else. {63} And
why? Because the defendant's report to you was that Philip had crossed
the Pass with a view to the preservation of the Phocians. Thus it was
Aeschines in whom all their trust was placed; it was with him in their
minds that they considered the whole situation; it was with him in
their minds that they made the Peace. (_To the clerk._) Now read the
remainder. (_To the jury._) And do you observe for what they trusted
him, and what treatment they received. Does it show any resemblance or
similarity to what Aeschines predicted in his report? (_To the clerk._)
Read on.

[_The decrees of the Amphictyons are read._]

{64} Men of Athens, the horror and the immensity of this calamity have
never been surpassed in our day in the Hellenic world, nor even, I
believe, in the time before us. Yet these great and dreadful events a
single man has been given power to bring about, by the action of these
men, while the city of Athens was still in being--Athens, whose
traditional policy is to stand as the champion of the Hellenic peoples,
and not to suffer anything like this to take place. The nature of the
ruin which the unhappy Phocians have suffered may be seen, not only
from these decrees, but also from the actual results of the action
taken, and an awful and piteous sight it is, men of Athens. {65} For
when recently we were on our way to Delphi[n] we could not help seeing
it all--houses razed to the ground, cities stripped of their walls, the
land destitute of men in their prime--only a few poor women and little
children left, and some old men in misery. Indeed, no words can
describe the distress now prevailing there. Yet this was the people, I
hear you all saying, that once gave its vote against the Thebans,[n]
when the question of your enslavement was laid before them. {66} What
then, men of Athens, do you think would be the vote, what the sentence,
that your forefathers would give, if they could recover consciousness,
upon those who were responsible for the destruction of this people? I
believe that if they stoned them to death with their own hands, they
would hold themselves guiltless of blood. Is it not utterly
shameful--does it not, if possible, go beyond all shame--that those who
saved us then, and gave the saving vote for us, should now have met
with the very opposite fate through these men, suffering as no Hellenic
people has ever suffered before, with none to hinder it? Who then is
responsible for this crime? Who is the author of this deception? Who
but Aeschines?

{67} Of all the many reasons for which Philip might be congratulated
with good cause upon his fortune, the chief ground of congratulation is
a piece of good fortune, to which, by every Heavenly Power, I cannot
find any parallel in our days. To have captured great cities, to have
reduced a vast expanse of territory to subjection, and all similar
actions, are, of course, enviable and brilliant
achievements--undeniably so. But many other persons might be mentioned
who had achieved as much. {68} The good fortune of which I am about to
speak is peculiar to Philip, and has never been given to any other. It
is this--that when he needed scoundrels to do his work for him, he
found even greater scoundrels than he wanted. For as such we have
surely good reason to think of them. For when there were falsehoods
which Philip himself, in spite of the immense interests which he had at
stake, did not dare to utter on his own behalf--which he did not set
down in any of his letters, and which none of his envoys uttered--these
men sold their services for the purpose, and undertook your deception.
{69} Antipater and Parmenio, servants of a master as they were, and
unlikely ever to find themselves in your presence again, none the less
secured for themselves that _they_ should not be the instruments in
your deception, while these men, who were Athenians, citizens of the
most free city, and held an official position as your
ambassadors--though they would have to meet you and look you in the
face, and pass the remainder of their lives among you, and render
before you an account of their actions--they, I say, undertook the task
of deceiving you. How could vileness or desperation go further than
this?

{70} But I would have you understand further that he is under your
curse, and that you cannot, without violation of religion and piety,
acquit him, when he has thus lied to you. (_To the clerk._) Recite the
Curse. Take it from me, and read it out of the law.

[_The Curse is read._]

This imprecation is pronounced in your name, men of Athens, by the
herald, at every meeting of the Assembly, as the law appoints; and when
the Council sits, it is pronounced again there. Nor can Aeschines say
that he did not know it well. He was your under-clerk and servant to
the Council, and used himself to read this law over[n] to the herald.
{71} Surely, then, you will have done a strange and monstrous thing,
men of Athens, if to-day, when you have it in your power, you should
fail to do for yourselves the thing which you enjoin upon the gods, or
rather claim from them as your due; and should acquit a man whom you
pray to the gods to destroy utterly--himself, his race and his house.
You must not do this. You may leave it to the gods to punish one whom
you cannot yourselves detect; but when you have yourselves caught the
criminal, you must no longer lay the task of punishing him upon the
gods.

{72} Now I am told that he intends to carry his shamelessness and
impudence so far, as to avoid all mention of his own proceedings--his
report, his promises, the deception he has practised upon the city--as
though his trial were taking place before strangers, instead of before
you, who know all the facts; and that he intends to accuse first the
Spartans,[n] then the Phocians,[n] and then Hegesippus.[n] {73} That is
mere mockery; or rather, it is atrocious shamelessness. For all that he
will allege to-day against the Phocians or the Spartans or
Hegesippus--their refusal to receive Proxenus, their impiety--let him
allege what he will--all these allegations refer, as you know, to
actions which were already past when these ambassadors returned to
Athens, and which were no obstacle to the preservation of the
Phocians--the admission is made by whom? By the defendant Aeschines
himself. For what was his report on that occasion? {74} Not that if it
had not been for their refusal to receive Proxenus, nor that if it had
not been for Hegesippus, nor that if it had not been for such and such
things, the Phocians would have been saved. No! he discarded all such
qualifications, and stated expressly that before he returned he had
persuaded Philip to save the Phocians, to repeople Boeotia, and to
arrange matters to suit your convenience; that within two or three days
these things would be accomplished facts, and that for this reason the
Thebans had set a price upon his head. {75} Refuse then, to hear or to
tolerate any mention of what had already been done, either by the
Spartans or by the Phocians, before he made his report; and do not let
him denounce the rascality of the Phocians. It was not for their virtue
that you once saved the Spartans, nor the Euboeans, that accursed
people! nor many others; but because the interests of the city demanded
their preservation, as they demanded that of the Phocians just now. And
what wrong was done either by the Phocians or by the Spartans, or by
yourselves, or by any one else in the world after he made those
declarations, to prevent the fulfilment of the promises which he then
made? Ask him that: for that is what he will {76} not be able to show
you. It was within five days--five days and no more--that Aeschines
made his lying report, that you believed him, that the Phocians heard
of it, surrendered themselves and perished. This, I think, makes it as
plain as it can possibly be, that the ruin of the Phocians was the
result of organized deceit and trickery, and of nothing else.[n] For so
long as Philip was unable to proceed to Phocis on account of the
Peace,[n] and was only waiting in readiness to do so, he kept sending
for the Spartans, promising to do all that they wished,[n]in order that
the Phocians might not win {77} them over to their side by your help.
But when he had arrived at Thermopylae, and the Spartans had seen the
trap and retired, he now sent Aeschines in advance to deceive you, in
order that he might not, owing to your perceiving that he was playing
into the hands of the Thebans, find himself once more involved in loss
of time and war and delay, through the Phocians defending themselves
and your going to their assistance, but might get everything into his
power without a struggle; and this is what has in fact happened. Do
not, then, let the fact that Philip deceived the Spartans and Phocians
as well as yourselves enable Aeschines to escape his punishment for
deceiving you. That would not be just.

{78} But if he tells you that, to compensate for the Phocians and
Thermopylae and all your other losses, you have retained possession of
the Chersonese, do not, in Heaven's name, accept the plea! Do not
tolerate the aggravation of all the wrong that you have suffered
through his conduct as ambassador, by the reproach which his defence
would bring upon the city--the reproach of having sacrificed the
existence of your allies, in an underhand attempt to save part of your
own possessions! You did not act thus; for when the Peace had already
been made, and the Chersonese was no longer in danger, there followed
four whole months[n] during which the Phocians remained unharmed; and
it was not until after this that the lying statements of Aeschines
brought about their ruin by deceiving you. {79} And further, you will
find that the Chersonese is in much greater danger now than it was
then. For when do you think that we had the greater facilities for
punishing Philip for any trespass against the Chersonese?--before he
stole any of these advantages from the city, or now? For my part, I
think we had far greater facilities then. What, then, does this
'retention of the Chersonese' amount to, when all the fears and the
risks which attended one who would have liked to attack it have been
removed?

{80} Again, I am told that he will express himself to some such effect
as this--that he cannot think why he is accused by Demosthenes, and not
by any of the Phocians. It is better that you should hear the true
state of the case from me beforehand. Of the exiled Phocians, the best,
I believe, and the most respectable, after being driven into banishment
and suffering as they have suffered, are content to be quiet, and none
of them would consent to incur an enmity which would fall upon himself,
on account of the calamities of his people: while those who would do
anything for money have no one to give it to them. {81} For assuredly
_I_ would never have given any one anything whatever to stand by my
side here and cry aloud how cruelly they have suffered. The truth and
the deeds that have been done cry aloud of themselves. And as for the
Phocian people,[n] they are in so evil and pitiable a plight, that
there is no question for them of appearing as accusers at the
examination of every individual ambassador in Athens. They are in
slavery, in mortal fear of the Thebans and of Philip's mercenaries,
whom they are compelled to support, broken up into villages as they are
and stripped of their arms. {82} Do not, then, suffer him to urge such
a plea. Make him prove to you that the Phocians are not ruined, or that
he did not promise that Philip would save them. For the questions upon
which the examination of an ambassador turns are these: 'What have you
effected? What have you reported? If the report is true, you may be
acquitted; if it is false, you must pay the penalty.' How can you plead
the non-appearance of the Phocians, when it was you yourself, I fancy,
that brought them, so far as it lay in your power, into such a
condition that they could neither help their friends nor repel their
enemies.

{83} And further, apart from all the shame and the dishonour in which
also these proceedings are involved, it is easy to show that in
consequence of them the city has been beset with grave dangers as well.
Every one of you knows that it was the hostilities which the Phocians
were carrying on, and their command of Thermopylae, that rendered us
secure against Thebes, and made it impossible that either Philip or the
Thebans should ever march into the Peloponese or into Euboea or into
Attica. {84} But this guarantee of safety which the city possessed,
arising out of the position of Thermopylae and the actual circumstances
of the time, you were induced to sacrifice by the deceptions and the
lying statements of these ambassadors--a guarantee, I say, fortified by
arms, by a continuous campaign, by great cities of allies, and by a
wide tract of territory; and you have looked on while it was swept
away. Fruitless has your first expedition to Thermopylae become--an
expedition made at a cost of more than two hundred talents, if you
include the private expenditure of the soldiers--and fruitless your
hopes of triumph over Thebes! {85} But of all the wicked services which
he has done for Philip, let me tell you of that which is in reality the
greatest outrage of all upon Athens and upon you all. It is this--that
when Philip had determined from the very first to do for the Thebans
all that he has done, Aeschines, by reporting the exact opposite to
you, and so displaying to the world your antagonism to Philip's
designs, has brought about for you an increase in the enmity between
yourselves and the Thebans, and for Philip an increase in their
gratitude. How could a man have treated you more outrageously than this?

(_To the clerk._) {86} Now take and read the decrees of Diophantus[n]
and Callisthenes[n]; (_to the jury_) for I would have you realize that
when you acted as you ought, you were thought worthy to be honoured
with public thanksgivings and praises, both at home and abroad; but
when once you had been driven astray by these men, you had to bring
your children and wives in from the country, and to decree that the
sacrifice to Heracles[n] should take place within the walls, though it
was a time of peace. And in view of this it is an amazing idea, that
you should dismiss unpunished a man who even prevented the gods from
receiving their worship from you after the manner of your fathers. (_To
the clerk._) Read the decree.

[_The decree of Diophantus is read._]

This decree, men of Athens, was one which your conduct nobly deserved.
(_To the clerk._) Now read the next decree.

[_The decree of Callisthenes is read._]

{87} This decree you passed in consequence of the action of these men.
It was not with such a prospect in view that you made the Peace and the
alliance at the outset, or that you were subsequently induced to insert
the words which extended them to your posterity. You expected their
action to bring you benefits of incredible value. Aye, and besides
this, you know how often, after this, you were bewildered by the report
that Philip's forces and mercenaries were threatening Porthmus or
Megara. You have not then to reflect contentedly that Philip has not
yet set foot in Attica. You have rather to consider whether their
action has not given him power to do so when he chooses. It is that
danger that you must keep before your eyes, and you must execrate and
punish the man who is guilty of putting such power into Philip's hands.

{88} Now I am aware that Aeschines will eschew all defence of the
actions with which he is charged, and that, in his desire to lead you
as far away as possible from the facts, he will enumerate the great
blessings which Peace brings to all mankind, and will set against them
the evils that follow in the train of war. His whole speech will be a
eulogy of peace, and in that will consist his defence. But such an
argument actually incriminates the defendant further. If peace, which
brings such blessings to all other men, has been the source of such
trouble and confusion to us, what explanation can be found, except that
they have taken bribes and have cruelly marred a thing by nature so
fair? {89} 'What?' he may say, 'have you not to thank the Peace for
three hundred ships, with their fittings, and for funds which remain
and will remain yours?' In answer to this, you are bound to suppose
that, thanks to the Peace, Philip's resources too have become far more
ample--aye, and his command of arms, and of territory, and of revenues,
which have accrued to him to such large amounts. {90} We, too, have had
some increase of revenue. But as for power and alliances, by the
establishment of which all men retain their advantages, either for
themselves or their masters, ours have been sold by these men--ruined
and enfeebled; while Philip's have become more formidable and extensive
by far. Thus it is not fair that while Philip has been enabled by their
action to extend both his alliances and his revenue, all that would in
any case have been ours, as the result of the Peace, should be set off
