black as a caird's.'

'Come and let Andie's Mary wash them,' said that little personage,
picking up fat Andrew in her arms, while he retained his beloved crab's
claw. 'Jeanie, would you carry Johnnie, he's not sure-footed, over the
stair? Annaple, take Lorn's hand over the kittle turning.'

One chamber was allotted to the entire party and their single nurse.
Being far up in the tower, it ventured to have two windows in the
massive walls, so thick that five-and-twenty steps from the floor were
needed to reach the narrow slips of glass in a frame that could be
removed at will, either to admit the air or to be exchanged for solid
wooden shutters to exclude storms by sea or arrows and bolts by land.
The lower part of the walls was hung with very grim old tapestry, on
which Holofernes' head, going into its bag, could just be detected;
there were two great solid box-beds, two more pallets rolled up for the
day, a chest or two, a rude table, a cross-legged chair, a few stools,
and some deer and seal skins spread on the floor completed the furniture
of this ladies' bower. There was, unusual luxury, a chimney with a
hearth and peat fire, and a cauldron on it, with a silver and a copper
basin beside it for washing purposes, never discarded by poor Queen
Joanna and her old English nurse Ankaret, who had remained beside her
through all the troubles of the stormy and barbarous country, and,
though crippled by a fall and racked with rheumatism, was the chief
comfort of the young children. She crouched at the hearth with her
spinning and her beads, and exclaimed at the tossed hair and soiled
hands and faces of her charges.

Mary brought the little ones to her to be set to rights, and the elder
girls did their best with their toilette. Princesses as they were, the
ruddy golden tresses of Eleanor and the flaxen locks of Jean and Mary
were the only ornaments that they could boast of as their own; and
though there were silken and embroidered garments of their mother's in
one of the chests, their mourning forbade the use of them. The girls
only wore the plain black kirtles that had been brought from Haddington
at the time of the funeral, and the little boys had such homespun
garments as the shepherd lads wore.

Partly scolding, partly caressing, partly bemoaning the condition of her
young ladies, so different from the splendours of the house of Somerset,
Ankaret saw that Eleanor was as fit to be seen as circumstances would
permit; as to Jean and Mary, there was no trouble on that score.

The whole was not accomplished till a horn was sounded as an intimation
that supper was ready, at five o'clock, for the entire household, and
all made their way down--Jean first, in all the glory of her fair face
and beautiful hair; then Eleanor with little Lorn, as he was called, his
Christian name being James; then Annaple and Johnnie hand-in-hand, Mary
carrying Andrew, and lastly old Ankaret, hobbling along with her stick,
and, when out of sight, a hand on Annaple's shoulder. In public, nothing
would have made her presume so far. The hall was a huge, vaulted,
stone-walled room, with a great fire on the wide hearth, and three long
tables--one was cross-wise, on the dais near the fire, the other two ran
the length of the hall. The upper one was furnished with tolerably clean
napery and a few silver vessels; as to the lower ones, they were in two
degrees of comparison, and the less said of the third the better. It was
for the men-at-arms and the lowest servants, whereas the second belonged
to those of the suite of the King and Chancellor, who were not of rank
to be at his table. The Lord Lion King-at-Arms was high-table company,
but he was absent, and the inferior royal pursuivant was entertaining
two of his fellows, one with the Douglas Bloody Heart, the other
with the Lindsay Lion on a black field, besides two messengers of the
different clans, who looked askance at one another.

Leaning against the wall near the window stood the young King with
two or three youths beside him, laughing and talking over three great
deer-hounds, and by the hearth were two elder men--one, a tall dignified
figure in the square cap and purple robe of a Bishop, with a face of
great wisdom and sweetness; the other, still taller, with slightly
grizzled hair and the weather-beaten countenance of a valiant and
sagacious warrior, dressed in the leathern garments usually worn under
armour.

As Jean emerged from the turret she was met and courteously greeted
by Sir Patrick Drummond and his sons, as were also her sisters, with a
grace and deference to their rank such as they hardly ever received from
the nobles, and whose very rarity made Eleanor shy and uncomfortable,
even while she was gratified and accepted it as her due.

The Bishop inclined his head and gave them a kind smile; but they had
already seen him in the morning, as he was residing in the castle. He
was the most fatherly friend and kinsman the young things knew, and
though really their first cousin, they looked to him like an uncle. He
insisted on due ceremony with them, though he had much difficulty in
enforcing it, except with those Scottish knights and nobles who, like
Sir Patrick Drummond, had served in France, and retained their French
breeding.

So Jean, hawk and all, had to be handed to her seat by Sir Patrick as
the guest, Eleanor by her brother, not without a little fraternal pinch,
and Mary by the Bishop, who answered with a paternal caress to her
murmured entreaty that she might keep wee Andie on her lap and give him
his brose.

It was not a sumptuous repast, the staple being a haggis, also broth
with chunks of meat and barleycorns floating in it, the meat in strings
by force of boiling. At the high table each person had a bowl, either
silver or wood, and each had a private spoon, and a dagger to serve as
knife, also a drinking-cup of various materials, from the King's gold
goblet downwards to horns, and a bannock to eat with the brose. At the
middle table trenchers and bannocks served the purpose of plates; and at
the third there was nothing interposed between the boards of the table
and the lumps of meat from which the soup had been made.

Jean's quick eyes soon detected more men-at-arms and with different
badges from the thyme spray of Drummond, and her brother was evidently
bursting with some communication, held back almost forcibly by the
Bishop, who had established a considerable influence over the impetuous
boy, while Sir Patrick maintained a wise and tedious political
conversation about the peace between France and England, which was to be
cemented by the marriage of the young King of England to the daughter of
King Rene and the cession of Anjou and Maine to her father.

'Solid dukedoms for a lassie!' cried young James. 'What a craven to make
such a bargain!'

'Scarce like his father's son,' returned Sir Patrick, 'who gat the bride
with a kingdom for her tocher that these folks have well-nigh lost among
them.'

'The saints be praised if they have.'

'I cannot forget, my liege, how your own sainted father loved and fought
for King Harry of Monmouth. Foe as he was, I own that I shall never look
on his like again.'

'I hold with you in that, Patie,' said Bishop Kennedy; 'and frown as
you may, my young liege, a few years with such as he would do more for
you--as it did with your blessed father--than ever we can.'

'I can hold mine own, I hope, without lessons from the enemy,' said
James, holding his head high, while his ruddy locks flew back, his eyes
glanced, and the red scar on his cheek widened. 'And is it true that you
are for going through false England, Patie?'

'I made friends there when I spent two years there with your Grace's
blessed father,' returned Sir Patrick, 'and so did my good wife. She
longs to see the lady who is now Sister Clare at St. Katharine's in
London, and it is well not to let her and Annis brook the long sea
voyage.'

'There, Jean! I'd brook ten sea voyages rather than hold myself beholden
to an Englishman!' quoth James.

'Nevertheless, there are letters and messages that it is well to confide
to so trusty and wise-headed a knight as Glenuskie,' returned the
Bishop.

The meal over, the silver bowls were carried round with water to wash
the hands by the two young Drummonds, sons of Glenuskie, and by the
King's pages, youths of about the same age, after which the Bishop and
Sir Patrick asked licence of the King to retire for consultation to
the Bishop's apartment, a permission which, as may well be believed, he
granted readily, only rejoicing that he was not wanted.

The little ones were carried off by Mary and Nurse Ankaret; and the
King, his elder sisters, and the other youths of condition betook
themselves, followed by half-a-dozen great dogs, to the court, where
the Drummonds wanted to exhibit the horses procured for the journey, and
James and Jean to show the hawks that were the pride of their heart.

By and by came an Italian priest, who acted as secretary to the
Bishop--a poor little man who grew yellower and yellower, was always
shivering, and seemed to be shrivelled into growing smaller and smaller
by the Scottish winds, but who had a most keen and intelligent face.

'How now, Father Romuald,' called out James. 'Are ye come to fetch me?'

'Di grazia, Signor Re', began the Italian in some fear, as the dogs
smelted his lambskin cape. 'The Lord Bishop entreats your Majesty's
presence.'

His Majesty, who, by the way, never was so called by any one else,
uttered some bitter growls and grumbles, but felt forced to obey the
call, taking with him, however, his beautiful falcon on his wrist, and
the two huge deer-hounds, who he declared should be of the council if he
was.

Jean and Eleanor then closed upon David and Malcolm, eagerly demanding
of them what they expected in that wonderful land to which they were
going, much against the will of young David, who was sure there would be
no hunting of deer, nor hawking for grouse, nor riding after an English
borderer or Hieland cateran--nothing, in fact, worth living for! It
would be all a-wearying with their manners and their courtesies and such
like daft woman's gear! Why could not his father be content to let him
grow up like his fellows, rough and free and ready?

'And knowing nothing better--nothing beyond,' said Eleanor.

'What would you have better than the hill and the brae? To tame a horse
and fly a hawk, and couch a lance and bend a bow! That's what a man is
made for, without fashing himself with letters and Latin and manners, no
better than a monk; but my father would always have it so!'

'Ye'll be thankful to him yet, Davie,' put in his graver brother.

'Thankful! I shall forget all about it as soon as I am knighted, and
make you write all my letters--and few enough there will be.'

'And you, Malcolm!' said Eleanor, 'would you be content to hide within
four walls, and know nothing by your own eyes?'

'No indeed, cousin,' replied the lad; 'I long for the fair churches
and cloisters and the learned men and books that my father tells of. My
mother says that her brother, that I am named for, yearned to make this
a land of peace and godliness, and to turn these high spirits to God's
glory instead of man's strife and feud, and how it might have been done
save for the slaying of your noble father--Saints rest him!--which broke
mine uncle's heart, so that he died on his way home from pilgrimage.
She hopes to pray at his tomb that I may tread in his steps, and be a
blessing and not a curse to the land we love.'

Eleanor was silent, seeing for the first time that there might be higher
aims than escaping from dulness, strife, and peril; whilst Jean cried--

''Tis the titles and jousts, the knights and ladies that I care for--men
that know what fair chivalry means, and make knightly vows to dare all
sorts of foes for a lady's sake.'

'As if any lass was worth it,' said David contemptuously.

'Ay, that's what you are! That's what it is to live in this savage
realm,' returned Jean.

At this moment, however, Brother Romuald was again seen advancing,
and this time with a request for the presence of the ladies Jean and
Eleanor.

'Could James be relenting on better advice?' they asked one another as
they went.

'More likely,' said Jean, with a sigh, amounting to a groan, 'it is only
to hear that we are made over, like a couple of kine, to some ruffianly
reivers, who will beat a princess as soon as a scullion.'

They reached the chamber in time. Though the Bishop slept there it also
served for a council chamber; and as he carried his chapel and household
furniture about with him, it was a good deal more civilised-looking than
even the princesses' room. Large folding screens, worked with tapestry,
representing the lives of the saints, shut off the part used as an
oratory and that which served as a bedchamber, where indeed the good man
slept on a rush mat on the floor. There were a table and several chairs
and stools, all capable of being folded up for transport. The young King
occupied a large chair of state, in which he twisted himself in a very
undignified manner; the Bishop-Chancellor sat beside him, with the Great
Seal of Scotland and some writing materials, parchments, and letters
before him, and Sir Patrick came forward to receive and seat the young
ladies, and then remained standing--as few of his rank in Scotland would
have done on their account.

'Well, lassies,' began the King, 'here's lads enow for you. There's the
Master of Angus, as ye ken--'(Jean tossed her head)--'moreover, auld
Crawford wants one of you for his son.'

'The Tyger Earl,' gasped Eleanor.

'And with Stirling for your portion, the modest fellow,' added James.
'Ay, and that's not all. There's the MacAlpin threats me with all his
clan if I dinna give you to him; and Mackay is not behindhand, but will
come down with pibroch and braidsword and five hundred caterans to pay
his court to you, and make short work of all others. My certie, sisters
seem but a cause for threats from reivers, though maybe they would not
be so uncivil if once they had you.'

'Oh, Jamie! oh! dear holy Father,' cried Eleanor, turning from the King
to the Bishop, 'do not, for mercy's sake, give me over to one of those
ruffians.'

'They are coming, Eleanor,' said James, with a boy's love of terrifying;
'the MacAlpin and Mackay are both coming down after you, and we shall
have a fight like the Clan Chattan and Clan Kay. There's for the
demoiselle who craved for knights to break lances for her!'

'Knights indeed! Highland thieves,' said Jean; 'and 'tis for what tocher
they may force from you, James, not for her face.'

'You are right there, my puir bairn,' said the Bishop. 'These men--save
perhaps the young Master of Angus--only seek your hands as a pretext
for demands from your brother, and for spuilzie and robbery among
themselves. And I for my part would never counsel his Grace to yield the
lambs to the wolves, even to save himself.'

'No, indeed,' broke in the King; we may not have them fighting down
here, though it would be rare sport to look on, if you were not to be
the prize. So my Lord Bishop here trows, and I am of the same mind, that
the only safety is that the birds should be flown, and that you should
have your wish and be away the morn, with Patie of Glenuskie here, since
he will take the charge of two such silly lasses.'

The sudden granting of their wish took the maidens' breath away. They
looked from one to the other without a word; and the Bishop, in more
courtly language, explained that amid all these contending parties he
could not but judge it wiser to put the King's two marriageable sisters
out of reach, either of a violent abduction, or of being the cause of
a savage contest, in either case ending in demands that would be either
impossible or mischievous for the Crown to grant, and moreover in misery
for themselves.

Sir Patrick added something courteous about the honour of the charge.

'So soon!' gasped Jean; 'are we really to go the morn?'

'With morning light, if it be possible, fair ladies,' said Sir Patrick.

'Ay,' said James, 'then will we take Mary and the weans to the nunnery
in St. Mary's Wynd, where none will dare to molest them, and I shall go
on to St. Andrews or Stirling, as may seem fittest; while we leave old
Seneschal Peter to keep the castle gates shut. If the Hielanders come,
they'll find the nut too hard for them to crack, and the kernel gone, so
you'd best burn no more daylight, maidens, but busk ye, as women will.'

'Oh, Jamie, to speak so lightly of parting!' sighed Eleanor.

'Come--no fule greeting, now you have your will,' hastily said James,
who could hardly bear it himself.

'Our gear!' faltered Jeanie, with consternation at their ill-furnished
wardrobes.

'For that,' said the Bishop, 'you must leave the supply till you are
over the Border, when the Lady Glenuskie will see to your appearing as
nigh as may be as befits the daughters of Scotland among your English
kin.'

'But we have not a mark between us,' said Jean, 'and all my mother's
jewels are pledged to the Lombards.'

'There are moneys falling due to the Crown,' said the Bishop, 'and I can
advance enow to Sir Patrick to provide the gear and horses.'

'And my gude wife's royal kin are my guests till they win to their
sister,' added Sir Patrick.

And so it was settled. It was an evening of bustle and a night of
wakefulness. There were floods of tears poured out by and over sweet
little Mary and good old Ankaret, not to speak of those which James
scorned to shed. Had a sudden stop been put to the journey, perhaps,
Eleanor would have been relieved but Jean sorely disappointed.

It was further decided that Father Romuald should accompany the party,
both to assist in negotiations with Henry VI. and Cardinal Beaufort, and
to avail himself of the opportunity of returning to his native land, fa
 north, and to show cause to the Pope for erecting St. Andrews into an
archiepiscopal see, instead of leaving Scotland under the primacy of
York.

Hawk and harp were all the properties the princesses-errant took with
them; but Jean, as her old nurse sometimes declared, loved Skywing
better than all the weans, and Elleen's small travelling-harp was all
that she owned of her father's--except the spirit that loved it.




CHAPTER 2. DEPARTURE


                 'I bowed my pride,
     A horse-boy in his train to ride.'--SCOTT.


The Lady of Glenuskie, as she was commonly called, was a near kinswoman
of the Royal House, Lilias Stewart, a grand-daughter of King Robert II.,
and thus first cousin to the late King. Her brother, Malcolm Stewart,
had resigned to her the little barony of Glenuskie upon his embracing
the life of a priest, and her becoming the wife of Sir Patrick Drummond,
the son of his former guardian.

Sir Patrick had served in France in the Scotch troop who came to the
assistance of the Dauphin, until he was taken prisoner by his native
monarch, James I., then present with the army of Henry V. He had then
spent two years at Windsor, in attendance upon that prince, until both
were set at liberty by the treaty made by Cardinal Beaufort. In the
meantime, his betrothed, Lilias, being in danger at home, had been
bestowed in the household of the Countess of Warwick, where she had
been much with an admirable and saintly foreign lady, Esclairmonde de
Luxembourg, who had taken refuge from the dissensions of her own vexed
country among the charitable sisterhood of St. Katharine in the Docks in
London.

Sir Patrick and his lady had thus enjoyed far more training in the
general European civilisation than usually fell to the lot of their
countrymen; and they had moreover imbibed much of the spirit of that
admirable King, whose aims at improvement, religious, moral, and
political, were so piteously cut short by his assassination. During the
nine miserable years that had ensued it had not been possible, even
in conjunction with Bishop Kennedy, to afford any efficient support or
protection to the young King and his mother, and it had been as much as
Sir Patrick could do to protect his own lands and vassals, and do his
best to bring up his children to godly, honourable, and chivalrous
ways; but amid all the evil around he had decided that it was well-nigh
impossible to train them to courage without ruffianism, or to prevent
them from being tainted by the prevailing standard. Even among the
