The trooper had supplied the wants of nature to his perfect
satisfaction; and, perhaps, with the exception of Washington and his
immediate commander, there was no mortal whose displeasure he regarded a
tittle. First helping himself, therefore, to a little of his favorite
bottle, he replied with admirable coolness,--

"Colonel Wellmere, your pardon; Major Dunwoodie owes his allegiance to
the confederated states of North America, and where he owes it he pays
it. Such a man is no rebel. Promoted I hope he may be, both because he
deserves it, and because I am next in rank in the corps; and I know not
what you call a misfortune, unless you deem meeting the Virginia
horse as such."

"We will not differ about terms, sir," said the colonel, haughtily. "I
spoke as duty to my sovereign prompted; but do you not call the loss of
a commander a misfortune to a party?"

"It certainly may be so," said the trooper, with emphasis.

"Miss Peyton, will you favor us with a toast?" cried the master of the
house, anxious to stop this dialogue.

The lady bowed her head with dignity, as she named "General Montrose";
and the long-absent bloom stole lightly over her features.

"There is no term more doubtful than that word misfortune," said the
surgeon, regardless of the nice maneuvers of the host. "Some deem one
thing a misfortune, others its opposite; misfortune begets misfortune.
Life is a misfortune, for it may be the means of enduring misfortune;
and death is a misfortune, as it abridges the enjoyments of life."

"It is a misfortune that our mess has no such wine as this," interrupted
the trooper.

"We will pledge you a sentiment in it, sir, as it seems to suit your
taste," said Mr. Wharton.

Lawton filled to the brim, and drank, "A speedy peace, or a stirring
war."

"I drink your toast, Captain Lawton, though I greatly distrust your
construction of activity," said the surgeon. "In my poor judgment,
cavalry should be kept in the rear to improve a victory, and not sent in
front to gain it. Such may be said to be their natural occupation, if
the term can be used in reference to so artificial a body; for all
history shows that the horse have done most when held in reserve."

This dissertation, uttered in a sufficiently didactic manner, was a hint
that Miss Peyton did not neglect. She arose and retired, followed by
her juniors.

Nearly at the same moment, Mr. Wharton and his son made an apology for
their absence, which was required on account of the death of a near
neighbor, and withdrew.

The retreat of the ladies was the signal for the appearance of the
surgeon's cigar, which, being established in a corner of his mouth, in a
certain knowing way, caused not the slightest interruption to his
discourse.

"If anything can sweeten captivity and wounds, it must be the happiness
of suffering in the society of the ladies who have left us," gallantly
observed the colonel, as he resumed his seat after closing the door.

"Sympathy and kindness have their influence on the human system,"
returned the surgeon, knocking the ashes from his cigar, with the tip of
a little finger, in the manner of an adept. "The connection is intimate
between the moral and physical feelings; but still, to accomplish a
cure, and restore nature to the healthy tone it has lost from disease or
accident, requires more than can flow from unguided sympathies. In such
cases, the lights--" the surgeon accidentally caught the eye of the
trooper and he paused. Taking two or three hasty puffs, he essayed to
finish the sentence, "In such cases, the knowledge that flows from
the lights--"

"You were saying, sir," said Colonel Wellmere, sipping his wine,--

"The purport of my remark went to say," continued Sitgreaves, turning
his back on Lawton, "that a bread poultice would not set a broken arm."

"More is the pity," cried the trooper, "for next to eating, the
nourishment could not be more innocently applied."

"To you, Colonel Wellmere," said the surgeon, "as a man of education, I
can with safety appeal." The colonel bowed. "You must have observed the
dreadful havoc made in your ranks by the men who were led by this
gentleman"; the colonel looked grave, again; "how, when blows lighted on
their frames, life was invariably extinguished, beyond all hope of
scientific reparation; how certain yawning wounds were inflicted, that
must set at defiance the art of the most experienced practitioner; now,
sir, to you I triumphantly appeal, therefore, to know whether your
detachment would not have been as effectually defeated, if the men had
all lost a right arm, for instance, as if they had all lost
their heads."

"The triumph of your appeal is somewhat hasty, sir," said Wellmere.

"Is the cause of liberty advanced a step by such injudicious harshness
in the field?" continued the surgeon, bent on the favorite principle
of his life.

"I am yet to learn that the cause of liberty is in any manner advanced
by the services of any gentleman in the rebel army," rejoined
the colonel.

"Not liberty! Good God, for what then are we contending?"

"Slavery, sir; yes, even slavery; you are putting the tyranny of a mob
on the throne of a kind and lenient prince. Where is the consistency of
your boasted liberty?"

"Consistency!" repeated the surgeon, looking about him a little wildly,
at hearing such sweeping charges against a cause he had so long
thought holy.

"Aye, sir, your consistency. Your congress of sages have published a
manifesto, wherein they set forth the equality of political rights."

"'Tis true, and it is done most ably."

"I say nothing of its ability; but if true, why not set your slaves at
liberty?" This argument, which is thought by most of the colonel's
countrymen a triumphant answer to a thousand eloquent facts, lost none
of its weight by the manner in which it was uttered.

Every American feels humbled at the necessity of vindicating his country
from the apparent inconsistency and injustice of the laws alluded to.
His feelings are much like those of an honorable man who is compelled to
exonerate himself from a disgraceful charge, although he may know the
accusation to be false. At the bottom, Sitgreaves had much good sense,
and thus called on, he took up the cudgels of argument in
downright earnest.

"We deem it a liberty to have the deciding voice in the councils by
which we are governed. We think it a hardship to be ruled by the king of
a people who live at a distance of three thousand miles, and who cannot,
and who do not, feel a single political interest in common with
ourselves. I say nothing of oppression; the child was of age, and was
entitled to the privileges of majority. In such cases, there is but one
tribunal to which to appeal for a nation's rights--it is power, and we
now make the appeal."

"Such doctrines may suit your present purposes," said Wellmere, with a
sneer; "but I apprehend it is opposed to all the opinions and practices
of civilized nations."

"It is in conformity with the practices of all nations," said the
surgeon, returning the nod and smile of Lawton, who enjoyed the good
sense of his comrade as much as he disliked what he called "his medical
talk." "Who would be ruled when he can rule? The only rational ground to
take is, that every community has a right to govern itself, so that in
no manner it violates the laws of God."

"And is holding your fellow creatures in bondage in conformity to those
laws?" asked the colonel, impressively.

The surgeon took another glass, and hemming once, returned to the
combat.

"Sir," said he, "slavery is of very ancient origin, and it seems to have
been confined to no particular religion or form of government; every
nation of civilized Europe does, or has held their fellow creatures in
this kind of _duresse_."

"You will except Great Britain," cried the colonel, proudly.

"No, sir," continued the surgeon, confidently, feeling that he was now
carrying the war out of his own country, "I cannot except Great Britain.
It was her children, her ships, and her laws, that first introduced the
practice into these states; and on her institutions the judgment must
fall. There is not a foot of ground belonging to England, in which a
negro would be useful, that has not its slave. England herself has none,
but England is overflowing with physical force, a part of which she is
obliged to maintain in the shape of paupers. The same is true of France,
and most other European countries. So long as we were content to remain
colonies, nothing was said of our system of domestic slavery; but now,
when we are resolute to obtain as much freedom as the vicious system of
metropolitan rule has left us, that which is England's gift has become
our reproach. Will your master liberate the slaves of his subjects
should he succeed in subduing the new states, or will he condemn the
whites to the same servitude as that in which he has been so long
content to see the blacks? It is true, we continue the practice; but we
must come gradually to the remedy, or create an evil greater than that
which we endure at present. Doubtless, as we advance, the manumission of
our slaves will accompany us, until happily these fair regions shall
exist, without a single image of the Creator that is held in a state
which disqualifies him to judge of that Creator's goodness."

It will be remembered that Doctor Sitgreaves spoke forty years ago, and
Wellmere was unable to contradict his prophetic assertion.

Finding the subject getting to be knotty, the Englishman retired to the
apartment in which the ladies had assembled; and, seated by the side of
Sarah, he found a more pleasing employment in relating the events of
fashionable life in the metropolis, and in recalling the thousand little
anecdotes of their former associates. Miss Peyton was a pleased
listener, as she dispensed the bounties of the tea table, and Sarah
frequently bowed her blushing countenance to her needlework, as her face
glowed at the flattering remarks of her companion.

The dialogue we have related established a perfect truce between the
surgeon and his comrade; and the former having paid a visit to
Singleton, they took their leave of the ladies, and mounted; the former
to visit the wounded at the encampment, and the latter to rejoin his
troop. But their movements were arrested at the gate by an occurrence
that we shall relate in the next chapter.




CHAPTER XIV


     I see no more those white locks thinly spread
     Round the bald polish of that honored head:
     No more that meek, that suppliant look in prayer,
     Nor that pure faith that gave it force, are there:
     But he is blest, and I lament no more,
     A wise good man, contented to be poor.
                                            --CRABBE.

We have already said that the customs of America leave the dead but a
short time in sight of the mourners; and the necessity of providing for
his own safety had compelled the peddler to abridge even this brief
space. In the confusion and agitation produced by the events we have
recorded, the death of the elder Birch had occurred unnoticed; but a
sufficient number of the immediate neighbors were hastily collected, and
the ordinary rites of sepulture were now about to be paid to the
deceased. It was the approach of this humble procession that arrested
the movements of the trooper and his comrade. Four men supported the
body on a rude bier; and four others walked in advance, ready to
relieve their friends from their burden. The peddler walked next the
coffin, and by his side moved Katy Haynes, with a most determined aspect
of woe, and next to the mourners came Mr. Wharton and the English
captain. Two or three old men and women, with a few straggling boys,
brought up the rear. Captain Lawton sat in his saddle, in rigid silence,
until the bearers came opposite to his position, and then, for the first
time, Harvey raised his eyes from the ground, and saw the enemy that he
dreaded so near him. The first impulse of the peddler was certainly
flight; but recovering his recollection, he fixed his eye on the coffin
of his parent, and passed the dragoon with a firm step but swelling
heart. The trooper slowly lifted his cap, and continued uncovered until
Mr. Wharton and his son had moved by, when, accompanied by the surgeon,
he rode leisurely in the rear, maintaining an inflexible silence.

Caesar emerged from the cellar kitchen of the cottage, and with a face
of settled solemnity, added himself to the number of the followers of
the funeral, though with a humble mien and at a most respectful distance
from the horsemen. The old negro had placed around his arm, a little
above the elbow, a napkin of unsullied whiteness, it being the only time
since his departure from the city that he had enjoyed an opportunity of
exhibiting himself in the garniture of servile mourning. He was a great
lover of propriety, and had been a little stimulated to this display by
a desire to show his sable friend from Georgia all the decencies of a
New York funeral; and the ebullition of his zeal went off very well,
producing no other result than a mild lecture from Miss Peyton at his
return, on the fitness of things. The attendance of the black was
thought well enough in itself; but the napkin was deemed a superfluous
exhibition of ceremony, at the funeral of a man who had performed all
the menial offices in his own person.

The graveyard was an inclosure on the grounds of Mr. Wharton, which had
been fenced with stone and set apart for the purpose, by that
gentleman, some years before. It was not, however, intended as a burial
place for any of his own family. Until the fire, which raged as the
British troops took possession of New York, had laid Trinity in ashes, a
goodly gilded tablet on its walls proclaimed the virtues of his deceased
parents, and beneath a flag of marble, in one of the aisles of the
church, their bones were left to molder in aristocratical repose.
Captain Lawton made a movement as if he was disposed to follow the
procession, when it left the highway, to enter the field which contained
the graves of the humble dead, but he was recalled to recollection by a
hint from his companion that he was taking the wrong road.

"Of all the various methods which have been adopted by man for the
disposal of his earthly remains, which do you prefer, Captain Lawton?"
said the surgeon, as they separated from the little procession. "In some
countries the body is exposed to be devoured by wild beasts; in others
it is suspended in the air to exhale its substance in the manner of
decomposition; in other regions it is consumed on the funeral pile, and,
again, it is inhumed in the bowels of the earth; every people have their
own particular fashion, and to which do you give the preference?"

"All are agreeable," said the trooper, following the group they had left
with his eyes; "though the speediest interments give the cleanest
fields. Of which are you an admirer?"

"The last, as practiced by ourselves, for the other three are
destructive of all the opportunities for dissection; whereas, in the
last, the coffin can lie in peaceful decency, while the remains are made
to subserve the useful purposes of science. Ah! Captain Lawton, I enjoy
comparatively but few opportunities of such a nature, to what I expected
on entering the army."

"To what may these pleasures numerically amount in a year?" said the
captain, withdrawing his gaze from the graveyard.

"Within a dozen, upon my honor; my best picking is when the corps is
detached; for when we are with the main army, there are so many boys to
be satisfied, that I seldom get a good subject. Those youngsters are as
wasteful as prodigals, and as greedy as vultures."

"A dozen!" echoed the trooper, in surprise. "Why, I furnish you that
number with my own hands."

"Ah! Jack," returned the doctor, approaching the subject with great
tenderness of manner, "it is seldom I can do anything with your
patients; you disfigure them woefully. Believe me, John, when I tell you
as a friend that your system is all wrong; you unnecessarily destroy
life, and then you injure the body so that it is unfit for the only use
that can be made of a dead man."

The trooper maintained a silence, which he thought would be the most
probable means of preserving peace between them; and the surgeon,
turning his head from taking a last look at the burial, as they rode
around the foot of the hill that shut the valley from their sight,
continued with a suppressed sigh,--

"One might get a natural death from that graveyard to-night, if there
was but time and opportunity! The patient must be the father of the lady
we saw this morning."

"The petticoat doctor!--she with the aurora borealis complexion," said
the trooper, with a smile, that began to cause uneasiness to his
companion. "But the lady was not the gentleman's daughter, only his
medico-petticoat attendant; and the Harvey, whose name was made to rime
with every word in her song, is the renowned peddler spy."

"What? He who unhorsed you?"

"No man ever unhorsed me, Dr. Sitgreaves," said the dragoon, gravely. "I
fell by mischance of Roanoke; rider and beast kissed the earth
together."

"A warm embrace, from the love spots it left on your cuticle; 'tis a
thousand pities that you cannot find where the tattling rascal
lies hid."

"He followed his father's body."

"And you let him pass!" cried the surgeon, checking his horse. "Let us
return immediately, and take him; to-morrow you shall have him hanged,
Jack,--and, damn him, I'll dissect him!"

"Softly, softly, my dear Archibald. Would you arrest a man while paying
the last offices to a dead father? Leave him to me, and I pledge myself
he shall have justice."

The doctor muttered his dissatisfaction at any postponement of
vengeance, but he was compelled to acquiesce, from a regard to his
reputation for propriety; and they continued their ride to the quarters
of the corps, engaged in various discussions concerning the welfare of
the human body.

Birch supported the grave and collected manner that was thought becoming
in a male mourner, on such occasions, and to Katy was left the part of
exhibiting the tenderness of the softer sex. There are some people,
whose feelings are of such nature that they cannot weep unless it be in
proper company, and the spinster was a good deal addicted to this
congregational virtue. After casting her eyes around the small
assemblage, the housekeeper found the countenances of the few females,
who were present, fixed on her in solemn expectation, and the effect was
instantaneous; the maiden really wept, and she gained no inconsiderable
sympathy, and some reputation for a tender heart, from the spectators.
The muscles of the peddler's face were seen to move, and as the first
clod of earth fell on the tenement of his father, sending up that dull,
hollow sound that speaks so eloquently the mortality of man, his whole
frame was for an instant convulsed. He bent his body down, as if in
pain, his fingers worked while the hands hung lifeless by his side, and
there was an expression in his countenance that seemed to announce a
writhing of the soul; but it was not unresisted, and it was transient.
He stood erect, drew a long breath, and looked around him with an
elevated face, that even seemed to smile with a consciousness of having
obtained the mastery. The grave was soon filled; a rough stone, placed
at either extremity, marked its position, and the turf, whose faded
vegetation was adapted to the fortunes of the deceased, covered the
little hillock with the last office of seemliness. This office ended,
the neighbors, who had officiously pressed forward to offer their
services in performing their solemn duty, paused, and lifting their
hats, stood looking towards the mourner, who now felt himself to be
really alone in the world. Uncovering his head also, the peddler
hesitated a moment, to gather energy, and spoke.

"My friends and neighbors," he said, "I thank you for assisting me to
bury my dead out of my sight."

A solemn pause succeeded the customary address, and the group dispersed
in silence, some few walking with the mourners back to their own
habitation, but respectfully leaving them at its entrance. The peddler
and Katy were followed into the building by one man, however, who was
well known to the surrounding country by the significant term of "a
speculator." Katy saw him enter, with a heart that palpitated with
dreadful forebodings, but Harvey civilly handed him a chair, and
evidently was prepared for the visit.

The peddler went to the door, and, taking a cautious glance about the
valley, quickly returned, and commenced the following dialogue:--

"The sun has just left the top of the eastern hill; my time presses me:
here is the deed for the house and lot; everything is done according
to law."

The other took the paper, and conned its contents with a deliberation
that proceeded partly from his caution, and partly from the unlucky
circumstance of his education having been much neglected when a youth.
The time occupied in this tedious examination was employed by Harvey in
gathering together certain articles which he intended to include in the
stores that were to leave the habitation with himself. Katy had already
inquired of the peddler whether the deceased had left a will; and she
saw the Bible placed in the bottom of a new pack, which she had made
for his accommodation, with a most stoical indifference; but as the six
silver spoons were laid carefully by its side, a sudden twinge of her
conscience objected to such a palpable waste of property, and she
broke silence.

"When you marry, Harvey, you may miss those spoons."

"I never shall marry."

"Well, if you don't there's no occasion to make rash promises, even to
yourself. One never knows what one may do, in such a case. I should like
to know, of what use so many spoons can be to a single man; for my part,
I think it is a duty for every man who is well provided, to have a wife
and family to maintain."

At the time when Katy expressed this sentiment, the fortune of women in
her class of life consisted of a cow, a bed, the labors of their own
hands in the shape of divers pillowcases, blankets, and sheets, with,
where fortune was unusually kind, a half dozen silver spoons. The
spinster herself had obtained all the other necessaries by her own
industry and prudence, and it can easily be imagined that she saw the
articles she had long counted her own vanish in the enormous pack, with
a dissatisfaction that was in no degree diminished by the declaration
that had preceded the act. Harvey, however, disregarded her opinions and
feelings, and continued his employment of filling the pack, which soon
grew to something like the ordinary size of the peddler's burden.

"I'm rather timersome about this conveyance," said the purchaser, having
at length waded through the covenants of the deed.

"Why so?"

"I'm afraid it won't stand good in law. I know that two of the neighbors
leave home to-morrow morning, to have the place entered for
confiscation; and if I should give forty pounds, and lose it all,
'twould be a dead pull back to me."

"They can only take my right," said the peddler. "Pay me two hundred
dollars, and the house is yours; you are a well-known Whig, and you at
least they won't trouble." As Harvey spoke, there was a strange
bitterness of manner, mingled with the shrewd care he expressed
concerning the sale of his property.

"Say one hundred, and it is a bargain," returned the man, with a grin
that he meant for a good-natured smile.

"A bargain!" echoed the peddler, in surprise. "I thought the bargain
already made."

"Nothing is a bargain," said the purchaser, with a chuckle, "until
papers are delivered, and the money paid in hand."

"You have the paper."

"Aye, and will keep it, if you will excuse the money. Come, say one
hundred and fifty, and I won't be hard; here--here is just the money."

The peddler looked from the window, and saw with dismay that the evening
was fast advancing, and knew well that he endangered his life by
remaining in the dwelling after dark; yet he could not tolerate the idea
of being defrauded in this manner, in a bargain that had already been
fairly made; he hesitated.

"Well," said the purchaser, rising, "mayhap you can find another man to
trade with between this and morning, but if you don't, your title won't
be worth much afterwards."

"Take it, Harvey," said Katy, who felt it impossible to resist a tender
like the one before her; for the purchase money was in English guineas.
Her voice roused the peddler, and a new idea seemed to strike him.

"I agree to the price," he said; and, turning to the spinster, he placed
part of the money in her hand, as he continued, "Had I other means to
pay you, I would have lost all, rather than suffer myself to be
defrauded of part."

"You may lose all yet," muttered the stranger, with a sneer, as he rose
and left the building.

"Yes," said Katy, following him with her eyes, "he knows your failing,
Harvey; he thinks with me, now the old gentleman is gone, you will want
a careful body to take care of your concerns."

The peddler was busied in making arrangements for his departure, and he
took no notice of this insinuation, while the spinster returned again to
the attack. She had lived so many years in expectation of a termination
to her hopes, so different from that which now seemed likely to occur,
that the idea of separation began to give her more uneasiness than she
had thought herself capable of feeling, about a man so destitute and
friendless.

"Have you another house to go to?" inquired Katy.

"Providence will provide me with a home."

"Yes," said the housekeeper, "but maybe 'twill not be to your liking."

"The poor must not be difficult."

"I'm sure I'm anything but a difficult body," cried the spinster, very
hastily; "but I love to see things becoming, and in their places; yet I
wouldn't be hard to persuade to leave this place myself. I can't say I
altogether like the ways of the people hereabouts."

"The valley is lovely," said the peddler, with fervor, "and the people
like all the race of man. But to me it matters nothing; all places are
now alike, and all faces equally strange." As he spoke he dropped the
article he was packing from his hand, and seated himself on a chest,
with a look of vacant misery.

"Not so, not so," said Katy, shoving her chair nearer to the place where
the peddler sat. "Not so, Harvey, you must know me at least; my face
cannot be strange to you."

Birch turned his eyes slowly on her countenance, which exhibited more of
feeling, and less of self, than he had ever seen there before; he took
her hand kindly, and his own features lost some of their painful
expression, as he said,--

"Yes, good woman, you, at least, are not a stranger to me; you may do me
partial justice; when others revile me possibly your feelings may lead
you to say something in my defense."

"That I will; that I would!" said Katy, eagerly. "I will defend you,
Harvey, to the last drop; let me hear them that dare to revile you! You
say true, Harvey, I am partial and just to you; what if you do like the
king? I have often heard it said he was at the bottom a good man; but
there's no religion in the old country, for everybody allows the
ministers are desperate bad!"

The peddler paced the floor in evident distress of mind; his eyes had a
look of wildness that Katy had never witnessed before, and his step was
measured, with a dignity that appalled the housekeeper.

"While my father lived," murmured Harvey, unable to smother his
feelings, "there was one who read my heart, and oh! what a consolation
to return from my secret marches of danger, and the insults and wrongs
that I suffered, to receive his blessing and his praise; but he is
gone," he continued, stopping and gazing wildly towards the corner that
used to hold the figure of his parent, "and who is there to do
me justice?"

"Why, Harvey! Harvey!"

"Yes, there is one who will, who must know me before I die! Oh! it is
dreadful to die, and leave such a name behind me."

"Don't talk of dying, Harvey," said the spinster, glancing her eye
around the room, and pushing the wood in the fire to obtain a light from
the blaze.

The ebullition of feeling in the peddler was over. It had been excited
by the events of the past day, and a vivid perception of his sufferings.
It was not long, however, that passion maintained an ascendency ever the
reason of this singular man; and perceiving that the night had already
thrown an obscurity around objects without doors, he hastily threw his
pack over his shoulders, and taking Katy kindly by the hand, in
leavetaking,--

