of these immigrants went on to the Yadkin, we are told, to unite with
others of their clan who had been for some time in 13 that district. The
exact time of the first Highlander on the Yadkin cannot be ascertained,
as there were no court records and the offices of the land companies
were not then open for the sale of these remote regions. But by 1753
there were not less than four thousand Gaels in Cumberland County,
where they occupied the chief magisterial posts; and they were already
spreading over the lands now comprised within Moore, Anson, Richmond,
Robeson, Bladen, and Sampson counties. In these counties Gaelic was as
commonly heard as English.

In the years immediately preceding the Revolution and even in 1776
itself they came in increasing numbers. They knew nothing of the
smoldering fire just about to break into flames in the country of their
choice, but the Royal Governor, Josiah Martin, knew that Highland arms
would soon be needed by His Majesty. He knew something of Highland
honor, too; for he would not let the Gaels proceed after their landing
until they had bound themselves by oath to support the Government
of King George. So it was that the unfortunate Highlanders found
themselves, according to their strict code of honor, forced to wield
arms against the very Americans who had received and 14 befriended
them--and for the crowned brother of a prince whose name is execrated to
this day in Highland song and story!

They were led by Allan MacDonald of Kingsborough; and tradition gives us
a stirring picture of Allan's wife--the famous Flora MacDonald, who
in Scotland had protected the Young Pretender in his flight--making an
impassioned address in Gaelic to the Highland soldiers and urging them
on to die for honor's sake. When this Highland force was conquered by
the Americans, the large majority willingly bound themselves not to
fight further against the American cause and were set at liberty.
Many of them felt that, by offering their lives to the swords of the
Americans, they had canceled their obligation to King George and were
now free to draw their swords again and, this time, in accordance with
their sympathies; so they went over to the American side and fought
gallantly for independence.

Although the brave glory of this pioneer age shines so brightly on the
Lion Rampant of Caledonia, not to Scots alone does that whole glory
belong. The second largest racial stream which flowed into the Back
Country of Virginia and 15 North Carolina was German. Most of
these Germans went down from Pennsylvania and were generally called
Pennsylvania Dutch, an incorrect rendering of _Pennsylvänische
Deutsche_. The upper Shenandoah Valley was settled almost entirely
by Germans. They were members of the Lutheran, German Reformed, and
Moravian churches. The cause which sent vast numbers of this sturdy
people across the ocean, during the first years of the eighteenth
century, was religious persecution. By statute and by sword the Roman
Catholic powers of Austria sought to wipe out the Salzburg Lutherans and
the Moravian followers of John Huss. In that region of the Rhine country
known in those days as the German Palatinate, now a part of Bavaria,
Protestants were being massacred by the troops of Louis of France,
then engaged in the War of the Spanish Succession (1701-13) and in the
zealous effort to extirpate heretics from the soil of Europe. In 1708,
by proclamation, Good Queen Anne offered protection to the persecuted
Palatines and invited them to her dominions. Twelve thousand of them
went to England, where they were warmly received by the English. But
it was no slight task to settle twelve thousand immigrants of an
alien speech in 16 England and enable them to become independent and
self-supporting. A better solution of their problem lay in the Western
World. The Germans needed homes and the Queen's overseas dominions
needed colonists. They were settled at first along the Hudson, and
eventually many of them took up lands in the fertile valley of the
Mohawk.

For fifty years or more German and Austrian Protestants poured into
America. In Pennsylvania their influx averaged about fifteen hundred a
year, and that colony became the distributing center for the German race
in America. By 1727, Adam Müller and his little company had established
the first white settlement in the Valley of Virginia. In 1732 Joist
Heydt went south from York, Pennsylvania, and settled on the Opequan
Creek at or near the site of the present city of Winchester.

The life of Count Zinzendorf, called the Apostle, one of the leaders
of the Moravian immigrants, glows like a star out of those dark and
troublous times. Of high birth and gentle nurture, he forsook whatever
of ease his station promised him and fitted himself for evangelical
work. In 1741 he visited the Wyoming Valley to bring his religion to the
Delawares and Shawanoes. He was not of those picturesque Captains of the
Lord who 17 bore their muskets on their shoulders when they went
forth to preach. Armored only with the shield of faith, the helmet
of salvation, and the sword of the spirit, his feet shod with the
preparation of the gospel of peace, he went out into the country of
these bloodthirsty tribes and told them that he had come to them in
their darkness to teach the love of the Christ which lighteth the world.
The Indians received him suspiciously. One day while he sat in his tent
writing, some Delawares drew near to slay him and were about to strike
when they saw two deadly snakes crawl in from the opposite side of the
tent, move directly towards the Apostle, and pass harmlessly over his
body. Thereafter they regarded him as under spiritual protection. Indeed
so widespread was his good fame among the tribes that for some years all
Moravian settlements along the borders were unmolested. Painted savages
passed through on their way to war with enemy bands or to raid the
border, but for the sake of one consecrated spirit, whom they had seen
death avoid, they spared the lives and goods of his fellow believers.
When Zinzendorf departed a year later, his mantle fell on David
Zeisberger, who lived the love he taught for over fifty years and
converted many savages. 18 Zeisberger was taken before the Governor
and army heads at Philadelphia, who had only too good reason to be
suspicious of priestly counsels in the tents of Shem: but he was able to
impress white men no less than simple savages with the nobility of the
doctrine he had learned from the Apostle.

In 1751 the Moravian Brotherhood purchased one hundred thousand acres in
North Carolina from Lord Granville. Bishop Spangenburg was commissioned
to survey this large acreage, which was situated in the present county
of Forsyth east of the Yadkin, and which is historically listed as the
Wachovia Tract. In 1753, twelve Brethren left the Moravian settlements
of Bethlehem and Nazareth, in Pennsylvania, and journeyed southward to
begin the founding of a colony on their new land. Brother Adam Grube,
one of the twelve, kept a diary of the events of this expedition.¹

¹ This diary is printed in full in _Travels in the American Colonies_
edited by N. D. Mereness. Honor to whom honor is due. We have paid
it, in some measure, to the primitive Gaels of the Highlands for their
warrior strength and their fealty, and to the enlightened Scots of
Ulster for their enterprise and for their sacrifice unto blood that free
conscience and just laws might promote the 19 progress and safeguard
the intercourse of their kind. Now let us take up for a moment Brother
Grube's _Journal_ even as we welcome, perhaps the more gratefully, the
mild light of evening after the flooding sun, or as our hearts, when too
strongly stirred by the deeds of men, turn for rest to the serene faith
and the naïve speech of little children.

The twelve, we learn, were under the leadership of one of their number,
Brother Gottlob. Their earliest alarms on the march were not caused,
as we might expect, by anticipations of the painted Cherokee, but by
encounters with the strenuous Irish. One of these came and laid himself
to sleep beside the Brethren's camp fire on their first night out, after
they had sung their evening hymn and eleven had stretched themselves on
the earth for slumber, while Brother Gottlob, their leader, hanging his
hammock between two trees, ascended--not only in spirit--a little higher
than his charges, and rested well in it. Though the alarming Irishman
did not disturb them, the Brethren's doubts of that race continued, for
Brother Grube wrote on the 14th of October: About four in the morning we
set up our tent, going four miles beyond Carl Isles [Carlisle, seventeen
miles southwest of Harrisburg] so as not to be too near the 20 Irish
Presbyterians. After breakfast the Brethren shaved and then we rested
under our tent.… People who were staying at the Tavern came to see what
kind of folk we were.… Br Gottlob held the evening service and then we
lay down around our cheerful fire, and Br Gottlob in his hammock.
Two other jottings give us a racial kaleidoscope of the settlers and
wayfarers of that time. On one day the Brethren bought some hay from a
Swiss, later some kraut from a German which tasted very good to us; and
presently an Englishman came by and drank a cup of tea with us and was
very grateful for it. Frequently the little band paused while some of
the Brethren went off to the farms along the route to help cut hay.
These kindly acts were usually repaid with gifts of food or produce.

One day while on the march they halted at a tavern and farm in
Shenandoah Valley kept by a man whose name Brother Grube wrote down as
Severe. Since we know that Brother Grube's spelling of names other than
German requires editing, we venture to hazard a guess that the name he
attempted to set down as it sounded to him was Sevier. And we wonder if,
in his brief sojourn, he saw a lad of eight years, slim, tall, and 21
blond, with daring and mischievous blue eyes, and a certain curve of the
lips that threatened havoc in the hearts of both sexes when he should be
a man and reach out with swift hands and reckless will for his desires.
If he saw this lad, he beheld John Sevier, later to become one of the
most picturesque and beloved heroes of the Old Southwest.

Hardships abounded on the Brethren's journey, but faith and the
Christian's joy, which no man taketh from him, met and surmounted them.
Three and a half miles beyond, the road forked.… We took the right hand
road but found no water for ten miles. It grew late and we had to drive
five miles into the night to find a stoppingplace. Two of the Brethren
went ahead to seek out the road through the darkened wilderness. There
were rough hills in the way; and, the horses being exhausted, Brethren
had to help push. But, in due season, Br Nathanael held evening prayer
and then we slept in the care of Jesus, with Brother Gottlob as usual
in his hammock. Three days later the record runs: Toward evening we
saw Jeams River, the road to it ran down so very steep a hill that we
fastened a small tree to the back of our wagon, locked the wheels, and
the Brethren held back by the tree with all their 22 might. Even then
the wagon went down so fast that most of the Brethren lost their
footing and rolled and tumbled pell-mell. But Faith makes little of
such mishaps: No harm was done and we thanked the Lord that he had so
graciously protected us, for it looked dangerous and we thought at times
that it could not possibly be done without accident but we got down
safely… we were all very tired and sleepy and let the angels be our
guard during the night. Rains fell in torrents, making streams almost
impassable and drenching the little band to the skin. The hammock was
empty one night, for they had to spend the dark hours trench-digging
about their tent to keep it from being washed away. Two days later
(the 10th of November) the weather cleared and we spent most of the day
drying our blankets and mending and darning our stockings. They also
bought supplies from settlers who, as Brother Grube observed without
irony, are glad we have to remain here so long and that it means money
for them. In the afternoon we held a little Lovefeast and rested our
souls in the loving sacrifice of Jesus, wishing for beloved Brethren in
Bethlehem and that they and we might live ever close to Him.…

Nov. 16. We rose early to ford the river. The bank was so steep that
we hung a tree behind the wagon, 23 fastening it in such a way that we
could quickly release it when the wagon reached the water. The current
was very swift and the lead horses were carried down a bit with it. The
water just missed running into the wagon but we came safely to the other
bank, which however we could not climb but had to take half the things
out of the wagon, tie ropes to the axle on which we could pull, help our
horses which were quite stiff, and so we brought our ark again to dry
land.

On the evening of the 17th of November the twelve arrived safely on
their land on the Etkin (Yadkin), having been six weeks on the march.
They found with joy that, as ever, the Lord had provided for them. This
time the gift was a deserted cabin, large enough that we could all
lie down around the walls. We at once made preparation for a little
Lovefeast and rejoiced heartily with one another.

In the deserted log cabin, which, to their faith, seemed as one of
those mansions not built with hands and descended miraculously from the
heavens, they held their Lovefeast, while wolves padded and howled about
the walls; and in that Pentacostal hour the tongue of fire descended
upon Brother Gottlob, so that he made a new song unto the Lord. Who
shall venture to say it is not better worth preserving than many a
classic?

24

     We hold arrival Lovefeast here
     In Carolina land,
     A company of Brethren true,
     A little Pilgrim-Band,
     Called by the Lord to be of those
     Who through the whole world go,
     To bear Him witness everywhere
     And nought but Jesus know.

Then, we are told, the Brethren lay down to rest and Br Gottlob hung his
hammock above our heads--as was most fitting on this of all nights; for
is not the Poet's place always just a little nearer to the stars?

The pioneers did not always travel in groups. There were families who
set off alone. One of these now claims our attention, for there was a
lad in this family whose name and deeds were to sound like a ballad
of romance from out the dusty pages of history. This family's name was
Boone.

Neither Scots nor Germans can claim Daniel Boone; he was in blood a
blend of English and Welsh; in character wholly English. His grandfather
George Boone was born in 1666 in the hamlet of Stoak, near Exeter in
Devonshire. George Boone was a weaver by trade and a Quaker by religion.
In England in his time the Quakers were 25 oppressed, and George
Boone therefore sought information of William Penn, his coreligionist,
regarding the colony which Penn had established in America. In 1712 he
sent his three elder children, George, Sarah, and Squire, to spy out
the land. Sarah and Squire remained in Pennsylvania, while their brother
returned to England with glowing reports. On August 17, 1717, George
Boone, his wife, and the rest of his children journeyed to Bristol and
sailed for Philadelphia, arriving there on the 10th of October. The
Boones went first to Abingdon, the Quaker farmers' community. Later
they moved to the northwestern frontier hamlet of North Wales, a Welsh
community which, a few years previously, had turned Quaker. Sarah Boone
married a German named Jacob Stover, who had settled in Oley Township,
Berks County. In 1718 George Boone took up four hundred acres in Oley,
or, to be exact, in the subdivision later called Exeter, and there
he lived in his log cabin until 1744, when he died at the age of
seventy-eight. He left eight children, fifty-two grandchildren, and ten
great-grandchildren, seventy descendants in all--English, German, Welsh,
and Scotch-Irish blended into one family of Americans.¹

¹ R. G. Thwaites, _Daniel Boone_, p. 5. 26 Among the Welsh Quakers was a
family of Morgans. In 1720 Squire Boone married Sarah Morgan. Ten
years later he obtained 250 acres in Oley on Owatin Creek, eight miles
southeast of the present city of Reading; and here, in 1734, Daniel
Boone was born, the fourth son and sixth child of Squire and Sarah
Morgan Boone. Daniel Boone therefore was a son of the frontier. In his
childhood he became familiar with hunters and with Indians, for even
the red men came often in friendly fashion to his grandfather's house.
Squire Boone enlarged his farm by thrift. He continued at his trade of
weaving and kept five or six looms going, making homespun cloth for the
market and his neighbors.

Daniel's father owned grazing grounds several miles north of the
homestead and each season he sent his stock to the range. Sarah Boone
and her little Daniel drove the cows. From early spring till late
autumn, mother and son lived in a rustic cabin alone on the frontier. A
rude dairy house stood over a cool spring, and here Sarah Boone made her
butter and cheese. Daniel, aged ten at this time, watched the herds; at
sunset he drove them to the cabin for milking, and locked them in the
cowpens at night.

27 He was not allowed firearms at that age, so he shaped for himself a
weapon that served him well. This was a slender smoothly shaved sapling
with a small bunch of gnarled roots at one end. So expert was he in the
launching of this primitive spear that he easily brought down birds and
small game. When he reached his twelfth year, his father bought him a
rifle; and he soon became a crack shot. A year later we find him setting
off on the autumn hunt--after driving the cattle in for the winter--with
all the keenness and courage of a man twice his thirteen years. His
rifle enabled him to return with meat for the family and skins to be
traded in Philadelphia. When he was fourteen his brother Sam married
Sarah Day, an intelligent young Quakeress who took a special interest in
her young brother-in-law and taught him the rudiments of three R's.

The Boones were prosperous and happy in Oley and it may be wondered why
they left their farms and their looms, both of which were profitable,
and set their faces towards the Unknown. It is recorded that, though
the Boones were Quakers, they were of a high mettle and were not
infrequently dealt with by the Meeting. Two of Squire Boone's children
married worldlings--non-Quakers--and 28 were in consequence disowned by
the Society. In defiance of his sect, which strove to make him sever all
connection with his unruly offspring, Squire Boone refused to shut his
doors on the son and the daughter who had scandalized local Quakerdom.
The Society of Friends thereupon expelled him. This occurred apparently
during the winter of 1748-49. In the spring of 1750 we see the whole
Boone family (save two sons) with their wives and children, their
household goods and their stock, on the great highway, bound for a land
where the hot heart and the belligerent spirit shall not be held amiss.

Southward through the Shenandoah goes the Boone caravan. The women and
children usually sit in the wagons. The men march ahead or alongside,
keeping a keen eye open for Indian or other enemy in the wild, their
rifles under arm or over the shoulder. Squire Boone, who has done with
Quakerdom and is leading all that he holds dear out to larger horizons,
is ahead of the line, as we picture him, ready to meet first whatever
