can rely upon you.'

'Entirely,' said I.

'To the death,' cried Gerard.

'It is everything to me to have two brave men at my back,' said she, and
so, with a smile, gave her horse its head and cantered off over the
downland in the direction of Grosbois.

For my part I remained in thought for some time, wondering what plan she
could have in her head by which she hoped to get upon the track of
Toussac.  A woman's wit, spurred by the danger of her lover, might
perhaps succeed where Fouche and Savary had failed.  When at last I
turned my horse I found my young hussar still staring after the distant
rider.

'My faith!  There is the woman for you, Etienne!' he kept repeating.
'What an eye!  What a smile!  What a rider!  And she is not afraid of
the Emperor.  Oh, Etienne, here is the woman who is worthy of you!'

These were the little sentences which he kept muttering to himself until
she vanished over the hill, when he became conscious at last of my
presence.

'You are mademoiselle's cousin?' he asked.  'You are joined with me in
doing something for her.  I do not yet know what it is, but I am
perfectly ready to do it.'

'It is to capture Toussac.'

'Excellent!'

'In order to save the life of her lover.'

There was a struggle in the face of the young hussar, but his more
generous nature won.

'Sapristi! I will do even that if it will make her the happier!' he
cried, and he shook the hand which I extended towards him.  'The Hussars
of Bercheny are quartered over yonder, where you see the lines of
picketed horses.  If you will send for Lieutenant Etienne Gerard you
will find a sure blade always at your disposal.  Let me hear from you
then, and the sooner the better!'  He shook his bridle and was off, with
youth and gallantry in every line of him, from his red toupet and
flowing dolman to the spur which twinkled on his heel.

But for four long days no word came from my cousin as to her quest, nor
did I hear from this grim uncle of mine at the Castle of Grosbois.
For myself I had gone into the town of Boulogne and had hired such a
room as my thin purse could afford over the shop of a baker named Vidal,
next to the Church of St. Augustin, in the Rue des Vents.  Only last
year I went back there under that strange impulse which leads the old to
tread once more with dragging feet the same spots which have sounded to
the crisp tread of their youth.  The room is still there, the very
pictures and the plaster head of Jean Bart which used to stand upon the
side table.  As I stood with my back to the narrow window, I had around
me every smallest detail upon which my young eyes had looked; nor was I
conscious that my own heart and feelings had undergone much change.  And
yet there, in the little round glass which faced me, was the long drawn,
weary face of an aged man, and out of the window, when I turned, were
the bare and lonely downs which had been peopled by that mighty host of
a hundred and fifty thousand men.  To think that the Grand Army should
have vanished away like a shredding cloud upon a windy day, and yet that
every sordid detail of a bourgeois lodging should remain unchanged!
Truly, if man is not humble it is not for want of having his lesson
taught to him by Nature.

My first care after I had chosen my room was to send to Grosbois for
that poor little bundle which I had carried ashore with me that squally
night from the English lugger.  My next was to use the credit which my
favourable reception by the Emperor and his assurance of employment had
given me in order to obtain such a wardrobe as would enable me to appear
without discredit among the richly dressed courtiers and soldiers who
surrounded him.  It was well known that it was his whim that he should
himself be the only plainly-dressed man in the company, and that in the
most luxurious times of the Bourbons there was never a period when fine
linen and a brave coat were more necessary for a man who would keep in
favour.  A new court and a young empire cannot afford to take anything
for granted.

It was upon the morning of the fifth day that I received a message from
Duroc, who was the head of the household, that I was to attend the
Emperor at the headquarters in the camp, and that a seat in one of the
Imperial carriages would be at my disposal that I might proceed with the
Court to Pont de Briques, there to be present at the reception of the
Empress.  When I arrived I was shown at once through the large entrance
tent, and admitted by Constant into the room beyond, where the Emperor
stood with his back to the fire, kicking his heels against the grate.
Talleyrand and Berthier were in attendance, and de Meneval, the
secretary, sat at the writing-table.

'Ah, Monsieur de Laval,' said the Emperor with a friendly nod.
'Have you heard anything yet of your charming cousin?'

'Nothing, Sire,' I answered.

'I fear that her efforts will be in vain.  I wish her every success, for
we have no reason at all to fear this miserable poet, while the other is
formidable.  All the same, an example of some sort must be made.'

The darkness was drawing in, and Constant had appeared with a taper to
light the candles, but the Emperor ordered him out.

'I like the twilight,' said he.  'No doubt, Monsieur de Laval, after
your long residence in England you find yourself also most at home in a
dim light.  I think that the brains of these people must be as dense as
their fogs, to judge by the nonsense which they write in their accursed
papers.'  With one of those convulsive gestures which accompanied his
sudden outbursts of passion he seized a sheaf of late London papers from
the table, and ground them into the fire with his heel.  'An editor!' he
cried in the guttural rasping voice which I had heard when I first met
him.  'What is he?  A dirty man with a pen in a back office.  And he
will talk like one of the great Powers of Europe.  I have had enough of
this freedom of the Press.  There are some who would like to see it
established in Paris.  You are among them, Talleyrand.  For my part I
see no need for any paper at all except the _Moniteur_ by which the
Government may make known its decisions to the people.'

'I am of opinion, Sire,' said the minister, 'that it is better to have
open foes than secret ones, and that it is less dangerous to shed ink
than blood.  What matter if your enemies have leave to rave in a few
Paris papers, as long as you are at the head of five hundred thousand
armed men?'

'Ta, ta, ta!' cried the Emperor impatiently.  'You speak as if I had
received my crown from my father the late king.  But even if I had, it
would be intolerable, this government by newspaper.  The Bourbons
allowed themselves to be criticised, and where are they now?  Had they
used their Swiss Guards as I did the Grenadiers upon the eighteenth
Brumaire what would have become of their precious National Assembly?
There was a time when a bayonet in the stomach of Mirabeau might have
settled the whole matter.  Later it took the heads of a king and queen
and the blood of a hundred thousand people.'

He sat down, and stretched his plump, white-clad legs towards the fire.
Through the blackened shreds of the English papers the red glow beat
upwards upon the beautiful, pallid, sphinx-like face--the face of a
poet, of a philosopher--of anything rather than of a ruthless and
ambitious soldier.  I have heard folk remark that no two portraits of
the Emperor are alike, and the fault does not lie with the artists but
with the fact that every varying mood made him a different man.  But in
his prime, before his features became heavy, I, who have seen sixty
years of mankind, can say that in repose I have never looked upon a more
beautiful face.

'You have no dreams and no illusions, Talleyrand,' said he.  'You are
always practical, cold, and cynical.  But with me, when I am in the
twilight, as now, or when I hear the sound of the sea, my imagination
begins to work.  It is the same when I hear some music--especially music
which repeats itself again and again like some pieces of Passaniello.
They have a strange effect upon me, and I begin to Ossianise.  I get
large ideas and great aspirations.  It is at such times that my mind
always turns to the East, that swarming ant-heap of the human race,
where alone it is possible to be very great.  I renew my dreams of '98.
I think of the possibility of drilling and arming these vast masses of
men, and of precipitating them upon Europe.  Had I conquered Syria I
should have done this, and the fate of the world was really decided at
the siege of Acre.  With Egypt at my feet I already pictured myself
approaching India, mounted upon an elephant, and holding in my hand a
new version of the Koran which I had myself composed.  I have been born
too late.  To be accepted as a world's conqueror one must claim to be
divine.  Alexander declared himself to be the son of Jupiter, and no one
questioned it.  But the world has grown old, and has lost its
enthusiasms.  What would happen if I were to make the same claim?
Monsieur de Talleyrand would smile behind his hand, and the Parisians
would write little lampoons upon the walls.'

He did not appear to be addressing us, but rather to be expressing his
thoughts aloud, while allowing them to run to the most fantastic and
extravagant lengths.  This it was which he called Ossianising, because
it recalled to him the wild vague dreams of the Gaelic Ossian, whose
poems had always had a fascination for him.  De Meneval has told me that
for an hour at a time he has sometimes talked in this strain of the most
intimate thoughts and aspirations of his heart, while his courtiers have
stood round in silence waiting for the instant when he would return once
more to his practical and incisive self.

'The great ruler,' said he, 'must have the power of religion behind him
as well as the power of the sword.  It is more important to command the
souls than the bodies of men.  The Sultan, for example, is the head of
the faith as well as of the army.  So were some of the Roman Emperors.
My position must be incomplete until this is accomplished.  At the
present instant there are thirty departments in France where the Pope is
more powerful than I am.  It is only by universal dominion that peace
can be assured in the world.  When there is only one authority in
Europe, seated at Paris, and when all the kings are so many lieutenants
who hold their crowns from the central power of France, it is then that
the reign of peace will be established.  Many powers of equal strength
must always lead to struggles until one becomes predominant.  Her
central position, her wealth and her history, all mark France out as
being the power which will control and regulate the others.  Germany is
divided.   Russia is barbarous.  England is insular.  France only
remains.'

I began to understand as I listened to him that my friends in England
had not been so far wrong when they had declared that as long as he
lived--this little thirty-six year old artilleryman--there could not
possibly be any peace in the world.  He drank some coffee which Constant
had placed upon the small round table at his elbow.  Then he leaned back
in his chair once more, still staring moodily at the red glow of the
fire, with his chin sunk upon his chest.

'In those days,' said he, 'the kings of Europe will walk behind the
Emperor of France in order to hold up his train at his coronation. Each
of them will have to maintain a palace in Paris, and the city will
stretch as far as Versailles.  These are the plans which I have made for
Paris if she will show herself to be worthy of them. But I have no love
for them, these Parisians, and they have none for me, for they cannot
forget that I turned my guns upon them once before, and they know that I
am ready to do so again.  I have made them admire me and fear me, but I
have never made them like me.  Look what I have done for them.  Where
are the treasures of Genoa, the pictures and statues of Venice and of
the Vatican?  They are in the Louvre.  The spoils of my victories have
gone to decorate her.  But they must always be changing, always
chattering.  They wave their hats at me now, but they would soon be
waving their fists if I did not give them something to talk over and to
wonder at.  When other things are quiet, I have the dome of the
Invalides regilded to keep their thoughts from mischief.  Louis XIV.
gave them wars.   Louis XV. gave them the gallantries and scandals of
his Court.  Louis XVI. gave them nothing, so they cut off his head. It
was you who helped to bring him to the scaffold, Talleyrand.'

'No, Sire, I was always a moderate.'

'At least, you did not regret his death.'

'The less so, since it has made room for you,
Sire.'

'Nothing could have held me down, Talleyrand.  I was born to reach
the highest.  It has always been the same with me.  I remember when
we were arranging the Treaty of Campo Formio--I a young general under
thirty--there was a high vacant throne with the Imperial arms in the
Commissioner's tent.  I instantly sprang up the steps, and threw myself
down upon it. I could not endure to think that there was anything above
myself.  And all the time I knew in my heart all that was going to 
happen to me.  Even in the days when my brother Lucien and I lived in
a little room upon a few francs a week, I knew perfectly well that the
day would come when I should stand where I am now.  And yet I had no
prospects and no reason for any great hopes.  I was not clever at school.
I was only the forty-second out of fifty-eight.  At mathematics I had
perhaps some ability, but at nothing else.  The truth is that I was
always dreaming when the others were working.  There was nothing to
encourage my ambition, for the only thing which I inherited from my
father was a weak stomach.  Once, when I was very young, I went up to
Paris with my father and my sister Caroline. We were in the Rue
Richelieu, and we saw the king pass in his carriage. Who would have
thought that the little boy from Corsica, who took his hat off and
stared, was destined to be the next monarch of France? And yet even then
I felt as if that carriage ought to belong to me. What is it, Constant?'

The discreet valet bent down and whispered something to the Emperor.

'Ah, of course,' said he.  'It was an appointment.  I had forgotten it.
Is she there?'

'Yes, Sire.'

'In the side room?'

'Yes, Sire.'

Talleyrand and Berthier exchanged glances, and the minister began to
move towards the door.

'No, no, you can remain here,' said the Emperor.  'Light the lamps,
Constant, and have the carriages ready in half-an-hour.  Look over this
draft of a letter to the Emperor of Austria, and let me have your
observations upon it, Talleyrand.  De Meneval, there is a lengthy report
here as to the new dockyard at Brest.  Extract what is essential from
it, and leave it upon my desk at five o'clock to-morrow morning.
Berthier, I will have the whole army into the boats at seven.  We will
see if they can embark within three hours.  Monsieur de Laval, you will
wait here until we start for Pont de Briques.'  So with a crisp order to
each of us, he walked with little swift steps across the room, and I saw
his square green back and white legs framed for an instant in the
doorway.  There was the flutter of a pink skirt beyond, and then the
curtains closed behind him.

Berthier stood biting his nails, while Talleyrand looked at him with a
slight raising of his bushy eyebrows.  De Meneval with a rueful face was
turning over the great bundle of papers which had to be copied by
morning.  Constant, with a noiseless tread, was lighting the candles
upon the sconces round the room.

'Which is it?' I heard the minister whisper.

'The girl from the Imperial Opera,' said Berthier.

'Is the little Spanish lady out of favour then?'

'No, I think not.  She was here yesterday.'

'And the other, the Countess?'

'She has a cottage at Ambleteuse?'

'But we must have no scandal about the Court,' said Talleyrand, with a
sour smile, recalling the moral sentiments with which the Emperor had
reproved him.  'And now, Monsieur de Laval,' he added, drawing me aside,
'I very much wish to hear from you about the Bourbon party in England.
You must have heard their views.  Do they imagine that they have any
chance of success?'

And so for ten minutes he plied me with questions, which showed me
clearly that the Emperor had read him aright, and that he was
determined, come what might, to be upon the side which won.  We were
still talking when Constant entered hurriedly, with a look of anxiety
and perplexity which I could not have imagined upon so smooth and
imperturbable a face.

'Good Heavens, Monsieur Talleyrand,' he cried, clasping and unclasping
his hands.  'Such a misfortune!  Who could have expected it?'

'What is it, then, Constant?'

'Oh, Monsieur, I dare not intrude upon the Emperor.  And yet--And yet--The
Empress is outside, and she is coming in.'



CHAPTER XIV


JOSEPHINE

At this unexpected announcement Talleyrand and Berthier looked at each
other in silence, and for once the trained features of the great
diplomatist, who lived behind a mask, betrayed the fact that he was
still capable of emotion.  The spasm which passed over them was caused,
however, rather by mischievous amusement than by consternation, while
Berthier--who had an honest affection for both Napoleon and Josephine--ran
frantically to the door as if to bar the Empress from entering.
Constant rushed towards the curtains which screened the Emperor's room,
and then, losing courage, although he was known to be a stout-hearted
man, he came running back to Talleyrand for advice.  It was too late
now, however, for Roustem the Mameluke had opened the door, and two
ladies had entered the room.  The first was tall and graceful, with a
