
[Footnote 7: The ancients seem rather uncertain about this personage's
name, for Velleius Paterculus gives _Adduus_, and Florus _Donnes_. The
modern reader may take his choice of the three, and the layman is as
likely to be right as the expert]

[Footnote 8: Between this point and the words "he both adopted Tiberius,"
etc., in chapter 13, two leaves of the codex Marcianus are lacking.
Of the missing portion Xiphilinus and Zonaras supply perhaps
three-sevenths.]

[Footnote 9: These are the words of Xiphilinus. Zonaras presents an
alternate possibility (X, 36) as follows: "Among the Greeks, Dio says,
the coin called _aureus_ has twenty drachmae (denarii) as its regular rate
of exchange."]

[Footnote 10: It seems rather likely that Zonaras has become confused,
and that he should have said "Livia."]

[Footnote 11: Verb supplied by Xylander.]

[Footnote 12: Possibly a reference to the opening of Book Fifty-four.
(Boissee.)]

[Footnote 13: Compare Xenophon, _Cyropaedia_, VIII, 4, 5.]

[Footnote 14: The three words after "kill" are on the basis of a
suggestion made by Boissevain. The MS. has a gap of some fifteen
letters.]

[Footnote 15: Emendation by Mommsen.]

[Footnote 16: Compare Book Fifty-three, chapter 14.]

[Footnote 17: His true name was Archelaus.]

[Footnote 18: Cp. Suetonius, Life of Augustus, chapter 23.]

[Footnote 19: At this point in the codex Marcianus four leaves have been
lost.]



DIO'S ROMAN HISTORY

56

The following is contained in the Fifty-sixth of Dio's Rome:

How Augustus addressed those having children and afterward the childless
and unmarried, and what rules he laid down to apply to them (chapters
1-10).

How Quintilius Varus was defeated by the Celtae and perished (chapters
18-24).

How the Temple of Concord was consecrated (chapter 25).

How the Portico of Livia was consecrated (chapter 27).

How Augustus passed away (chapters 29-47).

Duration of time, six years, in which there were the following
magistrates here enumerated:

Q. Sulpicius Q.F. Camerinus, C. Poppaeus Q.F. Sabinus. (A.D. 9 = a. u.
762.)

P. Cornelius P.F. Dolabella, C. Iunius C.F. Silanus. (A.D. 10 = a. u.
763.)

M. AEmilius Q.F. Lepidus, T. Statilius T.F. Taurus. (A.D. 11 = a. u. 764.)

Germanicus Caesaris F. Caesar, C. Fonteius C.F. Capito. (A.D. 12 = a. u.
765.)

L. Munatius L.F. Plancus, C. Silius C.F. Caecina Largus. (A.D. 13 = a. u.
766.)

Sextus Pompeius Sexti F., Sex. Apuleius Sex. F. (A.D. 14 = a. u. 767.)


_( BOOK 56, BOISSEVAIN.)_

[A.D. 9 (_a. u._ 762)]

[-1-] Tiberius returned to Rome after the winter when Quintus Sulpicius
and Gaius Sabinus were consuls. Augustus went out into the suburbs to
meet him, accompanied him to the Saepta, and there from a platform greeted
the people. Next he performed the ceremonies proper on such an occasion
and had the consuls give triumphal spectacles. And since the knights on
this occasion with great vigor sought for the repeal of the law regarding
the unmarried and the childless, he assembled in one place in the Forum
the unmarried men of this number and in another those who were married or
had children. Seeing that the latter were much fewer in number than the
former he was filled with grief and addressed them to the following
effect:

[-2-] "Though you are but few all together, in comparison with the great
throng that inhabits this city, and are far behind the others, who are
unwilling to fulfill their duties at all, yet for this reason I praise
you the more and I am heartily grateful that you have shown yourselves
obedient and are helping to replenish the fatherland. It is by lives so
conducted that the Romans of later days will become a mighty multitude.
We were at first a mere handful, but when We had recourse to marriage and
begot children we came to surpass all mankind not only in manliness but
in populousness. This we must remember and console the mortal element of
our being with an endless succession of generations like torches. Thus
the one gap which separates us from divine happiness may through relays
of men be filled by immortality. It was for this cause most of all that
that first and greatest god who fashioned us divided the race of mortals
in twain, rendering one half of it male and the other female, and added
love and the compulsion of their intercourse together, making their
association fruitful, that by the young continually born he might in
a way render mortality eternal. Even of the gods themselves some are
believed to be male, the rest female: and the tradition prevails that
some have begotten others and certain ones have been born of others. So,
even among them, who need no such device, marriage and child-begetting
have been approved as noble. [-3-] You have done right, then, to imitate
the gods and right to emulate your fathers, that, just as they begot you,
you may also bring others into the world. Just as you deem them and
name them ancestors, others will regard you and address you in similar
fashion. The undertakings which they nobly achieved and handed down to
you with glory you will hand on to others. The possessions which they
acquired and left to you will leave to others sprung from your own loins.
Surely the best of all things is a woman who is temperate, domestic,
a good house-keeper, a rearer of children; one to gladden you when in
health, to tend you when sick; to be your partner in good fortune, to
console you in misfortune; to restrain the frenzied nature of the youth
and to temper the superannuated severity of the old man. Is it not a
delight to acknowledge a child bearing the nature of both, to nurture and
educate it, a physical image and a spiritual image, so that in its growth
you yourself live again? Is it not most blessed on departing from life to
leave behind a successor to and inheritor of one's substance and family,
something that is one's own, sprung from one's self? And to have only
one's human part waste away, but to live through the child as successor?
We need not be in the hands of aliens, as in war, nor perish utterly, as
in war. These are the private advantages that accrue to those who marry
and beget children: but for the State, for whose sake we ought to do many
things that are even distasteful to us, how excellent and how necessary
it is, if cities and peoples are to exist, if you are to rule others and
others are to obey you, that there should be a multitude of men to till
the earth in peace and quiet, to make voyages, practice arts, follow
handicrafts, men who in war will protect what we already have with the
greater zeal because of family ties and will replace those that fall by
others. Therefore, men,--for you alone may properly be called men,--and
fathers,--for you are worthy to hold this title like myself,--I love you
and I praise you for this, I am glad of the prizes I have already offered
and I will glorify you still more besides by honors and offices. Thus
you may yourselves reap great benefits and leave them to your children
undiminished. I shall now descend to speak to the rest, who have not done
like you, and whose lot will therefore be directly the opposite: you will
thus learn not only from words but by facts even more how far you excel
them."

[-4-] After this speech he made presents to some of them at once and
promised to make others: he then went over to the other throng, to whom
he addressed these words:

"A strange experience has been mine, O--What shall I call you?--Men? But
you do not perform the offices of men.--Citizens? But so far as you are
concerned the city is perishing.--Romans? But you are undertaking to do
away with this name.--Well, at any rate, whoever you are and by whatever
name you delight to be called, mine has been an unexpected experience.
For, though I am always doing everything to promote an increase of
population among you and am now about to rebuke you, I grieve to see that
you are numerous. I could rather wish that those others to whom I have
just spoken were so many than to see you as many as you are; or, still
better, to see you mustered with them,--or at least not to know how
things stand. It is you who without pausing to reflect on the foresight
of the gods or the care of your forefathers are bent upon annihilating
your whole race and making it in truth mortal, upon destroying and ending
the whole Roman nation. What seed of human beings would be left, if all
the remainder of mankind should do the same as you? You are their leaders
and may rightly bear the responsibility for universal destruction. Or,
even if no others emulate you, will you not be justly hated for the very
reason that you overlook what no one else would overlook, and neglect
what no one else would neglect? You are introducing customs and
practices, which, if imitated, would lead to the annihilation of all,
and, if hated, would end in your own punishment. We do not spare
murderers because all persons do not murder, nor do we let temple-robbers
go because not everybody robs temples: but anybody who is convicted of
committing any forbidden act is chastised for the very reason that he
alone, or as one of a small group, does such things as no one else would
do. [-5-] Yet if one should name over the greatest offences, there is
none to compare with that which is now being committed by you, and this
statement holds true not only if you examine crime for crime but if you
compare all of them together with this single one of yours. You have
incurred blood guiltiness by not begetting those who ought to be your
descendants; you are sacrilegious in putting an end to the names and
honors of your ancestors; you are impious in abolishing your families,
which were instituted by the gods, and destroying the greatest of
offerings to them,--the human being,--and by overthrowing in this way
their rites and their temples. Moreover, by causing the downfall of the
government you are disobedient to the laws, and you even betray your
country by rendering her barren and childless: nay more, you lay her even
with the dust by making her destitute of inhabitants. A city consists of
human beings, not of houses or porticos or fora empty of men. Think what
rage would justly seize the great Romulus, the founder of our race, if he
could reflect on the circumstances of his own birth, and then upon
your attitude,--refusing to get children even by lawful marriages! How
wrathful would the Romans who were his followers be when they considered
that they themselves even seized foreign girls, but you are not satisfied
with those of your own race. They actually had children even by their
enemies: you will not beget them even of women with undisputed standing
in the State. How incensed would Curtius be, who endured to die that
the married men might not be sundered from their wives: how indignant
Hersilia, the attendant of her daughter, who instituted for us all the
rites of marriage. Our fathers fought the Sabines to obtain marriages and
made peace through the intercession of their wives and children; they
administered oaths and made sundry treaties for this very purpose: you
are bringing all that labor to naught. Why is it? Do you desire to live
forever apart from women, as the vestal virgins live apart from men?
Then you should be punished like them if you break out into any act of
lewdness.

[-6-] "I know that my words to you appear bitter and harsh. But, first of
all, reflect that physicians, too, treat many patients by burning when
they can not recover health in any other way. In the second place, it is
not my wish or my pleasure to speak them; and hence it is that I have
this further reproach to bring against you, that you have provoked me to
this discourse. If you dislike what I say, do not continue the conduct
for which you are inevitably reprimanded. If my speech wounds any of you,
how much more do your acts wound both me and all the rest of the Romans.
If you vexed in very truth, make a change, that so I may praise and
reward you. You yourselves are aware that I am not irritable by nature
and that I have done, subject to human limitations, all the acts proper
for a good lawgiver. Never in old times was any one permitted to neglect
marriage and the rearing of children, but from the very outset, at the
first establishment of the government, strict laws were passed regarding
them: since then many decrees have been issued by both the senate and the
people, which it would be superfluous to enumerate. I have increased the
penalties for the disobedient in order that through fear of becoming
liable to them you may be brought to your senses. To those that obey I
have offered more numerous and greater prizes than are given for any
other display of excellence, that if for no other reason at least by
this one you may be persuaded to marry and beget children. Yet you, not
striving for any of the recompenses nor fearing any of the penalties,
have despised all these measures, have trodden them all under foot, as
if you were not even inhabitants of the city. You declare you have taken
upon yourselves this free and continent life, without wives and without
children. You are no different from robbers or the most savage [-7-]
beasts. It is not your delight in a solitary existence that leads you
to live without wives. There is not one of you who either eats alone
or sleeps alone, but you want to have opportunity for wantonness and
licentiousness. Yet I have allowed you to court girls still tender and
not yet of age for marriage, in order that having the name of intendant
bridegrooms you may lead a domestic life. And those not in the senatorial
class I have permitted to wed freedwomen, so that if any one through
passion or some inclination should be disposed to such a proceeding he
might go about it lawfully. I have not limited you rigidly to this, even,
but at first gave you three whole years in which to make preparations,
and later two. Yet not even so, by threatening or urging or postponing or
entreating, have I accomplished anything. You see for yourselves how much
larger a mass you constitute than the married men, when you ought by this
time to have furnished us with as many more children, or rather with
several times your number. How otherwise shall families continue? How can
the commonwealth be preserved if we neither marry nor produce children?
Surely you are not expecting some to spring up from the earth to succeed
to your goods and to public affairs, as myths describe. It is neither
pleasing to Heaven nor creditable that our race should cease and the
name of Romans meet extinguishment in us, and the city be given up to
foreigners,--Greek or even barbarians. We liberate slaves chiefly for the
purpose of making out of them as many citizens as possible; we give our
allies a share in the government that our numbers may increase: yet you,
Romans of the original stock, including Quintii, Valerii, Iulli, are
eager that your families and names at once shall perish with you.

[-8-] "I am thoroughly ashamed that I have been led to speak in such a
fashion. Have done with your madness, then, and reflect now if not before
that with many dying all the time by disease and many in the wars it is
impossible for the city to maintain itself unless the multitude in it is
constantly reinforced by those who are ever and anon being born. Let no
one of you think that I am ignorant of the many disagreeable and painful
features that belong to marriage and child-rearing. But bear in mind that
we possess nothing at all good with which some bane is not mingled, and
that in our most abundant and greatest blessings there reside the most
abundant and greatest woes. If you decline to accept the latter, do
not strive to obtain the former. Practically all who possess any real
excellence and pleasure are obliged to work before its enjoyment, to work
at the time, and to work afterward. Why should I lengthen my speech by
going into each one of them in detail? Therefore even if there are
some unpleasant features connected with marriage and the begetting of
children, set over against them the better elements: you will find them
more numerous and more vital. For, in addition to all the other blessings
that naturally inhere in this state of life, the prizes offered by
law--an infinitesimal portion of which determines many to undergo
death--might induce anybody to obey me. And is it not a disgrace that for
rewards which influence others to give up their own lives you should be
unwilling either to marry wives or to rear children?

[-9-] "Therefore, fellow-citizens (for I believe that I have now
persuaded you both to hold fast to the name of citizens and to secure the
additional title of men and fathers), I have administered this rebuke
reluctantly but of necessity, not as your foe nor as one hating you, but
rather loving you and wishing to obtain many others like you,--as one
wishing you to guard lawful hearths, with houses full of descendants,
that we may approach the gods together with wives and children, and
associate with one another standing on an equality in whatever we possess
and harvesting equally the hopes to which it gives rise. How could I
call myself a good ruler over you if I should endure seeing you becoming
constantly fewer? How could I any longer be rightfully named your father,
if you rear no children? Therefore, if you really have a regard for me
and have given me this title not out of flattery but as an honor, desire
yourselves to become men and fathers. Thus you may yourselves share this
title and also render me well named."

[-10-] Such were his words to both groups at that time. After this he
increased the rewards for those having children and by penalties made a
still wider difference between the married and those without wives. He
further allowed each of them a year in which persons who obeyed him might
render themselves non-liable by yielding obedience. Contrary to the
Voconian Law, according to which no woman could inherit any property
over two and a half myriads in value, he gave women permission to become
inheritors of any amount. He also granted the vestal virgins all the
benefits enjoyed by women who had children. Later the Pappian and Poppaean
Law was framed by Marcus Pappius Mutilus and by Quintus Poppaeus Secundus,
who were then consuls for a portion of the year. It turned out that both
of them had not only no children but not even wives. From this very fact
the need of the law was discernible.--These were the events in Rome.

[-11-] Germanicus meanwhile had captured among other posts in Dalmatia
also Splonum, in spite of the fact that it occupied a naturally strong
position, was well protected by walls, and had a huge number of
defenders. Consequently he was unable to accomplish aught with engines
or by assaults, yet he took it as a result of the following coincidence.
Pusio, a Celtic horseman, discharged a stone against the wall which so
shook the superstructure that it immediately fell and dragged down the
man who was leaning upon it. At this the rest were terrified, and in fear
left the wall to ascend the acropolis. Subsequently they surrendered both
it and themselves.

The Romans under Germanicus having reached Raetinium, a city of Dalmatia,
fared rather badly. Their opponents, forced back by the numbers, could
not resist them and therefore placed fire in a circle about themselves
and threw it into the buildings near by, devising a way to keep it surely
from blazing up at once and to make it go unnoticed for a long time. The
enemy after doing this retired to the heights. The Romans, unaware of
their action, followed hard after them expecting to find no work at all
in pillaging extensively. Thus they got inside of the circle of fire and
with their minds directed upon the enemy saw nothing of it until they
were encompassed by it on all sides. Then they found themselves in
imminent danger, being pelted by men from above and injured by fire from
without. They could neither safely stay where they were nor break their
way out without danger. If they stood out of range of the missiles they
were consumed by the fire, or if they jumped away from the flame they
were destroyed by the hurlers of missiles. Some were caught in narrow
places and perished by both at once, wounded on one side and burned on
the other. The majority of those who entered the circle met their fate in
this way. Some few by casting corpses into the very flame and making a
passage over them as over bridges managed to escape. The fire gained
such headway that not even those on the acropolis could stay there, but
abandoned it in the night and hid themselves in subterranean chambers.

[-12-] These were the operations at that point.--Seretium, which Tiberius
had once besieged but not captured, was subdued, and after this some
other towns were more easily won. But since the remainder even under
these conditions offered resistance and the war kept lengthening out and
famine came in its train, especially in Italy, Augustus sent Tiberius
again into Dalmatia. He saw that the soldiers were not for enduring
further delay and were anxious to end the war in some way eyen if it
involved danger; therefore, fearing that if they remained in one place
together they might revolt, he divided them into three parts. One he
assigned to Silvanus and one to Marcus Lepidus; with the remainder he
marched with Germanicus against Bato. Without difficulty the two former
overcame those arrayed in battle opposite them. Tiberius himself went
wandering off through practically the entire country, as Bato appeared
first at one point and then at another: finally, Bato took refuge in Fort
Andetrium, located close to Salonae, and Tiberius, who besieged him,
found himself in sore straits. The garrison had the protection of
fortifications built upon a well guarded rock, difficult of access,
encircled by deep ravines through which torrents roared, and the men had
all necessary provisions, part of which they had previously stored there,
while a part they were still bringing from the mountains, which were
in their hands. Moreover, by ambuscades they interfered with the Roman
provision trains. Hence Tiberius, though supposed to be besieging them,
was himself placed in the position of a besieged force.
