miscarried.  No excuse availed with him.  An unlucky man was as
abhorrent to him as a negligent one.  In this great crisis the king had
trusted him with an all-important message, and that message had not been
delivered.  What could save him now from disgrace and from ruin?
He cared nothing for the dim dungeon in which he found himself, nor for
the uncertain fate which hung over his head, but his heart turned to
lead when he thought of his blasted career, and of the triumph of those
whose jealousy had been aroused by his rapid promotion.  There were his
people in Paris, too--his sweet Adele, his old uncle, who had been as
good as a father to him.  What protector would they have in their
troubles now that he had lost the power that might have shielded them?
How long would it be before they were exposed once more to the
brutalities of Dalbert and his dragoons?  He clenched his teeth at the
thought, and threw himself down with a groan upon the litter of straw
dimly visible in the faint light which streamed through the single
window.

But his energetic comrade had yielded to no feeling of despondency.
The instant that the clang of the prison door had assured him that he
was safe from interruption he had slipped off the bonds which held him
and had felt all round the walls and flooring to see what manner of
place this might be.  His search had ended in the discovery of a small
fireplace at one corner, and of two great clumsy billets of wood, which
seemed to have been left there to serve as pillows for the prisoners.
Having satisfied himself that the chimney was so small that it was
utterly impossible to pass even his head up it, he drew the two blocks
of wood over to the window, and was able, by placing one above the other
and standing on tiptoe on the highest, to reach the bars which guarded
it.  Drawing himself up, and  fixing one toe in an inequality of the
wall, he managed to look out on to the courtyard which they had just
quitted.  The carriage and De Vivonne were passing out through the gate
as he looked, and he heard a moment later the slam of the heavy door and
the clatter of hoofs from the troop of horsemen outside.  The seneschal
and his retainers had disappeared; the torches, too, were gone, and,
save for the measured tread of a pair of sentinels in the yard twenty
feet beneath him, all was silent throughout the great castle.

And a very great castle it was.  Even as he hung there with straining
hands his eyes were running in admiration and amazement over the huge
wall in front of him, with its fringe of turrets and pinnacles and
battlements all lying so still and cold in the moonlight.  Strange
thoughts will slip into a man's head at the most unlikely moments.  He
remembered suddenly a bright summer day over the water when first he had
come down from Albany, and how his father had met him on the wharf by
the Hudson, and had taken him through the water-gate to see Peter
Stuyvesant's house, as a sign of how great this city was which had
passed from the Dutch to the English.  Why, Peter Stuyvesant's house and
Peter Stuyvesant's Bowery villa put together would not make one wing of
this huge pile, which was itself a mere dog-kennel beside the mighty
palace at Versailles.  He would that his father were here now;  and
then, on second thoughts, he would not, for it came back to him that he
was a prisoner in a far land, and that his sight-seeing was being done
through the bars of a dungeon window.

The window was large enough to pass his body through if it were not for
those bars.  He shook them and hung his weight upon them, but they were
as thick as his thumb and firmly welded.  Then, getting some strong hold
for his other foot, he supported himself by one hand while he picked
with his knife at the setting of the iron.  It was cement, as smooth as
glass and as hard as marble.  His knife turned when he tried to loosen
it.  But there was still the stone.  It was sandstone, not so very hard.
If he could cut grooves in it, he might be able to draw out bars,
cement, and all.  He sprang down to the floor again, and was thinking
how he should best set to work, when a groan drew his attention to his
companion.

"You seem sick, friend," said he.

"Sick in mind," moaned the other.  "Oh, the cursed fool that I have
been!  It maddens me!"

"Something on your mind?" said Amos Green, sitting down upon his billets
of wood.  "What was it, then?"

The guardsman made a movement of impatience.  "What was it?  How can you
ask me, when you know as well as I do the wretched failure of my
mission.  It was the king's wish that the archbishop should marry them.
The king's wish is the law.  It must be the archbishop or none.
He should have been at the palace by now.  Ah, my God! I can see the
king's cabinet, I can see him waiting, I can see madame waiting, I can
hear them speak of the unhappy De Catinat--" He buried his face in his
hands once more.

"I see all that," said the American stolidly, "and I see something
more."

"What then?"

"I see the archbishop tying them up together."

"The archbishop!  You are raving."

"Maybe.  But I see him."

"He could not be at the palace."

"On the contrary, he reached the palace about half an hour ago."

De Catinat sprang to his feet.  "At the palace!" he screamed.  "Then who
gave him the message?"

"I did," said Amos Green.



CHAPTER XVIII.


A NIGHT OF SURPRISES.

If the American had expected to surprise or delight his companion by
this curt announcement he was woefully disappointed, for De Catinat
approached him with a face which was full of sympathy and trouble, and
laid his hand caressingly upon his shoulder.

"My dear friend," said he, "I have been selfish and thoughtless.  I have
made too much of my own little troubles and too little of what you have
gone through for me.  That fall from your horse has shaken you more than
you think.  Lie down upon this straw, and see if a little sleep may
not--"

"I tell you that the bishop is there!" cried Amos Green impatiently.

"Quite so.  There is water in this jug, and if I dip my scarf into it
and tie it round your brow--"

"Man alive!  Don't you hear me!  The bishop is there."

"He is, he is," said De Catinat soothingly.  "He is most certainly
there.  I trust that you have no pain?"

The American waved in the air with his knotted fists.  "You think that I
am crazed," he cried, "and, by the eternal, you are enough to make me
so!  When I say that I sent the bishop, I mean that I saw to the job.
You remember when I stepped back to your friend the major?"

It was the soldier's turn to grow excited now.  "Well?" he cried,
gripping the other's arm.

"Well, when we send a scout into the woods, if the matter is worth it,
we send a second one at another hour, and so one or other comes back
with his hair on.  That's the Iroquois fashion, and a good fashion too."

"My God! I believe that you have saved me!"

"You needn't grip on to my arm like a fish-eagle on a trout!  I went
back to the major, then, and I asked him when he was in Paris to pass by
the archbishop's door."

"Well? Well?"

"I showed him this lump of chalk.  'If we've been there,' said I,
'you'll see a great cross on the left side of the door-post.  If there's
no cross, then pull the latch and ask the bishop if he'll come up to the
palace as quick as his horses can bring him.'  The major started an hour
after us; he would be in Paris by half-past ten; the bishop would be in
his carriage by eleven, and he would reach Versailles half an hour ago,
that is to say, about half-past twelve.  By the Lord, I think I've
driven him off his head!"

It was no wonder that the young woodsman was alarmed at the effect of
his own announcement.  His slow and steady nature was incapable of the
quick, violent variations of the fiery Frenchman.  De Catinat, who had
thrown off his bonds before he had lain down, spun round the cell now,
waving his arms and his legs, with his shadow capering up the wall
behind him, all distorted in the moonlight.  Finally he threw himself
into his comrade's arms with a torrent of thanks and ejaculations and
praises and promises, patting him with his hands and hugging him to his
breast.

"Oh, if I could but do something for you!" he exclaimed.  "If I could do
something for you!"

"You can, then.  Lie down on that straw and go to sleep."

"And to think that I sneered at you!  I!  Oh, you have had your
revenge!"

"For the Lord's sake, lie down and go to sleep!"  By persuasions and a
little pushing he got his delighted companion on to his couch again, and
heaped the straw over him to serve as a blanket.  De Catinat was wearied
out by the excitements of the day, and this last great reaction seemed
to have absorbed all his remaining strength.  His lids drooped heavily
over his eyes, his head sank deeper into the soft straw, and his last
remembrance was that the tireless American was seated cross-legged in
the moonlight, working furiously with his long knife upon one of the
billets of wood.

So weary was the young guardsman that it was long past noon, and the sun
was shining out of a cloudless blue sky, before he awoke.  For a moment,
enveloped as he was in straw, and with the rude arch of the dungeon
meeting in four rough-hewn groinings above his head, he stared about him
in bewilderment.  Then in an instant the doings of the day before, his
mission, the ambuscade, his imprisonment, all flashed back to him, and
he sprang to his feet.  His comrade, who had been dozing in the corner,
jumped up also at the first movement, with his hand on his knife, and a
sinister glance directed  towards the door.

"Oh, it's you, is it?" said he, "I thought it was the man."

"Has some one been in, then?"

"Yes; they brought those two loaves and a jug of water, just about dawn,
when I was settling down for a rest."

"And did he say anything?"

"No; it was the little black one."

"Simon, they called him."

"The same.  He laid the things down and was gone.  I thought that maybe
if he came again we might get him to stop."

"How, then?"

"Maybe if we got these stirrup leathers round his  ankles he would not
get them off quite as easy as we have done."

"And what then?"

"Well, he would tell us where we are, and what is to be done with us."

"Pshaw! what does it matter since our mission is done?"

"It may not matter to you--there's no accounting for tastes--but it
matters a good deal to me.  I'm not used to sitting in a hole, like a
bear in a trap, waiting for what other folks choose to do with me.
It's new to me.  I found Paris a pretty close sort of place, but it's a
prairie compared to this.  It don't suit a man of my habits, and I am
going to come out of it."

"There's no help but patience, my friend."

"I don't know that.  I'd get more help out of a bar and a few pegs."
He opened his coat, and took out a short piece of rusted iron, and three
small thick pieces of wood, sharpened at one end.

"Where did you get those, then?"

"These are my night's work.  The bar is the top one of the grate.  I had
a job to loosen it, but there it is.  The pegs I whittled out of that
log."

"And what are they for?"

"Well, you see, peg number one goes in here, where I have picked a hole
between the stones.  Then I've made this other log into a mallet, and
with two cracks there it is firm fixed, so that you can put your weight
on it.  Now these two go in the same way into the holes above here.
So!  Now, you see, you can stand up there and look out of that window
without asking too much of your toe joint.  Try it."

De Catinat sprang up and looked eagerly out between the bars.

"I do not know the place," said he, shaking his head.

"It may be any one of thirty castles which lie upon the south side of
Paris, and within six or seven leagues of it.  Which can it be?  And who
has any interest in treating us so?  I would that I could see a coat of
arms, which might help us.  Ah! there is one yonder in the centre of the
mullion of the window.  But I can scarce read it at the distance.
I warrant that your eyes are better than mine, Amos, and that you can
read what is on yonder escutcheon."

"On what?"

"On the stone slab in the centre window."

"Yes, I see it plain enough.  It looks to me like three turkey-buzzards
sitting on a barrel of molasses."

"Three allurions in chief over a tower proper, maybe.  Those are the
arms of the Provence De Hautevilles.  But it cannot be that.  They have
no chateau within a hundred leagues.  No, I cannot tell where we are."

He was dropping back to the floor, and put his weight upon the bar.
To his amazement, it came away in his hand.

"Look, Amos, look!" he cried.

"Ah, you've found it out!  Well, I did that during the night."

"And how?  With your knife?"

"No; I could make no way with my knife; but when I got the bar out of
the grate, I managed faster.  I'll put this one back now, or some of
those folks down below may notice that we have got it loose."

"Are they all loose?"

"Only the one at present, but we'll get the other two out during the
night.  You can take that bar out and work with it, while I use my own
picker at the other.  You see, the stone is soft, and by grinding it you
soon make a groove along which you can slip the bar.  It will be mighty
queer if we can't clear a road for ourselves before morning."

"Well, but even if we could get out into the courtyard, where could we
turn to then?"

"One thing at a time, friend.  You might as well stick at the Kennebec
because you could not see how you would cross the Penobscot.  Anyway,
there is more air in the yard than in here, and when the window is clear
we shall soon plan out the rest."

The two comrades did not dare to do any work during the day, for fear
they should be surprised by the jailer, or observed from without.
No one came near them, but they ate their loaves and drank their water
with the appetite of men who had often known what it was to be without
even such simple food as that.  The instant that night fell they were
both up upon the pegs, grinding away at the hard stone and tugging at
the bars.  It was a rainy night, and there was a sharp thunder-storm,
but they could see very well, while the shadow of the arched window
prevented their being seen.  Before midnight they had loosened one bar,
and the other was just beginning to give, when some slight noise made
them turn their heads, and there was their jailer standing, open-mouthed
in the middle of the cell, staring up at them.

It was De Catinat who observed him first, and he sprang down at him in
an instant with his bar; but at his movement the man rushed for the
door, and drew it after him just as the American's tool whizzed past his
ear and down the passage.  As the door slammed, the two comrades looked
at each other.  The guardsman shrugged his shoulders and the other
whistled.

"It is scarce worth while to go on," said De Catinat.

"We may as well be doing that as anything else.  If my picker had been
an inch lower I'd have had him.  Well, maybe he'll get a stroke, or
break his neck down those stairs.  I've nothing to work with now, but a
few rubs with your bar will finish the job.  Ah, dear!  You are right,
and we are fairly treed!"

A great bell had begun to ring in the chateau, and there was a loud buzz
of voices and a clatter of feet upon the stones.  Hoarse orders were
shouted, and there was the sound of turning keys.  All this coming
suddenly in the midst of the stillness of the night showed only too
certainly that the alarm had been given.  Amos Green threw himself down
in the straw, with his hands in his pockets, and De Catinat leaned
sulkily against the wall, waiting for whatever might come to him.
Five minutes passed, however, and yet another five minutes, without
anyone appearing.  The hubbub in the courtyard continued, but there was
no sound in the corridor which led to their cell.

"Well, I'll have that bar out, after all," said the American at last,
rising and stepping over to the window.  "Anyhow, we'll see what all
this caterwauling is about."  He climbed up on his pegs as he spoke, and
peeped out.

"Come up!" he cried excitedly to his comrade.  "They've got some other
game going on here, and they are all a deal too busy to bother their
heads about us."

De Catinat clambered up beside him, and the two stood staring down into
the courtyard.  A brazier had been lit at each corner, and the place was
thronged with men, many of whom carried torches.  The yellow glare
played fitfully over the grim gray walls, flickering up sometimes until
the highest turrets shone golden against the black sky, and then, as the
wind caught them, dying away until they scarce threw a glow upon the
cheek of their bearer.  The main gate was open, and a carriage, which
had apparently just driven in, was standing at a small door immediately
in front of their window.  The wheels and sides were brown with mud, and
the two horses were reeking and heavy-headed, as though their journey
had been both swift and long.  A man wearing a plumed hat and enveloped
in a riding-coat had stepped from the carriage, and then, turning round,
had dragged a second person out after him.  There was a scuffle, a cry,
a push, and the two figures had vanished through the door.  As it
closed, the carriage drove away, the torches and braziers were
extinguished, the main gate was closed once more, and all was as quiet
as before this sudden interruption.

"Well!" gasped De Catinat.  "Is this another king's messenger they've
got?"

"There will be lodgings for two more here in a short time," said Amos
Green.  "If they only leave us alone, this cell won't hold us long."

"I wonder where that jailer has gone?"

"He may go where he likes, as long as he keeps away from here.  Give me
your bar again.  This thing is giving.  It won't take us long to have it
out."  He set to work furiously, trying to deepen the groove in the
stone, through which he hoped to drag the staple.  Suddenly he ceased,
and strained his ears.

"By thunder!" said he, "there's some one working on the other side."

They both stood listening.  There were the thud of hammers, the rasping
of a saw, and the clatter of wood from the other side of the wall.

"What can they be doing?"

"I can't think."

"Can you see them?"

"They are too near the wall."

"I think I can manage," said De Catinat.  "I am slighter than you." He
pushed his head and neck and half of one shoulder through the gap
between the bars, and there he remained until his friend thought that
perhaps he had stuck, and pulled at his legs to extricate him.
He writhed back, however, without any difficulty.

"They are building something," he whispered.

"Building!"

"Yes; there are four of them, with a lantern."

"What can they be building, then?"

"It's a shed, I think.  I can see four sockets in the ground, and they
are fixing four uprights into them."

"Well, we can't get away as long as there are four men just under our
window."

"Impossible."

"But we may as well finish our work, for all that."  The gentle
scrapings of his iron were drowned amid the noise which swelled ever
louder from without.  The bar loosened at the end, and he drew it slowly
towards him.  At that instant, however, just as he was disengaging it, a
round head appeared between him and the moonlight, a head with a great
shock of tangled hair and a woollen cap upon the top of it.
So astonished was Amos Green at the sudden apparition that he let go his
grip upon the bar, which, falling outwards, toppled over the edge of the
window-sill.

"You great fool!" shrieked a voice from below, "are your fingers ever to
be thumbs, then, that you should fumble your tools so?  A thousand
thunders of heaven!  You have broken my shoulder."

"What is it, then?" cried the other.  "My faith, Pierre, if your fingers
went as fast as your tongue, you would be the first joiner in France."

"What is it, you ape!  You have dropped your tool upon me."

"I!  I have dropped nothing."

"Idiot!  Would you have me believe that iron falls from the sky?  I say
that you have struck me, you foolish, clumsy-fingered lout."

"I have not struck you yet," cried the other, "but, by the Virgin, if I
have more of this I will come down the ladder to you!"

"Silence, you good-for-naughts!" said a third voice sternly.  "If the
work be not done by daybreak, there will be a heavy reckoning for
somebody."

And again the steady hammering and sawing went forward.  The head still
passed and repassed, its owner walking apparently upon some platform
which they had constructed beneath their window, but never giving a
glance or a thought to the black square opening beside him.  It was
early morning, and the first cold light was beginning to steal over the
courtyard, before the work was at last finished and the workmen had
left.  Then at last the prisoners dared to climb up and to see what it
was which had been constructed during the night.  It gave them a catch
of the breath as they looked at it.  It was a scaffold.

There it lay, the ill-omened platform of dark greasy boards newly
fastened together, but evidently used often before for the same purpose.
It was buttressed up against their wall, and extended a clear twenty
feet out, with a broad wooden stair leading down from the further side.
In the centre stood a headsman's block, all haggled at the top, and
smeared with rust-coloured stains.

"I think it is time that we left," said Amos Green.

"Our work is all in vain, Amos," said De Catinat sadly.

"Whatever our fate may be--and this looks ill enough--we can but submit
to it like brave men."

"Tut, man; the window is clear!  Let us make a rush for it."

"It is useless.  I can see a line of armed men along the further side
of the yard."

"A line! At this hour!"

"Yes; and here come more.  See, at the centre gate!  Now what in the
name of heaven is this?"

As he spoke the door which faced them opened and a singular procession
filed out.  First came two dozen footmen, walking in pairs, all carrying
