hastily finished the laugh that he had hidden in his hand. Everybody
laughed. "Upon my word," said the Queen, "it is an odd skylark cannot
sleep in feathers! What didst thou do, forsooth?"

"I slept in the coverlid on the floor," said Nick. "It was na hurt,--I
dusted the place well,--and I slept like a top."

"Now verily," laughed Elizabeth, "if it be floors that thou dost desire,
we have acres to spare--thou shalt have thy pick of the lot. Come, we
are ill used to begging people to be favored--thou'lt stay?"

Nick shook his head.

"_Ma foi!"_ exclaimed the Queen, "it is a queer fancy makes a face at
such a pleasant dwelling! What is it sticks in thy throat?"

Nick stood silent. What was there to say? If he came here he never would
see Stratford town again; and _this_ was no abiding-place for him. They
would not even let him go to the fountain himself to draw water with
which to wash, but fetched it, three at a time, in a silver ewer and a
copper basin with towels and a flask of perfume.

Elizabeth was tapping with her fan. "Thou art be-dazzled like," she
said. "Think twice--preferment does not gooseberry on the hedge-row
every day; and this is a rare chance which hangs ripening on thy tongue.
Consider well. Come, thou wilt accept?"

Nick slowly shook his head.

"Go then, if thou wilt go!" said she; and as she spoke she shrugged her
shoulders, illy pleased, and turning toward Colley, took him by the hand
and drew him closer to her, smiling at his guise. "Thy comrade hath
more wit."

"He hath no mother," Nick said quietly, loosing his hold at last on
Colley's hand. "I would rather have my mother than his wit."

Elizabeth turned sharply back. Her keen eyes were sparkling, yet soft.

"Thou art no fool," said she.

A little murmur ran through the room.

She sat a moment, silent, studying his face. "Or if thou art, upon my
word I like the breed. It is a stubborn, froward dog; but Hold-fast is
his name. Ay, sirs," she said, and sat up very straight, looking into
the faces of her court, "Brag is a good dog, but Hold-fast is better. A
lad who loves his mother thus makes a man who loveth his native
land--and it's no bad streak in the blood. Master Skylark, thou shalt
have thy wish; to London thou shalt go this very night."

"I do na live in London," Nick began.

"What matters the place?" said she. "Live wheresoever thine heart doth
please. It is enough--so. Thou mayst kiss our hand." She held her hand
out, bright with jewels. He knelt and kissed it as if it were all a
doing in a dream, or in some unlikely story he had read. But a long
while after he could smell the perfume from her slender fingers on
his lips.

Then a page standing by him touched his arm as he arose, and bowing
backward from the throne, came with him to the curtain and the rest. Old
Master Gyles was standing there apart. It was too dark to see his face,
but he laid his hand upon Nick's head.

"Thy cake is burned to a coal," said he.




CHAPTER XXIX


BACK TO GASTON CAREW

So they marched back out of the palace gates, down to the landing-place,
the last red sunlight gleaming on the basinets of the tall halberdiers
who marched on either side.

Nick looked out toward London, where the river lay like a serpent,
bristling with masts; and beyond the river and the town to the forests
of Epping and Hainault; and beyond the forests to the hills, where the
waning day still lingered in a mist of frosty blue. At their back,
midway of the Queen's park, stood up the old square tower Mirefleur, and
on its top one yellow light like the flame of a gigantic candle. The day
seemed builded of memories strange and untrue.

A belated gull flapped by them heavily, and the red sun went down.
England was growing lonely. A great barge laden with straw came out of
the dusk, and was gone without a sound, its ghostly sail drawing in a
wind that the wherry sat too low to feel. Nick held his breath as the
barge went by: it was unreal, fantastical.

Then the river dropped between its banks, and the woods and the hills
were gone. The tide ran heavily against the shore, and the wake of the
wherry broke the floating stars into cold white streaks and zigzag
ripplings of raveled light that ran unsteadily after them. The craft at
anchor in the Pool had swung about upon the flow, and pointed down to
Greenwich. A hush had fallen upon the never-ending bustle of the town;
and the air was full of a gray, uncanny afterglow which seemed to come
up out of the water, for the sky was grown quite dark.

They were all wrapped in their boat-cloaks, tired and silent. Now and
then Nick dipped his fingers into the cold water over the gunwale.

This was the end of the glory.

He wished the boat would go a little faster. Yet when they came to the
landing he was sorry.

The man-at-arms who went with him to Master Carew's house was one of the
Earl of Arundel's men, in a stiff-wadded jacket of heron-blue, with the
earls colors richly worked upon its back and his badge upon the sleeves.
Prowlers gave way before him in the streets, for he was broad and tall
and mighty, and the fear of any man was not in the look of his eye.

As they came up the slow hill, Nick sighed, for the long-legged
man-at-arms walked fast. "What, there!" said he, and clapped Nick on the
shoulder with his bony hand; "art far spent, lad? Why, marry, get thee
upon my back. I'll jog thee home in the shake of a black sheep's tail."

So Nick rode home upon the back of the Earl of Arundel's man-at-arms;
and that, too, seemed a dream like all the rest.

When they came to Master Carew's house the street was dark, and Nick's
foot was asleep. He stamped it, tingling, upon the step, and the empty
passage echoed with the sound. Then the earl's man beat the door with
the pommel of his dagger-hilt, and stood with his hands upon his hips,
carelessly whistling a little tune.

Nick heard a sound of some one coming through the hall, and felt that at
last the day was done. A tired wonder wakened in his heart at how so
much had come to pass in such a little while; yet more he wondered why
it had ever come to pass at all. And what was the worth of it, anyway,
now it was over and gone?

Then the door opened, and he went in.

Master Gaston Carew himself had come to the door, walking quickly
through the hallway, with a queer, nervous twitching in his face. But
when he made out through the dusk that it was Nick, he seemed in no wise
moved, and said quite simply, as he gave the man-at-arms a penny: "Oh,
is it thou? Why, we have heard somewhat of thee; and upon my word I
thought, since thou wert grown so great, thou wouldst come home in a
coach-and-four, all blowing horns!"

Nevertheless he drew Nick quickly in, and kissed him thrice; and after
he had kissed him kept fast hold of his hand until they came together
through the hall into the great room where Cicely was sitting quite
dismally in the chimney-seat alone.

[Illustration: "SO NICK RODE HOME UPON THE BACK OF THE EARL OF ARUNDEL'S
MAN-AT-ARMS."]

"There, Nick," said he; "tell her thyself that thou hast come back. She
thought she had lost thee for good and all, and hath sung, 'Hey ho, my
heart is full of woe!' the whole twilight, and would not be comforted.
Come, Cicely, doff thy doleful willow--the proverb lies. 'Out of sight,
out of mind'--fudge! the boy's come back again! A plague take
proverbs, anyway!"

But when the children were both long since abed, and all the house was
still save for the scamper of rats in the wall, the heavy door of Nick's
room opened stealthily, with a little grating upon the uneven sill, and
Master Carew stood there, peeping in, his hand upon the bolt outside.

He held a rush-light in the other. Its glimmer fell across the bed upon
Nick's tousled hair; and when the master-player saw the boy's head upon
the pillow he started eagerly, with brightening eyes. "My soul!" he
whispered to himself, a little quaver in his tone, "I would have sworn
my own desire lied to me, and that he had not come at all! It cannot
be--yet, verily, I am not blind. _Ma foil_ it passeth understanding--a
freed skylark come back to its cage! I thought we had lost him forever."

Nick stirred in his sleep. Carew set the light on the floor. "Thou
fool!" said he, and he fumbled at his pouch; "thou dear-beloved little
fool! To catch the skirts of glory in thine hand, and tread the heels of
happy chance, and yet come back again to ill-starred twilight--and to
me! Ai, lad, I would thou wert my son--mine own, own son; yet Heaven
spare thee father such as I! For, Nick, I love thee. Yet thou dost hate
me like a poison thing. And still I love thee, on my word, and on the
remnant of mine honour!" His voice was husky. "Let thee go?--send thee
back?--eat my sweet and have it too?--how? Nay, nay; thy happy cake
would be my dough--it will not serve." He shook his head, and looked
about to see that all was fast. "Yet, Nick, I say I love thee, on
my soul!"

Slipping to the bedside with stealthy step, he laid a fat little Banbury
cheese and some brown sweet cakes beside Nick's pillow; then came out
hurriedly and barred the door.

The fire in the great hall had gone out, and the room was growing cold.
The table stood by the chimney-side, where supper had been laid, Carew
brought a napkin from the linen-chest, and spread it upon the board.
Then he went to the server's screen and looked behind it, and tried the
latches of the doors; and having thus made sure that all was safe, came
back to the table again, and setting the rush-light there, turned the
contents of his purse into the napkin.

There were both gold and silver. The silver he put back into the purse
again; the gold he counted carefully; and as he counted, laying the
pieces one by one in little heaps upon the cloth, he muttered under his
breath, like a small boy adding up his sums in school, saying over and
over again, "One for me, and one for thee, and two for Cicely Carew. One
for me, and one for thee, and two for Cicely Carew"; and told the coins
off in keeping with the count, so that the last pile was as large as
both the others put together. Then slowly ending, "None for me, and one
for thee, and two for Cicely Carew," he laid the last three nobles
with the rest.

Then he arose and stood a moment listening to the silence in the house.
An old he rat that was gnawing a rind on the hearth looked up, and ran a
little nearer to his hole. "Tsst! come back," said Carew, "I'm no cat!"
and from the sliding panel in the wall took out a buckskin bag tied like
a meal-sack with a string.

As he slipped the knot the throat of the bag sagged down, and a gold
piece jangled on the floor. Carew started as if all his nerves had
leaped within him at the unexpected sound, and closed the panel like a
flash. Then, setting his foot upon the fallen coin, he stopped its
spinning, and with one hand on his poniard, peering right and left, blew
the candle out.

A little while he stood and listened in the dark; a little while his
feet went to and fro in the darkness. The wind cried in the chimney. Now
and then the casements shivered. The timbers in the wall creaked with
the cold, and the boards in the stairway cracked. Then the old he rat
came back to his rind, and his mate came out of the crack in the wall,
working her whiskers hungrily and snuffing the smell of the candle-drip;
for there was no sound, and the coast of rat-land was clear.




CHAPTER XXX


AT THE FALCON INN

     And then there came both mist and snow,
       And it grew wondrous cold;
     And ice mast-high came floating by,
       As green as emerald.

So says that wonder-ballad of the sea.

But over London came a gale that made the chimneys rock; and after it
came ice and snow, sharp, stinging sleet, and thumping hail, with
sickening winds from the gray west, sour yellow fogs, and plunging rain,
till all the world was weary of the winter and the cold.

But winter could not last forever. March crept onward, and the streets
of London came up out of the slush again with a glad surprise of
cobblestones. The sickly mist no longer hung along the river; and
sometimes upon a breezy afternoon it was pleasant and fair, the sun
shone warmly on one's back, and the rusty sky grew bluer overhead. The
trees in Paris Garden put out buds; the lilac-tips began to swell; there
was a stirring in the roadside grass, and now and then a questing bird
went by upon the wind, piping a little silver thread of song. Nick's
heart grew hungry for the woods of Arden and the gathering rush of the
waking water-brooks among the old dead leaves. The rain beat in at his
window, but he did not care for that, and kept it open day and night;
for when he wakened in the dark he loved to feel the fingers of the wind
across his face.

Sometimes the moonlight through the ragged clouds came in upon the
floor, and in the hurry of the wind he almost fancied he could hear the
Avon, bank-full, rushing under the old mill-bridge.

Then one day there came a shower with a warm south wind, sweet and
healthful and serene; and through the shower, out of the breaking
clouds, a sun-gleam like a path of gold straight down to the heart of
London town; and on the south wind, down that path of gold, came April.

That night the wind in the chimney fluted a glad, new tune; and when
Nick looked out at his casement the free stars danced before him in the
sky. And when he felt that fluting wind blow warm and cool together on
his cheek, the chimneys mocked him, and the town was hideous.

       *       *       *       *       *

It fell upon an April night, when the moon was at its full, that Master
Carew had come to the Falcon Inn, on the Southwark side of the river,
and had brought Nick with him for the air. Master Heywood was along, and
it was very pleasant there.

The night breeze smelled of green fields, and the inn was thronged with
company. The windows were bright, and the air was full of voices. Tables
had been brought out into the garden and set beneath the arbor toward
the riverside. The vines of the arbor were shooting forth their first
pink-velvet leaves, and in the moonlight their shadows fell like
lacework across the linen cloths, blurred by the glow of the lanterns
hung upon the posts.

The folds in the linen marked the table-tops with squares like a
checker-board, and Nick stood watching from the tap-room door, as if it
were a game. Not that he cared for any game; but that watching dulled
the teeth of the hunger in his heart to be out of the town and back
among the hills of Warwickshire, now that the spring was there.

"What, there!--a pot of sack!" cried one gay fellow with a
silver-bordered cloak. "A pot of sack?" cried out another with a feather
like a rose-bush in his cap; "two pots ye mean, my buck!" "Ods-fish my
skin!" bawled out a third--"ods-fish my skin! Two pots of beggarly sack
on a Saturday night and a moon like this? Three pots, say I--and make it
malmsey, at my cost! What, there, knave! the table full of pots--I'll
pay the score."

At that they all began to laugh and to slap one another on the back, and
to pound with their fists upon the board until the pewter tankards
hopped; and when the tapster's knave came back they were singing at the
top of their lungs, for the spring had gotten into their wits, and they
were beside themselves with merriment.

Master Tom Heywood had a little table to himself off in a corner, and
was writing busily upon a new play. "A sheet a day," said he, "doth do
a wonder in a year"; so he was always at it.

Gaston Carew sat beyond, dicing with a silky rogue who had the coldest,
hardest face that Nick had ever seen. His eyes were black and beady as a
rat's, and were circled about by a myriad of little crowfoot lines; and
his hooked nose lay across his thin blue lips like a finger across a
slit in a dried pie. His long, slim hands were white as any woman's; and
his fingers slipped among the laces at his cuffs like a weasel in a
tangle-patch.

They had been playing for an hour, and the game had gone beyond all
reason. The other players had put aside the dice to watch the two, and
the nook in which their table stood was ringed with curious faces. A
lantern had been hung above, but Carew had had it taken down, as its
bottom made a shadow on the board. Carew's face was red and white by
turns; but the face of the other had no more color than candle-wax.

At the end of the arbor some one was strumming upon a gittern. It was
strung in a different key from that in which the men were singing, and
the jangle made Nick feel all puckered up inside. By and by the playing
ceased, and the singers came to the end of their song. In the brief hush
the sharp rattle of the dice sounded like the patter of cold hail
against the shutter in the lull of a winter storm.

Then there came a great shouting outside, and, looking through the
arbor, Nick saw two couriers on galloway nags come galloping over the
bowling-green to the arbor-side, calling for ale. They drank it in
their saddles, while their panting horses sniffed at the fresh young
grass. Then they galloped on. Through the vines, as he looked after
them, Nick could see the towers of London glittering strangely in the
moonlight. It was nearly high tide, and up from the river came the sound
of women's voices and laughter, with the pulse-like throb of oars and
the hoarse calling of the watermen.

In the great room of the inn behind him the gallants were taking their
snuff in little silver ladles, and talking of princesses they had met,
and of whose coach they had ridden home in last from tennis at my
lord's. Some were eating, some were drinking, and some were puffing at
long clay pipes, while others, by twos, locked arm in arm, went
swaggering up and down the room, with a huge talking of foreign lands
which they had never so much as seen.

"A murrain on the luck!" cried Carew, suddenly. "Can I throw nothing but
threes and fours?"

A muffled stir ran round. Nick turned from the glare of the open door,
and looked out into the moonlight. It seemed quite dark at first. The
master-player's face was bitter white, and his fingers were tapping a
queer staccato upon the table-top.

"A plague on the bedlam dice!" said he. "I think they are bewitched."

"Huff, ruff, and snuff!" the other replied. "Don't get the
mubble-fubbles, Carew: there's nought the matter with the dice."

A man came down from the tap-room door. Nick stepped aside to let him
pass. He was a player, by his air.

He wore a riding-cloak of Holland cloth, neither so good nor so bad as a
riding-cloak might be, but under it a handsome jerkin overlaid with
lace, and belted with a buff girdle in which was a light Spanish rapier.
His boots were russet cordovan, mid-thigh tall, and the rowels of his
clinking spurs were silver stars. He was large of frame, and his curly
hair was short and brown; so was his pointed beard. His eyes were
singularly bright and fearless, and bluff self-satisfaction marked his
stride; but his under lip was petulant, and he flicked his boot with his
riding-whip as he shouldered his way along.

"Ye cannot miss the place, sir," called the tapster after him. "'Tis
just beyond Ned Alleyn's, by the ditch. Ye'll never mistake the ditch,
sir--Billingsgate is roses to it."

"Oh, I'll find it fast enough," the stranger answered; "but he should
have sent to meet me, knowing I might come at any hour. 'Tis a felon
place for thieves; and I've not heart to skewer even a goose on such a
night as this."

At the sudden breaking of voices upon the silence, Carew looked up, with
a quarrel ripe for picking in his eye. But seeing who spoke, such a
smile came rippling from the corners of his mouth across his dark,
unhappy face that it was as if a lamp of welcome had been lighted there.
"What, Ben!" he cried; "thou here? Why, bless thine heart, old gossip,
'tis good to see an honest face amid this pack of rogues."

There was a surly muttering in the crowd. Carew threw his head back
haughtily and set his knuckles to his hip. "A pack of rogues, I say," he
repeated sharply; "and a fig for the whole pack!" There was a certain
wildness in his eyes. No one stirred or made reply.

"Good! Gaston," laughed the stranger, with a shrug; "picking thy company
still, I see, for quantity, and not for quality. No, thank 'e; none of
the tap for me. My Lord Hunsdon was made chamberlain in his father's
stead to-day, and I'm off hot-foot with the news to Will's."

He gathered his cloak about him, and was gone.

"Ye've lost," said the man who was dicing with Carew.

Nick stepped down from the tap-room door. His ears were tingling with
the sound: "I'm off hot-foot with the news to Will's."

"Hot-foot with the news to Will's"?

To "Will's"? "Will" who?

The man was a player, by his air.

Nick hurriedly looked around. Carew's wild eyes were frozen upon the
dice. The bandy-legged man was drinking at a table near the door. The
crimson ribbon in his ear looked like a patch of blood.

He saw Nick looking at him, and made a horrible face. He would have
sworn likewise, but there was half a quart of ale in his can; so he
turned it up and drank instead. It was a long, long drink, and half his
face was buried in the pot.

When he put it down the boy was gone.




CHAPTER XXXI


IN THE TWINKLING OF AN EYE

In a garden near the old bear-yard, among tall rose-trees which would
soon be in bloom, a merry company of men were sitting around a table
which stood in the angle of a quick-set hedge beside a path graveled
with white stones and bordered with mussel-shells.

