Fronting the Ionian gulf there lies an island in the Ceraunian sea, rich
in soil, with a harbour on both sides, beneath which lies the sickle, as
legend saith--grant me grace, O Muses, not willingly do I tell this tale
of olden days--wherewith Cronos pitilessly mutilated his father; but
others call it the reaping-hook of Demeter, goddess of the nether world.
For Demeter once dwelt in that island, and taught the Titans to reap the
ears of corn, all for the love of Macris. Whence it is called
Drepane,[1] the sacred nurse of the Phaeacians; and thus the Phaeacians
themselves are by birth of the blood of Uranus. To them came Argo, held
fast by many toils, borne by the breezes from the Thrinacian sea; and
Alcinous and his people with kindly sacrifice gladly welcomed their
coming; and over them all the city made merry; thou wouldst say they
were rejoicing over their own sons. And the heroes themselves strode in
gladness through the throng, even as though they had set foot in the
heart of Haemonia; but soon were they to arm and raise the battle-cry;
so near to them appeared a boundless host of Colchians, who had passed
through the mouth of Pontus and between the Cyanean rocks in search of
the chieftains. They desired forthwith to carry off Medea to her
father's house apart from the rest, or else they threatened with fierce
cruelty to raise the dread war-cry both then and thereafter on the
coming of Aeetes. But lordly Alcinous checked them amid their eagerness
for war. For he longed to allay the lawless strife between both sides
without the clash of battle. And the maiden in deadly fear often
implored the comrades of Aeson's son, and often with her hands touched
the knees of Arete, the bride of Alcinous:

[Footnote 1: i.e. the Sickle-island.]

"I beseech thee, O queen, be gracious and deliver me not to the
Colchians to be borne to my father, if thou thyself too art one of the
race of mortals, whose heart rushes swiftly to ruin from light
transgressions. For my firm sense forsook me--it was not for wantonness.
Be witness the sacred light of Helios, be witness the rites of the
maiden that wanders by night, daughter of Perses. Not willingly did I
haste from my home with men of an alien race but a horrible fear wrought
on me to bethink me of flight when I sinned; other device was there
none. Still my maiden's girdle remains, as in the halls of my father,
unstained, untouched. Pity me, lady, and turn thy lord to mercy; and may
the immortals grant thee a perfect life, and joy, and children, and the
glory of a city unravaged!"

Thus did she implore Arete, shedding tears, and thus each of the
chieftains in turn:

"On your account, ye men of peerless might, and on account of my toils
in your ventures am I sorely afflicted; even I, by whose help ye yoked
the bulls, and reaped the deadly harvest of the earthborn men; even I,
through whom on your homeward path ye shall bear to Haemonia the golden
fleece. Lo, here am I, who have lost my country and my parents, who have
lost my home and all the delights of life; to you have I restored your
country and your homes; with eyes of gladness ye will see again your
parents; but from me a heavy-handed god has reft all joy; and with
strangers I wander, an accursed thing. Fear your covenant and your
oaths, fear the Fury that avenges suppliants and the retribution of
heaven, if I fall into Aeetes' hands and am slain with grievous outrage.
To no shrines, no tower of defence, no other refuge do I pay heed,
but/only to you. Hard and pitiless in your cruelty! No reverence have ye
for me in your heart though ye see me helpless, stretching my hands
towards the knees of a stranger queen; yet, when ye longed to seize the
fleece, would have met all the Colchians face to face and haughty Aeetes
himself; but now ye have forgotten your courage, now that they are all
alone and cut off."

Thus she spake, beseeching; and to whomsoever she bowed in prayer, that
man tried to give her heart and to check her anguish. And in their hands
they shook their sharp pointed spears, and drew the swords from their
sheaths; and they swore they would not hold back from giving succour, if
she should meet with an unrighteous judgement. And the host were all
wearied and Night came on them, Night that puts to rest the works of
men, and lulled all the earth to sleep; but to the maid no sleep brought
rest, but in her bosom her heart was wrung with anguish. Even as when a
toiling woman turns her spindle through the night, and round her moan
her orphan children, for she is a widow, and down her cheeks fall the
tears, as she bethinks her how dreary a lot hath seized her; so Medea's
cheeks were wet; and her heart within her was in agony, pierced with
sharp pain.

Now within the palace in the city, as aforetime, lay lordly Alcinous and
Arete, the revered wife of Alcinous, and on their couch through the
night they were devising plans about the maiden; and him, as her wedded
husband, the wife addressed with loving words:

"Yea, my friend, come, save the woe-stricken maid from the Colchians and
show grace to the Minyae. Argos is near our isle and the men of
Haemonia; but Aeetes dwells not near, nor do we know of Aeetes one whit:
we hear but his name; but this maiden of dread suffering hath broken my
heart by her prayers. O king, give her not up to the Colchians to be
borne back to her father's home. She was distraught when first she gave
him the drugs to charm the oxen; and next, to cure one ill by another,
as in our sinning we do often, she fled from her haughty sire's heavy
wrath. But Jason, as I hear, is bound to her by mighty oaths that he
will make her his wedded wife within his halls. Wherefore, my friend,
make not, of thy will, Aeson's son to be forsworn, nor let the father,
if thou canst help, work with angry heart some intolerable mischief on
his child. For fathers are all too jealous against their children; what
wrong did Nycteus devise against Antiope, fair of face! What woes did
Danae endure on the wide sea through her sire's mad rage! Of late, and
not far away, Echetus in wanton cruelty thrust spikes of bronze in his
daughter's eyes; and by a grievous fate is she wasting away, grinding
grains of bronze in a dungeon's gloom."

Thus she spake, beseeching; and by his wife's words his heart was
softened, and thus he spake:

"Arete, with arms I could drive forth the Colchians, showing grace to
the heroes for the maiden's sake. But I fear to set at nought the
righteous judgment of Zeus. Nor is it well to take no thought of Aeetes,
as thou sayest: for none is more lordly than Aeetes. And, if he willed,
he might bring war upon Hellas, though he dwell afar. Wherefore it is
right for me to deliver the judgement that in all men's eyes shall be
best; and I will not hide it from thee. If she be yet a maid I decree
that they carry her back to her father; but if she shares a husband's
bed, I will not separate her from her lord; nor, if she bear a child
beneath her breast, will I give it up to an enemy."

Thus he spake, and at once sleep laid him to rest. And she stored up in
her heart the word of wisdom, and straightway rose from her couch and
went through the palace; and her handmaids came hasting together,
eagerly tending their mistress. But quietly she summoned her herald and
addressed him, in her prudence urging Aeson's son to wed the maiden, and
not to implore Alcinous; for he himself, she said, will decree to the
Colchians that if she is still a maid he will deliver her up to be borne
to her father's house, but that if she shares a husband's bed he will
not sever her from wedded love.

Thus she spake, and quickly from the hall his feet bore him, that be
might declare to Jason the fair-omened speech of Arete and the counsel
of god-fearing Alcinous. And he found the heroes watching in full armour
in the haven of Hyllus, near the city; and out he spake the whole
message; and each hero's heart rejoiced; for the word that he spake was
welcome.

And straightway they mingled a bowl to the blessed ones, as is right,
and reverently led sheep to the altar, and for that very night prepared
for the maiden the bridal couch in the sacred cave, where once dwelt
Macris, the daughter of Aristaeus, lord of honey, who discovered the
works of bees and the fatness of the olive, the fruit of labour. She it
was that first received in her bosom the Nysean son of Zeus in Abantian
Euboea, and with honey moistened his parched lips when Hermes bore him
out of the flame. And Hera beheld it, and in wrath drove her from the
whole island. And she accordingly came to dwell far off, in the sacred
cave of the Phaeacians, and granted boundless wealth to the inhabitants.
There at that time did they spread a mighty couch; and thereon they laid
the glittering fleece of gold, that so the marriage might be made
honoured and the theme of song. And for them nymphs gathered flowers of
varied hue and bore them thither in their white bosoms; and a splendour
as of flame played round them all, such a light gleamed from the golden
tufts. And in their eyes it kindled a sweet longing; yet for all her
desire, awe withheld each one from laying her hand thereon. Some were
called daughters of the river Aegaeus; others dwelt round the crests of
the Meliteian mount; and others were woodland nymphs from the plains.
For Hera herself, the spouse of Zeus, had sent them to do honour to
Jason. That cave is to this day called the sacred cave of Medea, where
they spread the fine and fragrant linen and brought these two together.
And the heroes in their hands wielded their spears for war, lest first a
host of foes should burst upon them for battle unawares, and, their
heads enwreathed with leafy sprays, all in harmony, while Orpheus' harp
rang clear, sang the marriage song at the entrance to the bridal
chamber. Yet not in the house of Alcinous was the hero, Aeson's son,
minded to complete his marriage, but in his father's hall when he had
returned home to Iolcus; and such was the mind of Medea herself; but
necessity led them to wed at this time. For never in truth do we tribes
of woe-stricken mortals tread the path of delight with sure foot; but
still some bitter affliction keeps pace with our joy; Wherefore they
too, though their souls were melted with sweet love, were held by fear,
whether the sentence of Alcinous would be fulfilled.

Now dawn returning with her beams divine scattered the gloomy night
through the sky; and the island beaches laughed out and the paths over
the plains far off, drenched with dew, and there was a din in the
streets; the people were astir throughout the city, and far away the
Colchians were astir at the bounds of the isle of Macris. And
straightway to them went Alcinous, by reason of his covenant, to declare
his purpose concerning the maiden, and in his hand he held a golden
staff, his staff of justice, whereby the people had righteous judgments
meted out to them throughout the city. And with him in order due and
arrayed in their harness of war went marching, band by band, the chiefs
of the Phaeacians. And from the towers came forth the women in crowds to
gaze upon the heroes; and the country folk came to meet them when they
heard the news, for Hera had sent forth a true report. And one led the
chosen ram of his Hock, and another a heifer that had never toiled; and
others set hard by jars of wine for mixing; and the smoke of sacrifice
leapt up far away. And women bore fine linen, the fruit of much toil, as
women will, and gifts of gold and varied ornaments as well, such as are
brought to newly-wedded brides; and they marvelled when they saw the
shapely forms and beauty of the gallant heroes, and among them the son
of Oeagrus, oft beating the ground with gleaming sandal, to the time of
his loud-ringing lyre and song. And all the nymphs together, whenever he
recalled the marriage, uplifted the lovely bridal-chant; and at times
again they sang alone as they circled in the dance, Hera, in thy honour;
for it was thou that didst put it into the heart of Arete to proclaim
the wise word of Alcinous. And as soon as he had uttered the decree of
his righteous judgement, and the completion of the marriage had been
proclaimed, he took care that thus it should abide fixed; and no deadly
fear touched him nor Aeetes' grievous wrath, but he kept his judgement
fast bound by unbroken oaths. So when the Colchians learnt that they
were beseeching in vain and he bade them either observe his judgements
or hold their ships away from his harbours and land, then they began to
dread the threats of their own king and besought Alcinous to receive
them as comrades; and there in the island long time they dwelt with the
Phaeacians, until in the course of years, the Bacchiadae, a race sprung
from Ephyra,[1] settled among them; and the Colchians passed to an
island opposite; and thence they were destined to reach the Ceraunian
hills of the Abantes, and the Nestaeans and Oricum; but all this was
fulfilled after long ages had passed. And still the altars which Medea
built on the spot sacred to Apollo, god of shepherds, receive yearly
sacrifices in honour of the Fates and the Nymphs. And when the Minyae
departed many gifts of friendship did Alcinous bestow, and many Arete;
moreover she gave Medea twelve Phaeacian handmaids from the palace, to
bear her company. And on the seventh day they left Drepane; and at dawn
came a fresh breeze from Zeus. And onward they sped borne along by the
wind's breath. Howbeit not yet was it ordained for the heroes to set
foot on Achaea, until they had toiled even in the furthest bounds of
Libya.

[Footnote 1: The old name of Corinth.]

Now had they left behind the gulf named after the Ambracians, now with
sails wide spread the land of the Curetes, and next in order the narrow
islands with the Echinades, and the land of Pelops was just descried;
even then a baleful blast of the north wind seized them in mid-course
and swept them towards the Libyan sea nine nights and as many days,
until they came far within Syrtis, wherefrom is no return for ships,
when they are once forced into that gulf. For on every hand are shoals,
on every hand masses of seaweed from the depths; and over them the light
foam of the wave washes without noise; and there is a stretch of sand to
the dim horizon; and there moveth nothing that creeps or flies. Here
accordingly the flood-tide--for this tide often retreats from the land
and bursts back again over the beach coming on with a rush and
roar--thrust them suddenly on to the innermost shore, and but little of
the keel was left in the water. And they leapt forth from the ship, and
sorrow seized them when they gazed on the mist and the levels of vast
land stretching far like a mist and continuous into the distance; no
spot for water, no path, no steading of herdsmen did they descry afar
off, but all the scene was possessed by a dead calm. And thus did one
hero, vexed in spirit, ask another:

"What land is this? Whither has the tempest hurled us? Would that,
reckless of deadly fear, we had dared to rush on by that same path
between the clashing rocks! Better were it to have overleapt the will of
Zeus and perished in venturing some mighty deed. But now what should we
do, held back by the winds to stay here, if ever so short a time? How
desolate looms before us the edge of the limitless land!"

Thus one spake; and among them Ancaeus the helmsman, in despair at their
evil case, spoke with grieving heart: "Verily we are undone by a
terrible doom; there is no escape from ruin; we must suffer the
cruellest woes, having fallen on this desolation, even though breezes
should blow from the land; for, as I gaze far around, on every side do I
behold a sea of shoals, and masses of water, fretted line upon line, run
over the hoary sand. And miserably long ago would our sacred ship have
been shattered far from the shore; but the tide itself bore her high on
to the land from the deep sea. But now the tide rushes back to the sea,
and only the foam, whereon no ship can sail, rolls round us, just
covering the land. Wherefore I deem that all hope of our voyage and of
our return is cut off. Let someone else show his skill; let him sit at
the helm--the man that is eager for our deliverance. But Zeus has no
will to fulfil our day of return after all our toils."

Thus he spake with tears, and all of them that had knowledge of ships
agreed thereto; but the hearts of all grew numb, and pallor overspread
their cheeks. And as, like lifeless spectres, men roam through a city
awaiting the issue of war or of pestilence, or some mighty storm which
overwhelms the countless labours of oxen, when the images of their own
accord sweat and run down with blood, and bellowings are heard in
temples, or when at mid-day the sun draws on night from heaven, and the
stars shine clear through the mist; so at that time along the endless
strand the chieftains wandered, groping their way. Then straightway dark
evening came upon them; and piteously did they embrace each other and
say farewell with tears, that they might, each one apart from his
fellow, fall on the sand and die. And this way and that they went
further to choose a resting-place; and they wrapped their heads in their
cloaks and, fasting and unfed, lay down all that night and the day,
awaiting a piteous death. But apart the maidens huddled together
lamented beside the daughter of Aeetes. And as when, forsaken by their
mother, unfledged birds that have fallen from a cleft in the rock chirp
shrilly; or when by the banks of fair-flowing Pactolus, swans raise
their song, and all around the dewy meadow echoes and the river's fair
stream; so these maidens, laying in the dust their golden hair, all
through the night wailed their piteous lament. And there all would have
parted from life without a name and unknown to mortal men, those bravest
of heroes, with their task unfulfilled; but as they pined in despair,
the heroine-nymphs, warders of Libya, had pity on them, they who once
found Athena, what time she leapt in gleaming armour from her father's
head, and bathed her by Trito's waters. It was noon-tide and the
fiercest rays of the sun were scorching Libya; they stood near Aeson's
son, and lightly drew the cloak from his head. And the hero cast down
his eyes and looked aside, in reverence for the goddesses, and as he lay
bewildered all alone they addressed him openly with gentle words:

"Ill-starred one, why art thou so smitten with despair? We know how ye
went in quest of the golden fleece; we know each toil of yours, all the
mighty deeds ye wrought in your wanderings over land and sea. We are the
solitary ones, goddesses of the land, speaking with human voice, the
heroines, Libya's warders and daughters. Up then; be not thus afflicted
in thy misery, and rouse thy comrades. And when Amphitrite has
straightway loosed Poseidon's swift-wheeled car, then do ye pay to your
mother a recompense for all her travail when she bare you so long in her
womb; and so ye may return to the divine land of Achaea."

Thus they spake, and with the voice vanished at once, where they stood.
But Jason sat upon the earth as he gazed around, and thus cried:

"Be gracious, noble goddesses of the desert, yet the saying about our
return I understand not clearly. Surely I will gather together my
comrades and tell them, if haply we can find some token of our escape,
for the counsel of many is better."

He spake, and leapt to his feet, and shouted afar to his comrades, all
squalid with dust, like a lion when he roars through the woodland
seeking his mate; and far off in the mountains the glens tremble at the
thunder of his voice; and the oxen of the field and the herdsmen shudder
with fear; yet to them Jason's voice was no whit terrible--the voice of
a comrade calling to his friends. And with looks downcast they gathered
near, and hard by where the ship lay he made them sit down in their
grief and the women with them, and addressed them and told them
everything:

"Listen, friends; as I lay in my grief, three goddesses girded with
goat-skins from the neck downwards round the back and waist, like
maidens, stood over my head nigh at hand; and they uncovered me, drawing
my cloak away with light hand, and they bade me rise up myself and go
and rouse you, and pay to our mother a bounteous recompense for all her
travail when she bare us so long in her womb, when Amphitrite shall have
loosed Poseidon's swift-wheeled car. But I cannot fully understand
concerning this divine message. They said indeed that they were
heroines, Libya's warders land daughters; and all the toils that we
endured aforetime by land and sea, all these they declared that they
knew full well. Then I saw them no more in their place, but a mist or
cloud came between and hid them from my sight."

Thus he spake, and all marvelled as they heard. Then was wrought for the
Minyae the strangest of portents. From the sea to the land leapt forth a
monstrous horse, of vast size, with golden mane tossing round his neck;
and quickly from his limbs he shook off abundant spray and started on
his course, with feet like the wind. And at once Peleus rejoiced and
spake among the throng of his comrades:

"I deem that Poseidon's car has even now been loosed by the hands of his
dear wife, and I divine that our mother is none else than our ship
herself; for surely she bare us in her womb and groans unceasingly with
grievous travailing. But with unshaken strength and untiring shoulders
will we lift her up and bear her within this country of sandy wastes,
where yon swift-footed steed has sped before. For he will not plunge
beneath the earth; and his hoof-prints, I ween, will point us to some
bay above the sea."

Thus he spake, and the fit counsel pleased all. This is the tale the
Muses told; and I sing obedient to the Pierides, and this report have I
heard most truly; that ye, O mightiest far of the sons of kings, by your
might and your valour over the desert sands of Libya raised high aloft
on your shoulders the ship and all that ye brought therein, and bare her
twelve days and nights alike. Yet who could tell the pain and grief
which they endured in that toil? Surely they were of the blood of the
immortals, such a task did they take on them, constrained by necessity.
How forward and how far they bore her gladly to the waters of the
Tritonian lake! How they strode in and set her down from their stalwart
shoulders!

Then, like raging hounds, they rushed to search for a spring; for
besides their suffering and anguish, a parching thirst lay upon them,
and not in vain did they wander; but they came to the sacred plain where
Ladon, the serpent of the land, till yesterday kept watch over the
golden apples in the garden of Atlas; and all around the nymphs, the
Hesperides, were busied, chanting their lovely song. But at that time,
stricken by Heracles, he lay fallen by the trunk of the apple-tree; only
the tip of his tail was still writhing; but from his head down his dark
spine he lay lifeless; and where the arrows had left in his blood the
bitter gall of the Lernaean hydra, flies withered and died over the
festering wounds And close at hand the Hesperides, their white arms
flung over their golden heads, lamented shrilly; and the heroes drew
near suddenly; but the maidens, at their quick approach, at once became
dust and earth where they stood. Orpheus marked the divine portent, and
for his comrades addressed them in prayer: "O divine ones, fair and
kind, be gracious, O queens, whether ye be numbered among the heavenly
goddesses, or those beneath the earth, or be called the Solitary nymphs;
come, O nymphs, sacred race of Oceanus, appear manifest to our longing
eyes and show us some spring of water from the rock or some sacred flow
gushing from the earth, goddesses, wherewith we may quench the thirst
that burns us unceasingly. And if ever again we return in our voyaging
to the Achaean land, then to you among the first of goddesses with
willing hearts will we bring countless gifts, libations and banquets."

So he spake, beseeching them with plaintive voice; and they from their
