"I will not dispute your knowledge, my lord Edric," replied the
Prince, "considering the intimacy you stand on with Sweyn."

"Intimacy! I would sooner own intimacy with the Evil One."

"You might own that, too, without much exaggeration, since the good
bishop will bear me witness that he is the father of lies."

"Edmund, this is unbearable," said the king.

"Pardon, my father and liege, but truth will out."

The company sat in amazement, while the hand of Edric played
convulsively with the hilt of his dagger; meanwhile Edmund ate, and
gave to Alfgar, ere he spake again.

"Stay, Edric," whispered the king; "thou art my Edric. I was never
false to thee, nor will I be now; did I not, for thy sake, look over
the death of Elfhelm of Shrewsbury, and put out the eyes of his sons?
canst thou not trust me now?"

Thus strengthened, Edric remained, and uneasy whispers passed around
the assembly.

At last Edmund looked up.

"When the flesh is weak through toil and fasting, speech is not
eloquent, but now listen, all Englishmen true, and I will speak out."

He told his tale, how he had conceived suspicions that the Danes
intended a winter descent; how he had risked his life (in the
exuberance of youthful daring) to ascertain the truth; how, trusting
to his knowledge of Carisbrooke, wherein he had spent many pleasant
days in his boyhood, he had ventured amongst the Danes as a gleeman,
in imitation of Alfred of old; how there he had assisted, unsuspected,
at a meeting of the council in the great hall, and heard it decided to
invade England, and finally how he had escaped. And then he continued:

"And in that council I heard that the Danes had a secret friend in the
English army, who ever gave them due warning of our movements, and who
caused all the miscarriage of our last campaign. Stand forth, Edric
Streorn, for thou art the man, and my sword shall prove it, if need
be."

"Edmund, thou ravest," cried the king; "produce thy witnesses."

"Alfgar, son of Anlaf, answer; whom didst thou espy talking with
Sweyn?"

"Edric Streorn."

"How didst know him?"

"Because he threatened my life on St. Brice's night, and I had often
seen him while dwelling in Mercia."

"A Dane witnessing against a free-born Englishman? Can it be endured?"
cried Ethelred. "What, here, my royal guard!--here! here! your King is
insulted--insulted, and by his son and his son's minions."

The guard rushed in, their weapons in their hands.

"Seize my son, the false Edmund."

"Here I am," quietly said the hero of the English army, for such he
was, although not recognised as such by the government of his father.
"Here I am; what Englishman will bind me?"

The men stood as if paralysed.

"Will you not obey?" shouted the weak Ethelred, and stamped in
impotent anger on the floor.

But they would not--they could not touch Edmund.

Edric whispered in the king's ear.

"I was wrong," said the king; "retire, guards.

"Edmund, come with me; tell me what you have seen. I will hear you,
and judge between you and my Edric--judge fairly."

"Wait till my return, Alfgar."

Alfgar waited. No one spoke to him; all the company seemed utterly
bewildered, as well they might be until, after the expiration of an
hour, during which time Ednoth had left the hall, and the company
broke up by degrees, an officer of the court came and whispered in his
ear that Edmund awaited him without the gates.

He left the table at once, and proceeded beyond the precincts of the
palace, following his guide.

"Where is the prince?"

"He has had a stormy interview with his father, and has just left him,
refusing to lodge in the palace, to sleep without the precincts. I am
to conduct you thither."

Leaving the palace, they were passing through some thick shrubbery,
when all at once two strong men sprang upon Alfgar. At the same moment
his attendant turned round and assisted his foes. He struggled, but he
was easily overpowered, when his captors led him away, until, passing
a postern gate in the western wall of the town, they crossed an
embankment, and came upon the river. There they placed him on board a
small boat, and rowed rapidly down the stream.

In the space of a few minutes they ran the boat ashore in the midst of
dense woods which fringed the farther bank, and there they forced him
to land, and led him upwards until, deep in the woods, they came upon
an old timbered house. They knocked at the door, which was speedily
opened by a man of gigantic stature and ruffianly countenance, by
whose side snarled a mastiff as repulsive as he.

"Here, Higbald, we have brought thee a prisoner from our lord."

The wretch looked upon Alfgar with the eyes of an ogre bent on
devouring a captive, and then said:

"The chamber where blind Cuthred was slaughtered looks out on the
woods behind where no one passes, and it is strong; it will be better
for you to take him there."

And he drew aside to let them pass.

"Here, Wolf" said the uncouth gaoler, "smell him, and see you have to
guard him."

The dog seemed to comprehend. He smelt around the prisoner, then
displayed his huge fangs, and growled, as if to tell Alfgar what his
fate would be if he tried to escape.

The poor lad turned to his captors who had brought him there, for they
seemed more humane than his new gaoler.

"For pity's sake, tell me why I am brought here--what crime I have
committed."

No reply.

"At least bear a message to one who will think I have deserted him in
his need."

Again they were silent.

They had ascended a rough staircase. At the summit a passage led past
two or three doors to one made of the strongest plank, and
strengthened with iron.

They opened it, thrust him in, showed him, by the light of their
torches, a bed of straw in the corner.

"There you can lie and sleep as peacefully as at Carisbrooke," said
one of his guards.

"And let me tell you," added Higbald, "that it will be certain death
to try to get away; for if you could escape me, my dog Wolf, who
prowls about by day and night, would tear you in pieces before any one
could help you. He has killed half-a-dozen men in his day."

Like a poor wounded deer which retires to his thicket to die, Alfgar
threw himself down upon the bed of straw. His reflections were very,
very bitter.

"What would Edmund think of him?"

"He will know I am faithful. He will not think that the lad whose life
he saved has deserted him. He will search till he find me even here."

Thus in alternate hope and despair he sank at last to sleep--nature
had its way--even as the criminal has slept on the rack.



CHAPTER XIV. THE SON AND THE FAVOURITE.


A stormy scene had meanwhile taken place in an interior chamber of the
palace of the bishop, which had been metamorphosed into a council
chamber for the king. There were present Ethelred himself, his
irrepressible son, the traitor Edric, the bishop, the sheriff of the
shire, and the reeve of the borough, with the captain of the
hus-carles, or royal guard.

"We all need Divine guidance at this moment," said Edric, clasping his
hands meekly; "would you, my lord and king, ask the bishop to open our
proceedings with especial prayer for the grace of meekness."

"Hypocrite!" said Edmund, with a sound like the gnashing of teeth.

The bishop, however, said the form generally used at the meetings of
council, but omitted to notice the special suggestion of Edric.

"The case before us," said the king, "is a difficult and trying one,
but one which we must discharge in our bounden duty towards our
subjects. Perhaps it is well that the accusation so often urged by
backbiters against our faithful subject Edric should--"

"Your majesty begs the question when you call that coward 'faithful.'"

"Silence, Edmund," said the king, sternly, "you are hardly yet of age,
yet you dare to interrupt me. I was going to say that it is a good
thing the accusation should at length be plainly made, and not spoken
in a corner by men who are afraid to speak out."

"Lest they should get the reward of Elfhelm of Shrewsbury," added
Edmund.

The bishop here interposed.

"Prince, remember that God has said, 'Honour thy father.'"

"Has he not somewhere also said, 'Parents, provoke not your children
to anger'?"

"God judge between you, then," said the bishop, "but I warn you that
you appear the greater transgressor."

"Meanwhile," said Edric, "I feel like a man who is being put unjustly
to the torture. What is the accusation against me?--let it be stated
in plain words."

"That just after the army disbanded in October, you visited the camp
of Sweyn, and gave him to understand that the country was at his
mercy, opposition being removed."

"What day of the month?"

"I do not know the exact day."

"Perhaps it was in the Greek calends," said Edric.

"I do not know when the Greek calends are, nor do I want to; my mother
spent her time, I thank God, in teaching me to speak the truth, and to
be true to my country, and not in teaching me outlandish gibberish."

"Still," said the bishop, "it is important to learn the day."

"Alfgar can perhaps inform you, but one day must have been much like
another to him in the Danish camp."

"His statement would need verification," said Ednoth.

"He is as true and brave as any man here."

"Of course, all Danes are true and brave," said Edric.

"He is a Christian."

"Yes; I think he became one on St. Brice's day," suggested Edric.

"To save his life, no doubt," said the sheriff.

Meanwhile Ethelred had changed colour, and Edric cried out:

"Have we not forgotten in whose presence we are? The king, who was
quite ignorant of the mistaken zeal which misinterpreted his wishes
that day, cannot bear to be reminded of it. He is all too merciful and
gentle for such days as ours."

"I suppose he put on mourning for Elfhelm," whispered Edmund in the
bishop's ear.

"Forget not that he is your father."

"We are wasting time," said the king. "Edric, what is your answer to
this accusation?"

"That when the army disbanded I went on pilgrimage to the shrine of
St. Joseph at Glastonbury, and can produce, in the time requisite for
a messenger to go and return, an attestation to that effect. Here," he
said, putting his hand to his bosom, and drawing out a reliquary, "is
a holy thorn plucked from St. Joseph's tree."

"Art thou not ashamed, my son, to have brought such a charge against
the venerator of the Saints, one of the few in whom faith yet lives?"

"No, for I do not believe he was ever there at all."

"Witness the holy thorn."

"Thorns may be plucked in bushels round Dorchester or any other
place."

"It is a question of pure testimony," said the bishop.

"It is," added the sheriff and the reeve.

"Then, may I produce my witness?" said Edmund.

"Certainly," said the king.

"By all means," added Edric.

The bishop called an attendant, and ordered him to fetch Alfgar.

"Before he enters I must remind you all," said Edric, "that the word
of a Dane is to be opposed to that of a Christian."

"I have already said that Alfgar is a Christian."

But Edric had already, by his adroit suggestion about St. Brice's day,
predisposed the company to doubt the genuineness of Alfgar's
conversion.

A long pause succeeded, which no one seemed to care to break. Ethelred
was anxious for his favourite; the traitor himself was studying how to
meet the accusation; the Prince was furious, and was striving in vain
to repress his surging passions, the others were perplexed.

The messenger returned after a time to say that Alfgar had left the
palace.

"Left the palace!" said Edmund.

"About half-an-hour since."

"There is some vile treason here," said Edmund.

"Treason! on whose part?" said Edric.

"Thine, villain."

"I am glad you think so, for you give me an opportunity of
demonstrating to the court how unreasonable your hatred makes you, and
how unjust. I have not left the king's presence since your first
appearance."

"It is true," said Ethelred.

