such a toy as children at that period were permitted to shoot small
birds with, and, assuming an attitude of great dignity, gracefully
extended his right hand to Sir Kenneth, in an attitude as if he expected
he would salute it. But such a result not following, he demanded, in a
sharp and angry tone of voice, "Soldier, wherefore renderest thou not
to Nectabanus the homage due to his dignity? Or is it possible that thou
canst have forgotten him?"

"Great Nectabanus," answered the knight, willing to soothe the
creature's humour, "that were difficult for any one who has ever looked
upon thee. Pardon me, however, that, being a soldier upon my post,
with my lance in my hand, I may not give to one of thy puissance the
advantage of coming within my guard, or of mastering my weapon. Suffice
it that I reverence thy dignity, and submit myself to thee as humbly as
a man-at-arms in my place may."

"It shall suffice," said Nectabanus, "so that you presently attend me to
the presence of those who have sent me hither to summon you."

"Great sir," replied the knight, "neither in this can I gratify thee,
for my orders are to abide by this banner till daybreak--so I pray you
to hold me excused in that matter also."

So saying, he resumed his walk upon the platform; but the dwarf did not
suffer him so easily to escape from his importunity.

"Look you," he said, placing himself before Sir Kenneth, so as to
interrupt his way, "either obey me, Sir Knight, as in duty bound, or I
will lay the command upon thee, in the name of one whose beauty could
call down the genii from their sphere, and whose grandeur could command
the immortal race when they had descended."

A wild and improbable conjecture arose in the knight's mind, but he
repelled it. It was impossible, he thought, that the lady of his love
should have sent him such a message by such a messenger; yet his voice
trembled as he said, "Go to, Nectabanus. Tell me at once, and as a true
man, whether this sublime lady of whom thou speakest be other than
the houri with whose assistance I beheld thee sweeping the chapel at
Engaddi?"

"How! presumptuous Knight," replied the dwarf, "think'st thou the
mistress of our own royal affections, the sharer of our greatness, and
the partner of our comeliness, would demean herself by laying charge on
such a vassal as thou? No; highly as thou art honoured, thou hast not
yet deserved the notice of Queen Guenevra, the lovely bride of Arthur,
from whose high seat even princes seem but pigmies. But look thou here,
and as thou knowest or disownest this token, so obey or refuse her
commands who hath deigned to impose them on thee."

So saying, he placed in the knight's hand a ruby ring, which, even in
the moonlight, he had no difficulty to recognize as that which usually
graced the finger of the high-born lady to whose service he had devoted
himself. Could he have doubted the truth of the token, he would have
been convinced by the small knot of carnation-coloured ribbon which was
fastened to the ring. This was his lady's favourite colour, and more
than once had he himself, assuming it for that of his own liveries,
caused the carnation to triumph over all other hues in the lists and in
the battle.

Sir Kenneth was struck nearly mute by seeing such a token in such hands.

"In the name of all that is sacred, from whom didst thou receive
this witness?" said the knight. "Bring, if thou canst, thy wavering
understanding to a right settlement for a minute or two, and tell me the
person by whom thou art sent, and the real purpose of thy message, and
take heed what thou sayest, for this is no subject for buffoonery."

"Fond and foolish Knight," said the dwarf, "wouldst thou know more of
this matter than that thou art honoured with commands from a princess,
delivered to thee by a king? We list not to parley with thee further
than to command thee, in the name and by the power of that ring, to
follow us to her who is the owner of the ring. Every minute that thou
tarriest is a crime against thy allegiance."

"Good Nectabanus, bethink thyself," said the knight. "Can my lady know
where and upon what duty I am this night engaged? Is she aware that my
life--pshaw, why should I speak of life--but that my honour depends on
my guarding this banner till daybreak; and can it be her wish that
I should leave it even to pay homage to her? It is impossible--the
princess is pleased to be merry with her servant in sending him such
a message; and I must think so the rather that she hath chosen such a
messenger."

"Oh, keep your belief," said Nectabanus, turning round as if to leave
the platform; "it is little to me whether you be traitor or true man to
this royal lady--so fare thee well."

"Stay, stay--I entreat you stay," said Sir Kenneth. "Answer me but one
question: is the lady who sent thee near to this place?"

"What signifies it?" said the dwarf. "Ought fidelity to reckon furlongs,
or miles, or leagues--like the poor courier, who is paid for his
labour by the distance which he traverses? Nevertheless, thou soul
of suspicion, I tell thee, the fair owner of the ring now sent to so
unworthy a vassal, in whom there is neither truth nor courage, is not
more distant from this place than this arblast can send a bolt."

The knight gazed again on that ring, as if to ascertain that there was
no possible falsehood in the token. "Tell me," he said to the dwarf, "is
my presence required for any length of time?"

"Time!" answered Nectabanus, in his flighty manner; "what call you time?
I see it not--I feel it not--it is but a shadowy name--a succession of
breathings measured forth by night by the clank of a bell, by day by
a shadow crossing along a dial-stone. Knowest thou not a true knight's
time should only be reckoned by the deeds that he performs in behalf of
God and his lady?"

"The words of truth, though in the mouth of folly," said the knight.
"And doth my lady really summon me to some deed of action, in her name
and for her sake?--and may it not be postponed for even the few hours
till daybreak?"

"She requires thy presence instantly," said the dwarf, "and without the
loss of so much time as would be told by ten grains of the sandglass.
Hearken, thou cold-blooded and suspicious knight, these are her very
words--Tell him that the hand which dropped roses can bestow laurels."

This allusion to their meeting in the chapel of Engaddi sent a thousand
recollections through Sir Kenneth's brain, and convinced him that the
message delivered by the dwarf was genuine. The rosebuds, withered as
they were, were still treasured under his cuirass, and nearest to his
heart. He paused, and could not resolve to forego an opportunity, the
only one which might ever offer, to gain grace in her eyes whom he had
installed as sovereign of his affections. The dwarf, in the meantime,
augmented his confusion by insisting either that he must return the ring
or instantly attend him.

"Hold, hold, yet a moment hold," said the knight, and proceeded to
mutter to himself, "Am I either the subject or slave of King Richard,
more than as a free knight sworn to the service of the Crusade? And whom
have I come hither to honour with lance and sword? Our holy cause and my
transcendent lady!"

"The ring! the ring!" exclaimed the dwarf impatiently; "false and
slothful knight, return the ring, which thou art unworthy to touch or to
look upon."

"A moment, a moment, good Nectabanus," said Sir Kenneth; "disturb not
my thoughts.--What if the Saracens were just now to attack our lines?
Should I stay here like a sworn vassal of England, watching that her
king's pride suffered no humiliation; or should I speed to the breach,
and fight for the Cross? To the breach, assuredly; and next to the cause
of God come the commands of my liege lady. And yet, Coeur de Lion's
behest--my own promise! Nectabanus, I conjure thee once more to say, are
you to conduct me far from hence?"

"But to yonder pavilion; and, since you must needs know," replied
Nectabanus, "the moon is glimmering on the gilded ball which crowns its
roof, and which is worth a king's ransom."

"I can return in an instant," said the knight, shutting his eyes
desperately to all further consequences, "I can hear from thence the bay
of my dog if any one approaches the standard. I will throw myself at my
lady's feet, and pray her leave to return to conclude my watch.--Here,
Roswal" (calling his hound, and throwing down his mantle by the side of
the standard-spear), "watch thou here, and let no one approach."

The majestic dog looked in his master's face, as if to be sure that he
understood his charge, then sat down beside the mantle, with ears erect
and head raised, like a sentinel, understanding perfectly the purpose
for which he was stationed there.

"Come now, good Nectabanus," said the knight, "let us hasten to obey the
commands thou hast brought."

"Haste he that will," said the dwarf sullenly; "thou hast not been in
haste to obey my summons, nor can I walk fast enough to follow your long
strides--you do not walk like a man, but bound like an ostrich in the
desert."

There were but two ways of conquering the obstinacy of Nectabanus, who,
as he spoke, diminished his walk into a snail's pace. For bribes Sir
Kenneth had no means--for soothing no time; so in his impatience
he snatched the dwarf up from the ground, and bearing him along,
notwithstanding his entreaties and his fear, reached nearly to the
pavilion pointed out as that of the Queen. In approaching it, however,
the Scot observed there was a small guard of soldiers sitting on the
ground, who had been concealed from him by the intervening tents.
Wondering that the clash of his own armour had not yet attracted
their attention, and supposing that his motions might, on the present
occasion, require to be conducted with secrecy, he placed the little
panting guide upon the ground to recover his breath, and point out what
was next to be done. Nectabanus was both frightened and angry; but he
had felt himself as completely in the power of the robust knight as an
owl in the claws of an eagle, and therefore cared not to provoke him to
any further display of his strength.

He made no complaints, therefore, of the usage he had received; but,
turning amongst the labyrinth of tents, he led the knight in silence
to the opposite side of the pavilion, which thus screened them from
the observation of the warders, who seemed either too negligent or too
sleepy to discharge their duty with much accuracy. Arrived there, the
dwarf raised the under part of the canvas from the ground, and made
signs to Sir Kenneth that he should introduce himself to the inside of
the tent, by creeping under it. The knight hesitated. There seemed an
indecorum in thus privately introducing himself into a pavilion pitched,
doubtless, for the accommodation of noble ladies; but he recalled
to remembrance the assured tokens which the dwarf had exhibited, and
concluded that it was not for him to dispute his lady's pleasure.

He stooped accordingly, crept beneath the canvas enclosure of the tent,
and heard the dwarf whisper from without, "Remain here until I call
thee."



CHAPTER XIII.

     You talk of Gaiety and Innocence!
     The moment when the fatal fruit was eaten,
     They parted ne'er to meet again; and Malice
     Has ever since been playmate to light Gaiety,
     From the first moment when the smiling infant
     Destroys the flower or butterfly he toys with,
     To the last chuckle of the dying miser,
     Who on his deathbed laughs his last to hear
     His wealthy neighbour has become a bankrupt.
         OLD PLAY.

Sir Kenneth was left for some minutes alone and in darkness. Here was
another interruption which must prolong his absence from his post, and
he began almost to repent the facility with which he had been induced to
quit it. But to return without seeing the Lady Edith was now not to be
thought of. He had committed a breach of military discipline, and was
determined at least to prove the reality of the seductive expectations
which had tempted him to do so. Meanwhile his situation was unpleasant.
There was no light to show him into what sort of apartment he had
been led--the Lady Edith was in immediate attendance on the Queen
of England--and the discovery of his having introduced himself thus
furtively into the royal pavilion might, were it discovered; lead to
much and dangerous suspicion. While he gave way to these unpleasant
reflections, and began almost to wish that he could achieve his retreat
unobserved, he heard a noise of female voices, laughing, whispering, and
speaking, in an adjoining apartment, from which, as the sounds gave him
reason to judge, he could only be separated by a canvas partition. Lamps
were burning, as he might perceive by the shadowy light which extended
itself even to his side of the veil which divided the tent, and he
could see shades of several figures sitting and moving in the adjoining
apartment. It cannot be termed discourtesy in Sir Kenneth that, situated
as he was, he overheard a conversation in which he found himself deeply
interested.

"Call her--call her, for Our Lady's sake," said the voice of one of
these laughing invisibles. "Nectabanus, thou shalt be made ambassador to
Prester John's court, to show them how wisely thou canst discharge thee
of a mission."

The shrill tone of the dwarf was heard, yet so much subdued that
Sir Kenneth could not understand what he said, except that he spoke
something of the means of merriment given to the guard.

"But how shall we rid us of the spirit which Nectabanus hath raised, my
maidens?"

"Hear me, royal madam," said another voice. "If the sage and princely
Nectabanus be not over-jealous of his most transcendent bride and
empress, let us send her to get us rid of this insolent knight-errant,
who can be so easily persuaded that high-born dames may need the use of
his insolent and overweening valour."

"It were but justice, methinks," replied another, "that the Princess
Guenever should dismiss, by her courtesy, him whom her husband's wisdom
has been able to entice hither."

Struck to the heart with shame and resentment at what he had heard, Sir
Kenneth was about to attempt his escape from the tent at all hazards,
when what followed arrested his purpose.

"Nay, truly," said the first speaker, "our cousin Edith must first learn
how this vaunted wight hath conducted himself, and we must reserve the
power of giving her ocular proof that he hath failed in his duty. It
may be a lesson will do good upon her; for, credit me, Calista, I have
sometimes thought she has let this Northern adventurer sit nearer her
heart than prudence would sanction."

One of the other voices was then heard to mutter something of the Lady
Edith's prudence and wisdom.

"Prudence, wench!" was the reply. "It is mere pride, and the desire to
be thought more rigid than any of us. Nay, I will not quit my advantage.
You know well that when she has us at fault no one can, in a civil way,
lay your error before you more precisely than can my Lady Edith. But
here she comes."

A figure, as if entering the apartment, cast upon the partition a
shade, which glided along slowly until it mixed with those which
already clouded it. Despite of the bitter disappointment which he had
experienced--despite the insult and injury with which it seemed he had
been visited by the malice, or, at best, by the idle humour of Queen
Berengaria (for he already concluded that she who spoke loudest, and in
a commanding tone, was the wife of Richard), the knight felt something
so soothing to his feelings in learning that Edith had been no partner
to the fraud practised on him, and so interesting to his curiosity in
the scene which was about to take place, that, instead of prosecuting
his more prudent purpose of an instant retreat, he looked anxiously,
on the contrary, for some rent or crevice by means of which he might be
made eye as well as ear witness to what was to go forward.

"Surely," said he to himself, "the Queen, who hath been pleased for
an idle frolic to endanger my reputation, and perhaps my life, cannot
complain if I avail myself of the chance which fortune seems willing to
afford me to obtain knowledge of her further intentions."

It seemed, in the meanwhile, as if Edith were waiting for the commands
of the Queen, and as if the other were reluctant to speak for fear of
being unable to command her laughter and that of her companions; for Sir
Kenneth could only distinguish a sound as of suppressed tittering and
merriment.

"Your Majesty," said Edith at last, "seems in a merry mood, though,
methinks, the hour of night prompts a sleepy one. I was well disposed
bedward when I had your Majesty's commands to attend you."

"I will not long delay you, cousin, from your repose," said the Queen,
"though I fear you will sleep less soundly when I tell you your wager is
lost."

"Nay, royal madam," said Edith, "this, surely, is dwelling on a jest
which has rather been worn out, I laid no wager, however it was your
Majesty's pleasure to suppose, or to insist, that I did so."

"Nay, now, despite our pilgrimage, Satan is strong with you, my gentle
cousin, and prompts thee to leasing. Can you deny that you gaged your
ruby ring against my golden bracelet that yonder Knight of the Libbard,
or how call you him, could not be seduced from his post?"

"Your Majesty is too great for me to gainsay you," replied Edith,
"but these ladies can, if they will, bear me witness that it was your
Highness who proposed such a wager, and took the ring from my finger,
even while I was declaring that I did not think it maidenly to gage
anything on such a subject."

"Nay, but, my Lady Edith," said another voice, "you must needs grant,
under your favour, that you expressed yourself very confident of the
valour of that same Knight of the Leopard."

"And if I did, minion," said Edith angrily, "is that a good reason why
thou shouldst put in thy word to flatter her Majesty's humour? I spoke
of that knight but as all men speak who have seen him in the field, and
had no more interest in defending than thou in detracting from him. In a
camp, what can women speak of save soldiers and deeds of arms?"

"The noble Lady Edith," said a third voice, "hath never forgiven Calista
and me, since we told your Majesty that she dropped two rosebuds in the
chapel."

"If your Majesty," said Edith, in a tone which Sir Kenneth could judge
to be that of respectful remonstrance, "have no other commands for
me than to hear the gibes of your waiting-women, I must crave your
permission to withdraw."

"Silence, Florise," said the Queen, "and let not our indulgence lead
you to forget the difference betwixt yourself and the kinswoman of
England.--But you, my dear cousin," she continued, resuming her tone
of raillery, "how can you, who are so good-natured, begrudge us poor
wretches a few minutes' laughing, when we have had so many days devoted
to weeping and gnashing of teeth?"

"Great be your mirth, royal lady," said Edith; "yet would I be content
not to smile for the rest of my life, rather than--"

She stopped, apparently out of respect; but Sir Kenneth could hear that
she was in much agitation.

"Forgive me," said Berengaria, a thoughtless but good-humoured princess
of the House of Navarre; "but what is the great offence, after all? A
young knight has been wiled hither--has stolen, or has been stolen, from
his post, which no one will disturb in his absence--for the sake of a
fair lady; for, to do your champion justice, sweet one, the wisdom of
Nectabanus could conjure him hither in no name but yours."

"Gracious Heaven! your Majesty does not say so?" said Edith, in a
voice of alarm quite different from the agitation she had previously
evinced,--"you cannot say so consistently with respect for your own
honour and for mine, your husband's kinswoman! Say you were jesting with
me, my royal mistress, and forgive me that I could, even for a moment,
think it possible you could be in earnest!"

"The Lady Edith," said the Queen, in a displeased tone of voice,
"regrets the ring we have won of her. We will restore the pledge to you,
gentle cousin; only you must not grudge us in turn a little triumph over
the wisdom which has been so often spread over us, as a banner over a
host."

"A triumph!" exclaimed Edith indignantly--"a triumph! The triumph will
be with the infidel, when he hears that the Queen of England can
make the reputation of her husband's kinswoman the subject of a light
frolic."

"You are angry, fair cousin, at losing your favourite ring," said the
Queen. "Come, since you grudge to pay your wager, we will renounce our
right; it was your name and that pledge brought him hither, and we care
not for the bait after the fish is caught."

"Madam," replied Edith impatiently, "you know well that your Grace could
not wish for anything of mine but it becomes instantly yours. But I
would give a bushel of rubies ere ring or name of mine had been used to
bring a brave man into a fault, and perhaps to disgrace and punishment."

"Oh, it is for the safety of our true knight that we fear!" said the
Queen. "You rate our power too low, fair cousin, when you speak of
a life being lost for a frolic of ours. O Lady Edith, others have
influence on the iron breasts of warriors as well as you--the heart
even of a lion is made of flesh, not of stone; and, believe me, I have
interest enough with Richard to save this knight, in whose fate Lady
Edith is so deeply concerned, from the penalty of disobeying his royal
commands."

"For the love of the blessed Cross, most royal lady," said Edith--and
Sir Kenneth, with feelings which it were hard to unravel, heard her
prostrate herself at the Queen's feet--"for the love of our blessed
Lady, and of every holy saint in the calendar, beware what you do! You
know not King Richard--you have been but shortly wedded to him. Your
breath might as well combat the west wind when it is wildest, as your
words persuade my royal kinsman to pardon a military offence. Oh, for
God's sake, dismiss this gentleman, if indeed you have lured him hither!
I could almost be content to rest with the shame of having invited him,
did I know that he was returned again where his duty calls him!"

"Arise, cousin, arise," said Queen Berengaria, "and be assured all will
be better than you think. Rise, dear Edith. I am sorry I have played my
foolery with a knight in whom you take such deep interest. Nay, wring
not thy hands; I will believe thou carest not for him--believe anything
rather than see thee look so wretchedly miserable. I tell thee I
will take the blame on myself with King Richard in behalf of thy fair
Northern friend--thine acquaintance, I would say, since thou own'st him
not as a friend. Nay, look not so reproachfully. We will send Nectabanus
to dismiss this Knight of the Standard to his post; and we ourselves
will grace him on some future day, to make amends for his wild-goose
chase. He is, I warrant, but lying perdu in some neighbouring tent."

"By my crown of lilies, and my sceptre of a specially good water-reed,"
said Nectabanus, "your Majesty is mistaken, He is nearer at hand than
you wot--he lieth ensconced there behind that canvas partition."

"And within hearing of each word we have said!" exclaimed the Queen, in
her turn violently surprised and agitated. "Out, monster of folly and
malignity!"

As she uttered these words, Nectabanus fled from the pavilion with a
yell of such a nature as leaves it still doubtful whether Berengaria had
confined her rebuke to words, or added some more emphatic expression of
her displeasure.

"What can now be done?" said the Queen to Edith, in a whisper of
undisguised uneasiness.

"That which must," said Edith firmly. "We must see this gentleman and
place ourselves in his mercy."

So saying, she began hastily to undo a curtain, which at one place
covered an entrance or communication.

"For Heaven's sake, forbear--consider," said the Queen--"my
apartment--our dress--the hour--my honour!"

But ere she could detail her remonstrances, the curtain fell, and there
was no division any longer betwixt the armed knight and the party of
ladies. The warmth of an Eastern night occasioned the undress of Queen
Berengaria and her household to be rather more simple and unstudied than
their station, and the presence of a male spectator of rank, required.
