from the wounded and the dying, screams of despair from the horrified
survivors, wails of lamentation from the suddenly bereaved, dismal
howlings of dogs, and terrified cries of other animals.

In two or three minutes the clouds of dust fell to the ground, and
disclosed the scene of desolation which a few seconds had wrought. The
ruin, though general, was not universal. A considerable number of houses
were left standing--fortunately tenantless--for a third great earth-wave
traversed the city, and most of the buildings which had withstood the
previous shocks, already severely shaken, were entirely overthrown.


WATER ADDS TO THE DESTRUCTION


The last disaster filled the surviving citizens with the impulse of
flight. The more fortunate of them ran in the direction of the open
country, and succeeded in saving their lives; but a great multitude
rushed down to the harbor, thinking to escape by sea. Here, however,
they were met by a new and unexpected peril. The tide, after first
retreating for a little, came rolling in with an immense wave, about
fifty feet in height, carrying with it ships, barges and boats, and
dashing them in dire confusion upon the crowded shore. Overwhelmed
by this huge wave, great numbers were, on its retreat, swept into the
seething waters and drowned. A vast throng took refuge on a fine new
marble quay, but recently completed, which had cost much labor and
expense. This the sea-wave had spared, sweeping harmless by. But, alas!
it was only for a moment. The vast structure itself, with the whole of
its living burden, sank instantaneously into an awful chasm which opened
underneath. The mole and all who were on it, the boats and barges moored
to its sides, all of them filled with people, were in a moment ingulfed.
Not a single corpse, not a shred of raiment, not a plank nor a splinter
floated to the surface, and a hundred fathoms of water covered the
spot. To the first great sea-wave several others succeeded, and the bay
continued for a long time in a state of tumultuous agitation.

About two hours after the first overthrow of the buildings, a new
element of destruction came into play. The fires in the ruined houses
kindled the timbers, and a mighty conflagration, urged by a violent
wind, soon raged among the ruins, consuming everything combustible, and
completing the wreck of the city. This fire, which lasted four days, was
not altogether a misfortune. It consumed the thousands of corpses which
would otherwise have tainted the air, adding pestilence to the other
misfortunes of the survivors. Yet they were threatened with an enemy not
less appalling, for famine stared them in the face. Almost everything
eatable within the precincts of the city had been consumed. A set
of wretches, morever, who had escaped from the ruins of the prisons,
prowled among the rubbish of the houses in search of plunder, so that
whatever remained in the shape of provisions fell into their hands and
was speedily devoured. They also broke into the houses that remained
standing, and rifled them of their contents. It is said that many of
those who had been only injured by the ruins, and might have escaped by
being extricated, were ruthlessly murdered by those merciless villains.

The total loss of life by this terrible catastrophe is estimated at
60,000 persons, of whom about 40,000 perished at once, and the remainder
died afterwards of the injuries and privations they sustained. Twelve
hundred were buried in the ruins of the general hospital, eight hundred
in those of the civil prison, and several thousands in those of the
convents. The loss of property amounted to many millions sterling.


WIDE-SPREAD DESTRUCTION


Although the earth-wave traversed the whole city, the shock was felt
more severely in some quarters than in others. All the older part of the
town, called the Moorish quarter, was entirely overthrown; and of the
newer part, about seventy of the principal streets were ruined.
Some buildings that withstood the shocks were destroyed by fire. The
cathedral, eighteen parish churches, almost all the convents, the halls
of the inquisition, the royal residence, and several other fine palaces
of the nobility and mansions of the wealthy, the custom-houses, the
warehouses filled with merchandise, the public granaries filled with
corn, and large timber yards, with their stores of lumber, were either
overthrown or burned.

The king and court were not in Lisbon at the time of this great
disaster, but were living in the neighborhood at the castle of Belem,
which escaped injury. The royal family, however, were so alarmed by the
shocks, that they passed the following night in carriages out of
doors. None of the officers of state were with them at the time. On
the following morning the king hastened to the ruined city, to see what
could be done toward restoring order, aiding the wounded, and providing
food for the hungry.

The royal family and the members of the court exerted themselves to the
uttermost, the ladies devoting themselves to the preparation of lint and
bandages, and to nursing the wounded, the sick, and the dying, of whom
the numbers were overwhelming. Among the sufferers were men of quality
and once opulent citizens, who had been reduced in a moment to absolute
penury. The kitchens of the royal palace, which fortunately remained
standing, were used for the purpose of preparing food for the starving
multitudes. It is said that during the first two or three days a pound
of bread was worth an ounce of gold. One of the first measures of the
government was to buy up all the corn that could be obtained in the
neighborhood of Lisbon, and to sell it again at a moderate price, to
those who could afford to buy, distributing it gratis to those who had
nothing to pay.

For about a month afterward earthquake shocks continued, some of them
severe. It was several months before any of the citizens could summon
courage to begin rebuilding the city. But by degrees their confidence
returned. The earth had relapsed into repose, and they set about the
task of rebuilding with so much energy, that in ten years Lisbon again
became one of the most beautiful capitals of Europe.


CHARACTERISTICS OF THE LISBON EARTHQUAKE


The most distinguishing peculiarities of this earthquake were the
swallowing up of the mole, and the vast extent of the earth's surface
over which the shocks were felt. Several of the highest mountains in
Portugal were violently shaken, and rent at their summits; huge masses
falling from them into the neighboring valleys. These great fractures
gave rise to immense volumes of dust, which at a distance were mistaken
for smoke by those who beheld them. Flames were also said to have been
observed: but if there were any such, they were probably electrical
flashes produced by the sudden rupture of the rocks.

The portion of the earth's surface convulsed by this earthquake is
estimated by Humboldt to have been four times greater than the whole
extent of Europe. The shocks were felt not only over the Spanish
peninsula, but in Morocco and Algeria they were nearly as violent. At a
place about twenty-four miles from the city of Morocco, there is said
to have occurred a catastrophe much resembling what took place at the
Lisbon mole. A great fissure opened in the earth, and an entire village,
with all its inhabitants, upwards of 8,000 in number, were precipitated
into the gulf, which immediately closed over its prey.


EARTHQUAKES IN CALABRIA


Of the numerous other examples of destructive earthquakes which might
be chosen from Old World annals, it will not be amiss to append a brief
account of those which took place in Calabria, Italy, in 1783. These,
while less wide-spread in their influence, were much longer in duration
than the Lisbon cataclysm, since they continued, at intervals, from the
5th of February until the end of the year. The shocks were felt all over
Sicily and as far north as Naples, but the area of severe convulsion was
comparatively limited, not exceeding five hundred square miles.

The centre of disturbance seems to have been under the town of Oppido in
the farther Calabria, and it extended in every direction from that
spot to a distance of about twenty-two miles, with such violence as to
overthrow every city, town and village lying within that circle. This
ruin was accomplished by the first shock on the 5th of February. The
second, of equal violence, on the 28th of March, was less destructive,
only because little or nothing had been left for it to overthrow.

At Oppido the motion was in the nature of a vertical upheaval of the
ground, which was accompanied by the opening of numerous large chasms,
into some of which many houses were ingulfed, the chasms closing over
them again almost immediately. The town itself was situated on the
summit of a hill, flanked by five steep and difficult slopes; it was
so completely overthrown by the first shock that scarcely a fragment of
wall was left standing. The hill itself was not thrown down, but a fort
which commanded the approach to the place was hurled into the gorge
below. It was on the flats immediately surrounding the site of the town
and on the rising grounds beyond them that the great fissures and chasms
were opened. On the slope of one of the hills opposite the town there
appeared a vast chasm, in which a large quantity of soil covered with
vines and olive-trees was engulfed. This chasm remained open after the
shock, and was somewhat in the form of an amphitheatre, 500 feet long
and 200 feet in depth.


MOST CALAMITOUS OF THE LANDSLIPS


The most calamitous of the landslips occurred on the sea-coast of the
Straits of Messina, near the celebrated rock of Scilla, where huge
masses fell from the tall cliffs, overwhelming many villas and gardens.
At Gian Greco a continuous line of precipitous rocks, nearly a mile in
length, tumbled down. The aged Prince of Scilla, after the first great
shock on the 5th of February, persuaded many of his vassals to quit
the dangerous shore, and take refuge in the fishing boats--he himself
showing the example. That same night, however, while many of the people
were asleep in the boats, and others on a flat plain a little above the
sea-level, another powerful shock threw down from the neighboring Mount
Jaci a great mass, which fell with a dreadful crash, partly into the
sea, and partly upon the plain beneath. Immediately the sea rose to a
height of twenty feet above the level ground on which the people were
stationed, and rolling over it, swept away the whole multitude. This
immense wave then retired, but returned with still greater violence,
bringing with it the bodies of the men and animals it had previously
swept away, dashing to pieces the whole of the boats, drowning all that
were in them, and wafting the fragments far inland. The prince with
1,430 of his people perished by this disaster.

It was on the north-eastern shore of Sicily, however, that the greatest
amount of damage was done. The first severe shock, on the 5th of
February, overthrew nearly the whole of the beautiful city of Messina,
with great loss of life. The shore for a considerable distance along the
coast was rent, and the ground along the port, which was before quite
level, became afterwards inclined towards the sea, the depth of the
water having, at the same time, increased in several parts, through the
displacement of portions of the bottom. The quay also subsided about
fourteen inches below the level of the sea, and the houses near it
were much rent. But it was in the city itself that the most terrible
desolation was wrought--a complication of disasters having followed
the shock, more especially a fierce conflagration, whose intensity was
augmented by the large stores of oil kept in the place.


IMMENSE DESTRUCTION


According to official reports made soon after the events, the
destruction caused by the earthquakes of the 5th of February and 28th
of March throughout the two Calabrias was immense. About 320 towns
and villages were entirely reduced to ruins, and about fifty others
seriously damaged. The loss of life was appalling--40,000 having
perished by the earthquakes, and 20,000 more having subsequently died
from privation and exposure, or from epidemic diseases bred by the
stagnant pools and the decaying carcases of men and animals. The greater
number were buried amid the ruins of the houses, while others perished
in the fires that were kindled in most of the towns, particularly in
Oppido, where the flames were fed by great magazines of oil. Not a few,
especially among the peasantry dwelling in the country, were suddenly
engulfed in fissures. Many who were only half buried in the ruins, and
who might have been saved had there been help at hand, were left to
die a lingering death from cold and hunger. Four Augustine monks at
Terranuova perished thus miserably. Having taken refuge in a vaulted
sacristy, they were entombed in it alive by the masses of rubbish,
and lingered for four days, during which their cries for help could be
heard, till death put an end to their sufferings.

Of still more thrilling interest was the case of the Marchioness
Spastara. Having fainted at the moment of the first great shock, she was
lifted by her husband, who, bearing her in his arms, hurried with her to
the harbor. Here, on recovering her senses, she observed that her infant
boy had been left behind. Taking advantage of a moment when her husband
was too much occupied to notice her, she darted off and, running back
to the house, which was still standing, she snatched her babe from its
cradle. Rushing with him in her arms towards the staircase, she
found the stair had fallen--cutting off all further progress in that
direction. She fled from room to room, pursued by the falling materials,
and at length reached a balcony as her last refuge. Holding up her
infant, she implored the few passers-by for help; but they all, intent
on securing their own safety, turned a deaf ear to her cries. Meanwhile
the mansion had caught fire, and before long the balcony, with the
devoted lady still grasping her darling, was hurled into the devouring
flames.



CHAPTER XVII.

The Charleston and Other Earthquakes of the United States.


The twin continents of America have rivalled the record of the Old World
in their experience of earthquakes since their discovery in 1492. The
first of these made note of was in Venezuela in 1530, but they have been
numerous and often disastrous since. Among them was the great shock at
Lima in 1746, by which 18,000 were killed, and those at Guatemala in
1773, with 33,000, and at Riobamba in 1797, with 41,000 victims. It
will, however, doubtless prove of more interest to our readers if we
pass over these ruinous disasters and confine ourselves to the less
destructive earthquakes which have taken place within our own country.

The United States, large a section of North America as it occupies, is
fortunate in being in a great measure destitute of volcanic phenomena,
while destructive earthquakes have been very rare in its history. This,
it is true, does not apply to the United States as it is, but as it was.
It has annexed the volcano and the earthquake with its new accessions of
territory. Alaska has its volcanoes, the Philippines are subject to
both forms of convulsion, and in Hawaii we possess the most spectacular
volcano of the earth, while the earthquake is its common attendant.
But in the older United States the volcano contents itself with an
occasional puff of smoke, and eruptive phenomena are confined to the
minor form of the geyser.

We are by no means so free from the earthquake. Slight movements of the
earth's surface are much more common than many of us imagine, and in
the history of our land there have been a number of earth shocks
of considerable violence. Prior to that of San Francisco, the most
destructive to life and property was that of Charleston in 1886, though
the 1812 convulsion in the Mississippi Valley might have proved a
much greater calamity but for the fact that civilized man had not then
largely invaded its centre of action.

As regards the number of earth movements in this country, we are told
that in New England alone 231 were recorded in two hundred and fifty
years, while doubtless many slighter ones were left unrecorded. Taking
the whole United States, there were 364 recorded in the twelve years
from 1872 to 1883, and in 1885 fifty-nine were recorded, more than
two-thirds of them being on the Pacific slope. Most of these, however,
were very slight, some of them barely perceptible.

Confining ourselves to those of the past important in their effects, we
shall first speak of the shocks which took place in New England in 1755,
in the year and month of the great earthquake at Lisbon. On the 18th of
November of that year, while the shocks at Lisbon still continued,
New England was violently shaken, loud underground explosive noises
accompanying the shocks. In the harbors along the Atlantic coast there
was much agitation of the waters and many dead fish were thrown up on
the shores. The shock, indeed, was felt far from the coast, by the
crew of a ship more than two hundred miles out at sea from Cape Ann,
Massachusetts.

This event, however, was of minor importance, being much inferior to
that of 1812, in which year California and the Mississippi Valley alike
were affected by violent movements of the earth's crust. The California
convulsions took place in the spring and summer of that year, extending
from the beginning of May until September. Throughout May the southern
portion of that region was violently agitated, the shocks being so
frequent and severe that people abandoned their houses and slept on the
open ground. The most destructive shocks came in September, when two
Mission houses were destroyed and many of their inmates killed. At Santa
Barbara a tidal wave invaded the coast and flowed some distance into the
interior.

It may be said here that California has proved more subject to severe
shocks than any other section of our country. In 1865 sharp tremors
shook the whole region about the Bay of San Francisco, many buildings
being thrown down. Hardly any of brick or stone escaped injury, though
few lives were lost. In 1872 a disturbance was felt farther west, the
whole range of the Sierra Nevada mountains being violently shaken and
the earth tremblings extending into the State of Nevada. The centre of
activity was along the crest of the range, and immense quantities of
rock were thrown down from the mountain pinnacles. A tremendous fissure
opened along the eastern base of the mountain range for forty miles,
the land to the west of the opening rising and that to the east sinking
several feet. One small settlement, that of Lone Pine, in Owen's Valley,
on the east base of the mountains, was completely demolished, from
twenty to thirty lives being lost. Luckily, the region affected had very
few inhabitants, or the calamity might have been great.

The earthquakes of 1812 in the Mississippi Valley began in December,
1811, and continued at intervals until 1813. As a rule they were more
distinguished by frequency than violence, though on several occasions
they were severe and had marked effects. They extended through
the valleys of the Mississippi, Arkansas and Ohio, and their long
continuance was remarkable in view of the territory affected being far
from any volcanic region.

The surface of the valley of the Mississippi was a good deal altered
by these convulsions--several new lakes being formed, while others were
drained. Several new islands were also raised in the river, and during
one of the shocks the ground a little below New Madrid was for a short
time lifted so high as to stop the current of the Mississippi, and cause
it to flow backward. The ground on which this town is built, and the
bank of the river for fifteen miles above it, subsided permanently about
eight feet, and the cemetery of the town fell into the river. In the
neighboring forest the trees were thrown into inclined positions in
every direction, and many of their trunks and branches were broken. It
is affirmed that in some places the ground swelled into great waves,
which burst at their summits and poured forth jets of water, along with
sand and pieces of coal, which were tossed as high as the tops of trees.
On the subsidence of these waves, there were left several hundreds
of hollow depressions from ten to thirty yards in diameter, and about
twenty feet in depth, which remained visible for many years afterward.
Some of the shocks were vertical, and others horizontal, the latter
being the most mischievous. These earthquakes resulted in the general
subsidence of a large tract of country, between seventy and eighty miles
in length from north to south, and about thirty miles in breadth from
east to west. Lakes now mark many of the localities affected by the
earthquake movements. It is only to the fact that this country was then
very thinly settled that a great loss of life was avoided.

New Madrid, Missouri, was a central point of this earthquake, the
shocks there being repeated with great frequency for several months.
The disturbance of the earth, however, was not confined to the United
States, but affected nearly half of the western hemisphere, ending
in the upheaval of Sabrina in the Azores, already described. The
destruction of Caracas, Venezuela, with many thousands of its
inhabitants, and the eruption of La Soufriere volcano of St. Vincent
Island were incidents of this convulsion. Dr. J. W. Foster tells us that
on the night of the disaster at Caracas the earthquake grew intense at
New Madrid, fissures being opened six hundred feet long by twenty broad,
from which water and sand were flung to the height of forty feet.

The most destructive of earthquakes in our former history was that which
visited Charleston, South Carolina, in 1886, the injury caused by it
being largely due to the fact that it passed through a populous city.
As it occurred after many of the people had retired, the confusion and
terror due to it were greatly augmented, people fleeing in panic fear
from the tumbling and cracking houses to seek refuge in the widest
streets and open spaces.

South Carolina had been affected by the wide-spread earthquakes of 1812.
These in some cases altered the level of the land, as is related in
Lyell's "Principles of Geology." But the effect then was much less than
in 1886. Several slight tremors occurred in the early summer of that
year, but did not excite much attention. More distinct shocks were felt
on August 27th and 28th, but the climax was deferred till the evening of
August 31st. The atmosphere that afternoon had been unusually sultry and
quiet, the breeze from the ocean, which generally accompanies the rising
tide, was almost entirely absent, and the setting sun caused a little
glow in the sky.

"As the hour of 9.50 was reached," we are told, "there was suddenly
heard a rushing, roaring sound, compared by some to a train of cars
at no great distance, by others to a clatter produced by two or more
omnibuses moving at a rapid rate over a paved street, by others again,
to an escape of steam from a boiler. It was followed immediately by a
thumping and beating of the earth beneath the houses, which rocked
and swayed to and fro. Furniture was violently moved and dashed to the
floor; pictures were swung from the walls, and in some cases turned
with their backs to the front, and every movable thing was thrown
into extraordinary convulsions. The greatest intensity of the shock is
considered to have been during the first half, and it was probably
then, during the period of its greatest sway, that so many chimneys
were broken off at the junction of the roof. The duration of this severe
shock is thought to have been from thirty-five to forty seconds. The
impression produced on many was that it could be subdivided into three
distinct movements, while others were of the opinion that it was
one continuous movement, or succession of waves, with the greatest
intensity, as already stated, during the first half of its duration."

Twenty-seven persons were killed outright, and more than that number
died soon after of their hurts or from exposure; many others were less
seriously injured. Among the buildings, the havoc, though much less
disastrous than has been recorded in some other earthquakes in either
hemisphere, was very great. "There was not a building in the city which
had escaped serious injury. The extent of the damage varied greatly,
ranging from total demolition down to the loss of chimney tops and the
dislodgment of more or less plastering. The number of buildings which
were completely demolished and levelled to the ground was not great; but
there were several hundreds which lost a large portion of their
walls. There were very many also which remained standing, but so badly
shattered that public safety required that they should be pulled down
altogether. There was not, so far as at present is known, a brick or
stone building which was not more or less cracked, and in most of them
the cracks were a permanent disfigurement and a source of danger
and inconvenience." In some places the railway track was curiously
distorted. "It was often displaced laterally, and sometimes alternately
depressed and elevated. Occasionally several lateral flexures of double
curvature and of great amount were exhibited. Many hundred yards of
track had been shoved bodily to the south eastward."

The ground was fissured at some places in the city to a depth of many
feet, and numerous "craterlets" were formed, from which sand was ejected
in considerable quantities. These are not uncommon phenomena, and were
due, no doubt, to the squirting of water out of saturated sandy layers
not far below the surface; these being squeezed between two less
pervious beds in the passage of the earthquake wave. The ejected
material in the Charleston earthquake was ordinary sand, such as
might exist in many districts which had been quite undisturbed by any
concussions of the earth.

Captain Dutton made a careful study of the observations collected
by himself and others concerning this earthquake, and came to the
conclusion that the Charleston wave traveled with unusual speed, for
its mean velocity was about 17,000 feet a second. The focus of the
disturbance was also ascertained. Apparently it was a double one, the
