"Ah, Richard!" she cried on seeing him, "I am glad you are come. You
will persuade this girl to restore me to reason--to free me from the
terrors that beset me. She can do so if she will."

"Calm yourself, dear sister," said Richard, gently endeavouring to free
Alizon from her grasp.

"No, do not take her from me," said Dorothy, wildly; "I am better when
she is near me--much better. My brow does not throb so violently, and my
limbs are not twisted so painfully. Do you know what ails me, Richard?"

"You have caught cold from wandering out indiscreetly last night," said
Richard.

"I am bewitched!" rejoined Dorothy, in tones that pierced her brother's
brain--"bewitched by Alizon Device--by your love--ha! ha! She wishes to
kill me, Richard, because she thinks I am in her way. But you will not
let her do it."

"You are mistaken, dear Dorothy. She means you no harm," said Richard.

"Heaven knows how much I grieve for her, and how fondly I love her!"
exclaimed Alizon, tearfully.

"It is false!" cried Dorothy. "She will tell a different tale when you
are gone. She is a witch, and you shall never marry her,
Richard--never!--never!"

Mistress Nutter, who stood at a little distance, anxiously observing
what was passing, waved her hand several times towards the sufferer, but
without effect.

"I have no influence over her," she muttered. "She is really bewitched.
I must find other means to quieten her."

Though both greatly distressed, Alizon and Richard redoubled their
attentions to the poor sufferer. For a few moments she remained quiet,
but with her eyes constantly fixed on Alizon, and then said, quickly
and fiercely, "I have been told, if you scratch one who has bewitched
you till you draw blood, you will be cured. I will plunge my nails in
her flesh."

"I will not oppose you," replied Alizon, gently; "tear my flesh if you
will. You should have my life's blood if it would cure you; but if the
success of the experiment depends on my having bewitched you, it will
assuredly fail."

"This is dreadful," interposed Richard. "Leave her, Alizon, I entreat of
you. She will do you an injury."

"I care not," replied the young maid. "I will stay by her till she
voluntarily releases me."

The almost tigress fury with which Dorothy had seized upon the
unresisting girl here suddenly deserted her, and, sobbing hysterically,
she fell upon her neck. Oh, with what delight Alizon pressed her to her
bosom!

"Dorothy, dear Dorothy!" she cried.

"Alizon, dear Alizon!" responded Dorothy. "Oh! how could I suspect you
of any ill design against me!"

"She is no witch, dear sister, be assured of that!" said Richard.

"Oh, no--no--no! I am quite sure she is not," cried Dorothy, kissing her
affectionately.

This change had been wrought by the low-breathed spells of Mistress
Nutter.

"The access is over," she mentally ejaculated; "but I must get him away
before the fit returns." "You had better go now, Richard," she added
aloud, and touching his arm, "I will answer for your sister's
restoration. An opiate will produce sleep, and if possible, she shall
return to Middleton to-day."

"If I go, Alizon must go with me," said Dorothy. "Well, well, I will not
thwart your desires," rejoined Mistress Nutter. And she made a sign to
Richard to depart.

The young man pressed his sister's hand, bade a tender farewell to
Alizon, and, infinitely relieved by the improvement which had taken
place in the former, and which he firmly believed would speedily lead to
her entire restoration, descended to the entrance-hall, where he found
Sir Ralph and Parson Dewhurst, who told him that Nicholas and Potts were
in the court-yard, and impatient to set out.

Shouts of laughter saluted the ears of the trio as they descended the
steps. The cause of the merriment was speedily explained when they
looked towards the stables, and beheld Potts struggling for mastery with
a stout Welsh pony, who showed every disposition, by plunging, kicking,
and rearing, to remove him from his seat, though without success, for
the attorney was not quite such a contemptible horseman as might be
imagined. A wicked-looking little fellow was Flint, with a rough,
rusty-black coat, a thick tail that swept the ground, a mane to match,
and an eye of mixed fire and cunning. When brought forth he had allowed
Potts to mount him quietly enough; but no sooner was the attorney
comfortably in possession, than he was served with a notice of
ejectment. Down went Flint's head and up went his heels; while on the
next instant he was rearing aloft, with his fore-feet beating the air,
so nearly perpendicular, that the chances seemed in favour of his coming
down on his back. Then he whirled suddenly round, shook himself
violently, threatened to roll over, and performed antics of the most
extraordinary kind, to the dismay of his rider, but to the infinite
amusement of the spectators, who were ready to split their sides with
laughter--indeed, tears fairly streamed down the squire's cheeks.
However, when Sir Ralph appeared, it was thought desirable to put an end
to the fun; and Peter, the groom, advanced to seize the restive little
animal's bridle, but, eluding the grasp, Flint started off at full
gallop, and, accompanied by the two blood-hounds, careered round the
court-yard, as if running in a ring. Vainly did poor Potts tug at the
bridle. Flint, having the bit firmly between his teeth, defied his
utmost efforts. Away he went with the hounds at his heels, as if, said
Nicholas, "the devil were behind him." Though annoyed and angry, Sir
Ralph could not help laughing at the ridiculous scene, and even a smile
crossed Parson Dewhurst's grave countenance as Flint and his rider
scampered madly past them. Sir Ralph called to the grooms, and attempts
were instantly made to check the furious pony's career; but he baffled
them all, swerving suddenly round when an endeavour was made to
intercept him, leaping over any trifling obstacle, and occasionally
charging any one who stood in his path. What with the grooms running
hither and thither, vociferating and swearing, the barking and springing
of the hounds, the yelping of lesser dogs, and the screaming of poultry,
the whole yard was in a state of uproar and confusion.

"Flint mun be possessed," cried Peter. "Ey never seed him go on i' this
way efore. Ey noticed Elizabeth Device near th' stables last neet, an ey
shouldna wonder if hoo ha' bewitched him."

"Neaw doubt on't," replied another groom. "Howsomever we mun contrive to
ketch him, or Sir Roaph win send us aw abowt our business.

"Ey wish yo'd contrive to do it, then, Tum Lomax," replied Peter, "fo'
ey'm fairly blowd. Dang me, if ey ever seed sich hey-go-mad wark i' my
born days. What's to be done, squoire?" he added to Nicholas.

"The devil only knows," replied the latter; "but it seems we must wait
till the little rascal chooses to stop."

This occurred sooner than was expected. Thinking, possibly, that he had
done enough to induce Master Potts to give up all idea of riding him,
Flint suddenly slackened his pace, and trotted, as if nothing had
happened, to the stable-door; but if he had formed any such notion as
the above, he was deceived, for the attorney, who was quite as obstinate
and wilful as himself, and who through all his perils had managed to
maintain his seat, was resolved not to abandon it, and positively
refused to dismount when urged to do so by Nicholas and the grooms.

"He will go quietly enough now, I dare say," observed Potts, "and if
not, and you will lend me a hunting-whip, I will undertake to cure him
of his tricks."

Flint seemed to understand what was said, for he laid back his ears as
if meditating more mischief; but being surrounded by the grooms, he
deemed it advisable to postpone the attempt to a more convenient
opportunity. In compliance with his request, a heavy hunting-whip was
handed to Potts, and, armed with this formidable weapon, the little
attorney quite longed for an opportunity of effacing his disgrace.
Meanwhile, Sir Ralph had come up and ordered a steady horse out for him;
but Master Potts adhered to his resolution, and Flint remaining
perfectly quiet, the baronet let him have his own way.

Soon after this, Nicholas and Richard having mounted their steeds, the
party set forth. As they were passing through the gateway, which had
been thrown wide open by Ned Huddlestone, they were joined by Simon
Sparshot, who had been engaged by Potts to attend him on the expedition
in his capacity of constable. Simon was mounted on a mule, and brought
word that Master Roger Nowell begged they would ride round by Read Hall,
where he would be ready to accompany them, as he wished to be present at
the perambulation of the boundaries. Assenting to the arrangement, the
party set forth in that direction, Richard and Nicholas riding a little
in advance of the others.




CHAPTER II.--READ HALL.


The road taken by the party on quitting Whalley led up the side of a
hill, which, broken into picturesque inequalities, and partially clothed
with trees, sloped down to the very brink of the Calder. Winding round
the broad green plain, heretofore described, with the lovely knoll in
the midst of it, and which formed, with the woody hills encircling it, a
perfect amphitheatre, the river was ever an object of beauty--sometimes
lost beneath over-hanging boughs or high banks, anon bursting forth
where least expected, now rushing swiftly over its shallow and rocky
bed, now subsiding into a smooth full current. The Abbey and the village
were screened from view by the lower part of the hill which the horsemen
were scaling; but the old bridge and a few cottages at the foot of
Whalley Nab, with their thin blue smoke mounting into the pure morning
air, gave life and interest to the picture. Hence, from base to summit,
Whalley Nab stood revealed, and the verdant lawns opening out amidst the
woods feathering its heights, were fully discernible. Placed by Nature
as the guardian of this fair valley, the lofty eminence well became the
post assigned to it. None of the belt of hills connected with it were so
well wooded as their leader, nor so beautiful in form; while some of
them were overtopped by the bleak fells of Longridge, rising at a
distance behind them.

Nor were those exquisite contrasts wanting, which are only to be seen in
full perfection when the day is freshest and the dew is still heavy on
the grass. The near side of the hill was plunged in deep shade; thin,
gauzy vapour hung on the stream beneath, while on the opposite heights,
and where the great boulder stones were visible in the bed of the river,
all was sparkling with sunshine. So enchanting was the prospect, that
though perfectly familiar with it, the two foremost horsemen drew in the
rein to contemplate it. High above them, on a sandbank, through which
their giant roots protruded, shot up two tall silver-stemm'd
beech-trees, forming with their newly opened foliage a canopy of
tenderest green. Further on appeared a grove of oaks scarcely in leaf;
and below were several fine sycamores, already green and umbrageous,
intermingled with elms, ashes, and horse-chestnuts, and overshadowing
brakes, covered with maples, alders, and hazels. The other spaces among
the trees were enlivened by patches of yellow flowering and odorous
gorse. Mixed with the warblings of innumerable feathered songsters were
heard the cheering notes of the cuckoo; and the newly-arrived swallows
were seen chasing the flies along the plain, or skimming over the
surface of the river. Already had Richard's depression yielded to the
exhilarating freshness of the morning, and the same kindly influence
produced a more salutary effect on Nicholas than Parson Dewhurst's
lecture had been able to accomplish. The worthy squire was a true lover
of Nature; admiring her in all her forms, whether arrayed in pomp of
wood and verdure, as in the lovely landscape before him, or dreary and
desolate, as in the heathy forest wastes they were about to traverse.
While breathing the fresh morning air, inhaling the fragrance of the
wild-flowers, and listening to the warbling of the birds, he took a
well-pleased survey of the scene, commencing with the bridge, passing
over Whalley Nab and the mountainous circle conjoined with it, till his
gaze settled on Morton Hall, a noble mansion finely situated on a
shoulder of the hill beyond him, and commanding the entire valley.

"Were I not owner of Downham," he observed to Richard, "I should wish to
be master of Morton." And then, pointing to the green area below, he
added, "What a capital spot for a race! There we might try the speed of
our nags for the twenty pieces I talked of yesterday; and the judges of
the match and those who chose to look on might station themselves on
yon knoll, which seems made for the express purpose. Three years ago I
remember a fair was held upon that plain, and the foot-races, the
wrestling matches, and the various sports and pastimes of the rustics,
viewed from the knoll, formed the prettiest sight ever looked upon. But,
pleasant as the prospect is, we must not tarry here all day."

Before setting forward, he cast a glance towards Pendle Hill, which
formed the most prominent object of view on the left, and lay like a
leviathan basking in the sunshine. The vast mass rose up gradually until
at its further extremity it attained an altitude of more than 1800 feet
above the sea. At the present moment it was without a cloud, and the
whole of its broad outline was distinctly visible.

"I love Pendle Hill," cried Nicholas, enthusiastically; "and from
whatever side I view it--whether from this place, where I see it from
end to end, from its lowest point to its highest; from Padiham, where it
frowns upon me; from Clithero, where it smiles; or from Downham, where
it rises in full majesty before me--from all points and under all
aspects, whether robed in mist or radiant with sunshine, I delight in
it. Born beneath its giant shadow, I look upon it with filial regard.
Some folks say Pendle Hill wants grandeur and sublimity, but they
themselves must be wanting in taste. Its broad, round, smooth mass is
better than the roughest, craggiest, shaggiest, most sharply splintered
mountain of them all. And then what a view it commands!--Lancaster with
its grey old castle on one hand; York with its reverend minster on the
other--the Irish Sea and its wild coast--fell, forest, moor, and valley,
watered by the Ribble, the Hodder, the Calder, and the Lime--rivers not
to be matched for beauty. You recollect the old distich--

          'Ingleborough, Pendle Hill, and Pennygent,
           Are the highest hills between Scotland and Trent.'

This vouches for its height, but there are two other doggerel lines
still more to the purpose--

          'Pendle Hill, Pennygent, and Ingleborough,
           Are three such hills as you'll not find by seeking England
               thorough.'

With this opinion I quite agree. There is no hill in England like Pendle
Hill."

"Every man to his taste, squire," observed Potts; "but to my mind,
Pendle Hill has no other recommendation than its size. I think it a
great, brown, ugly, lumpy mass, without beauty of form or any striking
character. I hate your bleak Lancashire hills, with heathy ranges on the
top, fit only for the sustenance of a few poor half-starved sheep; and
as to the view from them, it is little else than a continuous range of
moors and dwarfed forests. Highgate Hill is quite mountain enough for
me, and Hampstead Heath wild enough for any civilised purpose."

"A veritable son of Cockayne!" muttered Nicholas, contemptuously.

Riding on, and entering the grove of oaks, he lost sight of his
favourite hill, though glimpses were occasionally caught through the
trees of the lovely valley below. Soon afterwards the party turned off
on the left, and presently arrived at a gate which admitted them to Read
Park. Five minutes' canter over the springy turf then brought them to
the house.

The manor of Reved or Read came into the possession of the Nowell family
in the time of Edward III., and extended on one side, within a mile of
Whalley, from which township it was divided by a deep woody ravine,
taking its name from the little village of Sabden, and on the other
stretched far into Pendle Forest. The hall was situated on an eminence
forming part of the heights of Padiham, and faced a wide valley, watered
by the Calder, and consisting chiefly of barren tracts of moor and
forest land, bounded by the high hills near Accrington and Rossendale.
On the left, some half-dozen miles off, lay Burnley, and the greater
part of the land in this direction, being uninclosed and thinly peopled,
had a dark dreary look, that served to enhance the green beauty of the
well-cultivated district on the right. Behind the mansion, thick woods
extended to the very confines of Pendle Forest, of which, indeed, they
originally formed part, and here, if the course of the stream, flowing
through the gully of Sabden, were followed, every variety of brake,
glen, and dingle, might be found. Read Hall was a large and commodious
mansion, forming, with a centre and two advancing wings, three sides of
a square, between which was a grass-plot ornamented with a dial. The
gardens were laid out in the taste of the time, with trim alleys and
parterres, terraces and steps, stone statues, and clipped yews.

The house was kept up well and consistently by its owner, who lived like
a country gentleman with a good estate, entertained his friends
hospitably, but without any parade, and was never needlessly lavish in
his expenditure, unless, perhaps, in the instance of the large
ostentatious pew erected by him in the parish church of Whalley; and
which, considering he had a private chapel at home, and maintained a
domestic chaplain to do duty in it, seemed little required, and drew
upon him the censure of the neighbouring gossips, who said there was
more of pride than religion in his pew. With the chapel at the hall a
curious history was afterwards connected. Converted into a dining-room
by a descendant of Roger Nowell, the apartment was incautiously occupied
by the planner of the alterations before the plaster was thoroughly
dried; in consequence of which he caught a severe cold, and died in the
desecrated chamber, his fate being looked upon as a judgment.

With many good qualities Roger Nowell was little liked. His austere and
sarcastic manner repelled his equals, and his harshness made him an
object of dislike and dread among his inferiors. Besides being the
terror of all evil-doers, he was a hard man in his dealings, though he
endeavoured to be just, and persuaded himself he was so. A year or two
before, having been appointed sheriff of the county, he had discharged
the important office with so much zeal and ability, as well as
liberality, that he rose considerably in public estimation. It was
during this period that Master Potts came under his notice at Lancaster,
and the little attorney's shrewdness gained him an excellent client in
the owner of Read. Roger Newell was a widower; but his son, who resided
with him, was married, and had a family, so that the hall was fully
occupied.

Roger Nowell was turned sixty, but he was still in the full vigour of
mind and body, his temperate and active habits keeping him healthy; he
was of a spare muscular frame, somewhat bent in the shoulders, and had
very sharp features, keen grey eyes, a close mouth, and prominent chin.
His hair was white as silver, but his eyebrows were still black and
bushy.

Seeing the party approach, the lord of the mansion came forth to meet
them, and begged them to dismount for a moment and refresh themselves.
Richard excused himself, but Nicholas sprang from his saddle, and Potts,
though somewhat more slowly, imitated his example. An open door admitted
them to the entrance hall, where a repast was spread, of which the host
pressed his guests to partake; but Nicholas declined on the score of
having just breakfasted, notwithstanding which he was easily prevailed
upon to take a cup of ale. Leaving him to discuss it, Nowell led the
attorney to a well-furnished library, where he usually transacted his
magisterial business, and held a few minutes' private conference with
him, after which they returned to Nicholas, and by this time the
magistrate's own horse being brought round, the party mounted once more.
The attorney regretted abandoning his seat; for Flint indulged him with
another exhibition somewhat similar to the first, though of less
duration, for a vigorous application of the hunting-whip brought the
wrong-headed little animal to reason.

Elated by the victory he had obtained over Flint, and anticipating a
successful issue to the expedition, Master Potts was in excellent
spirits, and found a great deal to admire in the domain of his honoured
and singular good client. Though not very genuine, his admiration was
deservedly bestowed. The portion of the park they were now traversing
was extremely diversified and beautiful, with long sweeping lawns
studded with fine trees, among which were many ancient thorns, now in
full bloom, and richly scenting the gale. Herds of deer were nipping the
short grass, browsing the lower spray of the ashes, or couching amid the
ferny hollows.

It was now that Nicholas, who had been all along anxious to try the
speed of his horse, proposed to Richard a gallop towards a clump of
trees about a mile off, and the young man assenting, away they started.
Master Potts started too, for Flint did not like to be left behind, but
the mettlesome pony was soon distanced. For some time the two horses
kept so closely together, that it was difficult to say which would
arrive at the goal first; but, by-and-by, Robin got a-head. Though at
first indifferent to the issue of the race, the spirit of emulation soon
seized upon Richard, and spurring Merlin, the noble animal sprang
forward, and was once again by the side of his opponent.

For a quarter of a mile the ground had been tolerably level, and the sod
firm; but they now approached a swamp, and, in his eagerness, Nicholas
did not take sufficient precaution, and got involved in it before he was
aware. Richard was more fortunate, having kept on the right, where the
ground was hard. Seeing Nicholas struggling out of the marshy soil, he
would have stayed for him; but the latter bade him go on, saying he
would soon be up with him, and he made good his words. Shortly after
this their course was intercepted by a brook, and both horses having
cleared it excellently, they kept well together again for a short time,
when they neared a deep dyke which lay between them and the clump of
trees. On descrying it, Richard pointed out a course to the left, but
Nicholas held on, unheeding the caution. Fully expecting to see him
break his neck, for the dyke was of formidable width, Richard watched
him with apprehension, but the squire gave him a re-assuring nod, and
went on. Neither horse nor man faltered, though failure would have been
certain destruction to both. The wide trench now yawned before
them--they were upon its edge, and without trusting himself to measure
it with his eye, Nicholas clapped spurs into Robin's sides. The brave
horse sprang forward and landed him safely on the opposite bank.
Hallooing cheerily, as soon as he could check his courser the squire
wheeled round, and rode back to look at the dyke he had crossed. Its
width was terrific, and fairly astounded him. Robin snorted loudly, as
if proud of his achievement, and showed some disposition to return, but
the squire was quite content with what he had done. The exploit
afterwards became a theme of wonder throughout the country, and the spot
was long afterwards pointed out as "Squire Nicholas's Leap"; but there
was not another horseman found daring enough to repeat the experiment.

Richard had to make a considerable circuit to join his cousin, and,
while he was going round, Nicholas looked out for the others. In the
distance, he could see Roger Nowell riding leisurely on, followed by
Sparshot and a couple of grooms, who had come with their master from the
hall; while midway, to his surprise, he perceived Flint galloping
without a rider. A closer examination showed the squire what had
happened. Like himself, Master Potts had incautiously approached the
swamp, and, getting entangled in it, was thrown, head foremost, into the
slough; out of which he was now floundering, covered from head to foot
with inky-coloured slime. As soon as they were aware of the accident,
the two grooms pushed forward, and one of them galloped after Flint,
whom he succeeded at last in catching; while the other, with difficulty
preserving his countenance at the woful plight of the attorney, who
looked as black as a negro, pointed out a cottage in the hollow which
belonged to one of the keepers, and offered to conduct him thither.
Potts gladly assented, and soon gained the little tenement, where he was
being washed and rubbed down by a couple of stout wenches when the rest
of the party came up. It was impossible to help laughing at him, but
Potts took the merriment in good part; and, to show he was not
disheartened by the misadventure, as soon as circumstances would permit
he mounted the unlucky pony, and the cavalcade set forward again.




CHAPTER III.--THE BOGGART'S GLEN.


The manor of Read, it has been said, was skirted by a deep woody ravine
of three or four miles in length, extending from the little village of
Sabden, in Pendle Forest, to within a short distance of Whalley; and
through this gully flowed a stream which, taking its rise near Barley,
at the foot of Pendle Hill, added its waters to those of the Calder at a
place called Cock Bridge. In summer, or in dry seasons, this stream
proceeded quietly enough, and left the greater part of its stony bed
unoccupied; but in winter, or after continuous rains, it assumed all the
character of a mountain torrent, and swept every thing before it. A
narrow bridle road led through the ravine to Sabden, and along it, after
quitting the park, the cavalcade proceeded, headed by Nicholas.

The little river danced merrily past them, singing as it went, the
sunshine sparkling on its bright clear waters, and glittering on the
pebbles beneath them. Now the stream would chafe and foam against some
larger impediment to its course; now it would dash down some rocky
height, and form a beautiful cascade; then it would hurry on for some
time with little interruption, till stayed by a projecting bank it would
form a small deep basin, where, beneath the far-cast shadow of an
overhanging oak, or under its huge twisted and denuded roots, the angler
might be sure of finding the speckled trout, the dainty greyling, or
their mutual enemy, the voracious jack. The ravine was well wooded
throughout, and in many parts singularly beautiful, from the disposition
of the timber on its banks, as well as from the varied form and
character of the trees. Here might be seen an acclivity covered with
waving birch, or a top crowned with a mountain ash--there, on a smooth
expanse of greensward, stood a range of noble elms, whose mighty arms
stretched completely across the ravine. Further on, there were chestnut
and walnut trees; willows, with hoary stems and silver leaves, almost
encroaching upon the stream; larches upon the heights; and here and
there, upon some sandy eminence, a spreading beech-tree. For the most
part the bottom of the glen was overgrown with brushwood, and, where its
sides were too abrupt to admit the growth of larger trees, they were
matted with woodbine and brambles. Out of these would sometimes start a
sharp pinnacle, or fantastically-formed crag, adding greatly to the
picturesque beauty of the scene. On such points were not unfrequently
found perched a hawk, a falcon, or some large bird of prey; for the
gully, with its brakes and thickets, was a favourite haunt of the
feathered tribe. The hollies, of which there were plenty, with their
green prickly leaves and scarlet berries, afforded shelter and support
to the blackbird; the thorns were frequented by the thrush; and
numberless lesser songsters filled every other tree. In the covert there
were pheasants and partridges in abundance, and snipe and wild-fowl
resorted to the river in winter. Thither also, at all seasons, repaired
the stately heron, to devour the finny race; and thither came, on like
errand, the splendidly-plumed kingfisher. The magpie chattered, the jay
screamed and flew deeper into the woods as the horsemen approached, and
the shy bittern hid herself amid the rushes. Occasionally, too, was
heard the deep ominous croaking of a raven.

[Illustration: POTTS AFTER BEING THROWN FROM HIS HORSE.]

Hitherto, the glen had been remarkable for its softness and beauty, but
it now began to assume a savage and sombre character. The banks drew
closer together, and became rugged and precipitous; while the trees met
overhead, and, intermingling their branches, formed a canopy impervious
to the sun's rays. The stream was likewise contracted in its bed, and
its current, which, owing to the gloom, looked black as ink, flowed
swiftly on, as if anxious to escape to livelier scenes. A large raven,
which had attended the horsemen all the way, now alighted near them, and
croaked ominously.

This part of the glen was in very ill repute, and was never traversed,
even at noonday, without apprehension. Its wild and savage aspect, its
horrent precipices, its shaggy woods, its strangely-shaped rocks and
tenebrous depths, where every imperfectly-seen object appeared doubly
frightful--all combined to invest it with mystery and terror. No one
willingly lingered here, but hurried on, afraid of the sound of his own
footsteps. No one dared to gaze at the rocks, lest he should see some
hideous hobgoblin peering out of their fissures. No one glanced at the
water, for fear some terrible kelpy, with twining snakes for hair and
scaly hide, should issue from it and drag him down to devour him with
his shark-like teeth. Among the common folk, this part of the ravine was
known as "the boggart's glen", and was supposed to be haunted by
mischievous beings, who made the unfortunate wanderer their sport.

For the last half-mile the road had been so narrow and intricate in its
windings, that the party were obliged to proceed singly; but this did
not prevent conversation; and Nicholas, throwing the bridle over Robin's
neck, left the surefooted animal to pursue his course unguided, while he
himself, leaning back, chatted with Roger Nowell. At the entrance of the
gloomy gorge above described, Robin came to a stand, and refusing to
move at a jerk from his master, the latter raised himself, and looked
forward to see what could be the cause of the stoppage. No impediment
was visible, but the animal obstinately refused to go on, though urged
both by word and spur. This stoppage necessarily delayed the rest of the
cavalcade.

Well aware of the ill reputation of the place, when Simon Sparshot and
the grooms found that Robin would not go on, they declared he must see
the boggart, and urged the squire to turn back, or some mischief would
befall him. But Nicholas, though not without misgivings, did not like to
yield thus, especially when urged on by Roger Nowell. Indeed, the party
could not get out of the ravine without going back nearly a mile, while
Sabden was only half that distance from them. What was to be done? Robin
still continued obstinate, and for the first time paid no attention to
his master's commands. The poor animal was evidently a prey to violent
terror, and snorted and reared, while his limbs were bathed in cold
sweat.

Dismounting, and leaving him in charge of Roger Nowell, Nicholas walked
on by himself to see if he could discover any cause for the horse's
alarm; and he had not advanced far, when his eye rested upon a blasted
oak forming a conspicuous object on a crag before him, on a scathed
branch of which sat the raven.

Croak! croak! croak!

"Accursed bird, it is thou who hast frightened my horse," cried
Nicholas. "Would I had a crossbow or an arquebuss to stop thy croaking."

And as he picked up a stone to cast at the raven, a crashing noise was
heard among the bushes high up on the rock, and the next moment a huge
fragment dislodged from the cliff rolled down and would have crushed
him, if he had not nimbly avoided it.

Croak! croak! croak!

Nicholas almost fancied hoarse laughter was mingled with the cries of
the bird.

The raven nodded its head and expanded its wings, and the squire, whose
recent experience had prepared him for any wonder, fully expected to
hear it speak, but it only croaked loudly and exultingly, or if it
laughed, the sound was like the creaking of rusty hinges.

Nicholas did not like it at all, and he resolved to go back; but ere he
could do so, he was startled by a buffet on the ear, and turning angrily
round to see who had dealt it, he could distinguish no one, but at the
same moment received a second buffet on the other ear.

The raven croaked merrily.

"Would I could wring thy neck, accursed bird!" cried the enraged squire.

Scarcely was the vindictive wish uttered than a shower of blows fell
upon him, and kicks from unseen feet were applied to his person.

All the while the raven croaked merrily, and flapped his big black
wings.

Infuriated by the attack, the squire hit right and left manfully, and
dashed out his feet in every direction; but his blows and kicks only met
the empty air, while those of his unseen antagonist told upon his own
person with increased effect.

The spectacle seemed to afford infinite amusement to the raven. The
mischievous bird almost crowed with glee.

There was no standing it any longer. So, amid a perfect hurricane of
blows and kicks, and with the infernal voice of the raven ringing in his
ears, the squire took to his heels. On reaching his companions he found
they had not fared much better than himself. The two grooms were
belabouring each other lustily; and Master Potts was exercising his
hunting-whip on the broad shoulders of Sparshot, who in return was
making him acquainted with the taste of a stout ash-plant. Assailed in
the same manner as the squire, and naturally attributing the attack to
their nearest neighbours, they waited for no explanation, but fell upon
each other. Richard Assheton and Roger Nowell endeavoured to interfere
and separate the combatants, and in doing so received some hard knocks
for their pains; but all their pacific efforts were fruitless, until the
squire appeared, and telling them they were merely the sport of
hobgoblins, they desisted, but still the blows fell heavily on them as
before, proving the truth of Nicholas's assertion.

Meanwhile the squire had mounted Robin, and, finding the horse no longer
exhibit the same reluctance to proceed, he dashed at full speed through
the haunted glen; but even above the clatter, of hoofs, and the noise of
the party galloping after him, he could hear the hoarse exulting
croaking of the raven.

As the gully expanded, and the sun once more found its way through the
trees, and shone upon the river, Nicholas began to breathe more freely;
but it was not until fairly out of the wood that he relaxed his speed.
Not caring to enter into any explanation of the occurrence, he rode a
little apart to avoid conversation; as the others, who were still
smarting from the blows they had received, were in no very good-humour,
a sullen silence prevailed throughout the party, as they mounted the
bare hill-side in the direction of the few scattered huts constituting
the village of Sabden.

A blight seemed to have fallen upon the place. Roger Nowell, who had
visited it a few months ago, could scarcely believe his eyes, so changed
was its appearance. His inquiries as to the cause of its altered
condition were every where met by the same answer--the poor people were
all bewitched. Here a child was ill of a strange sickness, tossed and
tumbled in its bed, and contorted its limbs so violently, that its
parents could scarcely hold it down. Another family was afflicted in a
different manner, two of its number pining away and losing strength
daily, as if a prey to some consuming disease. In a third, another child
was sick, and vomited pins, nails, and other extraordinary substances. A
fourth household was tormented by an imp in the form of a monkey, who
came at night and pinched them all black and blue, spilt the milk, broke
the dishes and platters, got under the bed, and, raising it to the roof,
let it fall with a terrible crash; putting them all in mental terror. In
the next cottage there was no end to calamities, though they took a more
absurd form. Sometimes the fire would not burn, or when it did it
emitted no heat, so that the pot would not boil, nor the meat roast.
Then the oatcakes would stick to the bake-stone, and no force could get
them away from it till they were burnt and spoiled; the milk turned
sour, the cheese became so hard that not even rats' teeth could gnaw it,
the stools and settles broke down if sat upon, and the list of petty
grievances was completed by a whole side of bacon being devoured in a
single night. Roger Nowell and Nicholas listened patiently to a detail
of all these grievances, and expressed strong sympathy for the
sufferers, promising assistance and redress if possible. All the
complainants taxed either Mother Demdike or Mother Chattox with
afflicting them, and said they had incurred the anger of the two
malevolent old witches by refusing to supply them with poultry, eggs,
milk, butter, or other articles, which they had demanded. Master Potts
made ample notes of the strange relations, and took down the name of
every cottager.

At length, they arrived at the last cottage, and here a man, with a very
doleful countenance, besought them to stop and listen to his tale.

"What is the matter, friend?" demanded Roger Nowell, halting with the
others. "Are you bewitched, like your neighbours?"

"Troth am ey, your warship," replied the man, "an ey hope yo may be able
to deliver me. Yo mun knoa, that somehow ey wor unlucky enough last Yule
to offend Mother Chattox, an ever sin then aw's gone wrang wi' me. Th'
good-wife con never may butter come without stickin' a redhot poker into
t' churn; and last week, when our brindlt sow farrowed, and had fifteen
to t' litter, an' fine uns os ever yo seed, seign on um deed. Sad wark!
sad wark, mesters. The week efore that t' keaw deed; an th' week efore
her th' owd mare, so that aw my stock be gone. Waes me! waes me! Nowt
prospers wi' me. My poor dame is besoide hersel, an' th' chilter seems
possessed. Ey ha' tried every remedy, boh without success. Ey ha'
followed th' owd witch whoam, plucked a hontle o' thatch fro' her roof,
sprinklet it wi' sawt an weter, burnt it an' buried th' ess at th'
change o' t' moon. No use, mesters. Then again, ey ha' getten a
horseshoe, heated it redhot, quenched it i' brine, an' nailed it to t'
threshold wi' three nails, heel uppard. No more use nor t'other. Then ey
ha' taen sawt weter, and put it in a bottle wi' three rusty nails,
needles, and pins, boh ey hanna found that th' witch ha' suffered
thereby. An, lastly, ey ha' let myself blood, when the moon wur at full,
an in opposition to th' owd hag's planet, an minglin' it wi' sawt, ha'
burnt it i' a trivet, in hopes of afflictin' her; boh without avail, fo'
ey seed her two days ago, an she flouted me an scoffed at me. What mun
ey do, good mesters? What mun ey do?"

"Have you offended any one besides Mother Chattox, my poor fellow?" said
Nowell.

"Mother Demdike, may be, your warship," replied the man.

"You suspect Mother Demdike and Mother Chattox of bewitching you," said
Potts, taking out his memorandum-book, and making a note in it. "Your
name, good fellow?"

"Oamfrey o' Will's o' Ben's o' Tummas' o' Sabden," replied the man.

"Is that all?" asked Potts.

"What more would you have?" said Richard. "The description is
sufficiently particular."

"Scarcely precise enough," returned Potts. "However, it may do. We will
help you in the matter, good Humphrey Etcetera. You shall not be
troubled with these pestilent witches much longer. The neighbourhood
shall be cleared of them."

"Ey'm reet glad to hear, mester," replied the man.

"You promise much, Master Potts," observed Richard.

"Not a jot more than I am able to perform," replied the attorney.

"That remains to be seen," said Richard. "If these old women are as
powerful as represented, they will not be so readily defeated."

"There you are in error, Master Richard," replied Potts. "The devil,
whose vassals they are, will deliver them into our hands."

"Granting what you say to be correct, the devil must have little regard
for his servants if he abandons them so easily," observed Richard,
drily.

"What else can you expect from him?" cried Potts. "It is his custom to
ensnare his victims, and then leave them to their fate."

"You are rather describing the course pursued by certain members of
your own profession, Master Potts," said Richard. "The devil behaves
with greater fairness to his clients."

"You are not going to defend him, I hope, sir?" said the attorney.

"No; I only desire to give him his due," returned Richard.

"Ha! ha! ha!" laughed Nicholas. "You had better have done, Master Potts;
you will never get the better in the argument. But we must be moving, or
we shall not get our business done before nightfall. As to you, Numps,"
he added, to the poor man, "we will not forget you. If any thing can be
done for your relief, rely upon it, it shall not be neglected."

"Ay, ay," said Nowell, "the matter shall be looked into--and speedily."

"And the witches brought to justice," said Potts; "comfort yourself with
that, good Humphrey Etcetera."

"Ay, comfort yourself with that," observed Nicholas.

Soon after this they entered a wide dreary waste forming the bottom of
the valley, lying between the heights of Padiham and Pendle Hill, and
while wending their way across it, they heard a shout from the
hill-side, and presently afterwards perceived a man, mounted on a
powerful black horse, galloping swiftly towards them. The party awaited
his approach, and the stranger speedily came up. He was a small man
habited in a suit of rusty black, and bore a most extraordinary and
marked resemblance to Master Potts. He had the same perky features, the
same parchment complexion, the same yellow forehead, as the little
attorney. So surprising was the likeness, that Nicholas unconsciously
looked round for Potts, and beheld him staring at the new-comer in angry
wonder.




CHAPTER IV.--THE REEVE OF THE FOREST.


The surprise of the party was by no means diminished when the stranger
spoke. His voice exactly resembled the sharp cracked tones of the
attorney.

"I crave pardon for the freedom I have taken in stopping you, good
masters," he said, doffing his cap, and saluting them respectfully;
"but, being aware of your errand, I am come to attend you on it."

"And who are you, fellow, who thus volunteer your services?" demanded
Roger Nowell, sharply.

"I am one of the reeves of the forest of Blackburnshire, worshipful
sir," replied the stranger, "and as such my presence, at the intended
perambulation of the boundaries of her property, has been deemed
necessary by Mrs. Nutter, as I shall have to make a representation of
the matter at the next court of swainmote."

"Indeed!" exclaimed Nowell, "but how knew you we were coming?"

"Mistress Nutter sent me word last night," replied the reeve, "that
Master Nicholas Assheton and certain other gentlemen, would come to
Rough Lee for the purpose of ascertaining the marks, meres, and
boundaries of her property, early this morning, and desired my
attendance on the occasion. Accordingly I stationed myself on yon high
ground to look out for you, and have been on the watch for more than an
hour."

"Humph!" exclaimed Roger Nowell, "and you live in the forest?"

"I live at Barrowford, worshipful sir," replied the reeve, "but I have
only lately come there, having succeeded Maurice Mottisfont, the other
reeve, who has been removed by the master forester to Rossendale, where
I formerly dwelt."

"That may account for my not having seen you before," rejoined Nowell.
"You are well mounted, sirrah. I did not know the master forester
allowed his men such horses as the one you ride."

"This horse does not belong to me, sir," replied the reeve; "it has been
lent me by Mistress Nutter."

"Aha! I see how it is now," cried Nowell; "you are suborned to give
false testimony, knave. I object to his attendance, Master Nicholas."

"Nay, I think you do the man injustice," said the squire. "He speaks
frankly and fairly enough, and seems to know his business. The worst
that can be said against him is, that he resembles somewhat too closely
our little legal friend there. That, however, ought to be no objection
to you, Master Nowell, but rather the contrary."

"Well, take the responsibility of the matter upon your own shoulders,"
said Nowell; "if any ill comes of it I shall blame you."

"Be it so," replied the squire; "my shoulders are broad enough to bear
the burthen. You may ride with us, master reeve."

"May I inquire your name, friend?" said Potts, as the stranger fell back
to the rear of the party.

"Thomas Potts, at your service, sir," replied the reeve.

"What!--Thomas Potts!" exclaimed the astonished attorney.

"That is my name, sir," replied the reeve, quietly.

"Why, zounds!" exclaimed Nicholas, who overheard the reply, "you do not
mean to say your name is Thomas Potts? This is more wonderful still. You
must be this gentleman's twin brother."

"The gentleman certainly seems to resemble me very strongly," replied
the reeve, apparently surprised in his turn. "Is he of these parts?"

"No, I am not," returned Potts, angrily, "I am from London, where I
reside in Chancery-lane, and practise the law, though I likewise attend
as clerk of the court at the assizes at Lancaster, where I may
possibly, one of these days, have the pleasure of seeing you, my
pretended namesake."

"Possibly, sir," said the reeve, with provoking calmness. "I myself am
from Chester, and like yourself was brought up to the law, but I
abandoned my profession, or rather it abandoned me, for I had few
clients; so I took to an honester calling, and became a forester, as you
see. My father was a draper in the city I have mentioned, and dwelt in
Watergate-street--his name was Peter Potts."

"Peter Potts your father!" exclaimed the attorney, in the last state of
astonishment--"Why, he was mine! But I am his only son."

"Up to this moment I conceived myself an only son," said the reeve; "but
it seems I was mistaken, since I find I have an elder brother."

"Elder brother!" exclaimed Potts, wrathfully. "You are older than I am
by twenty years. But it is all a fabrication. I deny the relationship
entirely."

"You cannot make me other than the son of my father," said the reeve,
with a smile.

"Well, Master Potts," interposed Nicholas, laughing, "I see no reason
why you should be ashamed of your brother. There is a strong family
likeness between you. So old Peter Potts, the draper of Chester, was
your father, eh? I was not aware of the circumstance before--ha, ha!"

"And, but for this intrusive fellow, you would never have become aware
of it," muttered the attorney. "Give ear to me, squire," he said, urging
Flint close up to the other's side, and speaking in a low tone, "I do
not like the fellow's looks at all."

"I am surprised at that," rejoined the squire, "for he exactly resembles
you."

"That is why I do not like him," said Potts; "I believe him to be a
