boulevard taken, men defending it might flee across a drawbridge, over a
stream, narrow and deep and swift, into Les Tourelles itself.  Here they
were safe from them on the side of Orleans, by reason of the broken arch
of the bridge.  So strong was this tower, that Monseigneur the Duc
d'Alencon, visiting it later, said he could have staked his duchy on his
skill to hold it for a week at least, with but few men, against all the
forces in France.  The captain of the English was that Glasdale who had
reviled the Maid, and concerning whom she had prophesied that he should
die without stroke of sword.  There was no fiercer squire in England, and
his men were like himself, being picked and chosen for that post;
moreover their backs were at the wall, for the French and Scots once
within the boulevard, it was in nowise easy for Talbot to bring the
English a rescue, as was seen.

The battle began with shooting of couleuvrines at the palisade, to weaken
it, and it was marvel to see how the Maid herself laid the guns, as
cunningly as her own countryman, the famed Lorrainer.  Now, when there
was a breach in the palisade, Xaintrailles led on his company, splendid
in armour, for he was a very brave young knight.  We saw the pales fall
with a crash, and the men go in, and heard the cry of battle; but slowly,
one by one, they staggered back, some falling, some reeling wounded, and
rolling their bodies out of arrow-shot.  And there, in the breach, shone
the back-plate of Xaintrailles, his axe falling and rising, and not one
foot he budged, till the men of La Hire, with a cry, broke in to back
him, and after a little space, swords fell and rose no more, but we saw
the banners waving of Xaintrailles and La Hire.  Soon the side of the
palisade towards us was all down, as if one had swept it flat with his
hand, but there stood the earthen wall of the boulevard, beyond the
fosse.  Then, all orderly, marched forth a band of men in the colours of
Florent d'Illiers, bearing scaling-ladders, and so began the escalade,
their friends backing them by shooting of arbalests from behind the
remnant of the palisade.  A ladder would be set against the wall, and we
could see men with shields, or doors, or squares of wood on their heads
to fend off stones, swarm up it, and axes flashing on the crest of the
wall, and arrows flying, and smoke of guns: but the smoke cleared, and
lo! the ladder was gone, and the three libbards grinned on the flag of
England.  So went the war, company after company staggering thinned from
the fosse, and re-forming behind the cover of the vineyards; company
after company marching forth, fresh and glorious, to fare as their
friends had fared.  And ever, with each company, went the Maid at their
head, and D'Aulon, she crying that the place was theirs and now was the
hour!  But the day went by, till the sun turned in heaven towards
evening, and no more was done.  The English, in sooth, showed no fear nor
faint heart; with axe, and sword, and mace, and with their very hands
they smote and grappled with the climbers, and I saw a tall man, his
sword being broken, strike down a French knight with his mailed fist, and
drag another from a ladder and take him captive.  Boldly they showed
themselves on the crest, running all risk of our arrows, as our men did
of theirs.

Now came the Scots, under Kennedy.  A gallant sight it was to see them
advance, shoulder to shoulder--Scots of the Marches and the Lennox, Fife,
Argyll, and the Isles, all gentlemen born.

"Come on!" cried Randal Rutherford.  "Come on, men of the Marches, Scots
of the Forest, Elliots, Rutherfords, Armstrongs, and deem that,
wheresoever a Southron slinks behind a stone, there is Carlisle wall!"

The Rough Clan roared "Bellenden!" the Buchanans cried "Clare Innis," a
rag of a hairy Highlander from the Lennox blew a wild skirl on the war-
pipes, and hearing the Border slogan shouted in a strange country, nom
Dieu! my blood burned, as that of any Scotsman would.  Contrary to the
Maid's desire, for she had noted that I was wan and weary, and had
commanded me to bide in cover, I cried "A Leslie! a Leslie!" and went
forward with my own folk, sword in hand and buckler lifted.

Beside good Randal Rutherford I ran, and we both leaped together into the
ditch.  There was a forest of ladders set against the wall, and I had my
foot on a rung, when the Maid ran up and cried, "Nom Dieu! what make you
here?  Let me lead my Scots"; and so, pennon and axe in her left hand,
she lightly leaped on the ladder, and arrows ringing on her mail, and a
great stone glancing harmless from her salade, she so climbed that my
lady's face on the pennon above her looked down into the English keep.

But, even then, I saw a face at an archere, an ill face and fell, the
wolf's eyes of Brother Thomas glancing along the stock of an arbalest.

"Gardez-vous, Pucelle, gardez-vous!" I cried in her ear, for I was next
her on the ladder; but a bolt whistled and smote her full, and reeling,
she fell into my arms.

I turned my back to guard her, and felt a bolt strike my back-piece; then
we were in the fosse, and all the Scots that might be were between her
and harm.  Swiftly they bore her out of the fray, into a little green
vineyard, where was a soft grassy ditch.  But the English so cried their
hurrah, that it was marvel, and our men gave back in fear; and had not
the Bastard come up with a fresh company, verify we might well have been
swept into the Loire.

Some while I remained with Rutherford, Kennedy, and many others, for what
could we avail to help the Maid? and to run has an ill look, and gives
great heart to an enemy.  Moreover, that saying of the Maid came into my
mind, that she should be smitten of a bolt, but not unto death.  So I
even abode by the fosse, and having found an arbalest, my desire was to
win a chance of slaying Brother Thomas, wherefore I kept my eyes on that
archere whence he had shot.  But no arbalest was pointed thence, and the
fight flagged.  On both sides men were weary, and they took some meat as
they might, no ladders being now set on the wall.

Then I deemed it no harm to slip back to the vineyard where the Maid lay,
and there I met the good Father Pasquerel, that was her confessor.  He
told me that now she was quiet, either praying or asleep, for he had left
her as still as a babe in its cradle, her page watching her.  The bolt
had sped by a rivet of her breast-piece, clean through her breast hard
below the shoulder, and it stood a hand-breadth out beyond.  Then she had
wept and trembled, seeing her own blood; but presently, with such might
and courage as was marvel, she had dragged out the bolt with her own
hands.  Then they had laid on the wound cotton steeped with olive oil,
for she would not abide that they should steep the bolt with weapon salve
and charm the hurt with a song, as the soldiers desired.  Then she had
confessed herself to Pasquerel, and so had lain down among the grass and
the flowers.  But it was Pasquerel's desire to let ferry her across
secretly to Orleans.  This was an ill hearing for me, yet it was put
about in the army that the Maid had but taken a slight scratch, and again
would lead us on, a thing which I well deemed to be impossible.  So the
day waxed late, and few onslaughts were made, and these with no great
heart, the English standing on the walls and openly mocking us.

They asked how it went with the Maid, and whether she would not fain be
at home among her kine, or in the greasy kitchen?  We would cry back, and
for my own part I bade them seek the kitchen as pock-puddings and belly-
gods, and that I cried in their own tongue, while they, to my great
amaze, called me "prentice boy" and "jackanapes."  Herein I saw the craft
and devilish enmity of Brother Thomas, and well I guessed that he had
gotten sight of me; but his face I saw not.

Ill names break no bones, and arrows from under cover wrought slight
scathe; so one last charge the Bastard commanded, and led himself, and a
sore tussle there was that time on the wall-crest, one or two of our men
leaping into the fort, whence they came back no more.

Now it was eight hours of the evening, the sky grey, the men out-worn and
out of all heart, and the captains were gathered in council.  Of this I
conceived the worst hope, for after a counsel men seldom fight.  So I
watched the fort right sullenly, and the town of Orleans looking black
against a red, lowering sky in the west.  Some concourse of townsfolk I
saw on the bridge, beside the broken arch, and by the Boulevard Belle
Croix; but I deemed that they had only come to see the fray as near as
might be.  Others were busy under the river wall with a great black boat,
belike to ferry over the horses from our side.

All seemed ended, and I misdoubted that we would scarce charge again so
briskly in the morning, nay, we might well have to guard our own gates.

As I sat thus, pondering by the vineyard ditch, the Maid stood by me
suddenly.  Her helmet was off, her face deadly white, her eyes like two
stars.

"Bring me my horse," she said, so sternly that I crushed the answer on my
lips, and the prayer that she would risk herself no more.

Her horse, that had been cropping the grass near him happily enough, I
found, and brought to her, and so, with some ado, she mounted and rode at
a foot's pace to the little crowd of captains.

"Maiden, ma mie," said the Bastard.  "Glad I am to see you able to mount.
We have taken counsel to withdraw for this night.  Martin," he said to
his trumpeter, "sound the recall."

"I pray you, sir," she said very humbly, "grant me but a little while";
and so saying, she withdrew alone from the throng of men into the
vineyard.

What passed therein I know not and no man knows; but in a quarter of an
hour's space she came forth, like another woman, her face bright and
smiling, her cheeks like the dawn, and so beautiful that we marvelled on
her with reverence, as if we had seen an angel.

"The place is ours!" she cried again, and spurred towards the fosse.
Thence her banner had never gone back, for D'Aulon held it there, to be a
terror to the English.  Even at that moment he had given it to a certain
Basque, a very brave man, for he himself was out-worn with its weight.
And he had challenged the Basque to do a vaillance, or boastful deed of
arms, as yesterday I and the Spaniard had done.  So D'Aulon leaped into
the fosse, his shield up, defying the English; but the Basque did not
follow, for the Maid, seeing her banner in the hands of a man whom she
knew not, laid hold of it, crying, "Ha, mon estandart! mon estandart!"

There, as they struggled for it, the Basque being minded to follow
D'Aulon to the wall foot, the banner wildly waved, and all men saw it,
and rallied, and flocked amain to the rescue.

"Charge!" cried the Maid.  "Forward, French and Scots; the place is
yours, when once my banner fringe touches the wall!"

With that word the wind blew out the banner fringe, and so suddenly that,
though I saw the matter, I scarce knew how it was done, the whole host
swarmed up and on, ladders, lifted, and so furiously went they, that they
won the wall crest and leaped within the fort.  Then the more part of the
English, adread, as I think, at the sight of the Maid whom they had
deemed slain, fled madly over the drawbridge into Les Tourelles.

Then standing on the wall crest, whither I had climbed, I beheld strange
sights.  First, through the dimness of the dusk, I saw a man armed,
walking as does a rope-dancer, balancing himself with his spear, across
the empty air, for so it seemed, above the broken arch of the bridge.
This appeared, in very sooth, to be a miracle; but, gazing longer, I saw
that a great beam had been laid by them of Orleans to span the gap, and
now other beams were being set, and many men, bearing torches, were
following that good knight, Nicole Giresme, who first showed the way over
such a bridge of dread.  So now were the English in Les Tourelles between
two fires.

Another strange sight I saw, for in that swift and narrow stream which
the drawbridge spanned whereby the English fled was moored a great black
barge, its stem and stern showing on either side of the bridge.  Boats
were being swiftly pulled forth from it into the stream, and as I gazed,
there leaped up through the dark one long tongue of fire.  Then I saw the
skill of it, namely, to burn down the drawbridge, and so cut the English
off from all succour.  Fed with pitch and pine the flame soared lustily,
and now it shone between the planks of the drawbridge.  On the stone
platform of the boulevard, wherein the drawbridge was laid, stood a few
English, and above them shone the axe of a tall squire, Glasdale, as it
fell on shield and helm of the French.  Others held us at bay with long
lances, and never saw I any knight do his devoir more fiercely than he
who had reviled the Maid.  For on his head lay all the blame of the
taking of the boulevard.  To rear of him rang the shouts of them of
Orleans, who had crossed the broken arch by the beam; but he never turned
about, and our men reeled back before him.  Then there shone behind him
the flames from the blazing barge; and so, black against that blaze, he
smote and slew, not knowing that the drawbridge began to burn.

On this the Maid ran forth, and cried to him--

"Rends-toi, rends-toi!  Yield thee, Glacidas; yield thee, for I stand in
much sorrow for thy soul's sake."

Then, falling on her knees, her face shining transfigured in that fierce
light, she prayed him thus--

"Ah! Glacidas, thou didst call me ribaulde, but I have sorrow for thy
soul.  Ah! yield thee, yield thee to ransom"; and the tears ran down her
cheeks, as if a saint were praying for a soul in peril.

Not one word spoke Glasdale: he neither saw nor heard.  But the levelled
spears at his side flew up, a flame caught his crest, making a plume of
fire, and with a curse he cast his axe among the throng, and the man who
stood in front of it got his death.  Glasdale turned about as he threw;
he leaped upon the burning drawbridge, where the last of his men were
huddled in flight, and lo! beneath his feet it crashed; down he plunged
through smoke and flame, and the stream below surged up as bridge and
flying men went under in one ruin.

The Maid gave a cry that rang above the roar of fire and water.

"Saints! will no man save him?" she shrieked, looking all around her on
the faces of the French.

A mad thought leaped up in my mind.

"Unharness me!" I cried; and one who stood by me undid the clasps of my
light jaseran.  I saw a head unhelmeted, I saw a hand that clutched at a
floating beam.  I thought of the Maid's desire, and of the ransom of so
great a squire as Glasdale, and then I threw my hands up to dive, and
leaped head foremost into the water.

Deep down I plunged, and swam far under water, to avoid a stroke from
floating timber, and then I rose and glanced up-stream.  All the air was
fiercely lit with the blaze of the burning barge; a hand and arm would
rise, and fall ere I could seize it.  A hand was thrown up before me, the
glinting fingers gripping at empty air.  I caught the hand, swimming
strongly with the current, for so the man could not clutch at me, and if
a drowning man can be held apart, it is no great skill to save him.  In
this art I was not unlearned, and once had even saved two men from a
wrecked barque in the long surf of St. Andrews Bay.  Save for a blow from
some great floating timber, I deemed that I had little to fear; nay, now
I felt sure of the Maid's praise and of a rich ransom.

A horn of bank with alder bushes ran out into the stream, a smooth eddy
or backwater curling within.  I caught a bough of alder, and, though nigh
carried down by the drowning man's weight, I found bottom, yet hardly,
and drew my man within the backwater.  He lay like a log, his face in the
stream.  Pushing him before me, I rounded the horn, and, with much ado,
dragged him up to a sloping gravelly beach, where I got his head on dry
land, his legs being still in the water.  I turned him over and looked
eagerly.  Lo! it was no Glasdale, but the drowned face of Brother Thomas!

Then something seemed to break in my breast; blood gushed from my mouth,
and I fell on the sand and gravel.  Footsteps I heard of men running to
us.  I lifted my hand faintly and waved it, and then I felt a hand on my
face.




CHAPTER XV--HOW NORMAN LESLIE WAS ABSOLVED BY BROTHER THOMAS


Certain Scots that found me, weak and bleeding, by the riverside, were
sent by the Maid, in hopes that I had saved Glasdale, whereas it was the
accursed cordelier I had won from the water.  What they did with him I
knew not then, but me they laid on a litter, and so bore me to a boat,
wherein they were ferrying our wounded men across to Orleans.  The Maid
herself, as she had foretold, returned by way of the bridge, that was all
bright with moving torches, as our groaning company were rowed across the
black water to a quay.  Thence I was carried in a litter to our lodgings,
and so got to bed, a physician doing what he might for me.  A noisy night
we passed, for I verily believe that no man slept, but all, after service
held in the Church of St. Aignan, went revelling and drinking from house
to house, and singing through the streets, as folk saved from utter
destruction.

With daybreak fell a short silence; short or long, it seemed brief to me,
who was now asleep at last, and I was rueful enough when a sound aroused
me, and I found the Maid herself standing by my bedside, with one in the
shadow behind her.  The chamber was all darkling, lit only by a thread of
light that came through the closed shutters of wood, and fell on her pale
face.  She was clad in a light jaseran of mail, because of her wound, and
was plainly eager to be gone and about her business, that is, to meet the
English in open field.

"Leslie, my friend," she said, in her sweet voice, "there were many brave
men in the fight yesterday, but, in God's name, none did a braver deed
than thou!  Nay, speak not," she said, as I opened my lips to thank her,
"for the leech that tended thee last night forbids it, on peril of thy
very life.  So I have brought thee here a sheet of fair paper, and a pen
and horn of ink, that thou, being a clerk, mayst write what thou hast to
say.  Alas! such converse is not for me, who know not A from his brother
B.  But the saints who helped thee have rewarded thee beyond all
expectation.  Thou didst not save that unhappy Glacidas, whom God in His
mercy forgive! but thou hast taken a goodlier prize--this holy man, that
had been prisoner in the hands of the English."

Here she stood a little aside, and the thread of light shone on the fell
face of Brother Thomas, lowering beneath his hood.

Then I would have spoken, leech or no leech, to denounce him, for the
Maid had no memory of his face, and knew him not for the false friar
taken at St. Loup.  But she laid her mailed finger gently on my lips.

"Silence!  Thou art my man-at-arms and must obey thy captain.  This
worthy friar hath been long in the holy company of the blessed Colette,
and hath promised to bring me acquainted with that daughter of God.  Ay,
and he hath given to me, unworthy as I am, a kerchief which has touched
her wonder-working hands.  Almost I believe that it will heal thee by
miracle, if the saints are pleased to grant it."

Herewith she drew a kerchief across my lips, and I began, being most
eager to instruct her innocence as to this accursed man--

"Lady--" but alas! no miracle was wrought for a sinner like me.  Howbeit
I am inclined to believe that the kerchief was no saintly thing, and had
never come near the body of the blessed Colette, but rather was a gift
from one of the cordelier's light-o'-loves.  Assuredly it was stained red
with blood from my lungs ere I could utter two words.

The Maid stanched the blood, saying--

"Did I not bid thee to be silent?  The saints forgive my lack of faith,
whereby this blessed thing has failed to heal thee!  And now I must be
gone, to face the English in the field, if they dare to meet us, which,
methinks, they will not do, but rather withdraw as speedily as they may.
So now I leave thee with this holy man to be thy nurse-tender, and thou
