  He shook two spears, and with determined strides
  March'd forward. As the lion mountain-bred,
  After long fast, by impulse of his heart
  Undaunted urged, seeks resolute the flock
  Even in the shelter of their guarded home;                     365
  He finds, perchance, the shepherds arm'd with spears,
  And all their dogs awake, yet can not leave
  Untried the fence, but either leaps it light,
  And entering tears the prey, or in the attempt
  Pierced by some dexterous peasant, bleeds himself;             370
  So high his courage to the assault impell'd
  Godlike Sarpedon, and him fired with hope
  To break the barrier; when to Glaucus thus,
  Son of Hippolochus, his speech he turn'd.
    Why, Glaucus, is the seat of honor ours,                     375
  Why drink we brimming cups, and feast in state?
  Why gaze they all on us as we were Gods
  In Lycia, and why share we pleasant fields
  And spacious vineyards, where the Xanthus winds?
  Distinguished thus in Lycia, we are call'd                     380
  To firmness here, and to encounter bold
  The burning battle, that our fair report
  Among the Lycians may be blazon'd thus--
  No dastards are the potentates who rule
  The bright-arm'd Lycians; on the fatted flock                  385
  They banquet, and they drink the richest wines;
  But they are also valiant, and the fight
  Wage dauntless in the vanward of us all.
  Oh Glaucus, if escaping safe the death
  That threats us here, we also could escape                     390
  Old age, and to ourselves secure a life
  Immortal, I would neither in the van
  Myself expose, nor would encourage thee
  To tempt the perils of the glorious field.
  But since a thousand messengers of fate                        395
  Pursue us close, and man is born to die--
  E'en let us on; the prize of glory yield,
  If yield we must, or wrest it from the foe.
    He said, nor cold refusal in return
  Received from Glaucus, but toward the wall                     400
  Their numerous Lycian host both led direct.
  Menestheus, son of Peteos, saw appall'd
  Their dread approach, for to his tower they bent;
  Their threatening march. An eager look he cast,
  On the embodied Greeks, seeking some Chief                     405
  Whose aid might turn the battle from his van:
  He saw, where never sated with exploits
  Of war, each Ajax fought, near whom his eye
  Kenn'd Teucer also, newly from his tent;
  But vain his efforts were with loudest call                    410
  To reach their ears, such was the deafening din
  Upsent to heaven, of shields and crested helms,
  And of the batter'd gates; for at each gate
  They thundering' stood, and urged alike at each
  Their fierce attempt by force to burst the bars.               415
  To Ajax therefore he at once dispatch'd
  A herald, and Thoeotes thus enjoin'd.
    My noble friend, Thoeotes! with all speed
  Call either Ajax; bid them hither both;
  Far better so; for havoc is at hand.                           420
  The Lycian leaders, ever in assault
  Tempestuous, bend their force against this tower
  My station. But if also there they find
  Laborious conflict pressing them severe,
  At least let Telamonian Ajax come,                             425
  And Teucer with his death-dispensing bow.
    He spake, nor was Thoeotes slow to hear;
  Beside the rampart of the mail-clad Greeks
  Rapid he flew, and, at their side arrived,
  To either Ajax, eager, thus began.                             430
    Ye leaders of the well-appointed Greeks,
  The son of noble Peteos calls; he begs
  With instant suit, that ye would share his toils,
  However short your stay; the aid of both
  Will serve him best, for havoc threatens there                 435
  The Lycian leaders, ever in assault
  Tempestuous, bend their force toward the tower
  His station. But if also here ye find
  Laborious conflict pressing you severe,
  At least let Telamonian Ajax come,                             440
  And Teucer with his death-dispensing bow.
    He spake, nor his request the towering son
  Of Telamon denied, but quick his speech
  To Ajax Oiliades address'd.
    Ajax! abiding here, exhort ye both                           445
  (Heroic Lycomedes and thyself)
  The Greeks to battle. Thither I depart
  To aid our friends, which service once perform'd
  Duly, I will incontinent return.
    So saying, the Telamonian Chief withdrew                     450
  With whom went Teucer, son of the same sire,
  Pandion also, bearing Teucer's bow.
  Arriving at the turret given in charge
  To the bold Chief Menestheus, and the wall
  Entering, they found their friends all sharply tried.          455
  Black as a storm the senators renown'd
  And leaders of the Lycian host assail'd
  Buttress and tower, while opposite the Greeks
  Withstood them, and the battle-shout began.
  First, Ajax, son of Telamon, a friend                          460
  And fellow-warrior of Sarpedon slew,
  Epicles. With a marble fragment huge
  That crown'd the battlement's interior side,
  He smote him. No man of our puny race,
  Although in prime of youth, had with both hands                465
  That weight sustain'd; but he the cumberous mass
  Uplifted high, and hurl'd it on his head.
  It burst his helmet, and his batter'd skull
  Dash'd from all form. He from the lofty tower
  Dropp'd downright, with a diver's plunge, and died.            470
  But Teucer wounded Glaucus with a shaft
  Son of Hippolochus; he, climbing, bared
  His arm, which Teucer, marking, from the wall
  Transfix'd it, and his onset fierce repress'd;
  For with a backward leap Glaucus withdrew                      475
  Sudden and silent, cautious lest the Greeks
  Seeing him wounded should insult his pain.
  Grief seized, at sight of his retiring friend,
  Sarpedon, who forgat not yet the fight,
  But piercing with his lance Alcmaon, son                       480
  Of Thestor, suddenly reversed the beam,
  Which following, Alcmaon to the earth
  Fell prone, with clangor of his brazen arms.
  Sarpedon, then, strenuous with both hands
  Tugg'd, and down fell the battlement entire;                   485
  The wall, dismantled at the summit, stood
  A ruin, and wide chasm was open'd through.
  Then Ajax him and Teucer at one time
  Struck both; an arrow struck from Teucer's bow
  The belt that cross'd his bosom, by which hung                 490
  His ample shield; yet lest his son should fall
  Among the ships, Jove turn'd the death aside.
  But Ajax, springing to his thrust, a spear
  Drove through his shield. Sarpedon at the shock
  With backward step short interval recoil'd,                    495
  But not retired, for in his bosom lived
  The hope of glory still, and, looking back
  On all his godlike Lycians, he exclaim'd,
    Oh Lycians! where is your heroic might?
  Brave as I boast myself, I feel the task                       500
  Arduous, through the breach made by myself
  To win a passage to the ships, alone.
  Follow me all--Most laborers, most dispatch.[4]
    So he; at whose sharp reprimand abash'd
  The embattled host to closer conflict moved,                   505
  Obedient to their counsellor and King.
  On the other side the Greeks within the wall
  Made firm the phalanx, seeing urgent need;
  Nor could the valiant Lycians through the breach
  Admittance to the Grecian fleet obtain,                        510
  Nor since they first approach'd it, had the Greeks
  With all their efforts, thrust the Lycians back.
  But as two claimants of one common field,
  Each with his rod of measurement in hand,
  Dispute the boundaries, litigating warm                        515
  Their right in some small portion of the soil,
  So they, divided by the barrier, struck
  With hostile rage the bull-hide bucklers round,
  And the light targets on each other's breast.
  Then many a wound the ruthless weapons made.                   520
  Pierced through the unarm'd back, if any turn'd,
  He died, and numerous even through the shield.
  The battlements from end to end with blood
  Of Grecians and of Trojans on both sides
  Were sprinkled; yet no violence could move                     525
  The stubborn Greeks, or turn their powers to flight.
  So hung the war in balance, as the scales
  Held by some woman scrupulously just,
  A spinner; wool and weight she poises nice,
  Hard-earning slender pittance for her babes,[5]                530
  Such was the poise in which the battle hung
  Till Jove himself superior fame, at length,
  To Priameian Hector gave, who sprang
  First through the wall. In lofty sounds that reach'd
  Their utmost ranks, he call'd on all his host.                 535
    Now press them, now ye Trojans steed-renown'd
  Rush on! break through the Grecian rampart, hurl
  At once devouring flames into the fleet.
  Such was his exhortation; they his voice
  All hearing, with close-order'd ranks direct                   540
  Bore on the barrier, and up-swarming show'd
  On the high battlement their glittering spears.
  But Hector seized a stone; of ample base
  But tapering to a point, before the gate
  It stood. No two men, mightiest of a land                      545
  (Such men as now are mighty) could with ease
  Have heaved it from the earth up to a wain;
  He swung it easily alone; so light
  The son of Saturn made it in his hand.
  As in one hand with ease the shepherd bears                    550
  A ram's fleece home, nor toils beneath the weight,
  So Hector, right toward the planks of those
  Majestic folding-gates, close-jointed, firm
  And solid, bore the stone. Two bars within
  Their corresponding force combined transvere                   555
  To guard them, and one bolt secured the bars.
  He stood fast by them, parting wide his feet
  For 'vantage sake, and smote them in the midst.
  He burst both hinges; inward fell the rock
  Ponderous, and the portals roar'd; the bars                    560
  Endured not, and the planks, riven by the force
  Of that huge mass, flew scatter'd on all sides.
  In leap'd the godlike Hero at the breach,
  Gloomy as night in aspect, but in arms
  All-dazzling, and he grasp'd two quivering spears.             565
  Him entering with a leap the gates, no force
  Whate'er of opposition had repress'd,
  Save of the Gods alone. Fire fill'd his eyes;
  Turning, he bade the multitude without
  Ascend the rampart; they his voice obey'd;                     570
  Part climb'd the wall, part pour'd into the gate;
  The Grecians to their hollow galleys flew
  Scatter'd, and tumult infinite arose.[6]




                              THE ILIAD.

                              BOOK XIII.




                   ARGUMENT OF THE THIRTEENTH BOOK.


Neptune engages on the part of the Grecians. The battle proceeds.
Deiphobus advances to combat, but is repulsed by Meriones, who losing
his spear, repairs to his tent for another. Teucer slays Imbrius, and
Hector Amphimachus. Neptune, under the similitude of Thoas, exhorts
Idomeneus. Idomeneus having armed himself in his tent, and going forth
to battle, meets Meriones. After discourse held with each other,
Idomeneus accommodates Meriones with a spear, and they proceed to
battle. Idomeneus slays Othryoneus, and Asius. Deiphobus assails
Idomeneus, but, his spear glancing over him, kills Hypsenor. Idomeneus
slays Alcathoues, son-in-law of Anchises. Deiphobus and Idomeneus
respectively summon their friends to their assistance, and a contest
ensues for the body of Alcathoues.




                              BOOK XIII.


  [1]When Jove to Hector and his host had given
  Such entrance to the fleet, to all the woes
  And toils of unremitting battle there
  He them abandon'd, and his glorious eyes
  Averting, on the land look'd down remote                         5
  Of the horse-breeding Thracians, of the bold
  Close-fighting Mysian race, and where abide
  On milk sustain'd, and blest with length of days,
  The Hippemolgi,[2] justest of mankind.
  No longer now on Troy his eyes he turn'd,                       10
  For expectation none within his breast
  Survived, that God or Goddess would the Greeks
  Approach with succor, or the Trojans more.
    Nor Neptune, sovereign of the boundless Deep,
  Look'd forth in vain; he on the summit sat                      15
  Of Samothracia forest-crown'd, the stir
  Admiring thence and tempest of the field;
  For thence appear'd all Ida, thence the towers
  Of lofty Ilium, and the fleet of Greece.
  There sitting from the deeps uprisen, he mourn'd                20
  The vanquished Grecians, and resentment fierce
  Conceived and wrath against all-ruling Jove.
  Arising sudden, down the rugged steep
  With rapid strides he came; the mountains huge
  And forests under the immortal feet                             25
  Trembled of Ocean's Sovereign as he strode.
  Three strides he made, the fourth convey'd him home
  To AEgae. At the bottom of the abyss,
  There stands magnificent his golden fane,
  A dazzling, incorruptible abode.                                30
  Arrived, he to his chariot join'd his steeds
  Swift, brazen-hoof'd, and maned with wavy gold;
  Himself attiring next in gold, he seized
  His golden scourge, and to his seat sublime
  Ascending, o'er the billows drove; the whales                   35
  Leaving their caverns, gambol'd on all sides
  Around him, not unconscious of their King;
  He swept the surge that tinged not as he pass'd
  His axle, and the sea parted for joy.
  His bounding coursers to the Grecian fleet                      40
  Convey'd him swift. There is a spacious cave
  Deep in the bottom of the flood, the rocks
  Of Imbrus rude and Tenedos between;
  There Neptune, Shaker of the Shores, his steeds
  Station'd secure; he loosed them from the yoke,                 45
  Gave them ambrosial food, and bound their feet
  With golden tethers not to be untied
  Or broken, that unwandering they might wait
  Their Lord's return, then sought the Grecian host.
  The Trojans, tempest-like or like a flame,                      50
  Now, following Priameian Hector, all
  Came furious on and shouting to the skies.
  Their hope was to possess the fleet, and leave
  Not an Achaian of the host unslain.
  But earth-encircler Neptune from the gulf                       55
  Emerging, in the form and with the voice
  Loud-toned of Calchas, roused the Argive ranks
  To battle--and his exhortation first
  To either Ajax turn'd, themselves prepared.
    Ye heroes Ajax! your accustomed force                         60
  Exert, oh! think not of disastrous flight,
  And ye shall save the people. Nought I fear
  Fatal elsewhere, although Troy's haughty sons
  Have pass'd the barrier with so fierce a throng
  Tumultuous; for the Grecians brazen-greaved                     65
  Will check them there. Here only I expect
  And with much dread some dire event forebode,
  Where Hector, terrible as fire, and loud
  Vaunting his glorious origin from Jove,
  Leads on the Trojans. Oh that from on high                      70
  Some God would form the purpose in your hearts
  To stand yourselves firmly, and to exhort
  The rest to stand! so should ye chase him hence
  All ardent as he is, and even although
  Olympian Jove himself his rage inspire.                         75
    So Neptune spake, compasser of the earth,
  And, with his sceptre smiting both, their hearts
  Fill'd with fresh fortitude; their limbs the touch
  Made agile, wing'd their feet and nerved their arms.
  Then, swift as stoops a falcon from the point                   80
  Of some rude rock sublime, when he would chase
  A fowl of other wing along the meads,
  So started Neptune thence, and disappear'd.
  Him, as he went, swift Oiliades
  First recognized, and, instant, thus his speech                 85
  To Ajax, son of Telamon, address'd.
    Since, Ajax, some inhabitant of heaven
  Exhorts us, in the prophet's form to fight
  (For prophet none or augur we have seen;
  This was not Calchas; as he went I mark'd                       90
  His steps and knew him; Gods are known with ease)
  I feel my spirit in my bosom fired
  Afresh for battle; lightness in my limbs,
  In hands and feet a glow unfelt before.
    To whom the son of Telamon replied.                           95
  I also with invigorated hands
  More firmly grasp my spear; my courage mounts,
  A buoyant animation in my feet
  Bears me along, and I am all on fire
  To cope with Priam's furious son, alone.                       100
    Thus they, with martial transport to their souls
  Imparted by the God, conferr'd elate.
  Meantime the King of Ocean roused the Greeks,
  Who in the rear, beside their gallant barks
  Some respite sought. They, spent with arduous toil,            105
  Felt not alone their weary limbs unapt
  To battle, but their hearts with grief oppress'd,
  Seeing the numerous multitude of Troy
  Within the mighty barrier; sad they view'd
  That sight, and bathed their cheeks with many a tear,          110
  Despairing of escape. But Ocean's Lord
  Entering among them, soon the spirit stirr'd
  Of every valiant phalanx to the fight.
  Teucer and Leitus, and famed in arms
  Peneleus, Thoas and Deipyrus,                                  115
  Meriones, and his compeer renown'd,
  Antilochus; all these in accents wing'd
  With fierce alacrity the God address'd.
    Oh shame, ye Grecians! vigorous as ye are
  And in life's prime, to your exertions most                    120
  I trusted for the safety of our ships.
  If _ye_ renounce the labors of the field,
  Then hath the day arisen of our defeat
  And final ruin by the powers of Troy.
  Oh! I behold a prodigy, a sight                                125
  Tremendous, deem'd impossible by me,
  The Trojans at our ships! the dastard race
  Fled once like fleetest hinds the destined prey
  Of lynxes, leopards, wolves; feeble and slight
  And of a nature indisposed to war                              130
  They rove uncertain; so the Trojans erst
  Stood not, nor to Achaian prowess dared
  The hindrance of a moment's strife oppose.
  But now, Troy left afar, even at our ships
  They give us battle, through our leader's fault                135
  And through the people's negligence, who fill'd
  With fierce displeasure against _him_, prefer
  Death at their ships, to war in their defence.
  But if the son of Atreus, our supreme,
  If Agamemnon, have indeed transgress'd                         140
  Past all excuse, dishonoring the swift
  Achilles, ye at least the fight decline
  Blame-worthy, and with no sufficient plea.
  But heal we speedily the breach; brave minds
  Easily coalesce. It is not well                                145
  That thus your fury slumbers, for the host
  Hath none illustrious as yourselves in arms.
  I can excuse the timid if he shrink,
  But am incensed at _you_. My friends, beware!
  Your tardiness will prove ere long the cause                   150
  Of some worse evil. Let the dread of shame
  Affect your hearts; oh tremble at the thought
  Of infamy! Fierce conflict hath arisen;
  Loud shouting Hector combats at the ships
  Nobly, hath forced the gates and burst the bar.                155
    With such encouragement those Grecian chiefs
  The King of Ocean roused. Then, circled soon
  By many a phalanx either Ajax stood,
  Whose order Mars himself arriving there
  Had praised, or Pallas, patroness of arms.                     160
  For there the flower of all expected firm
  Bold Hector and his host; spear crowded spear,
  Shield, helmet, man, press'd helmet, man and shield;[3]
  The hairy crests of their resplendent casques
  Kiss'd close at every nod, so wedged they stood;               165
  No spear was seen but in the manly grasp
  It quiver'd, and their every wish was war.
  The powers of Ilium gave the first assault
  Embattled close; them Hector led himself[4]
  Right on, impetuous as a rolling rock                          170
  Destructive; torn by torrent waters off
  From its old lodgment on the mountain's brow,
  It bounds, it shoots away; the crashing wood
  Falls under it; impediment or check
  None stays its fury, till the level found,                     175
  There, settling by degrees, it rolls no more;
  So after many a threat that he would pass
  Easily through the Grecian camp and fleet
  And slay to the sea-brink, when Hector once
  Had fallen on those firm ranks, standing, he bore              180
  Vehement on them; but by many a spear
  Urged and bright falchion, soon, reeling, retired,
  And call'd vociferous on the host of Troy.
    Trojans, and Lycians, and close-fighting sons
  Of Dardanus, oh stand! not long the Greeks                     185
  Will me confront, although embodied close
  In solid phalanx; doubt it not; my spear
  Shall chase and scatter them, if Jove, in truth,
  High-thundering mate of Juno, bid me on.
    So saying he roused the courage of them all                  190
  Foremost of whom advanced, of Priam's race
  Deiphobus, ambitious of renown.
  Tripping he came with shorten'd steps,[5] his feet
  Sheltering behind his buckler; but at him
  Aiming, Meriones his splendid lance                            195
  Dismiss'd, nor err'd; his bull-hide targe he struck
  But ineffectual; where the hollow wood
  Receives the inserted brass, the quivering beam
  Snapp'd; then, Deiphobus his shield afar
  Advanced before him, trembling at a spear                      200
  Hurl'd by Meriones. He, moved alike
  With indignation for the victory lost
  And for his broken spear, into his band
  At first retired, but soon set forth again
  In prowess through the Achaian camp, to fetch                  205
  Its fellow-spear within his tent reserved.
    The rest all fought, and dread the shouts arose
  On all sides. Telamonian Teucer, first,
  Slew valiant Imbrius, son of Mentor, rich
  In herds of sprightly steeds. He ere the Greeks                210
  Arrived at Ilium, in Pedaeus dwelt,
  And Priam's spurious daughter had espoused
  Medesicasta. But the barks well-oar'd
  Of Greece arriving, he return'd to Troy,
  Where he excell'd the noblest, and abode                       215
  With Priam, loved and honor'd as his own.
  Him Teucer pierced beneath his ear, and pluck'd
  His weapon home; he fell as falls an ash
  Which on some mountain visible afar,
  Hewn from its bottom by the woodman's axe,                     220
  With all its tender foliage meets the ground
  So Imbrius fell; loud rang his armor bright
  With ornamental brass, and Teucer flew
  To seize his arms, whom hasting to the spoil
  Hector with his resplendent spear assail'd;                    225
  He, marking opposite its rapid flight,
  Declined it narrowly and it pierced the breast,
  As he advanced to battle, of the son
  Of Cteatus of the Actorian race,
  Amphimachus; he, sounding, smote the plain,                    230
  And all his batter'd armor rang aloud.
  Then Hector swift approaching, would have torn
  The well-forged helmet from the brows away
  Of brave Amphimachus; but Ajax hurl'd
  Right forth at Hector hasting to the spoil                     235
  His radiant spear; no wound the spear impress'd,
  For he was arm'd complete in burnish'd brass
  Terrific; but the solid boss it pierced
  Of Hector's shield, and with enormous force
  So shock'd him, that retiring he resign'd                      240
  Both bodies,[6] which the Grecians dragg'd away.
  Stichius and Menestheus, leaders both
  Of the Athenians, to the host of Greece
  Bore off Amphimachus, and, fierce in arms
  The Ajaces, Imbrius. As two lions bear                         245
  Through thick entanglement of boughs and brakes
  A goat snatch'd newly from the peasants' cogs,
  Upholding high their prey above the ground,
  So either Ajax terrible in fight,
  Upholding Imbrius high, his brazen arms                        250
  Tore off, and Oiliades his head
  From his smooth neck dissevering in revenge
  For slain Amphimachus, through all the host
  Sent it with swift rotation like a globe,
  Till in the dust at Hector's feet it fell.                     255
    Then anger fill'd the heart of Ocean's King,
  His grandson[7] slain in battle; forth he pass'd
  Through the Achaian camp and fleet, the Greeks
  Rousing, and meditating wo to Troy.
  It chanced that brave Idomeneus return'd                       260
  That moment from a Cretan at the knee
  Wounded, and newly borne into his tent;
  His friends had borne him off, and when the Chief
  Had given him into skilful hands, he sought
  The field again, still coveting renown.                        265
  Him therefore, meeting him on his return,
  Neptune bespake, but with the borrow'd voice
  Of Thoas, offspring of Andraemon, King
  In Pleuro and in lofty Calydon,
  And honor'd by the AEtolians as a God.                          270
    Oh counsellor of Crete! our threats denounced
  Against the towers of Troy, where are they now?
    To whom the leader of the Cretans, thus,
  Idomeneus. For aught that I perceive
  Thoas! no Grecian is this day in fault!                        275
  For we are all intelligent in arms,
  None yields by fear oppress'd, none lull'd by sloth
  From battle shrinks; but such the pleasure seems
  Of Jove himself, that we should perish here
  Inglorious, from our country far remote                        280
  But, Thoas! (for thine heart was ever firm
  In battle, and thyself art wont to rouse
  Whom thou observ'st remiss) now also fight
  As erst, and urge each leader of the host.
    Him answered, then, the Sovereign of the Deep.               285
  Return that Grecian never from the shores
  Of Troy, Idomeneus! but may the dogs
  Feast on him, who shall this day intermit
  Through wilful negligence his force in fight!
  But haste, take arms and come; we must exert                   290
  All diligence, that, being only two,
  We yet may yield some service. Union much
  Emboldens even the weakest, and our might
  Hath oft been proved on warriors of renown.
    So Neptune spake, and, turning, sought again                 295
  The toilsome field. Ere long, Idomeneus
  Arriving in his spacious tent, put on
  His radiant armor, and, two spears in hand,
  Set forth like lightning which Saturnian Jove
  From bright Olympus shakes into the air,                       300
  A sign to mortal men, dazzling all eyes;
  So beam'd the Hero's armor as he ran.
  But him not yet far distant from his tent
  Meriones, his fellow-warrior met,
  For he had left the fight, seeking a spear,                    305
  When thus the brave Idomeneus began.
    Swift son of Molus! chosen companion dear!
  Wherefore, Meriones, hast thou the field
  Abandon'd? Art thou wounded? Bring'st thou home
  Some pointed mischief in thy flesh infixt?                     310
  Or comest thou sent to me, who of myself
  The still tent covet not, but feats of arms?
    To whom Meriones discreet replied,
  Chief leader of the Cretans, brazen-mail'd
  Idomeneus! if yet there be a spear                             315
  Left in thy tent, I seek one; for I broke
  The spear, even now, with which erewhile I fought,
  Smiting the shield of fierce Deiphobus.
    Then answer thus the Cretan Chief return'd,
  Valiant Idomeneus. If spears thou need,                        320
  Within my tent, leaning against the wall,
  Stand twenty spears and one, forged all in Troy,
  Which from the slain I took; for distant fight
  Me suits not; therefore in my tent have I
  Both spears and bossy shields, with brazen casques             325
  And corselets bright that smile against the sun.
    Him answer'd, then, Meriones discreet.
  I also, at my tent and in my ship
  Have many Trojan spoils, but they are hence
  Far distant. I not less myself than thou                       330
  Am ever mindful of a warrior's part,
  And when the din of glorious arms is heard,
  Fight in the van. If other Greeks my deeds
  Know not, at least I judge them known to thee.
    To whom the leader of the host of Crete                      335
  Idomeneus. I know thy valor well,
  Why speakest thus to me? Choose we this day
  An ambush forth of all the bravest Greeks,
  (For in the ambush is distinguish'd best
  The courage; there the timorous and the bold                   340
  Plainly appear; the dastard changes hue
  And shifts from place to place, nor can he calm
  The fears that shake his trembling limbs, but sits
  Low-crouching on his hams, while in his breast
  Quick palpitates his death-foreboding heart,                   345
  And his teeth chatter; but the valiant man
  His posture shifts not; no excessive fears
  Feels he, but seated once in ambush, deems
  Time tedious till the bloody fight begin;)
  Even there, thy courage should no blame incur.[8]              350
  For should'st thou, toiling in the fight, by spear
  Or falchion bleed, not on thy neck behind
  Would fall the weapon, or thy back annoy,
  But it would meet thy bowels or thy chest
  While thou didst rush into the clamorous van.                  355
  But haste--we may not longer loiter here
  As children prating, lest some sharp rebuke
  Reward us. Enter quick, and from within
  My tent provide thee with a noble spear.
    Then, swift as Mars, Meriones produced                       360
  A brazen spear of those within the tent
  Reserved, and kindling with heroic fire
  Follow'd Idomeneus. As gory Mars
  By Terror follow'd, his own dauntless son
  Who quells the boldest heart, to battle moves;                 365
  From Thrace against the Ephyri they arm,
  Or hardy Phlegyans, and by both invoked,
  Hear and grant victory to which they please;
  Such, bright in arms Meriones, and such
  Idomeneus advanced, when foremost thus                         370
  Meriones his fellow-chief bespake.
    Son of Deucalion! where inclinest thou most
  To enter into battle? On the right
  Of all the host? or through the central ranks?
  Or on the left? for nowhere I account                          375
  The Greeks so destitute of force as there.
    Then answer thus Idomeneus return'd
  Chief of the Cretans. Others stand to guard
  The middle fleet; there either Ajax wars,
  And Teucer, noblest archer of the Greeks,                      380
  Nor less in stationary fight approved.
  Bent as he is on battle, they will task
  And urge to proof sufficiently the force
  Of Priameian Hector; burn his rage
  How fierce soever, he shall find it hard,                      385
  With all his thirst of victory, to quell
  Their firm resistance, and to fire the fleet,
  Let not Saturnian Jove cast down from heaven
  Himself a flaming brand into the ships.
  High towering Telamonian Ajax yields                           390
  To no mere mortal by the common gift
  Sustain'd of Ceres, and whose flesh the spear
  Can penetrate, or rocky fragment bruise;
  In standing fight Ajax would not retire
  Even before that breaker of the ranks                          395
  Achilles, although far less swift than he.
  But turn we to the left, that we may learn
  At once, if glorious death, or life be ours.
    Then, rapid as the God of war, his course
  Meriones toward the left began,                                400
  As he enjoin'd. Soon as the Trojans saw
  Idomeneus advancing like a flame,
  And his compeer Meriones in arms
  All-radiant clad, encouraging aloud
  From rank to rank each other, on they came                     405
  To the assault combined. Then soon arose
  Sharp contest on the left of all the fleet.
  As when shrill winds blow vehement, what time
  Dust deepest spreads the ways, by warring blasts
  Upborne a sable cloud stands in the air,                       410
  Such was the sudden conflict; equal rage
  To stain with gore the lance ruled every breast.
  Horrent with quivering spears the fatal field
  Frown'd on all sides; the brazen flashes dread
  Of numerous helmets, corselets furbish'd bright,               415
  And shields refulgent meeting, dull'd the eye,
  And turn'd it dark away. Stranger indeed
  Were he to fear, who could that strife have view'd
  With heart elate, or spirit unperturb'd.
    Two mighty sons of Saturn adverse parts                      420
  Took in that contest, purposing alike
  To many a valiant Chief sorrow and pain.
  Jove, for the honor of Achilles, gave
  Success to Hector and the host of Troy,
  Not for complete destruction of the Greeks                     425
  At Ilium, but that glory might redound
  To Thetis thence, and to her dauntless son.
  On the other side, the King of Ocean risen
  Secretly from the hoary Deep, the host
  Of Greece encouraged, whom he grieved to see                   430
  Vanquish'd by Trojans, and with anger fierce
  Against the Thunderer burn'd on their behalf.
  Alike from one great origin divine
  Sprang they, but Jove was elder, and surpass'd
  In various knowledge; therefore when he roused                 435
  Their courage, Neptune traversed still the ranks
  Clandestine, and in human form disguised.
  Thus, these Immortal Two, straining the cord
  Indissoluble of all-wasting war,
  Alternate measured with it either host,                        440
  And loosed the joints of many a warrior bold.
  Then, loud exhorting (though himself with age
  Half grey) the Achaians, into battle sprang
  Idomeneus, and scatter'd, first, the foe,
  Slaying Othryoneus, who, by the lure                           445
  Of martial glory drawn, had left of late
  Cabesus. He Priam's fair daughter woo'd
  Cassandra, but no nuptial gift vouchsafed
  To offer, save a sounding promise proud
  To chase, himself, however resolute                            450
  The Grecian host, and to deliver Troy.
  To him assenting, Priam, ancient King,
  Assured to him his wish, and in the faith
  Of that assurance confident, he fought.
  But brave Idomeneus his splendid lance                         455
  Well-aim'd dismissing, struck the haughty Chief.
  Pacing elate the field; his brazen mail
  Endured not; through his bowels pierced, with clang
  Of all his arms he fell, and thus with joy
  Immense exulting, spake Idomeneus.                             460
    I give thee praise, Othryoneus! beyond
  All mortal men, if truly thou perform
  Thy whole big promise to the Dardan king,
  Who promised thee his daughter. Now, behold,
  We also promise: doubt not the effect.                         465
  We give into thy arms the most admired
  Of Agamemnon's daughters, whom ourselves
  Will hither bring from Argos, if thy force
  With ours uniting, thou wilt rase the walls
  Of populous Troy. Come--follow me; that here                   470
  Among the ships we may adjust the terms
  Of marriage, for we take not scanty dower.
    So saying, the Hero dragg'd him by his heel
  Through all the furious fight. His death to avenge
  Asius on foot before his steeds advanced,                      475
  For them, where'er he moved, his charioteer
  Kept breathing ever on his neck behind.
  With fierce desire the heart of Asius burn'd
  To smite Idomeneus, who with his lance
  Him reaching first, pierced him beneath the chin               480
  Into his throat, and urged the weapon through.
  He fell, as some green poplar falls, or oak,
  Or lofty pine, by naval artists hewn
  With new-edged axes on the mountain's side.
  So, his teeth grinding, and the bloody dust                    485
  Clenching, before his chariot and his steeds
  Extended, Asius lay. His charioteer
  (All recollection lost) sat panic-stunn'd,
  Nor dared for safety turn his steeds to flight.
  Him bold Antilochus right through the waist                    490
  Transpierced; his mail sufficed not, but the spear
  Implanted in his midmost bowels stood.
  Down from his seat magnificent he fell
  Panting, and young Antilochus the steeds
  Drove captive thence into the host of Greece.                  495
  Then came Deiphobus by sorrow urged
  For Asius, and, small interval between,
  Hurl'd at Idomeneus his glittering lance;
  But he, foreseeing its approach, the point
  Eluded, cover'd whole by his round shield                      500
  Of hides and brass by double belt sustain'd,
  And it flew over him, but on his targe
  Glancing, elicited a tinkling sound.
  Yet left it not in vain his vigorous grasp,
  But pierced the liver of Hypsenor, son                         505
  Of Hippasus; he fell incontinent,
  And measureless exulting in his fall
  Deiphobus with mighty voice exclaim'd.
    Not unavenged lies Asius; though he seek
  Hell's iron portals, yet shall he rejoice,                     510
  For I have given him a conductor home.
    So he, whose vaunt the Greeks indignant heard!
  But of them all to anger most he roused
  Antilochus, who yet his breathless friend[9]
  Left not, but hasting, fenced him with his shield,             515
  And brave Alastor with Mecisteus son
  Of Echius, bore him to the hollow ships
  Deep-groaning both, for of their band was he.
  Nor yet Idomeneus his warlike rage
  Remitted aught, but persevering strove                         520
  Either to plunge some Trojan in the shades,
  Or fall himself, guarding the fleet of Greece.
  Then slew he brave Alcathoues the son
  Of AEsyeta, and the son-in-law
  Of old Anchises, who to him had given                          525
  The eldest-born of all his daughters fair,
  Hippodamia; dearly loved was she
  By both her parents in her virgin state,[10]
  For that in beauty she surpass'd, in works
  Ingenious, and in faculties of mind                            530
  All her coevals; wherefore she was deem'd
  Well worthy of the noblest prince of Troy.
  Him in that moment, Neptune by the arm
  Quell'd of Idomeneus, his radiant eyes
  Dimming, and fettering his proportion'd limbs.                 535
  All power of flight or to elude the stroke
  Forsook him, and while motionless he stood
  As stands a pillar tall or towering oak,
  The hero of the Cretans with a spear
