
Four years later, the religious belief of the English Church, which
had been first formulated under Edward VI (S362), was revised and
reduced to the Thirty-Nine Articles which constitute it at the present
time.[1]  But the real value of the religious revolution which was
taking place did not lie in the substitution of one creed for another,
but in the new spirit of inquiry, and the new freedom of thought,
which that change awakened.

[1] But the Clerical Subscription Act (1866) simply requires the
clergy of the Church of England to make a general declaration of
assent to the Thirty-Nine Articles and the Prayer Book.

As for Elizabeth herself, she seems to have had no deep and abiding
convictions on these matters.  Her political interests practically
compelled her to favor Protestantism, but to the end of her life she
kept up some Catholic forms.  Though she upheld the service of the
Church of England, yet she shocked the Puritans by keeping a crucifix,
with lighted candles in front of it, hung in her private chapel,
before which she prayed to the Virgin as fervently as her sister Mary
had ever done.

384. The Nation halting between Two Opinions.

In this double course she represented a large part of the nation,
which hesitated about committing itself fully to either side.  Men
were not wanting who were ready to lay down their lives for
conscience' sake, but they do not appear to have been numerous.

Some sympathized at heart with the notorious Vicar of Bray, who kept
his pulpit under the whole or some part of the successive reigns of
Henry VIII, Edward VI, Mary, and Elizabeth, changing his theology with
each change of rule.  When taunted as a turncoat, he replied, "Not so,
for I have always been true to my principles, which are to live and
die Vicar of Bray."[2]

[2]     "For this as law I will maintain
            Until my dying day, sir,
         That whatsoever king shall reign,
            I'll be Vicar of Bray, sir."

Though there was nothing morally noble in such halting between two
opinions, and facing both ways, yet it saved England for the time from
the worst of all calamities, a religious civil war.  Such a conflict
rent France in pieces, drenched her fair fields with the blood of
Catholics and Protestants, split Germany and Italy into petty states,
and ended in Spain in the triumph of the Inquisition and of
intellectual death.[1]

[1] S. R. Gardiner's "History of England"; consult also J. F. Bright's
"History of England" and L. Von Ranke's "History of England."

385. The Question of the Queen's Marriage.

Elizabeth showed the same tact with regard to marriage that she did
with regard to religion.  Her first Parliament, realizing that the
welfare of the country depended largely on whom the Queen should
marry, begged her to consider the question of taking a husband.  Her
reply was that she had resolved to live and die a maiden queen.  When
further pressed, she returned answers that, like the ancient Greek
oracles, might be interpreted either way.

The truth was that Elizabeth saw the difficult of her position better
than any one else.  The choice opf her heart at that time would
probably have been Robert Dudley, her "sweet Robin," the handsome but
unscrupulous Earl of Leicester; but, as he called himself a
Protestant, she knew that to take him as consort would be to incur the
enmity of the Catholic powers of Europe.  On the other hand, if she
accepted a Catholic, she would inevitably alienate a large and
influential number of her own subjects.

In this delimma she resolved to keep both sides in a state of hopeful
expectation.  Philip II of Spain, who had married her sister Mary
(S370), made overtures to Elizabeth.  She kept him waiting in
uncertainty until at last his ambassador lost all patience, and
declared that the Queen "was possessed with ten thousand demons."

Later, the Duke of Anjou, a son of Henry II of France, proposed.  He
was favorably received, but the country became so alarmed at the
prospect of having a Catholic King, that Stubbs, a Puritan lawyer,
published a coarse and violent pamphlet denouncing the marriage.[2]
For this attack his right hand was cut off; as it fell, says an
eyewitness,[3] he seized his hat with the other hand, and waved it,
shouting, "God save Queen Elizabeth!"  That act was an index to the
popular feeling.  A majority of the people, whether Catholics or
Protestants, stood by the Crown even when they condemned its policy,
determined, at all hazards, to preserve the unity of the nation.  That
spirit of intense loyalty and love of country without regard to creed
or calling found perfect expression in Shakespeare's utterance:

        "This England never did, nor never shall,
         Lie at the proud foot of a conqueror.
         .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .
         Come the three corners of the world in arms,
         And we shall shock them: nought shall make us rue,
         If England to itself do but rest true."[4]

We shall see that this feeling showed itself still more unmistakably,
when, years later, men of all classes and of widely different
religious views rose to destroy the Armada,--that great fleet which
Spain sent to subjugate the English realm (SS398-401).

[2] Stubbs's pamphlet was entitled "The Discovery of the Gaping Gulf,
wherein England is likely to be swallowed up by another French
marriage, unless the Lords forbid the bans by letting her see the sin
and punishment thereof."
[3] Camden's "Annals," 1581.
[4] Shakespeare's "King John," Act V, scene vii; written after the
defeat of the Armada.

386. The Queen a Coquette.

During all this time the court buzzed with whispered scandals.
Elizabeth was by nature an incorrigible coquette.  Robert Dudley, Earl
of Leicester, the Earl of Essex, and Sir Walter Raleigh were by turns
her favorites.  Over her relations with Dudley there hangs the
terrible shadow of the suspected murder of his wife, the beautiful Amy
Robsart.[3]

[3] See the "De Quadra Letter" in Froude's "England."

Elizabeth's vanity was as insatiable as it was ludicrous.  She issued
a proclamation forbidding any one to sell her picture, lest it should
fail to do her justice.  She was greedy of flattery even when long
past sixty, and there was a sting of truth in the letter which Mary
Queen of Scots wrote her, saying, "Your aversion to marriage proceeds
from your not wishing to lose the liberty of compelling people to make
love to you."

387. Violence of Temper; Crooked Policy.

In temper Elizabeth was arbitrary, fickle, and passionate.  When her
blood was up, she would swear like a trooper, spit on a courtier's new
velvet suit, beat her maids of honor, and box Essex's ears.  She wrote
abusive and even profane letters to high Church dignitaries,[1] and
she openly insulted the wife of Archbishop Parker, because she did not
believe in a married clergy.

[1] For the famous letter to the bishop of Ely attributed to
Elizabeth, see Hallam's "Constitutional History of England," Froude,
or Creighton; but the "Dictionary of National Biography" ("Elizabeth")
calls it a forgery.

The age in which Elizabeth reigned was preeminently one of craft and
intrigue.  The Kings of that day endeavored to get by fraud what their
less polished predecessors got by force.  At this game of double
dealing Elizabeth had few equals and no superior.  So profound was her
dissimulation that her most confidential advisers never felt quite
sure that she was not deceiving them.  In her diplomatic relations she
never hesitated at an untruth if it would serve her purpose, and when
the falsehood was discovered, she always had another and more
plausible one ready to take its place.  In all this her devotion to
England stands out unquestioned and justifies the saying, "She lived
and lied for her country."

388. Her Knowledge of Men; the Monopolies.

The Queen's real ability lay in her instinctive perception of the
needs of the age, and in her power of self-adjustment to them.
Elizabeth never made public opinion, but watched it and followed it.
She knew an able man at sight, and had the happy faculty of attaching
such men to her service.  By nature she was both irresolute and
impulsive; but her sense was good and her judgment clear.  She could
tell when she was well advised, and although she fumed and blustered,
she yielded.

It has been said that the next best thing to having a good rule is to
know when to break it.  Elizabeth always knew when to change her
policy.  No matter how obstinate she was, she saw the point where
obstinacy became dangerous.  In order to enrich Raleigh and her
numerous other favorites, she granted them the exclusive right to deal
in certain articles.  These privileges were called "monopolies."

They finally came to comprise almost everything that could be bought
or sold, from French wines to secondhand shoes.  The effect was to
raise prices so as to make even the common necessaries of life
excessively dear.  A great outcry finally arose; Parliament requested
the Queen to abolish the "monopolies"; she hesitated, but when she saw
their determined attitude she gracefully granted the ptition (S433).

389. The Adulation of the Court.

No English sovereign was so popular or so praised.  The great writers
and the great men of that day vied with each other in their
compliments to Elizabeth's beauty, wisdom, and wit.  She lived in an
atmosphere of splendor, of pleasure, and of adulation.  Her reign was
full of pageants, progresses, or journeys made with great pomp and
splendor, and feasts, like those which Scott describes in his
delightful novel, "Kenilworth."

Spenser composed his poem, the "Faerie Queen," as he said, to extol
"the glorious person of our sovereign Queen."  Shakespeare is reported
to have written the "Merry Wives of Windsor" for her amusement, and in
his "Midsummer Night's Dream" he addresses her as the "fair vestal in
the West."  The translators of the Bible spoke of her as "that bright
Occidental Star," and the common people loved to sing and shout the
praises of their "good Queen Bess."  After her death at Richmond, when
her body was being conveyed down the Thames to Westminster, one
extravagant eulogist declared that the very fishes that followed the
funeral barge "wept out their eyes and swam blind after!"

390. Grandeur of the Age; More's "Utopia."

The reign of Elizabeth was, in fact, Europe's grandest age.  It was a
time when everything was bursting into life and color.  The world had
suddenly grown larger; it had opened toward the east in the revival of
classical learning; it had opened toward the west, and disclosed a
continent of unknown extent and unimaginable resources.

About twenty years after Cabot had discovered the mainland of America
(S335), Sir Thomas More (SS339, 351) wrote a remarkable work of
fiction, in Latin (1516), called "Utopia" (the Land of Nowhere).  In
it he pictured an ideal commonwealth, where all men were equal; where
none were poor; where perpetual peace prevailed; where there was
absolute freedom of thought; where all were contented and happy.  It
was, in fact, the Golden Age come back to earth again.

More's book, now translated into English (1551), suited such a time,
for Elizabeth's reign was one of adventure, of poetry, of luxury, of
rapidly increasing wealth.  When men looked across the Atlantic, their
imaginations were stimulated, and the most extravagant hopes did not
appear too good to be true.  Courtiers and adventurers dreamed of
fountains of youth in Florida, of silver mines in Brazil, of rivers in
Virginia, whose pebbles were precious stones.[1]  Thus all were
dazzled with visions of sudden riches and of renewed life.

[1] "Why, man, all their dripping-pans [in Virginia] are pure gould;
... all the prisoners they take are feterd in gold; and for rubies and
diamonds, they goe forth on holydayes and gather 'hem by the
sea-shore, to hang on their children's coates."--"Eastward Hoe," a
play by John Marston and others, "as it was playd in the Blackfriers
[Theatre] by the Children of her Maiesties Revels." (1603?)

391. Change in Mode of Life.

England, too, was undergoing transformation.  Once, a nobleman's
residence had been simply a square stone fortress, built for safety
only; but now that the Wars of the Roses had destroyed the old feudal
barons (SS299, 316), there was no need of such precaution.  Men were
no longer content to live shut up in somber strongholds, surrounded
with moats of stagnant water, or in meanly built houses, where the
smoke curled around the rafters for want of chimneys by which to
escape, while the wind whistled through the unglazed latticed windows.

Mansions and stately manor houses like Hatfield, Knowle, parts of
Haddon Hall, and the "Bracebridge Hall" of Washington Irving,[2] rose
instead of castles, and hospitality, not exclusion, became the
prevailing custom.  The introduction of chimneys brought the cheery
comfort of the English fireside, while among the wealthy, carpets,
tapestry, and silver plate took the place of floors strewed with
rushes, of bare walls, and of tables covered with pewter or woooden
dishes.

[2] Aston Hall, Birmingham, is the original of Irving's "Bracebridge
Hall."  It came a little later than Elizabeth's time, but is
Elizabethan in style.

An old writer, lamenting these innovations, says: "When our houses
were built of willow, then we had oaken men; but, now that our houses
are made of oak, our men have not only become willow, but many are
altogether of straw, which is a sore affliction."

392. An Age of Adventure and of Daring.

But they were not all of straw, for that was a period of daring
enterprise, of explorers, sea rovers, and freebooters.  Sir Walter
Raleigh planted the first English colony in America, which the maiden
Queen named Virginia, in honor of herself.  It proved unsuccessful,
but he said, "I shall live to see it an English nation yet"; and he
did.

Frobisher explored the coasts of Labrador and Greenland.  Sir Francis
Drake, who plundered the treasure ships of Spain wherever he found
them, sailed into the Pacific, spent a winter in or near the harbor of
San Francisco, and ended his voyage by circumnavigating the globe.
(See map facing p. 222.)  In the Far East, London merchants had
established the East India Company, the beginning of English dominion
in Asia; while in Holland, Sir Philip Sydney gave his lifeblood for
the cause of Protestantism.

393. Literature and Natural Philosophy.

It was an age, too, not only of brave deeds but of high thoughts.
Shakespeare, Spenser, and Jonson were making English literature the
noblest of all literatures.  Furthermore, Shakespeare had no equal as
a teacher of English history.  His historical plays appealed then, as
they do now, to every heart.  At his touch the dullest and driest
records of the past are transformed and glow with color, life,
movement, and meaning.[1]  On the other hand, Francis Bacon, son of
Sir Nicholas Bacon, of Elizabeth's council, was giving a wholly
different direction to education.  In his new system of philosophy,[2]
he taught men that in order to use the forces of nature they must
learn by observation and experiment to know nature herself; "for,"
said he, "knowledge is power."

[1] On the value of Shakespeare's Historical Plays, see S298, note 1;
S313, note 2; and S410.
[2] In his tract on "The Greatest Birth of Time," in 1582.

394. Mary Queen of Scots claims the Crown (1561).

For England it was also an age of great and constant peril.
Elizabeth's entire reign was undermined with plots against her life
and against the life of the Protestant faith.  No sooner was one
conspiracy detected and suppressed than a new one sprang up.  Perhaps
the most formidable of these was the effort which Mary Stuart, Queen
of Scots, made to supplant her English rival.  Shortly after
Elizabeth's accession, Mary's husband, the King of France, died.  She
returned to Scotland (1561) and there assumed the Scottish crown, at
the same time asserting her right to the English throne.[3]

[3] See Genealogical Table (p. 207).  Mary's claim was based on the
fact that the Pope had never recognized Henry VIII's marriage to Anne
Boleyn, Elizabeth's mother, as lawful, while she, herself, as the
direct descendant of Henry's sister, Margaret, stood next in
succession.

395. Mary marries Darnley; his Murder.

A few years later Mary married Lord Darnley.  He became jealous of
Rizzio, her private secretary, and, with the aid of accomplices,
seized him in her presence, dragged him into an antechamber, and there
stabbed him.  The next year Darnley was murdered.  It was believed
that Mary and the Earl of Bothwell, whom she soon married, were guilty
of the crime.  The people rose and cast her into prison, and forced
her to abdicate in favor of her infant son, James VI, who eventually
became King of England and Scotland (1603).

396. Mary escapes to England (1568); plots against Elizabeth and
Protestantism.

Mary escaped and fled to England.  Elizabeth, fearing she might pass
over to France and stir up war, confined her in Bolton Castle,
Yorkshire.  During her imprisonment in another stronghold, to which
she had been transferred, she was accused of being implicated in a
plot for assassinating the English Queen and seizing the reins of
government in behalf of herself and the Jesuits (S378).

It was, in fact, a time when the Protestant faith seemed everywhere
marked for destruction.  In France evil counselors had induced the
King to order a massacre of the Reformers, and on St. Batholomew's Day
thousands were slain.  The Pope, misinformed in the matter, ordered a
solemn thanksgiving for the slaughter, and struck a gold medal to
commemorate it.  Philip II of Spain, whose cold, impassive face
scarcely ever relaxed into a smile, now laughed outright.  Still more
recently, William the Silent, who had driven out the Catholics from a
part of the Netherlands, had been assassinated by a Jesuit fanatic.
Meanwhile the Pope had excommunicated Queen Elizabeth (1570) and had
released her subjects from allegiance to her.  A fanatic nailed this
bull of excommunication to the door of the Bishop of London's palace.
This bold act, for which the offender suffered death, brought matters
to a crisis.

Englishmen felt that they could no longer remain halting between two
opinions.  They realized that now they must resolve to take their
stand by the Queen or else by the Pope.  Parliament at once retaliated
against the Pope by passing two stringent measures which declared it
high treason for any one to deny the Queen's right to the crown, to
name her successor, to denounce her as a heretic, or to say or do
anything which should "alienate the hearts and minds of her Majesty's
subjects from their dutiful obedience" to her.  Later, the
"Association," a vigilance committee, was formed by a large number of
the principal people of the realm to protect Elizabeth against
assassination.  Not only prominent Protestants but many Catholic
noblemen joined the organization to defend the Queen at all hazards.

397. Elizabeth beheads Mary, 1587.

The ominous significance of these events had their full effect on the
English Queen.  Aroused to a sense of her danger, she signed the
Scottish Queen's death warrant, and Mary, after nineteen years'
imprisonment, was beheaded at Fotheringay Castle.[1]

[1] Fotheringay Castle, Northamptonshire, demolished by James I.

As soon as the news of her execution was brought to Elizabeth, she
became alarmed at the political consequences the act might have in
Europe.  With her usual duplicity she bitterly upbraided the minister
who had advised it, and throwing Davidson, her secretary, into the
Tower, fined him 10,000 pounds, the payment of which reduced him to
beggary.

Not satisfied with this, Elizabeth even had the effrontery to write a
letter of condolence to Mary's son, James VI, declaring that his
mother had been beheaded by mistake! Yet facts prove that Elizabeth
had not only determined to put Mary to death, but that she had urged
those who held Mary prisoner to kill her privately.[2]

[2] See "Elizabeth" in the "National Dictionary of (British)
Biography."

398. The Spanish Armada.

Mary was hardly under ground when a new and greater danger threatened
the country.  At her death, the Scottish Queen, disgusted with her
mean-spirited son James,[3] bequeathed her dominions, including her
claim to the English throne, to Philip II of Spain (S370).  He was
then the most powerful sovereign in Europe, ruling over a territory
equal to that of the Roman Empire in its greatest extent.

[3] James had deserted his mother and accepted a pension from
Elizabeth.

Philip II, with the encouragement of the Pope, and with the further
help of the promise of a very large sum of money from him, resolved to
invade England, conquer it, annex it to his possessions, and restore
the religion of Rome.  To accomplish this, he began fitting out the
"Invisible Armada," an immense fleet of warships, intended to carry
twenty thousand soldiers, and to receive on its way reenforcements of
thirty thousand more from the Spanish army in the Netherlands.

399. Drake's Expedition; Sailing of the Armada (1588).

Sir Francis Drake (S392) determined to check Philip's preparations.
He heard that the enemy's fleet was gathered at Cadiz.  He sailed
there, and in spite of all opposition effectually "singed the Spanish
King's beard," as he said, by burning and otherwise destroying more
than a hundred ships.

This so crippled the expedition that it had to be given up for that
year, but the next summer a vast armament set sail.  Motley[1] says it
consisted of ten squadrons, of more than one hundred and thirty ships,
carrying upwards of three thousand cannon.

[1] Motley's "United Netherlands," II, 465; compare Froude's
"England," XII, 466, and Laughton's "Armada" (State Papers),
pp. xl-lvii.

The impending peril thoroughly roused England.  Both Catholics and
Protestants rose to defend their country and their Queen.

400. The Battle, 1588.

The English sea forces under Lord High Admiral Howard, of Effingham, a
zealous patriot, with Sir Francis Drake, who ranked second in command,
were assembled at Plymouth, watching for the enemy.  Whe nthe
long-looked-for Spanish fleet came in sight, beacon fires were lighted
on the hills to give the alarm.

 "For swift to east and swift to west the ghastly war flame spread;
  High on St. Michael's Mount it shone: it shone on Beachy Head.
  Far on the deep the Spaniard saw, along each southern shire,
  Cape beyond cape, in endless range, those twinkling points of fire."
                                              --Macaulay's "Armada."

The enemy's ships moved steadily toward the coast in the form of a
crescent seven miles across; but Howard, Drake, Hawkins, Raleigh, and
other noted captains, were ready to receive them.  With their
fast-sailing cruisers they sailed around the unwieldy Spanish
warships, firing four shots to the enemy's one, and "harassing them as
a swarm of wasps worry a bear."  Several of the Spanish vessels were
captured and one blown up.  At last the commander sailed for Calais to
repair damages and take a fresh start.  The English followed.  When
night came on, Drake sent eight blazing fire ships to drift down among
the Armada as it lay at anchor.  Thoroughly alarmed at the prospect of
being burned where they lay, the Spaniards cut their cables and made
sail for the north.

401. Destruction of the Armada, 1588; Elizabeth at Tilbury and at
St. Paul's.

They were hotly pursued by the English, who, having lost but a single
vessel in the fight, might have cut them to pieces, had not
Elizabeth's suicidal economy stinted them in body powder and
provisions.  Meanwhile the Spanish fleet kept moving northward.  The
wind increased to a gale, the gale to a furious storm.  The commander
of the Armada attempted to go around Scotland and return home that
way; but ship after ship was driven ashore and wrecked on the wild and
rocky coast of western Ireland.  On one strand, less than five miles
long, over a thousand corpses were counted.  Those who escaped the
waves met death by the hands of the inhabitants.  Of the magnificent
fleet which had sailed so proudly from Spain only fifty-three vessels
returned, and they were but half manned by exhausted crews stricken by
pestilence and death.  Thus ended Philip II's boasted attack on
England.

When all danger was past, Elizabeth went to Tilbury, on the Thames
below London, to review the troops collected there to defend the
capital.  "I know," said she, "that I have but the feeble body of a
woman, but I have the heart of a king, and of a king of England too."
Unhappily the niggardly Queen had half starved her brave sailors, and
many of them came home only to die.  None the less Elizabeth went with
solemn pomp to St. Paul's Cathedral to offer thanks for the great
victory, which was commemorated by a medal bearing this inscription:
"God blew with his winds, and they were scattered."  The date of the
defeat of the Armada, 1588, was a turning point in English history.
From that time England gradually rose, under the leadership of such
illustrious commanders as Drake, Blake, and Nelson, until she became
what she has ever since remained--the greatest sea power in the world
(SS459, 557).

402. Insurrection in Ireland (1595).

A few years later a terrible rebellion broke out in Ireland.  From its
partial conquest in the time of Henry II (S159), the condition of that
island continued to be deplorable.  First, the chiefs of the native
tribes fought constantly among themselves; next, the English attempted
to force the Protestant religion upon a people who detested it;
lastly, the greed and misgovernment of the rulers put a climax to
these miseries.  Sir Walter Raleigh said, "The country was a
commonwealth of common woe."  What made this state of things still
more dangerous was the fact that the Catholic rulers of Spain
considered the Irish as their natural allies, and were plotting to
send troops to that island in order to strike England a deadly side
blow when she least expected it.

Elizabeth's government began a war, the object of which was "not to
subdue but to destroy."  The extermination was so merciless that the
Queen herself declared that if the work of destruction went on much
longer, "she should have nothing left but ashes and corpses to rule
over."  Then, but not till then, the starving remnant of the Irish
people submitted, and England gained a barren victory which has ever
since carried with it its own curse.

403. The First Poor Law (1601).

In Elizabeth's reign the first effective English poor law was passed.
It required each parish to make provision for such paupers as were
unable to work, while the able-bodied were compelled to labor for
their own support.  This measure relieved much of the distress which
had prevailed during the three previous reigns (S354), and forms the
basis of the law in force at the present time (S607).

404. Elizabeth's Death (1603).

The death of the great Queen (1603) was as sad as her life had been
brilliant.  Her favorite, Essex, Shakespeare's intimate friend, had
been beheaded for an attempted rebellion against her power.  From that
time she grew, as she said, "heavy-hearted."  Her old friends and
counselors were dead, her people no longer welcomed her with their
former enthusiasm.  She kept a sword always within reach.  Treason had
grown so common that Hentzner, a German traveler in England, said that
he counted three hundred heads of persons, who had suffered death for
this crime, exposed on London Bridge.  Elizabeth felt that her sun was
nearly set; gradually her strength declined; she ceased to leave her
palace, and sat muttering to herself all day long, "Mortua, sed non
sepulta!" (Dead, but not buried).

At length she lay propped up on cushions on the floor,[1] "tired," as
she said, "of reigning and tired of life."  In that sullen mood she
departed to join that "silent majority" whose realm under earth is
bounded by the sides of the grave. "Four days afterward," says a
writer of that time, "she was forgotten."

[1] See in the works of Delaroche his fine picture of "The Death of
Queen Elizabeth."

One sees her tomb, with her full-length, recumbent effigy, in the
north aisle of Henry VII's Chapel, Westminster Abbey, while in the
south aisle he sees the tomb and effigy of her old rival and enemy,
Mary Queen of Scots (S397).  The sculptured features of both look
placid.  "After life's fitful fever they sleep well."

405. Summary.

The Elizabethan period was in every respect remarkable.  It was great
in its men of thought, great in its literature, and equally great in
its men of action.  It was greatest, however, in its successful
resistance to the armed hand of religious oppression. "Practically the
reign of Elizabeth," as Bishop Creighton remarks, "saw England
established as a Protestant country."[2]

[2] See "The Dictionary of English History" ("The Reformation"),
p. 860.

The defeat of the Spanish Armada in 1588 gave renewed courage to the
cause of the Reformation, not only in England, but in every Protestant
country in Europe.  It meant that a movement had begun which, though
it might be temporarily hindered, would secure to all civilized
countries, which accepted it, the right of private judgment and of
liberty of conscience in matters of religion.

General Reference Summary of the Tudor Period (1485-1603)

I. Government  II. Religion  III. Military Affairs.  IV. Literature,
Learning and Art.  V. General Industry and Commerce.  VI. Mode of
Life, Manners, and Customs

I. Government

406. Absolutism of the Crown; Free Trade; the Post Office.

During a great part of the Tudor period the power of the Crown was
well-nigh absolute.  Four causes contributed to this: (1) The
destruction of a very large part of the feudal nobility by the Wars of
the Roses.[1] (2) The removal of many of the higher clergy from the
House of Lords.[2] (3) The creation of a new nobility dependant on the
king. (4) The desire of the great body of the people for "peace at any
price."

[1] In the last Parliament before the Wars of the Roses (1454) there
were fifty-three temporal peers; at the beginning of the reign of
Henry VII (1485) there were only twenty-nine.
[2] Out of a total of barely ninety peers, Henry VIII, by the
suppression of the monasteries, removed upwards of thirty-six abbots
and priors.  He, however, added five new bishops, which made the House
of Lords number about fifty-nine.

Under Henry VII and Elizabeth the courts of Star Chamber and High
Commission exercised arbitrary power, and often inflicted cruel
punishments for offenses against the government, and for heresy or the
denial of the religious supremacy of the sovereign.

Henry VII established a treaty of free trade, called the "Great
Intercourse," between England and the Netherlands.  Under Elizabeth
the first postmaster-general entered upon his duties, though the post
office was nott fully established until the reign of her successor.

II. Religion

407. Establishment of the Protestant Church of England.

Henry VIII suppressed the Roman Catholic monasteries, seized their
property, and ended by declaring the Church of England independent of
the Pope.  Thenceforth he assumed the title of Supreme Head of the
National Church.  Under Edward VI Protestantism was established by
law.  Mary led a reaction in favor of Roman Catholicism, but her
successor, Elizabeth, reinstated the Protestant form of worship.
Under Elizabeth the Puritans demanded that the National Church be
completely "purified" from all Catholic forms and doctrines.  Severe
laws were passed under Elizabeth for the punishment of both Catholics
and Puritans who failed to conform to the Church of England.

III. Military Affairs

408. Arms and Armor; the Navy.

Though gunpowder had been in use for two centuries, yet full suits of
armor were still worn during a great part of the period.  An improved
matchlock gun, with the pistol, an Italian invention, and heavy cannon
were introduced.  Until the death of Henry VIII foot soldiers
continued to be armed with the long bow; but under Edward VI that
weapon was superseded by firearms.  The principal wars of the period
were with Scotland, France, and Spain, the last being by far the most
important, and ending with the destruction of the Armada.

Henry VIII established a permanent navy, and built several vessels of
upwards of one thousand tons register.  The largest men-of-war under
Elizabeth carried forty cannon and a crew of several hundred men.

IV. Literature, Learning, and Art

409. Schools.  The revival of learning gave a great impetus to
education.  The money which had once been given to monasteries was now
spent in building schools, colleges, and hospitals.  Dean Colet
established the free grammar school of St. Paul's, several colleges
were endowed at Oxford and Cambridge, and Edward VI opened upwards of
forty charity schools in different parts of the country, of which the
Christ's Hospital or "Blue-Coat School," originally established in
London, is one of the best known.  Improved textbooks were rpepared
for the schools, and Lily's "Latin Grammar," first published in 1513
for the use of Dean Colet's school, continued a standard work for over
three hundred years.

410. Literature; the Theater.

The latter part of the period deserves the name of the "Golden Age of
English Literature."  More, Sydney, Hooker, Jewell, and Bacon were the
leading prose writers; while Shakespeare, Spenser, Marlowe, and Jonson
represented the poets.

In 1574 a public theater was erected in London, in which Shakespeare
was a stockholder.  Not very long after, a second was opened.  At both
these, the Globe and the Blackfriars, the great dramatist appeared in
his own plays, and in such pieces as "King John," "Richard the Third,"
and the Henrys, he taught his countrymen more of the true spirit and
meaning of the nation's history than they had ever learned before.
His historical plays are chiefly based on Holinshed and Hall, two
noted chroniclers of the period.

411. Progress of Science; Superstitions.

The discoveries of Columbus, Cabot, Magellan, and other navigators,
had proved the earth to be a globe.  Copernicus, a Prussian
astronomer, now demonstrated the fact that it both turns on its axis
and revolves around the sun, but the discovery was not accepted until
many years later.

On the other hand, astrology, witchcraft, and the transmutation of
copper and lead into gold were generally believed in.  In preaching
before Queen Elizabeth, Bishop Jewell urged that stringent measures be
taken with witches and sorcerers, saying that through their demoniacal
acts "your Grace's subjects pine away even unto death, their color
fadeth, their flesh rotteth."  Lord Bacon and other eminent men held
the same belief, and many persons eventually suffered death for the
practice of witchcraft.

412. Architecture.

The Gothic, or Pointed, style of architecture reached its final stage
(the Perpendicular) in the early part of this period.  The first
examples of it have already been mentioned at the close of the
preceding period (S324).  After the close of Henry VII's reign no
attempts were made to build any grand church edifices until St. Paul's
Cathedral was rebuilt by Wren, in the seventeenth century, in the
Italian, or classical, style.

In the latter part of the Tudor period many stately country houses[1]
and grand city mansions were built, ornamented with carved woodwork
and bay windows.  Castles were no longer constructed, and, as the
country was at peace, many of those which had been built were
abandoned, though a few castellated mansions like Thornbury,
Gloucestershire, were built in Henry VIII's time.  The streets of
London still continued to be very narrow, and the houses, with their
projecting stories, were so near together at the top that neighbors
living on opposite sides of the street might almost shake hands from
the upper windows.

[1] Such as Hatfield House, Knowle Hall, Hardwick Hall, and part of
Haddon Hall; and, in London, Crosby Hall and other noble mansions.

V. General Industry and Commerce

413. Foreign Trade.

The eographical discoveries of this period gave a great impulse to
foreign trade with Africe, Brazil, and North America.  The wool trade
continued to increase, and also commerce with the East Indies.  In
1600 the East India Company was established, thus laying the
foundation of England's Indian empire, and ships now brought cargoes
direct to England by way of the Cape of Good Hope.

Sir Francis Drake did a flourishing business in plundering Spanish
settlements in America and Spanish treasure ships on the sea, and Sir
