them, which means four miles, as we have got to return somehow? And now
you talk about climbing down that break-neck cliff to have a look at
them close!"

But Francis paid no attention to Matteo's words. He was gazing down
into the clear smooth water, which was so transparent that every stone
and pebble at the bottom could be seen.

"The water looks extremely shallow, Giuseppi. What do you think?"

"It seems to me, signor, that there is not a foot of water between the
rocks and the shore."

"It does look so, Giuseppi; but it is possible that the transparency of
the water deceives us, and that there may be ten or twelve feet of
water there. However, that is what we must go down and find out. Now
the first thing is to look about, and find some point at which we can
get down to the beach."

"Well, I will lie down and take a nap till you come back," Matteo said
in a tone of resignation. "I have no interest either in these rocks or
in the water; and as far as I can protest, I do so against the whole
proceeding, which to me savours of madness."

"Don't you understand, you silly fellow, what I am thinking about?"
Francis said impatiently.

"Not in the smallest degree, Francisco; but do not trouble to tell
me--it makes no matter. You have some idea in your head. Carry it out
by all means; only don't ask me to cut my hands, tear my clothes, and
put myself into a perspiration by climbing down that cliff."

"My idea is this, Matteo. There is no chance of carrying off the Lido
by speed from the Genoese; but if we could get her out of the bay we
might bring her round here and lay her behind those rocks, and the
Genoese would pass by without dreaming she was there. Half a mile out
those rocks would look as if they form part of the cliff, and none
would suspect there was a passage behind them."

"That is something like an idea!" Matteo said, jumping to his feet.
"Why did you not tell me of it before? You have quite alarmed me.
Seriously, I began to think that you had become a little mad, and was
wondering whether I had not better go back and fetch the captain and
some of his men to look after you.

"Now let us look at your rocks again. Why, man, there is not water
enough to float a boat between them and the shore, much less the Lido,
which draws nine foot of water now she is loaded."

"I don't know, Matteo. Looking down on water from a height is very
deceiving. If it is clear and transparent, there is nothing to enable
you to judge its depth. At any rate it is worth trying. Before we go
down, we will cut some long stiff rods with which we can measure the
depth. But we have first to find a place where we can get down to the
water."

After a quarter of an hour's search, they found a point where the
descent seemed practicable. A little stream had worn a deep fissure in
the face of the rock. Shrubs and bushes had grown up in the crevices
and afforded a hold for the hands, and there appeared no great
difficulty in getting down. Before starting they cut three stiff
slender rods twelve feet in length. They then set to work to make the
descent. It was by no means difficult, and in a few minutes they stood
by the edge of the water.

"It is a great advantage, the path being so easy," Francis said, "for
in case they did discover the ship we could land and climb to the top
before they had time to come to shore, and once there we could keep the
whole force in those galleys at bay. Now for the main point, the depth
of the water."

Matteo shook his head.

"It is useless to take the trouble to undress, Francis," he said, as
the latter threw off his jacket. "Giuseppi can wade out to the rocks
without wetting his knees."

"Giuseppi can try if he likes," Francis said, "but I will wager he will
not get far."

Giuseppi, as convinced as Matteo of the shallowness of the water,
stepped into it, but was surprised to find that, before he had gone
many paces, the water was up to his waist.

"Well, I wouldn't have believed it if I hadn't seen it," Matteo said
when he returned, "but I think he must have got into a deep hole among
the rocks. However, we shall soon see," and he too began to undress.

In a few minutes the three lads were swimming out towards the rocks
which, as Francis had anticipated, rose from twenty to thirty feet
above the level of the sea. The water deepened fast, and for the last
thirty or forty yards, they were unable to touch the bottom, even when
thrusting down their rods to the fullest depth. They then tried the
depth in the passages at the end of the rocks, and found that there was
ample water for the Lido. When they ascertained this to their
satisfaction they swam back to the shore.

"I shall believe you in future, Francis, even if you assert that the
moon is made of cheese. I could have taken an oath that there was not a
foot of water between those rocks and the shore."

"I hardly ventured to hope that it was as deep as it is," Francis said,
"but I know how deceiving clear water is, when you look down upon it
from a height. However, that point is settled."

"But they would see our masts above the rocks, Francisco. They are sure
to keep a sharp lookout as they go along."

"We must take the masts out of her," Francis said. "I don't know how it
is to be done, but the captain will know, and if that can't be managed
we must cut them down. There is no difficulty about that.

"Now we will make our way back again, it will be dark in a couple of
hours' time. Everything depends upon whether they have towed the Lido
out and anchored her among their galleys. If they have, I fear the
scheme is impracticable, but if they let her remain where she is lying,
we might get her out without being noticed, for there is no moon."

As they began to ascend the cliff, Francis stopped suddenly.

"We should never be able to find this place in the dark," he said.

"Giuseppi, you must stay here. Do you collect a quantity of dried
sticks, and lay them in readiness at that point opposite the ledge. We
will show a light as we come along, that is if we succeed in getting
the Lido out, and directly you see it set fire to the sticks. The fire
will be a guide to us as to the position of the rocks."

"Perhaps I had better take the sticks off to the ledge, Messer
Francisco, and light my fire on the rock at the end. The water is deep
a few yards out, as we found, so you could sail close to the fire and
then round behind the rocks without danger."

"That will be the best way, Giuseppi; but how will you get the sticks
off without wetting them?"

"I will make a bundle three or four times as big as I want," Giuseppi
said, "and then half of them will be dry. I can put my clothes on them
and the tinder. I will answer for the fire, but I would rather have
been with you in your adventure."

"There will be no danger there, Giuseppi, so you need not be anxious
about us. It has to be done quietly and secretly, and there will be no
fighting. These Genoese are too strong to think of that; and if we are
discovered in the attempt, or as we make off, we shall take to our
boats again and row straight on shore.

"Keep a sharp lookout for us, we will hoist two lights, one above the
other, to prevent your mistaking any fishing boat which may be coming
along for us.

"Now, Matteo, for a climb. We have no time to lose."

The two lads climbed to the top of the cliff, and then started at a
brisk pace along the top, and in half an hour reached the wood.

"We were beginning to wonder what had become of you," the captain said
as they joined him.

"We have been settling how to carry off the Lido," Francis said, "and
have arranged everything."

The captain laughed.

"If we could fly with her through the air, you might get her away, but
I see no other way. I have been thinking it over since you left. With
luck we might get her safely out of the bay, but the galleys row four
feet to our one, and as they would be sure to send some one way, and
some the other, along the coast; they would pick us up again in two or
three hours after daylight."

"Nevertheless we have settled it, captain. We have found a place where
we can hide her, and the Genoese might search the coast for a month
without finding her."

"If that be so it is possible," the captain said eagerly, "and you may
be sure you will not find us backward in doing our best."

Francis described the nature and position of the rock which would
afford a shelter, and the means by which they had ascertained that
there was plenty of water for the Lido behind it.

"It seems plausible," the captain said when he had concluded, "and I am
quite ready to make the attempt, if, in your opinion, it can be done.
You are Messer Polani's representative, and for my own sake as well as
his, I would do anything which promises a chance of recapturing the
ship. Besides, as you say, there is little danger in it, for we can
take to the boats and make for the shore if discovered.

"The Lido is still lying where we anchored her. They can have no fear
of a recapture, for they would know that they could overtake us easily
enough. I daresay they intend to sail tomorrow morning, and did not
think it worth the trouble to get up the anchor and tow her out to
where they are lying."

The details of the expedition were now discussed and arranged, and the
men told off to their various duties, and at eleven o'clock at night,
when all in the town were fast asleep, the party quitted the bivouac
and marched down again to the port.



Chapter 10: Recaptured.


No one was astir in the streets as the band marched through, and they
reached the port without encountering a single person. A small boat was
chosen, and in this the captain, Francis, Matteo, and two of the
strongest and most powerful of the sailors embarked. It was thought
unlikely that, lying, as the Lido did, within a couple of hundred yards
of the Genoese galleys, any very vigilant watch would be kept, and not
more than two sailors would probably be on deck.

The dark mass of the ship could just be made out from the shore, and
when all was ready the two sailors with their oars pushed her off with
all their strength, and then stood perfectly quiet.

The impetus was sufficient. The boat moved so slowly through the water,
indeed, before they reached the ship, that Francis thought it would be
necessary for the men to row a stroke or two; but the boat still moved
on, until at last it touched the side of the ship. All had removed
their boots before starting, and they now clambered up the sides
without making the slightest noise.

Once on deck they stood perfectly quiet, listening. Presently they
heard a murmur of voices on the other side of the vessel. Very quietly
they crept towards the sound, and at length made out two figures
leaning over the bulwarks, talking.

Each man's work had been settled, and there was no confusion. One of
the sailors and Francis stole towards one of the men, while the other
and Matteo approached the second. The captain stood with his sword
bared, in readiness to cut down any other man who might be on deck.

The Genoese did not look round. Francis gave the word, "Now," and in a
moment the two sailors seized them from behind with a grasp of iron,
while the lads at the same moment passed bandages tightly round their
mouths, and before the Genoese were quite aware of what had happened,
they were lying, bound hand and foot, gagged upon the deck.

The party now made a search, but found no one else about. They then
secured and fastened down the hatch of the forecastle by coiling ropes
upon it, quietly opened the door leading to the poop cabins, and
entering, seized and bound two officers sleeping there without the
slightest noise or resistance.

Then they took a light from the cabin and showed it towards the shore.
At the signal the sailors, who had already taken their places in the
boats, at once rowed out to the vessel. When all were on board, the
boats were fastened alongside, in case it should be necessary to
abandon the ship again.

The cable was then cut. One of the sailors had already ascended the
shrouds, and poured oil over the blocks through which the halyards ran,
so that the sails should ascend noiselessly. The wind was very light,
scarcely enough to belly out the sails, but it was fortunately in the
right direction, and the Lido began to steal through the water.

Not a word had been spoken since they first started, but Francis now
whispered to the captain, "I think I can make out the Genoese ships."

"So can I," the captain said, "but they cannot see us. They are against
the skyline, while we are in the shadow of the shore. So far all is
perfectly safe, and if this breath of wind will but carry us far enough
out to be able to use our oars without their hearing us, we shall
certainly get away."

The progress of the Lido was so slow, that it was nearly an hour before
the captain said that he thought they were now fairly round the point
of the bay, and could use their oars.

"We had better tow," he said; "the sweeps make a noise that can be
heard miles away on a calm night like this, whereas, if they are
careful, men in a boat can row almost noiselessly."

Ten of the men accordingly took their places in one of the large boats
in which they had come on board, and a rope being passed down to them
they began rowing at the head of the ship.

"We may as well lower the sails," the captain said, "they are doing no
good now. Indeed I think it is a current rather than the wind that has
helped us so far."

"I will put two lanterns over the side," Francis said. "We may have
gone farther than we think, and it would never do to pass our hiding
place."

The men in the boat rowed vigorously, but it was slow work towing the
deeply-laden vessel. At last, however, a light burst suddenly up from
the shore.

"There is Giuseppi," Francis exclaimed. "We are further out than we
thought we were. He must be fully a mile and a half away."

The men in the boat were told to row direct for the light, and some of
the sweeps were got out and helped the vessel through the water. As
they drew near, they could make out Giuseppi throwing fresh wood on the
fire.

"You can steer within ten yards of where he is standing, captain, and
directly you are abreast of him, put your helm hard to port. You had
better get the sweeps in now, the less way she has on her the better."

"All well?" Giuseppi hailed, as they came within fifty yards of it.

"All well, Giuseppi! There has been no fighting, so you have lost
nothing. Put all your wood on the fire, we want as much light as we can
to get in."

The flames shot up high, and the captain had no difficulty in rounding
the corner of the rocks, and bringing up his vessel behind them. A
kedge was dropped, and the men in the boat rowed to the end of the
rocks, and brought off Giuseppi.

"I was beginning to be anxious," the lad said, as he joined them on
deck, "and when I first saw your signal I took you for a fishing boat.
You were so far off that the two lights looked like one, but by dint of
gazing I made them out at last, and then lit the fire."

"Now, captain," Francis said, "we have a good deal to do before
morning, for I take it it will be no easy matter to get out the masts."

"There would be no difficulty in getting the masts out," the captain
answered. "I have only to knock out the wedges, and loosen the stays,
and get up a tripod made of three spars to lift them out; but I don't
see how they are to be got in again."

"How is that, captain? I should have thought it no more difficult to
get a mast in than to take it out."

"Nor would it be so, under ordinary circumstances," the captain
replied; "but you see, our hold is full of grain, and as the mast comes
out, the hole it leaves will fill up, and there will be no getting it
down again to step it on the keel without discharging the cargo."

"Yes, I see that, captain. Then you think we had better cut down the
masts; but in that case how are we to raise them?"

"We will cut them off about six feet above the deck, Messer Francisco;
then when we want to set sail again, we have only to rear the masts up
by the side of the stumps, and lash them securely. Of course they will
be six feet shorter than before, but that is of little consequence."

"Then so let it be," Francis said, "the sooner we begin the better."

Just at this moment there was a violent knocking against the hatch of
the forecastle.

"I had forgotten all about the sailors," the captain said, laughing. "I
suppose the men who were to relieve the watch have woke up, and finding
they could not get out, have aroused their comrades."

"Shall we leave them there, or take them out and bind them?" Matteo
asked.

"We had better have them up," the captain said. "I don't suppose there
are more than twenty of them, and it would be best to bind them, and
put them down in the hold with the corn, otherwise they may manage to
break out when we are not expecting it, and might give us some
trouble."

Accordingly, the sailors gathered round the hatch. The ropes were then
removed, and the hatch taken off.

"What fooling are you up to?" one of the Genoese exclaimed, angrily, as
they rushed up on deck. "You have nearly stifled us down below putting
on the hatch and fastening it."

He stopped abruptly as, on gaining the deck, he saw a crowd of armed
figures round him, for a lantern had been placed so as to throw a light
upon the spot.

"You are prisoners," the captain said. "It is useless to attempt
resistance."

"Help, help, treachery!" one of the Genoese shouted at the top of his
voice.

"It is useless for you to shout," the captain said, "you are miles away
from your fleet. Now, do you surrender, or are we to attack you?"

Taken by surprise, and unarmed, the Genoese who had gained the deck
sullenly replied that they surrendered. They were bound and led away,
and the others ordered to come up on deck. There were found to be
four-and-twenty in all, and these were soon laid side by side on the
grain in the hold, the hatch being left off to give them air. The masts
were then cut through, and were with some trouble lowered to the deck.

"There is nothing more to be done now," the captain said, "and I think
we can all safely turn in till morning."

He then ordered the under officer to place two men on watch on the
rocks, and two men on deck, two men to stand as sentinels over the
prisoners, and the rest to lie down. He directed that he should be
roused at the earliest streak of daylight.

The lads were soon fast asleep, and could hardly believe that the night
was over, when Giuseppi awakened them with the news that day was
breaking. They were soon on deck, and found that the crew were already
astir. The sentinels on the rock were at once ordered to lie down, so
that they could command a view of the sea, without exposing themselves
to sight. The boats were drawn up alongside, and everything put in
readiness for instant debarkation, and then the party waited for the
appearance of the Genoese galleys.

"They will be along in less than an hour," the captain said. "It is
light enough now for the watch to have discovered that the Lido is
missing, and it will not be many minutes before they are under way.
They will calculate that we can have but five or six hours' start at
the utmost, and that three hours' rowing will bring them up to us."

"I have no fear whatever of their discovering us as they go along,"
Francis said. "The only fear is that, after rowing for three or four
hours and seeing no sign of us, they will guess that we are hidden
somewhere under the cliffs, and will come back along the shore,
searching every bay."

"There is a chance of that," the captain agreed, "but I should think
only a chance. When the party who come this way find they do not
overtake us, they will suppose that we have sailed to the west, and
that on their return they will find us in the hands of their comrades;
and when these also come back empty handed they will conclude that we
have sailed straight out to sea. Of course they may have sent a galley
southward also, but will conclude that that has somehow missed us when
it returns without news. I hardly think that the idea, that we may be
hidden so close to them, will enter their minds, and the only fear I
entertain is that some peasant may happen to come to the edge of the
cliff and see us lying here, and may take the news back to Girgenti."

"Yes, there is certainly a danger of that," Francis said. "I think,
captain, it would be the best plan to land twenty men at once. Giuseppi
will show them the way up the cliff, and then they must take their
station, at short distances apart, along the edge of the cliff, from
point to point of this little bay, with orders to seize any one who may
approach and bring him down here. They must, of course, be told to lie
down, as a line of sentries along the top of the cliff might attract
the attention of somebody on the galleys, and lead to a search."
