his greed and cruelty that they nicknamed him the "Great Wolf of North
Carolina."

At last many of the settlers vowed that they would not give the
governor another penny. When he sent tax-collectors to get money,
they drove them back, and they flogged one of the governor's friends
with a rawhide till he had to run for his life.

The governor then collected some soldiers and marched against the
people in the west. A battle was fought near the Alamance River. The
governor had the most men and had cannon besides, so he gained the
day. He took seven of the people prisoners and hanged them. They all
died bravely, as men do who die for liberty.

[Footnote 1: Sevier (Se-veer'): he was born in Rockingham County,
Virginia.]

[Footnote 2: Alamance River (Al'a-mance): see map in paragraph 150.]

[Footnote 3: Robertson was born in Brunswick County, Virginia; he
emigrated to North Carolina and settled in the neighborhood of
Raleigh. See map in paragraph 150.]


157. James Robertson leaves North Carolina and goes west.--After the
battle of Alamance James Robertson and his family made up their minds
that they would not live any longer where Governor Tryon ruled. They
resolved to go across the mountains into the western wilderness.
Sixteen other families joined Robertson's and went with them. It was
a long, hard journey; for they had to climb rocks and find their way
through deep, tangled woods. The men went ahead with their axes and
their guns; then the older children followed, driving the cows; last
of all came the women with the little children, with beds, pots, and
kettles packed on the backs of horses.

[Illustration: ROBERTSON WITH HIS PARTY CROSSING THE MOUNTAINS
ON THEIR WAY TO TENNESSEE.]


158. The emigrants settle on the Watauga River[4] in
Tennessee.--When the little party had crossed the mountains into
what is now the state of Tennessee, they found a delightful valley.
Through this valley there ran a stream of clear sparkling water
called the Watauga River; the air of the valley was sweet with the
smell of wild crab-apples.

On the banks of that stream the emigrants built their new homes. Their
houses were simply rough log huts, but they were clean and
comfortable. When the settlers put up these cabins, they chopped down
every tree near them which was big enough for an Indian to hide behind.
They knew that they might have to fight the savages; but they had
rather do that than be robbed by tax-collectors. In the wilderness
Governor Tryon could not reach them--they were free; free as the deer
and the squirrels were: that one thought made them contented and
happy.

[Footnote 4: Watauga River (Wa-taw'ga): see map in paragraph 150.]


159. John Sevier goes to settle at Watauga; what he and Robertson
did.--The year after this little settlement was made John Sevier went
from Virginia to Watauga, as it was called. He and Robertson soon
became fast friends--for one brave man can always see something to
respect and like in another brave man. Robertson and Sevier hunted
together and worked together.

After a while they called a meeting of the settlers and agreed on
some excellent laws, so that everything in the log village might be
done decently and in order; for although these people lived in the
woods, they had no notion of living like savages or wild beasts. In
course of time President Washington made James Robertson General
Robertson, in honor of what he had done for his country.

Out of this settlement on the Watauga River grew the state of
Tennessee. A monument in honor of John Sevier stands in Nashville,
a city founded by his friend Robertson. Sevier became the first
governor of the new state.

[Illustration: THE SEVIER MONUMENT.]


160. Summary.--James Robertson, of North Carolina, and John Sevier,
of Virginia, emigrated across the mountains to the western
wilderness. They settled on the Watauga River, and that settlement,
with others made later, grew into the state of Tennessee, of which
John Sevier became the first governor.


What friend did Boone have in North Carolina? Tell about Governor
Tryon. What happened on the Alamance River? Where did Robertson and
others go? Where did they settle? Why did they like to be there? Tell
about John Sevier. What did he and Robertson do? What did Washington
do for Robertson? What state grew out of the Watauga settlement? What
did Sevier become? Where is his monument?




GENERAL GEORGE ROGERS CLARK
(1752-1818).


161. The British in the west; their forts; hiring Indians to fight
the settlers.--While Washington was fighting the battles of the
Revolution in the east, the British in the west were not sitting still.
They had a number of forts in the Wilderness,[1] as that part of the
country was then called. One of these forts was at Detroit,[2] in
what is now Michigan; another was at Vincennes,[3] in what is now
Indiana; a third fort was at Kaskaskia,[4] in what is now Illinois.

[Illustration: Map showing the Forts at Detroit, Kaskaskia, and
Vincennes, with the line of Clark's march.]

Colonel Hamilton, the British commander at Detroit, was determined
to drive the American settlers out of the west. In the beginning of
the Revolution the Americans resolved to hire the Indians to fight
for them, but the British found that they could hire them better than
we could, and so they got their help. The savages did their work in
a terribly cruel way. Generally they did not come out and do battle
openly, but they crept up secretly, by night, and attacked the
farmers' homes. They killed and scalped the settlers in the west,
burned their log cabins, and carried off the women and children
prisoners. The greater part of the people in England hated this sort
of war. They begged the king not to hire the Indians to do these
horrible deeds of murder and destruction. George the Third was not
a bad-hearted man; but he was very set in his way, and he had fully
made up his mind to conquer the "American rebels," as he called them,
even if he had to get the savages to help him do it.

[Footnote 1: See map in paragraph 187.]

[Footnote 2: Detroit (De-troit'): for these forts see map in this
paragraph.]

[Footnote 3: Vincennes (Vin-senz').]

[Footnote 4: Kaskaskia (Kas-kas'ki-a).]


162. George Rogers Clark gets help from Virginia and starts to attack
Fort Kaskaskia.--Daniel Boone had a friend in Virginia named George
Rogers Clark,[5] who believed that he could take the British forts
in the west and drive out the British from all that part of the country.
Virginia then owned most of the Wilderness. For this reason Clark
went to Patrick Henry, governor of Virginia, and asked for help. The
governor liked the plan, and let Clark have money to hire men to go
with him and try to take Fort Kaskaskia to begin with.

Clark started in the spring of 1778 with about a hundred and fifty
men. They built boats just above Pittsburg[6] and floated down the
Ohio River, a distance of over nine hundred miles. Then they landed
in what is now Illinois, and set out for Fort Kaskaskia.[7]

[Footnote 5: George Rogers Clark was born near Monticello, Virginia.
See map in paragraph 140.]

[Footnote 6: Pittsburg: see map in paragraph 140.]

[Footnote 7: Fort Kaskaskia: see map in paragraph 161.]


163. The march to Fort Kaskaskia; how a dance ended.--It was a hundred
miles to the fort, and half of the way the men had to find their way
through thick woods, full of underbrush, briers, and vines. The
British, thinking the fort perfectly safe from attack, had left it
in the care of a French officer. Clark and his band reached Kaskaskia
at night. They found no one to stop them. The soldiers in the fort
were having a dance, and the Americans could hear the merry music
of a violin and the laughing voices of girls.

Clark left his men just outside the fort, and, finding a door open,
he walked in. He reached the room where the fun was going on, and
stopping there, he stood leaning against the door-post, looking on.
The room was lighted with torches; the light of one of the torches
happened to fall full on Clark's face; an Indian sitting on the floor
caught sight of him; he sprang to his feet and gave a terrific
war-whoop. The dancers stopped as though they had been shot; the
women screamed; the men ran to the door to get their guns. Clark did
not move, but said quietly, "Go on; only remember you are dancing
now under Virginia, and not under Great Britain." The next moment
the Americans rushed in, and Clark and his "Long Knives," as the
Indians called his men, had full possession of the fort.

[Illustration: CLARK LOOKING ON AT THE DANCE.]


164. How Fort Vincennes was taken; how the British got it back again;
what Francis Vigo[8] did.--Clark wanted next to march against Fort
Vincennes, but he had not men enough. There was a French Catholic
priest[9] at Kaskaskia, and Clark's kindness to him had made him our
friend. He said, I will go to Vincennes for you, and I will tell the
French, who hold the fort for the British, that the Americans are
their real friends, and that in this war they are in the right. He
went; the French listened to him, then hauled down the British flag
and ran up the American flag in its place.

The next year the British, led by Colonel Hamilton of Detroit, got
the fort back again. When Clark heard of it he said, "Either I must
take Hamilton, or Hamilton will take me." Just then Francis Vigo,
a trader at St. Louis, came to see Clark at Kaskaskia. Hamilton had
held Vigo as a prisoner, so he knew all about Fort Vincennes. Vigo
said to Clark, "Hamilton has only about eighty soldiers; you can take
the fort, and I will lend you all the money you need to pay your men
what you owe them."

[Footnote 8: Vigo (Vee-go).]

[Footnote 9: The priest was Father Gibault (Zhe-bo').]


165. Clark's march to Fort Vincennes; the "Drowned Lands."--Clark,
with about two hundred men, started for Vincennes. The distance was
nearly a hundred and fifty miles. The first week everything went on
pretty well. It was in the month of February, the weather was cold,
and it rained a good deal, but the men did not mind that. They would
get wet through during the day; but at night they built roaring log
fires, gathered round them, roasted their buffalo meat or venison,
smoked their pipes, told jolly stories, and sang jolly songs.

But the next week they got to a branch of the Wabash River.[10] Then
they found that the constant rains had raised the streams so that
they had overflowed their banks; the whole country was under water
three or four feet deep. This flooded country was called the "Drowned
Lands": before Clark and his men had crossed them they were nearly
drowned themselves.

[Footnote 10: See map in paragraph 161.]


166. Wading on to victory.--For about a week the Americans had to
wade in ice-cold water, sometimes waist deep, sometimes nearly up
to their chins. While wading, the men were obliged to hold their guns
and powder-horns above their heads to keep them dry. Now and then
a man would stub his toe against a root or a stone and would go
sprawling headfirst into the water. When he came up, puffing and
blowing from such a dive, he was lucky if he still had his gun. For
two days no one could get anything to eat; but hungry, wet, and cold,
they kept moving slowly on.

[Illustration: MEN WADING WITH GUNS OVER THEIR HEADS.]

The last part of the march was the worst of all. They were now near
the fort, but they still had to wade through a sheet of water four
miles across. Clark took the lead and plunged in. The rest, shivering,
followed. A few looked as though their strength and courage had given
out. Clark saw this, and calling to Captain Bowman,--one of the
bravest of his officers,--he ordered him to kill the first man who
refused to go forward.

At last, with numbed hands and chattering teeth, all got across, but
some of them were so weak and blue with cold that they could not take
another step, but fell flat on their faces in the mud. These men were
so nearly dead that no fire seemed to warm them. Clark ordered two
strong men to lift each of these poor fellows up, hold him between
them by the arms, and run him up and down until he began to get warm.
By doing this he saved every one.


167. Clark takes the fort; what we got by his victory; his
grave.--After a long and desperate fight Clark took Fort Vincennes
and hoisted the Stars and Stripes over it in triumph. The British
never got it back again. Most of the Indians were now glad to make
peace, and to promise to behave themselves.

By Clark's victory the Americans got possession of the whole western
wilderness up to Detroit. When the Revolutionary War came to an end,
the British did not want to give us any part of America beyond the
thirteen states on the Atlantic coast. But we said, The whole west,
clear to the Mississippi, is ours; we fought for it; we took it; we
hoisted our flag over its forts, and _we mean to keep it_. We did
keep it.

There is a grass-grown grave in a burial-ground in Louisville,
Kentucky, which has a small headstone marked with the letters G. R.
C., and nothing more; that is the grave of General George Rogers Clark,
the man who did more than any one else to get the west for us--or
what was called the west a hundred years ago.

[Illustration: CLARK'S GRAVE.]


168. Summary.--During the Revolutionary War George Rogers Clark of
Virginia, with a small number of men, captured Fort Kaskaskia in
Illinois, and Fort Vincennes in Indiana. Clark drove out the British
from that part of the country, and when peace was made, we kept the
west--that is, the country as far as the Mississippi River--as part
of the United States. Had it not been for him and his brave men, we
might not have got it.


What did the British have in the west? Where were three of those
forts? Who hired the Indians to fight? How did they fight? What did
most of the people in England think about this? What is said of George
the Third? What friend did Daniel Boone have in Virginia? What did
Clark undertake to do? Tell how he went down the Ohio. Tell how he
marched on Fort Kaskaskia. What happened when he got there? What did
Clark say to the people in the fort? How was Fort Vincennes taken?
What did the British do the next year? Tell about Francis Vigo. What
did Clark and his men start to do? How far off was Fort Vincennes?
Tell about the first part of the march. What lands did they come to?
Tell how the men waded. How did Clark save the lives of some of the
men? Did Clark take the fort? What did the Americans get possession
of by this victory? What happened at the end of the Revolutionary
War? What did we say? What is said of the grave at Louisville,
Kentucky? What did Clark get for us?




GENERAL RUFUS PUTNAM
(1738-1824).


169. What General Putnam did for Washington, and what the British
said of Putnam's work.--When the British had possession of Boston
in the time of the Revolution, Washington asked Rufus Putnam,[1] who
was a great builder of forts, to help him drive them out. Putnam set
to work, one dark, stormy night, and built a fort on some high land[2]
overlooking Boston Harbor.

[Illustration: PUTNAM'S FORT. General Washington looking at the
