Turning in confusion to the next, I was surprised to see before me the
lady whose lodging I had invaded in my search for Mademoiselle de la
Vire--she, I mean, who, having picked up the velvet; knot, had dropped
it so providentially where Simon Fleix found it. She looked at me
blushing and laughing, and the young gentleman, who had done her errand,
presenting me by name, she asked me, while the others listened, whether
I had found my mistress.

Before I could answer, the lady to whom I had first addressed myself
interposed. 'Stop, sir!' she cried. What is this--a tale, a jest, a
game, or a forfeit?'

'An adventure, madam,' I answered, bowing low.

'Of gallantry, I'll be bound,' she exclaimed. 'Fie, Madame de Bruhl, and
you but six months married!'

Madame de Bruhl protested, laughing, that she had no more to do with it
than Mercury. 'At the worst,' she said, 'I carried the POULETS! But I
can assure you, duchess, this gentleman should be able to tell us a very
fine story, if he would.'

The duchess and all the other ladies clapping their hands at this, and
crying out that the story must and should be told, I found myself in
a prodigious quandary; and one wherein my wits derived as little
assistance as possible from the bright eyes and saucy looks which
environed me. Moreover, the commotion attracting other listeners, I
found my position, while I tried to extricate myself, growing each
moment worse, so that I began to fear that as I had little imagination
I should perforce have to tell the truth. The mere thought of this
threw me into a cold perspiration, lest I should let slip something of
consequence, and prove myself unworthy of the trust which M. de Rosny
had reposed in me.

At the moment when, despairing of extricating myself, I was stooping
over Madame de Bruhl begging her to assist me, I heard, amid the babel
of laughter and raillery which surrounded me--certain of the courtiers
having already formed hands in a circle and sworn I should not depart
without satisfying the ladies--a voice which struck a chord in my
memory. I turned to see who the speaker was, and encountered no other
than M. de Bruhl himself; who, with a flushed and angry face, was
listening to the explanation which a friend was pouring into his ear.
Standing at the moment with my knee on Madame de Bruhl's stool, and
remembering very well the meeting on the stairs, I conceived in a flash
that the man was jealous; but whether he had yet heard my name, or had
any clew to link me with the person who had rescued Mademoiselle de la
Vire from his clutches, I could not tell. Nevertheless his presence led
my thoughts into a new channel. The determination to punish him began to
take form in my mind, and very quickly I regained my composure. Still I
was for giving him one chance. Accordingly I stooped once more to Madame
de Bruhl's ear, and begged her to spare me the embarrassment of telling
my tale. But then, finding her pitiless, as I expected, and the rest of
the company growing more and more insistent, I hardened my heart to go
through with the fantastic notion which had occurred to me.

Indicating by a gesture that I was prepared to obey, and the duchess
crying for a hearing, this was presently obtained, the sudden silence
adding the king himself to my audience. 'What is it?' he asked, coming
up effusively, with a lap-dog in his arms. 'A new scandal, eh?'

'No, sire, a new tale-teller,' the duchess answered pertly. 'If your
Majesty will sit, we shall hear him the sooner.'

He pinched her ear and sat down in the chair which a page presented.
'What! is it Rambouillet's GRISON again?' he said with some surprise.
'Well, fire away, man. But who brought you forward as a Rabelais?'

There was a general cry of 'Madame de Bruhl!' whereat that lady shook
her fair hair, about her face, and cried out for someone to bring her a
mask.

'Ha, I see!' said the king drily, looking pointedly at M. de Bruhl, who
was as black as thunder. 'But go on, man.'

The king's advent, by affording me a brief respite, had enabled me to
collect my thoughts, and, disregarding the ribald interruptions, which
at first were frequent, I began as follows: 'I am no Rabelais, sire,' I
said, 'but droll things happen to the most unlikely. Once upon a time it
was the fortune of a certain swain, whom I will call Dromio, to arrive
in a town not a hundred miles from Blois, having in his company a nymph
of great beauty, who had been entrusted to his care by her parents. He
had not more than lodged her in his apartments, however, before she
was decoyed away by a trick, and borne off against her will by a young
gallant, who had seen her and been smitten by her charms. Dromio,
returning, and finding his mistress gone, gave way to the most poignant
grief. He ran up and down the city, seeking her in every place, and
filling all places with his lamentations; but for a time in vain, until
chance led him to a certain street, where, in an almost incredible
manner, he found a clew to her by discovering underfoot a knot of
velvet, bearing Phyllida's name wrought on it in delicate needlework,
with the words, "A moi!"'

'Sanctus!' cried the king, amid a general murmur of surprise, 'that
is well devised! Proceed, sir. Go on like that, and we will make your
twenty men twenty-five.'

'Dromio,' I continued, 'at sight of this trifle experienced the most
diverse emotions, for while he possessed in it a clew to his mistress's
fate, he had still to use it so as to discover the place whither she had
been hurried. It occurred to him at last to begin his search with the
house before which the knot had lain. Ascending accordingly to the
second-floor, he found there a fair lady reclining on a couch, who
started up in affright at his appearance. He hastened to reassure
her, and to explain the purpose of his coming, and learned after a
conversation with which I will not trouble your Majesty, though it
was sufficiently diverting, that the lady had found the velvet knot in
another part of the town, and had herself dropped it again in front of
her own house.'

'Pourquoi?' the king asked, interrupting me.

'The swain, sire,' I answered, 'was too much taken up with his own
troubles to bear that in mind, even if he learned it. But this delicacy
did not save him from misconception, for as he descended from the lady's
apartment he met her husband on the stairs.'

'Good!' the king exclaimed, rubbing his hands in glee. 'The husband!'
And under cover of the gibe and the courtly laugh which followed it M.
de Bruhl's start of surprise passed unnoticed save by me.

'The husband,' I resumed, 'seeing a stranger descending his staircase,
was for stopping him and learning the reason of his presence; But
Dromio, whose mind was with Phyllida, refused to stop, and, evading his
questions, hurried to the part of the town where the lady had told him
she found the velvet knot. Here, sire, at the corner of a lane running
between garden-walls, he found a great house, barred and gloomy, and
well adapted to the abductor's purpose. Moreover, scanning it on every
side, he presently discovered, tied about the bars of an upper window,
a knot of white linen, the very counterpart of that velvet one which he
bore in his breast. Thus he knew that the nymph was imprisoned in that
room!'

'I will make it twenty-five, as I am a good Churchman!' his Majesty
exclaimed, dropping the little dog he was nursing into the duchess's
lap, and taking out his comfit-box. 'Rambouillet,' he added languidly,
'your friend is a treasure!'

I bowed my acknowledgments, and took occasion as I did so to step a
pace aside, so as to command a view of Madame de Bruhl, as well as her
husband. Hitherto madame, willing to be accounted a part in so pretty
a romance, and ready enough also, unless I was mistaken, to cause her
husband a little mild jealousy, had listened to the story with a certain
sly demureness. But this I foresaw would not last long; and I felt
something like compunction as the moment for striking the blow
approached. But I had now no choice. 'The best is yet to come, sire,' I
went on, 'as I think you will acknowledge in a moment. Dromio, though
he had discovered his mistress, was still in the depths of despair. He
wandered round and round the house, seeking ingress and finding none,
until at length, sunset approaching, and darkness redoubling his fears
for the nymph, fortune took pity on him. As he stood in front of the
house he saw the abductor come out, lighted by two servants. Judge of
his surprise, sire,' I continued, looking round and speaking slowly, to
give full effect to my words, 'when he recognised in him no other than
the husband of the lady who, by picking up and again dropping the velvet
knot, had contributed so much to the success of his search!'

'Ha! these husbands!' cried the king. And slapping his knee in an
ecstasy at his own acuteness, he laughed in his seat till he rolled
again. 'These husbands! Did I not say so?'

The whole Court gave way to like applause, and clapped their hands as
well, so that few save those who stood nearest took notice of Madame de
Bruhl's faint cry, and still fewer understood why she rose up suddenly
from her stool and stood gazing at her husband with burning cheeks and
clenched hands. She took no heed of me, much less of the laughing crowd
round her, but looked only at him with her soul in her eyes. He, after
uttering one hoarse curse, seemed to have no thought for any but me. To
have the knowledge that his own wife had baulked him brought home to him
in this mocking fashion, to find how little a thing had tripped him that
day, to learn how blindly he had played into the hands of fate, above
all to be exposed at once to his wife's resentment and the ridicule of
the Court--for he could not be sure that I should not the next moment
disclose his name--all so wrought on him that for a moment I thought he
would strike me in the presence.

His rage, indeed, did what I had not meant to do. For the king, catching
sight of his face, and remembering that Madame de Bruhl had elicited the
story, screamed suddenly, 'Haro!' and pointed ruthlessly at him with his
finger. After that I had no need to speak, the story leaping from eye to
eye, and every eye settling on Bruhl, who sought in vain to compose his
features. Madame, who surpassed him, as women commonly do surpass men,
in self-control, was the first to recover herself, and sitting down as
quickly as she had risen, confronted alike her husband and her rivals
with a pale smile.

For a moment curiosity and excitement kept all breathless, the eye
alone busy. Then the king laughed mischievously. 'Come, M. de Bruhl,' he
cried, 'perhaps you will finish the tale for us?' And he threw himself
back in his chair, a sneer on his lips.

'Or why not Madame de Bruhl?' said the duchess, with her head on one
side and her eyes glittering over her fan. 'Madame would, I am sure,
tell it so well.'

But madame only shook her head, smiling always that forced smile. For
Bruhl himself, glaring from face to face like a bull about to charge,
I have never seen a man more out of countenance, or more completely
brought to bay. His discomposure, exposed as he was to the ridicule
of all present, was such that the presence in which he stood scarcely
hindered him from some violent attack; and his eyes, which had wandered
from me at the king's word, presently returning to me again, he so far
forgot himself as to raise his hand furiously, uttering at the same time
a savage oath.

The king cried out angrily, 'Have a care, sir!' But Bruhl only heeded
this so far as to thrust aside those who stood round him and push his
way hurriedly through the circle.

'Arnidieu!' cried the king, when he was gone. 'This is fine conduct! I
have half a mind to send after him and have him put where his hot blood
would cool a little. Or--'

He stopped abruptly, his eyes resting on me. The relative positions of
Bruhl and myself as the agents of Rosny and Turenne occurred to him for
the first time, I think, and suggested the idea, perhaps, that I had
laid a trap for him, and that he had fallen into it. At any rate his
face grew darker and darker, and at last, 'A nice kettle of fish this is
you have prepared for us, sir!' he muttered, gazing at me gloomily.

The sudden change in his humour took even courtiers by surprise. Faces
a moment before broad with smiles grew long again. The less important
personages looked uncomfortably at one another, and with one accord
frowned on me. 'If your Majesty would please to hear the end of the
story at another time?' I suggested humbly, beginning to wish with all
my heart that I had never said a word.

'Chut!' he answered, rising, his face still betraying his perturbation,
'Well, be it so. For the present you may go, sir. Duchess, give me
Zizi, and come to my closet. I want you to see my puppies. Retz, my good
friend, do you come too. I have something to say to you. Gentlemen, you
need not wait. It is likely I shall be late.'

And, with the utmost abruptness, he broke up the circle.



CHAPTER XVII. THE JACOBIN MONK.

Had I needed any reminder of the uncertainty of Court favour, or an
instance whence I might learn the lesson of modesty, and so stand in
less danger of presuming on my new and precarious prosperity, I had it
in this episode, and in the demeanour of the company round me. On the
circle breaking up in confusion, I found myself the centre of general
regard, but regard of so dubious a character, the persons who would have
been the first to compliment me had the king retired earlier, standing
farthest aloof now, that I felt myself rather insulted than honoured by
it. One or two, indeed, of the more cautious spirits did approach me;
but it was with the air of men providing against a danger particularly
remote, their half-hearted speeches serving only to fix them in my
memory as belonging to a class, especially abhorrent to me--the class, I
mean, of those who would run at once with the hare and the hounds.

I was rejoiced to find that on one person, and that the one whose
disposition towards me was, next to the king's, of first importance,
this episode had produced a different impression, Feeling, as I made for
the door, a touch on my arm, I turned to find M. de Rambouillet at my
elbow, regarding me with a glance of mingled esteem and amusement; in
fine, with a very different look from that which had been my welcome
earlier in the evening. I was driven to suppose that he was too great a
man, or too sure of his favour with the king, to be swayed by the
petty motives which actuated the Court generally, for he laid his hand
familiarly on my shoulder, and walked on beside me.

'Well my friend,' he said,' you have distinguished yourself finely! I
do not know that I ever remember a pretty woman making more stir in one
evening. But if you are wise you will not go home alone to-night.'

'I have my sword, M. le Marquis,' I answered, somewhat proudly. 'Which
will avail you little against a knife in the back!' he retorted drily.
'What attendance have you?'

'My equerry, Simon Fleix, is on the stairs.'

'Good, so far, but not enough,' he replied, as we reached the head of
the staircase. 'You had better come home with me now, and two or three
of my fellows shall go on to your lodging with you. Do you know, my
friend,' he continued, looking at me keenly, 'you are either a very
clever or a very foolish man?'

I made answer modestly. 'Neither the one, I fear, nor the other, I hope
sir,' I said.

'Well, you have done a very pertinent thing,' he replied, 'for good or
evil. You have let the enemy know what he has to expect, and he is not
one, I warn you, to be despised. But whether you have been very wise or
very foolish in declaring open war remains to be seen.'

'A week will show,' I answered.

He turned and looked at me. 'You take it coolly,' he said.

'I have been knocking about the world for forty years, marquis,' I
rejoined.

He muttered something about Rosny having a good eye, and then stopped to
adjust his cloak. We were by this time in the street. Making me go hand
in hand with him, he requested the other gentlemen to draw their swords;
and the servants being likewise armed and numbering half a score or
more, with pikes and torches, we made up a very formidable party,
and caused, I think, more alarm as we passed through the streets to
Rambouillet's lodging than we had any reason to feel. Not that we had it
all to ourselves, for the attendance at Court that evening being large,
and the circle breaking up as I have described more abruptly than usual,
the vicinity of the castle was in a ferment, and the streets leading
from it were alive with the lights and laughter of parties similar to
our own.

At the door of the marquis's lodging I prepared to take leave of him
with many expressions of gratitude, but he would have me enter and
sit down with him to a light refection, which it was his habit to take
before retiring. Two of his gentlemen sat down with us, and a valet, who
was in his confidence, waiting on us, we made very merry over the scene
in the presence. I learned that M. de Bruhl was far from popular at
Court; but being known to possess some kind of hold over the king, and
enjoying besides a great reputation for recklessness and skill with the
sword, he had played a high part for a length of time, and attached to
himself, especially since the death of Guise, a considerable number of
followers.

'The truth is,' one of the marquis's gentlemen, who was a little heated
with wine, observed, 'there is nothing at this moment which a bold and
unscrupulous man may not win in France!'

'Nor a bold and Christian gentleman for France!' replied M. de
Rambouillet with, some asperity. 'By the way,' he continued, turning
abruptly to the servant, 'where is M. Francois?'

The valet answered that he had not returned with us from the castle. The
Marquis expressed himself annoyed at this, and I gathered, firstly, that
the missing man was his near kinsman, and, secondly, that he was also
the young spark who had been so forward to quarrel with me earlier in
the evening. Determining to refer the matter, should it become pressing,
to Rambouillet for adjustment, I took leave of him, and attended by
two of his servants, whom he kindly transferred to my service for the
present, I started towards my lodging a little before midnight.

The moon had risen while we were at supper, and its light, which
whitened the gables on one side of the street, diffused a glimmer below
sufficient to enable us to avoid the kennel. Seeing this, I bade the
men put out our torch. Frost had set in, and a keen wind was blowing,
so that we were glad to hurry on at a good pace; and the streets being
quite deserted at this late hour, or haunted only by those who had come
to dread the town marshal, we met no one and saw no lights. I fell to
thinking, for my part, of the evening I had spent searching Blois for
Mademoiselle, and of the difference between then and now. Nor did I fail
while on this track to retrace it still farther to the evening of our
arrival at my mother's; whence, as a source, such kindly and gentle
thoughts welled up in my mind as were natural, and the unfailing
affection of that gracious woman required. These, taking the place for
the moment of the anxious calculations and stern purposes which had of
late engrossed me, were only ousted by something which, happening under
my eyes, brought me violently and abruptly to myself.

This was the sudden appearance of three men, who issued one by one from
an alley a score of yards in front of us, and after pausing a second
to look back the way they had come, flitted on in single file along
the street, disappearing, as far as the darkness permitted me to judge,
round a second corner. I by no means liked their appearance, and, as a
scream and the clash of arms rang out next moment from the direction in
which they had gone, I cried lustily to Simon Fleix to follow, and ran
on, believing from the rascals' movements that they were after no good,
but that rather some honest man was like to be sore beset.

On reaching the lane down which they had plunged, however, I paused a
moment, considering not so much its black-ness, which was intense,
the eaves nearly meeting overhead, as the small chance I had of
distinguishing between attackers and attacked. But Simon and the men
overtaking me, and the sounds of a sharp tussle still continuing,
I decided to venture, and plunged into the alley, my left arm well
advanced, with the skirt of my cloak thrown over it, and my sword drawn
back. I shouted as I ran, thinking that the knaves might desist on
hearing me; and this was what happened, for as I arrived on the scene of
action--the farther end of the alley--two men took to their heels, while
of two who remained, one lay at length in the kennel, and another rose
slowly from his knees.

'You are just in time, sir,' the latter said, breathing hard, but
speaking with a preciseness which sounded familiar. 'I am obliged to
you, sir, whoever you are. The villains had got me down, and in a few
minutes more would have made my mother childless. By the way, you have
no light, have you?' he continued, lisping like a woman.

One of M. de Rambouillet's men, who had by this time come up, cried out
that it was Monsieur Francois.

'Yes, blockhead!' the young gentleman answered with the utmost coolness.
'But I asked for a light, not for my name.

'I trust you are not hurt, sir?' I said, putting up my sword.

'Scratched only,' he answered, betraying no surprise on learning who it
was had come up so opportunely; as he no doubt did learn from my voice,
for he continued with a bow, a slight price to pay for the knowledge
that M. de Marsac is as forward on the field as on the stairs.'

I bowed my acknowledgments.

'This fellow,' I said, 'is he much hurt?'

'Tut, tut! I thought I had saved the marshal all trouble, M. Francois
replied. 'Is he not dead, Gil?'

The poor wretch made answer for himself, crying out piteously, and in
a choking voice, for a priest to shrive him. At that moment Simon
Fleix returned with our torch, which he had lighted at the nearest
cross-streets, where there was a brazier, and we saw by this light that
the man was coughing up blood, and might live perhaps half an hour.

'Mordieu! That comes of thrusting too high!' M. Francois muttered,
regretfully. An inch lower, and there would have been none of this
trouble! I suppose somebody must fetch one. Gil,' he continued, 'run,
man, to the sacristy in the Rue St. Denys, and get a Father. Or--stay!
Help to lift him under the lee of the wall there. The wind cuts like a
knife here.'

The street being on the slope of the hill, the lower part of the house
nearest us stood a few feet from the ground, on wooden piles, and the
space underneath it, being enclosed at the back and sides, was used as a
cart-house. The servants moved the dying man into this rude shelter, and
I accompanied them, being unwilling to leave the young gentleman alone.
Not wishing, however, to seem to interfere, I walked to the farther end,
and sat down on the shaft of a cart, whence I idly admired the strange
aspect of the group I had left, as the glare of the torch brought now
one and now another into prominence, and sometimes shone on M. Francois'
jewelled fingers toying with his tiny moustache, and sometimes on the
writhing features of the man at his feet.

On a sudden, and before Gil had started on his errand, I saw there was
a priest among them. I had not seen him enter, nor had I any idea whence
he came. My first impression was only that here was a priest, and that
he was looking at me--not at the man craving his assistance on the
floor, or at those who stood round him, but at me, who sat away in the
shadow beyond the ring of light!

This was surprising; but a second glance explained it, for then I saw
that he was the Jacobin monk who had haunted my mother's dying hours.
And, amazed as much at this strange RENCONTRE as at the man's boldness,
I sprang up and strode forwards, forgetting, in an impulse of righteous
anger, the office he came to do. And this the more as his face, still
turned to me, seemed instinct to my eyes with triumphant malice. As I
moved towards him, however, with a fierce exclamation on my lips, he
suddenly dropped his eyes and knelt. Immediately M. Francois cried
'Hush!' and the men turned to me with scandalised faces. I fell back.
Yet even then, whispering on his knees by the dying man, the knave was
thinking, I felt sure, of me, glorying at once in his immunity and the
power it gave him to tantalise me without fear.

I determined, whatever the result, to intercept him when all was over;
and on the man dying a few minutes later, I walked resolutely to the
open side of the shed, thinking it likely he might try to slip away as
mysteriously as he had come. He stood a moment speaking to M. Francois,
however, and then, accompanied by him, advanced boldly to meet me, a
lean smile on his face.

'Father Antoine,' M. d'Agen said politely,' tells me that he knows
you, M. de Marsac, and desires to speak to you, MAL-A-PROPOS as is the
occasion.'

'And I to him,' I answered, trembling with rage, and only restraining
by an effort the impulse which would have had me dash my hand in the
priest's pale, smirking face. 'I have waited long for this moment,' I
continued, eyeing him steadily, as M. Francois withdrew out of hearing,
'and had you tried to avoid me, I would have dragged you back, though
all your tribe were here to protect you.'

His presence so maddened me that I scarcely knew what I said. I felt my
breath come quickly, I felt the blood surge to my head, and it was
with difficulty I restrained myself when he answered with well-affected
sanctity, 'Like mother, like son, I fear, sir. Huguenots both.'

I choked with rage. What!' I said, 'you dare to threaten me as you
threatened my mother? Fool! know that only to-day for the purpose of
discovering and punishing you I took the rooms in which my mother died.'

'I know it,' he answered quietly. And then in a second, as by magic, he
altered his demeanour completely, raising his head and looking me in the
face. 'That, and so much besides, I know,' he continued, giving me, to
my astonishment, frown for frown, 'that if you will listen to me for a
moment, M. de Marsac, and listen quietly, I will convince you that the
folly is not on my side.'

Amazed at his new manner, in which there was none of the madness that
had marked him at our first meeting, but a strange air of authority,
unlike anything I had associated with him before, I signed to him to
proceed.

'You think that I am in your power?' he said, smiling.

'I think,' I retorted swiftly, 'that, escaping me now, you will have at
your heels henceforth a worse enemy than even your own sins.'

'Just so,' he answered, nodding. 'Well, I am going to show you that
the reverse is the case; and that you are as completely in my hands, to
spare or to break, as this straw. In the first place, you are here in
Blois, a Huguenot!'

'Chut!' I exclaimed contemptuously, affecting a confidence I was far
from feeling. 'A little while back that might have availed you. But we
are in Blois, not Paris. It is not far to the Loire, and you have to
deal with a man now, not with a woman. It is you who have cause to
tremble, not I.'

'You think to be protected,' he answered with a sour smile, 'even on
this side of the Loire, I see. But one word to the Pope's Legate, or to
the Duke of Nevers, and you would see the inside of a dungeon, if not
worse. For the king--'

'King or no king!' I answered, interrupting him with more assurance than
I felt, seeing that I remembered only too well Henry's remark that Rosny
must not look to him for protection, 'I fear you not a whit! And that
