day they saw several parties of troops following the road; and many
couriers passed along, at a swift run.

"The whole country is up," Bathalda said. "We shall have to be very
careful, in future."

The first night, while passing through the low, hot country near
the lake, Roger had cut a strong bamboo; together with a bundle of
smaller rods, suitable for arrows. Bathalda had brought with him a
bag of sharp obsidian arrowheads, and some feathers for winging
them, together with a bowstring of twice the ordinary strength. He
had looked on with amusement when Roger cut the bamboo, making it,
as was the custom of English archers, of his own height.

"My lord is not intending that, surely, for a bow?" he said.

"Yes, Bathalda, I think that will do well," Roger said, trying with
his knee the stiffness of the cane.

At the halt next day, Roger had cut the notches for the string.

"Now, Bathalda," he said, "can you string this?"

"No, my lord; nor can any other man."

"I think it is about the strength of the bows we use at home,"
Roger said. "The stringing them is a matter of knack, as well as of
strength."

And, to the amazement of the Aztec, he strung the bow.

"Now," said he, "let us make some arrows. They should be a cloth
yard in length--that is, from the middle of my chest to the end of
my middle finger."

A dozen of the light bamboos were cut to this length. The huntsman
fitted the obsidian points to them, and Roger stepped back a
hundred yards from the small tree, with a trunk some six inches in
diameter, under whose shade they had been sitting. Then he fitted
the arrow to the string, bent the bow to its head, and loosed the
arrow. It struck the trunk, but glanced off.

"I am out of practice, indeed," he said, "or I should have hit that
fair in the center."

To the huntsman, however, the shot seemed well-nigh miraculous, the
distance being twice as great as the Mexican bows would carry, with
anything like accuracy; while the speed with which the arrow flew,
and the distance it went after glancing from the tree, showed that
it would have been fatal at least fifty yards beyond the object
aimed at. Taking the bow from Roger, he fitted another arrow in and
tried to bend it; but with all his efforts could only draw the
arrow four or five inches.

"It is wonderful," he said, returning the weapon to Roger. "If I
had not seen it done, I could not have believed it."

"It is merely a matter of practice," Roger said. "My people are
famous for their dexterity with the bow, and I have seen men hit a
mark no bigger than the palm of my hand, ten times in succession,
at that distance."

The next time they halted, Bathalda made the rest of the bamboos
into arrows and, making a quiver of the bark of a tree, hung them
over his shoulder. Roger left his spear behind; using the bow,
which he had unstrung, as a walking staff. Bathalda offered to
carry the spear, in addition to his own weapon, but Roger told him
that he did not care about it.

"If it should come to a hand-to-hand fight," he said, "I would
rather rely on my ax. Besides, the bow, now it is unstrung, makes
an excellent quarterstaff, a weapon with which I have practiced a
great deal. With a spear your people would know quite as much as I
should; but I fancy that, with a quarterstaff, I should astonish
them. It has the advantage, too, that it disables without killing;
and as your soldiers would only be doing their duty in arresting
me, I should be sorry to do them more harm than I could help.

"There were a great many men on the road below there, today."

"A great many, my lord; and no doubt the garrisons of the two towns
we shall have to pass tonight will be all out, and on the watch.
This is the most dangerous part of the journey. The mountains are
rugged, and there are only certain passes by which we can travel,
and they are sure to be watched narrowly. They will guess that we
shall travel by night."

"I suppose it will not be possible to make a detour, either to the
south or north?"

The Aztec shook his head.

"To the north lie terrible mountains, of whose passes I know
nothing. Our provisions are exhausted, and we must, in future,
depend upon maize and other things we can pick by the way. Were we
to go there, we should find nothing.

"To the south lies Tlascala, whose people are independent of
Montezuma. They are fierce and warlike, and would seize and offer
you to the gods, without pity."

"Still, they would not be on the lookout for us; and we might,
therefore, pass through their country without being seen."

"We might do so, my lord," Bathalda agreed.

"At any rate," Roger said, "it seems to me that there would be more
chance, in that direction, than in going straight forward. From
what you say, it seems well-nigh impossible for us to get through
the passes ahead of us, without being captured."

Accordingly, when night fell they struck off to the south. The
journey was a very toilsome one, for they were now crossing the
spurs of the hills, running far down into the plateau. As before,
they had to halt when the moon set, but continued their way at
daybreak.

"There is a road down in the valley there," Roger said, after three
hours' more walking.

Bathalda stood looking down, for some time.

"I know it, now," he said. "It is the last road north of Tlascala,
and runs from Huejotlipan to Yxtacamaxtitlan. We are already east
of Tlascala, and about fifteen miles from Yxtacamaxtitlan. If we
get past that town without accident, we shall then have to cross
the Pass of Obispo, over the great range of mountains, and come
down near Naulinco. Once past that town our dangers will be over,
for there are few towns and villages in the Tierra Caliente. Our
great danger will lie in the pass. There are but two or three roads
across these mountains, and they will know that we must follow
them."

"Well, we must take our chance," Roger said. "So far we have met
with no difficulties, whatever, and provided we don't come across
too large a force, we ought to be able to manage to get through. I
noticed there were trees right through the pass I came over; and I
see the country ahead is thickly wooded. How far is the pass from
where we are now?"

"About thirty miles. It is where you see that cleft in the great
line of hills."

"Well, we can get near it before the moon sets, and will try to
pass through by daylight. It would be useless attempting to make
our way through the trees at night; and if we have to fight, I
would rather do so in the light. We will lie down now, for I own I
am completely tired out."



Chapter 11: Cortez.


The expedition, whose arrival had caused such excitement in Mexico,
was commanded by Hernando Cortez, a man who united in his person
all the gifts requisite for a great leader of men. He possessed a
handsome person, great strength and skill at arms, extraordinary
courage and daring, singular powers of conciliation and of bringing
others to his way of thinking, pleasing and courteous demeanor, a
careless and easy manner which concealed great sagacity and wisdom,
an inexhaustible flow of spirits, and an iron determination.

Born in Estremadura in 1485, of an ancient and respectable family,
he was--like many others who have distinguished themselves as great
soldiers--while at school and college remarkable rather for
mischievous freaks, and disregard of authority, than for love of
learning. At the age of seventeen he had exhausted his parents'
patience, and was on the point of starting with the expedition of
Ovando, the successor to Columbus, when he so injured himself by a
fall, incurred in one of his wild escapades, that he was unable to
sail with it. Two years later, however, he went out in a merchant
vessel to the Indies.

On reaching Hispaniola Ovando, who was governor of the island,
received him kindly, and gave him a grant of land and a number of
Indians to till it. The quiet life of the planter, however, little
suited the restless young fellow; and after taking part in several
military expeditions against insurgent natives, under the command
of Diego Velasquez, he sailed in 1511, with that officer, to
undertake the conquest of Cuba.

He displayed great courage and activity during the campaign, and
his cheerful manner and fund of high spirits made him a great
favorite with the soldiers. When the fighting was over, Cortez soon
became discontented with the quiet life in the island, and joined a
party of men who were disaffected to Velasquez, owing to their not
having received such rewards as they considered their services
merited. Cortez undertook to carry their complaints to the Governor
of Hispaniola, and was about starting when the matter came to the
ears of Velasquez, who seized him, put him in irons, and threw him
into prison. He was not long in making his escape, and sought
sanctuary in a church; but a few days later, when carelessly
strolling outside its walls, he was again seized and imprisoned.

He was put on board a ship to be sent to Hispaniola, there to be
tried for exciting disaffection and revolt; but at night, before
she set sail, he managed to free himself from his irons, gain the
deck, and swim ashore, where he again took refuge in the church.
Here several influential people interfered on his behalf--among
them the family of Catalina Xuares, a young lady to whom he was
engaged--and a reconciliation was brought about between him and the
governor. Cortez received a large estate, with an ample number of
Indians for its cultivation; married, and settled down, and for
some years devoted himself to agriculture and gold mining.

Success attended him, and he accumulated some three thousand
castalanos--a considerable sum. So he might have lived and died,
had not the news of discoveries made by Grijalva--who had sailed
west and discovered Yucatan, and traded with Tabasco, and had
returned with a good deal of gold and wonderful tales of fabulous
wealth, existing in a great nation farther to the north--caused an
excitement in the islands. The governor at once prepared to fit out
a large expedition, and among the many who offered to undertake its
command, and to contribute largely towards its expenses, he finally
selected Cortez, who had gained the ear and influence of the
governor's secretary, Duero, and the royal treasurer, Lares.

Cortez was appointed captain general of the expedition, and at once
set to work, with his accustomed energy, to gather material for it.
He not only contributed all the fortune he had made, but raised
funds by mortgaging his estates to their full value, and by
borrowing money from merchants and others, on security of the
wealth that was to be acquired by the expedition.

His personal popularity in the island enabled him to gather
numerous recruits, and many of his intimate friends, who joined
him, assisted him from their own resources or by raising money on
their estates. Velasquez himself contributed comparatively little
towards the expenses, which were almost entirely borne by Cortez
and his friends.

Six ships were fitted out, and three hundred recruits enrolled. The
instructions Cortez received were first to find Grijalva and,
joining company with him, to visit Yucatan, and endeavor to rescue
six Christians who were reported as still living there, the
survivors of a vessel wrecked, years before, on the coast. He was
to make a survey of the whole coastline, to acquaint himself with
the natural productions of the country, and with the character and
institutions of the native races. He was to barter with the
natives, and to treat them with kindness and humanity, and to
remember, above all things, that the object the emperor had most at
heart was the conversion of the Indians. He was to invite them to
give in their allegiance to the king, and to send such presents as
would ensure his favor and protection. The governor gave no
directions for colonizing or conquering, having received no warrant
from Spain that would enable him to invest his agent with such
powers.

But while Cortez was preparing to start, many of the leading men of
the island, who were jealous of his rapid rise, roused the
suspicions of Velasquez against him; saying that, when he had once
sailed, he would no longer recognize the governor's authority, and
would be thinking only of winning renown and wealth for himself.
Velasquez determined to appoint another commander, but Duero and
Lares, to whom he confided his intentions, at once informed Cortez
of them. With the same promptitude that always distinguished him in
moments of danger, Cortez went round to his officers after
nightfall, got them and his men on board, visited the contractor,
carried off all his stock of meat (giving him a massive gold chain
in security for payment), and before daybreak the fleet left its
moorings and the sails were hoisted.

As soon as the news was carried to Velasquez, he hurriedly dressed
and rowed down to the shore. Cortez, when he saw him, got into a
boat and rowed to within speaking distance.

"This is a courteous way of taking leave, indeed!" the angry
governor said.

"I was pressed for time," Cortez replied. "There are some things
that should be done even before they are thought of. Has your
Excellency any orders?"

Velasquez saw, by the innuendo in the words of Cortez, that the
latter was aware of his intention to deprive him of his command. He
had no orders to give, for it was evident that Cortez would not
obey them. The latter therefore returned to his vessel, and the
fleet instantly set sail for the port of Macaca. This was in
November, 1516.

The act of Cortez was doubtless one of insubordination; but, after
he had embarked the whole of his resources in the expedition, and
had received the command from the governor, this being ratified by
the authorities of Hispaniola, it could hardly be expected that he
would submit to disgrace and ruin being brought, not only upon
himself, but upon all the friends who had aided him in the
enterprise. At Macaca Cortez laid in some more stores, and then
sailed for Trinidad, an important town on the southern coast of
Cuba. Here he issued proclamations inviting recruits to join him.
These came in in considerable numbers, among them a hundred men
from Grijalva's ship, which had just before reached the port.

What was still more important, several cavaliers of high family and
standing joined him: among them the Alvarados, Olid, Avila,
Velasquez de Leon (a near relation of the governor), and Sandoval.
He purchased at Trinidad large military stores and provisions.
While he was taking these and other steps to strengthen his
position, Verdugo, the commander of the town, received letters from
Velasquez ordering him to seize Cortez; but upon his communicating
these orders to the principal officers of the expedition, they
pointed out to him that, if he attempted to take such a grave step,
the soldiers and sailors would certainly resist it, and the town
would not improbably be laid in ashes. The expedition then sailed
round the island to Havana, where Cortez completed his preparations;
and in spite of another ineffectual attempt of Velasquez to detain
him, set sail.

In the time that had intervened between the inception of the
expedition and its departure, the historians agree that a
remarkable change had come over Cortez. He was still frank and
pleasant in his manner, courteous and cheery with all; but he was
no longer the gay, careless character who had been liked, but
scarcely greatly respected, in the island. His whole actions were
marked by an air of resolute determination and authority. He
himself superintended every detail of work and exhibited a
thoughtfulness, prudence, and caution that seemed alien to his
former character. He was immensely popular both among his soldiers
and officers, but all felt that he was entitled to their respect as
well as their liking, and that he was not only commander, but
thoroughly master, of the expedition.

Although extremely careless himself as to food, comfort, or
appearance, he now assumed the state befitting his appointment and
authority. He dressed handsomely but quietly, appointed officers
and domestics for his household, and placed it on the footing of a
man of high station. Before sailing he dispatched a letter to
Velasquez, begging him to rely on his devotion to his interests.

On February 10th, 1519, the expedition started. It consisted of
eleven vessels, only one of which was as large as a hundred tons;
of a hundred and ten sailors, five hundred and fifty-three
soldiers, and two hundred Indians of the islands. There were ten
heavy guns and four light ones, and sixteen horses.

Before sailing, Cortez gave an address to his soldiers, and aroused
their enthusiasm to the utmost. He had the advantage of obtaining
the services, as chief pilot, of Alaminos, a veteran who had acted
as pilot to Columbus on his last voyage, and to Grijalva in his
late expedition. Soon after they started they met with a storm, and
put in at the island of Cozumal; and Cortez thence sent Ordaz to
Yucatan, to try to recover the captives said to be there. That
officer returned without tidings, but before the fleet sailed a
canoe arrived containing one of them, Aquilar, who had been wrecked
there eight years previously. He had been a priest, and had so won
the esteem and reverence of the barbarians among whom he lived,
that they had with great reluctance allowed him to depart, in
exchange for glass beads and other trinkets promised by Ordaz.

The fleet now sailed along the coast of Yucatan, until they reached
the mouth of the Tabasco River, where Grijalva had carried on so
profitable a trade. Leaving the ships at anchor they ascended the
river in boats; but instead of meeting with the friendly reception
that Grijalva had done, they found the banks lined with the
natives, whose menacing attitude showed that a landing would be
opposed.

After solemnly summoning them to surrender, Cortez landed. The
natives fought bravely, but were unable to resist the astounding
effect of the Spaniards' firearms; and the invaders, advancing,
drove them back and took possession of the town, which was found to
be deserted.

Two strong parties were sent out next morning to reconnoiter, but
were attacked and driven back to the town. They reported that the
whole country was under arms. Cortez was much vexed at finding
himself thus engaged in a war, from which no benefit was to be
gained; but he felt that it would impair the confidence of his
troops, were he now to draw back. He therefore landed six of the
guns and the horses, and the following day sallied out to the
attack. Ordaz commanded the infantry, while Cortez himself led the
little body of cavalry, the horses being mounted by the cavaliers
of the party.

After marching a league, the infantry came in sight of the enemy.
The natives attacked them as they were struggling through deeply
irrigated ground, poured volleys of missiles of all kinds upon
them, and wounded many before they could get across to solid
ground, where they could bring the guns into play. But even these,
and the discharges of musketry did not appall the natives, who
pressed forward with such fury that, after the engagement had
lasted an hour, the position of the Spaniards became perilous in
the extreme.

But at this moment Cortez and his companions, who had been
compelled to make a great detour, owing to the difficult nature of
the ground, fell suddenly upon the rear of the enemy. The latter,
who had never before seen horses, and who believed that horse and
rider were the same animal, were seized with a sudden panic at this
extraordinary apparition. The panic speedily communicated itself to
the whole army, and while the cavalry trampled down and slaughtered
many in the rear, the infantry charged, and the Indians fled in
wild confusion.

Great numbers had fallen, whilst on the Christian side a few only
were killed, and a hundred wounded. No pursuit was attempted.
Cortez released the prisoners taken in battle, among whom were two
chiefs, and sent them to their countrymen, with a message that he
would forgive the past if they would at once come in and tender
their submission; otherwise he would ride over the land, and put
every living creature to the sword. The Tabascans, cowed by the
dreadful thunder weapons, and by the astounding armed creatures
that had fallen upon them, had no wish for further fighting, and
the principal caziques soon came in with offerings to propitiate
the Spaniards.

Among these were twenty female slaves--one of whom turned out a
more valuable gift to the Spaniards than all the other presents,
put together. Among the gifts were only a few small gold ornaments,
and when asked where the metal was procured, they pointed to the
northwest and said Mexico. As there was nothing to be done here,
the Spaniards prepared to depart; but before doing so insisted on
the people consenting to become Christians. As they had but little
idea of what was required by them, and were in no mood for argument
with the Spaniards, a solemn mass was held, at which the whole
people became nominally Christians.

Re-embarking, the Spaniards sailed along the coast, until they
reached the island of San Juan de Uloa, and anchored in the strait
between it and the mainland. A canoe speedily came off from the
latter, with presents of fruit and flowers, and small gold
trinkets, which the natives willingly bartered with the Spaniards.
Cortez was, however, unable to converse with them; for Aquilar, who
had acted as interpreter with the Tabascans, was unable to
understand their dialect. Presently, however, the female slaves
informed him that one of their number, named Malinche, was a native
of Mexico, and spoke that language as well as the tongue of the
Tabascans. She was at once installed as interpreter--she informing
Aquilar what the Mexicans said, and he interpreting it to Cortez.
By this means he learned that the Indians were subjects of the
great Mexican Empire, which was ruled over by a monarch named
Montezuma, whose capital lay seventy leagues from the coast.

A strong force at once landed on the mainland, and threw up a
fortified camp. The Mexicans came in, in crowds, with fruit,
vegetables, flowers, and other articles, which they bartered with
the Spaniards. They brought news that the Mexican governor of the
province intended to visit them, the next day.

Before noon, he arrived with his numerous suite. A banquet was
served to them, and then, in answer to the cazique's inquiries as
to the objects of their visit, he was informed by Cortez that he
was the subject of a great monarch beyond the seas, who ruled over
a vast empire; and that, hearing of the greatness of the Mexican
Emperor, he had sent him as an envoy, with a present in token of
his goodwill, and a message which he must deliver in person. The
cazique said that he would send couriers with the royal gift to
Montezuma; and that, as soon as he had learned his will, he would
communicate it.

He then presented ten slave loads of fine cottons, mantles of rich
feather work, and a basket filled with gold ornaments to Cortez;
who then handed over the presents intended for Montezuma. These
consisted of a richly carved and painted armchair, a crimson cap
with a gold medal, and a quantity of collars, bracelets, and other
ornaments of cut glass.

Cortez observed one of the cazique's attendants busy sketching, and
found that he was drawing the Spaniards, their costumes, and arms.
This was the picture writing of the Aztecs, and the chief informed
him that the pictures would be sent to Montezuma. In order to
impress the monarch, Cortez ordered the cavalry to maneuver, and
the cannon to be fired; and these exhibitions, as well as the
ships, were faithfully depicted by the artist. The chief then took
his leave.

Eight days later an embassy arrived from Montezuma, with an
enormous quantity of extremely valuable presents--shields, helmets,
cuirasses, collars and bracelets of gold; crests of variegated
feathers sprinkled with pearls and precious stones; birds and
animals in excellent workmanship in gold and silver; curtains,
coverings, and robes of the finest cotton of rich colors,
interwoven with marvelous feather work. Among the presents were two
circular plates of gold and silver, as large as cartwheels--the
value of the silver wheel was estimated at five thousand pounds,
that of the gold one at fifty-five thousand.

The Spaniards were astounded at this display of treasure, and
delighted at the prospect it opened to them. The ambassadors,
however, brought a message from the emperor, saying that he
regretted much that he could not have a personal interview with
them, the distance from his capital being too great, and the
journey beset with difficulties and dangers; and that all that
could be done, therefore, was for them to return to their own land,
with the proofs thus afforded of his friendly disposition.

Cortez was much mortified by the refusal, but requested the envoys
to lay before the emperor his immense desire for a personal
interview with him, and that the dangers of a short land journey
were as nothing to one who had accomplished so long a voyage over
the sea to see him. The Mexicans repeated their assurance that his
application would be unavailing, and left with some coldness of
manner. The effect of their displeasure at the insistence of the
Spaniards was soon manifest, the natives ceasing to bring in
provisions.

While awaiting the emperor's reply, the soldiers suffered greatly
from the heat and the effluvia from the neighboring marshes. Thirty
died, and as the anchorage was exposed to the northern gales,
Cortez decided to sail north as soon as the answer to his last
application was received, and sent off two vessels to see where a
safe port could be found. Ten days after the departure of the
envoys they returned with a large quantity of fresh presents, but
with a positive refusal on the part of the emperor to allow them to
advance near the capital, and a request that, now they had obtained
what they most desired, they would at once return to their own
country.

Four days later the ships returned, with the news that they had
found but one sheltered port, and that the country round it was
well watered and favorable for a camp.

The soldiers, however, were now growing discontented. The treasure
already acquired was large, the unhealthiness of the climate had
alarmed them, and the proofs of the wealth and greatness of the
Mexican Empire had convinced them that it needed a vastly larger
force than that which Cortez had under his orders to undertake an
expedition against it; for the courage showed by the Tabascans had
proved conclusively that, ill armed as they were, the natives were
not to be despised.

Fortunately for Cortez, five Indians made their appearance in camp
one morning. Their dress and appearance were wholly different from
those of the Aztecs, and they spoke a different language, but
Malinche--who had been baptized, and christened Marina, by Father
Olmedo, the leading priest of the expedition--found that two of
them could converse in Aztec. They said that they were Totonacs,
and had come from Cempoalla, their capital. They had been but
recently conquered by the Aztecs, and were so oppressed by them
that they were anxious to throw off their yoke, and they came to
ask the wonderful strangers, of whom they had heard, to visit them.

Cortez at once saw the immense importance of the communication.
