Stenius flushed.  Then he smiled.

"And, Cappadox," he went on, in an unruffled voice, "do you send what
remains in my cellar of the vintages we have been drinking, to the
horse of my worthy guest."

At the giant's discourteous words, Hannibal himself had started from
the mood of thought in which he had seemed well-nigh buried.  A quick
glance shot from his eye, and his brow furrowed.  Then the courtly
answer of Stenius relieved the situation, and he turned to his host.

"You must pardon rough words to rough soldiers, my friend.  We of
Carthage have had but slender chances to avail ourselves of Greek
culture and urbanity.  We are mere merchants and warriors--not men of
letters or of social manners."

The hulking savage grew purple and trembled under the rebuke of his
chief.  Twice he essayed to speak and then discreetly gulped down the
words, for Hannibal's face, though calm and courtly, showed a hardening
of its lines which meant much to those who knew him.

As for the Campanian, he raised his hands in voluble deprecation of the
apology.

Did _he_ not realize that but for soldiers and merchants, letters and
social manners would never have come into being?  It was the privilege
of so brave a warrior as Hannibal-the-Fighter to say what he pleased,
and when and where.  Ordinary rules were only for little men.  Besides,
the best of Campanian wines were truly all too poor for heroes whose
souls were already attasted to the nectar of the gods.

The suppressed fury and shame of the offender melted away under the
balm of these honeyed words, and, laughing loudly but with some
constraint, he tossed off to his host a cup of the wine last brought.

And now Hannibal seemed to shake himself loose from the bonds of
silence and thought, though his conversation still showed the trend of
his mind.  He turned to Calavius.

"Thirty thousand foot and four thousand horse form an excellent array,
and yet I should imagine that the second city in Italy could do even
better--in case of need."

The attention of hosts and guests became tense at once, though Marcia
could note that the motives were diverse.

Calavius seemed nervous and flustered.

"There was a time when that was undoubtedly so, my Lord," he said
hastily; "but, now, many of our young men have fallen in the wars, and
many are serving with the enemy, unable to escape and doubtless in
serious danger--"

"Three hundred horsemen," interrupted Hannibal, dryly, "and my spies
inform me that they are likely to continue serving Rome--by choice, as
would doubtless many of your well-born at home--like this fellow,
Magius," and his brow darkened ominously.

The Campanians moved uneasily on the couches.

"Magius is a traitor and will be dealt with in due season," said
Stenius.  "It is friends and festivities first with us, and enemies and
punishments later."

"Yes, Magius shall be dealt with," echoed Hannibal; but the
acquiescence brought no relief to his hearers.  Why should he feel it
necessary to supplement their assurance so significantly?  Did not the
treaty between Carthage and Capua provide that Capuan laws and
magistrates should still govern all Capuans?  Why should he speak so
markedly of their military power?  Did not the treaty expressly state
that no Capuan was to be called upon for military duty except by his
own rulers?

Calavius had been signalling vigorously to his son, Perolla, who had
reclined silent and gloomy, but who now seemed about to speak.
Disregarding his father's warning, the young man broke in:--

"It is idle to deny that the Campanian horse serve willingly with Rome
and will continue so to serve.  As for Decius Magius, there are many
good men here who hold with him, but who lack his boldness."

For an instant every one held his breath in terror of the coming
outburst, but those whose angry or frightened eyes first ventured to
glance toward the captain-general saw his face wreathed in smiles, and
his wine cup raised toward the daring speaker.

"Happiness to you, flower of Campanian youth! and know that there are
two things that Hannibal prizes most among men: a friend who was once
an enemy, and a friend who dares to speak the truth."

Calavius had recovered his composure during this speech.

"I would not have you imagine, my Lord," he began, "but that my son
speaks as he believes and in order that you may have full information;
yet, he is ill to-day in body and mind, and, even were it not so, I am
older than he and know more of men.  That Decius Magius has
sympathizers, it is vain to deny; but that they are many or
influential, I, who know the Capuans, aver is not the case.  As for our
horsemen, it is easy to see that their safety demands an apparent
friendship for Rome.  It is not wise for three hundred to revile thirty
thousand."

Hannibal had continued to keep his gaze upon Perolla, scarcely
listening to his father's words.  In the young man's face something of
surprise had mingled with his half-defiant, half-moody expression.

"I do not ask of you, my son," pursued the general, "that you whose
heart was but lately with our enemies, should love and trust us at
once.  That were the part of a hypocrite, and I honour you, both for
the filial piety that threw down your preference before your father's
will, and for the slowness with which your heart follows your act.
Grant me but this: that you judge us fairly by our deeds, and if we
prove not better friends than Rome, return to them in peace and safety.
Meanwhile there is a horse with crimson mane and feet that shall be led
from my stable to yours in the morning.  Ride him, and remember that
Hannibal honours courage, filial obedience, and truth--all in like
measure."

Subdued applause from both tables followed these words, but the face of
Perolla lost but little of its stubborn hostility.  Hannibal turned
away, and Calavius and Ninius sought to cover by eager talking the
young man's ungracious reception of such signal favour.  The faces of
the Carthaginians remained for the most part impassive; only their dark
eyes seemed to sparkle, either with wine or suppressed passion.  Marcia
still felt that one pair was trying to look through her, and she was
conscious that Silenus, the Sicilian Greek, was making eager and
indecorous love to one of the women at the other table.  Another of the
latter had just ventured on some light badinage with the chief guest,
in whose face smiles had chased away all the abstraction of the earlier
hours.  He answered her as lightly, but with indifference, and turned
to Marcia.

"And what says our Roman beauty?" he asked.  "She has come boldly and
far to see her enemies.  Who knows but she has a boon to beg."

Again Marcia noted disturbance under Calavius' smile.  He was wondering
at the general's knowledge.  Then he realized that Mago's report must
be its basis, and his face cleared.

"Yes, truly, I _have_ a boon to ask," replied Marcia, fixing her great
eyes upon the bearded front, stern through its smiles.  "It is that you
will spare one house in Italy from ravage and destruction."

"And where may this house be?" he asked in bantering tones.  "We shall
leave many standing, but this one most surely of all."

"It is upon the brow of the Palatine Hill--" she began, and then a
burst of applause gave notice that the compliment had struck home.  "It
is my father's," she concluded, blushing.

Calavius was in ecstasy over the graceful tact of his protege.  No
Capuan or Greek could have done better.  Hannibal eyed her with a
curious expression, half admiring, half doubtful.

"I grant the boon--freely," he said.  Then, fixing her with his gaze,
he went on, "And when will you claim it?"

"The son of Hamilcar knows best," replied Marcia, casting down her
eyes, and again she felt the approval of her host and his friends.

That Hannibal was pleased and flattered was evident, and yet there was
a certain reserve in his manner.  Possibly he suspected that she wished
to provoke an announcement of his plans; perhaps an even deeper insight
led him near to a fuller conception of her purpose.

"Yes, it is truly for us to say," he said loudly, glancing around the
board; then, turning quickly to Marcia: "I understand that you
counselled delay until spring to my brother, Mago.  Why?"

So frank a question, so different from all that had been told of the
more than Oriental craft of the Carthaginians, and one that went so
straight to the motive of her presence, threw Marcia into some
confusion.  Calavius noticed it, and, fearing lest she might say
something to do away with the impression of her former tact, he came to
the rescue.

"Surely we shall not insult my Lord Bacchus by a council of war in his
presence?" but Hannibal waved his hand toward him and looked fixedly at
Marcia.

"Goddesses may speak on all subjects, at all times; and the gods smile."

"That my words," she began, with eyes still cast down, "were deemed
worthy to be borne to my Lord, is too much honour.  That he should deem
them worthy of thought, is beyond the dream of mere woman."  Then,
glancing up and smiling wistfully into his face, she went on: "Know,
that whatever of judgment born of knowledge of the place and the men
has come to me, a girl,--that and more is for the service of the great
general of Carthage,--the benignant liberator of Italy."

"Why do you advise delay?" asked Hannibal again, and the eyes of
Maharbal glittered, as he leaned over from the other table.  "There are
those who say I have delayed too long already."

"For this," replied Marcia, boldly; "that you may save your soldiers
and your allies; that they may lie in rest and luxury, and that, ere
springtime, the cities of the Latin Name, yes, truly, and the very
rabble of Rome, shall come to you on their knees for leave to bear the
horseheads along the Sacred Way, up the Capitoline slope--"

"If in the spring, why not now?"

Maharbal and Hannibal-the-Fighter made a clucking sound of assent;
Hasdrubal and the other guests seemed indifferent, but the Capuans were
hanging on Marcia's words.

"Because the time is not ripe--" she began.

"Words!" cried her questioner, cutting off her speech; "I asked, _why_?"

Frightened at his vehemence, but put to it of necessity, she answered:--

"Because there are strifes and bickerings--at Rome--throughout the
Latin Name--that must soon bear fruit of civil strife.  The nobles
grind and hold to their privileges; the commons serve and starve and
look to Carthage for aid.  How shall these things grow better, while
you hold the garden of Italy--while the Greeks of the south and the
Samnites and the men of the soil gather behind you on one side, and the
Gauls and Etruscans muster in the north?  The water is eating at the
mole; soon the waves will lash up and sweep it from its foundations."

Hannibal eyed her closely for a moment.  Then he said: "There are those
at Rome and among the Latin Name who tell me otherwise.  They are good
men, and they know.  Perhaps I have been even too cautious.  You are
young and beautiful.  Hold fast to matters suited to youth and beauty,
and leave the conduct of wars and statecraft to men."  Turning to
Stenius, he went on, "If this Leucadian wine of yours, my Stenius, were
let into the veins of those who lie dead at Cannae, they would be fit
to rise and do battle again."

Stenius bowed and smiled; Marcia grew red and then pale with shame and
vexation, seeing how her plots were like to fall and crush her; but, at
this moment, the voice of Hannibal-the-Fighter rose from the other
table.  Flushed with wine, he was boasting of his slain.  "Four at
Trebia," he cried out, "seven at Trasimenus, eighteen at Cannae--but
all men.  It is better to slay the wolves' whelps, if only to teach
women that it is no longer wise to bring forth Romans.  I--I who speak
have already killed eleven boys--ah! but you must wait till we enter
Rome.  Then will be the day when they shall build new cities in Hades!"

The Carthaginians heard him with indifference; the Capuans, all save
Perolla, applauded nervously; and Marcia grew sick at heart and mad
with a rage that could almost have strangled the giant as he reclined.

"And now," began Ninius, mildly, when there was a moment's silence,
"that we may the better enjoy what is to come, there are baths and
attendants; and the red feather will make way for new feastings at the
end of two hours."

Slaves had run in to assist the diners from their couches; the Capuans,
with dreams of relief, refreshment, and re-repletion; the
Carthaginians, bored, but striving to be polite and to follow the
customs of their entertainers.  Even Hannibal, while his smile was half
a frown, permitted himself to be led away.

Filled with disgust and despair, Marcia felt herself all unfit to begin
a new revel--one that was to be made possible by loathsome practices,
as yet unknown at Rome, and which bade fair to end in aimless and
hideous debauchery.  The women were but warming to their part, when the
summons of Stenius Ninius had proclaimed a truce with Bacchus and
Venus--a truce with promise of more deadly battle to be joined.  She
had seen glances hot with wine and lust, claspings of hands, loosened
cyclas, and more lascivious reclinings.  The gloomy Perolla had yielded
a little to the soft influences, and even Hannibal seemed to force
himself to toying, if only in the name of courtesy; while, through it
all, and more and more as the light of day advanced, Marcia felt the
eyes of Iddilcar, priest of Melkarth, burning into her soul.  He at
least gave no heed to nearer blandishments, and terror and loathing
filled her in equal measure.

A faintness--a sudden weakness born of her recent journey--served for
excuse, which Calavius seemed not unwilling to voice, and, surrounded
by a guard of slaves, her litter bore her back to his house, through
streets littered with drunken men and fluctuant with the figured robes
of courtesans.




VI.

ALLIES.

Night had come again, before Marcia could arouse herself from the deep
sleep with which exhaustion of mind and body had overwhelmed her.  She
remembered the scenes of the banquet as the phantasms of a
dream--strange and terrible; for her thoughts were slow to gather the
threads and weave the woof.  Only a feeling of failure, of fruitless
abasement, was ever present.  Hannibal had admired her, but, proof
against any controlling attraction, he had put her words aside with
little short of contempt.  A dread, even, lest the strange acumen of
this wonderful man had pierced her mask, and that her very motive and
mission were already suspected, was not lacking to add dismay to
discouragement.  Such thoughts were but wretched company, and they
brought with them a vague conception of her own vain egotism in
imagining the possibility of other outcome.  She tried to sleep again,
but could not.  What mattered it though, by some shifting of hours, her
day had become night and her night day!  She must arise and talk with
some one, if it were only the host whom she so heartily despised.

Attendants entered at her summons, and the refreshment of the bath and
the labour of the toilet were once more passed through.  Then,
dismissing the slaves, she walked out alone into the garden and sat
down on a softly cushioned seat of carved marble.  A fountain plashed
soothingly in the foliage near by, the stars were shining again, while,
from without, the jarring sounds of the city came to her ears.

How long she sat, awake yet thinking of nothing, dull and dazed, she
could not tell.  Then she was aroused by a sandalled step upon the
pavement.  A man was standing before her, whose face, despite its
youthful contours, was deep-lined and melancholy.  He was short of
stature and slenderly though gracefully built, and his black curls
clustered over brow and eyes that seemed rather those of a poet or a
dreamer than of a man of action.  In the sombre, dark blue garments of
mourning, without ornaments or jewels, so different from the gay
banqueting robes in which she had last seen him, Marcia gazed a moment,
before she recognized Perolla, the son of Pacuvius.

"You are not pretty to-night, Scylla," he said tauntingly, "though you
left us early.  There are dark circles under the eyes that looked
kindly at the enemy of your country."

Marcia flushed crimson, and he went on: "Yes; I watched you smiling and
ogling, but it will take greater traitors than you to snare him.  He is
like Minos, in that he did not reach out to take from your hands the
purple lock shorn from your father's head: he is not like him
otherwise: he is not just, and he will not give honourable terms."

"You, at least, are faithful to Rome?" said Marcia, slowly, and
ignoring his insults.

"Can you ask?" he answered; "is it that you wish to betray me?  Well,
then, know truly that I have betrayed myself to your heart's content.
Do you not see the mourning garments I wear for my city's faithlessness
and for her coming ruin?  Have you not heard how my father dragged me
from the side of Decius Magius in the market place that I might attend
the banquet?--ah! but you have not heard how I had planned to startle
them all."

Marcia began to wonder whether she was talking with a madman.

"Shall I tell?"

She made a sign of assent.

"It was toward evening--they have but just risen from the tables now.
Then, it was to seek the red feathers for the third time; but I led my
father back among the rose bushes and showed him a sword which I had
girt to my side, beneath my tunic.  'This,' said I, 'shall win us
pardon from Rome.  Look you, when we return, I will plunge it into the
Carthaginian's breast.'"

Marcia bent forward eagerly.

"And then," he went on, "my father bound my arms to my sides, with his
own around me, and wept and talked of our recent pledges to these
foreigners.  'Can they outweigh our ancient pledges to Rome?' I
answered.  So he pleaded how the attendants would surely cut me down,
and mentioned Hannibal's look, which he affirmed I would not be able to
confront; but I laughed and made little of these things.  Then he spoke
of the hospitable board, which I admitted had something of reason; and,
finally, when he had declared that the sword must reach Hannibal only
through his own breast, then, at last, from filial duty, mark you, I
threw the weapon from me, telling him that he had betrayed his country
thrice: in revolting from Rome, in allying with foreigners, and, now,
in turning aside the instrument of escape.  Then we returned to the
banquet, but my father trembled, and ate and drank no more.  There,
now, is a story to tell your city's destroyer.  If you betray me,
perhaps he may yet love you."

Marcia viewed him sternly.

"Truly your father was right, when he said you were ill in mind."

"Yes, ill in mind and in heart."

"How, then, do you not recognize one whose heart is sicker than your
own?"

Perolla looked at her inquiringly, and she went on:--

"You have a city that has been false to itself, and is in danger of
punishment--a father, too, if you will.  _My_ city has already suffered
every evil but destruction: my brother and he to whom Juno was about to
lead me have been killed by these pulse-eaters.  Are such things the
benefits that go to make friendship and love for the slayers?  Say,
rather, hate and the craving for revenge."

"Yes," said Perolla, moodily; "they are indeed evils, but less than
mine, in that they are passed--"

"And is Rome safe, do you think?" she asked quickly.

"Rome will conquer," he said doggedly, "unless there be many more
traitors like you."

"Fool!" she cried, grasping his wrist.  "Can you not see--you who claim
to be a philosopher and to have Greek blood?--you, at least, should
have understood my words."

He gazed at her vacantly, and she began to regret her vehemence.  It
came to her mind that this was not altogether a safe man to trust with
her secret.  Faithful he was, no doubt; but a fool might be even more
dangerous than a traitor.  Still, she had said too much to be silent,
and she felt the need of some ally to whom she could talk--upon whom
she could at least pretend to lean when the weight of her burden was
heaviest.

"I have told you what I have lost--what I dread to lose.  Now learn
what I am here to gain.  For many days after the black news of Cannae,
I heard them talking in my father's house--talking of the advance of
the insolent victors and of the paltry defence we could oppose, the
certain destruction that awaited us.  Still they were brave--old men
and boys.  The soldiers were dead, but we set to work training
