    Before, produced, or after. Me his eye
    No sooner mark'd, than knowing me, in words                      750
    By sorrow quick suggested, he began.
      Laertes' noble son, for wiles renown'd!
    Ah, hapless Hero! thou art, doubtless, charged,
    Thou also, with some arduous labour, such
    As in the realms of day I once endured.
    Son was I of Saturnian Jove, yet woes
    Immense sustain'd, subjected to a King
    Inferior far to me, whose harsh commands
    Enjoin'd me many a terrible exploit.
    He even bade me on a time lead hence                             760
    The dog, that task believing above all
    Impracticable; yet from Ades him
    I dragg'd reluctant into light, by aid
    Of Hermes, and of Pallas azure-eyed.
      So saying, he penetrated deep again
    The abode of Pluto; but I still unmoved
    There stood expecting, curious, other shades
    To see of Heroes in old time deceased.
    And now, more ancient worthies still, and whom
    I wish'd, I had beheld, Pirithoues                                770
    And Theseus, glorious progeny of Gods,
    But nations, first, numberless of the dead
    Came shrieking hideous; me pale horror seized,
    Lest awful Proserpine should thither send
    The Gorgon-head from Ades, sight abhorr'd!
    I, therefore, hasting to the vessel, bade
    My crew embark, and cast the hawsers loose.
    They, quick embarking, on the benches sat.
    Down the Oceanus[55] the current bore
    My galley, winning, at the first, her way                        780
    With oars, then, wafted by propitious gales.


FOOTNOTES:

[40] Milton.

[41] The shore of Scilly commonly called Trinacria, but _Euphonice_ by
Homer, Thrinacia.

[42] The expression is used by Milton, and signifies--Beset with many
difficulties.

[43] Mistaking the oar for a corn-van. A sure indication of his ignorance
of maritime concerns.

[44] By the Tragedians called--Jocasta.

[45] Iphicles had been informed by the Oracles that he should have no
children till instructed by a prophet how to obtain them; a service which
Melampus had the good fortune to render him.

[46] Apollo.

[47] Bacchus accused her to Diana of having lain with Theseus in his
temple, and the Goddess punished her with death.

[48] Probably meaning Helen.

[49] This is surely one of the most natural strokes to be found in any
Poet. Convinced, for a moment, by the virtues of Penelope, he mentioned
her with respect; but recollecting himself suddenly, involves even her in
his general ill opinion of the sex, begotten in him by the crimes of
Clytemnestra.

[50] Another most beautiful stroke of nature. Ere yet Ulysses has had
opportunity to answer, the very thought that Peleus may possibly be
insulted, fires him, and he takes the whole for granted. Thus is the
impetuous character of Achilles sustained to the last moment!

[51] +Gynaion eineka doron+--Priam is said to have influenced by gifts
the wife and mother of Eurypylus, to persuade him to the assistance of
Troy, he being himself unwilling to engage. The passage through defect of
history has long been dark, and commentators have adapted different
senses to it, all conjectural. The Ceteans are said to have been a people
of Mysia, of which Eurypylus was King.

[52] +Kat' asphodelon leimona+--Asphodel was planted on the graves and
around the tombs of the deceased, and hence the supposition that the
Stygian plain was clothed with asphodel. F.

[53] +Basazonta+ must have this sense interpreted by what follows. To
attempt to make the English numbers expressive as the Greek is a labour
like that of Sisyphus. The Translator has done what he could.

[54] It is now, perhaps, impossible to ascertain with precision what
Homer meant by the word +krataiis+, which he uses only here, and in the
next book, where it is the name of Scylla's dam.--+Anaides+--is also of
very doubtful explication.

[55] The two first lines of the following book seem to ascertain the true
meaning of the conclusion of this, and to prove sufficiently that by
+Okeanos+ here Homer could not possibly intend any other than a river. In
those lines he tells us in the plainest terms that _the ship left the
stream of the river Oceanus, and arrived in the open sea_. Diodorus
Siculus informs us that +Okeanos+ had been a name anciently given to the
Nile. See Clarke.




BOOK XII

ARGUMENT

Ulysses, pursuing his narrative, relates his return from the shades to
Circe's island, the precautions given him by that Goddess, his escape
from the Sirens, and from Scylla and Charybdis; his arrival in Sicily,
where his companions, having slain and eaten the oxen of the Sun, are
afterward shipwrecked and lost; and concludes the whole with an account
of his arrival, alone, on the mast of his vessel, at the island of
Calypso.


    And now, borne seaward from the river-stream
    Of the Oceanus, we plow'd again
    The spacious Deep, and reach'd th' AEaean isle,
    Where, daughter of the dawn, Aurora takes
    Her choral sports, and whence the sun ascends.
    We, there arriving, thrust our bark aground
    On the smooth beach, then landed, and on shore
    Reposed, expectant of the sacred dawn.
    But soon as day-spring's daughter rosy-palm'd
    Look'd forth again, sending my friends before,                    10
    I bade them bring Elpenor's body down
    From the abode of Circe to the beach.
    Then, on the utmost headland of the coast
    We timber fell'd, and, sorrowing o'er the dead,
    His fun'ral rites water'd with tears profuse.
    The dead consumed, and with the dead his arms,
    We heap'd his tomb, and the sepulchral post
    Erecting, fix'd his shapely oar aloft.
      Thus, punctual, we perform'd; nor our return
    From Ades knew not Circe, but attired                             20
    In haste, ere long arrived, with whom appear'd
    Her female train with plenteous viands charged,
    And bright wine rosy-red. Amidst us all
    Standing, the beauteous Goddess thus began.
      Ah miserable! who have sought the shades
    Alive! while others of the human race
    Die only once, appointed twice to die!
    Come--take ye food; drink wine; and on the shore
    All day regale, for ye shall hence again
    At day-spring o'er the Deep; but I will mark                      30
    Myself your future course, nor uninform'd
    Leave you in aught, lest, through some dire mistake,
    By sea or land new mis'ries ye incur.
      The Goddess spake, whose invitation kind
    We glad accepted; thus we feasting sat
    Till set of sun, and quaffing richest wine;
    But when the sun went down and darkness fell,
    My crew beside the hawsers slept, while me
    The Goddess by the hand leading apart,
    First bade me sit, then, seated opposite,                         40
    Enquired, minute, of all that I had seen,
    And I, from first to last, recounted all.
    Then, thus the awful Goddess in return.
      Thus far thy toils are finish'd. Now attend!
    Mark well my words, of which the Gods will sure
    Themselves remind thee in the needful hour.
    First shalt thou reach the Sirens; they the hearts
    Enchant of all who on their coast arrive.
    The wretch, who unforewarn'd approaching, hears
    The Sirens' voice, his wife and little-ones                       50
    Ne'er fly to gratulate his glad return,
    But him the Sirens sitting in the meads
    Charm with mellifluous song, while all around
    The bones accumulated lie of men
    Now putrid, and the skins mould'ring away.
    But, pass them thou, and, lest thy people hear
    Those warblings, ere thou yet approach, fill all
    Their ears with wax moulded between thy palms;
    But as for thee--thou hear them if thou wilt.
    Yet let thy people bind thee to the mast                          60
    Erect, encompassing thy feet and arms
    With cordage well-secured to the mast-foot,
    So shalt thou, raptur'd, hear the Sirens' song.
    But if thou supplicate to be released,
    Or give such order, then, with added cords
    Let thy companions bind thee still the more.
    When thus thy people shall have safely pass'd
    The Sirens by, think not from me to learn
    What course thou next shalt steer; two will occur;
    Delib'rate chuse; I shall describe them both.                     70
    Here vaulted rocks impend, dash'd by the waves
    Immense of Amphitrite azure-eyed;
    The blessed Gods those rocks, Erratic, call.
    Birds cannot pass them safe; no, not the doves
    Which his ambrosia bear to Father Jove,
    But even of those doves the slipp'ry rock
    Proves fatal still to one, for which the God
    Supplies another, lest the number fail.
    No ship, what ship soever there arrives,
    Escapes them, but both mariners and planks                        80
    Whelm'd under billows of the Deep, or, caught
    By fiery tempests, sudden disappear.
    Those rocks the billow-cleaving bark alone
    The Argo, further'd by the vows of all,
    Pass'd safely, sailing from AEaeta's isle;
    Nor she had pass'd, but surely dash'd had been
    On those huge rocks, but that, propitious still
    To Jason, Juno sped her safe along.
    These rocks are two; one lifts his summit sharp
    High as the spacious heav'ns, wrapt in dun clouds                 90
    Perpetual, which nor autumn sees dispers'd
    Nor summer, for the sun shines never there;
    No mortal man might climb it or descend,
    Though twice ten hands and twice ten feet he own'd,
    For it is levigated as by art.
    Down scoop'd to Erebus, a cavern drear
    Yawns in the centre of its western side;
    Pass it, renown'd Ulysses! but aloof
    So far, that a keen arrow smartly sent
    Forth from thy bark should fail to reach the cave.               100
    There Scylla dwells, and thence her howl is heard
    Tremendous; shrill her voice is as the note
    Of hound new-whelp'd, but hideous her aspect,
    Such as no mortal man, nor ev'n a God
    Encount'ring her, should with delight survey.
    Her feet are twelve, all fore-feet; six her necks
    Of hideous length, each clubb'd into a head
    Terrific, and each head with fangs is arm'd
    In triple row, thick planted, stored with death.
    Plunged to her middle in the hollow den                          110
    She lurks, protruding from the black abyss
    Her heads, with which the rav'ning monster dives
    In quest of dolphins, dog-fish, or of prey
    More bulky, such as in the roaring gulphs
    Of Amphitrite without end abounds.
    It is no seaman's boast that e'er he slipp'd
    Her cavern by, unharm'd. In ev'ry mouth
    She bears upcaught a mariner away.
    The other rock, Ulysses, thou shalt find
    Humbler, a bow-shot only from the first;                         120
    On this a wild fig grows broad-leav'd, and here
    Charybdis dire ingulphs the sable flood.
    Each day she thrice disgorges, and each day
    Thrice swallows it. Ah! well forewarn'd, beware
    What time she swallows, that thou come not nigh,
    For not himself, Neptune, could snatch thee thence.
    Close passing Scylla's rock, shoot swift thy bark
    Beyond it, since the loss of six alone
    Is better far than shipwreck made of all.
      So Circe spake, to whom I thus replied.                        130
    Tell me, O Goddess, next, and tell me true!
    If, chance, from fell Charybdis I escape,
    May I not also save from Scylla's force
    My people; should the monster threaten them?
      I said, and quick the Goddess in return.
    Unhappy! can exploits and toils of war
    Still please thee? yield'st not to the Gods themselves?
    She is no mortal, but a deathless pest,
    Impracticable, savage, battle-proof.
    Defence is vain; flight is thy sole resource.                    140
    For should'st thou linger putting on thy arms
    Beside the rock, beware, lest darting forth
    Her num'rous heads, she seize with ev'ry mouth
    A Greecian, and with others, even thee.
    Pass therefore swift, and passing, loud invoke
    Cratais, mother of this plague of man,
    Who will forbid her to assail thee more.
    Thou, next, shalt reach Thrinacia; there, the beeves
    And fatted flocks graze num'rous of the Sun;
    Sev'n herds; as many flocks of snowy fleece;                     150
    Fifty in each; they breed not, neither die,
    Nor are they kept by less than Goddesses,
    Lampetia fair, and Phaeethusa, both
    By nymph Neaera to Hyperion borne.
    Them, soon as she had train'd them to an age
    Proportion'd to that charge, their mother sent
    Into Thrinacia, there to dwell and keep
    Inviolate their father's flocks and herds.
    If, anxious for a safe return, thou spare
    Those herds and flocks, though after much endured,               160
    Ye may at last your Ithaca regain;
    But should'st thou violate them, I foretell
    Destruction of thy ship and of thy crew,
    And though thyself escape, thou shalt return
    Late, in ill plight, and all thy friends destroy'd.
      She ended, and the golden morning dawn'd.
    Then, all-divine, her graceful steps she turn'd
    Back through the isle, and, at the beach arrived,
    I summon'd all my followers to ascend
    The bark again, and cast the hawsers loose.                      170
    They, at my voice, embarking, fill'd in ranks
    The seats, and rowing, thresh'd the hoary flood.
    And now, melodious Circe, nymph divine,
    Sent after us a canvas-stretching breeze,
    Pleasant companion of our course, and we
    (The decks and benches clear'd) untoiling sat,
    While managed gales sped swift the bark along.
    Then, with dejected heart, thus I began.
      Oh friends! (for it is needful that not one
    Or two alone the admonition hear                                 180
    Of Circe, beauteous prophetess divine)
    To all I speak, that whether we escape
    Or perish, all may be, at least, forewarn'd.
    She bids us, first, avoid the dang'rous song
    Of the sweet Sirens and their flow'ry meads.
    Me only she permits those strains to hear;
    But ye shall bind me with coercion strong
    Of cordage well-secured to the mast-foot,
    And by no struggles to be loos'd of mine.
    But should I supplicate to be released                           190
    Or give such order, then, with added cords
    Be it your part to bind me still the more.
      Thus with distinct precaution I prepared
    My people; rapid in her course, meantime,
    My gallant bark approach'd the Sirens' isle,
    For brisk and favourable blew the wind.
    Then fell the wind suddenly, and serene
    A breathless calm ensued, while all around
    The billows slumber'd, lull'd by pow'r divine.
    Up-sprang my people, and the folded sails                        200
    Bestowing in the hold, sat to their oars,
    Which with their polish'd blades whiten'd the Deep.
    I, then, with edge of steel sev'ring minute
    A waxen cake, chafed it and moulded it
    Between my palms; ere long the ductile mass
    Grew warm, obedient to that ceaseless force,
    And to Hyperion's all-pervading beams.
    With that soft liniment I fill'd the ears
    Of my companions, man by man, and they
    My feet and arms with strong coercion bound                      210
    Of cordage to the mast-foot well secured.
    Then down they sat, and, rowing, thresh'd the brine.
    But when with rapid course we had arrived
    Within such distance as a voice may reach,
    Not unperceived by them the gliding bark
    Approach'd, and, thus, harmonious they began.
      Ulysses, Chief by ev'ry tongue extoll'd,
    Achaia's boast, oh hither steer thy bark!
    Here stay thy course, and listen to our lay!
    These shores none passes in his sable ship                       220
    Till, first, the warblings of our voice he hear,
    Then, happier hence and wiser he departs.
    All that the Greeks endured, and all the ills
    Inflicted by the Gods on Troy, we know,
    Know all that passes on the boundless earth.
      So they with voices sweet their music poured
    Melodious on my ear, winning with ease
    My heart's desire to listen, and by signs
    I bade my people, instant, set me free.
    But they incumbent row'd, and from their seats                   230
    Eurylochus and Perimedes sprang
    With added cords to bind me still the more.
    This danger past, and when the Sirens' voice,
    Now left remote, had lost its pow'r to charm,
    Then, my companions freeing from the wax
    Their ears, deliver'd me from my restraint.
    The island left afar, soon I discern'd
    Huge waves, and smoke, and horrid thund'rings heard.
    All sat aghast; forth flew at once the oars
    From ev'ry hand, and with a clash the waves                      240
    Smote all together; check'd, the galley stood,
    By billow-sweeping oars no longer urged,
    And I, throughout the bark, man after man
    Encouraged all, addressing thus my crew.
      We meet not, now, my friends, our first distress.
    This evil is not greater than we found
    When the huge Cyclops in his hollow den
    Imprison'd us, yet even thence we 'scaped,
    My intrepidity and fertile thought
    Opening the way; and we shall recollect                          250
    These dangers also, in due time, with joy.
    Come, then--pursue my counsel. Ye your seats
    Still occupying, smite the furrow'd flood
    With well-timed strokes, that by the will of Jove
    We may escape, perchance, this death, secure.
    To thee the pilot thus I speak, (my words
    Mark thou, for at thy touch the rudder moves)
    This smoke, and these tumultuous waves avoid;
    Steer wide of both; yet with an eye intent
    On yonder rock, lest unaware thou hold                           260
    Too near a course, and plunge us into harm.
      So I; with whose advice all, quick, complied.
    But Scylla I as yet named not, (that woe
    Without a cure) lest, terrified, my crew
    Should all renounce their oars, and crowd below.
    Just then, forgetful of the strict command
    Of Circe not to arm, I cloath'd me all
    In radiant armour, grasp'd two quiv'ring spears,
    And to the deck ascended at the prow,
    Expecting earliest notice there, what time                       270
    The rock-bred Scylla should annoy my friends.
    But I discern'd her not, nor could, although
    To weariness of sight the dusky rock
    I vigilant explored. Thus, many a groan
    Heaving, we navigated sad the streight,
    For here stood Scylla, while Charybdis there
    With hoarse throat deep absorb'd the briny flood.
    Oft as she vomited the deluge forth,
    Like water cauldron'd o'er a furious fire
    The whirling Deep all murmur'd, and the spray                    280
    On both those rocky summits fell in show'rs.
    But when she suck'd the salt wave down again,
    Then, all the pool appear'd wheeling about
    Within, the rock rebellow'd, and the sea
    Drawn off into that gulph disclosed to view
    The oozy bottom. Us pale horror seized.
    Thus, dreading death, with fast-set eyes we watch'd
    Charybdis; meantime, Scylla from the bark
    Caught six away, the bravest of my friends.
    With eyes, that moment, on my ship and crew                      290
    Retorted, I beheld the legs and arms
    Of those whom she uplifted in the air;
    On me they call'd, my name, the last, last time
    Pronouncing then, in agony of heart.
    As when from some bold point among the rocks
    The angler, with his taper rod in hand,
    Casts forth his bait to snare the smaller fry,
    He swings away remote his guarded line,[56]
    Then jerks his gasping prey forth from the Deep,
    So Scylla them raised gasping to the rock,                       300
    And at her cavern's mouth devour'd them loud-
    Shrieking, and stretching forth to me their arms
    In sign of hopeless mis'ry. Ne'er beheld
    These eyes in all the seas that I have roam'd,
    A sight so piteous, nor in all my toils.
      From Scylla and Charybdis dire escaped,
    We reach'd the noble island of the Sun
    Ere long, where bright Hyperion's beauteous herds
    Broad-fronted grazed, and his well-batten'd flocks.
    I, in the bark and on the sea, the voice                         310
    Of oxen bellowing in hovels heard,
    And of loud-bleating sheep; then dropp'd the word
    Into my memory of the sightless Seer,
    Theban Tiresias, and the caution strict
    Of Circe, my AEaean monitress,
    Who with such force had caution'd me to avoid
    The island of the Sun, joy of mankind.
    Thus then to my companions, sad, I spake.
      Hear ye, my friends! although long time distress'd,
    The words prophetic of the Theban seer                           320
    And of AEaean Circe, whose advice
    Was oft repeated to me to avoid
    This island of the Sun, joy of mankind.
    There, said the Goddess, dread your heaviest woes,
    Pass the isle, therefore, scudding swift away.
      I ceased; they me with consternation heard,
    And harshly thus Eurylochus replied.
      Ulysses, ruthless Chief! no toils impair
    Thy strength, of senseless iron thou art form'd,
    Who thy companions weary and o'erwatch'd                         330
    Forbidd'st to disembark on this fair isle,
    Where now, at last, we might with ease regale.
    Thou, rash, command'st us, leaving it afar,
    To roam all night the Ocean's dreary waste;
    But winds to ships injurious spring by night,
    And how shall we escape a dreadful death
    If, chance, a sudden gust from South arise
    Or stormy West, that dash in pieces oft
    The vessel, even in the Gods' despight?
    Prepare we rather now, as night enjoins,                         340
    Our evening fare beside the sable bark,
    In which at peep of day we may again
    Launch forth secure into the boundless flood.
      He ceas'd, whom all applauded. Then I knew
    That sorrow by the will of adverse heav'n
    Approach'd, and in wing'd accents thus replied.
      I suffer force, Eurylochus! and yield
    O'er-ruled by numbers. Come, then, swear ye all
    A solemn oath, that should we find an herd
    Or num'rous flock, none here shall either sheep                  350
    Or bullock slay, by appetite profane
    Seduced, but shall the viands eat content
    Which from immortal Circe we received.
      I spake; they readily a solemn oath
    Sware all, and when their oath was fully sworn,
    Within a creek where a fresh fountain rose
    They moor'd the bark, and, issuing, began
    Brisk preparation of their evening cheer.
    But when nor hunger now nor thirst remain'd
    Unsated, recollecting, then, their friends                       360
    By Scylla seized and at her cave devour'd,
    They mourn'd, nor ceased to mourn them, till they slept.
    The night's third portion come, when now the stars
    Had travers'd the mid-sky, cloud-gath'rer Jove
    Call'd forth a vehement wind with tempest charged,
    Menacing earth and sea with pitchy clouds
    Tremendous, and the night fell dark from heav'n.
    But when Aurora, daughter of the day,
    Look'd rosy forth, we haled, drawn inland more,
    Our bark into a grot, where nymphs were wont                     370
    Graceful to tread the dance, or to repose.
    Convening there my friends, I thus began.
      My friends! food fails us not, but bread is yet
    And wine on board. Abstain we from the herds,
    Lest harm ensue; for ye behold the flocks
    And herds of a most potent God, the Sun!
    Whose eye and watchful ear none may elude.
      So saying, I sway'd the gen'rous minds of all.
    A month complete the South wind ceaseless blew,
    Nor other wind blew next, save East and South,                   380
    Yet they, while neither food nor rosy wine
    Fail'd them, the herds harm'd not, through fear to die.
    But, our provisions failing, they employed
    Whole days in search of food, snaring with hooks
    Birds, fishes, of what kind soe'er they might.
    By famine urged. I solitary roam'd
    Meantime the isle, seeking by pray'r to move
    Some God to shew us a deliv'rance thence.
    When, roving thus the isle, I had at length
    Left all my crew remote, laving my hands                         390
    Where shelter warm I found from the rude blast,
    I supplicated ev'ry Pow'r above;
    But they my pray'rs answer'd with slumbers soft
    Shed o'er my eyes, and with pernicious art
    Eurylochus, the while, my friends harangued.
      My friends! afflicted as ye are, yet hear
    A fellow-suff'rer. Death, however caused,
    Abhorrence moves in miserable man,
    But death by famine is a fate of all
    Most to be fear'd. Come--let us hither drive                     400
    And sacrifice to the Immortal Pow'rs
    The best of all the oxen of the Sun,
    Resolving thus--that soon as we shall reach
    Our native Ithaca, we will erect
    To bright Hyperion an illustrious fane,
    Which with magnificent and num'rous gifts
    We will enrich. But should he chuse to sink
    Our vessel, for his stately beeves incensed,
    And should, with him, all heav'n conspire our death,
    I rather had with open mouth, at once,                           410
    Meeting the billows, perish, than by slow
    And pining waste here in this desert isle.
      So spake Eurylochus, whom all approved.
    Then, driving all the fattest of the herd
    Few paces only, (for the sacred beeves
    Grazed rarely distant from the bark) they stood
    Compassing them around, and, grasping each
    Green foliage newly pluck'd from saplings tall,
    (For barley none in all our bark remain'd)
    Worshipp'd the Gods in pray'r. Pray'r made, they slew
    And flay'd them, and the thighs with double fat                  421
    Investing, spread them o'er with slices crude.
    No wine had they with which to consecrate
    The blazing rites, but with libation poor
    Of water hallow'd the interior parts.
    Now, when the thighs were burnt, and each had shared
    His portion of the maw, and when the rest
    All-slash'd and scored hung roasting at the fire,
    Sleep, in that moment, suddenly my eyes
    Forsaking, to the shore I bent my way.                           430
    But ere the station of our bark I reach'd,
    The sav'ry steam greeted me. At the scent
    I wept aloud, and to the Gods exclaim'd.
      Oh Jupiter, and all ye Pow'rs above!
    With cruel sleep and fatal ye have lull'd
    My cares to rest, such horrible offence
    Meantime my rash companions have devised.
      Then, flew long-stoled Lampetia to the Sun
    At once with tidings of his slaughter'd beeves,
    And he, incensed, the Immortals thus address'd.                  440
      Jove, and ye everlasting Pow'rs divine!
    Avenge me instant on the crew profane
    Of Laertiades; Ulysses' friends
    Have dared to slay my beeves, which I with joy
    Beheld, both when I climb'd the starry heav'ns,
    And when to earth I sloped my "westring wheels,"
    But if they yield me not amercement due
    And honourable for my loss, to Hell
    I will descend and give the ghosts my beams.
      Then, thus the cloud-assembler God replied.                    450
    Sun! shine thou still on the Immortal Pow'rs,
    And on the teeming earth, frail man's abode.
    My candent bolts can in a moment reach
    And split their flying bark in the mid-sea.
      These things Calypso told me, taught, herself,
    By herald Hermes, as she oft affirm'd.
      But when, descending to the shore, I reach'd
    At length my bark, with aspect stern and tone
    I reprimanded them, yet no redress
    Could frame, or remedy--the beeves were dead.                    460
