in Gilbert Town (present Lincolnton, Lincoln County) at the foot of the
Blue Ridge and indited a letter to the Back Water Men, telling them
that if they did not lay down their arms and return to their rightful
allegiance, he would come over their hills and raze their settlements
and hang their leaders. He paroled a kinsman of Shelby's, whom he had
taken prisoner in the chase, and sent him home with the letter. Then he
set about his usual business of gathering up Tories and making soldiers
of them, and of hunting down rebels.

One of the rebels was a certain Captain Lytle. When Ferguson drew up at
Lytle's door, Lytle had 204 already made his escape; but Mrs. Lytle was
there. She was a very handsome woman and she had dressed herself in her
best to receive Ferguson, who was reported a gallant as well as a wolf.
After a few spirited passages between the lady in the doorway and the
officer on the white horse before it, the latter advised Mrs. Lytle
to use her influence to bring her husband back to his duty. She became
grave then and answered that her husband would never turn traitor to his
country. Ferguson frowned at the word traitor, but presently he said:
Madam, I admire you as the handsomest woman I have seen in North
Carolina. I even half way admire your zeal in a bad cause. But take
my word for it, the rebellion has had its day and is now virtually put
down. Give my regards to Captain Lytle and tell him to come in. He will
not be asked to compromise his honor. His verbal pledge not again to
take up arms against the King is all that will be asked of him.¹

¹ Draper, _King's Mountain and its Heroes,_ pp. 151-53. This was another
phase of the character of the one-armed Highlander whose final challenge
to the back water men was now being considered in every log cabin beyond
the hills. A man who would not shoot an enemy in the back, who was ready
to put 205 the same faith in another soldier's honor which he knew was
due to his own, yet in battle a wolfish fighter who leaped through the
dark to give no quarter and to take none--he was fit challenger to those
other mountaineers who also had a chivalry of their own, albeit they too
were wolves of war.

When Shelby on the Holston received Ferguson's pungent letter, he flung
himself on his horse and rode posthaste to Watauga to consult with
Sevier. He found the bank of the Nolichucky teeming with merrymakers.
Nolichucky Jack was giving an immense barbecue and a horse race. Without
letting the festival crowd have an inkling of the serious nature of
Shelby's errand, the two men drew apart to confer. It is said to have
been Sevier's idea that they should muster the forces of the western
country and go in search of Ferguson ere the latter should be able
to get sufficient reinforcements to cross the mountains. Sevier, like
Ferguson, always preferred to seek his foe, knowing well the advantage
of the offensive. Messengers were sent to Colonel William Campbell of
the Virginia settlements on the Clinch, asking his aid. Campbell at
first refused, thinking it better to fortify the positions they held
and let Ferguson 206 come and put the mountains between himself and
Cornwallis. On receipt of a second message, however, he concurred. The
call to arms was heard up and down the valleys, and the frontiersmen
poured into Watauga. The overhill men were augmented by McDowell's
troops from Burke County, who had dashed over the mountains a few weeks
before in their escape from Ferguson.

At daybreak on the 26th of September they mustered at the Sycamore
Shoals on the Watauga, over a thousand strong. It was a different
picture they made from that other great gathering at the same spot when
Henderson had made his purchase in money of the Dark and Bloody Ground,
and Sevier and Robertson had bought for the Wataugans this strip of
Tennessee. There were no Indians in this picture. Dragging Canoe, who
had uttered his bloody prophecy, had by these very men been driven far
south into the caves of the Tennessee River. But the Indian prophecy
still hung over them, and in this day with a heavier menace. Not with
money, now, were they to seal their purchase of the free land by the
western waters. There had been no women in that other picture, only the
white men who were going forward to open the way and the red men who
were 207 retreating. But in this picture there were women--wives and
children, mothers, sisters, and sweethearts. All the women of the
settlement were there at this daybreak muster to cheer on their way the
men who were going out to battle that they might keep the way of liberty
open not for men only but for women and children also. And the battle to
which the men were now going forth must be fought against Back Country
men of their own stripe under a leader who, in other circumstances,
might well have been one of themselves--a primitive spirit of hardy
mountain stock, who, having once taken his stand, would not barter and
would not retreat.

With the Sword of the Lord and of Gideon! cried their pastor, the
Reverend Samuel Doak, with upraised hands, as the mountaineers swung
into their saddles. And it is said that all the women took up his
words and cried again and again, With the sword of the Lord and of our
Gideons! To the shouts of their women, as bugles on the wind of dawn,
the buckskin-shirted army dashed out upon the mountain trail.

The warriors' equipment included rifles and ammunition, tomahawks,
knives, shot pouches, a knapsack, and a blanket for each man. Their
uniforms 208 were leggings, breeches, and long loose shirts of gayly
fringed deerskin, or of the linsey-woolsey spun by their women. Their
hunting shirts were bound in at the waist by bright-colored linsey
sashes tied behind in a bow. They wore moccasins for footgear, and on
their heads high fur or deerskin caps trimmed with colored bands of
raveled cloth. Around their necks hung their powder-horns ornamented
with their own rude carvings.

On the first day they drove along with them a number of beeves but,
finding that the cattle impeded the march, they left them behind on the
mountain side. Their provisions thereafter were wild game and the small
supply each man carried of mixed corn meal and maple sugar. For drink,
they had the hill streams.

They passed upward between Roan and Yellow mountains to the top of
the range. Here, on the bald summit, where the loose snow lay to their
ankles, they halted for drill and rifle practice. When Sevier called up
his men, he discovered that two were missing. He suspected at once that
they had slipped away to carry warning to Ferguson, for Watauga was
known to be infested with Tories. Two problems now confronted the
mountaineers. They must increase the speed of their march, so 209 that
Ferguson should not have time to get reinforcements from Cornwallis; and
they must make that extra speed by another trail than they had intended
taking so that they themselves could not be intercepted before they had
picked up the Back Country militia under Colonels Cleveland, Hampbright,
Chronicle, and Williams, who were moving to join them. We are not told
who took the lead when they left the known trail, but we may suppose it
was Sevier and his Wataugans, for the making of new warpaths and wild
riding were two of the things which distinguished Nolichucky Jack's
leadership. Down the steep side of the mountain, finding their way as
they plunged, went the overhill men. They crossed the Blue Ridge at
Gillespie's Gap and pushed on to Quaker Meadows, where Colonel Cleveland
with 350 men swung into their column. Along their route, the Back
Country Patriots with their rifles came out from the little hamlets and
the farms and joined them.

They now had an army of perhaps fifteen hundred men but no commanding
officer. Thus far, on the march, the four colonels had conferred
together and agreed as to procedure; or, in reality, the influence of
Sevier and Shelby, who had planned the enterprise and who seem always to
210 have acted in unison, had swayed the others. It would be, however,
manifestly improper to go into battle without a real general. Something
must be done. McDowell volunteered to carry a letter explaining their
need to General Gates, who had escaped with some of his staff into North
Carolina and was not far off. It then occurred to Sevier and Shelby,
evidently for the first time, that Gates, on receiving such a request,
might well ask why the Governor of North Carolina, as the military head
of the State, had not provided a commander. The truth is that Sevier
and Shelby had been so busy drumming up the militia and planning their
campaign that they had found no time to consult the Governor. Moreover,
the means whereby the expedition had been financed might not have
appealed to the chief executive. After finding it impossible to raise
sufficient funds on his personal credit, Sevier had appropriated the
entry money in the government land office to the business in hand--with
the good will of the entry taker, who was a patriotic man, although,
as he had pointed out, he could not, officially, hand over the money.
Things being as they were, no doubt Nolichucky Jack felt that an
interview with the Governor had better be deferred until after 211 the
capture of Ferguson. Hence the tenor of this communication to General
Gates:

As we have at this time called out our militia without any orders from
the Executive of our different States and with the view of expelling
the Enemy out of this part of the Country, we think such a body of men
worthy of your attention and would request you to send a General Officer
immediately to take the command.… All our Troops being Militia and but
little acquainted with discipline, we could wish him to be a Gentleman
of address, and able to keep up a proper discipline without disgusting
the soldiery.

For some unknown reason--unless it might be the wording of this
letter!--no officer was sent in reply. Shelby then suggested that, since
all the officers but Campbell were North Carolinians and, therefore,
no one of them could be promoted without arousing the jealousy of the
others, Campbell, as the only Virginian, was the appropriate choice.
The sweet reasonableness of selecting a commander from such a motive
appealed to all, and Campbell became a general in fact if not in name!
Shelby's principal aim, however, had been to get rid of McDowell,
who, as their senior, would naturally expect to command and whom
he considered too far advanced in life and too inactive for such an
enterprise. At this time McDowell must have 212 been nearly thirty-nine;
and Shelby, who was just thirty, wisely refused to risk the campaign
under a general who was in his dotage!

News of the frontiersmen's approach, with their augmented force, now
numbering between sixteen and eighteen hundred, had reached Ferguson by
the two Tories who had deserted from Sevier's troops. Ferguson thereupon
had made all haste out of Gilbert Town and was marching southward to get
in touch with Cornwallis. His force was much reduced, as some of his
men were in pursuit of Elijah Clarke towards Augusta and a number of his
other Tories were on furlough. As he passed through the Back Country
he posted a notice calling on the loyalists to join him. If the
overmountain men felt that they were out on a wolf hunt, Ferguson's
proclamation shows what the wolf thought of his hunters.

To the Inhabitants of North Carolina.

Gentlemen: Unless you wish to be eat up by an innundation of barbarians,
who have begun by murdering an unarmed son before the aged father, and
afterwards lopped off his arms, and who by their shocking cruelties
and irregularities give the best proof of their cowardice and want of
discipline: I say if you wish to be pinioned, robbed and murdered,
and see your wives and daughters in four days, abused by the dregs of
mankind--in 213 short if you wish to deserve to live and bear the name
of men, grasp your arms in a moment and run to camp. The Back Water men
have crossed the mountains: McDowell, Hampton, Shelby, and Cleveland
are at their head, so that you know what you have to depend upon. If you
choose to be degraded forever and ever by a set of mongrels, say so at
once, and let your women turn their backs upon you, and look out for
real men to protect them. Pat. Ferguson, Major 71st Regiment.¹

¹ Draper, _King's Mountain and its Heroes,_ p. 204. Ferguson's force has
been estimated at about eleven hundred men, but it is likely that this
estimate does not take the absentees into consideration. In the diary
of Lieutenant Allaire, one of his officers, the number is given as only
eight hundred. Because of the state of his army, chroniclers have found
Ferguson's movements, after leaving Gilbert Town, difficult to explain.
It has been pointed out that he could easily have escaped, for he had
plenty of time, and Charlotte, Cornwallis's headquarters, was only sixty
miles distant. We have seen something of Ferguson's quality, however,
and we may simply take it that he did not want to escape. He had been
planning to cross the high hills--to him, the Highlander, no barrier
but a challenge--to fight these men. Now that they 214 had taken the
initiative he would not show them his back. He craved the battle. So he
sent out runners to the main army and rode on along the eastern base
of the mountains, seeking a favorable site to go into camp and wait for
Cornwallis's aid. On the 6th of October he reached the southern end of
the King's Mountain ridge, in South Carolina, about half a mile south
of the northern boundary. Here a rocky, semi-isolated spur juts out from
the ridge, its summit--a table-land about six hundred yards long and one
hundred and twenty wide at its northern end--rising not more than sixty
feet above the surrounding country. On the summit Ferguson pitched his
camp.

The hill was a natural fortress, its sides forested, its bald top
protected by rocks and bowlders. All the approaches led through dense
forest. An enemy force, passing through the immediate, wooded territory,
might easily fail to discover a small army nesting sixty feet above the
shrouding leafage. Word was evidently brought to Ferguson here, telling
him the now augmented number of his foe, for he dispatched another
emissary to Cornwallis with a letter stating the number of his own
troops and urging full and immediate assistance.

Meanwhile the frontiersmen had halted at the 215 Cowpens. There they
feasted royally off roasted cattle and corn belonging to the loyalist
who owned the Cowpens. It is said that they mowed his fifty acres of
corn in an hour. And here one of their spies, in the assumed rôle of a
Tory, learned Ferguson's plans, his approximate force, his route, and
his system of communication with Cornwallis. The officers now held
council and determined to take a detachment of the hardiest and fleetest
horsemen and sweep down on the enemy before aid could reach him. About
nine o'clock that evening, according to Shelby's report, 910 mounted men
set off at full speed, leaving the main body of horse and foot to follow
after at their best pace.

Rain poured down on them all that night as they rode. At daybreak they
crossed the Broad at Cherokee Ford and dashed on in the drenching rain
all the forenoon. They kept their firearms and powder dry by wrapping
them in their knapsacks, blankets, and hunting shirts. The downpour
had so churned up the soil that many of the horses mired, but they were
pulled out and whipped forward again. The wild horsemen made no halt
for food or rest. Within two miles of King's Mountain they captured
Ferguson's messenger with the letter that told of his desperate
situation. They asked 216 this man how they should know Ferguson. He
told them that Ferguson was in full uniform but wore a checkered shirt
or dust cloak over it. This was not the only messenger of Ferguson's
who failed to carry through. The men he had sent out previously had been
followed and, to escape capture or death, they had been obliged to lie
in hiding, so that they did not reach Cornwallis until the day of the
battle.

At three o'clock on the afternoon of the 7th of October, the
overmountain men were in the forest at the base of the hill. The rain
had ceased and the sun was shining. They dismounted and tethered their
steaming horses. Orders were given that every man was to throw the
priming out of his pan, pick his touchhole, prime anew, examine bullets
and see that everything was in readiness for battle. The plan of battle
agreed on was to surround the hill, hold the enemy on the top and,
themselves screened by the trees, keep pouring in their fire. There was
a good chance that most of the answering fire would go over their heads.

As Shelby's men crossed a gap in the woods, the outposts on the hill
discovered their presence and sounded the alarm. Ferguson sprang to
horse, blowing his silver whistle to call his men to attack. 217
His riflemen poured fire into Shelby's contingent, but meanwhile the
frontiersmen on the other sides were creeping up, and presently a circle
of fire burst upon the hill. With fixed bayonets, some of Ferguson's men
charged down the face of the slope, against the advancing foe, only
to be shot in the back as they charged. Still time and time again
they charged; the overhill men reeled and retreated; but always their
comrades took toll with their rifles; Ferguson's men, preparing for a
mounted charge, were shot even as they swung to their saddles. Ferguson,
with his customary indifference to danger, rode up and down in front of
his line blowing his whistle to encourage his men. Huzza, brave boys!
The day is our own! Thus he was heard to shout above the triumphant war
whoops of the circling foe, surging higher and higher about the hill.

But there were others in his band who knew the fight was lost. The
overmountain men saw two white handkerchiefs, affixed to bayonets,
raised above the rocks; and then they saw Ferguson dash by and slash
them down with his sword. Two horses were shot under Ferguson in the
latter part of the action; but he mounted a third and rode again into
the thick of the fray.

218 Suddenly the cry spread among the attacking troops that the British
officer, Tarleton, had come to Ferguson's rescue; and the mountaineers
began to give way. But it was only the galloping horses of their own
comrades; Tarleton had not come. Nolichucky Jack spurred out in front of
his men and rode along the line. Fired by his courage they sounded the
war whoop again and renewed the attack with fury.

These are the same yelling devils that were at Musgrove's Mill, said
Captain De Peyster to Ferguson.

Now Shelby and Sevier, leading his Wataugans, had reached the summit.
The firing circle pressed in. The buckskin-shirted warriors leaped the
rocky barriers, swinging their tomahawks and long knives. Again the
white handkerchiefs fluttered. Ferguson saw that the morale of his
troops was shattered.

Surrender, De Peyster, his second in command, begged of him.

Surrender to those damned banditti? Never!

Ferguson turned his horse's head downhill and charged into the
Wataugans, hacking right and left with his sword till it was broken at
the hilt. A dozen rifles were leveled at him. An iron muzzle pushed at
his breast, but the powder flashed in the 219 pan. He swerved and struck
at the rifleman with his broken hilt. But the other guns aimed at him
