Never may I forget the look that sprang into Ralph's eyes when at last
he awoke and, turning them to seek Suzanne, remembered all.

"Why am I here and not dead?" he asked hoarsely.

"Sihamba saved you and you have been brought back in the waggon," I
answered.

"Where then is Suzanne?" he asked again.

"Sihamba has ridden to save her also, and Jan starts presently to follow
her, and with him others."

"Sihamba!" he groaned. "What can one woman do against Piet Van Vooren
and his murderers, and for the rest they will be too late. Oh! my God,
my God, what have we done that such a thing should fall upon us? Think
of it, think of her in the hands of Piet Van Vooren. Oh! my God, my God,
I shall go mad!"

Indeed I, who watched him, believe that this would have been so, or else
his brain must have burst beneath its shock of sorrow, had not nature
been kind to him and plunged him back into stupor. In this he lay long,
until well on into the morrow indeed, or rather the day, for by now it
was three o'clock, when the doctor came to take out the pistol ball and
set his shattered bone. For, as it chanced, a doctor, and a clever one,
had been sent for from the dorp to visit the wife of a neighbour who lay
sick not more than twenty miles away, and we were able to summon him.
Indeed but for this man's skill, the sleeping medicines he gave him to
quiet his mind, and, above all, a certain special mercy which shall be
told of in its place, I think that Ralph would have died. As it was,
seven long weeks went by before he could sit upon a horse.



CHAPTER XVII

THE HIDDEN KRANTZ

Before the waggon left her, Sihamba took from it Ralph's gun, a very
good _roer_, together with powder and bullets. Also she took tinder, a
bottle of peach-brandy, a blanket, mealies in a small bag, wherewith to
bait the horses in case of need, and some other things which she thought
might be necessary. These she laded among her own goods upon the mule
that with her horse had been fetched by Zinti and hastily fed with corn.
Now, at her bidding, Zinti set Suzanne's saddle upon the back of the
_schimmel_, and Ralph's on that of Suzanne's grey mare, which he mounted
that the mule might travel lighter. Then Sihamba got upon her own horse,
a good and quiet beast which she rode with a sheepskin for a saddle, and
they started, Sihamba leading the _schimmel_ and Zinti the mule that, as
it chanced, although bad tempered, would follow well on a riem.

Riding up the kloof they soon reached the spot where Van Vooren's band
had tethered their horses and tracked the spoor of them with ease for
so long as the ground was soft. Afterwards when they reached the open
country, where the grass had been burnt off and had only just begun to
spring again, this became more difficult, and at length, in that light,
impossible. Here they wasted a long time, searching for the hoof-marks
by the rays of the waning moon, only to lose them again so soon as they
were found.

"At this pace we shall take as long to reach Bull-Head's kraal as did
the cow you followed," said Sihamba presently. "Say, now, can you find
the way to it?"

"Without a doubt, lady; Zinti never forgets a road or a landmark."

"Then lead me there as fast as may be."

"Yes, lady, but Bull-Head may have taken the Swallow somewhere else,
and if we do not follow his spoor how shall we know where he has hidden
her?"

"Fool, I have thought of that," she answered angrily, "else should I
have spent all this time looking for hoof-marks in the dark? We must
risk it, I say. To his house he has not taken her, for other white folk
are living in it, and it is not likely he would have a second, or a
better hiding-place than that you saw. I say that we must be bold and
risk it since we have no time to lose."

"As you will, mistress," answered Zinti. "Who am I that I should
question your wisdom?" and, turning his horse's head, he rode forward
across the gloomy veldt as certainly as a homing rock-dove wings its
flight.

So they travelled till the sun rose behind a range of distant hills.
Then Zinti halted and pointed to them.

"Look, lady," he said. "Do you see that peak among the mountains which
has a point like a spear, the one that seems as though it were on fire?
Well, behind it lies Bull-Head's kraal."

"It is far, Zinti, but we must be there by night."

"That may be done, lady, but if so we must spare our horses."

"Good," she answered. "Here is a spring; let us off-saddle a while."

So they off-saddled and ate of the food which they had brought, while
the horses filled themselves with the sweet green grass, the _schimmel_
being tied to the grey mare, for he would not bear a knee-halter.

All that day they rode, not so very fast but steadily, till towards
sunset they off-saddled again beneath the shadow of the spear-pointed
peak. There was no water at this spot, but seeing a green place upon
the slope of a hill close by, Zinti walked to it, leading the thirsty
beasts. Presently he threw up his hand and whistled, whereon Sihamba set
out to join him, knowing that he had found a spring. So it proved to be,
and now they learned that Sihamba had been wise in heading straight for
Swart Piet's hiding-place, since round about this spring was the spoor
of many horses and of men. Among these was the print of a foot that she
knew well, the little foot of Suzanne.

"How long is it since they left here?" asked Sihamba, not as one who
does not know, but rather as though she desired to be certified in her
judgment.

"When the sun stood there," answered Zinti, pointing to a certain height
in the heavens.

"Yes," she answered, "three hours. Bull-Head has travelled quicker than
I thought."

"No," said Zinti, "but I think that he knew a path through the big
_vlei_, whereas we rode round it, two hours' ride, fearing lest we
should be bogged. Here by this spring they stayed till sunset, for it
was needful that the horses should feed and rest, since they would save
their strength in them.

"Lady," went on Zinti presently, "beyond the neck of the hill yonder
lies the secret kraal of Bull-Head. Say, now, what is your plan when you
reach it?"

"I do not know," she answered, "but tell me again of the hidden krantz
where the women built the new hut, and of the way to it."

He told her and she listened, saying nothing.

"Good," she said, when he had done. "Now lead me to this place, and then
perhaps I will tell my plan if I have one."

So they started on again, but just as they reached the crest of the
Nek a heavy thunderstorm came up, together with clouds and rain, hiding
everything from them.

"Now I suppose that we must stay here till the light comes," said
Sihamba.

"Not so, lady," answered Zinti, "I have been the path once and I can go
it again in storm or shine," and he pressed forward, with the lightning
flashes for a candle.

Well was that storm for them indeed, since otherwise they would have
been seen, for already Swart Piet had set his scouts about the kraal.

At length Sihamba felt that they were riding among trees, for water
dripped from them upon her and their branches brushed her face.

"Here is the wood where the women cut poles for the new hut," whispered
Zinti in her ear.

"Then let us halt," she answered, and dismounting they tied the three
horses and the mule to as many small trees close together, but not near
enough for them to kick each other.

Now Sihamba took a piece of biltong from a saddle-bag and began to eat
it, for she knew that she would need all her cleverness and strength.
"Take the bag of mealies," she said, "and divide it among the horses and
the mule, giving a double share to the _schimmel_."

Zinti obeyed her, and presently all four of the beasts were eating well,
for though they had travelled far their loads were light, nor had the
pace been pressed.

Sihamba turned, and, holding out her hands towards the horses, muttered
something rapidly.

"What are you doing, mistress?" asked Zinti.

"Perhaps I am throwing a charm upon these animals, that they may neither
neigh nor whinny till we come again, for if they do so we are lost.
Now let us go, and--stay, bring the gun with you, for you know how to
shoot."

So they started, slipping through the wet wood like shadows. For ten
minutes or more they crept on thus towards the dark line of cliff, Zinti
going first and feeling the way with his fingers, till presently he
halted.

"Hist!" he whispered. "I smell people."

As he spoke, they heard a sound like to that of someone sliding down
rocks. Then a man challenged, saying, "Who passes from the krantz?" and
a woman's voice answered, "It is I, Asika, the wife of Bull-Head." "I
hear you," answered the man. "Now tell me, Asika, what happens yonder."

"What happens? How do I know what happens?" she answered crossly. "About
sunset Bull-Head brought home his new wife, a white chieftainess, for
whom we built the hut yonder; but the fashions of marriage among these
white people must be strange indeed, for this one came to her husband,
her feet bound, and with a face like to the face of a dead woman, the
eyes set wide, and the lips parted. Yes, and they blindfolded her in the
wood there and carried her through this hole in the rock down to the hut
where she is shut in."

"I know something of this matter," answered the man; "the white lady is
no willing wife to Bull-Head, for he killed her husband and took her by
force. Yes, yes, I know, for my uncle was one of those with him when the
deed was done, and he told me something of it just now."

"An evil deed," said Asika, "and one that will bring bad luck upon all
of us; but then, Bull-Head, our chief, is an evil man. Oh! I know it who
am of the number of his Kaffir wives. Say, friend," she went on, "will
you walk a little way with me, as far as the first huts of the kraal,
for there are ghosts in the wood, and I fear to pass it alone at night."

"I dare not, Asika," he answered, "for I am set here on guard."

"Have no fear, friend, the chief is within, seeing to the comfort of his
new wife."

"Well, I will come with you a little way if you wish it, but I must
be back immediately," he said, and the listeners heard them walk off
together.

"Now, Zinti," whispered Sihamba, "lead me through the hole in the rock."

So he took her by the hand and felt along the face of the cliff till he
found the bush which covered the entrance. To this he climbed, dragging
her after him, and presently they were in the secret krantz.

"We have found our way into the spider's nest," muttered Zinti, who grew
afraid; "but say, lady, how shall we find our way out of it?"

"Lead on and leave that to me," she answered. "Where I, a woman, can go,
surely you who are a man can go also."

"I trust to your magic to protect us--therefore I come," said Zinti,
"though if we are seen our death is sure."

On they crept across the glen, till presently they heard the sound of
the small waterfall and saw it glimmering faintly through the gloom and
drizzling rain. To their left ran the stream, and on the banks of it
stood something large and round.

"There stands the new hut where Swallow is," whispered Zinti.

Now Sihamba thought for a moment and said:

"Zinti, I must find out what passes in that hut. Listen: do you lie hid
among the rocks under the bank of the stream, and if you hear me hoot
like an owl, then come to me, but not before."

"I obey," answered Zinti, and crept down among the reeds, where he
crouched for a long time up to his knees in water, shivering with cold
and fear.



CHAPTER XVIII

WHAT PASSED IN THE HUT

Going on to her hands and knees Sihamba crawled towards the hut. Now she
was within ten paces of it and could see that a man stood on guard at
its doorway. "I must creep round to the back," she thought, and began to
do so, heading for some shrubs which grew to the right. Already she had
almost reached them, when of a sudden, and for an instant only, the moon
shone out between two thick clouds, revealing her, though indistinctly,
to the eyes of the guard. Now Sihamba was wearing a fur cape made of
wild dog's hide, and, crouched as she was upon her hands and knees,
half-hidden, moreover, by a tuft of dry grass, the man took her to be
a wild dog or a jackal, and the hair which stood out round her head for
the ruff upon the animal's neck.

"Take that, you four-legged night thief," he said aloud, and hurled the
assegai in his hand straight at her. The aim was good; indeed, had she
been a dog it would have transfixed her. As it was, the spear passed
just beneath her body, pinning the hanging edges of the cape and
remaining fixed in the tough leather. Now if Sihamba's wit had left her,
as would have happened with most, she was lost, but not for nothing had
she been a witch-doctoress from her childhood, skilled in every artifice
and accustomed to face death. From his words she guessed that the sentry
had mistaken her for a wild beast, so instead of springing to her feet
she played the part of one, and uttering a howl of pain scrambled
away among the bushes. She heard the man start to follow her, then the
moonlight went out and he returned to his post grumbling over his lost
assegai and saying that he would find it in the jackal's body on the
morrow. Sihamba, listening not far away, knew his voice; it was that of
the fellow who had set the noose about her neck at Swart Piet's bidding
and who was to have done the murder in the pass.

"Now, friend, you are unarmed," she thought to herself, "for you have no
gun with you, and perhaps we shall settle our accounts before you go to
seek that dead jackal by to-morrow's light." Then drawing the assegai
from the cloak and keeping it in her hand, she crept on till she came to
the back of the hut in safety. Still she was not much nearer to her end,
for the hut was new and very well built, and she could find no crack
to look through, though when she placed her ear against its side
she thought that she could hear the sound of a man's voice. In her
perplexity Sihamba cast her eyes upwards and saw that a fine line of
light shone from the smoke-hole at the very top of the hut, which was
hive-shaped, and a thought came into her head.

"If I climb up there," she said to herself, "I can look down through
the smoke-hole and see and hear what passes in the hut. Only then if
the moon comes out again I may be seen lying on the thatch; well, that I
must chance with the rest."

So very slowly and silently, by the help of the rimpis which bound the
straw, she climbed the dome of the hut, laughing to herself to think
that this was the worst of omens for its owner, till at length she
reached the smoke-hole at the top and looked down.

This was what she saw: Half seated, half lying upon a rough bedstead
spread with blankets, was Suzanne. Her hair had come undone and hung
about her, her feet were still loosely bound together, and as the
Kaffir, Asika, had said, her face was like that of a dead woman, and her
eyes were set in a fixed unnatural stare. Before her was a table cut
by natives out of a single block of wood, on which were two candles of
sheep's fat set in bottles, and beyond the table stood Swart Piet, who
was addressing her.

"Suzanne," he said, "listen to me. I have always loved you, Suzanne,
yes, from the time when I was but a boy: we used to meet now and
again, you know, when you were out riding with the Englishman who
is dead"--here Suzanne's face changed, then resumed its deathlike
mask--"and always I worshipped you, and always I hated the Englishman
whom you favoured. Well, as you grew older you began to understand and
dislike me, and Kenzie began to understand and insult me, and from that
seed of slight and insult grew most that is bad in me. Yes, Suzanne, you
will say that I am wicked; and I am wicked. I have done things of which
I should not like to tell you. I have done such things as you saw last
night; I have mixed myself up with Kaffir wizardries and cruelties; I
have forgotten God and taken another master, and so far from honouring
my own father, why, I struck him down when he was drunk and dared me to
do it, and of that blow they say he died. Well, I owed him nothing less
for begetting me into such a world as this, and teaching me how to find
the devil before my time.

"And now," he went on after a pause, for Suzanne answered nothing,
"standing before you as I do here with your husband's blood upon my
hands, and seeking your love over his grave, you will look at me and
say--'This man is a monster, a madman, one who should be cast from the
earth and stamped deep, deep into hell!' Yes, all these things I am,
and let the weight of them rest upon your head, for you made me them,
Suzanne. I am mad, I know that I am mad, as my father and grandfather
were before me, but my madness is mixed with knowledge, for in me runs
the blood of the old Pondo witch-doctoress, my grandmother, she who knew
many things that are not given to white men. When I saw you and loved
you I became half mad--before that I was sane--and when the Englishman,
Kenzie, struck me with the whip after our fight at the sheep-kraal, ah!
then I went wholly mad, and see how wisely, for you are the first-fruits
of my madness, you and the body that to-night rolls to and fro in the
ocean.

"You do not answer: Well, look you, Suzanne, I have won you by craft and
blood, and by craft and blood I will keep you. Here you are in my power,
here Heaven itself could not save you from me, in Bull-Head's secret
krantz which none knew of but some few natives. Choose, therefore;
forget the sins that I have committed to win you and become my wife
willingly, and no woman shall ever find a better husband, for then the
fire and the tempest will leave my brain and it will grow calm as it was
before I saw you.

"Have you still no answer? Well, I will not hurry you. See, I must
go--do you know what for? To set scouts lest by any chance your father
or other fools should have found my hiding-place, though I think that
they can never find it except it be through the wisdom of Sihamba, which
they will not seek. Still I go, and in an hour I will return for your
answer, which you must make then, Suzanne, since whether you desire it,
