
"The Lord de Corasse could not tell; he only heard him--he never saw
aught; for Orthon only came by night, and, having wakened him, would
begin by saying, 'he was come from England, Hungary, or elsewhere,' and
telling all the news of the place."

"And what think you was he?"

"That was what our Lord, the Count de Foix, would fain have known, when
he had much marveled at the tidings that were brought him by the Lord
de Corasse, and had heard of the strange messenger who brought them.
He entreated the Knight to desire Orthon to show himself in his own
proper form--and then, having seen, to describe him.

"So at night, when Orthon came again, and plucked away the pillow, the
Knight asked him from whence he came?  'From Prague, in Bohemia,'
answered Orthon.  'How far is it?'--'Sixty days' journey.'  'Hast thou
returned thence in so short a time?'--'I travel as fast as the wind, or
faster.'  'What! hast thou got wings?'--'Oh, no.'  'How, then, canst
thou fly so fast?'--'That is no business of yours!' 'No,' said the
Knight--'I should like exceedingly to see what form thou hast.'--'That
concerns you not,' replied Orthon; 'be satisfied that you hear me.'  'I
should love thee better had I seen thee,' said the Knight,--whereupon
Orthon promised that the first thing he should see to-morrow, on
quitting his bed, should be no other than himself."

"Ha! then, I wager that he saw one of the black cats that played round
young Ashton's bed."

"Nay, the Knight's lady would not rise all day lest she should see
Orthon; but the Knight, leaping up in the morning, looked about, but
could see nothing unusual.  At night, when Orthon came, he reproached
him for not having shown himself, as he had promised. 'I have,' replied
Orthon.  'I say No,' said the Knight.  'What! you saw nothing when you
leapt out of bed?'--'Yes,' said the Lord de Corasse, after having
considered awhile, 'I saw two straws, which were turning and playing
together on the floor.'  'That was myself,' said Orthon.

"The Knight now desired importunately that Orthon would show himself in
his own true shape.  Orthon told him that it might lead to his being
forced to quit his service--but he persisted, and Orthon promised to
show himself when first the Knight should leave his chamber in the
morning.  Therefore, as soon as he was dressed, the Knight went to a
window overlooking the court, and there he beheld nothing but a large
lean sow, so poor, that she seemed nothing but skin and bone, with long
hanging ears, all spotted, and a thin sharp-pointed snout.  The Lord de
Corasse called to his servants to set the dogs on the ill-favoured
creature, and kill it; but, as the kennel was opened, the sow vanished
away, and was never seen afterwards.  Then the Lord de Corasse returned
pensive to his chamber, fearing that the sow had indeed been
Orthon!--and truly Orthon never returned more to his bed-side.  Within
a year, the Knight was dead!"

"Is it true, think you, Sanchez?"

"True! why, man, I have seen the Chateau de Corasse, seven leagues from
Orthes!"

"And what think you was Orthon?"

"It is not for me to say; but, you see, there are some who stand fair
in men's eyes, who have strange means of gaining intelligence! It will
be a merit to weigh down a score of rifled Priests, if we can but
circumvent a wizard such as this!"

"But he has brought his books!  I saw that broad-faced Englishman carry
up a whole pile of them," cried Tristan, turning pale.  "With his books
he will be enough to conjure us all into apes!"

"Now or never," said Sanchez, encouragingly.

"When all is still, I will go round and waken our comrades, while you
creep forth by the hole beneath the bartizan, and warn Clisson that the
secret passage is nought, but that when he sees a light in old
Montfort's turret--"

Tristan suddenly trod on his foot, as a sign of silence, as a step
descended the stairs, and Sir Eustace stood before them.

"You appear to be agreeably employed, gentlemen," said he, glancing at
the stoup of wine which was before them; "but my orders are as precise
as Norman William's.  No lights in this Castle, save my own, after
eight o'clock.  To your beds, gentlemen, and a good night to you!"  He
was still fully armed, so that it was unsafe to attack him.  And he saw
them up the spiral stairs that led from the hall, and watched them
enter the narrow dens that served them as sleeping rooms, where many a
curse was uttered on the watchfulness of the wizard Knight.  At the
turn of midnight, Le Borgne Basque crept forth, in some hope that there
might be an opportunity of fulfilling his designs, and earning the
reward promised him both by Clarenham and the French.  But he had not
descended far before a red gleam of torchlight was seen on the dark
stairs, and, ere he could retreat, the black head and dark eyes of
Gaston appeared, glancing with mischievous amusement, as he said, in
his gay voice, "You are on the alert, my old comrade.  You have not
forgotten your former habits when in command here.  But Sir Eustace
intrusts the care of changing the guard to none but me; so I will not
trouble you to disturb yourself another night."  And the baffled
miscreant retreated.

In this manner passed day after day, in a tacit yet perpetual war
between the Knight and the garrison.  Not a step could be taken, scarce
a word spoken, without some instant reminder that either Sir Eustace or
Gaston was on the watch.  On the borders of the enemy's country, there
was so much reason for vigilance, that the garrison could not
reasonably complain of the services required of them; the perpetual
watch, and numerous guards; the occupations which Knight and Squire
seemed never weary of devising for the purpose of keeping them
separate, and their instant prohibition of any attempt at the riotous
festivity which was their only consolation for the want of active
exercises.  They grew heartily weary, and fiercely impatient of
restraint, and though the firm, calm, steady strictness of the Knight
was far preferable to the rude familiarity and furious passions of many
a Castellane, there were many of the men-at-arms who, though not
actually engaged in the conspiracy, were impatient of what they called
his haughtiness and rigidity.  These men were mercenaries from
different parts of France, accustomed to a lawless life, and caring
little or nothing whatever whether it were beneath the standard of King
Charles or King Edward that they acquired pay and plunder.  The
Englishmen were, of course, devoted to their King and Prince, and
though at times unruly, were completely to be depended upon.  Yet,
while owning Sir Eustace to be a brave, gallant, and kind-hearted
Knight, there were times when even they felt a shudder of dread and
almost of hatred pass over them, when tales were told of the
supernatural powers he was supposed to possess; when Leonard Ashton's
adventure with the cats was narrated, or the story of his sudden
arrival at Lynwood Keep on the night before the lady's funeral.  His
own immediate attendants might repel the charge with honest
indignation, but many a stout warrior slunk off in terror to bed from
the sight of Sir Eustace, turning the pages of one of his heavy books
by the light of the hall fire, and saw in each poor bat that flitted
about within the damp depths of the vaulted chambers the familiar
spirit which brought him exact intelligence of all that passed at
Bordeaux, at Paris, or in London.  Nay, if he only turned his eyes on
the ground, he was thought to be looking for the twisting straws.




CHAPTER XIII


There was a village at some distance from the Chateau Norbelle, the
inhabitants of which were required to furnish it with provisions. The
Castellane, by paying just prices, and preventing his men from treating
the peasants in the cruel and exacting manner to which they were
accustomed, had gained their good-will.  Prompt intelligence of the
proceedings of the French army was always brought to him, and he was
thus informed that a large treasure was on its way from Bayonne to
Carcasonne, being the subsidy promised by Enrique, King of Castile, to
his allies, Bertrand du Guesclin and Oliver de Clisson.

It became the duty of the English to intercept these supplies, and
Eustace knew that he should incur censure should he allow the occasion
to pass.  But how divide his garrison?  Which of the men-at-arms could
be relied on?  After consultation with d'Aubricour, it was determined
that he himself should remain with John Ingram and a sufficient number
of English to keep the traitors in check, while Gaston went forth in
command of the party, who were certain to fight with a good will where
spoil was the object.  They would be absent at least two nights, since
the pass of the Pyrenees, where they intended to lie in ambush, was at
a considerable distance, nor was the time of the arrival of the convoy
absolutely certain.

The expedition proved completely successful, and on the morning of the
third day the rising sun beheld Gaston d'Aubricour riding triumphantly
at the head of his little band, in the midst of which was a long line
of heavily-laden baggage mules.  The towers of Chateau Norbelle
appeared in his view, when suddenly with a cry of amazement he
perceived that the pennon of St. George and the banner of Lynwood were
both absent from the Keep.  He could scarcely believe his eyes, but
forcing his horse onward with furious impetuosity to obtain a nearer
view, he discovered that it was indeed true.

"The miscreants!" he shouted.  "Oh, my Knight, my Knight!" and turning
to the men who followed him, he exclaimed, "There is yet hope!  Will
you see our trust betrayed, our noble Knight foully murdered and
delivered to his enemies, or will ye strike a bold stroke in his
defence?  He who is not dead to honour, follow me!"

There was a postern, of which Eustace had given Gaston the key, on his
departure, and thither the faithful Squire hastened, without looking
back to see whether he was followed by many or few--in fact, rather
ready to die with Sir Eustace than hoping to rescue him.  The ten
Englishmen and some eight Frenchmen, infected by the desperation of his
manner, followed him closely as he rushed up the slope, dashed through
the moat, and in another moment, opening the door, burst into the
court.  There stood a party of the garrison, upon whom he rushed with a
shout of "Death, death to the traitor!"  Gaston's arm did the work of
three, as he hewed down the villains, who, surprised and discomfited,
made feeble resistance.  Who they were, or how many, he saw not, he
cared not, but struck right and left, till the piteous cries for mercy,
in familiar tones, made some impression, and he paused, as did his
companions, while, in a tone of rage and anguish, he demanded, "Where
is Sir Eustace?"

"Ah! Master d'Aubricour, 'twas not me, 'twas the traitor,
Sanchez--'twas Tristan," was the answer.  "Oh, mercy, for our blessed
Lady's sake!"

"No mercy, dogs! till ye have shown me Sir Eustace in life and limb."

"Alas! alas! Master d'Aubricour!"  This cry arose from some of the
English; and Gaston, springing towards the bartizan, beheld the
senseless form of his beloved Knight lying stretched in a pool of his
own blood!  Pouring out lamentations in the passionate terms of the
South, tearing his hair at having been beguiled into leaving the
Castle, and vowing the most desperate vengeance against Clarenham and
his accomplices, he lifted his master from the ground, and, as he did
so, he fancied he felt a slight movement of the chest, and a faint moan
fell upon his ear.

What recked Gaston that the Castle was but half taken, that enemies
were around on every side?  He saw only, heard only, thought only, of
Sir Eustace!  What was life or death, prosperity or adversity, save as
shared with him!  He lifted the Knight in his arms, and, hurrying up
the stone steps, placed him on his couch.

"Bring water! bring wine!" he shouted as he crossed the hall.  A
horse-boy followed with a pitcher of water, and Gaston, unfastening the
collar of his doublet, raised his head, held his face towards the air,
and deluged it with water, entreating him to look up and speak.

A few long painful gasps, and the eyes were half unclosed, while a
scarce audible voice said, "Gaston! is it thou?  I deemed it was over!"
and then the eyes closed again.  Gaston's heart was lightened at having
heard that voice once more, even had that word been his last--and
answering, "Ay, truly, Sir Knight, all is well so you will but look
up," he succeed in pouring a little water into his mouth.

He was interrupted by several of the men-at-arms, who came trooping up
to the door, looking anxiously at the wounded Knight, while the
foremost said, "Master Gaston, here is gear which must be looked to.
Thibault Sanchez and half a dozen more have drawn together in
Montfort's tower, and swear they will not come forth till we have
promised their lives."

"Give them no such pledge!--Hang without mercy!" cried another voice
from behind.  "Did not I myself hear the traitorous villains send off
Tristan de la Fleche to bear the news to Carcassonne?  We shall have
the butcher of Bretagne at our throats before another hour is over."

"Cowardly traitor!" cried Gaston.  "Wherefore didst thou not cut the
throat of the caitiff, and make in to the rescue of the Knight?"

"Why, Master d'Aubricour, the deed was done ere I was well awake, and
when it was done, and could not be undone, and we were but four men to
a dozen, what could a poor groom do?  But you had better look to
yourself; for it is true as the legends of the saints, that Tristan is
gone to Carcassonne, riding full speed on the Knight's own black
charger!"

The news seemed to have greater effect in restoring Eustace than any of
Gaston's attentions.  He again opened his eyes, and made an effort to
raise his head, as he said, almost instinctively, "Secure the gates!
Warders, to your posts!"

The men stood amazed; and Eustace, rallying, looked around him, and
perceived the state of the case.  "Said you they had sent to summon the
enemy?" said he.

"Martin said so," replied Gaston, "and I fear it is but too true."

"Not a moment to be lost!" said Eustace.  "Give me some wine!" and he
spoke in a stronger voice, "How many of you are true to King Edward and
to the Prince?  All who will not fight to the death in their cause have
free leave to quit this Castle; but, first, a message must be sent to
Bordeaux."

"True, Sir Eustace, but on whom can we rely?" asked Gaston.

"Alas!  I fear my faithful Ingram must be slain," said the Knight,
"else this could never have been.  Know you aught of him?" he added,
looking anxiously at the men.

The answer was a call from one of the men: "Here, John, don't stand
there grunting like a hog; the Knight is asking for you, don't you
hear?"

A slight scuffle was heard, and in a few seconds the broad figure of
Ingram shouldered through the midst of the men-at-arms.  He came,
almost like a man in a dream, to the middle of the room, and there,
suddenly dropping upon his knees, he clasped his hands, exclaiming, "I,
John Ingram, hereby solemnly vow to our blessed Lady of Taunton, and
St. Joseph of Glastonbury, that never more will I drink sack, or wine
or any other sort or kind, spiced or unspiced, on holiday or common
day, by day or night.  So help me, our blessed Lady and St. Joseph."

"Stand up, John, and let us know if you are in your senses," said
Gaston, angrily; "we have no time for fooleries.  Let us know whether
you have been knave, traitor, or fool; for one or other you must have
been, to be standing here sound and safe."

"You are right, Sir Squire," said Ingram, covering his face with his
hands.  "I would I were ten feet underground ere I had seen this day;"
and he groaned aloud.

"You have been deceived by their arts," said Eustace.  "That I can well
believe; but that you should be a traitor, never, my trusty John!"

"Blessings on you for the word, Sir Eustace!" cried the yeoman, while
tears fell down his rough cheeks.  "Oh! all the wine in the world may
be burnt to the very dregs ere I again let a drop cross my lips! but it
was drugged, Sir Eustace, it was drugged--that will I aver to my dying
day."

"I believe it," said Eustace; "but we must not wait to hear your tale,
John.  You must take horse and ride with all speed to Bordeaux. One of
you go and prepare a horse--"

"Take Brigliador!" said Gaston; "he is the swiftest.  Poor fellow! well
that I spared him from our journey amid the mountain passes."

"Then," proceeded Eustace, "bear the news of our case--that we have
been betrayed--that Clisson will be on us immediately--that we will do
all that man can do to hold out till succour can come, which I pray the
Prince to send us."

"Take care to whom he addresses himself," said Gaston.  "To some our
strait will be welcome news."

"True," said Eustace.  "Do thy best to see Sir John Chandos, or, if he
be not at the court, prefer thy suit to the Prince himself--to any save
the Earl of Pembroke.  Or if thou couldst see little Arthur, it might
be best of all.  Dost understand my orders, John?"

"Ay, Sir," said Ingram, shaking his great head, while the tears still
flowed down his cheeks; "but to see you in this case!"

"Think not of that, kind John," said Eustace; "death must come sooner
or later, and a sword-cut is the end for a Knight."

"You will not, shall not die, Sir Eustace!" cried Gaston.  "Your
wounds--"
