I. "The Works and Days":

The poem consists of four main sections. a) After the prelude, which
Pausanias failed to find in the ancient copy engraved on lead seen by
him on Mt. Helicon, comes a general exhortation to industry. It begins
with the allegory of the two Strifes, who stand for wholesome Emulation
and Quarrelsomeness respectively. Then by means of the Myth of Pandora
the poet shows how evil and the need for work first arose, and goes on
to describe the Five Ages of the World, tracing the gradual increase in
evil, and emphasizing the present miserable condition of the world, a
condition in which struggle is inevitable. Next, after the Fable of the
Hawk and Nightingale, which serves as a condemnation of violence
and injustice, the poet passes on to contrast the blessing which
Righteousness brings to a nation, and the punishment which Heaven
sends down upon the violent, and the section concludes with a series
of precepts on industry and prudent conduct generally. b) The second
section shows how a man may escape want and misery by industry and care
both in agriculture and in trading by sea. Neither subject, it should
be carefully noted, is treated in any way comprehensively. c) The third
part is occupied with miscellaneous precepts relating mostly to actions
of domestic and everyday life and conduct which have little or no
connection with one another. d) The final section is taken up with
a series of notices on the days of the month which are favourable or
unfavourable for agricultural and other operations.

It is from the second and fourth sections that the poem takes its name.
At first sight such a work seems to be a miscellany of myths, technical
advice, moral precepts, and folklore maxims without any unifying
principle; and critics have readily taken the view that the whole is a
canto of fragments or short poems worked up by a redactor. Very probably
Hesiod used much material of a far older date, just as Shakespeare
used the "Gesta Romanorum", old chronicles, and old plays; but close
inspection will show that the "Works and Days" has a real unity and that
the picturesque title is somewhat misleading. The poem has properly no
technical object at all, but is moral: its real aim is to show men
how best to live in a difficult world. So viewed the four seemingly
independent sections will be found to be linked together in a real bond
of unity. Such a connection between the first and second sections is
easily seen, but the links between these and the third and fourth are no
less real: to make life go tolerably smoothly it is most important to
be just and to know how to win a livelihood; but happiness also largely
depends on prudence and care both in social and home life as well, and
not least on avoidance of actions which offend supernatural powers and
bring ill-luck. And finally, if your industry is to be fruitful, you
must know what days are suitable for various kinds of work. This
moral aim--as opposed to the currently accepted technical aim of the
poem--explains the otherwise puzzling incompleteness of the instructions
on farming and seafaring.

Of the Hesiodic poems similar in character to the "Works and Days", only
the scantiest fragments survive. One at least of these, the "Divination
by Birds", was, as we know from Proclus, attached to the end of the
"Works" until it was rejected by Apollonius Rhodius: doubtless it
continued the same theme of how to live, showing how man can avoid
disasters by attending to the omens to be drawn from birds. It is
possible that the "Astronomy" or "Astrology" (as Plutarch calls it) was
in turn appended to the "Divination". It certainly gave some account of
the principal constellations, their dates of rising and setting, and the
legends connected with them, and probably showed how these influenced
human affairs or might be used as guides. The "Precepts of Chiron" was
a didactic poem made up of moral and practical precepts, resembling the
gnomic sections of the "Works and Days", addressed by the Centaur Chiron
to his pupil Achilles.

Even less is known of the poem called the "Great Works": the title
implies that it was similar in subject to the second section of the
"Works and Days", but longer. Possible references in Roman writers
[1106] indicate that among the subjects dealt with were the cultivation
of the vine and olive and various herbs. The inclusion of the judgment
of Rhadamanthys (frag. 1): 'If a man sow evil, he shall reap evil,'
indicates a gnomic element, and the note by Proclus [1107] on "Works
and Days" 126 makes it likely that metals also were dealt with. It is
therefore possible that another lost poem, the "Idaean Dactyls", which
dealt with the discovery of metals and their working, was appended to,
or even was a part of the "Great Works", just as the "Divination by
Birds" was appended to the "Works and Days".




II. The Genealogical Poems:

The only complete poem of the genealogical group is the "Theogony",
which traces from the beginning of things the descent and vicissitudes
of the families of the gods. Like the "Works and Days" this poem has no
dramatic plot; but its unifying principle is clear and simple. The gods
are classified chronologically: as soon as one generation is catalogued,
the poet goes on to detail the offspring of each member of that
generation. Exceptions are only made in special cases, as the Sons of
Iapetus (ll. 507-616) whose place is accounted for by their treatment
by Zeus. The chief landmarks in the poem are as follows: after the
first 103 lines, which contain at least three distinct preludes,
three primeval beings are introduced, Chaos, Earth, and Eros--here an
indefinite reproductive influence. Of these three, Earth produces
Heaven to whom she bears the Titans, the Cyclopes and the hundred-handed
giants. The Titans, oppressed by their father, revolt at the instigation
of Earth, under the leadership of Cronos, and as a result Heaven and
Earth are separated, and Cronos reigns over the universe. Cronos knowing
that he is destined to be overcome by one of his children, swallows each
one of them as they are born, until Zeus, saved by Rhea, grows up and
overcomes Cronos in some struggle which is not described. Cronos is
forced to vomit up the children he had swallowed, and these with Zeus
divide the universe between them, like a human estate. Two events mark
the early reign of Zeus, the war with the Titans and the overthrow of
Typhoeus, and as Zeus is still reigning the poet can only go on to give
a list of gods born to Zeus by various goddesses. After this he formally
bids farewell to the cosmic and Olympian deities and enumerates the sons
born of goddess to mortals. The poem closes with an invocation of the
Muses to sing of the 'tribe of women'.

This conclusion served to link the "Theogony" to what must have been
a distinct poem, the "Catalogues of Women". This work was divided into
four (Suidas says five) books, the last one (or two) of which was known
as the "Eoiae" and may have been again a distinct poem: the curious
title will be explained presently. The "Catalogues" proper were a series
of genealogies which traced the Hellenic race (or its more important
peoples and families) from a common ancestor. The reason why women are
so prominent is obvious: since most families and tribes claimed to be
descended from a god, the only safe clue to their origin was through a
mortal woman beloved by that god; and it has also been pointed out that
'mutterrecht' still left its traces in northern Greece in historical
times.

The following analysis (after Marckscheffel) [1108] will show the
principle of its composition. From Prometheus and Pronoia sprang
Deucalion and Pyrrha, the only survivors of the deluge, who had a son
Hellen (frag. 1), the reputed ancestor of the whole Hellenic race. From
the daughters of Deucalion sprang Magnes and Macedon, ancestors of the
Magnesians and Macedonians, who are thus represented as cousins to the
true Hellenic stock. Hellen had three sons, Dorus, Xuthus, and Aeolus,
parents of the Dorian, Ionic and Aeolian races, and the offspring
of these was then detailed. In one instance a considerable and
characteristic section can be traced from extant fragments and notices:
Salmoneus, son of Aeolus, had a daughter Tyro who bore to Poseidon two
sons, Pelias and Neleus; the latter of these, king of Pylos, refused
Heracles purification for the murder of Iphitus, whereupon Heracles
attacked and sacked Pylos, killing amongst the other sons of Neleus
Periclymenus, who had the power of changing himself into all manner of
shapes. From this slaughter Neleus alone escaped (frags. 13, and
10-12). This summary shows the general principle of arrangement of the
"Catalogues": each line seems to have been dealt with in turn, and the
monotony was relieved as far as possible by a brief relation of famous
adventures connected with any of the personages--as in the case of
Atalanta and Hippomenes (frag. 14). Similarly the story of the Argonauts
appears from the fragments (37-42) to have been told in some detail.

This tendency to introduce romantic episodes led to an important
development. Several poems are ascribed to Hesiod, such as the
"Epithalamium of Peleus and Thetis", the "Descent of Theseus into
Hades", or the "Circuit of the Earth" (which must have been
connected with the story of Phineus and the Harpies, and so with the
Argonaut-legend), which yet seem to have belonged to the "Catalogues".
It is highly probable that these poems were interpolations into the
"Catalogues" expanded by later poets from more summary notices in the
genuine Hesiodic work and subsequently detached from their contexts
and treated as independent. This is definitely known to be true of the
"Shield of Heracles", the first 53 lines of which belong to the
fourth book of the "Catalogues", and almost certainly applies to other
episodes, such as the "Suitors of Helen" [1109], the "Daughters of
Leucippus", and the "Marriage of Ceyx", which last Plutarch mentions as
'interpolated in the works of Hesiod.'

To the "Catalogues", as we have said, was appended another work, the
"Eoiae". The title seems to have arisen in the following way [1110]:
the "Catalogues" probably ended (ep. "Theogony" 963 ff.) with some such
passage as this: 'But now, ye Muses, sing of the tribes of women with
whom the Sons of Heaven were joined in love, women pre-eminent above
their fellows in beauty, such as was Niobe (?).' Each succeeding heroine
was then introduced by the formula 'Or such as was...' (cp. frags. 88,
92, etc.). A large fragment of the "Eoiae" is extant at the beginning of
the "Shield of Heracles", which may be mentioned here. The "supplement"
(ll. 57-480) is nominally Heracles and Cycnus, but the greater part
is taken up with an inferior description of the shield of Heracles, in
imitation of the Homeric shield of Achilles ("Iliad" xviii. 478 ff.).
Nothing shows more clearly the collapse of the principles of the
Hesiodic school than this ultimate servile dependence upon Homeric
models.

At the close of the "Shield" Heracles goes on to Trachis to the house
of Ceyx, and this warning suggests that the "Marriage of Ceyx" may have
come immediately after the 'Or such as was' of Alcmena in the "Eoiae":
possibly Halcyone, the wife of Ceyx, was one of the heroines sung in
the poem, and the original section was 'developed' into the "Marriage",
although what form the poem took is unknown.

Next to the "Eoiae" and the poems which seemed to have been developed
from it, it is natural to place the "Great Eoiae". This, again, as we
know from fragments, was a list of heroines who bare children to the
gods: from the title we must suppose it to have been much longer that
the simple "Eoiae", but its extent is unknown. Lehmann, remarking that
the heroines are all Boeotian and Thessalian (while the heroines of
the "Catalogues" belong to all parts of the Greek world), believes the
author to have been either a Boeotian or Thessalian.

Two other poems are ascribed to Hesiod. Of these the "Aegimius" (also
ascribed by Athenaeus to Cercops of Miletus), is thought by Valckenaer
to deal with the war of Aegimus against the Lapithae and the aid
furnished to him by Heracles, and with the history of Aegimius and
his sons. Otto Muller suggests that the introduction of Thetis and of
Phrixus (frags. 1-2) is to be connected with notices of the allies of
the Lapithae from Phthiotis and Iolchus, and that the story of Io was
incidental to a narrative of Heracles' expedition against Euboea. The
remaining poem, the "Melampodia", was a work in three books, whose plan
it is impossible to recover. Its subject, however, seems to have been
the histories of famous seers like Mopsus, Calchas, and Teiresias, and
it probably took its name from Melampus, the most famous of them all.




Date of the Hesiodic Poems

There is no doubt that the "Works and Days" is the oldest, as it is the
most original, of the Hesiodic poems. It seems to be distinctly earlier
than the "Theogony", which refers to it, apparently, as a poem already
renowned. Two considerations help us to fix a relative date for the
"Works". 1) In diction, dialect and style it is obviously dependent
upon Homer, and is therefore considerably later than the "Iliad" and
"Odyssey": moreover, as we have seen, it is in revolt against the
romantic school, already grown decadent, and while the digamma is still
living, it is obviously growing weak, and is by no means uniformly
effective.

2) On the other hand while tradition steadily puts the Cyclic poets
at various dates from 776 B.C. downwards, it is equally consistent in
regarding Homer and Hesiod as 'prehistoric'. Herodotus indeed puts both
poets 400 years before his own time; that is, at about 830-820 B.C., and
the evidence stated above points to the middle of the ninth century
as the probable date for the "Works and Days". The "Theogony" might be
tentatively placed a century later; and the "Catalogues" and "Eoiae" are
again later, but not greatly later, than the "Theogony": the "Shield of
Heracles" may be ascribed to the later half of the seventh century, but
there is not evidence enough to show whether the other 'developed' poems
are to be regarded as of a date so low as this.




Literary Value of Homer

Quintillian's [1111] judgment on Hesiod that 'he rarely rises to great
heights... and to him is given the palm in the middle-class of speech'
is just, but is liable to give a wrong impression. Hesiod has nothing
that remotely approaches such scenes as that between Priam and Achilles,
or the pathos of Andromache's preparations for Hector's return, even as
he was falling before the walls of Troy; but in matters that come
within the range of ordinary experience, he rarely fails to rise to the
appropriate level. Take, for instance, the description of the Iron
Age ("Works and Days", 182 ff.) with its catalogue of wrongdoings and
violence ever increasing until Aidos and Nemesis are forced to leave
mankind who thenceforward shall have 'no remedy against evil'. Such
occasions, however, rarely occur and are perhaps not characteristic of
Hesiod's genius: if we would see Hesiod at his best, in his most natural
vein, we must turn to such a passage as that which he himself--according
to the compiler of the "Contest of Hesiod and Homer"--selected as best
in all his work, 'When the Pleiades, Atlas' daughters, begin to rise...'
("Works and Days," 383 ff.). The value of such a passage cannot be
analysed: it can only be said that given such a subject, this alone is
the right method of treatment.

Hesiod's diction is in the main Homeric, but one of his charms is the
use of quaint allusive phrases derived, perhaps, from a pre-Hesiodic
peasant poetry: thus the season when Boreas blows is the time when 'the
Boneless One gnaws his foot by his fireless hearth in his cheerless
house'; to cut one's nails is 'to sever the withered from the quick
upon that which has five branches'; similarly the burglar is the
'day-sleeper', and the serpent is the 'hairless one'. Very similar is
his reference to seasons through what happens or is done in that season:
'when the House-carrier, fleeing the Pleiades, climbs up the plants from
the earth', is the season for harvesting; or 'when the artichoke flowers
and the clicking grass-hopper, seated in a tree, pours down his shrill
song', is the time for rest.

Hesiod's charm lies in his child-like and sincere naivete, in his
unaffected interest in and picturesque view of nature and all that
happens in nature. These qualities, it is true, are those pre-eminently
of the "Works and Days": the literary values of the "Theogony" are of a
more technical character, skill in ordering and disposing long lists of
names, sure judgment in seasoning a monotonous subject with marvellous
incidents or episodes, and no mean imagination in depicting the awful,
as is shown in the description of Tartarus (ll. 736-745). Yet it remains
true that Hesiod's distinctive title to a high place in Greek literature
lies in the very fact of his freedom from classic form, and his grave,
and yet child-like, outlook upon his world.




The Ionic School

The Ionic School of Epic poetry was, as we have seen, dominated by
the Homeric tradition, and while the style and method of treatment are
Homeric, it is natural that the Ionic poets refrained from cultivating
the ground tilled by Homer, and chose for treatment legends which lay
beyond the range of the "Iliad" and "Odyssey". Equally natural it is
that they should have particularly selected various phases of the
tale of Troy which preceded or followed the action of the "Iliad" or
"Odyssey". In this way, without any preconceived intention, a body of
epic poetry was built up by various writers which covered the whole
Trojan story. But the entire range of heroic legend was open to these
poets, and other clusters of epics grew up dealing particularly with the
famous story of Thebes, while others dealt with the beginnings of the
world and the wars of heaven. In the end there existed a kind of epic
history of the world, as known to the Greeks, down to the death of
Odysseus, when the heroic age ended. In the Alexandrian Age these
poems were arranged in chronological order, apparently by Zenodotus of
Ephesus, at the beginning of the 3rd century B.C. At a later time the
term "Cycle", 'round' or 'course', was given to this collection.

Of all this mass of epic poetry only the scantiest fragments survive;
but happily Photius has preserved to us an abridgment of the synopsis
made of each poem of the "Trojan Cycle" by Proclus, i.e. Eutychius
Proclus of Sicca.

The pre-Trojan poems of the Cycle may be noticed first. The
"Titanomachy", ascribed both to Eumelus of Corinth and to Arctinus of
Miletus, began with a kind of Theogony which told of the union of Heaven
and Earth and of their offspring the Cyclopes and the Hundred-handed
Giants. How the poem proceeded we have no means of knowing, but we may
suppose that in character it was not unlike the short account of the
Titan War found in the Hesiodic "Theogony" (617 ff.).

What links bound the "Titanomachy" to the Theben Cycle is not clear.
This latter group was formed of three poems, the "Story of Oedipus", the
"Thebais", and the "Epigoni". Of the "Oedipodea" practically nothing is
known, though on the assurance of Athenaeus (vii. 277 E) that Sophocles
followed the Epic Cycle closely in the plots of his plays, we may
suppose that in outline the story corresponded closely to the history of
Oedipus as it is found in the "Oedipus Tyrannus". The "Thebais" seems
to have begun with the origin of the fatal quarrel between Eteocles and
Polyneices in the curse called down upon them by their father in his
misery. The story was thence carried down to the end of the expedition
under Polyneices, Adrastus and Amphiarus against Thebes. The "Epigoni"
(ascribed to Antimachus of Teos) recounted the expedition of the
'After-Born' against Thebes, and the sack of the city.




The Trojan Cycle

Six epics with the "Iliad" and the "Odyssey" made up the Trojan
Cycle--The "Cyprian Lays", the "Iliad", the "Aethiopis", the "Little
Iliad", the "Sack of Troy", the "Returns", the "Odyssey", and the
"Telegony".

It has been assumed in the foregoing pages that the poems of the Trojan
Cycle are later than the Homeric poems; but, as the opposite view
