the threatened evil; and Edward, with horror, regarded himself as
the original cause of both.

Ere he could collect himself sufficiently to speak, Colonel Talbot
had recovered his usual composure of manner, though his troubled
eye denoted his mental agony.

'She is a woman, my young friend, who may justify even a soldier's
tears.' He reached him the miniature, exhibiting features which
fully justified the eulogium; 'and yet, God knows, what you see of
her there is the least of the charms she possesses--possessed, I
should perhaps say--but God's will be done.'

' You must fly--you must fly instantly to her relief. It is not--
it shall not be too late.'

'Fly? how is it possible? I am a prisoner, upon parole.'

'I am your keeper; I restore your parole; I am to answer for you.'

'You cannot do so consistently with your duty; nor can I accept a
discharge from you, with due regard to my own honour; you would be
made responsible.'

'I will answer it with my head, if necessary,' said Waverley
impetuously. 'I have been the unhappy cause of the loss of your
child, make me not the murderer of your wife.'

'No, my dear Edward,' said Talbot, taking him kindly by the hand,
'you are in no respect to blame; and if I concealed this domestic
distress for two days, it was lest your sensibility should view it
in that light. You could not think of me, hardly knew of my
existence, when I left England in quest of you. It is a
responsibility, Heaven knows, sufficiently heavy for mortality,
that we must answer for the foreseen and direct result of our
actions; for their indirect and consequential operation the great
and good Being, who alone can foresee the dependence of human
events on each other, hath not pronounced his frail creatures
liable.'

'But that you should have left Lady Emily,' said Waverley, with
much emotion, 'in the situation of all others the most interesting
to a husband, to seek a--'

'I only did my duty,' answered Colonel Talbot, calmly, 'and I do
not, ought not, to regret it. If the path of gratitude and honour
were always smooth and easy, there would be little merit in
following it; but it moves often in contradiction to our interest
and passions, and sometimes to our better affections. These are
the trials of life, and this, though not the least bitter' (the
tears came unbidden to his eyes), 'is not the first which it has
been my fate to encounter. But we will talk of this to-morrow,'
he said, wringing Waverley's hands. 'Good-night; strive to forget
it for a few hours. It will dawn, I think, by six, and it is now
past two. Good-night.'

Edward retired, without trusting his voice with a reply.





CHAPTER LVI

EXERTION


When Colonel Talbot entered the breakfast-parlour next morning, he
learned from Waverley's servant that our hero had been abroad at
an early hour and was not yet returned. The morning was well
advanced before he again appeared. He arrived out of breath, but
with an air of joy that astonished Colonel Talbot.

'There,' said he, throwing a paper on the table, 'there is my
morning's work. Alick, pack up the Colonel's clothes. Make haste,
make haste.'

The Colonel examined the paper with astonishment. It was a pass
from the Chevalier to Colonel Talbot, to repair to Leith, or any
other port in possession of his Royal Highness's troops, and there
to embark for England or elsewhere, at his free pleasure; he only
giving his parole of honour not to bear arms against the house of
Stuart for the space of a twelve-month.

'In the name of God,' said the Colonel, his eyes sparkling with
eagerness, 'how did you obtain this?'

'I was at the Chevalier's levee as soon as he usually rises. He
was gone to the camp at Duddingston. I pursued him thither, asked
and obtained an audience--but I will tell you not a word more,
unless I see you begin to pack.'

'Before I know whether I can avail myself of this passport, or how
it was obtained?'

'O, you can take out the things again, you know. Now I see you
busy, I will go on. When I first mentioned your name, his eyes
sparkled almost as bright as yours did two minutes since. "Had
you," he earnestly asked, "shown any sentiments favourable to his
cause?" "Not in the least, nor was there any hope you would do
so." His countenance fell. I requested your freedom. "Impossible,"
he said; "your importance as a friend and confidant of such and
such personages made my request altogether extravagant." I told
him my own story and yours; and asked him to judge what my
feelings must be by his own. He has a heart, and a kind one,
Colonel Talbot, you may say what you please. He took a sheet of
paper and wrote the pass with his own hand. "I will not trust
myself with my council," he said; "they will argue me out of what
is right. I will not endure that a friend, valued as I value you,
should be loaded with the painful reflections which must afflict
you in case of further misfortune in Colonel Talbot's family; nor
will I keep a brave enemy a prisoner under such circumstances.
Besides," said he, "I think I can justify myself to my prudent
advisers by pleading the good effect such lenity will produce on
the minds of the great English families with whom Colonel Talbot
is connected."'

'There the politician peeped out,' said the Colonel.

'Well, at least he concluded like a king's son: "Take the
passport; I have added a condition for form's sake; but if the
Colonel objects to it, let him depart without giving any parole
whatever. I come here to war with men, but not to distress or
endanger women."'

'Well, I never thought to have been so much indebted to the
Pretend--'

'To the Prince,' said Waverley, smiling.

'To the Chevalier,' said the Colonel; 'it is a good travelling
name, and which we may both freely use. Did he say anything more?'

'Only asked if there was anything else he could oblige me in; and
when I replied in the negative, he shook me by the hand, and
wished all his followers were as considerate, since some friends
of mine not only asked all he had to bestow, but many things which
were entirely out of his power, or that of the greatest sovereign
upon earth. Indeed, he said, no prince seemed, in the eyes of his
followers, so like the Deity as himself, if you were to judge from
the extravagant requests which they daily preferred to him.'

'Poor young gentleman,' said the Colonel, 'I suppose he begins to
feel the difficulties of his situation. Well, dear Waverley, this
is more than kind, and shall not be forgotten while Philip Talbot
can remember anything. My life--pshaw--let Emily thank you for
that; this is a favour worth fifty lives. I cannot hesitate on
giving my parole in the circumstances; there it is (he wrote it
out in form). And now, how am I to get off?'

'All that is settled: your baggage is packed, my horses wait, and
a boat has been engaged, by the Prince's permission, to put you on
board the Fox frigate. I sent a messenger down to Leith on
purpose.'

'That will do excellently well. Captain Beaver is my particular
friend; he will put me ashore at Berwick or Shields, from whence I
can ride post to London; and you must entrust me with the packet
of papers which you recovered by means of your Miss Bean Lean. I
may have an opportunity of using them to your advantage. But I see
your Highland friend, Glen ---- what do you call his barbarous name?
and his orderly with him; I must not call him his orderly cut-
throat any more, I suppose. See how he walks as if the world were
his own, with the bonnet on one side of his head and his plaid
puffed out across his breast! I should like now to meet that youth
where my hands were not tied: I would tame his pride, or he should
tame mine.'

'For shame, Colonel Talbot! you swell at sight of tartan as the
bull is said to do at scarlet. You and Mac-Ivor have some points
not much unlike, so far as national prejudice is concerned.'

The latter part of this discourse took place in the street. They
passed the Chief, the Colonel and he sternly and punctiliously
greeting each other, like two duellists before they take their
ground. It was evident the dislike was mutual. 'I never see that
surly fellow that dogs his heels,' said the Colonel, after he had
mounted his horse, 'but he reminds me of lines I have somewhere
heard--upon the stage, I think:--

    Close behind him
    Stalks sullen Bertram, like a sorcerer's fiend,
    Pressing to be employed.

'I assure you, Colonel,' said Waverley,'that you judge too harshly
of the Highlanders.'

'Not a whit, not a whit; I cannot spare them a jot; I cannot bate
them an ace. Let them stay in their own barren mountains, and puff
and swell, and hang their bonnets on the horns of the moon, if
they have a mind; but what business have they to come where people
wear breeches, and speak an intelligible language? I mean
intelligible in comparison to their gibberish, for even the
Lowlanders talk a kind of English little better than the Negroes
in Jamaica. I could pity the Pr----, I mean the, Chevalier
himself, for having so many desperadoes about him. And they learn
their trade so early. There is a kind of subaltern imp, for
example, a sort of sucking devil, whom your friend Glena----
Glenamuck there, has sometimes in his train. To look at him, he is
about fifteen years; but he is a century old in mischief and
villainy. He was playing at quoits the other day in the court; a
gentleman, a decent-looking person enough, came past, and as a
quoit hit his shin, he lifted his cane; but my young bravo whips
out his pistol, like Beau Clincher in the "Trip to the Jubilee,"
and had not a scream of Gardez l'eau from an upper window set all
parties a-scampering for fear of the inevitable consequences, the
poor gentleman would have lost his life by the hands of that
little cockatrice.'

'A fine character you'll give of Scotland upon your return,
Colonel Talbot.'

'O, Justice Shallow,' said the Colonel, 'will save me the trouble
--"Barren, barren, beggars all, beggars all. Marry, good air,"--and
that only when you are fairly out of Edinburgh, and not yet come
to Leith, as is our case at present.'

In a short time they arrived at the seaport.

    The boat rock'd at the pier of Leith,
    Full loud the wind blew down the ferry;
    The ship rode at the Berwick Law.

'Farewell, Colonel; may you find all as you would wish it! Perhaps
we may meet sooner than you expect; they talk of an immediate
route to England.'

'Tell me nothing of that,' said Talbot; 'I wish to carry no news
of your motions.'

'Simply, then, adieu. Say, with a thousand kind greetings, all
that is dutiful and affectionate to Sir Everard and Aunt Rachel.
Think of me as kindly as you can, speak of me as indulgently as
your conscience will permit, and once more adieu.'

'And adieu, my dear Waverley; many, many thanks for your kindness.
Unplaid yourself on the first opportunity. I shall ever think on
you with gratitude, and the worst of my censure shall be, Que
diable alloit-il faire dans cette galere?'

And thus they parted, Colonel Talbot going on board of the boat
and Waverley returning to Edinburgh.





CHAPTER LVII

THE MARCH


It is not our purpose to intrude upon the province of history. We
shall therefore only remind our readers that about the beginning
of November the Young Chevalier, at the head of about six thousand
men at the utmost, resolved to peril his cause on an attempt to
penetrate into the centre of England, although aware of the mighty
preparations which were made for his reception. They set forward
on this crusade in weather which would have rendered any other
troops incapable of marching, but which in reality gave these
active mountaineers advantages over a less hardy enemy. In
defiance of a superior army lying upon the Borders, under Field-
Marshal Wade, they besieged and took Carlisle, and soon afterwards
prosecuted their daring march to the southward.

As Colonel Mac-Ivor's regiment marched in the van of the clans, he
and Waverley, who now equalled any Highlander in the endurance of
fatigue, and was become somewhat acquainted with their language,
were perpetually at its head. They marked the progress of the
army, however, with very different eyes. Fergus, all air and fire,
and confident against the world in arms, measured nothing but that
every step was a yard nearer London. He neither asked, expected,
nor desired any aid except that of the clans to place the Stuarts
once more on the throne; and when by chance a few adherents joined
the standard, he always considered them in the light of new
claimants upon the favours of the future monarch, who, he
concluded, must therefore subtract for their gratification so much
of the bounty which ought to be shared among his Highland
followers.

Edward's views were very different. He could not but observe that
in those towns in which they proclaimed James the Third, 'no man
cried, God bless him.' The mob stared and listened, heartless,
stupefied, and dull, but gave few signs even of that boisterous
spirit which induces them to shout upon all occasions for the mere
exercise of their most sweet voices. The Jacobites had been taught
to believe that the north-western counties abounded with wealthy
squires and hardy yeomen, devoted to the cause of the White Rose.
But of the wealthier Tories they saw little. Some fled from their
houses, some feigned themselves sick, some surrendered themselves
to the government as suspected persons. Of such as remained, the
ignorant gazed with astonishment, mixed with horror and aversion,
at the wild appearance, unknown language, and singular garb of the
Scottish clans. And to the more prudent their scanty numbers,
apparent deficiency in discipline, and poverty of equipment seemed
certain tokens of the calamitous termination of their rash
undertaking. Thus the few who joined them were such as bigotry of
political principle blinded to consequences, or whose broken
fortunes induced them to hazard all on a risk so desperate.

The Baron of Bradwardine, being asked what he thought of these
recruits, took a long pinch of snuff, and answered drily,'that he
could not but have an excellent opinion of them, since they
resembled precisely the followers who attached themselves to the
good King David at the cave of Adullam--videlicet, every one that
was in distress, and every one that was in debt, and every one
that was discontented, which the vulgate renders bitter of soul;
and doubtless,' he said, 'they will prove mighty men of their
hands, and there is much need that they should, for I have seen
many a sour look cast upon us.'

But none of these considerations moved Fergus. He admired the
luxuriant beauty of the country, and the situation of many of the
seats which they passed. 'Is Waverley-Honour like that house,
Edward?'

'It is one-half larger.'

'Is your uncle's park as fine a one as that?'

'It is three times as extensive, and rather resembles a forest
than a mere park.'

'Flora will be a happy woman.'

'I hope Miss Mac-Ivor will have much reason for happiness
unconnected with Waverley-Honour.'

'I hope so too; but to be mistress of such a place will be a
pretty addition to the sum total.'

'An addition, the want of which, I trust, will be amply supplied
by some other means.'

'How,' said Fergus, stopping short and turning upon Waverley--'how
am I to understand that, Mr. Waverley? Had I the pleasure to hear
you aright?'

'Perfectly right, Fergus.'

'And am I to understand that you no longer desire my alliance and
my sister's hand?'

'Your sister has refused mine,' said Waverley, 'both directly and
by all the usual means by which ladies repress undesired
attentions.'

'I have no idea,' answered the Chieftain, 'of a lady dismissing or
a gentleman withdrawing his suit, after it has been approved of by
her legal guardian, without giving him an opportunity of talking
the matter over with the lady. You did not, I suppose, expect my
sister to drop into your mouth like a ripe plum the first moment
you chose to open it?'

'As to the lady's title to dismiss her lover, Colonel,' replied
Edward, 'it is a point which you must argue with her, as I am
ignorant of the customs of the Highlands in that particular. But
as to my title to acquiesce in a rejection from her without an
appeal to your interest, I will tell you plainly, without meaning
to undervalue Miss Mac-Ivor's admitted beauty and accomplishments,
that I would not take the hand of an angel, with an empire for her
dowry, if her consent were extorted by the importunity of friends
and guardians, and did not flow from her own free inclination.'

'An angel, with the dowry of an empire,' repeated Fergus, in a
tone of bitter irony, 'is not very likely to be pressed upon a ----
