now taken arms for government. This person, whom they call Gifted
Gilfillan, has been long a leader among them, and now heads a small
party, which will pass here to-day or to-morrow on their march towards
Stirling, under whose escort Major Melville proposes you shall travel.
I would willingly speak to Gilfillan in your behalf; but, having deeply
imbibed all the prejudices of his sect, and being of the same fierce
disposition, he would pay little regard to the remonstrances of an
Erastian divine, as he would politely term me. And now, farewell, my
young friend; for the present I must not weary out the Major's
indulgence, that I may obtain his permission to visit you again in the
course of the day.'





CHAPTER XXXIV

THINGS MEND A LITTLE


About noon Mr. Morton returned and brought an invitation from Major
Melville that Mr. Waverley would honour him with his company to dinner,
notwithstanding the unpleasant affair which detained him at
Cairnvreckan, from which he should heartily rejoice to see Mr. Waverley
completely extricated. The truth was that Mr. Morton's favourable
report and opinion had somewhat staggered the preconceptions of the old
soldier concerning Edward's supposed accession to the mutiny in the
regiment; and in the unfortunate state of the country the mere
suspicion of disaffection or an inclination to join the insurgent
Jacobites might infer criminality indeed, but certainly not dishonour.
Besides, a person whom the Major trusted had reported to him (though,
as it proved, inaccurately) a contradiction of the agitating news of
the preceding evening. According to this second edition of the
intelligence, the Highlanders had withdrawn from the Lowland frontier
with the purpose of following the army in their march to Inverness. The
Major was at a loss, indeed, to reconcile his information with the
well-known abilities of some of the gentlemen in the Highland army, yet
it was the course which was likely to be most agreeable to others. He
remembered the same policy had detained them in the north in the year
1715, and he anticipated a similar termination to the insurrection as
upon that occasion.

This news put him in such good-humour that he readily acquiesced in Mr.
Morton's proposal to pay some hospitable attention to his unfortunate
guest, and voluntarily added, he hoped the whole affair would prove a
youthful escapade, which might be easily atoned by a short confinement.
The kind mediator had some trouble to prevail on his young friend to
accept the invitation. He dared not urge to him the real motive, which
was a good-natured wish to secure a favourable report of Waverley's
case from Major Melville to Governor Blakeney. He remarked, from the
flashes of our hero's spirit, that touching upon this topic would be
sure to defeat his purpose. He therefore pleaded that the invitation
argued the Major's disbelief of any part of the accusation which was
inconsistent with Waverley's conduct as a soldier and a man of honour,
and that to decline his courtesy might be interpreted into a
consciousness that it was unmerited. In short, he so far satisfied
Edward that the manly and proper course was to meet the Major on easy
terms that, suppressing his strong dislike again to encounter his cold
and punctilious civility, Waverley agreed to be guided by his new
friend.

The meeting at first was stiff and formal enough. But Edward, having
accepted the invitation, and his mind being really soothed and relieved
by the kindness of Morton, held himself bound to behave with ease,
though he could not affect cordiality. The Major was somewhat of a bon
vivant, and his wine was excellent. He told his old campaign stories,
and displayed much knowledge of men and manners. Mr. Morton had an
internal fund of placid and quiet gaiety, which seldom failed to
enliven any small party in which he found himself pleasantly seated.
Waverley, whose life was a dream, gave ready way to the predominating
impulse and became the most lively of the party. He had at all times
remarkable natural powers of conversation, though easily silenced by
discouragement. On the present occasion he piqued himself upon leaving
on the minds of his companions a favourable impression of one who,
under such disastrous circumstances, could sustain his misfortunes with
ease and gaiety. His spirits, though not unyielding, were abundantly
elastic, and soon seconded his efforts. The trio were engaged in very
lively discourse, apparently delighted with each other, and the kind
host was pressing a third bottle of Burgundy, when the sound of a drum
was heard at some distance. The Major, who, in the glee of an old
soldier, had forgot the duties of a magistrate, cursed, with a muttered
military oath, the circumstances which recalled him to his official
functions. He rose and went towards the window, which commanded a very
near view of the highroad, and he was followed by his guests.

The drum advanced, beating no measured martial tune, but a kind of
rub-a-dub-dub, like that with which the fire-drum startles the
slumbering artizans of a Scotch burgh. It is the object of this history
to do justice to all men; I must therefore record, in justice to the
drummer, that he protested he could beat any known march or point of
war known in the British army, and had accordingly commenced with
'Dumbarton's Drums,' when he was silenced by Gifted Gilfillan, the
commander of the party, who refused to permit his followers to move to
this profane, and even, as he said, persecutive tune, and commanded the
drummer to beat the 119th Psalm. As this was beyond the capacity of the
drubber of sheepskin, he was fain to have recourse to the inoffensive
row-de-dow as a harmless substitute for the sacred music which his
instrument or skill were unable to achieve. This may be held a trifling
anecdote, but the drummer in question was no less than town-drummer of
Anderton. I remember his successor in office, a member of that
enlightened body, the British Convention. Be his memory, therefore,
treated with due respect.





CHAPTER XXXV

A VOLUNTEER SIXTY YEARS SINCE


On hearing the unwelcome sound of the drum, Major Melville hastily
opened a sashed door and stepped out upon a sort of terrace which
divided his house from the highroad from which the martial music
proceeded. Waverley and his new friend followed him, though probably he
would have dispensed with their attendance. They soon recognised in
solemn march, first, the performer upon the drum; secondly, a large
flag of four compartments, on which were inscribed the words, COVENANT,
KIRK, KING, KINGDOMS. The person who was honoured with this charge was
followed by the commander of the party, a thin, dark, rigid-looking
man, about sixty years old. The spiritual pride, which in mine host of
the Candlestick mantled in a sort of supercilious hypocrisy, was in
this man's face elevated and yet darkened by genuine and undoubting
fanaticism. It was impossible to behold him without imagination placing
him in some strange crisis, where religious zeal was the ruling
principle. A martyr at the stake, a soldier in the field, a lonely and
banished wanderer consoled by the intensity and supposed purity of his
faith under every earthly privation, perhaps a persecuting inquisitor,
as terrific in power as unyielding in adversity; any of these seemed
congenial characters to this personage. With these high traits of
energy, there was something in the affected precision and solemnity of
his deportment and discourse that bordered upon the ludicrous; so that,
according to the mood of the spectator's mind and the light under which
Mr. Gilfillan presented himself, one might have feared, admired, or
laughed at him. His dress was that of a West-Country peasant, of better
materials indeed than that of the lower rank, but in no respect
affecting either the mode of the age or of the Scottish gentry at any
period. His arms were a broadsword and pistols, which, from the
antiquity of their appearance, might have seen the rout of Pentland or
Bothwell Brigg.

As he came up a few steps to meet Major Melville, and touched solemnly,
but slightly, his huge and over-brimmed blue bonnet, in answer to the
Major, who had courteously raised a small triangular gold-laced hat,
Waverley was irresistibly impressed with the idea that he beheld a
leader of the Roundheads of yore in conference with one of
Marlborough's captains.

The group of about thirty armed men who followed this gifted commander
was of a motley description. They were in ordinary Lowland dresses, of
different colours, which, contrasted with the arms they bore, gave them
an irregular and mobbish appearance; so much is the eye accustomed to
connect uniformity of dress with the military character. In front were
a few who apparently partook of their leader's enthusiasm, men
obviously to be feared in a combat, where their natural courage was
exalted by religious zeal. Others puffed and strutted, filled with the
importance of carrying arms and all the novelty of their situation,
while the rest, apparently fatigued with their march, dragged their
limbs listlessly along, or straggled from their companions to procure
such refreshments as the neighbouring cottages and alehouses afforded.
Six grenadiers of Ligonier's, thought the Major to himself, as his mind
reverted to his own military experience, would have sent all these
fellows to the right about.

Greeting, however, Mr. Gilfillan civilly, he requested to know if he
had received the letter he had sent to him upon his march, and could
undertake the charge of the state prisoner whom he there mentioned as
far as Stirling Castle. 'Yea,' was the concise reply of the Cameronian
leader, in a voice which seemed to issue from the very penetralia of
his person.

'But your escort, Mr. Gilfillan, is not so strong as I expected,' said
Major Melville.

'Some of the people,' replied Gilfillan, 'hungered and were athirst by
the way, and tarried until their poor souls were refreshed with the
word.'

'I am sorry, sir,' replied the Major, 'you did not trust to your
refreshing your men at Cairnvreckan; whatever my house contains is at
the command of persons employed in the service.'

'It was not of creature-comforts I spake,' answered the Covenanter,
regarding Major Melville with something like a smile of contempt;
'howbeit, I thank you; but the people remained waiting upon the
precious Mr. Jabesh Rentowel for the out-pouring of the afternoon
exhortation.'

'And have you, sir,' said the Major, 'when the rebels are about to
spread themselves through this country, actually left a great part of
your command at a fieldpreaching?'

Gilfillan again smiled scornfully as he made this indirect answer
--'Even thus are the children of this world wiser in their generation
than the children of light!'

'However, sir,' said the Major, 'as you are to take charge of this
gentleman to Stirling, and deliver him, with these papers, into the
hands of Governor Blakeney, I beseech you to observe some rules of
military discipline upon your march. For example, I would advise you to
keep your men more closely together, and that each in his march should
cover his file-leader, instead of straggling like geese upon a common;
and, for fear of surprise, I further recommend to you to form a small
advance-party of your best men, with a single vidette in front of the
whole march, so that when you approach a village or a wood'--(here the
Major interrupted himself)--'But as I don't observe you listen to me,
Mr. Gilfillan, I suppose I need not give myself the trouble to say more
upon the subject. You are a better judge, unquestionably, than I am of
the measures to be pursued; but one thing I would have you well aware
of, that you are to treat this gentleman, your prisoner, with no rigour
nor incivility, and are to subject him to no other restraint than is
necessary for his security.'

'I have looked into my commission,' said Mr. Gilfillan,' subscribed by
a worthy and professing nobleman, William, Earl of Glencairn; nor do I
find it therein set down that I am to receive any charges or commands
anent my doings from Major William Melville of Cairnvreckan.'

Major Melville reddened even to the well-powdered ears which appeared
beneath his neat military sidecurls, the more so as he observed Mr.
Morton smile at the same moment. 'Mr. Gilfillan,' he answered, with
some asperity, 'I beg ten thousand pardons for interfering with a
person of your importance. I thought, however, that as you have been
bred a grazier, if I mistake not, there might be occasion to remind you
of the difference between Highlanders and Highland cattle; and if you
should happen to meet with any gentleman who has seen service, and is
disposed to speak upon the subject, I should still imagine that
listening to him would do you no sort of harm. But I have done, and
have only once more to recommend this gentleman to your civility as
well as to your custody. Mr. Waverley, I am truly sorry we should part
in this way; but I trust, when you are again in this country, I may
have an opportunity to render Cairnvreckan more agreeable than
circumstances have permitted on this occasion.'

So saying, he shook our hero by the hand. Morton also took an
affectionate farewell, and Waverley, having mounted his horse, with a
musketeer leading it by the bridle and a file upon each side to prevent
his escape, set forward upon the march with Gilfillan and his party.
Through the little village they were accompanied with the shouts of the
children, who cried out, 'Eh! see to the Southland gentleman that's
gaun to be hanged for shooting lang John Mucklewrath, the smith!





APPENDICES TO THE GENERAL PREFACE


NO. I

FRAGMENT [Footnote: It is not to be supposed that these fragments are
given in possessing any intrinsic value of themselves; but there may be
some curiosity attached to them, as to the first etchings of a plate,
which are accounted interesting by those who have, in any degree, been
interested in the more finished works of the artist.] OF A ROMANCE
WHICH WAS TO HAVE BEEN ENTITLED

THOMAS THE RHYMER

CHAPTER I

THE sun was nearly set behind the distant mountains of Liddesdale, when
a few of the scattered and terrified inhabitants of the village of
Hersildoune, which had four days before been burned by a predatory band
of English Borderers, were now busied in repairing their ruined
dwellings. One high tower in the centre of the village alone exhibited
no appearance of devastation. It was surrounded with court walls, and
the outer gate was barred and bolted. The bushes and brambles which
grew around, and had even insinuated their branches beneath the gate,
plainly showed that it must have been many years since it had been
opened. While the cottages around lay in smoking ruins, this pile,
deserted and desolate as it seemed to be, had suffered nothing from the
violence of the invaders; and the wretched beings who were endeavouring
to repair their miserable huts against nightfall seemed to neglect the
preferable shelter which it might have afforded them without the
necessity of labour.

Before the day had quite gone down, a knight, richly armed and mounted
upon an ambling hackney, rode slowly into the village. His attendants
were a lady, apparently young and beautiful, who rode by his side upon
a dappled palfrey; his squire, who carried his helmet and lance, and
led his battlehorse, a noble steed, richly caparisoned. A page and four
yeomen bearing bows and quivers, short swords, and targets of a span
breadth, completed his equipage, which, though small, denoted him to be
a man of high rank.

He stopped and addressed several of the inhabitants whom curiosity had
withdrawn from their labour to gaze at him; but at the sound of his
voice, and still more on perceiving the St. George's Cross in the caps
of his followers, they fled, with a loud cry, 'that the Southrons were
returned.' The knight endeavoured to expostulate with the fugitives,
who were chiefly aged men, women, and children; but their dread of the
English name accelerated their flight, and in a few minutes, excepting
the knight and his attendants, the place was deserted by all. He paced
through the village to seek a shelter for the night, and, despairing to
find one either in the inaccessible tower or the plundered huts of the
peasantry, he directed his course to the left hand, where he spied a
small decent habitation, apparently the abode of a man considerably
above the common rank. After much knocking, the proprietor at length
showed himself at the window, and speaking in the English dialect, with
great signs of apprehension, demanded their business. The warrior
replied that his quality was an English knight and baron, and that he
was travelling to the court of the King of Scotland on affairs of
consequence to both kingdoms.

'Pardon my hesitation, noble Sir Knight,' said the old man, as he
unbolted and unbarred his doors--'Pardon my hesitation, but we are here
exposed to too many intrusions to admit of our exercising unlimited and
unsuspicious hospitality. What I have is yours; and God send your
mission may bring back peace and the good days of our old Queen
Margaret!'

'Amen, worthy Franklin,' quoth the Knight--'Did you know her?'

'I came to this country in her train,' said the Franklin; 'and the care
of some of her jointure lands which she devolved on me occasioned my
settling here.'

'And how do you, being an Englishman,' said the Knight, 'protect your
life and property here, when one of your nation cannot obtain a single
night's lodging, or a draught of water were he thirsty?'

'Marry, noble sir,' answered the Franklin, 'use, as they say, will make
a man live in a lion's den; and as I settled here in a quiet time, and
have never given cause of offence, I am respected by my neighbours, and
even, as you see, by our FORAYERS from England.'

'I rejoice to hear it, and accept your hospitality. Isabella, my love,
our worthy host will provide you a bed. My daughter, good Franklin, is
ill at ease. We will occupy your house till the Scottish King shall
return from his northern expedition; meanwhile call me Lord Lacy of
Chester.'

The attendants of the Baron, assisted by the Franklin, were now busied
in disposing of the horses, and arranging the table for some
refreshment for Lord Lacy and his fair companion. While they sat down
to it, they were attended by their host and his daughter, whom custom
did not permit to eat in their presence, and who afterwards withdrew to
an outer chamber, where the squire and page (both young men of noble
birth) partook of supper, and were accommodated with beds. The yeomen,
after doing honour to the rustic cheer of Queen Margaret's bailiff,
withdrew to the stable, and each, beside his favourite horse, snored
away the fatigues of their journey.

Early on the following morning the travellers were roused by a
thundering knocking at the door of the house, accompanied with many
demands for instant admission in the roughest tone. The squire and page
of Lord Lacy, after buckling on their arms, were about to sally out to
chastise these intruders, when the old host, after looking out at a
private casement, contrived for reconnoitring his visitors, entreated
them, with great signs of terror, to be quiet, if they did not mean
that all in the house should be murdered.

He then hastened to the apartment of Lord Lacy, whom he met dressed in
a long furred gown and the knightly cap called a MORTIER, irritated at
the noise, and demanding to know the cause which had disturbed the
repose of the household.

'Noble sir,' said the Franklin, 'one of the most formidable and bloody
of the Scottish Border riders is at hand; he is never seen,' added he,
faltering with terror, 'so far from the hills but with some bad
purpose, and the power of accomplishing it; so hold yourself to your
guard, for--'

A loud crash here announced that the door was broken down, and the
knight just descended the stair in time to prevent bloodshed betwixt
his attendants and the intruders. They were three in number; their
chief was tall, bony, and athletic, his spare and muscular frame, as
well as the hardness of his features, marked the course of his life to
have been fatiguing and perilous. The effect of his appearance was
aggravated by his dress, which consisted of a jack or jacket, composed
of thick buff leather, on which small plates of iron of a lozenge form
were stitched in such a manner as to overlap each other and form a coat
of mail, which swayed with every motion of the wearer's body. This
defensive armour covered a doublet of coarse grey cloth, and the
Borderer had a few half-rusted plates of steel on his shoulders, a
two-edged sword, with a dagger hanging beside it, in a buff belt; a
helmet, with a few iron bars, to cover the face instead of a visor, and
a lance of tremendous and uncommon length, completed his appointments.
The looks of the man were as wild and rude as his attire: his keen
black eyes never rested one moment fixed upon a single object, but
constantly traversed all around, as if they ever sought some danger to
oppose, some plunder to seize, or some insult to revenge. The latter
seemed to be his present object, for, regardless of the dignified
presence of Lord Lacy, he uttered the most incoherent threats against
the owner of the house and his guests.

'We shall see--ay, marry shall we--if an English hound is to harbour
and reset the Southrons here. Thank the Abbot of Melrose and the good
Knight of Coldingnow that have so long kept me from your skirts. But
those days are gone, by Saint Mary, and you shall find it!'

It is probable the enraged Borderer would not have long continued to
vent his rage in empty menaces, had not the entrance of the four yeomen
with their bows bent convinced him that the force was not at this
moment on his own side.

Lord Lacy now advanced towards him. 'You intrude upon my privacy,
soldier; withdraw yourself and your followers. There is peace betwixt
our nations, or my servants should chastise thy presumption.'

'Such peace as ye give such shall ye have,' answered the moss-trooper,
first pointing with his lance towards the burned village and then
almost instantly levelling it against Lord Lacy. The squire drew his
sword and severed at one blow the steel head from the truncheon of the
spear.

'Arthur Fitzherbert,' said the Baron, 'that stroke has deferred thy
knighthood for one year; never must that squire wear the spurs whose
unbridled impetuosity can draw unbidden his sword in the presence of
his master. Go hence and think on what I have said.'

The squire left the chamber abashed.

'It were vain,' continued Lord Lacy, 'to expect that courtesy from a
mountain churl which even my own followers can forget. Yet, before thou
drawest thy brand (for the intruder laid his hand upon the hilt of his
sword), thou wilt do well to reflect that I came with a safe-conduct
from thy king, and have no time to waste in brawls with such as thou.'

'From MY king--from my king!' re-echoed the mountaineer. 'I care not
that rotten truncheon (striking the shattered spear furiously on the
ground) for the King of Fife and Lothian. But Habby of Cessford will be
here belive; and we shall soon know if he will permit an English churl
to occupy his hostelrie.'

Having uttered these words, accompanied with a lowering glance from
under his shaggy black eyebrows, he turned on his heel and left the
house with his two followers. They mounted their horses, which they had
tied to an outer fence, and vanished in an instant.

'Who is this discourteous ruffian?' said Lord Lacy to the Franklin, who
had stood in the most violent agitation during this whole scene.

'His name, noble lord, is Adam Kerr of the Moat, but he is commonly
called by his companions the Black Rider of Cheviot. I fear, I fear, he
comes hither for no good; but if the Lord of Cessford be near, he will
not dare offer any unprovoked outrage.'

'I have heard of that chief,' said the Baron. 'Let me know when he
approaches, and do thou, Rodulph (to the eldest yeoman), keep a strict
watch. Adelbert (to the page), attend to arm me.' The page bowed, and
the Baron withdrew to the chamber of the Lady Isabella to explain the
cause of the disturbance.

No more of the proposed tale was ever written; but the Author's purpose
was that it should turn upon a fine legend of superstition which is
current in the part of the Borders where he had his residence, where,
in the reign of Alexander III of Scotland, that renowned person Thomas
of Hersildoune, called the Rhymer, actually flourished. This personage,
the Merlin of Scotland, and to whom some of the adventures which the
British bards assigned to Merlin Caledonius, or the Wild, have been
transferred by tradition, was, as is well known, a magician, as well as
a poet and prophet. He is alleged still to live in the land of Faery,
and is expected to return at some great convulsion of society, in which
he is to act a distinguished part, a tradition common to all nations,
as the belief of the Mahomedans respecting their twelfth Imaum
demonstrates.

Now, it chanced many years since that there lived on the Borders a
jolly, rattling horse-cowper, who was remarkable for a reckless and
fearless temper, which made him much admired and a little dreaded
amongst his neighbours. One moonlight night, as he rode over Bowden
Moor, on the west side of the Eildon Hills, the scene of Thomas the
Rhymer's prophecies, and often mentioned in his story, having a brace
of horses along with him which he had not been able to dispose of, he
met a man of venerable appearance and singularly antique dress, who, to
his great surprise, asked the price of his horses, and began to chaffer
with him on the subject. To Canobie Dick, for so shall we call our
Border dealer, a chap was a chap, and he would have sold a horse to the
devil himself, without minding his cloven hoof, and would have probably
cheated Old Nick into the bargain. The stranger paid the price they
agreed on, and all that puzzled Dick in the transaction was, that the
gold which he received was in unicorns, bonnet-pieces, and other
ancient coins, which would have been invaluable to collectors, but were
rather troublesome in modern currency. It was gold, however, and
therefore Dick contrived to get better value for the coin than he
perhaps gave to his customer. By the command of so good a merchant, he
brought horses to the same spot more than once, the purchaser only
stipulating that he should always come, by night, and alone. I do not
know whether it was from mere curiosity, or whether some hope of gain
mixed with it, but after Dick had sold several horses in this way, he
began to complain that dry bargains were unlucky, and to hint that,
since his chap must live in the neighbourhood, he ought, in the
courtesy of dealing, to treat him to half a mutchkin.

'You may see my dwelling if you will,' said the stranger; 'but if you
lose courage at what you see there, you will rue it all your life.'

Dicken, however, laughed the warning to scorn, and, having alighted to
secure his horse, he followed the stranger up a narrow foot-path, which
led them up the hills to the singular eminence stuck betwixt the most
southern and the centre peaks, and called from its resemblance to such
an animal in its form the Lucken Hare. At the foot of this eminence,
which is almost as famous for witch meetings as the neighbouring
wind-mill of Kippilaw, Dick was somewhat startled to observe that his
conductor entered the hillside by a passage or cavern, of which he
himself, though well acquainted with the spot, had never seen or heard.

'You may still return,' said his guide, looking ominously back upon
him; but Dick scorned to show the white feather, and on they went. They
entered a very long range of stables; in every stall stood a coal-black
horse; by every horse lay a knight in coal-black armour, with a drawn
sword in his hand; but all were as silent, hoof and limb, as if they
had been cut out of marble. A great number of torches lent a gloomy
lustre to the hall, which, like those of the Caliph Vathek, was of
large dimensions. At the upper end, however, they at length arrived,
where a sword and horn lay on an antique table.

'He that shall sound that horn and draw that sword,' said the stranger,
who now intimated that he was the famous Thomas of Hersildoune, 'shall,
if his heart fail him not, be king over all broad Britain. So speaks
the tongue that cannot lie. But all depends on courage, and much on
your taking the sword or the horn first.'

Dick was much disposed to take the sword, but his bold spirit was
quailed by the supernatural terrors of the hall, and he thought to
unsheath the sword first might be construed into defiance, and give
offence to the powers of the Mountain. He took the bugle with a
trembling hand, and [sounded] a feeble note, but loud enough to produce
a terrible answer. Thunder rolled in stunning peals through the immense
hall; horses and men started to life; the steeds snorted, stamped,
grinded their bits, and tossed on high their heads; the warriors sprung
to their feet, clashed their armour, and brandished their swords.
Dick's terror was extreme at seeing the whole army, which had been so
lately silent as the grave, in uproar, and about to rush on him. He
dropped the horn, and made a feeble attempt to seize the enchanted
sword; but at the same moment a voice pronounced aloud the mysterious
words:

    'Woe to the coward, that ever he was born,
    Who did not draw the sword before he blew the horn!'

At the same time a whirlwind of irresistible fury howled through the
long hall, bore the unfortunate horse-jockey clear out of the mouth of
the cavern, and precipitated him over a steep bank of loose stones,
where the shepherds found him the next morning, with just breath
sufficient to tell his fearful tale, after concluding which he expired.

This legend, with several variations, is found in many parts of
Scotland and England; the scene is sometimes laid in some favourite
glen of the Highlands, sometimes in the deep coal-mines of
Northumberland and Cumberland, which run so far beneath the ocean. It
is also to be found in Reginald Scott's book on "Witchcraft," which was
written in the sixteenth century. It would be in vain to ask what was
the original of the tradition. The choice between the horn and sword,
may perhaps, include as a moral that it is foolhardy to awaken danger
before we have arms in our hands to resist it.

Although admitting of much poetical ornament, it is clear that this
legend would have formed but an unhappy foundation for a prose story,
and must have degenerated into a mere fairy tale. Doctor John Leyden
has beautifully introduced the tradition in his Scenes of Infancy:--

    Mysterious Rhymer, doom'd by fate's decree,
    Still to revisit Eildon's fated tree;
    Where oft the swain, at dawn of Hallow-day,
    Hears thy fleet barb with wild impatience neigh;
    Say who is he, with summons long and high.
    Shall bid the charmed sleep of ages fly,
    Roll the long sound through Eildon's caverns vast,
    While each dark warrior kindles at the blast:
    The horn, the falchion grasp with mighty hand,
    And peal proud Arthur's march from Fairy-land?

    Scenes of Infancy, Part I.

In the same cabinet with the preceding fragment, the following occurred
among other disjecta membra. It seems to be an attempt at a tale of a
different description from the last, but was almost instantly
abandoned. The introduction points out the time of the composition to
have been about the end of the eighteenth century.

THE LORD OF ENNERDALE

A FRAGMENT OF A LETTER FROM JOHN B----, ESQ., OF THAT ILK, TO WILLIAM
G----, F.R.S.E.

'FILL a bumper,' said the Knight; 'the ladies may spare us a little
longer. Fill a bumper to the Archduke Charles.'

The company did due honour to the toast of their landlord.

'The success of the Archduke,' said the muddy Vicar, 'will tend to
further our negotiation at Paris; and if--'

'Pardon the interruption, Doctor,' quoth a thin emaciated figure, with
somewhat of a foreign accent; 'but why should you connect those events,
unless to hope that the bravery and victories of our allies may
supersede the necessity of a degrading treaty?'

'We begin to feel, Monsieur L'Abbe,' answered the Vicar, with some
asperity, 'that a Continental war entered into for the defence of an
ally who was unwilling to defend himself, and for the restoration of a
royal family, nobility, and priesthood who tamely abandoned their own
rights, is a burden too much even for the resources of this country.'

'And was the war then on the part of Great Britain,' rejoined the Abbe,
'a gratuitous exertion of generosity? Was there no fear of the
wide-wasting spirit of innovation which had gone abroad? Did not the
laity tremble for their property, the clergy for their religion, and
every loyal heart for the Constitution? Was it not thought necessary to
destroy the building which was on fire, ere the conflagration spread
around the vicinity?'

'Yet, if upon trial,' said the Doctor,' the walls were found to resist
our utmost efforts, I see no great prudence in persevering in our
labour amid the smouldering ruins.'

'What, Doctor,' said the Baronet,'must I call to your recollection your
own sermon on the late general fast? Did you not encourage us to hope
that the Lord of Hosts would go forth with our armies, and that our
enemies, who blasphemed him, should be put to shame?'

'It may please a kind father to chasten even his beloved children,'
answered the Vicar.

'I think,' said a gentleman near the foot of the table,'that the
Covenanters made some apology of the same kind for the failure of their
prophecies at the battle of Dunbar, when their mutinous preachers
compelled the prudent Lesley to go down against the Philistines in
Gilgal.'

The Vicar fixed a scrutinizing and not a very complacent eye upon this
intruder. He was a young man, of mean stature, and rather a reserved
appearance. Early and severe study had quenched in his features the
gaiety peculiar to his age, and impressed upon them a premature cast of
thoughtfulness. His eye had, however, retained its fire, and his
gesture its animation. Had he remained silent, he would have been long
unnoticed; but when he spoke there was something in his manner which
arrested attention.

'Who is this young man?' said the Vicar in a low voice to his neighbour.

'A Scotchman called Maxwell, on a visit to Sir Henry,' was the answer.

'I thought so, from his accent and his manners,' said the Vicar.

It may be here observed that the northern English retain rather more of
the ancient hereditary aversion to their neighbours than their
countrymen of the south. The interference of other disputants, each of
whom urged his opinion with all the vehemence of wine and politics,
rendered the summons to the drawing-room agreeable to the more sober
part of the company.

The company dispersed by degrees, and at length the Vicar and the young
Scotchman alone remained, besides the Baronet, his lady, daughters, and
myself. The clergyman had not, it would seem, forgot the observation
which ranked him with the false prophets of Dunbar, for he addressed
Mr. Maxwell upon the first opportunity.

'Hem! I think, sir, you mentioned something about the civil wars of
last century? You must be deeply skilled in them, indeed, if you can
draw any parallel betwixt those and the present evil days--days which
I am ready to maintain are the most gloomy that ever darkened the
prospects of Britain.'

'God forbid, Doctor, that I should draw a comparison between the
present times and those you mention. I am too sensible of the
advantages we enjoy over our ancestors. Faction and ambition have
introduced division among us; but we are still free from the guilt of
civil bloodshed, and from all the evils which flow from it. Our foes,
sir, are not those of our own household; and while we continue united
and firm, from the attacks of a foreign enemy, however artful, or
however inveterate, we have, I hope, little to dread.'

'Have you found anything curious, Mr. Maxwell, among the dusty papers?'
said Sir Henry, who seemed to dread a revival of political discussion.

'My investigation amongst them led to reflections at which I have just
now hinted,' said Maxwell; 'and I think they are pretty strongly
exemplified by a story which I have been endeavouring to arrange from
some of your family manuscripts.'

'You are welcome to make what use of them you please,' said Sir Henry;'
they have been undisturbed for many a day, and I have often wished for
some person as well skilled as you in these old pot-hooks to tell me
their meaning.'

'Those I just mentioned,' answered Maxwell, 'relate to a piece of
private history, savouring not a little of the marvellous, and
intimately connected with your family; if it is agreeable, I can read
to you the anecdotes in the modern shape into which I have been
endeavouring to throw them, and you can then judge of the value of the
originals.'

There was something in this proposal agreeable to all parties. Sir
Henry had family pride, which prepared him to take an interest in
whatever related to his ancestors. The ladies had dipped deeply into
the fashionable reading of the present day. Lady Ratcliff and her fair
daughters had climbed every pass, viewed every pine-shrouded ruin,
heard every groan, and lifted every trap-door in company with the noted
heroine of Udolpho. They had been heard, however, to observe that the
famous incident of the Black Veil singularly resembled the ancient
apologue of the mountain in labour, so that they were unquestionably
critics as well as admirers. Besides all this, they had valorously
mounted en croupe behind the ghostly horseman of Prague, through all
his seven translators, and followed the footsteps of Moor through the
forest of Bohemia. Moreover, it was even hinted (but this was a greater
mystery than all the rest) that a certain performance called the
'Monk,' in three neat volumes, had been seen by a prying eye in the
right hand drawer of the Indian cabinet of Lady Ratcliff's
dressing-room. Thus predisposed for wonders and signs, Lady Ratcliff
and her nymphs drew their chairs round a large blazing wood-fire and
arranged themselves to listen to the tale. To that fire I also
approached, moved thereunto partly by the inclemency of the season, and
partly that my deafness, which you know, cousin, I acquired during my
campaign under Prince Charles Edward, might be no obstacle to the
gratification of my curiosity, which was awakened by what had any
reference to the fate of such faithful followers of royalty as you well
know the house of Ratcliff have ever been. To this wood-fire the Vicar
likewise drew near, and reclined himself conveniently in his chair,
seemingly disposed to testify his disrespect for the narration and
narrator by falling asleep as soon as he conveniently could. By the
side of Maxwell (by the way, I cannot learn that he is in the least
related to the Nithsdale family) was placed a small table and a couple
of lights, by the assistance of which he read as follows:--

'Journal of Jan Van Eulen

'On the 6th November 1645, I, Jan Van Eulen, merchant in Rotterdam,
embarked with my only daughter on board of the good vessel Vryheid of
Amsterdam, in order to pass into the unhappy and disturbed kingdom of
England. 7th November--a brisk gale--daughter sea-sick--myself unable
to complete the calculation which I have begun of the inheritance left
by Jane Lansache of Carlisle, my late dear wife's sister, the
collection of which is the object of my voyage. 8th November--wind
still stormy and adverse--a horrid disaster nearly happened--my dear
child washed overboard as the vessel lurched to leeward. Memorandum--to
reward the young sailor who saved her out of the first moneys which I
can recover from the inheritance of her aunt Lansache. 9th
November--calm--P.M. light breezes from N. N. W. I talked with the
captain about the inheritance of my sister-in-law, Jane Lansache. He
says he knows the principal subject, which will not exceed L1000 in
value. N. B. He is a cousin to a family of Petersons, which was the
name of the husband of my sister-in-law; so there is room to hope it
may be worth more than he reports. 10th November, 10 A.M. May God
pardon all our sins!--An English frigate, bearing the Parliament flag,
has appeared in the offing, and gives chase.--11 A.M. She nears us
every moment, and the captain of our vessel prepares to clear for
action.--May God again have mercy upon us!'

'Here,' said Maxwell, 'the journal with which I have opened the
narration ends somewhat abruptly.'

'I am glad of it,' said Lady Ratcliff.

'But, Mr. Maxwell,' said young Frank, Sir Henry's grandchild, 'shall we
not hear how the battle ended?'

I do not know, cousin, whether I have not formerly made you acquainted
