'Well spoken, my Lady,' said the pastor; 'there is real nobility in that
way of thinking. Yet, remember, Noemi is not without means; she feels
not the burden. And the flock contribute enough for the shepherd's
support, and yours likewise.'

'Then let her give it to the poor creatures who so often come in
begging, and saying they have been burned out of house and home by one
party or the other,' said Eustacie. 'Let me have my way, dear sir;
Soeur Bernadine always said I should be a prime _menagere_. I like it so
much.'

And Madame de Ribaumont mixed sugar and dough, and twisted quaint
shapes, and felt important and almost light-hearted, and sang over her
work and over her child songs that were not always Marot's psalms; and
that gave the more umbrage to Noemi, because she feared that Maitre
Gardon actually like to hear them, though, should their echo reach the
street, why it would be a peril, and still worse, a horrible scandal
that out of that sober, afflicted household should proceed profane tunes
such as court ladies sang.




CHAPTER XX. THE ABBE.



     By the day and night her sorrows fall
       Where miscreant hands and rude
     Have stained her pure, ethereal pall
       With many a martyr's blood.
     And yearns not her maternal heart
       To hear their secret sighs,
     Upon whose doubting way apart
       Bewildering shadows rise?--KEBLE


It was in the summer twilight that Eustacie, sitting on the doorstep
between the two rooms, with her baby on her knees, was dreamily humming
to her a tune, without even words, but one that she loved, because she
had first learnt to sing it with Berenger and his friend Sidney to the
lute of the latter; and its notes always brought before her eyes the
woods of Montpipeau. Then it was that, low and soft as was the voice,
that befell which Noemi had feared: a worn, ragged-looking young man,
who had been bargaining at the door for a morsel of bread in exchange
for a handkerchief, started at the sound, and moved so as to like into
the house.

Noemi was at the moment not attending, being absorbed in the study of
the handkerchief, which was of such fine, delicate texture that an
idea of its having been stolen possessed her; and she sought the corner
where, as she expected, a coat-of-arms was embroidered. Just as she was
looking up to demand explanation, the stranger, with a sudden cry of
'Good heavens, it is she!' pushed past her into the house, and falling
on his knee before Eustacie, exclaimed, 'O Lady, Lady, is it thus that I
see you?'

Eustacie had started up in dismay, crying out, 'Ah! M. l'Abbe, as you
are a gentleman, betray me not. Oh! have they sent you to find me? Have
pity on us! You loved my husband!'

'You have nothing to fear from me, Lady,' said the young man, still
kneeling; 'if you are indeed a distressed fugitive--so am I. If you have
shelter and friends--I have none.'

'Is it indeed so?' said Eustacie, wistfully, yet scarce reassured. 'You
are truly not come from my uncle. Indeed, Monsieur, I would not doubt
you, but you see I have so much at stake. I have my little one here, and
they mean so cruelly by her.'

'Madame, I swear by the honour of a nobleman--nay, by all that is
sacred--that I know nothing of your uncle. I have been a wanderer for
many weeks past; proscribed and hunted down because I wished to seek
into the truth.'

'Ah!' said Eustacie, with a sound of relief, and of apology, 'pardon
me, sir; indeed, I know you were good. You loved my husband;' and she
reached out her hand to raise him, when he kissed it reverently. Little
_bourgeoise_ and worn mendicant as they were in dress, the air of the
Louvre breathed round them; and there was all its grace and dignity as
the lady turned round to her astonished hosts, saying, 'Good sir, kind
mother, this gentleman is, indeed, what you took me for, a fugitive for
the truth. Permit me to present to you, Monsieur l'Abbe de Mericour--at
least, so he was, when last I had the honour to see him.'

The last time HE had seen her, poor Eustacie had been incapable of
seeing anything save that bloody pool at the foot of the stairs.

Mericour now turned and explained. 'Good friends,' he said courteously,
but with the _fierete_ of the noble not quite out of his tone, 'I beg
your grace. I would not have used so little ceremony, if I had not been
out of myself at recognizing a voice and a tune that could belong to
none but Madame---'

'Sit down, sir,' said Noemi, a little coldly and stiffly--for Mericour
was a terrible name to Huguenots ears; 'a true friend to this lady must
needs be welcome, above all if he comes in Heaven's name.'

'Sit down and eat, sir,' added Gardon, much more heartily; 'and forgive
us for not having been more hospitable--but the times have taught us to
be cautious, and in that lady we have a precious charge. Rest; for you
look both weary and hungry.'

Eustacie added an invitation, understanding that he would not sit
without her permission, and then, as he dropped into a chair, she
exclaimed, 'Ah! sir, you are faint, but you are famished.'

'It will pass,' he said; 'I have not eaten to-day.'

Instantly a meal was set before him, and ere long he revived; and as
the shutters were closed, and shelter for the night promised to him by a
Huguenot family lodging in the same house, he began to answer Eustacie's
anxious questions, as well as to learn from her in return what had
brought her into her present situation.

Then it was that she recollected that it had been he who, at her cousin
Diane's call, had seized her when she was rushing out of the palace
in her first frenzy of grief, and had carried her back to the women's
apartments.

'It was that day which brought me here,' he said.

And he told how, bred up in his own distant province, by a pious and
excellent tutor, he had devoutly believed in the extreme wickedness of
the Reformers; but in his seclusion he had been trained to such purity
of faith and morals, that, when his brother summoned him to court to
solicit a benefice, he had been appalled at the aspect of vice, and had,
at the same time, been struck by the pure lives of the Huguenots; for
truly, as things then were at the French court, crime seemed to have
arrayed itself on the side of the orthodox party, all virtue on that of
the schismatics.

De Mericour consulted spiritual advisers, who told him that none but
Catholics could be truly holy, and that what he admired were merely
heathen virtues that the devil permitted the Huguenots to display in
order to delude the unwary. With this explanation he had striven to be
satisfied, though eyes unblended by guilt and a pure heart continued to
be revolted at the practices which his Church, scared at the evil
times, and forgetful of her own true strength, left undenounced in her
partisans. And the more that the Huguenot gentlemen thronged the court,
and the young Abbe was thrown into intercourse with them, and the more
he perplexed himself how the truth, the faith, the uprightness, the
forbearance, the purity that they evinced could indeed be wanting in
the zeal that made them acceptable. Then came the frightful morning when
carnage reigned in every street, and the men who had been treated as
favourite boon companions were hunted down like wild beasts in every
street. He had endeavoured to save life, but would have speedily been
slaughtered himself except for his soutane; and in all good faith he
had hurried to the Louvre, to inform royalty of the horrors that, as he
thought, a fanatic passion was causing the populace to commit.

He found the palace become shambles--the King himself, wrought up to
frenzy, firing on the fugitives. And the next day, while his brain still
seemed frozen with horror, he was called on to join in the procession of
thanksgiving for the King's deliverance from a dangerous plot. Surely,
if the plot were genuine, he thought, the procession should have
savoured of penance and humiliation rather than of barbarous exultation!
Yet these might be only the individual crimes of the Queen-mother, and
of the Guises seeking to mask themselves under the semblance of
zeal; and the infallible head of the visible Church would disown the
slaughter, and cast it from the Church with loathing as a blood-stained
garment. Behold, Rome was full of rejoicing, and sent sanction and
commendation of the pious zeal of the King! Had the voice of Holy Church
become indeed as the voice of the bloodhound? Was this indeed her call?

The young man, whose life from infancy had been marked out for the
service of the Church--so destined by his parents as securing a wealthy
provision for a younger son, but educated by his good tutor with more
real sense of his obligations--felt the question in its full import.
He was under no vows; he had, indeed, received the tonsure, but was
otherwise unpledged, and he was bent on proving all things. The gaieties
in which he had at first mingled had become abhorrent to him, and he
studied with the earnestness of a newly-awakened mind in search of true
light. The very face of study and inquiry, in one of such a family as
that of his brother the Duke de Mericour, was enough to excite suspicion
of Huguenot inclinations. The elder brother tried to quash the folly of
the younger, by insisting on his sharing the debaucheries which, whether
as priest or monk, or simply as Christian man, it would be his duty to
abjure; and at length, by way of bringing things to a test, insisted
on his making one of a party who were about to break up and destroy a
Huguenot assembly. Unable, in his present mood, to endure the thought
of further cruelty, the young Abbe fled, gave secret warning to the
endangered congregation, and hastened to the old castle in Brittany,
where he had been brought up, to pour out his perplexities, and seek the
counsel of the good old chaplain who had educated him. Whether the kind,
learned, simple-hearted tutor could have settled his mind, he had no
time to discover, for he had scarcely unfolded his troubles before
warnings came down that he had better secure himself--his brother, as
head of the family, had obtained the royal assent to the imprisonment of
the rebellious junior, so as to bring him to a better mind, and cure
him of the Huguenot inclinations, which in the poor lad were simply
undeveloped. But in all the Catholic eyes he was a tainted man, and
his almost inevitable course was to take refuge with some Huguenot
relations. There he was eagerly welcome; instruction was poured in on
him; but as he showed a disposition to inquire and examine, and needed
time to look into what they taught him, as one who feared to break
his link with the Church, and still longed to find her blameless and
glorious, the righteous nation that keepeth the truth, they turned on
him and regarded him as a traitor and a spy, who had come among them on
false pretences.

All the poor lad wanted was time to think, time to examine, time to
consult authorities, living and dead. The Catholics called this treason
to the Church, the Huguenots called it halting between two opinions; and
between them he was a proscribed, distrusted vagabond, branded on one
side as a recreant, and on the other as a traitor. He had asked for a
few months of quiet, and where could they be had? His grand-mother had
been the daughter of a Scottish nobleman in the French service, and he
had once seen a nephew of hers who had come to Paris during the time of
Queen Mary's residence there. He imagined that if he were once out of
this distracted land of France, he might find respite for study, for
which he longed; and utterly ignorant of the real state of Scotland,
he had determined to make his way to his kindred there; and he had
struggled on the way to La Rochelle, cheated out of the small remains
of his money, selling his last jewels and all the clothing that was
not indispensable, and becoming so utterly unable to pay his passage to
England, that he could only trust to Providence to find him some means
of reaching his present goal.

He had been listened to with kindness, and a sympathy such as M.
Gardon's large mind enable him to bestow, where his brethren had been
incapable of comprehending that a man could sincerely doubt between them
and Rome. When the history was finished, Eustacie exclaimed, turning
to Maitre Gardon, 'Ah! sir, is not this just what we sought? If this
gentleman would but convey a letter to my mother-in-law---'

M. Gardon smiled. 'Scotland and England are by no means the same place,
Lady,' he said.

'Whatever this lady would command, wherever she would send me, I am at
her service,' cried the Abbe, fervently.

And, after a little further debate, it was decided that it might really
be the best course, for him as for Madame de Ribaumont, to become the
bearer of a letter and token from her, entreating her mother-in-law to
notify her pleasure whether she should bring her child to England. She
had means enough to advance a sufficient sum to pay Mericour's passage,
and he accepted it most punctiliously as a loan, intending, so soon as
her despatches were ready, to go on to La Rochelle, and make inquiry for
a ship.

Chance, however, seemed unusually propitious, for the next day there
was an apparition in the streets of La Sablerie of four or five
weather-beaten, rollicking-looking men, their dress profusely adorned
with ribbons, and their language full of strange oaths. They were well
known at La Sablerie as sailors belonging to a ship of the fleet of the
Count de Montgomery, the unfortunate knight whose lance had caused the
death of King Henry II., and who, proscribed by the mortal hatred of
Catherine de Medicis, had become the admiral of a piratical fleet in the
Calvinist interest, so far winked at the Queen Elizabeth that it had its
head-quarters in the Channel Islands, and thence was a most formidable
foe to merchant vessels on the northern and eastern coasts of France;
and often indulged in descents on the coast, when the sailors--being in
general the scum of the nation--were apt to comport themselves more like
American buccaneers than like champions of any form of religion.

La Sablerie was a Huguenot town, so they used no violence, but only
swaggered about, demanding from Bailli La Grasse, in the name of their
gallant Captain Latouche, contributions and provisions, and giving him
to understand that if he did not comply to the uttermost it should be
the worse for him. Their ship, it appeared, had been forced to put into
the harbour, about two miles off, and Maitre Gardon and the young Abbe
decided on walking thither to see it, and to have an interview with the
captain, so as to secure a passage for Mericour at least. Indeed Maitre
Gardon had, in consultation with Eustacie, resolved, if he found things
suitable, to arrange for their all going together. She would be far
safer out of France; and, although the Abbe alone could not have
escorted her, yet Maitre Gardon would gladly have secured for her
the additional protection of a young, strong, and spirited man; and
Eustacie, who was no scribe, was absolutely relieved to have the voyage
set before her as an alternative to the dreadful operation of composing
a letter to the _belle-mere_, whom she had not seen since she had been
seven years old, and of whose present English name she had the most
indistinct ideas.

However, the first sight of the ship overthrew all such ideas. It was a
wretched single-decked vessel, carrying far more sail than experienced
nautical eyes would have deemed safe, and with no accommodation fit
for a woman and child, even had the aspect of captain or crew been more
satisfactory--for the ruffianly appearance and language of the former
fully rivaled that of his sailors. It would have been mere madness to
think of trusting the lady in such hands; and, without a word to each
other, Gardon and Mericour resolved to give no hint even that she and
her jewels were in La Sablerie. Mericour, however, made his bargain with
the captain, who understood to transport him as far as Guernsey, whence
he might easily make his way to Dorsetshire, where M. Gardon knew that
Berenger's English home had been.

So Eustacie, with no small trouble and consideration, indited her
letter--telling of her escape, the birth of her daughter, the dangers
that threatened her child--and begging that its grand-mother would give
it a safe home in England, and love it for the sake of its father. An
answer would find her at the Widow Noemi Laurent's, Rue des Trois
Fees, La Sablerie. She could not bring herself to speak of the name of
Eserance Gardon which had been saddled upon her; and even M. de Mericour
remained in ignorance of her bearing this disguise. She recommended him
to the kindness of her mother-in-law; and M. Gardon added another letter
to the lady, on behalf of the charge to whom he promised to devote
himself until he should see them safe in friendly hands. Both
letters were addressed, as best they might be, between Eustacie's
dim comprehension of the word Thistlewood, and M. Gardon's notion of
spelling. 'Jadis, Baronne de Ribaumont' was the securest part of the
direction.

And for a token, Eustacie looked over her jewels to find one that would
serve for a token; but the only ones she knew would be recognized, were
the brooch that had fastened the plume in Berenger's bloody cap, and the
chaplet of pearls. To part with the first, or to risk the second in the
pirate-ship, was impossible, but Eustacie at last decided upon detaching
the pear-shaped pearl which was nearest the clasp, and which was so
remarkable in form and tint that there was no doubt of its being well
known.




CHAPTER XXI. UNDER THE WALNUT-TREE



  Mistress Jean was making the elder-flower wine--
  'And what brings the
  Laird at sic a like time?'
                              LADY NAIRN, THE LAIRD OF COCKPEN


Summer was nearly ended, and Lucy Thistlewood was presiding in the great
kitchen of the Manor-house, standing under the latticed window near
the large oak-table, a white apron over her dress, presiding over the
collecting of elder-berries for the brew of household-wine for the
winter. The maids stood round her with an array of beechen bowls or red
and yellow crocks, while barefooted, bareheaded children came thronging
in with rush or wicker baskets of the crimson fruit, which the maids
poured in sanguine cascades into their earthenware; and Lucy requited
with substantial slices of bread and cheese, and stout homely garment
mostly of her own sewing.

Lucy was altogether an inmate of her father's house. She had not even
been at Hurst Walwyn for many months; for her step-mother's reiterated
hopes that Berenger would make her his consolation for all he had
suffered from his French spouse rendered it impossible to her to meet
him with sisterly unconsciousness; and she therefore kept out of the
way, and made herself so useful at home, that Dame Annora only wondered
how it had been possible to spare her so long, and always wound up her
praises by saying, that Berenger would learn in time how lucky he had
been to lose the French puppet, and win the good English housewife.

If only tidings would have come that the puppet was safe married. That
was the crisis which all the family desired yet feared for Berenger,
since nothing else they saw would so detach his thoughts from the past
as the leave him free to begin life again. The relapse brought on by the
cruel reply to Osbert's message had been very formidable: he was long
insensible or delirious and then came a state of annihilated thought,
then of frightfully sensitive organs, when light, sound, movement, or
scent were alike agony; and when he slowly revived, it was with such
sunken spirits, that his silence was as much from depression as from
difficulty of speech. His brain was weak, his limbs feeble, the wound in
his mouth never painless; and all this necessarily added to his listless
indifference and weariness, as though all youthful hope and pleasure
were extinct in him. He had ceased to refer to the past. Perhaps he had
thought it over, and seen that the deferred escape, the request for the
pearls, the tryst at the palace, and detention from the king's chamber,
made an uglier case against Eustacie than he could endure to own even to
himself. If his heart trusted, his mind could not argue out her defence,
and his tongue would not serve him for discussion with his grandfather,
the only person who could act for him. Perhaps the stunned condition of
his mind made the suspense just within the bounds of endurance, while
trust in his wife's innocence rendered his inability to come to her aid
well-nigh intolerable; and doubt of her seemed both profanity and misery
unspeakable. He could do nothing. He had shot his only shaft by sending
Landry Osbert, and had found that to endeavour to induce his grandfather
to use further measures was worse than useless, and was treated as mere
infatuation. He knew that all he had to do was to endeavour for what
patience he could win from Cecily's sweet influence and guidance, and
to wait till either certainty should come--that dreadful, miserable
certainty that all looked for, and his very helplessness might be
bringing about--or till he should regain strength to be again effective.

And miserably slow work was this recovery. No one had surgical skill to
deal with so severe a wound as that which Narcisse had inflicted; and
the daily pain and inconvenience it caused led to innumerable drawbacks
that often--even after he had come as far as the garden--brought him
back to his bed in a dark room, to blood-letting, and to speechlessness.
No one knew much of his mind--Cecily perhaps the most; and next to her,
Philip--who, from the time he had been admitted to his step-brother's
presence, had been most assiduous in tending him--seemed to understand
his least sign, and to lay aside all his boisterous roughness in his
eager desire to do him service. The lads had loved each other from the
moment they had met as children, but never so apparently as now,
when all the rude horse-play of healthy youths was over--and one was
dependent, the other considerate. And if Berenger had made on one else
believe in Eustacie, he had taught Philip to view her as the 'Queen's
men' viewed Mary of Scotland. Philip had told Lucy the rough but
wholesome truth, that 'Mother talks mere folly. Eustacie is no more to
be spoken of with you than a pheasant with old brown Partlet; and Berry
waits but to be well to bring her off from all her foes. And I'll go
with him.'

It was on Philip's arm that Berenger first crept round the
bowling-green, and with Philip at his rein that he first endured to
ride along the avenue on Lord Walwyn's smooth-paced palfrey; and it
was Philip who interrupted Lucy's household cares by rushing in and
shouting, 'Sister, here! I have wiled him to ride over the down, and
he is sitting under the walnut-tree quite spent, and the three little
wenches are standing in a row, weeping like so many little mermaids.
Come, I say!'

Lucy at once followed him through the house, through the deep porch to
the court, which was shaded by a noble walnut-tree, where Sir Marmaduke
loved to sit among his dogs. There not sat Berenger, resting against the
trunk, overcome by the heat and exertion of his ride. His cloak and
hat lay on the ground; the dogs fawned round him, eager for the wonted
caress, and his three little sisters stood a little aloof, clinging to
one another and crying piteously.

It was their first sight of him; and it seemed to them as if he were
behind a frightful mask. Even Lucy was not without a sensation of the
kind, of this effect in the change from the girlish, rosy complexion to
extreme paleness, on which was visible, in ghastly red and purple, the
great scar left by Narcisse, from the temple on the one side to the ear
on the other.

The far more serious would on the cheek was covered with a black patch,
and the hair had almost entirely disappeared from the head, only a few
light brown locks still hanging round the neck and temples, so that
the bald brow gave a strange look of age; and the disfigurement was
terrible, enhanced as it was by the wasting effect of nearly a year of
sickness. Lucy was so much shocked, that she could hardly steady her
voice to chide the children for not giving a better welcome to their
brother. They would have clung round her, but she shook them off, and
sent Annora in haste for her mother's fan; while Philip arriving with a
slice of diet-bread and a cup of sack, the one fanned him, and the other
fed him with morsels of the cake soaked in the wine, till he revived,
looked up with eyes that were unchanged, and thanked them with a few
faltering words, scarcely intelligible to Lucy. The little girls came
nearer, and curiously regarded him but when he held out his hand to his
favourite Dolly, she shrank back in reluctance.

'Do not chide her,' he said wearily. 'May she never become used to such
marks!'

'What, would you have her live among cowards?' exclaimed Philip; but
Berenger, instead of answering, looked up at the front of the house,
one of those fine Tudor facades that seem all carved timber and glass
lattice, and asked, so abruptly that Lucy doubted whether she heard him
alright,--'How many windows are there in this front?'

'I never counted,' said Philip.

'I have,' said Annora; 'there are seven and thirty, besides the two
little ones in the porch.'

'None shall make them afraid,' he muttered. 'Who would dare build such a
defenceless house over yonder?'--pointing south.

'Our hearts are guarded now,' said Philip, proudly. Berenger half
smiled, as he was wont to do when he meant more than he could
conveniently utter, and presently he asked, in the same languid, musing
tone, 'Lucy, were you ever really affrighted?'

Lucy questioned whether he could be really in his right mind, as if the
bewilderment of his brain was again returning; and while she paused,
Annora exclaimed, 'Yes, when we were gathering cowslips, and the
brindled cow ran at us, and Lucy could not run because she had Dolly in
her arm. Oh! we were frightened then, till you came, brother.'

'Yes,' added Bessie; 'and last winter too, when the owl shrieked at the
window---'

'And,' added Berenger, 'sister, what was your greatest time of revelry?'

Annora again put in her word. 'I know, brother; you remember the
fair-day, when my Lady Grandame was angered because you and Lucy went on
dancing when we and all then gentry had ceased. And when Lucy said she
had not seen that you were left alone, Aunt Cecily said it was because
the eyes of discretion were lacking.'

'Oh, the Christmas feast was far grander,' said Bessie. 'Then Lucy had
her first satin farthingale, and three gallants, besides my brother,
wanted to dance with her.'

Blushing deeply, Lucy tried to hush the little ones, much perplexed by
the questions, and confused by the answers. Could he be contrasting the
life where a vicious cow had been the most alarming object, a greensward
dance with a step-brother the greatest gaiety, dye of the elder juice
the deepest stain, with the temptations and perils that had beset one
equally young? Resting his head on his hand, his elbow on his knee,
he seemed to be musing in a reverie that he could hardly brook, as his
young brow was knitted by care and despondency.

Suddenly, the sounds in the village rose from the quiet sleepy summer
hum into a fierce yell of derisive vituperation, causing Philip at once
to leap up, and run across the court to the entrance-gate, while Lucy
called after him some vain sisterly warning against mingling in a fray.

It seemed as if his interposition had a good effect, for the uproar
lulled almost as soon as he had hurried to the scene of action; and
presently he reappeared, eager and breathless. 'I told them to bring him
up here,' he said; 'they would have flogged him at the cart's-tail, the
rogues, just because my father is out of the way. I could not make out
his jargon, but you can, brother; and make that rascal Spinks let him
go.'

'What should I have to do with it?' said Berenger, shrinking from
the sudden exposure of his scarred face and maimed speech. 'I am no
magistrate.'

'But you can understand him; he is French, the poor rogue something abut
a letter, and wanting to ask his way. Ah! I thought that would touch
you, and it will cost you little pains, and slouching it over his face,
rose, and, leaning upon Annora's shoulder, stepped forward, just as the
big burly blacksmith-constable and small shriveled cobbler advanced,
dragging along, by a cord round the wrists, a slight figure with a red
woolen sailor's shirt, ragged black hosen, bare head, and almost bare
feet.

Doffing their caps, the men began an awkward salutation to the young
Lord on his recovery, but he only touched his beaver in return, and
demanded, 'How now! what have you bound him for?'

'You see, my Lord,' began the constable, 'there have been a sort of
vagrants of late, and I'll be bound' twas no four-legged fox as took
Gaffer Shepherd's lamb.'

The peroration was broken off, for with a start as if he had been shot,
Berenger cried aloud, 'Mericour! the Abbe!'

'Ah, Monsieur, if you know me,' cried the young man, raising his head,
'free me from this shame--aid me in my mission!'

'Loose him, fellows,' shouted Berenger; 'Philip, a knife--Lucy, those
scissors.'

'Tis my duty, my Lord,' said Spinks, gruffly. 'All vagabonds to be
apprehended and flogged at the cart's-tail, by her Grace's special
commands. How is it to be answered to his Honour, Sir Marmaduke?'

'Oaf!' cried Philip, 'you durst not have used such violence had my
father been at home! Don't you see my brother knows him?'

With hands trembling with haste, Berenger had seized the scissors
that, house-wife like, hung at Lucy's waist, and was cutting the
rope, exclaiming in French, 'Pardon, pardon, friend, for so shameful a
reception.'

'Sir,' was the reply, without a sign of recognition, 'if, indeed, you
know my name, I entreat you to direct me to the chateau of Le Sieur
Tistefote, whose lady was once Baronne de Ribaumont.'

'My mother! Ah, my friend, my friend! what would you?' he cried in a
tone of tremulous hope and fear, laying one hand on Mericour's shoulder,
and about to embrace him.

Mericour retreated from him; but the high-spirited young man crossed his
arms on his breast, and gazing at the group with indignant scorn, made
answer, 'My message is from her who deems herself a widow, to the
mother of the husband whom she little imagines to be not only alive, but
consoled.'

'Faithful! Faithful!' burst out Berenger, with a wild, exultant,
strangely-ringing shout. 'Woe, woe to those who would have had me doubt
her! Philip--Lucy--hear! Her truth is clear to all the world!' Then
changing back again to French, 'Ten thousand blessings on you, Mericour!
You have seen her! Where--how?'

Mericour still spoke with frigid politeness. 'I had the honour to part
with Madame la Baronne de Ribaumont in the town of La Sablerie, among
humble, Huguenot guardians, to whom she had fled, to save her infant's
life--when no aid came.'

He was obliged to break off, for Berenger, stunned by the sudden rush
of emotion, reeled as he stood, and would have fallen but for the prompt
support of Lucy, who was near enough to guide him back to rest upon the
bench, saying resentfully in French as she did so, 'My brother is still
very ill. I pray you, sir, have a care.'

She had not half understood the rapid words of the two young men, Philip
comprehended them far less, and the constable and his crew of course
not at all; and Spinks pushed forward among the group as he saw Berenger
sink back on the bench; and once more collaring his prisoner, exclaimed
almost angrily to Philip, 'There now, sir, you've had enough of the
vagabond. We'll keep him tight ere he bewitches any more of you.'

This rude interference proved an instant restorative. Berenger sprang up
at once, and seizing Spink's arm, exclaimed, 'Hands off, fellow! This is
my friend--a gentleman. He brings me tidings of infinite gladness. Who
insults him, insults me.'

Spinks scarcely withdrew his hand from Mericour's neck; and scowling,
said, 'Very odd gentleman--very queer tidings, Master Berenger, to fell
you like an ox. I must be answerable for the fellow till his Honour
comes.'

'Ah! _Eh quoi_, wherefore not show the _canaille_ your sword?' said
Mericour, impatiently.

'It may not be here, in England,' said Berenger (who fortunately was not
wearing his weapon). 'And in good time here comes my step-father,' as
the gate swung back, and Sir Marmaduke and Lady Thistlewood rode through
it, the former sending his voice far before him to demand the meaning of
the hurly-burly that filled his court.

Philip was the first to spring to his rein, exclaiming, 'Father, it is
a Frenchman whom Spinks would have flogged at the cart's-tail; but it
seems he is a friend of Berenger's, and has brought him tidings. I know
not what--about his wife, I believe--any way he is beside himself with
joy.'

'Sir, your Honour,' shouted Spinks, again seizing Mericour, and striving
to drag him forward, 'I would know whether the law is to be hindered
from taking its course because my young Lord there is a Frenchman and
bewitched.'

'Ah,' shrieked Lady Thistlewood, 'I knew it. They will have sent secret
poison to finish him. Keep the fellow safe. He will cast it in the air.'

'Ay, ay, my Lady,' said Spinks, 'there are plenty of us to testify
that he made my young Lord fall back as in a swoon, and reel like one
distraught. Pray Heaven it have not gone further.'

'Sir,' exclaimed Berenger, who on the other side held his friend's hand
tight, 'this is a noble gentleman--the brother of the Duke de Mericour.
He has come at great risk to bring me tidings of my dear and true wife.
And not one word will these demented rascals let me hear with their
senseless clamour.'

'Berenger! You here, my boy!' exclaimed Sir Marmaduke, more amazed by
this than all the rest.

'He touches him--he holds him! Ah! will no one tear him away?' screamed
Lady Thistlewood. Nor would Spinks have been slow in obeying her if Sir
Marmaduke had not swung his substantial form to the ground, and
stepping up to the prisoner, rudely clawed on one side by Spinks, and
affectionately grasped on the other side by Berenger, shouted--

'Let go, both!' does he speak English? Peace, dame! If the lad be
bewitched, it is the right way. He looks like the other man. Eh, lad,
what does your friend say for himself?'

'Sir,' said Berenger, interpreting Mericour's words as they were spoken,
'he has been robbed and misused at sea by Montgomery's pirate crews. He
fled from court for the religion's sake; he met her--my wife' (the voice
was scarcely intelligible, so tremulously was it spoken), 'in hiding
among the Huguenots--he brings a letter and a token from her to my
mother.'
