
New York was not then too busy making money to take an interest in such
a wedding, and Arenta's drive through its pleasant streets was a kind
of public invitation. For Jacob Van Ariens was one of a guild of
wealthy merchants, and they were at their shop doors to express their
sympathy by lifted hats and smiling faces; while the women looked from
every window, and the little children followed, their treble voices
heralding and acclaiming the beautiful bride. Then came the breakfast
and the health-drinking and the speech-making and the rather sadder
drive to the wharf at which lay La Belle France. And even Arenta was by
this time weary of the excitement, so that it was almost with a sense
of relief she stepped across the little carpeted gangway to her deck.
Then the anchor was lifted, the cable loosened, and with every sail set
La Belle France went dancing down the river on the tide-top to the open
sea.

Van Ariens and his son Rem turned silently away. A great and evident
depression had suddenly taken the place of their assumed satisfaction.
"I am going to the Swamp office," said Rem after a few moments'
silence, "there is something to be done there."

"That is well," answered Peter. "To my Cousin Deborah I will give some
charges about the silver, and then I will follow you."

Both men were glad to be alone. They had outworn emotion and knew
instinctively that some common duty was the best restorer. The same
feeling affected, in one way or another, all the watchers of this
destiny. Women whose household work was belated, whose children were
strayed, who had used up their nervous strength in waiting and feeling,
were now cross and inclined to belittle the affair and to be angry at
Arenta and themselves for their lost day. And men, young and old, all
went back to their ledgers and counters and manufacturing with a sense
of lassitude and dejection.

Peter had nearly reached his own house when he met Doctor Moran. The
doctor was more irritable than depressed. He looked at his friend and
said sharply, "You have a fever, Van Ariens. Go to bed and sleep."

"To work I will go. That is the best thing to do. My house has no
comfort in it. Like a milliner's or a mercer's store it has been for
many weeks. Well, then, my Cousin Deborah is at work there, and in a
little while--a little while--" He suddenly stopped and looked at the
doctor with brimming eyes. In that moment he understood that no putting
to rights could ever make his home the same. His little saucy, selfish,
but dearly loved Arenta would come there no more; and he found not one
word that could express the tide of sorrow rising in his heart. Doctor
John understood. He remained quiet, silent, clasping Van Ariens' hand
until the desolate father with a great effort blurted out--

"She is gone!--and smiling, also, she went."

"It is the curse of Adam," answered Doctor Moran bitterly--"to bring up
daughters, to love them, to toil and save and deny ourselves for them,
and then to see some strange man, of whom we have no certain knowledge,
carry them off captive to his destiny and his desires. 'Tis a thankless
portion to be a father--a bitter pleasure."

"Well, then, to be a mother is worse."

"Who can tell that? Women take for compensations things that do not
deceive a father. And, also, they have one grand promise to help them
bear loss and disappointment--the assurance of the Holy Scripture that
they shall have salvation through child-bearing. And I, who have seen
so much of family love and life, can tell you that this promise is all
many a mother has for her travail and sorrowful love."

"It is enough. Pray God that we miss not of that reward some share,"
and with a motion of adieu he turned into his house. Very thoughtfully
the Doctor went on to William Street where he had a patient,--a young
girl of about Arenta's age--very ill. A woman opened the door--a woman
weeping bitterly.

"She is gone, Doctor."

"At what hour?"

"The clock was striking three--she went smiling."

Then he bowed his head and turned away.

There was nothing more that he could do; but he remembered that Arenta
had stepped on board the La Belle France as the clock struck three, and
that she also had gone smiling to her unknown destiny.

"Two emigrants," he thought, "pilgrims of Love and Death, and both went
smiling!" An unwonted tenderness came into his heart; he thought of the
bright, lovely bride clinging so trustfully to her husband's arm, and
he voiced this gentle feeling to his wife in very sincere wishes for
the safety and happiness of the little emigrant for Love. He had a
singular reluctance to name her--he knew not why--with the other little
maid who also had left smiling at three o'clock, an emigrant for whom
Death had opened eternal vistas of delight.

"I do not know," said Mrs. Moran, "how Van Ariens could suffer his
daughter to go to a country full of turmoil and bloodshed."

"He was very unhappy to do so, Ava. But when things have gone a certain
length they have fatality. The Marquis had promised to become
eventually a citizen of this Republic, and Van Ariens had no idea in
sanctioning the marriage that his daughter would leave New York. It was
even supposed the Marquis would remain here in the Count de Moustier's
place, and the sudden turn of events which sent de Tounnerre to France
was a severe blow to Van Ariens. But what could he do?"

"He might have delayed the marriage until the return of de Tounnerre."

"Ah, Ava! you are counting without consideration. He could not have
detained Arenta against her will, and if he had, a miserable life would
have been before both of them--domestic discomfort, public queries and
suspicions, questions, doubts, offending sympathies--all the griefs and
vexations that are sure to follow a Fate that is crossed. He did the
best thing possible when he let the wilful girl go as pleasantly as he
could. Arenta needs a wide horizon."

"Is she in any danger from the state of affairs in Paris?"

"Mr. Jefferson says in no danger whatever. Our Minister is living there
in safety. Arenta will have his friendship and protection; and her
husband has many friends in the most powerful party. She will have a
brilliant visit and be very happy."

"How can she be very happy with the guillotine daily enacting such
murders?"

"She need not be present at such murders. And Mr. Jefferson may be
right, and we outsiders may make too much of circumstances that France,
and France alone, can properly estimate. He says that the God that made
iron wished not slaves to exist, and thinks there is a profound and
eternal justice in this desolation and retribution of aristocrats who
have committed unmentionable oppressions. I know not; good and evil are
so interwoven in life that every good, traced up far enough, is found
to involve evil. This is the great mystery of life. However, Ava, I am
a great believer in sequences; there are few events that break off
absolutely. In Arenta's life there will be sequences; let us hope that
they will be happy ones. Where is Cornelia?"

"I know not. She is asleep. The ball to-night is to be fairy-land and
love-land, an Arabian night's dream and a midsummer night's dream all
in one. I told her to rest, for she was weary and nervous with
expectation."

"I dare say. But what is the good of being young if it is not to expect
miracles?"

"George Hyde calls for her at eight o'clock. I shall let her sleep
until seven, give her some refreshment, and then assist her to dress."

"George Hyde! So you still believe in trusting the cat with the cream?"

"I still believe in Cornelia. Come, now, and drink a cup of tea.
To-morrow the Van Ariens' excitement will be over, and we shall have
rest."

"I think not. The town is now ready to move to Philadelphia. I hear
that Mrs. Adams is preparing to leave Richmond Hill. Washington has
already gone, and Congress is to meet in December. Even the Quakers are
intending all sorts of social festivities."

"But this will not concern us."

"It may. If George Hyde does not go very soon to England, we shall go
to Philadelphia. I wish to rid myself and Cornelia of his airs and
graces and wearisome good temper, his singing and reciting and
tringham-trangham poetry. This story has been long enough; we will turn
over and end it."

"It will be a great trial to Cornelia."

"It may, or it may not--there is Rem--Rem is your own suggestion.
However, we have all to sing the hymn of Renunciation at some time; it
is well to sing it in youth."

Mrs. Moran did not answer. When answering was likely to provoke anger,
she kept silence and talked the matter over with herself. A very wise
plan. For where shall we find a friend so intimate, so discreet, so
conciliating as self? Who can speak to us so well?--without obscurity,
without words, without passion. Yes, indeed: "I will talk to myself" is
a very significant phrase.




CHAPTER VIII

TWO PROPOSALS


The ruling idea of any mind assumes the foreground of thought; and
after Arenta's marriage the dominant desire of George Hyde was to have
his betrothal to Cornelia recognized and assured. He was in haste to
light his own nuptial torch, and afraid every day of that summons to
England which would delay the event. Hitherto, both had been satisfied
with the delicious certainty of their own hearts. To bring Love to
discussion and catechism, to talk of Love in connection with house and
money matters, to put him into bonds, however light those bonds might
be, was indeed a safe and prudent thing for their future happiness;
but, so far, the present with its sweet freedom and uncertainty had
been more charming to their imagination. Suddenly, however, Hyde felt
the danger and stress of this uncertainty and the fear of losing what
he appeared to hold so lightly.

"I may have to go away with mother at any time--I may be detained by
events I cannot help--and I have not bound Cornelia to me by any
personal recognized tie--and Rem Van Ariens will be ever near her. Oh,
indeed, this state of affairs will never do! I will write to Cornelia
this very moment and tell her I must see her father this evening. I
cannot possibly delay it longer. I have been a fool--a careless, happy
fool--too long. There is not now a day to lose. I have already wasted
more time than was reasonable over the love affairs of other people;
now I must look after my own. Safe bind, safe find; I will bind
Cornelia to me before I leave her, then I have a good right to find her
safe when I return to claim her."

While such thoughts were passing through his mind he had risen hastily
from the chair in which he had been musing. He opened his secretary and
sitting resolutely down, began a letter to Doctor Moran. He poured out
his heart and desires, and then he read what he had written. It would
not do at all. It was a love letter and not a business letter. He wrote
another, and then another. The first was too long, it left nothing in
the inkstand; the last was not to be thought of. When he had finished
reading them over, he was in a passion with himself.

"A fool in your teeth twice over, Joris Hyde!" he cried, "yes, sir,
three times, and far too good for you! Since you cannot write a decent
business letter, write, then, to the adorable Cornelia; the words will
be at your finger ends for that letter, and will slip from your pen as
if they were dancing:

"MY SWEET CORNELIA:

"I have not seen you for two days, and 'tis a miracle that I have
endured it. I can tell you, beloved, that I am much concerned about our
affairs, and now that I have begun to talk wisely I may talk a little
more without wearying you. You know that I may have to go to England
soon, and go I will not until I have asked your father what favour he
will show us. On the street, he gets out of my way as if I had the
plague. Tell me at what hour I may call and see him in his house. I
will then ask him point blank for your hand, and he is so candid that I
shall have in a word Yes or No on the matter. Do not keep me waiting
longer than seven this very night. I have a fever of anxiety, and I
shall not grow better, but worse, until I settle our engagement. Oh, my
peerless Cornelia, pearl and flower of womanhood, I speak your speech,
I think your thought; you are the noblest thing in my life, and to
remember you is to remember the hours when I was the very best and the
very happiest. Your image has become part of me, your memory is a
perfume which makes sweet my heart. I wish this moment to give you
thousands and thousands of kisses. Bid me come to you soon, very soon,
sooner than seven, if possible, for your love is my life. Send your
answer to my city lodging. I shall follow this letter and be
impatiently waiting for it. Oh, Cornelia, am I not ever and entirely
yours?

"GEORGE HYDE."

It was not more than eight o'clock in the morning when he wrote this
letter, and as soon as possible he despatched a swift messenger with it
to Cornelia. He hoped that she would receive it soon after the Doctor
had left his home for his usual round of professional visits; then she
might possibly write to him at once, and if so, he would get the letter
very soon after he reached the city.

Probably Madame Hyde divined something of the importance and tenor of a
missive sent in such a hurry of anxious love, so early in the day, but
she showed neither annoyance nor curiosity regarding it. In the first
place, she knew that opposition would only strengthen whatever resolve
her son had made; in the second place, she was conscious of a singular
restlessness of her own spirit. She was apprehending change, and she
could think of no change but that call to leave her home and her native
land which she so much dreaded. If this event happened, then the
affairs of Joris would assume an entirely different aspect. He would be
obliged to leave everything which now interested him, and he could not
live without interests; very well, then, he would be compelled to
accept such as a new Fate thrown into his new life. She had a great
faith in circumstances. She knew that in the long run every one wrote
beneath that potent word, "Your obedient servant." Circumstances would
either positively deny all her son's hopes, or they would so powerfully
aid them that opposition would be useless; and she mentally bowed
herself to an influence so powerful and perhaps so favourable.

"Joris, my dear one," she said, as they rose from the breakfast table;
"Joris, I think there is a letter from your father. To the city you
must go as soon as you can, for I have had a restless night, full of
feeling it has been."

"You should not go to bed to feel, mother. Night is the time for sleep."

"And for dreams, and for many good things to come, that come not in the
day. Yes, indeed, the nighttime of the body is the daytime of the soul."

Then Joris smiled and kissing her, said, "I am going at once. If there
is a letter I will send a quick rider with it."

"But come thyself."

"That I cannot." "But why, then?"

"To-morrow, I will tell you."

"That is well. Into thy mother's heart drop all thy joys and sorrows.
Thine are mine." And she kissed him, and he went away glad and hopeful
and full of tender love for the mother who understood him so
sympathetically. He stood up in his stirrups to wave her a last adieu,
and then he said to himself, "How fortunate I am about women! Could I
have a sweeter, lovelier mistress? No! Mother? No! Grandmother? No!
Friend? No! Cornelia, mother, grandmother, Madame Jacobus, all of them
just what I love and need, sweet souls between me and the angels."

It happened--but doubtless happened because so ordered--that the very
