wanted a certain check upon him, and that it was good for him to be in
the presence of persons who expected him to be delighted to see his wife
and children.

I believe that that quarter of an hour was actual pain to Cecile from
the very overflowing rush of felicity. To have her husband seated beside
her, with his son upon his knee, had been the dream and prayer of her
life for six years, and now that it was gratified the very intensity of
her hopes and fears choked her, made her stammer and answer at random,
when a woman without her depth of affection might have put out all kinds
of arts to win and detain him.

After a time he put the child down, but still held his hand, came up to
the rest of the company and mingled with it. I could have wished they
had been younger and more fashionable, instead of a poor old Scottish
cavalier and his wife, my mother's old contemporary Madame de
Delincourt, and a couple of officers waiting for Solivet. Annora was the
only young brilliant creature there, and she had much too low an opinion
of M. d'Aubepine to have a word to say to him, and continued to converse
in English with old Sir Andrew Macniven about the campaigns of the
Marquis of Montrose, both of them hurling out barbarous names that were
enough to drive civilized ears out of the room.

Our unwilling guest behaved with tolerably good grace, and presently
made his excuse to my mother and me, promising immediately to send back
Solivet to his friends. His wife went with him into the outer room, and
when in a few minutes Armantine ran back to call me--

'Papa is gone, and mama is crying,' she said.

It was true, but they were tears of joy. Cecile threw herself on my
bosom perfectly overwhelmed with happiness, poor little thing, declaring
that she owed it all to me, and that though he could not remain now, he
had promised that she should hear from him. He was enchanted with his
children; indeed, how could he help it? And she would have kept me up
all night, discussing every hair of his moustache, every tone in the few
words he had spoken to her. When at last I parted from her I could
not help being very glad. Was the victory indeed won, and would my
Philippe's sister become a happy wife?

I trusted that now he had seen her he would be armed against Madame
Croquelebois, who you will remember had been his grandmother's dame de
compagnie, and a sort of governess to him. She had petted him as much as
she had afterwards tyrannized over his poor little wife, and might still
retain much influence over him, which she was sure to exert against me.
But at any rate he could not doubt of his wife's adoration for him.

We waited in hope. We heard of the Prince in attendance on the
Queen-Regent, and we knew his aide-de-camp could not be spared, and we
went on expecting all the morning and all the evening, assuring Cecile
that military duty was inexorable, all the time that we were boiling
over with indignation.

My mother was quite as angry as we were, and from her age and position
could be more effective. She met M. d'Aubepine one evening at the
Louvre, and took him to task, demanding when his wife was to hear from
him, and fairly putting him out of countenance in the presence of the
Queen of England. She came home triumphant at what she had done, and
raised our hopes again, but in fact, though it impelled him to action,
there was now mortified vanity added to indifference and impatience of
the yoke.

There was a letter the next day. Half an hour after receiving it I
found Cecile sunk down on the floor of her apartment, upon which all her
wardrobe was strewn about as if to be packed up. She fell into my arms
weeping passionately, and declaring she must leave us. to leave us and
set up her menage with her husband had always been her ambition, so
it was plain that this was not what she meant; but for a long time she
neither would nor could tell me, or moan out anything but a 'convent,'
'how could he?' and 'my children.'

At last she let me read the letter, and a cruel one it was, beginning
'Madame,' and giving her the choice of returning to Chateau d'Aubepine
under the supervision of Madame Croquelebois, or of entering a convent,
and sending her son to be bred up at the Chateau under a tutor and the
intendant. She had quite long enough lived with Madame de Bellaise, and
that young Englishman, her brother, who was said to be charming.

It was an absolute insult to us all, and as I saw at once was the work
of Madame Croquelebois, accepted by the young Count as a convenient
excuse for avoiding the ennui and expense of setting up a household with
his wife, instead of living a gay bachelor life with his Prince. I did
not even think it was his handwriting except the signature, an idea
which gave the first ray of comfort to my poor sister-in-law. It was
quite provoking to find that she had no spirit to resent, or even
to blame; she only wept that any one should be so cruel, and, quite
hopeless of being heard on her own defence, was ready to obey, and
return under the power of her oppressor, if only she might keep her
son. All the four years she had lived with us had not taught her
self-assertion, and the more cruelly she was wounded, the meeker she
became.

The Abbe said she was earning a blessing; but I felt, like Annora, much
inclined to beat her, when she would persist in loving and admiring that
miserable fellow through all, and calling him 'so noble.'

We did not take things by any means so quietly. We were the less sorry
for my brother's absence that such an insinuation almost demanded a
challenge, though in truth I doubt whether they would have dared to make
it had he been at hand. Annora did wish she could take sword or pistols
in hand and make him choke on his own words, and she was very angry that
our brother de Solivet was much too cool and prudent to take Eustace's
quarrel on himself.

Here, however, it was my mother who was most reasonable, and knew best
how to act. She said that it was true that as this was my house, and the
charge of M. d'Aubepine had been committed to me, I had every right to
be offended; but as she was the eldest lady in the house it was suitable
for her to act. She wrote a billet to him demanding a personal interview
with him that he might explain the insinuations which concerned the
honour of herself, her son, and her daughter.

I believe a duel would have been much more agreeable to him than such
a meeting, but my mother so contrived it that he knew that he could not
fail to meet her without its being known to the whole Court, and that he
could not venture. So he came, and I never saw anything more admirably
managed than the conference was on my mother's part, for she chose to
have me present as mistress of the house. She had put on her richest
black velvet suit, and looked a most imposing chatelaine, and though he
came in trying to carry it off with military bravado and nonchalance, he
was evidently ill at ease.

My mother then demanded of him, in her own name, her son's, and mine,
what right or cause he had to make such accusations, as he had implied,
respecting our house.

He laughed uneasily, and tried to make light of it, talking of reports,
and inferences, and so on; but my mother, well assured that there was no
such scandal, drove him up into a corner, and made him confess that he
had heard nothing but from Madame Croquelebois. My mother then insisted
on that lady being called for, sending her own sedan chair to bring her.

Now the Baronne de Ribaumont Walwyn was a veritable grande dame, and
Madame Croquelebois, in spite of her sharp nose, and sharper tongue, was
quite cowed by her, and absolutely driven to confess that she had not
heard a word against Madame la Comtesse. All that she had gone upon was
the fact of their residence in the same house, and that a servant of
hers had heard from a servant of ours that M. le Baron gave her his hand
to go in to dinner every day when there were no visitors.

It all became plain then. The intendant's wife, who had never forgiven
me for taking her victim away from her, had suggested this hint as an
excuse for withdrawing the Countess from me, without obliging the Count
to keep house with her, and becoming the attentive husband, who seemed,
to his perverted notions, a despicable being. Perhaps neither of
them had expected the matter to be taken up so seriously, and an old
country-bred Huguenot as Madame Croquelebois had originally been,
thought that as we were at Court, gallantry was our natural atmosphere.

Having brought them to confession, we divided them. My mother talked to
the intendante, and made her perceive what a wicked, cruel injustice and
demoralization she was leading her beloved young Count into committing,
injuring herself and his children, till the woman actually wept, and
allowed that she had not thought of it; she wanted to gratify him, and
she felt it hard and ungrateful that she should not watch over his wife
and children as his grandmother had always intended.

On my side I had M. d'Aubepine, and at last I worked down to the
Armand I had known at Nancy, not indeed the best of subjects, but still
infinitely better than the conceited, reckless man who had appeared
at first. The one thing that touched him was that I should think him
disrespectful to me, and false to his friendship for my husband. He
really had never thought his words would hurt me for a moment. He
actually shed tears at the thought of my Philippe, and declared that
nothing was farther from his intention than any imputation on any one
belonging to me.

But bah! he was absolutely driven to find some excuse! How could he play
the devoted husband to a little ugly imbecile like that, who would make
him ridiculous every moment they appeared together? Yes, he knew I
had done the best I could for her, but what was she after all? And her
affection was worst of all. Everybody would made game of him.

There was no getting farther. The example of the Prince of Conde and the
fear of ridicule had absolutely steeled his heart and blinded his eyes.
He could not and would not endure the innocent wife who adored him.

Finally my mother, calling in Solivet, came to the following
arrangement, since it was plain that we must part with our inmates.
Cecile and her children were to be installed in the Hotel d'Aubepine, to
which her husband did not object, since he would be either in attendance
on the Prince, or with his regiment. This was better than sending her
either to a convent or to the country, since she would still be within
our reach, although to our great vexation we could not prevail so far
as to hinder Madame Croquelebois from being installed as her duenna, the
intendant himself returning to La Vendee.

To our surprise, Cecile did not seem so much dismayed at returning
under the power of her tyrant as we had expected. It was doing what her
husband wished, and living where she would have news of him, and perhaps
sometimes see him.

That was all she seemed to think about, except that she would have her
children still with her, and not be quite cut off from us.

And I took this consolation, that she was in better health and a woman
of twenty-two could not be so easily oppressed as a sickly child of
sixteen.

But we were very unhappy about it, and Annora almost frantic, above all
at Cecile's meek submission. She was sure the poor thing would be dead
in a month, and then we should be sorry.




CHAPTER XVIII. -- TWELFTH NIGHT, OR WHAT YOU WILL.

My mother declared that M. d'Aubepine would fare the better if we left
her alone and did not excite the jealousy of Madame Croquelebois, who
would be quite capable of carrying her off into the country if she were
interfered with.

Indeed it was not an easy or a pleasant thing to go about Paris just
then, and we were obliged to stay at home. The town was in a restless
state, mobs went about, hooting or singing political songs, or assembled
in front of the Louvre to abuse the Cardinal, and any one who was
supposed to belong to the Court party might at any time be mobbed.
Annora and I much missed the explanations that our brother, Lord Walwyn,
used to make to us; and the listening to his conversations with M.
Darpent. The Duchess de Rambouillet and her family had wisely retired
to their estates, so that there were no more meetings in the Salon Bleu;
and after what my brother had said to me, I durst not make the slightest
demonstration towards Clement Darpent, though I continued to give
my weekly receptions to our poor hungry cavaliers, as I had promised
Eustace that I would do. It was from one of them, Sir Andrew Macniven, a
clever man who had been a law student in Scotland and at Leyden, that we
came to some understanding of what was going on around us.

Under the great Cardinal de Richelieu, the Crown had taken more
authority then ever, and raised taxes at its will. The Parliament was
only permitted to register the edicts of the Crown, but not to refuse
them, as it claimed to do. As nobody who was noble paid taxes the
noblesse did not care, and there had hitherto seemed to be no redress.
But at this moment, when the war taxes were weighing more heavily than
ever, and the demand of a house-tax had irritated the people of Paris,
there were a very large number of the nobility much incensed against
Cardinal Mazarin, and very jealous of his favour with the Queen-Regent.
What they would endure from a French nobleman like Richelieu they
abhorred from a low-born foreigner such Mazarin was; and it seemed to
the Parliament that this was the moment to make a stand, since they had
the populace on their side, and likewise so many of the Court party.
There was the Archbishop of Corinth, the Coadjutor to the Archbishop of
Paris, who had been mortally offended by the way in which the Queen
had treated him on the day of the barricades; there was the handsome,
fair-haired Duke of Beaufort, a grandson of Henri IV., who used to
be called 'Le roi des halles,' he was such a favourite with the
market-women; there was the clever brilliant Prince de Marsillac
(you know will his maxims, written after he had become Duke of
Rochefoucauld). He could do anything with Madame de Longueville; and she
was thought able to do anything with her brothers, the Prince of Code
and Conti. Every one had been watching to see what side the Prince would
take, but at this time he seemed inclined to the Crown, though it was
not likely he could go on long without quarrelling with Mazarin. All
this made the Frondeurs hope much from beginning to resist; but I
remember Sir Andrew said that he did not believe that these nobles and
princes cared in the least for relieving the people, but merely for
overthrowing the Cardinal, and he could not find out that the Parliament
had any definite scheme, or knew what they wished. In fact, Sir
Andrew dreaded any movement. He had been so much disappointed, and so
broken-hearted at the loss of friends and the ruin of the country, that
his only thought was to leave all alone. And above all he so thought,
when every letter from England told how the enemy were proceeding to
hunt down his Sacred Majesty.

What a change it was when my son and I had to go into waiting at the
Louvre! Before the Queen-Regent there was nothing but vituperation of
the Parliament, but the Duke of Orleans hates the Cardinal quite as much
as the Parisians did; and his daughter, Mademoiselle, wanted him to
lead the Frondeuse, and chatted to me of her plan of leading the party,
together with the Prince of Conde, whom she eagerly desired to marry if
his poor wife could be divorced. I used to shake my head at her and say
I knew she was too good at the bottom to desire anything so shocking,
and she took it in good part. She was much better than she chose to
seem.

Thus the eve of the Epiphany came, and there was a feast for the King
and his little companions. Gaspard had the Bean, and the Queen crowned
him and made him King of the night. King Louis himself had to bend the
knee, which he did with the best grace in the world. (You must all have
seen the little enamelled Bean-flower badge that your father received on
that night.)

Every one went to see the children at their feast, where the little
English lady Henrietta sat between her two royal cousins, looking like
a rosebud, all ignorant, poor child, of the said disaster which was
falling on her. Her mother was looking on, smiling in the midst of her
cares to see the children's glee.

The Queen-Regent was in the highest spirits. We had never seen her
dignity so relax into merriment as when she set the little ones to dance
together after the supper was over; but she sent them to bed early,
much earlier than her sons desired. We heard his real Majesty saying to
Gaspard, 'M. le Marquis, since you are King of the Bean, command that we
should be like all other revelers, and sit up till morning.'

My boy looked up to me, and read in my face that he must not presume.

'Ah! sire,' said he, 'though we are called kings, these ladies are the
higher powers.'

It was applauded as a grand witticism, although Gaspard meant it in all
simplicity, and had no notion of the meaning attributed to it. Nay, he
thought all the praise was approval of him as a good boy inducing the
King to be obedient.

After the children had gone to bed, including Mademoiselle's three
little half-sisters, dull little girls of whom she spoke contemptuously
but always treated very kindly, she led the way to the apartment where
her father was sitting by a great fire, fretful with gout, and wanting
the amusement which she tried to give him by describing the children's
diversions. Some one came and whispered something to her, and in the
tone of one who has an excellent joke to rehearse she went up to the
Duke of Orleans, exclaiming--

'Monsieur! Here is news! We are all to start for St. Germain this very
night!'

Monsieur made no answer, and immediately after bade her good night.
She then went to her stepmother's room, and I remained with some of the
other ladies, who were pretty well convinced that it was a true report,
and that the Queen had been only waiting the arrival of the troops
from the Low Countries to quit Paris and crush the resistance of the
Parliament. What was to become of us we did not know, whether we were to
stay or go; but as we heard no more, and Mademoiselle came out and went
to bed, we followed her example.

Between three and four we were all awakened by a loud knocking at the
door, and Mademoiselle's shrill voice calling out to her maids to
open it. Through the anteroom, where the Comtess de Fiesque and I
were sleeping, there came M. de Comminges. Mademoiselle, in her laced
night-cap, rose on her pillows and asked--

'Are we going?'

'Yes, Mademoiselle,' was the reply. 'The King, the Queen, and Monsieur,
are waiting for you in the court, and here is a letter from Monsieur.'

She put it aside, saying she did not want Monsieur's orders to make her
obey those of the Queen, but he begged her to read it. She glanced
at it, and then declared that she would be ready immediately. M. de
Comminges departed, and then began the greatest bustle imaginable,
everybody dressing at once in the greatest confusion, putting on each
other's things by mistake, and Mademoiselle talking--talking through
all.

They were afraid to leave her behind, she said, lest she should have
headed a party. No doubt M. le Prince dreaded her influence, and so did
the Queen. They had made her father issue his commands without warning
lest she should disobey.

In fact she had the greatest desire to disobey, only she did not quite
venture, and we her ladies had no notion what we were to do, whether to
stay or go, while I was in great anxiety as to what they might have done
with my boy.

Somehow or other we all found ourselves in the court of the Louvre,
strongly lighted by flambeaux, and by the windows of the building. There
stood a row of carriages; Mademoiselle called for hers, but it was not
forthcoming, and M. de Comminges, bowing low, offered her his own;
but another gentleman came up and handed her into the royal one, where
already were the King and Queen, the two Princesses of Conde, the Prince
of Conti, and a lady.

I heard Mademoiselle asserting her right to one of the best seats, and
then declaring that she yielded 'as the young must give place to the
old,' a little cut at the Princess Dowager of Conde. She bade M. de
Fiesque follow with her carriage and properties, and we were left in the
most wonderful confusion in that dark court, the carriages moving away
one after another, the mounted servants carrying torches, and the guards
trampling and clinking behind them; servants, gentlemen, and ladies
running about wildly, some of the women crying and wringing their hands.
Among these was Madame de Fiesque, who was of a timid nature, and was
frightened out of her wits at the notion of having to follow, whither
she did not even know, while I was equally wild, though I hope I did not
make quite so much noise, about my son.

One of the gentlemen at last came and spoke to us, and told us that the
King and Queen were gone to St. Germain. It had all been determined upon
for some time past (as soon in fact as the Queen knew that the Prince of
Conde would support her, and that the troops were near enough to be
of use), and this night had been chosen because she could get off more
easily in a time of revelry. Monsieur had known it all the evening, but
had been afraid to tell his daughter because of 'her ideas,' which meant
that he was by no means sure that she might choose to obey, unless she
were taken by surprise, but might want to represent the House of Orleans
at Paris. The Queen of England was not gone; and, as to M. le Marquis de
Nidemerle--

That question was answered by a sound of bare, pattering feet, and a cry
of 'Mamma, mamma!' and my little Marquis himself, with nothing on
but his little white shirt and black velvet breeches, his long hair
streaming behind him, came and threw himself on me, followed by two or
three more little fellows in the same state of dishabille. 'Oh, mamma!'
he cried, 'we thought they were all gone, and had left us to be murdered
by the cruel Parliament; and then I saw you from the window in the
court.' So there they all were, except one little Count from Burgundy,
who slept serenely through the tumult.

By this time we could recollect that it was a January night, and that
we had better retreat into the great hall, where the fire was not out.
I had a great mind, since we were thus deserted, to return home with my
son, but my poor Princess could not be left without a single attendant,
or any clothes save what had been huddled on in haste, nor perhaps even
a bed, for we knew that St. Germain was dismantled of furniture, and
that no preparations had been made for fear of giving alarm.

M. de Fiesque declared that she should die if she tried to pass the
streets of Paris, where we began to hear loud cries. The maids seemed
to have all run away, and she implored me to go, with all that was most
necessary, to Mademoiselle.

'You are English! You are a very Gildippe. You have been in the
wars--you fear nothing,' said the poor woman. 'I implore you to go!'

And as I had my son with me, and it seemed to be a duty or even a
charity that no one else would undertake, though it was not likely that
any harm could come to us, I sent Gaspard to dress himself, with my
faithful Nicolas, who had come to light. The gentlemen undertook to find
us Mademoiselle's coach, and we hurried back to get together what we
could for our mistress. I laugh now to think of M. de Fiesque and myself
trying with our inexperienced hands to roll up a mattress and some
bedding, and to find the linen and the toilet requisites, in which we
had but small success, for the femmes de chamber kept everything, and
had all either run away or slept too far off to hear us. We managed at
last to fasten up the mattress with the other things in it, tied by
a long scarf at each end, and dragging it to the top of the stairs
we rolled it down each flight. At the second it upset at unfortunate
lackey, who began to yell, firmly persuaded that it was a corpse, and
that the Frondeurs had got in and were beginning a general slaughter.

How we recovered from the confusion I do not know, but Gaspard joined me
at the top of the stairs, bringing with him a page of his own age, the
little Chevalier de Mericour, whom he entreated me to take with us. All
the other boys had relations close at hand; but this child's mother was
dead, and his father and brothers with the army. Being really a cousin
of Harry Merrycourt's, he had always seemed like a relation, and he was
Gaspard's chief friend, so I was very willing to give him a seat in the
carriage, which came from somewhere, and into which the mattress was
