at the time you proposed, for the hawks have stooped upon it. Here
is Jem come back with tidings, that he saw a pursuivant there with a
privy-council warrant, and half a score of yeomen assistants, armed to
the teeth, and the horn which we heard was sounded to call out the posse
of the Friars. Indeed, when old Duke Hildebrod saw that the quest was
after some one of whom he knew nothing, he permitted, out of courtesy,
the man-catcher to search through his dominions, quite certain that
they would take little by their motions; for Duke Hildebrod is a most
judicious potentate.--Go back, you bastard, and bring us word when all
is quiet."

"And who may Duke Hildebrod be?" said Lord Glenvarloch.

"Nouns! my lord," said the Templar, "have you lived so long on the town,
and never heard of the valiant, and as wise and politic as valiant, Duke
Hildebrod, grand protector of the liberties of Alsatia? I thought the
man had never whirled a die but was familiar with his fame."

"Yet I have never heard of him, Master Lowestoffe," said Lord
Glenvarloch; "or, what is the same thing, I have paid no attention to
aught that may have passed in conversation respecting him."

"Why, then," said Lowestoffe--"but, first, let me have the honour of
trussing you. Now, observe, I have left several of the points untied, of
set purpose; and if it please you to let a small portion of your shirt
be seen betwixt your doublet and the band of your upper stock, it will
have so much the more rakish effect, and will attract you respect in
Alsatia, where linen is something scarce. Now, I tie some of the
points carefully asquint, for your ruffianly gallant never appears too
accurately trussed--so."

"Arrange it as you will, sir," said Nigel; "but let me hear at least
something of the conditions of the unhappy district into which, with
other wretches, I am compelled to retreat."

"Why, my lord," replied the Templar, "our neighbouring state of Alsatia,
which the law calls the Sanctuary of White-friars, has had its mutations
and revolutions like greater kingdoms; and, being in some sort a
lawless, arbitrary government, it follows, of course, that these have
been more frequent than our own better regulated commonwealth of the
Templars, that of Gray's Inn, and other similar associations, have
had the fortune to witness. Our traditions and records speak of twenty
revolutions within the last twelve years, in which the aforesaid state
has repeatedly changed from absolute despotism to republicanism, not
forgetting the intermediate stages of oligarchy, limited monarchy, and
even gynocracy; for I myself remember Alsatia governed for nearly nine
months by an old fish-woman. 'I hen it fell under the dominion of a
broken attorney, who was dethroned by a reformado captain, who, proving
tyrannical, was deposed by a hedgeparson, who was succeeded, upon
resignation of his power, by Duke Jacob Hildebrod, of that name the
first, whom Heaven long preserve."

"And is this potentate's government," said Lord Glenvarloch, forcing
himself to take some interest in the conversation, "of a despotic
character?"

"Pardon me, my lord," said the Templar; "this said sovereign is too
wise to incur, like many of his predecessors, the odium of wielding
so important an authority by his own sole will. He has established a
council of state, who regularly meet for their morning's draught
at seven o'clock; convene a second time at eleven for their
_ante-meridiem_, or whet; and, assembling in solemn conclave at the
hour of two afternoon, for the purpose of consulting for the good of
the commonwealth, are so prodigal of their labour in the service of
the state, that they seldom separate before midnight. Into this worthy
senate, composed partly of Duke Hildebrod's predecessors in his high
office, whom he has associated with him to prevent the envy attending
sovereign and sole authority, I must presently introduce your lordship,
that they may admit you to the immunities of the Friars, and assign you
a place of residence."

"Does their authority extend to such regulation?" said Lord Glenvarloch.

"The council account it a main point of their privileges, my lord,"
answered Lowestoffe; "and, in fact, it is one of the most powerful means
by which they support their authority. For when Duke Ilildebrod and his
senate find a topping householder in the Friars becomes discontented and
factious, it is but assigning him, for a lodger, some fat bankrupt, or
new lesidenter, whose circumstances require refuge, and whose purse can
pay for it, and the malecontent becomes as tractable as a lamb. As
for the poorer refugees, they let them shift as they can; but the
registration of their names in the Duke's entry-book, and the payment of
garnish conforming to their circumstances, is never dispensed with; and
the Friars would be a very unsafe residence for the stranger who should
dispute these points of jurisdiction."

"Well, Master Lowestoffe," said Lord Glenvarloch, "I must be controlled
by the circumstances which dictate to me this state of concealment--of
course, I am desirous not to betray my name and rank."

"It will be highly advisable, my lord," said Lowestoffe; "and is a
case thus provided for in the statutes of the republic, or monarchy, or
whatsoever you call it.--He who desires that no questions shall be asked
him concerning his name, cause of refuge, and the like, may escape
the usual interrogations upon payment of double the garnish otherwise
belonging to his condition. Complying with this essential stipulation,
your lordship may register yourself as King of Bantam if you will, for
not a question will be asked of you.--But here comes our scout, with
news of peace and tranquillity. Now, I will go with your lordship
myself, and present you to the council of Alsatia, with all the
influence which I have over them as an office-bearer in the Temple,
which is not slight; for they have come halting off upon all occasions
when we have taken part against them, and that they well know. The time
is propitious, for as the council is now met in Alsatia, so the Temple
walks are quiet. Now, my lord, throw your cloak about you, to hide your
present exterior. You shall give it to the boy at the foot of the stairs
that go down to the Sanctuary; and as the ballad says that Queen Eleanor
sunk at Charing Cross and rose at Queenhithe, so you shall sink a
nobleman in the Temple Gardens, and rise an Alsatian at Whitefriars."

They went out accordingly, attended by the little scout, traversed
the gardens, descended the stairs, and at the bottom the young Templar
exclaimed,--"And now let us sing, with Ovid,

     'In nova fert animus mutatas dicere formas--'

Off, off, ye lendings!" he continued, in the same vein. "Via, the
curtain that shadowed Borgia!--But how now, my lord?" he continued,
when he observed Lord Glenvarloch was really distressed at the degrading
change in his situation, "I trust you are not offended at my rattling
folly? I would but reconcile you to your present circumstances, and give
you the tone of this strange place. Come, cheer up; I trust it will only
be your residence for a very few days."

Nigel was only able to press his hand, and reply in a whisper, "I am
sensible of your kindness. I know I must drink the cup which my own
folly has filled for me. Pardon me, that, at the first taste, I feel its
bitterness."

Reginald Lowestoffe was bustlingly officious and good-natured; but,
used to live a scrambling, rakish course of life himself, he had not the
least idea of the extent of Lord Glenvarloch's mental sufferings, and
thought of his temporary concealment as if it were merely the trick of
a wanton boy, who plays at hide-and-seek with his tutor. With the
appearance of the place, too, he was familiar--but on his companion it
produced a deep sensation.

The ancient Sanctuary at Whitefriars lay considerably lower than the
elevated terraces and gardens of the Temple, and was therefore generally
involved in the damps and fogs arising from the Thames. The brick
buildings by which it was occupied, crowded closely on each other, for,
in a place so rarely privileged, every foot of ground was valuable; but,
erected in many cases by persons whose funds were inadequate to their
speculations, the houses were generally insufficient, and exhibited the
lamentable signs of having become ruinous while they were yet new.
The wailing of children, the scolding of their mothers, the miserable
exhibition of ragged linens hung from the windows to dry, spoke the
wants and distresses of the wretched inhabitants; while the sounds of
complaint were mocked and overwhelmed in the riotous shouts, oaths,
profane songs, and boisterous laughter, that issued from the alehouses
and taverns, which, as the signs indicated, were equal in number to all
the other houses; and, that the full character of the place might be
evident, several faded, tinselled and painted females, looked boldly at
the strangers from their open lattices, or more modestly seemed busied
with the cracked flower-pots, filled with mignonette and rosemary,
which were disposed in front of the windows, to the great risk of the
passengers.

"_Semi-reducta Venus_," said the Templar, pointing to one of these
nymphs, who seemed afraid of observation, and partly concealed herself
behind the casement, as she chirped to a miserable blackbird, the tenant
of a wicker prison, which hung outside on the black brick wall.--"I
know the face of yonder waistcoateer," continued the guide; "and I could
wager a rose-noble, from the posture she stands in, that she has clean
head-gear and a soiled night-rail.--But here come two of the male
inhabitants, smoking like moving volcanoes! These are roaring blades,
whom Nicotia and Trinidado serve, I dare swear, in lieu of beef and
pudding; for be it known to you, my lord, that the king's counter-blast
against the Indian weed will no more pass current in Alsatia than will
his writ of _capias_."

As he spoke, the two smokers approached; shaggy, uncombed ruffians,
whose enormous mustaches were turned back over their ears, and mingled
with the wild elf-locks of their hair, much of which was seen under
the old beavers which they wore aside upon their heads, while some
straggling portion escaped through the rents of the hats aforesaid.
Their tarnished plush jerkins, large slops, or trunk-breeches, their
broad greasy shoulder-belts, and discoloured scarfs, and, above all, the
ostentatious manner in which the one wore a broad-sword and the other an
extravagantly long rapier and poniard, marked the true Alsatian bully,
then, and for a hundred years afterwards, a well-known character.

"Tour out," said the one ruffian to the other; "tour the bien mort
twiring at the gentry cove!" [Footnote: Look sharp. See how the girl is
coquetting with the strange gallants!]

"I smell a spy," replied the other, looking at Nigel. "Chalk him across
the peepers with your cheery." [Footnote: Slash him over the eyes with
your dagger.]

"Bing avast, bing avast!" replied his companion; "yon other is rattling
Reginald Lowestoffe of the Temple--I know him; he is a good boy, and
free of the province."

So saying, and enveloping themselves in another thick cloud of smoke,
they went on without farther greeting.

"_Grasso in aere_!" said the Templar. "You hear what a character the
impudent knave gives me; but, so it serves your lordship's turn, I care
not.--And, now, let me ask your lordship what name you will assume, for
we are near the ducal palace of Duke Hildebrod."

"I will be called Grahame," said Nigel; "it was my mother's name."

"Grime," repeated the Templar, "will suit Alsatia well enough--both a
grim and grimy place of refuge."

"I said Grahame, sir, not Grime," said Nigel, something shortly, and
laying an emphasis on the vowel--for few Scotsmen understand raillery
upon the subject of their names.

"I beg pardon, my lord," answered the undisconcerted punster; "but
_Graam_ will suit the circumstance, too--it signifies tribulation in
the High Dutch, and your lordship must be considered as a man under
trouble."

Nigel laughed at the pertinacity of the Templar; who, proceeding to
point out a sign representing, or believed to represent, a dog attacking
a bull, and running at his head, in the true scientific style of
onset,--"There," said he, "doth faithful Duke Hildebrod deal forth laws,
as well as ale and strong waters, to his faithful Alsatians. Being a
determined champion of Paris Garden, he has chosen a sign corresponding
to his habits; and he deals in giving drink to the thirsty, that he
himself may drink without paying, and receive pay for what is drunken by
others.--Let us enter the ever-open gate of this second Axylus."

As they spoke, they entered the dilapidated tavern, which was,
nevertheless, more ample in dimensions, and less ruinous, than many
houses in the same evil neighbourhood. Two or three haggard, ragged
drawers, ran to and fro, whose looks, like those of owls, seemed only
adapted for midnight, when other creatures sleep, and who by day seemed
bleared, stupid, and only half awake. Guided by one of these blinking
Ganymedes, they entered a room, where the feeble rays of the sun were
almost wholly eclipsed by volumes of tobacco-smoke, rolled from the
tubes of the company, while out of the cloudy sanctuary arose the old
chant of--

      "Old Sir Simon the King,
       And old Sir Simon the King,
       With his malmsey nose,
       And his ale-dropped hose,
       And sing hey ding-a-ding-ding."

Duke Hildebrod, who himself condescended to chant this ditty to his
loving subjects, was a monstrously fat old man, with only one eye; and
a nose which bore evidence to the frequency, strength, and depth of
his potations. He wore a murrey-coloured plush jerkin, stained with the
overflowings of the tankard, and much the worse for wear, and unbuttoned
at bottom for the ease of his enormous paunch. Behind him lay a
favourite bull-dog, whose round head and single black glancing eye, as
well as the creature's great corpulence, gave it a burlesque resemblance
to its master.

The well-beloved counsellors who surrounded the ducal throne, incensed
it with tobacco, pledged its occupier in thick clammy ale, and echoed
back his choral songs, were Satraps worthy of such a Soldan. The buff
jerkin, broad belt, and long sword of one, showed him to be a Low
Country soldier, whose look of scowling importance, and drunken
impudence, were designed to sustain his title to call himself a Roving
Blade. It seemed to Nigel that he had seen this fellow somewhere or
other. A hedge-parson, or buckle-beggar, as that order of priesthood
has been irreverently termed, sat on the Duke's left, and was easily
distinguished by his torn band, flapped hat, and the remnants of a rusty
cassock. Beside the parson sat a most wretched and meagre-looking old
man, with a threadbare hood of coarse kersey upon his head, and buttoned
about his neck, while his pinched features, like those of old Daniel,
were illuminated by

                            --"an eye,
  Through the last look of dotage still cunning and sly."

On his left was placed a broken attorney, who, for some malpractices,
had been struck from the roll of practitioners, and who had nothing
left of his profession, except its roguery. One or two persons of
less figure, amongst whom there was one face, which, like that of the
soldier, seemed not unknown to Nigel, though he could not recollect
where he had seen it, completed the council-board of Jacob Duke
Hildebrod.

The strangers had full time to observe all this; for his grace the Duke,
whether irresistibly carried on by the full tide of harmony, or whether
to impress the strangers with a proper idea of his consequence, chose
to sing his ditty to an end before addressing them, though, during the
whole time, he closely scrutinized them with his single optic.

When Duke Hildebrod had ended his song, he informed his Peers that a
worthy officer of the Temple attended them, and commanded the captain
and parson to abandon their easy chairs in behalf of the two strangers,
whom he placed on his right and left hand. The worthy representative of
the army and the church of Alsatia went to place themselves on a crazy
form at the bottom of the table, which, ill calculated to sustain men
of such weight, gave way under them, and the man of the sword and man of
the gown were rolled over each other on the floor, amidst the exulting
shouts of the company. They arose in wrath, contending which should vent
his displeasure in the loudest and deepest oaths, a strife in which
the parson's superior acquaintance with theology enabled him greatly to
excel the captain, and were at length with difficulty tranquillised by
the arrival of the alarmed waiters with more stable chairs, and by a
long draught of the cooling tankard. When this commotion was appeased,
and the strangers courteously accommodated with flagons, after the
fashion of the others present, the Duke drank prosperity to the Temple
in the most gracious manner, together with a cup of welcome to Master
Reginald Lowestoffe; and, this courtesy having been thankfully accepted,
the party honoured prayed permission to call for a gallon of Rhenish,
over which he proposed to open his business.

The mention of a liquor so superior to their usual potations had an
instant and most favourable effect upon the little senate; and its
immediate appearance might be said to secure a favourable reception
of Master Lowestoffe's proposition, which, after a round or two had
circulated, he explained to be the admission of his friend Master Nigel
Grahame to the benefit of the sanctuary and other immunities of Alsatia,
in the character of a grand compounder; for so were those termed who
paid a double fee at their matriculation, in order to avoid laying
before the senate the peculiar circumstances which compelled them to
take refuge there.

The worthy Duke heard the proposition with glee, which glittered in his
single eye; and no wonder, as it was a rare occurrence, and of peculiar
advantage to his private revenue. Accordingly, he commanded his ducal
register to be brought him, a huge book, secured with brass clasps like
a merchant's ledger, and whose leaves, stained with wine, and slabbered
with tobacco juice, bore the names probably of as many rogues as are to
be found in the Calendar of Newgate.

Nigel was then directed to lay down two nobles as his ransom, and to
claim privilege by reciting the following doggerel verses, which were
dictated to him by the Duke:--

        "Your suppliant, by name
         Nigel Grahame,
         In fear of mishap
         From a shoulder-tap;
         And dreading a claw
         From the talons of law,
          That are sharper than briers:
         His freedom to sue,
         And rescue by you--
         Thorugh weapon and wit,
         From warrant and writ,
         From bailiff's hand,
         From tipstaff's wand,
          Is come hither to Whitefriars."

As Duke Hildebrod with a tremulous hand began to make the entry, and had
already, with superfluous generosity, spelled Nigel with two g's instead
of one, he was interrupted by the parson. [Footnote: This curious
register is still in existence, being in possession of that eminent
antiquary, Dr. Dryasdust, who liberally offered the author permission to
have the autograph of Duke Hildebrod engraved as an illustration of this
passage. Unhappily, being rigorous as Ritson himself in adhering to the
very letter of his copy, the worthy Doctor clogged his munificence with
the condition that we should adopt the Duke's orthography, and entitle
the work "The Fortunes of Niggle," with which stipulation we did
not think it necessary to comply.] This reverend gentleman had been
whispering for a minute or two, not with the captain, but with that
other individual, who dwelt imperfectly, as we have already mentioned,
in Nigel's memory, and being, perhaps, still something malecontent on
account of the late accident, he now requested to be heard before the
registration took place.

"The person," he said, "who hath now had the assurance to propose
himself as a candidate for the privileges and immunities of this
honourable society, is, in plain terms, a beggarly Scot, and we have
enough of these locusts in London already--if we admit such palmer-worms
and caterpillars to the Sanctuary, we shall soon have the whole nation."

"We are not entitled to inquire," said Duke Hildebrod, "whether he be
Scot, or French, or English; seeing he has honourably laid down his
garnish, he is entitled to our protection."

"Word of denial, most Sovereign Duke," replied the parson, "I ask him no
questions--his speech betrayeth him--he is a Galilean--and his garnish
is forfeited for his assurance in coming within this our realm; and I
call on you, Sir Duke, to put the laws in force against him!"

The Templar here rose, and was about to interrupt the deliberations of
the court, when the Duke gravely assured him that he should be heard
in behalf of his friend, so soon as the council had finished their
deliberations.

The attorney next rose, and, intimating that he was to speak to the
point of law, said--"It was easy to be seen that this gentleman did not
come here in any civil case, and that he believed it to be the story
they had already heard of concerning a blow given within the verge of
the Park--that the Sanctuary would not bear out the offender in such
case--and that the queer old Chief would send down a broom which would
sweep the streets of Alsatia from the Strand to the Stairs; and it
was even policy to think what evil might come to their republic, by
sheltering an alien in such circumstances."

The captain, who had sat impatiently while these opinions were
expressed, now sprung on his feet with the vehemence of a cork bouncing
from a bottle of brisk beer, and, turning up his mustaches with a
martial air, cast a glance of contempt on the lawyer and churchman,
while he thus expressed his opinion.

"Most noble Duke Hildebrod! When I hear such base, skeldering, coistril
propositions come from the counsellors of your grace, and when I
remember the Huffs, the Muns, and the Tityretu's by whom your grace's
ancestors and predecessors were advised on such occasions, I begin to
think the spirit of action is as dead in Alsatia as in my old grannam;
and yet who thinks so thinks a lie, since I will find as many roaring
boys in the Friars as shall keep the liberties against all the
scavengers of Westminster. And, if we should be overborne for a turn,
death and darkness! have we not time to send the gentleman off by water,
either to Paris Garden or to the bankside? and, if he is a gallant of
true breed, will he not make us full amends for all the trouble we have?
Let other societies exist by the law, I say that we brisk boys of
the Fleet live in spite of it; and thrive best when we are in right
opposition to sign and seal, writ and warrant, sergeant and tipstaff,
catchpoll, and bum-bailey."

This speech was followed by a murmur of approbation, and Lowestoffe,
striking in before the favourable sound had subsided, reminded the Duke
and his council how much the security of their state depended upon the
amity of the Templars, who, by closing their gates, could at pleasure
shut against the Alsatians the communication betwixt the Friars and the
Temple, and that as they conducted themselves on this occasion, so would
they secure or lose the benefit of his interest with his own body, which
they knew not to be inconsiderable. "And, in respect of my friend being
a Scotsman and alien, as has been observed by the reverend divine and
learned lawyer, you are to consider," said Lowestoffe, "for what he is
pursued hither--why, for giving the bastinado, not to an Englishman, but
to one of his own countrymen. And for my own simple part," he continued,
touching Lord Glenvarloch at the same time, to make him understand he
spoke but in jest, "if all the Scots in London were to fight a Welsh
main, and kill each other to a man, the survivor would, in my humble
opinion, be entitled to our gratitude, as having done a most acceptable
service to poor Old England."

A shout of laughter and applause followed this ingenious apology for the
client's state of alienage; and the Templar followed up his plea with
the following pithy proposition:--"I know well," said he, "it is the
custom of the fathers of this old and honourable republic, ripely
and well to consider all their proceedings over a proper allowance of
liquor; and far be it from me to propose the breach of so laudable a
custom, or to pretend that such an affair as the present can be well and
constitutionally considered during the discussion of a pitiful gallon
of Rhenish. But, as it is the same thing to this honourable conclave
whether they drink first and determine afterwards, or whether they
determine first and drink afterwards, I propose your grace, with the
advice of your wise and potent senators, shall pass your edict, granting
to mine honourable friend the immunities of the place, and assigning
him a lodging, according to your wise forms, to which he will presently
retire, being somewhat spent with this day's action; whereupon I will
presently order you a rundlet of Rhenish, with a corresponding quantity
of neats' tongues and pickled herrings, to make you all as glorious as
George-a-Green."

This overture was received with a general shout of applause, which
altogether drowned the voice of the dissidents, if any there were
amongst the Alsatian senate who could have resisted a proposal so
popular. The words of, kind heart! noble gentleman! generous gallant!
flew from mouth to mouth; the inscription of the petitioner's name in
the great book was hastily completed, and the oath administered to him
by the worthy Doge. Like the Laws of the Twelve Tables, of the ancient
Cambro-Britons, and other primitive nations, it was couched in poetry,
and ran as follows:--

 "By spigot and barrel,
  By bilboe and buff;
  Thou art sworn to the quarrel
  Of the blades of the huff.
  For Whitefriars and its claims
  To be champion or martyr,
  And to fight for its dames
  Like a Knight of the Garter."

Nigel felt, and indeed exhibited, some disgust at this mummery; but,
the Templar reminding him that he was too far advanced to draw back,
he repeated the words, or rather assented as they were repeated by Duke
Hildebrod, who concluded the ceremony by allowing him the privilege of
sanctuary, in the following form of prescriptive doggerel:--

 "From the touch of the tip,
  From the blight of the warrant,
  From the watchmen who skip
  On the Harman Beck's errand;
  From the bailiffs cramp speech,
  That makes man a thrall,
  I charm thee from each,
  And I charm thee from all.
  Thy freedom's complete
  As a Blade of the Huff,
  To be cheated and cheat,
  To be cuff'd and to cuff;
  To stride, swear, and swagger,
  To drink till you stagger,
  To stare and to stab,
  And to brandish your dagger
  In the cause of your drab;
  To walk wool-ward in winter,
  Drink brandy, and smoke,
  And go _fresco_ in summer
  For want of a cloak;
  To eke out your living
  By the wag of your elbow,
  By fulham and gourd,
  And by baring of bilboe;
  To live by your shifts,
  And to swear by your honour,
  Are the freedom and gifts
  Of which I am the donor."[Footnote: Of the cant words used in this
inauguratory oration, some are obvious in their meaning, others, as
Harman Beck (constable), and the like, derive their source from that
ancient piece of lexicography, the Slang Dictionary]

This homily being performed, a dispute arose concerning the special
residence to be assigned the new brother of the Sanctuary; for, as
the Alsatians held it a maxim in their commonwealth, that ass's milk
fattens, there was usually a competition among the inhabitants which
should have the managing, as it was termed, of a new member of the
society.

The Hector who had spoken so warmly and critically in Nigel's behalf,
stood out now chivalrously in behalf of a certain Blowselinda, or
Bonstrops, who had, it seems, a room to hire, once the occasional
residence of Slicing Dick of Paddington, who lately suffered at Tyburn,
and whose untimely exit had been hitherto mourned by the damsel in
solitary widowhood, after the fashion of the turtle-dove.

The captain's interest was, however, overruled, in behalf of the old
gentleman in the kersey hood, who was believed, even at his extreme age,
to understand the plucking of a pigeon, as well, or better, than any man
in Alsatia.

This venerable personage was an usurer of notoriety, called Trapbois,
and had very lately done the state considerable service in advancing a
subsidy necessary to secure a fresh importation of liquors to the Duke's
cellars, the wine-merchant at the Vintry being scrupulous to deal with
so great a man for any thing but ready money.

When, therefore, the old gentleman arose, and with much coughing,
reminded the Duke that he had a poor apartment to let, the claims of all
others were set aside, and Nigel was assigned to Trapbois as his guest.

No sooner was this arrangement made, than Lord Glenvarloch expressed to
Lowestoffe his impatience to leave this discreditable assembly, and took
his leave with a careless haste, which, but for the rundlet of Rhenish
wine that entered just as he left the apartment, might have been taken
in bad part. The young Templar accompanied his friend to the house of
the old usurer, with the road to which he and some other youngsters
about the Temple were even but too well acquainted. On the way, he
assured Lord Glenvarloch that he was going to the only clean house in
Whitefriars; a property which it owed solely to the exertions of the old
man's only daughter, an elderly damsel, ugly enough to frighten sin, yet
likely to be wealthy enough to tempt a puritan, so soon as the devil had
got her old dad for his due. As Lowestoffe spoke thus, they knocked at
the door of the house, and the sour stern countenance of the female by
whom it was opened, fully confirmed all that the Templar had said of
the hostess. She heard with an ungracious and discontented air the young
Templar's information, that the gentleman, his companion, was to be her
father's lodger, muttered something about the trouble it was likely
to occasion, but ended by showing the stranger's apartment, which was
better than could have been augured from the general appearance of the
place, and much larger in extent than that which he occupied at Paul's
Wharf, though inferior to it in neatness.

Lowestoffe, having thus seen his friend fairly installed in his new
apartment, and having obtained for him a note of the rate at which he
could be accommodated with victuals from a neighbouring cook's shop, now
took his leave, offering, at the same time, to send the whole, or any
part of Lord Glenvarloch's baggage, from his former place of residence
to his new lodging. Nigel mentioned so few articles, that the Templar
could not help observing, that his lordship, it would seem, did not
intend to enjoy his new privileges long.

"They are too little suited to my habits and taste, that I should do
so," replied Lord Glenvarloch.

"You may change your opinion to-morrow," said Lowestoffe; "and so I wish
you a good even. To-morrow I will visit you betimes."

The morning came, but instead of the Templar, it brought only a letter
from him. The epistle stated, that Lowestoffe's visit to Alsatia had
drawn down the animadversions of some crabbed old pantaloons among the
benchers, and that he judged it wise not to come hither at present, for
fear of attracting too much attention to Lord Glenvarloch's place of
residence. He stated, that he had taken measures for the safety of his
baggage, and would send him, by a safe hand, his money-casket, and
what articles he wanted. Then followed some sage advices, dictated by
Lowestoffe's acquaintance with Alsatia and its manners. He advised him
to keep the usurer in the most absolute uncertainty concerning the state
of his funds-never to throw a main with the captain, who was in the
habit of playing dry-fisted, and paying his losses with three vowels;
and, finally, to beware of Duke Hildebrod, who was as sharp, he said,
as a needle, though he had no more eyes than are possessed by that
necessary implement of female industry.




CHAPTER XVIII


_Mother._ What I dazzled by a flash from Cupid's mirror, With which
the boy, as mortal urchins wont, Flings back the sunbeam in the eye of
passengers--Then laughs to see them stumble!

_Daughter._ Mother! no--It was a lightning-flash which dazzled me, And
never shall these eyes see true again. _Beef and Pudding.-An Old English
Comedy._

It is necessary that we should leave our hero Nigel for a time, although
in a situation neither safe, comfortable, nor creditable, in order
to detail some particulars which have immediate connexion with his
fortunes.

It was but the third day after he had been forced to take refuge in the
house of old Trapbois, the noted usurer of Whitefriars, commonly called
Golden Trapbois, when the pretty daughter of old Ramsay, the watchmaker,
after having piously seen her father finish his breakfast, (from
the fear that he might, in an abstruse fit of thought, swallow the
salt-cellar instead of a crust of the brown loaf,) set forth from the
house as soon as he was again plunged into the depth of calculation,
and, accompanied only by that faithful old drudge, Janet, the Scots
laundress, to whom her whims were laws, made her way to Lombard Street,
and disturbed, at the unusual hour of eight in the morning, Aunt Judith,
the sister of her worthy godfather.

The venerable maiden received her young visitor with no great
complacency; for, naturally enough, she had neither the same admiration
of her very pretty countenance, nor allowance for her foolish and
girlish impatience of temper, which Master George Heriot entertained.
Still Mistress Margaret was a favourite of her brother's, whose will was
to Aunt Judith a supreme law; and she contented herself with asking her
untimely visitor, "what she made so early with her pale, chitty face, in
the streets of London?"

"I would speak with the Lady Hermione," answered the almost breathless
girl, while the blood ran so fast to her face as totally to remove the
objection of paleness which Aunt Judith had made to her complexion.

"With the Lady Hermione?" said Aunt Judith--"with the Lady Hermione? and
at this time in the morning, when she will scarce see any of the family,
even at seasonable hours? You are crazy, you silly wench, or you abuse
the indulgence which my brother and the lady have shown to you."

"Indeed, indeed I have not," repeated Margaret, struggling to retain the
unbidden tear which seemed ready to burst out on the slightest occasion.
"Do but say to the lady that your brother's god-daughter desires
earnestly to speak to her, and I know she will not refuse to see me."

Aunt Judith bent an earnest, suspicious, and inquisitive glance on her
young visitor, "You might make me your secretary, my lassie," she said,
"as well as the Lady Hermione. I am older, and better skilled to advise.
I live more in the world than one who shuts herself up within four
rooms, and I have the better means to assist you."

"O! no--no--no," said Margaret, eagerly, and with more earnest sincerity
than complaisance; "there are some things to which you cannot advise me,
Aunt Judith. It is a case--pardon me, my dear aunt--a case beyond your
counsel."

"I am glad on't, maiden," said Aunt Judith, somewhat angrily; "for I
think the follies of the young people of this generation would drive mad
an old brain like mine. Here you come on the viretot, through the whole
streets of London, to talk some nonsense to a lady, who scarce sees
God's sun, but when he shines on a brick wall. But I will tell her you
are here."

She went away, and shortly returned with a dry--"Miss Marget, the lady
will be glad to see you; and that's more, my young madam, than you had a
right to count upon."

Mistress Margaret hung her head in silence, too much perplexed by
the train of her own embarrassed thoughts, for attempting either to
conciliate Aunt Judith's kindness, or, which on other occasions
would have been as congenial to her own humour, to retaliate on her
cross-tempered remarks and manner. She followed Aunt Judith, therefore,
in silence and dejection, to the strong oaken door which divided the
Lady Hermione's apartments from the rest of George Heriot's spacious
house.

At the door of this sanctuary it is necessary to pause, in order to
correct the reports with which Richie Moniplies had filled his master's
ear, respecting the singular appearance of that lady's attendance at
prayers, whom we now own to be by name the Lady Hermione. Some part
of these exaggerations had been communicated to the worthy Scotsman by
Jenkin Vincent, who was well experienced in the species of wit which
has been long a favourite in the city, under the names of cross-biting,
giving the dor, bamboozling, cramming, hoaxing, humbugging, and
quizzing; for which sport Richie Moniplies, with his solemn gravity,
totally unapprehensive of a joke, and his natural propensity to the
marvellous, formed an admirable subject. Farther ornaments the tale had
received from Richie himself, whose tongue, especially when oiled with
good liquor, had a considerable tendency to amplification, and
who failed not, while he retailed to his master all the wonderful
circumstances narrated by Vincent, to add to them many conjectures of
his own, which his imagination had over-hastily converted into facts.

Yet the life which the Lady Hermione had led for two years, during which
she had been the inmate of George Heriot's house, was so singular, as
almost to sanction many of the wild reports which went abroad. The house
which the worthy goldsmith inhabited, had in former times belonged to a
powerful and wealthy baronial family, which, during the reign of Henry
VIII., terminated in a dowager lady, very wealthy, very devout, and most
unalienably attached to the Catholic faith. The chosen friend of the
Honourable Lady Foljambe was the Abbess of Saint Roque's Nunnery, like
herself a conscientious, rigid, and devoted Papist. When the house of
Saint Roque was despotically dissolved by the fiat of the impetuous
monarch, the Lady Foljambe received her friend into her spacious
mansion, together with two vestal sisters, who, like their Abbess, were
determined to follow the tenor of their vows, instead of embracing the
profane liberty which the Monarch's will had thrown in their choice.
For their residence, the Lady Foljambe contrived, with all secrecy--for
Henry might not have relished her interference--to set apart a suite of
four rooms, with a little closet fitted up as an oratory, or chapel; the
whole apartments fenced by a stout oaken door to exclude strangers, and
accommodated with a turning wheel to receive necessaries, according
to the practice of all nunneries. In this retreat, the Abbess of Saint
Roque and her attendants passed many years, communicating only with the
Lady Foljambe, who, in virtue of their prayers, and of the support she
afforded them, accounted herself little less than a saint on earth. The
