he had solved the great questions--those which Hypatia set forth as the
roots of all knowledge--how the world was made, and what was the
origin of evil, and what his own personality was, and--that being
settled--whether he had one, with a few other preliminary matters, then
it would be time to return, with his enlarged light, to the study of
Christianity; and if, of course, Christianity should be found to be at
variance with that enlarged light, as Hypatia seemed to think ....
Why, then--What then?.... He would not think about such disagreeable
possibilities. Sufficient for the day was the evil thereof.

Possibilities? It was impossible.... Philosophy could not mislead. Had
not Hypatia defined it, as man's search after the unseen? And if he
found the unseen by it, did it not come to just the same thing as if the
unseen had revealed itself to him? And he must find it--for logic and
mathematics could not err. If every step was correct, the conclusion
must be correct also; so he must end, after all, in the right path--that
is, of course, supposing Christianity to be the right path--and return
to fight the Church's battles, with the sword which he had wrested from
Goliath the Philistine....But he had not won the sword yet.; and in the
meanwhile, learning was weary work; and sufficient for the day was the
good, as well as the evil, thereof.

So, enabled by his gold coin each month to devote himself entirely
to study, he became very much what Peter would have coarsely termed a
heathen. At first, indeed, he slipped into the Christian churches,
from a habit of conscience. But habits soon grow sleepy; the fear of
discovery and recapture made his attendance more and more of a labour.
And keeping himself apart as much as possible from the congregation, as
a lonely and secret worshipper, he soon found himself as separate from
them in heart as in daily life. He felt that they, and even more than
they, those flowery and bombastic pulpit rhetoricians, who were paid for
their sermons by the clapping and cheering of the congregation, were
not thinking of, longing after, the same things as himself. Besides, he
never spoke to a Christian; for the negress at his lodgings seemed to
avoid him--whether from modesty or terror, he could not tell; and cut
off thus from the outward 'communion of saints,' he found himself fast
parting away from the inward one. So he went no more to church, and
looked the other way, he hardly knew why, whenever he passed the
Caesareum; and Cyril, and all his mighty organisation, became to him
another world, with which he had even less to do than with those
planets over his head, whose mysterious movements, and symbolisms, and
influences Hypatia's lectures on astronomy were just opening before his
bewildered imagination.

Hypatia watched all this with growing self-satisfaction, and fed herself
with the dream that through Philammon she might see her wildest hopes
realised. After the manner of women, she crowned him, in her own
imagination, with all powers and excellences which she would have wished
him to possess, as well as with those which he actually manifested, till
Philammon would have been as much astonished as self-glorified could he
have seen the idealised caricature of himself which the sweet enthusiast
had painted for her private enjoyment. They were blissful months those
to poor Hypatia. Orestes, for some reason or other, had neglected to
urge his suit, and the Iphigenia-sacrifice had retired mercifully into
the background. Perhaps she should be able now to accomplish all without
it. And yet--it was so long to wait! Years might pass before Philammon's
education was matured, and with them golden opportunities which might
never recur again.

'Ah!' she sighed at times, 'that Julian had lived a generation later!
That I could have brought all my hard-earned treasures to the feet of
the Poet of the Sun, and cried, "Take me!--Hero, warrior, statesman,
sage, priest of the God of Light! Take thy slave! Command her--send
her--to martyrdom, if thou wilt!" A pretty price would that have been
wherewith to buy the honour of being the meanest of thy apostles, the
fellow-labourer of Iamblichus, Maximus, Libanius, and the choir of sages
who upheld the throne of the last true Caesar!'



CHAPTER XV: NEPHELOCOCCUGIA


Hypatia had always avoided carefully discussing with Philammon any
of those points on which she differed from his former faith. She was
content to let the divine light of philosophy penetrate by its own
power, and educe its own conclusions. But one day, at the very time at
which this history reopens, she was tempted to speak more openly to her
pupil than she yet had done. Her father had introduced him, a few days
before, to a new work of hers on Mathematics; and the delighted and
adoring look with which the boy welcomed her, as he met her in the
Museum Gardens, pardonably tempted her curiosity to inquire what
miracles her own wisdom might have already worked. She stopped in her
walk, and motioned her father to begin a conversation with Philammon.

'Well!' asked the old man, with an encouraging smile, 'and how does our
pupil like his new--'

'You mean my conic sections, father? It is hardly fair to expect an
unbiased answer in my presence.'

'Why so?' said Philammon. 'Why should I not tell you, as well as all the
world, the fresh and wonderful field of thought which they have opened
to me in a few short hours?'

'What then?' asked Hypatia, smiling, as if she knew what the answer
would be. 'In what does my commentary differ from the original text of
Apollonius, on which I have so faithfully based it?'

'Oh, as much as a living body differs from a dead one. Instead of mere
dry disquisitions on the properties of lines and curves, I found a
mine of poetry and theology. Every dull mathematical formula seemed
transfigured, as if by a miracle, into the symbol of some deep and noble
principle of the unseen world.'

'And do you think that he of Perga did not see as much? or that we can
pretend to surpass, in depth of insight, the sages of the elder world?
Be sure that they, like the poets, meant only spiritual things, even
when they seem to talk only of physical ones, and concealed heaven under
an earthly garb, only to hide it from the eyes of the profane; while we,
in these degenerate days, must interpret and display each detail to the
dull ears of men.'

'Do you think, my young friend,' asked Theon, 'that mathematics can
be valuable to the philosopher otherwise than as vehicles of spiritual
truth? Are we to study numbers merely that we may be able to keep
accounts; or as Pythagoras did, in order to deduce from their laws the
ideas by which the universe, man, Divinity itself, consists?'

'That seems to me certainly to be the nobler purpose.'

'Or conic sections, that we may know better how to construct machinery;
or rather to devise from them symbols of the relations of Deity to its
various emanations?'

'You use your dialectic like Socrates himself, my father,' said Hypatia.

'If I do, it is only for a temporary purpose. I should be sorry to
accustom Philammon to suppose that the essence of philosophy was to be
found in those minute investigations of words and analyses of notions,
which seem to constitute Plato's chief power in the eyes of those who,
like the Christian sophist Augustine, worship his letter while they
neglect his spirit; not seeing that those dialogues, which they fancy
the shrine itself, are but vestibules--'

'Say rather, veils, father.'

'Veils, indeed, which were intended to baffle the rude gaze of the
carnal-minded; but still vestibules, through which the enlightened soul
might be led up to the inner sanctuary, to the Hesperid gardens and
golden fruit of the Timaeus and the oracles.... And for myself, were
but those two books left, I care not whether every other writing in the
world perished to-morrow.'[Footnote: This astounding speech is usually
attributed to Proclus, Hypatia's 'great' successor.]

'You must except Homer, father.'

'Yes, for the herd.... But of what use would he be to them without some
spiritual commentary?'

'He would tell them as little, perhaps, as the circle tells to the
carpenter who draws one with his compasses.'

'And what is the meaning of the circle?' asked Philammon.

'It may have infinite meanings, like every other natural phenomenon;
and deeper meanings in proportion to the exaltation of the soul which
beholds it. But, consider, is it not, as the one perfect figure, the
very symbol of the totality of the spiritual world; which, like it, is
invisible, except at its circumference, where it is limited by the dead
gross phenomena of sensuous matter! and even as the circle takes its
origin from one centre, itself unseen,--a point, as Euclid defines it,
whereof neither parts nor magnitude can be predicated,--does not
the world of spirits revolve round one abysmal being, unseen and
undefinable--in itself, as I have so often preached, nothing, for it
is conceivable only by the negation of all properties, even of those of
reason, virtue, force; and yet, like the centre of the circle, the cause
of all other existences?'

'I see,' said Philammon; for the moment, certainly, the said abysmal
Deity struck him as a somewhat chill and barren notion.... but that
might be caused only by the dulness of his own spiritual perceptions. At
all events, if it was a logical conclusion, it must be right.

'Let that be enough for the present. Hereafter you may be--I fancy that
I know you well enough to prophesy that you will be--able to recognise
in the equilateral triangle inscribed within the circle, and touching it
only with its angles, the three supra-sensual principles of existence,
which are contained in Deity as it manifests itself in the physical
universe, coinciding with its utmost limits, and yet, like it, dependent
on that unseen central One which none dare name.'

'Ah!' said poor Philammon, blushing scarlet at the sense of his own
dulness, 'I am, indeed, not worthy to have such wisdom wasted upon
my imperfect apprehension.... But, if I may dare to ask.... does not
Apollonius regard the circle, like all other curves, as not depending
primarily on its own centre for its existence, but as generated by the
section of any cone by a plane at right angles to its axis?'

'But must we not draw, or at least conceive a circle, in order to
produce that cone? And is not the axis of that cone determined by the
centre of that circle?'

Philammon stood rebuked.

'Do not be ashamed; you have only, unwittingly, laid open another, and
perhaps, as deep a symbol. Can you guess what it is?'

Philammon puzzled in vain.

'Does it not show you this? That, as every conceivable right section of
the cone discloses the circle, so in all which is fair and symmetric
you will discover Deity, if you but analyse it in a right and symmetric
direction?'

'Beautiful!' said Philammon, while the old man added--

'And does it not show us, too, how the one perfect and original
philosophy may be discovered in all great writers, if we have but that
scientific knowledge which will enable us to extract it?'

'True, my father: but just now, I wish Philammon, by such thoughts as I
have suggested, to rise to that higher and more spiritual insight into
nature, which reveals her to us as instinct throughout--all fair and
noble forms of her at least--with Deity itself; to make him feel that it
is not enough to say, with the Christians, that God has made the world,
if we make that very assertion an excuse for believing that His presence
has been ever since withdrawn from it.'

'Christians, I think, would hardly say that,' said Philammon.

'Not in words. But, in fact, they regard Deity as the maker of a
dead machine, which, once made, will move of itself thenceforth, and
repudiate as heretics every philosophic thinker, whether Gnostic
or Platonist, who, unsatisfied with so dead, barren, and sordid
a conception of the glorious all, wishes to honour the Deity by
acknowledging His universal presence, and to believe, honestly, the
assertion of their own Scriptures, that He lives and moves, and has His
being in the universe.'

Philammon gently suggested that the passage in question was worded
somewhat differently in the Scripture.

'True. But if the one be true, its converse will be true also. If
the universe lives and moves, and has its being in Him, must He not
necessarily pervade all things?'

'Why?--Forgive my dulness, and explain.'

'Because, if He did not pervade all things, those things which He did
not pervade would be as it were interstices in His being, and in so far,
without Him.'

'True, but still they would be within His circumference.'

'Well argued. But yet they would not live in Him, but in themselves.
To live in Him they must be pervaded by His life. Do you think it
possible--do you think it even reverent to affirm that there can be
anything within the infinite glory of Deity which has the power of
excluding from the space which it occupies that very being from which it
draws its worth, and which must have originally pervaded that thing,
in order to bestow on it its organisation and its life? Does He retire
after creating, from the spaces which He occupied during creation,
reduced to the base necessity of making room for His own universe, and
endure the suffering--for the analogy of all material nature tells us
that it is suffering--of a foreign body, like a thorn within the flesh,
subsisting within His own substance? Rather believe that His wisdom and
splendour, like a subtle and piercing fire, insinuates itself eternally
with resistless force through every organised atom, and that were it
withdrawn but for an instant from the petal of the meanest flower, gross
matter, and the dead chaos from which it was formed, would be all which
would remain of its loveliness....

'Yes'--she went on, after the method of her school, who preferred,
like most decaying ones, harangues to dialectic, and synthesis to
induction.... 'Look at yon lotus-flower, rising like Aphrodite from
the wave in which it has slept throughout the night, and saluting, with
bending swan-neck, that sun which it will follow lovingly around the
sky. Is there no more there than brute matter, pipes and fibres, colour
and shape, and the meaningless life-in-death which men call vegetation?
Those old Egyptian priests knew better, who could see in the number and
the form of those ivory petals and golden stamina, in that mysterious
daily birth out of the wave, in that nightly baptism, from which it
rises each morning re-born to a new life, the signs of some divine idea,
some mysterious law, common to the flower itself, to the white-robed
priestess who held it in the temple rites, and to the goddess to whom
they both were consecrated.... The flower of Isis!.... Ah!--well. Nature
has her sad symbols, as well as her fair ones. And in proportion as
a misguided nation has forgotten the worship of her to whom they owed
their greatness, for novel and barbaric superstitions, so has her sacred
flower grown rarer and more rare, till now--fit emblem of the worship
over which it used to shed its perfume--it is only to be found in
gardens such as these--a curiosity to the vulgar, and, to such as me, a
lingering monument of wisdom and of glory past away.'

Philammon, it may be seen, was far advanced by this time; for he bore
the allusions to Isis without the slightest shudder. Nay--he dared even
to offer consolation to the beautiful mourner.

'The philosopher,' he said, 'will hardly lament the loss of a mere
outward idolatry. For if, as you seem to think, there were a root of
spiritual truth in the symbolism of nature, that cannot die. And thus
the lotus-flower must still retain its meaning, as long as its species
exists on earth.'

'Idolatry!' answered she, with a smile. 'My pupil must not repeat to me
that worn-out Christian calumny. Into whatsoever low superstitions the
pious vulgar may have fallen, it is the Christians now, and not the
heathens, who are idolaters. They who ascribe miraculous power to dead
men's bones, who make temples of charnel-houses, and bow before the
images of the meanest of mankind, have surely no right to accuse of
idolatry the Greek or the Egyptian, who embodies in a form of symbolic
beauty ideas beyond the reach of words!

'Idolatry? Do I worship the Pharos when I gaze at it, as I do for hours,
with loving awe, as the token to me of the all-conquering might of
Hellas? Do I worship the roll on which Homer's words are written, when
I welcome with delight the celestial truths which it unfolds to me, and
even prize and love the material book for the sake of the message
which it brings? Do you fancy that any but the vulgar worship the image
itself, or dream that it can help or hear them? Does the lover mistake
his mistress's picture for the living, speaking reality? We worship the
idea of which the image is a symbol. Will you blame us because we use
that symbol to represent the idea to our own affections and emotions
instead of leaving it a barren notion, a vague imagination of our own
intellect?'

'Then,' asked Philammon, with a faltering voice, yet unable to restrain
his curiosity, 'then you do reverence the heathen gods?'

Why Hypatia should have felt this question a sore one, puzzled
Philammon; but she evidently did feel it as such, for she answered
haughtily enough--

'If Cyril had asked me that question, I should have disdained to answer.
To you I will tell, that before I can answer your question you must
learn what those whom you call heathen gods are. The vulgar, or rather
those who find it their interest to calumniate the vulgar for the sake
of confounding philosophers with them, may fancy them mere human beings,
subject like man to the sufferings of pain and love, to the limitations
of personality. We, on the other hand, have been taught by the primeval
philosophers of Greece, by the priests of ancient Egypt, and the sages
of Babylon, to recognise in them the universal powers of nature, those
children of the all-quickening spirit, which are but various emanations
of the one primeval unity--say rather, various phases of that unity, as
it has been variously conceived, according to the differences of climate
and race, by the wise of different nations. And thus, in our eyes, he
who reverences the many, worships by that very act, with the highest
and fullest adoration, the one of whose perfection they are the partial
antitypes; perfect each in themselves, but each the image of only one of
its perfections.'

'Why, then,' said Philammon, much relieved by this explanation, 'do you
so dislike Christianity? may it not be one of the many methods--'

'Because,' she answered, interrupting him impatiently, 'because it
denies itself to be one of those many methods, and stakes its existence
on the denial; because it arrogates to itself the exclusive revelation
of the Divine, and cannot see, in its self-conceit, that its own
doctrines disprove that assumption by their similarity to those of all
creeds. There is not a dogma of the Galileans which may not be found,
under some form or other, in some of those very religions from which it
pretends to disdain borrowing.'

'Except,' said Theon, 'its exaltation of all which is human and
low-born, illiterate, and levelling.'

'Except that--. But look! here comes some one whom I cannot--do not
choose to meet. Turn this way--quick!'

And Hypatia, turning pale as death, drew her father with unphilosophic
haste down a side-walk.

'Yes,' she went on to herself, as soon as she had recovered her
equanimity. 'Were this Galilean superstition content to take its place
humbly among the other "religiones licitas" of the empire, one might
tolerate it well enough, as an anthropomorphic adumbration of divine
things fitted for the base and toiling herd; perhaps peculiarly fitted,
because peculiarly flattering to them. But now--'

'There is Miriam again,' said Philammon, 'right before us!'

'Miriam?' asked Hypatia severely. 'You know her then? How is that?'

'She lodges at Eudaimon's house, as I do,' answered Philammon frankly.
'Not that I ever interchanged, or wish to interchange, a word with so
base a creature.'

'Do not! I charge you!' said Hypatia, almost imploringly. But there was
now no way of avoiding her, and perforce Hypatia and her tormentress met
face to face.

'One word! one moment, beautiful lady,' began the old woman, with a
slavish obeisance. 'Nay, do not push by so cruelly. I have--see what I
have for you!' and she held out with a mysterious air, 'The Rainbow of
Solomon.'

'Ah! I knew you would stop a moment--not for the ring's sake, of course,
nor even for the sake of one who once offered it to you.--Ah! and where
is he now? Dead of love, perhaps! at least, here is his last token to
the fairest one, the cruel one.... Well, perhaps she is right.... To be
an empress--an empress!.... Far finer than anything the poor Jew could
have offered.... But still.... An empress need not be above hearing her
subject's petition....'

All this was uttered rapidly, and in a wheedling undertone, with a
continual snaky writhing of her whole body, except her eye, which
seemed, in the intense fixity of its glare, to act as a fulcrum for all
her limbs; and from that eye, as long as it kept its mysterious hold,
there was no escaping.

'What do you mean? What have I to do with this ring?' asked Hypatia,
half frightened.

'He who owned it once, offers it to you now. You recollect a little
black agate--a paltry thing..... If you have not thrown it away, as you
most likely have, he wishes to redeem it with this opal.... a gem surely
more fit for such a hand as that.'

'He gave me the agate, and I shall keep it.'

'But this opal--worth, oh, worth ten thousand gold pieces--in exchange
for that paltry broken thing not worth one?'

'I am not a dealer, like you, and have not yet learnt to value things
by their money price. It that agate had been worth money, I would never
have accepted it.'

'Take the ring, take it, my darling,' whispered Theon impatiently; 'it
will pay all our debts.'

'Ah, that it will--pay them all,' answered the old woman, who seemed to
have mysteriously overheard him.

'What!--my father! Would you, too, counsel me to be so mercenary? My
good woman,' she went on, turning to Miriam, 'I cannot expect you to
understand the reason of my refusal. You and I have a different standard
of worth. But for the sake of the talisman engraven on that agate, if
for no other reason, I cannot give it up.'

'Ah! for the sake of the talisman! That is wise, now! That is noble!
Like a philosopher! Oh, I will not say a word more. Let the beautiful
prophetess keep the agate, and take the opal too; for see, there is a
charm on it also! The name by which Solomon compelled the demons to do
his bidding. Look! What might you not do now, if you knew how to use
that! To have great glorious angels, with six wings each, bowing at your
feet whensoever you called them, and saying, "Here am I, mistress; send
me." Only look at it!'

Hypatia took the tempting bait, and examined it with more curiosity than
she would have wished to confess; while the old woman went on--

'But the wise lady knows how to use the black agate, of course?
Aben-Ezra told her that, did he not?'

Hypatia blushed somewhat; she was ashamed to confess that Aben-Ezra had
not revealed the secret to her, probably not believing that there was
any, and that the talisman had been to her only a curious plaything,
of which she liked to believe one day that it might possibly have
some occult virtue, and the next day to laugh at the notion as
unphilosophical and barbaric; so she answered, rather severely, that her
secrets were her own property.

'Ah, then! she knows it all--the fortunate lady! And the talisman
has told her whether Heraclian has lost or won Rome by this time, and
whether she is to be the mother of a new dynasty of Ptolemies, or to die
a virgin, which the Four Angels avert! And surely she has had the great
demon come to her already, when she rubbed the flat side, has she not?'

'Go, foolish woman! I am not like you, the dupe of childish
superstitions.'

'Childish superstitions! Ha! ha! ha!'said the old woman, as she turned
to go, with obeisances more lowly than ever. 'And she has not seen the
Angels yet!.... Ah well! perhaps some day, when she wants to know how to
use the talisman, the beautiful lady will condescend to let the poor old
Jewess show her the way.'

And Miriam disappeared down an alley, and plunged into the thickest
shrubberies, while the three dreamers went on their way.

Little thought Hypatia that the moment the old woman had found herself
alone, she had dashed herself down on the turf, rolling and biting at
the leaves like an infuriated wild beast..... 'I will have it yet! I
will have it, if I tear out her heart with it!'



CHAPTER XVI: VENUS AND PALLAS


As Hypatia was passing across to her lecture-room that afternoon, she
was stopped midway by a procession of some twenty Goths and damsels,
headed by Pelagia herself, in all her glory of jewels, shawls, and
snow-white mule; while by her side rode the Amal, his long legs, like
those of Gang-Rolf the Norseman, all but touching the ground, as he
crushed down with his weight a delicate little barb, the best substitute
to be found in Alexandria for the huge black chargers of his native
land.

On they came, followed by a wondering and admiring mob, straight to the
door of the Museum, and stopping began to dismount, while their slaves
took charge of the mules and horses.

There was no escape for Hypatia; pride forbade her to follow her own
maidenly instinct, and to recoil among the crowd behind her; and in
another moment the Amal had lifted Pelagia from her mule, and the rival
beauties of Alexandria stood, for the first time in their lives, face to
face.

'May Athene befriend you this day, Hypatia!' said Pelagia with her
sweetest smile. 'I have brought my guards to hear somewhat of your
wisdom this afternoon. I am anxious to know whether you can teach Ahem
anything more worth listening to than the foolish little songs which
Aphrodite taught me, when she raised me from the sea-foam, as she rose
herself, and named me Pelagia.'

Hypatia drew herself up to her stateliest height, and returned no
answer.

'I think my bodyguard will well hear comparison with yours. At least
they are the princes and descendants of deities. So it is but fitting
that they should enter before your provincials. Will you show them the
way?'

No answer.

'Then I must do it myself. Come, Amal!' and she swept up the steps,
followed by the Goths, who put the Alexandrians aside right and left, as
if they had been children.

'Ah! treacherous wanton that you are!' cried a young man's voice out
of the murmuring crowd. 'After having plundered us of every coin out
of which you could dupe us, here you are squandering our patrimonies on
barbarians!'

'Give us back our presents, Pelagia,' cried another, 'and you are
welcome to your herd of wild bulls!'

'And I will!' cried she, stopping suddenly; and clutching at her chains
and bracelets, she was on the point of dashing them among the astonished
crowd--

'There! take your gifts! Pelagia and her girls scorn to be debtors to
boys, while they are worshipped by men like these!'

But the Amal, who, luckily for the students, had not understood a word
of this conversation, seized her arm, asking if she were mad.

'No, no!' panted she, inarticulate with passion. 'Give me gold--every
coin you have. These wretches are twitting me with what they gave me
before--before--oh Amal, you understand me?' And she clung imploringly
to his arm.

'Oh! Heroes! each of you throw his purse among these fellows! they say
that we and our ladies are living on their spoils!' And he tossed his
purse among the crowd.

In an instant every Goth had followed his example: more than one
following it up by dashing a bracelet or necklace into the face of some
hapless philosophaster.

'I have no lady, my young friends,' said old Wulf, in good enough Greek,
'and owe you nothing: so I shall keep my money, as you might have kept
yours; and as you might, too, old Smid, if you had been as wise as I.'

'Don't be stingy, prince, for the honour of the Goths,' said Smid,
laughing.

'If I take in gold I pay in iron,' answered Wulf, drawing half out of
its sheath the huge broad blade, at the ominous brown stains of which
the studentry recoiled; and the whole party swept into the empty
lecture-room, and seated themselves at their ease in the front ranks.

Poor Hypatia! At first she determined not to lecture--then to send for
Orestes--then to call on her students to defend the sanctity of the
Museum; but pride, as well as prudence, advised her better; to retreat
would be to confess herself conquered--to disgrace philosophy--to lose
her hold on the minds of all waverers. No! she would go on and brave
everything, insults, even violence; and with trembling limbs and a pale
cheek, she mounted the tribune and began.

To her surprise and delight, however, her barbarian auditors were
perfectly well behaved. Pelagia, in childish good-humour at her triumph,
and perhaps, too, determined to show her contempt for her adversary by
giving her every chance, enforced silence and attention, and checked
the tittering of the girls, for a full half-hour. But at the end of
that time the heavy breathing of the slumbering Amal, who had been twice
awoke by her, resounded unchecked through the lecture-room, and deepened
into a snore; for Pelagia herself was as fast asleep as he. But now
another censor took upon himself the office of keeping order. Old Wulf,
from the moment Hypatia had begun, had never taken his eyes off her
face; and again and again the maiden's weak heart had been cheered, as
she saw the smile of sturdy intelligence and honest satisfaction which
twinkled over that scarred and bristly visage; while every now and then
the graybeard wagged approval, until she found herself, long before the
end of the oration, addressing herself straight to her new admirer.

At last it was over, and the students behind, who had sat meekly through
it all, without the slightest wish to 'upset' the intruders, who had so
thoroughly upset them, rose hurriedly, glad enough to get safe out of so
dangerous a neighbourhood. But to their astonishment, as well as to that
of Hypatia, old Wulf rose also, and stumbling along to the foot of the
tribune, pulled out his purse, and laid it at Hypatia's feet.

'What is this?' asked she, half terrified at the approach of a figure
more rugged and barbaric than she had ever beheld before.

'My fee for what I have heard to-day. You are a right noble maiden, and
may Freya send you a husband worthy of you, and make you the mother of
kings!'

And Wulf retired with his party.

Open homage to her rival, before her very face! Pelagia felt quite
inclined to hate old Wulf.

But at least he was the only traitor. The rest of the Goths agreed
unanimously that Hypatia was a very foolish person, who was wasting her
youth and beauty in talking to donkey-riders; and Pelagia remounted her
mule, and the Goths their horses, for a triumphal procession homeward.

And yet her heart was sad, even in her triumph. Right and wrong were
ideas as unknown to her as they were to hundreds of thousands in her
day. As far as her own consciousness was concerned, she was as destitute
of a soul as the mule on which she rode. Gifted by nature with boundless
frolic and good-humour, wit and cunning, her Greek taste for the
physically beautiful and graceful developed by long training, until she
had become, without a rival, the most perfect pantomime, dancer,
and musician who catered for the luxurious tastes of the Alexandrian
theatres, she had lived since her childhood only for enjoyment and
vanity, and wished for nothing more. But her new affection, or rather
worship, for the huge manhood of her Gothic lover had awoke in her a new
object--to keep him--to live for him--to follow him to the ends of the
