and the wicket door opened stealthily.

"I want," said I, "room for my horse to pass."

Thereupon more grumbling follow'd, and a prodigious creaking of bolts
and chains; after which the big gate swung stiffly back.

"Sure, you must be worth a deal," I said, "that shut yourselves in so
careful."

Before me stood a strange fellow--extraordinary old and bent, with a
wizen'd face, one eye only, and a chin that almost touched his nose. He
wore a dirty suit of livery, that once had been canary-yellow; and shook
with the palsy.

"Master Tingcomb will see the young man," he squeak'd, nodding his head;
"but is a-reading just now in his Bible."

"A pretty habit," answered I, leading in Molly--"if unseasonable. But
why not have said so?"

He seem'd to consider this for a while, and then said abruptly--

"Have some pasty and some good cider?"

"Why yes," I said, "with all my heart, when I have stabled the sorrel
here."

He led the way across the court, well paved but chok'd with weeds,
toward the stable. I found it a spacious building, and counted sixteen
stalls there; but all were empty save two, where stood the horses I had
seen in Bodmin the day before. Having stabled Molly, I left the place
(which was thick with cobwebs) and follow'd the old servant into the
house.

He took me into a great stone kitchen, and brought out the pasty and
cider, but poured out half a glass only.

"Have a care, young man: 'tis a luscious, thick, seductive drink," and
he chuckled.

"'Twould turn the edge of a knife," said I, tasting it and looking at
him: but his one blear'd eye was inscrutable. The pasty also was mouldy,
and I soon laid it down.

"Hast a proud stomach that cometh of faring sumptuously: the beef
therein is our own killing," said he. "Young sir, art a man of blood, I
greatly fear, by thy long sword and handiness with the firearms."

"Shall be presently," answered I, "if you lead me not to Master
Tingcomb."

He scrambled up briskly and totter'd out of the kitchen into a stone
corridor, I after him. Along this he hurried, muttering all the way, and
halted before a door at the end. Without knocking he pushed it open, and
motioning me to enter, hasten'd back as he had come.

"Come in," said a voice that seem'd familiar to me.

Though, as you know, 'twas still high day, in the room where now I found
myself was every appearance of night: the shutters being closed, and
six lighted candles standing on the table. Behind them sat the venerable
gentleman whom I had seen in the coach, now wearing a plain suit of
black, and reading in a great book that lay open on the table. I guess'd
it to be the Bible; but noted that the candles had shades about them,
so disposed as to throw the light, not on the page, but on the doorway
where I stood.

Yet the old gentleman, having bid me enter, went on reading for a while
as though wholly unaware of me: which I found somewhat nettling, so
began---

"I speak, I believe, to Master Hannibal Tingcomb, steward to Sir Deakin
Killigrew."

He went on, as if ending his sentence aloud: "... And my darling from
the power of the dog." Here he paused with finger on the place and
looked up. "Yes, young sir, that is my name--steward to the late Sir
Deakin Killigrew."

"The late?" cried I: "Then you know--"

"Surely I know that Sir Deakin is dead: else should I be but an unworthy
steward." He open'd his grave eyes as if in wonder.

"And his son, also?"

"Also his son Anthony, a headstrong boy, I fear me, a consorter with
vile characters. Alas? that I should say it."

"And his daughter, Mistress Delia?"

"Alas!" and he fetched a deep sigh.

"Do you mean, sir, that she too is dead!"

"Why, to be sure-but let us talk on less painful matters."

"In one moment, sir: but first tell me--where did she die, and when?"

For my heart stood still, and I was fain to clutch the table between us
to keep me from falling. I think this did not escape him, for he gave me
a sharp look, and then spoke very quiet and hush'd,

"She was cruelly kill'd by highwaymen, at the 'Three Cups' inn, some
miles out of Hungerford. The date given me is the 3d of December last."

With this a great rush of joy came over me, and I blurted out,
delighted--

"There, sir, you are wrong! Her father was kill'd on the night of which
you speak--cruelly enough, as you say: but Mistress Delia Killigrew
escaped, and after the most incredible adventures--"

I was expecting him to start up with joy at my announcement; but instead
of this, he gaz'd at me very sorrowfully and shook his head; which
brought me to a stand.

"Sir," I said, changing my tone, "I speak but what I know: for 'twas I
had the happy fortune to help her to escape, and, under God's hand, to
bring her safe to Cornwall."

"Then, where is she now?"

Now this was just what I could not tell. So, standing before him, I
gave him my name and a history of all my adventures in my dear comrade's
company, from the hour when I saw her first in the inn at Hungerford.
Still keeping his finger on the page, he heard me to the end
attentively, but with a curling of the lips toward the close, such as I
did not like. And when I had done, to my amaze he spoke out sharply, and
as if to a whipp'd schoolboy.

"'Tis a cock-and-bull story, sir, of which I could hope to make you
ashamed. Six weeks in your company? and in boy's habit? Surely 'twas
enough the pure unhappy maid should be dead--without such vile slander
on her fame, and from you, that were known, sir, to have been at that
inn, and on that night, with her murderers. Boy, I have evidence that,
taken with your confession, would weave you a halter; and am a Justice
of the Peace. Be thankful, then, that I am a merciful man; yet be
abash'd."

Abash'd, indeed, I was; or at least taken aback, to see his holy
indignation and the flush on his waxen cheek. Like a fool I stood
staggered, and wondered dimly where I had heard that thin voice before.
In the confusion of my senses I heard it say solemnly---

"The sins of her fathers have overtaken her, as the Book of Exodus
proclaim'd: therefore is her inheritance wasted, and given to the satyr
and the wild ass."

[Illustration: "What did you in Oxford last November?"--Page 219.]

"And which of the twain be you, sir?"

I cannot tell what forced this violent rudeness from me, for he seem'd
an honest, good man; but my heart was boiling that any should put so
ill a construction on my Delia. As for him, he had risen, and was moving
with dignity to the door--to show me out, as I guess. When suddenly I,
that had been staring stupidly, leap'd upon him and hurled him back into
his chair.

For I had marked his left foot trailing, and, by the token, knew him for
the white hair'd man of the bowling-green.

"Master Hannibal Tingcomb," I spoke in his ear, "--dog and murderer!
What did you in Oxford last November? And how of Captain Lucius Higgs,
otherwise Captain Luke Settle, otherwise Mr. X.? Speak, before I serve
you as the dog was served that night!"

I dream yet, in my sick nights, of the change that came over the vile,
hypocritical knave at these words of mine. To see his pale venerable
face turn green and livid, his eyeball start, his hands clutch at
air--it frighten'd me.

"Brandy!" he gasped. "Brandy! there--quick--for God's sake!"

And the next moment he had slipp'd from my grasp, and was wallowing in
a fit on the floor. I ran to the cupboard at which he had pointed, and
finding there a bottle of strong waters, forced some drops between his
teeth; and hard work it was, he gnashing at me all the time and foaming
at the mouth.

Presently he ceased to writhe and bite: and lifting, I set him in his
chair, where he lay, a mere limp bundle, staring and blinking. So I sat
down facing him, and waited his recovery.

"Dear young sir," he began at length feebly, his fingers searching the
Bible before him, from force of habit. "Kind young sir--I am an old,
dying man, and my sins have found me out. Only yesterday, the physician
at Bodmin told me that my days are numbered. This is the second attack,
and the third will kill me."

"Well?" said I.

"If--if Mistress Delia be alive (as indeed I did not think), I will make
restitution--I will confess--only tell me what to do, that I may die in
peace."

Indeed, he look'd pitiable, sitting there and stammering: but I harden'd
my heart to say---

"I must have a confession, then, written before I leave the room."

"But, dear young friend, you will not use it if I give up all? You will
not seek my life? that already is worthless, as you see."

"Why, 'tis what you deserve. But Delia shall say when I find her--as
I shall go straight to seek her. If she be lost, I shall use it--never
fear: if she be found, it shall be hers to say what mercy she can
discover in her heart; but I promise you I shall advise none."

The tears by this were coursing down his shrunken cheeks, but I observ'd
him watch me narrowly, as though to find out how much I knew. So I
pull'd out my pistol, and setting pen and paper before him, obtained
at the end of an hour a very pretty confession of his sins, which lies
among my papers to this day. When 'twas written and sign'd, in a weak,
rambling hand, I read it through, folded it, placed it inside my coat,
and prepared to take my leave.

But he called out an order to the old servant to saddle my mare, and
stood softly praying and beseeching me in the courtyard till the last
moment. Nor when I was mounted would anything serve but he must follow
at my stirrup to the gate. But when I had briefly taken leave, and the
heavy doors had creaked behind me, I heard a voice calling after me down
the road---

"Dear young sir! Dear friend!--I had forgotten somewhat."

Returning, I found the gate fastened, and the iron shutter slipp'd back.

"Well?" I asked, leaning toward it.

"Dear young friend, I pity thee, for thy paper is worthless. To-day, by
my advices, the army of our most Christian Parliament, more than twenty
thousand strong, under the Earl of Stamford, have overtaken thy friends,
the malignant gentry, near Stratton Heath, in the northeast. They are
more than two to one. By this hour to-morrow, the Papists all will be
running like conies to their burrows, and little chance wilt thou have
to seek Delia Killigrew, much less to find her. And remember, I know
enough of thy late services to hang thee: mercy then will lie in my
friends' hands; but be sure I shall advise none."

And with a mocking laugh he clapp'd--to the grating in my face.




CHAPTER XV.

I LEAVE JOAN AND RIDE TO THE WARS.


You may guess how I felt at being thus properly fooled. And the worst
was I could see no way to mend it; for against the barricade between us
I might have beat myself for hours, yet only hurt my fists: and the wall
was so smooth and high, that even by standing on Molly's back I could
not--by a foot or more--reach the top to pull myself over.

There was nothing for it but to turn homewards, down the hill: which I
did, chewing the cud of my folly, and finding it bitter as gall. What
consoled me somewhat was the reflection that his threats were, likely
enough, mere vaporing: for of any breach of the late compact between
the parties I had heard nothing, and never seem'd a country more wholly
given up to peace than that through which I had ridden in the morning.
So recalling Master Tingcomb's late face of terror, and the confession
in my pocket, I felt more cheerful. "England has grown a strange place,
if I cannot get justice on this villain," thought I; and rode forward,
planning a return-match and a sweet revenge.

There is no more soothing game, I believe, in the world than this of
holding imaginary triumphant discourse with your enemy. Yet (oddly) it
brought me but cold comfort on this occasion, my wound being too recent
and galling. The sky, so long clouded, was bright'ning now, and growing
serener every minute: the hills were thick with fox-gloves, the vales
white with hawthorn, smelling very sweetly in the cool of the day: but
I, with the bridle flung on Molly's neck, pass'd them by, thinking only
of my discomfiture, and barely rousing myself to give back a "Good-day"
to those that met me on the road. Nor, till we were on the downs and
Joan's cottage came in sight, did I shake the brooding off.

Joan was not in the kitchen when I arrived, nor about the buildings; nor
yet could I spy her anywhere moving on the hills. So, after calling to
her once or twice, I stabled the mare, and set off up the tor side to
seek her.

Now I must tell you that since the day of my coming I had made many
attempts to find the place where Joan had then hidden me, and always
fruitlessly: though I knew well whereabouts it must be. Indeed, I had
thought at first I had only to walk straight to the hole: yet found
after repeated trials but solid earth and boulders for my pains.

But to-day as I climb'd past the spot, something very bright flashed in
my eyes and dazzled me, and rubbing them and looking, I saw a great hole
in the hill--facing to the sou'-west--in the very place I had search'd
for it; and out of this a beam of light glancing.

Creeping near on tiptoe, I found one huge block of granite that before
had seemed bedded, among a dozen fellow-boulders, against the turf--the
base resting on another well-nigh as big--was now rolled back; having
been fixed to work smoothly on a pivot, yet so like nature that no eye,
but by chance, could detect it. Now, who in the beginning designed this
hiding place I leave you to consider; and whether it was the Jews or
Phoenicians--nations, I am told, that once work'd the hills around for
tin. But inside 'twas curiously paved and lined with slabs of granite,
the specks of ore in which, I noted, were the points of light that had
once puzzled me. And here was Joan's bower, and Joan herself inside it.

She was sitting with her back to me, in her left hand holding up the
mirror, that caught the rays of the now sinking sun (and thus had
dazzled me), while with her right she tried to twist into some form of
knot her tresses--black, and coarse as a horse's mane--that already she
had roughly braided. A pail of water stood beside her; and around lay
scatter'd a score or more of long thorns, cut to the shape of hair pins.

'Tis probable that after a minute's watching I let some laughter escape
me. At any rate Joan turned, spied me, and scrambled up, with an angry
red on her cheek. Then I saw that her bodice was neater lac'd than
usual, and a bow of yellow ribbon (fish'd up heaven knows whence) stuck
in the bosom. But the strangest thing was to note the effect of this new
tidiness upon her: for she took a step forward as if to cuff me by the
ear (as, a day agone, she would have done), and then stopp'd, very shy
and hesitating.

"Why, Joan," said I, "don't be anger'd. It suits you choicely--it does
indeed."

"Art scoffing, I doubt." She stood looking heavily and askance at me.

"On my faith, no: and what a rare tiring-bower the Jew's Kitchen makes!
Come, Joan, be debonair and talk to me, for I am out of luck to-day."

"Forgit it, then" (and she pointed to the sun), "whiles yet some o't is
left. Tell me a tale, an thou'rt minded."

"Of what?"

"O' the bloodiest battle thou'st ever heard tell on."

So, sitting by the mouth of the Jew's Kitchen, I told her as much as I
could remember out of Homer's Iliad, wondering the while what my tutor,
Mr. Josias How, of Trinity College, would think to hear me so use his
teaching. By-and-bye, as I warm'd to the tale, Joan forgot her new
smartness; and at length, when Hector was running from Achilles round
the walls, clapp'd her hands for excitement, crying, "Church an' King,
lad! Oh, brave work!"

"Why, no," answered I, "'twas not for that they were fighting;" and
looking at her, broke off with, "Joan, art certainly a handsome girl:
give me a kiss for the mirror."

Instead of flying out, as I look'd for, she fac'd round, and answered me
gravely---

"That I will not: not to any but my master."

"And who is that?"

"No man yet; nor shall be till one has beat me sore: him will I love,
an' follow like a dog--if so be he whack me often enow'."

"A strange way to love," laughed I.

She look'd at me straight, albeit with an odd gloomy light in her eyes.

"Think so, Jack? then I give thee leave to try."

I think there is always a brutality lurking in a man to leap out
unawares. Yet why do I seek excuses, that have never yet found one? To
be plain, I sprang fiercely up and after Joan, who had already started,
and was racing along the slope.

Twice around the tor she led me: and though I strain'd my best, not
a yard could I gain upon her, for her bare feet carried her light and
free. Indeed, I was losing ground, when coming to the Jew's Kitchen a
second time, she tried to slip inside and shut the stone in my face.

Then should I have been prettily bemock'd, had I not, with a great
effort, contrived to thrust my boot against the door just as it was
closing. Wrenching it open, I laid hand on her shoulder; and in a moment
she had gripp'd me, and was wrestling like a wild-cat.

Now being Cumberland-bred I knew only the wrestling of my own county,
and nothing of the Cornish style. For in the north they stand well
apart, and try to wear down one another's strength: whereas the Cornish
is a brisker lighter play--and (as I must confess) prettier to watch.
So when Joan rush'd in and closed with me, I was within an ace of being
thrown, pat.

But recovering, I got her at arm's length, and held her so, while my
heart ach'd to see my fingers gripping her shoulders and sinking into
the flesh. I begg'd off; but she only fought and panted, and struggled
to lock me by the ankles again. I could not have dream'd to find such
fierce strength in a girl. Once or twice she nearly overmastered me: but
at length my stubborn play wore her out. Her breath came short and fast,
then fainter: and in the end, still holding her off, I turned her by the
shoulders, and let her drop quietly on the turf. No thought had I any
longer of kissing her; but stood back, heartily sick and ashamed of
myself.

For awhile she lay, turn'd over on her side, with hands guarding her
head, as if expecting me to strike her. Then gathering herself up, she
came and put her hand in mine, very meekly.

"Had lik'd it better had'st thou stamped the life out o' me, a'most. But
there, lad--am thine forever!"

'Twas like a buffet in the face to me. "What!" I cried.

She look'd up in my face--dear Heaven, that I should have to write
it!--with eyes brimful, sick with love; tried to speak, but could only
nod: and broke into a wild fit of tears.

I was standing there with her hand in mine, and a burning remorse in my
heart, when I heard the clear notes of a bugle blown, away on the road
to Launceston.

Looking that way, I saw a great company of horse coming down over the
crest, the sun shining level on their arms and a green standard that
they bore in their midst.

Joan spied them the same instant, and check'd her sobs. Without a word
we flung ourselves down full length on the turf to watch.

They were more than a thousand, as I guess'd, and came winding down the
road very orderly, till, being full of them, it seem'd a long serpent
writhing with shiny scales. The tramp of hoofs and jingling of bits were
pretty to hear.

"Rebels!" whisper'd I.

Joan nodded.

There were three regiments in all, whereof the first (and biggest) was
of dragoons. So clear was the air, I could almost read the legend on
their standard, and the calls of their captains were borne up to us
extremely distinct.

As they rode leisurely past, I thought of Master Tingcomb's threat, and
wonder'd what this array could intend. Nor, turning it over, could I
find any explanation: for the Earl of Stamford's gathering, he had said,
was in the northeast, and I knew such troops as the Cornish generals had
to be quarter'd at Launceston. Yet here, on the near side of Launceston,
