Rose immediately recollected the imprudence of suffering Gillian
to hear what her mistress might say at such an awful moment, and
hastily adopting the proposal she had before declined, desired her
to go and call other two maidens of their mistress's household.

"And where am I to find them in this house," said Dame Gillian,
"where strange men run about one chamber at midnight, and devils,
for aught I know, frequent the rest of the habitation?"

"Find them where you can," said Rose, sharply; "but begone
presently."

Gillian withdrew lingeringly, and muttering at the same time
something which could not distinctly be understood. No sooner was
she gone, than Rose, giving way to the enthusiastic affection
which she felt for her mistress, implored her, in the most tender
terms, to open her eyes, (for she had again closed them,) and
speak to Rose, her own Rose, who was ready, if necessary, to die
by her mistress's side.

"To-morrow--to-morrow, Rose," murmured Eveline--"I cannot speak at
present."

"Only disburden your mind with one word--tell what has thus
alarmed you--what danger you apprehend."

"I have seen her," answered Eveline--"I have seen the tenant of
yonder chamber--the vision fatal to my race!--Urge me no more--to-
morrow you shall know all." [Footnote: The idea of the Bahr-Geist
was taken from a passage in the Memoirs of Lady Fanshaw, which
have since been given to the public, and received with deserved
approbation.

The original runs as follows. Lady Fanshaw, shifting among her
friends in Ireland, like other sound loyalists of the period,
tells her story thus:--

"From thence we went to the Lady Honor O'Brien's, a lady that went
for a maid, but few believed it. She was the youngest daughter of
the Earl of Thomond. There we staid three nights--the first of
which I was surprised at being laid in a chamber, where, when
about one o'clock, I heard a voice that awakened me. I drew the
curtain, and in the casement of the window I saw, by the light of
the moon, a woman leaning through the casement into the room, in
white, with red hair and pale and ghastly complexion. She spoke
loud, and in a tone I had never heard, thrice. "A horse;" and
then, with a sigh more like the wind than breath, she vanished,
and to me her body looked more like a thick cloud than substance.
I was so much frightened, that my hair stood on end, and my night-
clothes fell off. I pulled and pinched your father, who never
awoke during the disorder I was in, but at last was much surprised
to see me in this fright, and more so when I related the story and
showed him the window opened. Neither of us slept any more that
night; but he entertained me by telling me how much more these
apparitions were common in this country than in England; and we
concluded the cause to be the great superstition of the Irish, and
the want of that knowing faith which should defend them from the
power of the devil, which he exercises among them very much. About
five o'clock the lady of the house came to see us, saying, she had
not been in bed all night, because a cousin O'Brien of hers, whose
ancestors had owned that house, had desired her to stay with him
in his chamber, and that he died at two o'clock; and she said, I
wish you to have had no disturbance, for 'tis the custom of the
place, that when any of the family are dying, the shape of a woman
appears every night in the window until they be dead. This woman
was many ages ago got with child by the owner of this place, who
murdered her in his garden, and flung her into the river under the
window; but truly I thought not of it when I lodged you here, it
being the best room in the house! We made little reply to her
speech, but disposed ourselves to be gone suddenly."]

As Gillian entered with two of the maidens of her mistress's
household, they removed the Lady Eveline, by Rose's directions,
into a chamber at some distance which the latter had occupied, and
placed her in one of their beds, where Rose, dismissing the others
(Gillian excepted) to seek repose where they could find it,
continued to watch her mistress. For some time she continued very
much disturbed, but, gradually, fatigue, and the influence of some
narcotic which Gillian had sense enough to recommend and prepare,
seemed to compose her spirits. She fell into a deep slumber, from
which she did not awaken until the sun was high over the distant
hills.




CHAPTER THE FIFTEENTH.


  I see a hand you cannot see,
    Which beckons me away;
  I hear a voice you cannot hear,
    Which says I must not stay.
     MALLET.


When Eveline first opened her eyes, it seemed to be without any
recollection of what had passed on the night preceding. She looked
round the apartment, which was coarsely and scantily furnished, as
one destined for the use of domestics and menials, and said to
Rose, with a smile, "Our good kinswoman maintains the ancient
Saxon hospitality at a homely rate, so far as lodging is
concerned. I could have willingly parted with last night's profuse
supper, to have obtained a bed of a softer texture. Methinks my
limbs feel as if I had been under all the flails of a Franklin's
barn-yard."

"I am glad to see you so pleasant, madam," answered Rose,
discreetly avoiding any reference to the events of the night
before.

Dame Gillian was not so scrupulous. "Your ladyship last night lay
down on a better bed than this," she said, "unless I am much
mistaken; and Rose Flammock and yourself know best why you left
it."

If a look could have killed, Dame Gillian would have been in
deadly peril from that which Rose shot at her, by way of rebuke
for this ill-advised communication. It had instantly the effect
which was to be apprehended, for Lady Eveline seemed at first
surprised and confused; then, as recollections of the past
arranged themselves in her memory, she folded her hands, looked on
the ground, and wept bitterly, with much agitation.

Rose entreated her to be comforted, and offered to fetch the old
Saxon chaplain of the house to administer spiritual consolation,
if her grief rejected temporal comfort.

"No--call him not," said Eveline, raising her head and drying her
eyes--"I have had enough of Saxon kindness. What a fool was I to
expect, in that hard and unfeeling woman, any commiseration for my
youth--my late sufferings--my orphan condition! I will not permit
her a poor triumph over the Norman blood of Berenger, by letting
her see how much I have suffered under her inhuman infliction. But
first, Rose, answer me truly, was any inmate of Baldringham
witness to my distress last night?"

Rose assured her that she had been tended exclusively by her own
retinue, herself and Gillian, Blanche and Ternotte. She seemed to
receive satisfaction from this assurance. "Hear me, both of you,"
she said, "and observe my words, as you love and as you fear me.
Let no syllable be breathed from your lips of what has happened
this night. Carry the same charge to my maidens. Lend me thine
instant aid, Gillian, and thine, my dearest Rose, to change these
disordered garments, and arrange this dishevelled hair. It was a
poor vengeance she sought, and all because of my country. I am
resolved she shall not see the slightest trace of the sufferings
she has inflicted."

As she spoke thus, her eyes flashed with indignation, which seemed
to dry up the tears that had before filled them. Rose saw the
change of her manner with a mixture of pleasure and concern, being
aware that her mistress's predominant failing was incident to her,
as a spoiled child, who, accustomed to be treated with kindness,
deference, and indulgence, by all around her, was apt to resent
warmly whatever resembled neglect or contradiction.

"God knows," said the faithful bower-maiden, "I would hold my hand
out to catch drops of molten lead, rather than endure your tears;
and yet, my sweet mistress, I would rather at present see you
grieved than angry. This ancient lady hath, it would seem, but
acted according to some old superstitious rite of her family,
which is in part yours. Her name is respectable, both from her
conduct and possessions; and hard pressed as you are by the
Normans, with whom your kinswoman, the Prioress, is sure to take
part. I was in hope you might have had some shelter and
countenance from the Lady of Baldringham."

"Never, Rose, never," answered Eveline; "you know not--you cannot
fuess what she has made me suffer--exposing me to witchcraft and
fiends. Thyself said it, and said it truly--the Saxons are still
half Pagans, void of Christianity, as of nurture and kindliness."

"Ay, but," replied Rose, "I spoke then to dissuade you from a
danger now that the danger is passed and over, I may judge of it
otherwise."

"Speak not for them, Rose," replied Eveline, angrily; "no innocent
victim was ever offered up at the altar of a fiend with more
indifference than my father's kinswoman delivered up me--me, an
orphan, bereaved of my natural and powerful support. I hate her
cruelty--I hate her house--I hate the thought of all that has
happened here--of all, Rose, except thy matchless faith and
fearless attachment. Go, bid our train saddle directly--I will be
gone instantly--I will not attire myself" she added, rejecting the
assistance she had at first required--"I will have no ceremony--
tarry for no leave-taking."

In the hurried and agitated manner of her mistress, Rose
recognized with anxiety another mood of the same irritable and
excited temperament, which had before discharged itself in tears
and fits. But perceiving, at the same time, that remonstrance was
in vain, she gave the necessary orders for collecting their
company, saddling, and preparing for departure; hoping, that as
her mistress removed to a farther distance from the scene where
her mind had received so severe a shock, her equanimity might, by
degrees, be restored.

Dame Gillian, accordingly, was busied with arranging the packages
of her lady, and all the rest of Lady Eveline's retinue in
preparing for instant departure, when, preceded by her steward,
who acted also as a sort of gentleman-usher, leaning upon her
confidential Berwine, and followed by two or three more of the
most distinguished of her household, with looks of displeasure on
her ancient yet lofty brow, the Lady Ermengarde entered the
apartment.

Eveline, with a trembling and hurried hand, a burning cheek, and
other signs of agitation, was herself busied about the arrangement
of some baggage, when her relation made her appearance. At once,
to Rose's great surprise, she exerted a strong command over
herself, and, repressing every external appearance of disorder,
she advanced to meet her relation, with a calm and haughty
stateliness equal to her own.

"I come to give you good morning, our niece," said Ermengarde,
haughtily indeed, yet with more deference than she seemed at first
to have intended, so much did the bearing of Eveline impose
respect upon her;--"I find that you have been pleased to shift
that chamber which was assigned you, in conformity with the
ancient custom of this household, and betake yourself to the
apartment of a menial."

"Are you surprised at that, lady?" demanded Eveline in her turn;
"or are you disappointed that you find me not a corpse, within the
limits of the chamber which your hospitality and affection
allotted to me?"

"Your sleep, then, has been broken?" said Ermengarde, looking
fixedly at the Lady Eveline, as she spoke.

"If I complain not, madam, the evil must be deemed of little
consequence. What has happened is over and passed, and it is not
my intention to trouble you with the recital."

"She of the ruddy finger," replied Ermengarde, triumphantly,
"loves not the blood of the stranger."

"She had less reason, while she walked the earth, to love that of
the Saxon," said Eveline, "unless her legend speaks false in that
matter; and unless, as I well suspect, your house is haunted, not
by the soul of the dead who suffered within its walls, but by evil
spirits, such as the descendants of Hengist and Horsa are said
still in secret to worship."

"You are pleasant, maiden," replied the old lady, scornfully, "or,
if your words are meant in earnest, the shaft of your censure has
glanced aside. A house, blessed by the holy Saint Dunstan, and by
the royal and holy Confessor, is no abode for evil spirits."

"The house of Baldringham," replied Eveline, "is no abode for
those who fear such spirits; and as I will, with all humility,
avow myself of the number, I shall presently leave it to the
custody of Saint Dunstan."

"Not till you have broken your fast, I trust?" said the Lady of
Baldringham; "you will not, I hope, do my years and our
relationship such foul disgrace?"

"Pardon me, madam," replied the Lady Eveline; "those who have
experienced your hospitality at night, have little occasion for
breakfast in the morning.--Rose, are not those loitering knaves
assembled in the court-yard, or are they yet on their couches,
making up for the slumber they have lost by midnight
disturbances?"

Rose announced that her train was in the court, and mounted; when,
with a low reverence, Eveline endeavoured to pass her relation,
and leave the apartment without farther ceremony. Ermengarde at
first confronted her with a grim and furious glance, which seemed
to show a soul fraught with more rage than the thin blood and
rigid features of extreme old age had the power of expressing, and
raised her ebony staff as if about even to proceed to some act of
personal violence. But she changed her purpose, and suddenly made
way for Eveline, who passed without farther parley; and as she
descended the staircase, which conducted from the apartment to the
gateway, she heard the voice of her aunt behind her, like that of
an aged and offended sibyl, denouncing wrath and wo upon her
insolence and presumption.

"Pride," she exclaimed, "goeth before destruction, and a haughty
spirit before a fall. She who scorneth the house of her
forefathers, a stone from its battlements shall crush her! She who
mocks the gray hairs of a parent, never shall one of her own locks
be silvered with age! She who weds with a man of war and of blood,
her end shall neither be peaceful nor bloodless!"

Hurrying to escape from these and other ominous denunciations,
Eveline rushed from the house, mounted her palfrey with the
precipitation of a fugitive, and, surrounded by her attendants,
who had caught a part of her alarm, though without conjecturing
the cause, rode hastily into the forest; old Raoul, who was well
acquainted with the country, acting as their guide.

Agitated more than she was willing to confess to herself, by thus
leaving the habitation of so near a relation, loaded with
maledictions, instead of the blessings which are usually bestowed
on a departing kinswoman, Eveline hastened forward, until the huge
oak-trees with intervening arms had hidden from her view the fatal
mansion.

The trampling and galloping of horse was soon after heard,
announcing the approach of the patrol left by the Constable for
the protection of the mansion, and who now, collecting from their
different stations, came prepared to attend the Lady Eveline on
her farther road to Gloucester, great part of which lay through
the extensive forest of Deane, then a silvan region of large
extent, though now much denuded of trees for the service of the
iron mines. The Cavaliers came up to join the retinue of Lady
Eveline, with armour glittering in the morning rays, trumpets
sounding, horses prancing, neighing, and thrown, each by his
chivalrous rider, into the attitude best qualified to exhibit the
beauty of the steed and dexterity of the horseman; while their
lances, streaming with long penoncelles, were brandished in every
manner which could display elation of heart and readiness of hand.
The sense of the military character of her countrymen of Normandy
gave to Eveline a feeling at once of security and of triumph,
which operated towards the dispelling of her gloomy thoughts, and
of the feverish disorder which affected her nerves. The rising sun
also--the song of the birds among the bowers--the lowing of the
cattle as they were driven to pasture--the sight of the hind, who,
with her fawn trotting by her side, often crossed some forest
glade within view of the travellers,--all contributed to dispel
the terror of Eveline's nocturnal visions, and soothe to rest the
more angry passions which had agitated her bosom at her departure
from Baldringham. She suffered her palfrey to slacken his pace,
and, with female attention to propriety, began to adjust her
riding robes, and compose her head-dress, disordered in her hasty
departure. Rose saw her cheek assume a paler but more settled hue,
instead of the angry hectic which had coloured it--saw her eye
become more steady as she looked with a sort of triumph upon her
military attendants, and pardoned (what on other occasions she
would probably have made some reply to) her enthusiastic
exclamations in praise of her countrymen.

"We journey safe," said Eveline, "under the care of the princely
and victorious Normans. Theirs is the noble wrath of the lion,
which destroys or is appeased at once--there is no guile in their
romantic affection, no sullenness mixed with their generous
indignation--they know the duties of the hall as well as those of
battle; and were they to be surpassed in the arts of war, (which
will only be when Plinlimmon is removed from its base,) they would
still remain superior to every other people in generosity and
courtesy."

"If I do not feel all their merits so strongly as if I shared
their blood." said Rose, "I am at least glad to see them around
us, in woods which are said to abound with dangers of various
kinds. And I confess, my heart is the lighter, that I can now no
longer observe the least vestige of that ancient mansion, in which
we passed so unpleasant a night, and the recollection of which
will always be odious to me."

Eveline looked sharply at her. "Confess the truth, Rose; thou
wouldst give thy best kirtle to know all of my horrible
adventure."

"It is but confessing that I am a woman," answered Rose; "and did
I say a man, I dare say the difference of sex would imply but a
small abatement of curiosity."

"Thou makest no parade of other feelings, which prompt thee to
inquire into my fortunes," said Eveline; "but, sweet Rose, I give
thee not the less credit for them. Believe me, thou shalt know
all--but, I think, not now."

"At your pleasure," said Rose; "and yet, methinks, the bearing in
your solitary bosom such a fearful secret will only render the
weight more intolerable. On my silence you may rely as on that of
the Holy Image, which hears us confess what it never reveals.
Besides, such things become familiar to the imagination when they
have been spoken of, and that which is familiar gradually becomes
stripped of its terrors."

"Thou speakest with reason, my prudent Rose; and surely in this
gallant troop, borne like a flower on a bush by my good palfrey
Yseulte--fresh gales blowing round us, flowers opening and birds
singing, and having thee by my bridle-rein, I ought to feel this a
fitting time to communicate what thou hast so good a title to
know. And--yes!--thou shalt know all!--Thou art not, I presume,
ignorant of the qualities of what the Saxons of this land call a
_Bahrgeist_?"

"Pardon me, lady," answered Rose, "my father discouraged my
listening to such discourses. I might see evil spirits enough, he
said, without my imagination being taught to form, such as were
fantastical. The word Bahr-geist, I have heard used by Gillian and
other Saxons; but to me it only conveys some idea of indefinite
terror, of which I never asked nor received an explanation."

"Know then," said Eveline, "it is a spectre, usually the image of
a departed person, who, either for wrong sustained in some
particular place during life, or through treasure hidden there, or
from some such other cause, haunts the spot from time to time,
becomes familiar to those who dwell there, takes an interest in
their fate, occasionally for good, in other instances or times for
evil. The Bahr-geist is, therefore, sometimes regarded as the good
genius, sometimes as the avenging fiend, attached to particular
families and classes of men. It is the lot of the family of
Baldringham (of no mean note in other respects) to be subject to
the visits of such a being."

"May I ask the cause (if it be known) of such visitation?" said
Rose, desirous to avail herself to the uttermost of the
communicative mood of her young lady, which might not perhaps last
very long.

"I know the legend but imperfectly," replied Eveline, proceeding
with a degree of calmness, the result of strong exertion over her
mental anxiety, "but in general it runs thus:--Baldrick, the Saxon
hero who first possessed yonder dwelling, became enamoured of a
fair Briton, said to have been descended from those Druids of whom
the Welsh speak so much, and deemed not unacquainted with the arts
of sorcery which they practised, when they offered up human
sacrifices amid those circles of unhewn and living rock, of which
thou hast seen so many. After more than two years' wedlock,
Baldrick became weary of his wife to such a point, that he formed
the cruel resolution of putting her to death. Some say he doubted
her fidelity--some that the matter was pressed on him by the
church, as she was suspected of heresy--some that he removed her
to make way for a more wealthy marriage--but all agree in the
result. He sent two of his Cnichts to the house of Baldringham, to
put to death the unfortunate Vanda, and commanded them to bring
him the ring which had circled her finger on the day of wedlock,
in token that his orders were accomplished. The men were ruthless
in their office; they strangled Vanda in yonder apartment, and as
the hand was so swollen that no effort could draw off the ring,
they obtained possession of it by severing the finger. But long
before the return of those cruel perpetrators of her death, the
shadow of Vanda had appeared before her appalled husband, and
holding up to him her bloody hand, made him fearfully sensible how
well his savage commands had been obeyed. After haunting him in
peace and war, in desert, court, and camp, until he died
despairingly on a pilgrimage to the Holy Land, the Bahr-geist, or
ghost of the murdered Vanda, became so terrible in the House of
Baldringham, that the succour of Saint Dunstan was itself scarcely
sufficient to put bounds to her visitation. Yea, the blessed
saint, when he had succeeded in his exorcism, did, in requital of
Baldrick's crime, impose a strong and enduring penalty upon every
female descendant of the house in the third degree; namely, that
once in their lives, and before their twenty-first year, they
should each spend a solitary night in the chamber of the murdered
Vanda, saying therein certain prayers, as well for her repose, as
for the suffering soul of her murderer. During that awful space,
it is generally believed that the spirit of the murdered person
appears to the female who observes the vigil, and shows some sign
of her future good or bad fortune. If favourable, she appears with
a smiling aspect, and crosses them with her unbloodied hand; but
she announces evil fortune by showing the hand from which the
finger was severed, with a stern countenance, as if resenting upon
the descendant of her husband his inhuman cruelty. Sometimes she
is said to speak. These particulars I learned long since from an
old Saxon dame, the mother of our Margery, who had been an
attendant on my grandmother, and left the House of Baldringham
when she made her escape from it with my father's father."

"Did your grandmother ever render this homage," said Rose, "which
seems to me--under favour of St. Dunstan--to bring humanity into
too close intercourse with a being of a doubtful nature?"

"My grandfather thought so, and never permitted my grandmother to
revisit the house of Baldringham after her marriage; hence
disunion betwixt him and his son on the one part, and the members
of that family on the other. They laid sundry misfortunes, and
particularly the loss of male heirs which at that time befell
them, to my parent's not having done the hereditary homage to the
bloody-fingered Bahr-geist."

"And how could you, my dearest lady," said Rose, "knowing that
they held among them a usage so hideous, think of accepting the
invitation of Lady Ermengarde?"

"I can hardly answer you the question," answered Eveline. "Partly
I feared my father's recent calamity, to be slain (as I have heard
him say his aunt once prophesied of him) by the enemy he most
despised, might be the result of this rite having been neglected;
and partly I hoped, that if my mind should be appalled at the
danger, when it presented itself closer to my eye, it could not be
urged on me in courtesy and humanity. You saw how soon my cruel-
hearted relative pounced upon the opportunity, and how impossible
it became for me, bearing the name, and, I trust, the spirit of
Berenger, to escape from the net in which I had involved myself."

"No regard for name or rank should have engaged me," replied Rose,
"to place myself where apprehension alone, even without the
terrors of a real visitation, might have punished my presumption
with insanity. But what, in the name of Heaven, did you see at
this horrible rendezvous?"

"Ay, there is the question," said Eveline, raising her hand to her
brow--"how I could witness that which I distinctly saw, yet be
able to retain command of thought and intellect!--I had recited
the prescribed devotions for the murderer and his victim, and
sitting down on the couch which was assigned me, had laid aside
such of my clothes as might impede my rest--I had surmounted, in
short, the first shock which I experienced in committing myself to
this mysterious chamber, and I hoped to pass the night in slumber
as sound as my thoughts were innocent. But I was fearfully
disappointed. I cannot judge how long I had slept, when my bosom
was oppressed by an unusual weight, which seemed at once to stifle
my voice, stop the beating of my heart, and prevent me from
drawing my breath; and when I looked up to discover the cause of
this horrible suffocation, the form of the murdered British matron
