bagpipe--above all, exchanging the smiles of those beauties, who form
a gay galaxy around the throne of England, for the cold courtesy of an
untaught damsel, and the bewildered stare of a miller's maiden. More
might I say of the exchange of the conversation of gallant knights and
gay courtiers of mine own order and capacity, whose conceits are bright
and vivid as the lightning, for that of monks and churchmen--but it were
discourteous to urge that topic."

The Abbot listened to this list of complaints with great round eyes,
which evinced no exact intelligence of the orator's meaning; and
when the knight paused to take breath, he looked with a doubtful and
inquiring eye at the Sub-Prior, not well knowing in what tone he should
reply to an exordium so extraordinary. The Sub-Prior accordingly stepped
in to the relief of his principal.

"We deeply sympathize with you, Sir Knight, in the several
mortifications and hardships to which fate has subjected you,
particularly in that which has thrown you into the society of those,
who, as they were conscious they deserved not such an honour, so neither
did they at all desire it. But all this goes little way to expound the
cause of this train of disasters, or, in plainer words, the reason which
has compelled you into a situation having so few charms for you."

"Gentle and reverend sir," replied the knight, "forgive an unhappy
person, who, in giving a history of his miseries, dilateth upon them
extremely, even as he who, having fallen from a precipice, looketh
upward to measure the height from which he hath been precipitated."

"Yea, but," said Father Eustace, "methinks it were wiser in him to tell
those who come to lift him up, which of his bones have been broken."

"You, reverend sir," said the knight, "have, in the encounter of our
wits, made a fair attaint; whereas I may be in some sort said to have
broken my staff across. [Footnote: _Attaint_ was a term of tilting
used to express the champion's having _attained_ his mark, or, in other
words, struck his lance straight and fair against the helmet or breast
of his adversary. Whereas to break the lance across, intimated a total
failure in directing the point of the weapon on the object of his aim.]
Pardon me, grave sir, that I speak in the language of the tilt-yard,
which is doubtless strange to your reverend years.--Ah! brave resort
of the noble, the fair and the gay!--Ah! throne of love, and citadel
of honour!--Ah! celestial beauties, by whose bright eyes it is graced!
Never more shall Piercie Shafton advance, as the centre of your radiant
glances, couch his lance, and spur his horse at the sound of the
spirit-stirring trumpets, nobly called the voice of war--never more
shall he baffle his adversary's encounter boldly, break his spear
dexterously, and ambling around the lovely circle, receive the rewards
with which beauty honours chivalry!"

Here he paused, wrung his hands, looked upwards, and seemed lost in
contemplation of his own fallen fortunes.

"Mad, very mad," whispered the Abbot to the Sub-Prior; "I would we were
fairly rid of him; for, of a truth, I expect he will proceed from raving
to mischief--Were it not better to call up the rest of the brethren?"

But the Sub-Prior knew better than his Superior how to distinguish the
jargon of affectation from the ravings of insanity, and although the
extremity of the knight's passion seemed altogether fantastic, yet
he was not ignorant to what extravagancies the fashion of the day can
conduct its votaries.

Allowing, therefore, two minutes' space to permit the knight's
enthusiastic feelings to exhaust themselves, he again gravely reminded
him that the Lord Abbot had taken a journey, unwonted to his age and
habits, solely to learn in what he could serve Sir Piercie Shafton--that
it was altogether impossible he could do so without his receiving
distinct information of the situation in which he had now sought refuge
in Scotland.--"The day wore on," he observed, looking at the window;
"and if the Abbot should be obliged to return to the Monastery without
obtaining the necessary intelligence, the regret might be mutual, but
the inconvenience was like to be all on Sir Piercie's own side."

The hint was not thrown away.

"O, goddess of courtesy!" said the knight, "can I so far have forgotten
thy behests as to make this good prelate's ease and time a sacrifice to
my vain complaints! Know, then, most worthy, and not less worshipful,
that I, your poor visitor and guest, am by birth nearly bound to the
Piercie of Northumberland, whose fame is so widely blown through all
parts of the world where English worth hath been known. Now, this
present Earl of Northumberland, of whom I propose to give you the brief
history----"

"It is altogether unnecessary," said the Abbot; "we know him to be a
good and true nobleman, and a sworn upholder of our Catholic faith,
in the spite of the heretical woman who now sits upon the throne of
England. And it is specially as his kinsman, and as knowing that ye
partake with him in such devout and faithful belief and adherence to our
holy Mother Church, that we say to you, Sir Piercie Shafton, that ye be
heartily welcome to us, and that, and we wist how, we would labour to do
you good service in your extremity."

"For such kind offer I rest your most humble debtor," said Sir Piercie,
"nor need I at this moment say more than that my Right Honourable Cousin
of Northumberland, having devised with me and some others, the choice
and picked spirits of the age, how and by what means the worship of God,
according to the Catholic Church, might be again introduced into this
distracted kingdom of England, (even as one deviseth, by the assistance
of his friend, to catch and bridle a runaway steed,) it pleased him so
deeply to intrust me in those communications, that my personal safety
becomes, as it were, entwined or complicated therewith. Natheless, as
we have had sudden reason to believe, this Princess Elizabeth, who
maintaineth around her a sort of counsellors skilful in tracking
whatever schemes may be pursued for bringing her title into challenge,
or for erecting again the discipline of the Catholic Church, has
obtained certain knowledge of the trains which we had laid before we
could give fire unto them. Wherefore, my Right Honourable Cousin of
Northumberland, thinking it best belike that one man should take
both blame and shame for the whole, did lay the burden of all this
trafficking upon my back; which load I am the rather content to bear,
in that he hath always shown himself my kind and honourable kinsman,
as well as that my estate, I wot not how, hath of late been somewhat
insufficient to maintain the expense of those braveries, wherewith it
is incumbent on us, who are chosen and selected spirits, to distinguish
ourselves from the vulgar."

"So that possibly," said the Sub-Prior, "your private affairs rendered a
foreign journey less incommodious to you than it might have been to the
noble earl, your right worthy cousin?"

"You are right, reverend sir," answered the courtier; "_rem acu_--you
have touched the point with a needle--My cost and expenses had been
indeed somewhat lavish at the late triumphs and tourneys, and the
flat-capp'd citizens had shown themselves unwilling to furnish my pocket
for new gallantries for the honour of the nation, as well as for mine
own peculiar glory--and, to speak truth, it was in some part the hope
of seeing these matters amended that led me to desire a new world in
England."

"So that the miscarriage of your public enterprise, with the derangement
of your own private affairs," said the Sub-Prior, "have induced you to
seek Scotland as a place of refuge?"

"_Rem acu_, once again," said Sir Piercie; "and not without good cause,
since my neck, if I remained, might have been brought within the
circumstances of a halter--and so speedy was my journey northward, that
I had but time to exchange my peach-coloured doublet of Genoa velvet,
thickly laid over with goldsmith's work, for this cuirass, which was
made by Bonamico of Milan, and travelled northward with all speed,
judging that I might do well to visit my Right Honourable Cousin of
Northumberland, at one of his numerous castles. But as I posted towards
Alnwick, even with the speed of a star, which, darting from its native
sphere, shoots wildly downwards, I was met at Northallerton by one Henry
Vaughan, a servant of my right honourable kinsman, who showed me, that
as then I might not with safety come to his presence, seeing that, in
obedience to orders from his court, he was obliged to issue out letters
for my incarceration."

"This," said the Abbot, "seems but hard measure on the part of your
honourable kinsman."

"It might be so judged, my lord," replied Sir Piercie; "nevertheless, I
will stand to the death for the honour of my Right Honourable Cousin of
Northumberland. Also, Henry Vaughan gave me, from my said cousin, a
good horse, and a purse of gold, with two Border-prickers, as they are
called, for my guides, who conducted me, by such roads and by-paths as
have never been seen since the days of Sir Lancelot and Sir Tristrem,
into this kingdom of Scotland, and to the house of a certain baron, or
one who holds the style of such, called Julian Avenel, with whom I found
such reception as the place and party could afford."

"And that," said the Abbot, "must have been right wretched; for to
judge from the appetite which Julian showeth when abroad, he hath not, I
judge, over-abundant provision at home."

"You are right, sir--your reverence is in the right," continued Sir
Piercie; "we had but lenten fare, and, what was worse, a score to
clear at the departure; for though this Julian Avenel called us to
no reckoning, yet he did so extravagantly admire the fashion of my
poniard--the _poignet_ being of silver exquisitely hatched, and indeed
the weapon being altogether a piece of exceeding rare device and
beauty--that in faith I could not for very shame's sake but pray his
acceptance of it; words which he gave me not the trouble of repeating
twice, before he had stuck it into his greasy buff-belt, where,
credit me, reverend sir, it showed more like a butcher's knife than a
gentleman's dagger."

"So goodly a gift might at least have purchased you a few days'
hospitality," said Father Eustace.

"Reverend sir," said Sir Piercie, "had I abidden with him, I should have
been complimented out of every remnant of my wardrobe--actually flayed,
by the hospitable gods I swear it! Sir, he secured my spare doublet, and
had a pluck at my galligaskins--I was enforced to beat a retreat before
I was altogether unrigged. That Border knave, his serving man, had
a pluck at me too, and usurped a scarlet cassock and steel cuirass
belonging to the page of my body, whom I was fain to leave behind me. In
good time I received a letter from my Right Honourable Cousin, showing
me that he had written to you in my behalf, and sent to your charge two
mails filled with wearing apparel--namely, my rich crimson silk doublet,
slashed out and lined with cloth of gold, which I wore at the last
revels, with baldric and trimmings to correspond--also two pair
black silk slops, with hanging garters of carnation silk--also the
flesh-coloured silken doublet, with the trimmings of fur, in which I
danced the salvage man at the Gray's-Inn mummery--also----"

"Sir Knight," said the Sub-Prior, "I pray you to spare the farther
inventory of your wardrobe. The monks of Saint Mary's are no
free-booting barons, and whatever part of your vestments arrived at
our house, have been this day faithfully brought hither, with the mails
which contained them. I may presume from what has been said, as we have
indeed been, given to understand by the Earl of Northumberland, that
your desire is to remain for the present as unknown and as unnoticed, as
may be consistent with your high worth and distinction?"

"Alas, reverend father!" replied the courtier, "a blade when it is in
the scabbard cannot give lustre, a diamond when it is in the casket
cannot give light, and worth, when it is compelled by circumstances to
obscure itself, cannot draw observation--my retreat can only attract
the admiration of those few to whom circumstances permit its displaying
itself."

"I conceive now, my venerable father and lord," said the Sub-Prior,
"that your wisdom will assign such a course of conduct to this noble
knight, as may be alike consistent with his safety, and with the weal of
the community. For you wot well, that perilous strides have been made
in these audacious days, to the destruction of all ecclesiastical
foundations, and that our holy community has been repeatedly menaced.
Hitherto they have found no flaw in our raiment; but a party, friendly
as well to the Queen of England, as to the heretical doctrines of
the schismatical church, or even to worse and wilder forms of heresy,
prevails now at the court of our sovereign, who dare not yield to her
suffering clergy the protection she would gladly extend to them."

"My lord, and reverend sir," said the knight, "I will gladly relieve
you of my presence, while ye canvass this matter at your freedom; and
to speak truly, I am desirous to see in what case the chamberlain of my
noble kinsman hath found my wardrobe, and how he hath packed the same,
and whether it has suffered from the journey--there are four suits of
as pure and elegant device as ever the fancy of a fair lady doated upon,
every one having a treble, and appropriate change of ribbons, trimmings,
and fringes, which, in case of need, may as it were renew each of
them, and multiply the four into twelve.--There is also my sad-coloured
riding-suit, and three cut-work shirts with falling bands--I pray you,
pardon me--I must needs see how matters stand with them without farther
dallying."

Thus speaking, he left the room; and the Sub-Prior, looking after him
significantly, added, "Where the treasure is will the heart be also."

"Saint Mary preserve our wits!" said the Abbot, stunned with the
knight's abundance of words; "were man's brains ever so stuffed with
silk and broadcloth, cut-work, and I wot not what besides! And
what could move the Earl of Northumberland to assume for his bosom
counsellor, in matters of death and danger, such a feather-brained
coxcomb as this?"

"Had he been other than what he is, venerable father," said the
Sub-Prior, "he had been less fitted for the part of scape-goat, to
which his Right Honourable Cousin had probably destined him from the
commencement, in case of their plot failing. I know something of this
Piercie Shafton. The legitimacy of his mother's descent from the Piercie
family, the point on which he is most jealous, hath been called in
question. If hairbrained courage, and an outrageous spirit of gallantry,
can make good his pretensions to the high lineage he claims, these
qualities have never been denied him. For the rest, he is one of the
ruffling gallants of the time, like Howland Yorke, Stukely,

[Footnote: "Yorke," says Camden, "was a Londoner, a man of loose and
dissolute behaviour, and desperately audacious--famous in his time
amongst the common bullies and swaggerers, as being the first that, to
the great admiration of many at his boldness, brought into England the
bold and dangerous way of fencing with the rapier in duelling. Whereas,
till that time, the English used to fight with long swords and bucklers,
striking with the edge, and thought it no part of man either to push or
strike beneath the girdle.

Having a command in the Low Countries, Yorke revolted to the Spaniards,
and died miserably, poisoned, as was supposed, by his new allies. Three
years afterwards, his bones were dug up and gibbeted by the command of
the States of Holland.

Thomas Stukely, another distinguished gallant of the time, was bred a
merchant, being the son of a rich clothier in the west. He wedded the
daughter and heiress of a wealthy alderman of London, named Curtis,
after whose death he squandered the riches he thus acquired in all
manner of extravagance. His wife, whose fortune supplied his waste,
represented to him that he ought to make more of her. Stukely replied,
"I will make as much of thee, believe me, as it is possible for any to
do;" and he kept his word in one sense, having stripped her even of her
wearing apparel, before he finally ran away from her.

Having fled to Italy, he contrived to impose upon the Pope, with a
plan of invading Ireland, for which he levied soldiers, and made some
preparations, but ended by engaging himself and his troops in the
service of King Sebastian of Portugal. He sailed with that prince on his
fatal voyage to Barbary, and fell with him at the battle of Alcazar.

Stukely, as one of the first gallants of the time, has had the honour
to be chronicled in song, in Evans' Old Ballads, vol. iii, edition 1810.
His fate is also introduced in a tragedy, by George Peel, as has been
supposed, called the Battle of Alcazar, from which play Dryden is
alleged to have taken the idea of Don Sebastian; if so, it is surprising
he omitted a character so congenial to King Charles the Second's time as
the witty, brave, and profligate Thomas Stukely.]

and others, who wear out their fortunes, and endanger their lives,
in idle braveries, in order that they may be esteemed the only choice
gallants of the time; and afterwards endeavour to repair their estate,
by engaging in the desperate plots and conspiracies which wiser
heads have devised. To use one of his own conceited similitudes, such
courageous fools resemble hawks, which the wiser conspirator keeps
hooded and blinded on his wrist until the quarry is on the wing, and who
are then flown at them."

"Saint Mary," said the Abbot, "he were an evil guest to introduce into
our quiet household. Our young monks make bustle enough, and more than
is beseeming God's servants, about their outward attire already--this
knight were enough to turn their brains, from the _Vestiarius_ down to
the very scullion boy."

"A worse evil might follow," said the Sub-Prior: "in these bad days, the
patrimony of the church is bought and sold, forfeited and distrained,
as if it were the unhallowed soil appertaining to a secular baron. Think
what penalty awaits us, were we convicted of harbouring a rebel to her
whom they call the Queen of England! There would neither be wanting
Scottish parasites to beg the lands of the foundation, nor an army from
England to burn and harry the Halidome. The men of Scotland were once
Scotsmen, firm and united in the love of their country, and throwing
every other consideration aside when the frontier was menaced--now
they are--what shall I call them--the one part French, the other
part English, considering their dear native country merely as a
prize-fighting stage, upon which foreigners are welcome to decide their
quarrels."

"Benedictine!" replied the Abbot, "they are indeed slippery and evil
times."

"And therefore," said Father Eustace, "we must walk warily--we must not,
for example, bring this man--this Sir Piercie Shafton, to our house of
Saint Mary's."

"But how then shall we dispose of him?" replied the Abbot; "bethink thee
that he is a sufferer for holy Church's sake--that his patron, the Earl
of Northumberland, hath been our friend, and that, lying so near us, he
may work us weal or wo according as we deal with his kinsman."

"And, accordingly," said the Sub-Prior, "for these reasons, as well as
for discharge of the great duty of Christian charity, I would protect
and relieve this man. Let him not go back to Julian Avenel--that
unconscientious baron would not stick to plunder the exiled
stranger--Let him remain here--the spot is secluded, and if the
accommodation be beneath his quality, discovery will become the less
likely. We will make such means for his convenience as we can devise."

"Will he be persuaded, thinkest thou?" said the Abbot; "I will leave my
own travelling bed for his repose, and send up a suitable easy-chair."

"With such easements," said the Sub-Prior, "he must not complain; and
then, if threatened by any sudden danger, he can soon come down to
the sanctuary, where we will harbour him in secret until means can be
devised of dismissing him in safety."

"Were we not better," said the Abbot, "send him on to the court, and get
rid of him at once?"

"Ay, but at the expense of our friends--this butterfly may fold his
wings, and lie under cover in the cold air of Glendearg; but were he
at Holyrood, he would, did his life depend on it, expand his spangled
drapery in the eyes of the queen and court--Rather than fail of
distinction, he would sue for love to our gracious sovereign--the eyes
of all men would be upon him in the course of three short days, and
the international peace of the two ends of the island endangered for a
creature, who, like a silly moth, cannot abstain from fluttering round a
light."

"Thou hast prevailed with me, Father Eustace," said the Abbot, "and it
will go hard but I improve on thy plan--I will send up in secret, not
only household stuff, but wine and wassell-bread. There is a young
swankie here who shoots venison well. I will give him directions to see
that the knight lacks none."

"Whatever accommodation he can have, which infers not a risk of
discovery," said the Sub-Prior, "it is our duty to afford him."

"Nay," said the Abbot, "we will do more, and will instantly despatch a
servant express to the keeper of our revestiary to send us such things
as he may want, even this night. See it done, good father."

"I will," answered Father Eustace; "but I hear the gull clamorous for
some one to truss his points.[Footnote: The points were the strings of
cord or ribbon, (so called, because _pointed_ with metal like the laces
of women's stays,) which attached the doublet to the hose. They were
very numerous, and required assistance to tie them properly, which was
called _trussing_.] He will be fortunate if he lights on any one here
who can do him the office of groom of the chamber."

"I would he would appear," said the Abbot, "for here comes the
Refectioner with the collation--By my faith, the ride hath given me a
sharp appetite!"

       *       *       *       *       *



Chapter the Seventeenth.


  I'll seek for other aid--Spirits, they say,
  Flit round invisible, as thick as motes
  Dance in the sunbeam. If that spell
  Or necromancer's sigil can compel them,
  They shall hold council with me.
                JAMES DUFF.

The reader's attention must be recalled to Halbert Glendinning, who had
left the Tower of Glendearg immediately after his quarrel with its new
guest, Sir Piercie Shafton. As he walked with a rapid pace up the glen,
Old Martin followed him, beseeching him to be less hasty.

"Halbert," said the old man, "you will never live to have white hair, if
you take fire thus at every spark of provocation."

"And why should I wish it, old man," said Halbert, "if I am to be the
butt that every fool may aim a shaft of scorn against?--What avails it,
old man, that you yourself move, sleep, and wake, eat thy niggard meal,
and repose on thy hard pallet?--Why art thou so well pleased that the
morning should call thee up to daily toil, and the evening again lay
thee down a wearied-out wretch? Were it not better sleep and wake no
more, than to undergo this dull exchange of labour for insensibility and
of insensibility for labour?"

"God help me," answered Martin, "there may be truth in what thou
sayest--but walk slower, for my old limbs cannot keep pace with your
young legs--walk slower, and I will tell you why age, though unlovely,
is yet endurable."

"Speak on then," said Halbert, slackening his pace, "but remember we
must seek venison to refresh the fatigues of these holy men, who will
this morning have achieved a journey of ten miles; and if we reach not
the Brocksburn head we are scarce like to see an antler."

"Then know, my good Halbert," said Martin, "whom I love as my own son,
that I am satisfied to live till death calls me, because my Maker wills
it. Ay, and although I spend what men call a hard life, pinched with
cold in winter, and burnt with heat in summer, though I feed hard and
sleep hard, and am held mean and despised, yet I bethink me, that were I
of no use on the face of this fair creation, God would withdraw me from
it."

"Thou poor old man," said Halbert, "and can such a vain conceit as this
of thy fancied use, reconcile thee to a world where thou playest so poor
a part?"

"My part was nearly as poor," said Martin, "my person nearly as much
despised, the day that I saved my mistress and her child from perishing
in the wilderness."

"Right, Martin," answered Halbert; "there, indeed, thou didst what might
be a sufficient apology for a whole life of insignificance."

"And do you account it for nothing, Halbert, that I should have
the power of giving you a lesson of patience, and submission to the
destinies of Providence? Methinks there is use for the grey hairs on
the old scalp, were it but to instruct the green head by precept and by
example."

Halbert held down his face, and remained silent for a minute or two, and
then resumed his discourse: "Martin, seest thou aught changed in me of
late?"

"Surely," said Martin. "I have always known you hasty, wild, and
inconsiderate, rude, and prompt to speak at the volley and without
reflection; but now, methinks, your bearing, without losing its natural
fire, has something in it of force and dignity which it had not before.
It seems as if you had fallen asleep a carle, and awakened a gentleman."

"Thou canst judge, then, of noble bearing?" said Halbert.

"Surely," answered Martin, "in some sort I can; for I have travelled
through court, and camp, and city, with my master, Walter Avenel,
although he could do nothing for me in the long run, but give me room
for two score of sheep on the hill--and surely even now, while I speak
with you, I feel sensible that my language is more refined than it is my
wont to use, and that--though I know not the reason--the rude northern
dialect, so familiar to my tongue, has given place to a more town-bred
speech."

"And this change in thyself and me, thou canst by no means account for?"
said young Glendinning.

"Change!" replied Martin, "by our Lady it is not so much a change which
I feel, as a recalling and renewing sentiments and expressions which I
had some thirty years since, ere Tibb and I set up our humble household.
It is singular, that your society should have this sort of influence
over me, Halbert, and that I should never have experienced it ere now."

"Thinkest thou," said Halbert, "thou seest in me aught that can raise
me from this base, low, despised state, into one where I may rank with
those proud men, who now despise my clownish poverty?"

Martin paused an instant, and then answered, "Doubtless you may,
Halbert; as broken a ship has come to land. Heard ye never of Hughie
Dun, who left this Halidome some thirty-five years gone by? A deliverly
fellow was Hughie--could read and write like a priest, and could wield
brand and buckler with the best of the riders. I mind him--the like of
him was never seen in the Halidome of Saint Mary's, and so was seen of
the preferment that God sent him."

"And what was that?" said Halbert, his eyes sparkling with eagerness.

"Nothing less," answered Martin, "than body-servant to the Archbishop of
Saint Andrews!"

Halbert's countenance fell.--"A servant--and to a priest? Was this all
that knowledge and activity could raise him to?"

Martin, in his turn, looked with wistful surprise in the face of his
young friend. "And to what could fortune lead him farther?" answered
he. "The son of a kirk-feuar is not the stuff that lords and knights
are made of. Courage and school craft cannot change churl's blood into
gentle blood, I trow. I have heard, forby, that Hughie Dun left a good
five hundred punds of Scots money to his only daughter, and that she
married the Bailie of Pittenweem."

At this moment, and while Halbert was embarrassed with devising a
suitable answer, a deer bounded across their path. In an instant the
crossbow was at the youth's shoulder, the bolt whistled, and the deer,
after giving one bound upright, dropt dead on the green sward.

"There lies the venison our dame wanted," said Martin; "who would
have thought of an out-lying stag being so low down the glen at this
season?--And it is a hart of grease too, in full season, and three
inches of fat on the brisket. Now this is all your luck, Halbert, that
follows you, go where you like. Were you to put in for it, I would
warrant you were made one of the Abbot's yeoman-prickers, and ride about
in a purple doublet as bold as the best."

"Tush, man," answered Halbert, "I will serve the Queen or no one. Take
thou care to have down the venison to the Tower, since they expect it. I
will on to the moss. I have two or three bird-bolts at my girdle, and it
may be I shall find wild-fowl."

He hastened his pace, and was soon out of sight. Martin paused for a
moment, and looked after him. "There goes the making of a right gallant
stripling, an ambition have not the spoiling of him--Serve the Queen!
said he. By my faith, and she hath worse servants, from all that I e'er
heard of him. And wherefore should he not keep a high head? They that
ettle to the top of the ladder will at least get up some rounds. They
that mint [Footnote: _Mint_--aim at.] at a gown of gold, will always get
a sleeve of it. But come, sir, (addressing the stag,) you shall go to
Glendearg on my two legs somewhat more slowly than you were frisking it
even now on your own four nimble shanks. Nay, by my faith, if you be so
heavy, I will content me with the best of you, and that's the haunch and
the nombles, and e'en heave up the rest on the old oak-tree yonder, and
come back for it with one of the yauds." [Footnote: _Yauds_--horses;
more particularly horses of labour.]

While Martin returned to Glendearg with the venison, Halbert prosecuted
his walk, breathing more easily since he was free of his companion. "The
domestic of a proud and lazy priest--body-squire to the Archbishop of
Saint Andrews," he repeated to himself; "and this, with the privilege of
allying his blood with the Bailie of Pittenween, is thought a preferment
worth a brave man's struggling for;--nay more, a preferment which, if
allowed, should crown the hopes, past, present, and to come, of the
son of a Kirk-vassal! By Heaven, but that I find in me a reluctance to
practise their acts of nocturnal rapine, I would rather take the jack
and lance, and join with the Border-riders.--Something I will do. Here,
degraded and dishonoured, I will not live the scorn of each whiffling
stranger from the South, because, forsooth, he wears tinkling spurs on a
tawney boot. This thing--this phantom, be it what it will, I will see
it once more. Since I spoke with her, and touched her hand, thoughts
and feelings have dawned on me, of which my former life had not even
dreamed; but shall I, who feel my father's glen too narrow for my
expanding spirit, brook to be bearded in it by this vain gewgaw of a
courtier, and in the sight too of Mary Avenel? I will not stoop to it,
by Heaven!"

As he spoke thus, he arrived in the sequestered glen of Corri-nan-shian,
as it verged upon the hour of noon. A few moments he remained looking
upon the fountain, and doubting in his own mind with what countenance
the White Lady might receive him. She had not indeed expressly
forbidden his again evoking her; but yet there was something like such
a prohibition implied in the farewell, which recommended him to wait for
another guide.

Halbert Glendinning did not long, however, allow himself to pause.
Hardihood was the natural characteristic of his mind; and under the
expansion and modification which his feelings had lately undergone, it
had been augmented rather than diminished. He drew his sword, undid the
buskin from his foot, bowed three times with deliberation towards the
fountain, and as often towards the tree, and repeated the same rhyme as
formerly,--

  "Thrice to the holy brake--
    Thrice to the well:--
  I bid thee awake,
    White Maid of Avenel!

  Noon gleams on the lake--
    Noon glows on the fell--
  Wake thee, O wake,
    White Maid of Avenel!"

His eye was on the holly bush as he spoke the last line; and it was not
without an involuntary shuddering that he saw the air betwixt his eye
and that object become more dim, and condense, as it were, into
the faint appearance of a form, through which, however, so thin and
transparent was the first appearance of the phantom, he could discern
the outline of the bush, as through a veil of fine crape. But,
gradually, it darkened into a more substantial appearance, and the White
Lady stood before him with displeasure on her brow. She spoke, and her
speech was still song, or rather measured chant; but, as if now more
familiar, it flowed occasionally in modulated blank-verse, and at other
times in the lyrical measure which she had used at their former meeting.

  "This is the day when the fairy kind
    Sits weeping alone for their hopeless lot,
  And the wood-maiden sighs to the sighing wind,
    And the mer-maiden weeps in her crystal grot:
  For this is the day that a deed was wrought,
    In which we have neither part nor share.
  For the children of clay was salvation bought,
    But not for the forms of sea or air!
  And ever the mortal is most forlorn.
    Who meeteth our race on the Friday morn."

"Spirit," said Halbert Glendinning, boldly, "it is bootless to threaten.
