shalt be admitted to him."

"Ernest the Apulian, thy dainty Italian wit is caught in a trap," said
one of his companions.

"Thou art an ultramontane fool, Polydore," returned Ernest; "there may
be more in this than either thy wit or mine is able to fathom. This
maiden and one of her attendants wear a dress belonging to the
Varangian Imperial guard. They have perhaps been intrusted with a
message from the Emperor, and it is not irreconcilable with Alexius's
politics to send it through such messengers as these. Let us,
therefore, convey them in all honour to the General's tent."

"With all my heart," said Polydore. "A blue-eyed wench is a pretty
thing, but I like not the sauce of the camp-marshal, nor his taste in
attiring men who gave way to temptation. [Footnote: Persons among the
Crusaders found guilty of certain offences, did penance in a dress of
tar and feathers though it is supposed a punishment of modern
invention.] Yet, ere I prove a fool like my companion, I would ask who
or what this pretty maiden is, who comes to put noble princes and holy
pilgrims in mind that they have in their time had the follies of men?"

Bertha advanced and whispered in the ear of Ernest. Meantime joke
followed jest, among Polydore and the rest of the gay youths, in
riotous and ribald succession, which, however characteristic of the
rude speakers, may as well be omitted here. Their effect was to shake
in some degree the fortitude of the Saxon maiden, who had some
difficulty in mustering courage to address them. "As you have mothers,
gentlemen," she said, "as you have fair sisters, whom you would protect
from dishonour with your best blood--as you love and honour those holy
places which you are sworn to free from the infidel enemy, have
compassion on me, that you may merit success in your undertaking!"

"Fear nothing, maiden," said Ernest, "I will be your protector; and
you, my comrades, be ruled by me. I have, during your brawling, taken a
view, though somewhat against my promise, of the pledge which she
bears, and if she who presents it is affronted or maltreated, be
assured Godfrey of Bouillon will severely avenge the wrong done her."

"Nay, comrade, if thou canst warrant us so much," said Polydore, "I
will myself be most anxious to conduct the young woman in honour and
safety to Sir Godfrey's tent."

"The Princes," said Ernest, "must be nigh meeting there in council.
What I have said I will warrant and uphold with hand and life. More I
might guess, but I conclude this sensible young maiden can speak for
herself."

"Now, Heaven bless thee, gallant squire," said Bertha, "and make thee
alike brave and fortunate! Embarrass yourself no farther about me, than
to deliver me safe to your leader, Godfrey."

"We spend time," said Ernest, springing from his horse. "You are no
soft Eastern, fair maid, and I presume you will find yourself under no
difficulty in managing a quiet horse?"

"Not the least," said Bertha, as, wrapping herself in her cassock, she
sprung from the ground, and alighted upon the spirited palfrey, as a
linnet stoops upon a rose-bush. "And now, sir, as my business really
brooks no delay, I will be indebted to you to show me instantly to the
tent of Duke Godfrey of Bouillon."

By availing herself of this courtesy of the young Apulian, Bertha
imprudently separated herself from the old Varangian; but the
intentions of the youth were honourable, and he conducted her through
the tents and huts to the pavilion of the celebrated General-in-chief
of the Crusade.

"Here," he said, "you must tarry for a space, under the guardianship of
my companions," (for two or three of the pages had accompanied them,
out of curiosity to see the issue,) "and I will take the commands of
the Duke of Bouillon upon the subject."

To this nothing could be objected, and Bertha had nothing better to do,
than to admire the outside of the tent, which, in one of Alexius's fits
of generosity and munificence, had been presented by the Greek Emperor
to the Chief of the Franks. It was raised upon tall spear-shaped poles,
which had the semblance of gold; its curtains were of thick stuff,
manufactured of silk, cotton, and gold thread. The warders who stood
round, were (at least during the time that the council was held) old
grave men, the personal squires of the body, most of them, of the
sovereigns who had taken the Cross, and who could, therefore, be
trusted as a guard over the assembly, without danger of their blabbing
what they might overhear. Their appearance was serious and considerate,
and they looked like men who had taken upon them the Cross, not as an
idle adventure of arms, but as a purpose of the most solemn and serious
nature. One of these stopt the Italian, and demanded what business
authorized him to press forward into the council of the crusaders, who
were already taking their seats. The page answered by giving his name,
"Ernest of Otranto, page of Prince Tancred;" and stated that he
announced a young woman, who bore a token to the Duke of Bouillon,
adding that it was accompanied by a message for his own ear.

Bertha, meantime, laid aside her mantle, or upper garment, and disposed
the rest of her dress according to the Anglo-Saxon costume. She had
hardly completed this task, before the page of Prince Tancred returned,
to conduct her into the presence of the council of the Crusade. She
followed his signal; while the other young men who had accompanied her,
wondering at the apparent ease with which she gained admittance, drew
back to a respectful distance from the tent, and there canvassed the
singularity of their morning's adventure.

In the meanwhile, the ambassadress herself entered the council chamber,
exhibiting an agreeable mixture of shamefacedness and reserve, together
with a bold determination to do her duty at all events. There were
about fifteen of the principal crusaders assembled in council, with
their chieftain Godfrey. He himself was a tall strong man, arrived at
that period of life in--which men are supposed to have lost none of
their resolution, while they have acquired a wisdom and circumspection
unknown to their earlier years. The countenance of Godfrey bespoke both
prudence and boldness, and resembled his hair, where a few threads of
silver were already mingled with his raven locks.

Tancred, the noblest knight of the Christian chivalry, sat at no great
distance from him, with Hugh, Earl of Vermandois, generally called the
Great Count, the selfish and wily Bohemond, the powerful Raymond of
Provence, and others of the principal crusaders, all more or less
completely sheathed in armour.

Bertha did not allow her courage to be broken down, but advancing with
a timid grace towards Godfrey, she placed in his hands the signet which
had been restored to her by the young page, and after a deep obeisance,
spoke these words: "Godfrey, Count of Bouillon, Duke of Lorraine the
Lower, Chief of the Holy Enterprise called the Crusade, and you, his
gallant comrades, peers, and companions, by whatever titles you may be
honoured, I, an humble maiden of England, daughter of Engelred,
originally a franklin of Hampshire, and since Chieftain of the
Foresters, or free Anglo-Saxons, under the command of the celebrated
Edric, do claim what credence is due to the bearer of the true pledge
which I put into your hand, on the part of one not the least
considerable of your own body, Count Robert of Paris"---

"Our most honourable confederate," said Godfrey, looking at the ring.
"Most of you, my lords, must, I think, know this signet--a field sown
with the fragments of many splintered lances." The signet was handed
from one of the Assembly to another, and generally recognised.

When Godfrey had signified so much, the maiden resumed her message. "To
all true crusaders, therefore, comrades of Godfrey of Bouillon, and
especially to the Duke himself,--to all, I say, excepting Bohemond of
Tarentum, whom he counts unworthy of his notice"--

"Hah! me unworthy of his notice," said Bohemond. "What mean you by
that, damsel?--But the Count of Paris shall answer it to me."

"Under your favour, Sir Bohemond," said Godfrey, "no. Our articles
renounce the sending of challenges among ourselves, and the matter, if
not dropt betwixt the parties, must be referred to the voice of this
honourable council."

"I think I guess the business now, my lord," said Bohemond. "The Count
of Paris is disposed to turn and tear me, because I offered him good
counsel on the evening before we left Constantinople, when he neglected
to accept or be guided by it"--

"It will be the more easily explained when we have heard his message,"
said Godfrey.--"Speak forth Lord Robert of Paris's charge, damsel, that
we may take some order with that which now seems a perplexed business."

Bertha resumed her message; and, having briefly narrated the recent
events, thus concluded:--"The battle is to be done to-morrow, about two
hours after daybreak, and the Count entreats of the noble Duke of
Lorraine that he will permit some fifty of the lances of France to
attend the deed of arms, and secure that fair and honourable conduct
which he has otherwise some doubts of receiving at the hands of his
adversary. Or if any young and gallant knight should, of his own free
will, wish to view the said combat, the Count will feel his presence as
an honour; always he desires that the name of such knight be numbered
carefully with the armed crusaders who shall attend in the lists, and
that the whole shall be limited, by Duke Godfrey's own inspection, to
fifty lances only, which are enough to obtain the protection required,
while more would be considered as a preparation for aggression upon the
Grecians, and occasion the revival of disputes which are now happily at
rest."

Bertha had no sooner finished delivering her manifesto, and made with
great grace her obeisance to the council, than a sort of whisper took
place in the assembly, which soon assumed a more lively tone.

Their solemn vow not to turn their back upon Palestine, now that they
had set their hands to the plough, was strongly urged by some of the
elder knights of the council, and two or three high prelates, who had
by this time entered to take share in the deliberations. The young
knights, on the other hand, were fired with indignation on hearing the
manner in which their comrade had been trepanned; and few of them could
think of missing a combat in the lists in a country in which such
sights were so rare, and where one was to be fought so near them.

Godfrey rested his brow on his hand, and seemed in great perplexity. To
break with the Greeks, after having suffered so many injuries in order
to maintain the advantage of keeping the peace with them, seemed very
impolitic, and a sacrifice of all he had obtained by a long course of
painful forbearance towards Alexius Comnenus. On the other hand, he was
bound as a man of honour to resent the injury offered to Count Robert
of Paris, whose reckless spirit of chivalry made him the darling of the
army. It was the cause, too, of a beautiful lady, and a brave one:
every knight in the host would think himself bound, by his vow, to
hasten to her defence. When Godfrey spoke, it was to complain of the
difficulty of the determination, and the short time there was to
consider the case.

"With submission to my Lord Duke of Lorraine," said Tancred, "I was a
knight ere I was a crusader, and took on me the vows of chivalry, ere I
placed this blessed, sign upon my shoulder: the vow first made must be
first discharged. I will therefore do penance for neglecting, for a
space, the obligations of the second vow, while I observe that which
recalls me to the first duty of knighthood,--the relief of a distressed
lady in the hands of men whose conduct towards her, and towards this
host, in every respect entitles me to call them treacherous faitours."

"If my kinsman Tancred," said Bohemond, "will check his impetuosity,
and you, my lords, will listen, as you have sometimes deigned to do, to
my advice, I think I can direct you how to keep clear of any breach of
your oath, and yet fully to relieve our distressed fellow-pilgrims.--I
see some suspicious looks are cast towards me, which are caused perhaps
by the churlish manner in which this violent, and, in this case, almost
insane young warrior, has protested against receiving my assistance. My
great offence is the having given him warning, by precept and example,
of the treachery which was about to be practised against him, and
instructed him to use forbearance and temperance. My warning he
altogether contemned--my example he neglected to follow, and fell into
the snare which was spread, as it were, before his very eyes. Yet the
Count of Paris, in rashly contemning me, has acted only from a temper
which misfortune and disappointment have rendered irrational and
frantic. I am so far from bearing him ill-will, that, with your
lordship's permission, and that of the present council, I will haste to
the place of rendezvous with fifty lances, making up the retinue which
attends upon each to at least ten men, which will make the stipulated
auxiliary force equal to five hundred; and with these I can have little
doubt of rescuing the Count and his lady."

"Nobly proposed," said the Duke of Bouillon; "and with a charitable
forgiveness of injuries which becomes our Christian expedition. But
thou hast forgot the main difficulty, brother Bohemond, that we are
sworn never to turn back upon the sacred journey."

"If we can elude that oath upon the present occasion," said Bohemond,
"it becomes our duty to do so. Are we such bad horsemen, or are our
steeds so awkward, that we cannot rein them back from this to the
landing-place at Scutari? We can get them on shipboard in the same
retrograde manner, and when we arrive in Europe, where our vow binds us
no longer, the Count and Countess of Paris are rescued, and our vow
remains entire in the Chancery of Heaven."

A general shout arose--"Long life to the gallant Bohemond!--Shame to us
if we do not fly to the assistance of so valiant a knight, and a lady
so lovely, since we can do so without breach of our vow."

"The question," said Godfrey, "appears to me to be eluded rather than
solved; yet such evasions have been admitted by the most learned and
scrupulous clerks; nor do I hesitate to admit of Bohemond's expedient,
any more than if the enemy had attacked our rear, which might have
occasioned our countermarching to be a case of absolute necessity."

Some there were in the assembly, particularly the churchmen, inclined
to think that the oath by which the crusaders had solemnly bound
themselves, ought to be as literally obeyed. But Peter the Hermit, who
had a place in the council, and possessed great weight, declared it as
his opinion, "That since the precise observance of their vow would tend
to diminish the forces of the crusade, it was in fact unlawful, and
should not be kept according to the literal meaning, if, by a fair
construction, it could be eluded."

He offered himself to back the animal which he bestrode--that is, his
ass; and though he was diverted from showing this example by the
remonstrances of Godfrey of Bouillon, who was afraid of his becoming a
scandal in the eyes of the heathen, yet he so prevailed by his
arguments, that the knights, far from scrupling to countermarch,
eagerly contended which should have the honour of making one of the
party which should retrograde to Constantinople, see the combat, and
bring back to the host in safety the valorous Count of Paris, of whose
victory no one doubted, and his Amazonian Countess.

This emulation was also put an end to by the authority of Godfrey, who
himself selected the fifty knights who were to compose the party. They
were chosen from different nations, and the command of the whole was
given to young Tancred of Otranto. Notwithstanding the claim of
Bohemond, Godfrey detained the latter, under the pretext that his
knowledge of the country and people was absolutely necessary to enable
the council to form the plan of the campaign in Syria; but in reality
he dreaded the selfishness of a man of great ingenuity as well as
military skill, who, finding himself in a separate command, might be
tempted, should opportunities arise, to enlarge his own power and
dominion, at the expense of the pious purposes of the crusade in
general. The younger men of the expedition were chiefly anxious to
procure such horses as had been thoroughly trained, and could go
through with ease and temper the manoeuvre of equitation, by which it
was designed to render legitimate the movement which they had recourse
to. The selection was at length made, and the detachment ordered to
draw up in the rear, or upon the eastward line of the Christian
encampment. In the meanwhile, Godfrey charged Bertha with a message for
the Count of Paris, in which, slightly censuring him for not observing
more caution in his intercourse with the Greeks, he informed him that
he had sent a detachment of fifty lances, with the corresponding
squires, pages, men-at-arms, and cross-bows, five hundred in number,
commanded by the valiant Tancred, to his assistance. The Duke also
informed him, that he had added a suit of armour of the best temper
Milan could afford, together with a trusty war-horse, which he
entreated him to use upon the field of battle; for Bertha had not
omitted to intimate Count Robert's want of the means of knightly
equipment. The horse was brought before the pavilion accordingly,
completely barbed or armed in steel, and laden with armour for the
knight's body. Godfrey himself put the bridle into Bertha's hand.

"Thou need'st not fear to trust thyself with this steed, he is as
gentle and docile as he is fleet and brave. Place thyself on his back,
and take heed thou stir not from the side of the noble Prince Tancred
of Otranto, who will be the faithful defender of a maiden that has this
day shown dexterity, courage, and fidelity."

Bertha bowed low, as her cheeks glowed at praise from one whose talents
and worth were in such general esteem, as to have raised him to the
distinguished situation of leader of a host which numbered in it the
bravest and most distinguished captains of Christendom.

"Who are yon two persons?" continued Godfrey, speaking of the
companions of Bertha, whom he saw in the distance before the tent.

"The one," answered the damsel, "is the master of the ferry-boat which
brought me over; and the other an old Varangian who came hither as my
protector."

"As they may come to employ their eyes here, and their tongues on the
opposite side," returned the general of the crusaders, "I do not think
it prudent to let them accompany you. They shall remain here for some
short time. The citizens of Scutari will not comprehend for some space
what our intention is, and I could wish Prince Tancred and his
attendants to be the first to announce their own arrival."

Bertha accordingly intimated the pleasure of the French general to the
parties, without naming his motives; when the ferryman began to exclaim
on the hardship of intercepting him in his trade; and Osmund to
complain of being detained from his duties. But Bertha, by the orders
of Godfrey, left them, with the assurance that they would be soon at
liberty. Finding themselves thus abandoned, each applied himself to his
favourite amusement. The ferryman occupied himself in staring about at
all that was new; and Osmund, having in the meantime accepted an offer
of breakfast from some of the domestics, was presently engaged with a
flask of such red wine as would have reconciled him to a worse lot than
that which he at present experienced.

The detachment of Tancred, fifty spears and their armed retinue, which
amounted fully to five hundred men, after having taken a short and
hasty refreshment, were in arms and mounted before the sultry hour of
noon. After some manoeuvres, of which the Greeks of Scutari, whose
curiosity was awakened by the preparations of the detachment, were at a
loss to comprehend the purpose, they formed into a single column,
having four men in front. When the horses were in this position, the
whole riders at once began to rein back. The action was one to which
both the cavaliers and their horses were well accustomed, nor did it at
first afford much surprise to the spectators; but when the same
retrograde evolution was continued, and the body of crusaders seemed
about to enter the town of Scutari in so extraordinary a fashion, some
idea of the truth began to occupy the citizens. The cry at length was
general, when Tancred and a few others, whose horses were unusually
well-trained, arrived at the port, and possessed themselves of a
galley, into which they led their horses, and, disregarding all
opposition from the Imperial officers of the haven, pushed the vessel
off from the shore.

Other cavaliers did not accomplish their purpose so easily; the riders,
or the horses, were less accustomed to continue in the constrained pace
for such a considerable length of time, so that many of the knights,
having retrograded for one or two hundred yards, thought their vow was
sufficiently observed by having so far deferred to it, and riding in
the ordinary manner into the town, seized without farther ceremony on
some vessels, which, notwithstanding the orders of the Greek Emperor,
had been allowed to remain on the Asiatic side of the strait. Some less
able horsemen met with various accidents; for though it was a proverb
of the time, that nothing was so bold as a blind horse, yet from this
mode of equitation, where neither horse nor rider saw the way he was
going, some steeds were overthrown, others backed upon dangerous
obstacles; and the bones of the cavaliers themselves suffered much more
than would have been the case in an ordinary march.

Those horsemen, also, who met with falls, incurred the danger of being
slain by the Greeks, had not Godfrey, surmounting his religious
scruples, despatched a squadron to extricate them--a task which they
performed with great ease. The greater part of Tancred's followers
succeeded in embarking, as was intended, nor was there more than a
score or two finally amissing. To accomplish their voyage, however,
even the Prince of Otranto himself, and most of his followers, were
obliged to betake themselves to the unknightly labours of the oar. This
they found extremely difficult, as well from the state both of the tide
and the wind, as from the want of practice at the exercise. Godfrey in
person viewed their progress anxiously, from a neighbouring height, and
perceived with regret the difficulty which they found in making their
way, which was still more increased by the necessity for their keeping
in a body, and waiting for the slowest and worst manned vessels, which
considerably detained those that were more expeditious. They made some
progress, however; nor had the commander-in-chief the least doubt, that
before sunset they would safely reach the opposite side of the strait.

He retired at length from his post of observation, having placed a
careful sentinel in his stead, with directions to bring him word the
instant that the detachment reached the opposite shore. This the
soldier could easily discern by the eye, if it was daylight at the
time; if, on the contrary, it was night before they could arrive, the
Prince of Otranto had orders to show certain lights, which, in case of
their meeting resistance from the Greeks, should be arranged in a
peculiar manner, so as to indicate danger.

Godfrey then explained to the Greek authorities of Scutari, whom he
summoned before him, the necessity there was that he should keep in
readiness such vessels as could be procured, with which, in case of
need, he was determined to transport a strong division from his army to
support those who had gone before. He then rode back to his camp, the
confused murmurs of which, rendered more noisy by the various
discussions concerning the events of the day, rolled off from the
numerous host of the crusaders, and mingled with the hoarse sound of
the many-billowed Hellespont.




CHAPTER THE TWENTH-FOURTH.

     All is prepared--the chambers of the mine
     Are cramm'd with the combustible, which, harmless
     While yet unkindled, as the sable sand,
     Needs but a spark to change its nature so,
     That he who wakes it from its slumbrous mood,
     Dreads scarce the explosion less than he who knows
     That 'tis his towers which meet its fury.
                                     ANONYMOUS.


When the sky is darkened suddenly, and the atmosphere grows thick and
stifling, the lower ranks of creation entertain the ominous sense of a
coming tempest. The birds fly to the thickets, the wild creatures
retreat to the closest covers which their instinct gives them the habit
of frequenting, and domestic animals show their apprehension of the
approaching thunderstorm by singular actions and movements inferring
fear and disturbance.

It seems that human nature, when its original habits are cultivated and
attended to, possesses, on similar occasions, something of that
prescient foreboding, which announces the approaching tempest to the
inferior ranks of creation. The cultivation of our intellectual powers
goes perhaps too far, when it teaches us entirely to suppress and
disregard those natural feelings, which were originally designed as
sentinels by which nature warned us of impending danger.

Something of the kind, however, still remains, and that species of
feeling which announces to us sorrowful or alarming tidings, may be
said, like the prophecies of the weird sisters, to come over us like a
sudden cloud.

During the fatal day which was to precede the combat of the Caesar with
the Count of Paris, there were current through the city of
Constantinople the most contradictory, and at the same time the most
terrific reports. Privy conspiracy, it was alleged, was on the very eve
of breaking out; open war, it was reported by others, was about to
shake her banners over the devoted city; the precise cause was not
agreed upon, any more than the nature of the enemy. Some said that the
barbarians from the borders of Thracia, the Hungarians, as they were
termed, and the Comani, were on their march from the frontiers to
surprise the city; another report stated that the Turks, who, during
this period, were established in Asia, had resolved to prevent the
threatened attack of the crusaders upon Palestine, by surprising not
only the Western Pilgrims, but the Christians of the East, by one of
their innumerable invasions, executed with their characteristic
rapidity.

Another report, approaching more near to the truth, declared that the
crusaders themselves, having discovered their various causes of
complaint against Alexius Comnenus, had resolved to march back their
united forces to the capital, with a view of dethroning or chastising
him; and the citizens were dreadfully alarmed for the consequences of
the resentment of men so fierce in their habits and so strange in their
manners. In short, although they did not all agree on the precise cause
of danger, it was yet generally allowed that something of a dreadful
kind was impending, which appeared to be in a certain degree confirmed
by the motions that were taking place among the troops. The Varangians,
as well as the Immortals, were gradually assembled, and placed in
occupation of the strongest parts of the city, until at length the
fleet of galleys, row-boats, and transports, occupied by Tancred and
his party, were observed to put themselves in motion from Scutari, and
attempt to gain such a height in the narrow sea, as upon the turn of
the tide should transport them to the port of the capital.

Alexius Comnenus was himself struck at this unexpected movement on the
part of the crusaders. Yet, after some conversation with Hereward, on
whom he had determined to repose his confidence, and had now gone too
far to retreat, he became reassured, the more especially by the limited
size of the detachment which seemed to meditate so bold a measure as an
attack upon his capital. To those around him he said with carelessness,
that it was hardly to be supposed that a trumpet could blow to the
charge, within hearing of the crusaders' camp, without some out of so
many knights coming forth to see the cause and the issue of the
conflict.

The conspirators also had their secret fears when the little armament
of Tancred had been seen on the straits. Agelastes mounted a mule, and
went to the shore of the sea, at the place now called Galata. He met
Bertha's old ferryman, whom Godfrey had set at liberty, partly in
contempt, and partly that the report he was likely to make, might serve
to amuse the conspirators in the city. Closely examined by Agelastes,
he confessed that the present detachment, so far as he understood, was
despatched at the instance of Bohemond, and was under the command of
his kinsman Tancred, whose well-known banner was floating from the
headmost vessel. This gave courage to Agelastes, who, in the course of
his intrigues, had opened a private communication with the wily and
ever mercenary Prince of Antioch. The object of the philosopher had
been to obtain from Bohemond a body of his followers to co-operate in
the intended conspiracy, and fortify the party of insurgents. It is
true, that Bohemond had returned no answer, but the account now given
by the ferryman, and the sight of Tancred the kinsman of Bohemond's
banner displayed on the straits, satisfied the philosopher that his
offers, his presents, and his promises, had gained to his side the
avaricious Italian, and that this band had been selected by Bohemond,
and were coming to act in his favour.

As Agelastes turned to go off, he almost jostled a person, as much
muffled up, and apparently as unwilling to be known, as the philosopher
himself. Alexius Comnenus, however--for it was the Emperor
himself--knew Agelastes, though rather from his stature and gestures,
than his countenance; and could not forbear whispering in his ear, as
he passed, the well-known lines, to which the pretended sage's various
acquisitions gave some degree of point:--

    "Grammaticus, rhetor, geometres, pictor, aliptes,
     Augur, schoenobates, medicus, magus; omnia novit.
     Graeculus esuriens in caelum, jusseris, ibit." [Footnote: The
lines of Juvenal imitated by Johnson in his _London_--
    "All sciences a fasting Monsieur knows,
     And bid him go to hell--to hell he goes."]

Agelastes first started at the unexpected sound of the Emperor's voice,
yet immediately recovered presence of mind, the want of which had made
him suspect himself betrayed; and without taking notice of the rank of
the person to whom he spoke, he answered by a quotation which should
return the alarm he had received. The speech that suggested itself was
said to be that which the Phantom of Cleonice dinned into the ears of
the tyrant who murdered her:--

    "Tu cole justitiam; toque atque alios manet ultor." [Footnote: "Do
thou cultivate justice: for thee and for others there remains an
avenger."--_Ovid. Met._]

The sentence, and the recollections which accompanied it, thrilled
through the heart of the Emperor, who walked on, however, without any
notice or reply.

"The vile conspirator," he said, "had his associates around him,
otherwise he had not hazarded that threat. Or it may have been
worse--Agelastes himself, on the very brink of this world, may have
obtained that singular glance into futurity proper to that situation,
and perhaps speaks less from his own reflection than from a strange
spirit of prescience, which dictates his words. Have I then in earnest
sinned so far in my imperial duty, as to make it just to apply to me
the warning used by the injured Cleonice to her ravisher and murderer?
Methinks I have not. Methinks that at less expense than that of a just
severity, I could ill have kept my seat in the high place where Heaven
has been pleased to seat me, and where, as a ruler, I am bound to
maintain my station. Methinks the sum of those who have experienced my
clemency may be well numbered with that of such as have sustained the
deserved punishments of their guilt--But has that vengeance, however
deserved in itself, been always taken in a legal or justifiable manner?
My conscience, I doubt, will hardly answer so home a question; and
where is the man, had he the virtues of Antoninus himself, that can
hold so high and responsible a place, yet sustain such an interrogation
as is implied in that sort of warning which I have received from this
traitor? _Tu cole justitiam_--we all need to use justice to
others--_Teque atque alios manet ultor_--we are all amenable to an
avenging being--I will see the Patriarch--instantly will I see him; and
by confessing my transgressions to the Church, I will, by her plenary
indulgence, acquire the right of spending the last day of my reign in a
consciousness of innocence, or at least of pardon--a state of mind
rarely the lot of those whose lines have fallen in lofty places."

So saying, he passed to the palace of Zosimus the Patriarch, to whom he
could unbosom himself with more safety, because he had long considered
Agelastes as a private enemy to the Church, and a man attached to the
ancient doctrines of heathenism. In the councils of the state they were
also opposed to each other, nor did the Emperor doubt, that in
communicating the secret of the conspiracy to the Patriarch, he was
sure to attain a loyal and firm supporter in the defence which he
proposed to himself. He therefore gave a signal by a low whistle, and a
confidential officer, well mounted, approached him, who attended him in
his ride, though unostentatiously, and at some distance.

In this manner, therefore, Alexius Comnenus proceeded to the palace of
the Patriarch, with as much speed as was consistent with his purpose of
avoiding to attract any particular notice as he passed through the
street. During the whole ride, the warning of Agelastes repeatedly
occurred to him, and his conscience reminded him of too many actions of
his reign which could only be justified by necessity, emphatically said
to be the tyrant's plea, and which were of themselves deserving the
dire vengeance so long delayed.

When he came in sight of the splendid towers which adorned the front of
the patriarchal palace, he turned aside from the lofty gates, repaired
to a narrow court, and again giving his mule to his attendant, he stopt
before a postern, whose low arch and humble architrave seemed to
exclude the possibility of its leading to any place of importance. On
knocking, however, a priest of an inferior order opened the door, who,
with a deep reverence, received the Emperor so soon as he had made
himself known, and conducted him into the interior of the palace.
Demanding a secret interview with the Patriarch, Alexius was then
ushered into his private library, where he was received by the aged
priest with the deepest respect, which the nature of his communication
soon changed into horror and astonishment.

Although Alexius was supposed by many of his own court, and
particularly by some members of his own family, to be little better
than a hypocrite in his religious professions, yet such severe
observers were unjust in branding him with a name so odious. He was
indeed aware of the great support which he received from the good
opinion of the clergy, and to them he was willing to make sacrifices
for the advantage of the Church, or of individual prelates who
manifested fidelity to the crown; but though, on the one hand, such
sacrifices were rarely made by Alexius, without a view to temporal
policy, yet, on the other, he regarded them as recommended by his
devotional feelings, and took credit to himself for various grants and
actions, as dictated by sincere piety, which, in another aspect, were
the fruits of temporal policy. His mode of looking on these measures
was that of a person with oblique vision, who sees an object in a
different manner, according to the point from which he chances to
contemplate it.

The Emperor placed his own errors of government before the Patriarch in
his confession, giving due weight to every branch of morality as it
occurred, and stripping from them the lineaments and palliative
circumstances which had in his own imagination lessened their guilt.
The Patriarch heard, to his astonishment, the real thread of many a
court intrigue, which had borne a very different appearance, till the
Emperor's narrative either justified his conduct upon the occasion, or
left it totally unjustifiable. Upon the whole, the balance was
certainly more in favour of Alexius than the Patriarch had supposed
likely in that more distant view he had taken of the intrigues of the
court, when, as usual, the ministers and the courtiers endeavoured to
make up for the applause which they had given in council in the most
blameable actions of the absolute monarch, by elsewhere imputing to his
motives greater guilt than really belonged to them. Many men who had
fallen sacrifices, it was supposed to the personal spleen or jealousy
of the Emperor, appeared to have been in fact removed from life, or
from liberty, because their enjoying either was inconsistent with the
quiet of the state and the safety of the monarch.

Zosimus also learned, what he perhaps already suspected, that amidst
the profound silence of despotism which seemed to pervade the Grecian
empire, it heaved frequently with convulsive throes, which ever and
anon made obvious the existence of a volcano under the surface. Thus,
while smaller delinquencies, or avowed discontent with the Imperial
government, seldom occurred, and were severely punished when they did,
the deepest and most mortal conspiracies against the life and the
authority of the Emperor were cherished by those nearest to his person;
and he was often himself aware of them, though it was not until they
approached an explosion that he dared act upon his knowledge, and
punish the conspirators.

The whole treason of the Caesar, with his associates, Agelastes and
Achilles Tatius, was heard by the Patriarch with wonder and
astonishment, and he was particularly surprised at the dexterity with
which the Emperor, knowing the existence of so dangerous a conspiracy
at home, had been able to parry the danger from the crusaders occurring
at the same moment.

"In that respect," said the Emperor, to whom indeed the churchman
hinted his surprise, "I have been singularly unfortunate. Had I been
secure of the forces of my own empire, I might have taken one out of
two manly and open courses with these frantic warriors of the west--I
might, my reverend father, have devoted the sums paid to Bohemond and
other of the more selfish among the crusaders, to the honest and open
support of the army of western Christians, and safely transported them
to Palestine, without exposing them to the great loss which they are
likely to sustain by the opposition of the Infidels; their success
would have been in fact my own, and a Latin kingdom in Palestine,
defended by its steel-clad warriors, would have been a safe and
unexpugnable barrier of the empire against the Saracens, Or, if it was
thought more expedient for the protection of the empire and the holy
Church, over which you are ruler, we might at once, and by open force,
have defended the frontiers of our states, against a host commanded by
so many different and discording chiefs, and advancing upon us with
such equivocal intentions. If the first swarm of these locusts, under
him whom they called Walter the Penniless, was thinned by the
Hungarians, and totally destroyed by the Turks, as the pyramids of
bones on the frontiers of the country still keep in memory, surely the
united forces of the Grecian empire would have had little difficulty in
scattering this second flight, though commanded by these Godfreys,
Bohemonds, and Tancreds."

The Patriarch was silent, for though he disliked, or rather detested
the crusaders, as members of the Latin Church, he yet thought it highly
doubtful that in feats of battle they could have been met and overcome
by the Grecian forces.

"At any rate," said Alexius, rightly interpreting his silence, "if
vanquished, I had fallen under my shield as a Greek emperor should, nor
had I been forced into these mean measures of attacking men by stealth,
and with forces disguised as infidels; while the lives of the faithful
soldiers of the empire, who have fallen in obscure skirmishes, had
better, both for them and me, been lost bravely in their ranks,
avowedly fighting for their native emperor and their native country.
Now, and as the matter stands, I shall be handed down to posterity as a
wily tyrant, who engaged his subjects in fatal feuds for the safety of
his own obscure life. Patriarch! these crimes rest not with me, but
with the rebels whose intrigues compelled me into such courses--What,
reverend father, will be my fate hereafter?--and in what light shall I
descend to posterity, the author of so many disasters?"

"For futurity," said the Patriarch, "your grace hath referred yourself
to the holy Church, which hath power to bind and loose; your means of
propitiating her are ample, and I have already indicated such as she
may reasonably expect, in consequence of your repentance and
forgiveness."

"They shall be granted," replied the Emperor, "in their fullest extent;
nor will I injure you in doubting their effect in the next world. In
this present state of existence, however, the favourable opinion of the
Church may do much for me during this important crisis. If we
understand each other, good Zosimus, her doctors and bishops are to
thunder in my behalf, nor is my benefit from her pardon, to be deferred
till the funeral monument closes upon me?"

"Certainly not," said Zosimus; "the conditions which I have already
stipulated being strictly attended to."

"And my memory in history," said Alexius, "in what manner is that to be
preserved?"

"For that," answered the Patriarch, "your Imperial Majesty must trust
to the filial piety and literary talents of your accomplished daughter,
Anna Comnena."

The Emperor shook his head. "This unhappy Caesar," he said, "is like to
make a quarrel between us; for I shall scarce pardon so ungrateful a
rebel as he is, because my daughter clings to him with a woman's
fondness. Besides, good Zosimus, it is not, I believe, the page of a
historian such as my daughter that is most likely to be received
without challenge by posterity. Some Procopius, some philosophical
slave, starving in a garret, aspires to write the life of an Emperor
whom he durst not approach; and although the principal merit of his
production be, that it contains particulars upon the subject which no
man durst have promulgated while the prince was living, yet no man
hesitates to admit such as true when he has passed from the scene."

"On that subject," said Zosimus, "I can neither afford your Imperial
Majesty relief or protection. If, however, your memory is unjustly
slandered upon earth, it will be a matter of indifference to your
Highness, who will be then, I trust, enjoying a state of beatitude
which idle slander cannot assail. The only way, indeed, to avoid it
while on this side of time, would be to write your Majesty's own
memoirs while you are yet in the body; so convinced am I that it is in
your power to assign legitimate excuses for those actions of your life,
which, without your doing so, would seem most worthy of censure."

"Change we the subject," said the Emperor; "and since the danger is
imminent, let us take care for the present, and leave future ages to
judge for themselves.--What circumstance is it, reverend father, in
your opinion, which encourages these conspirators to make so audacious
an appeal to the populace and the Grecian soldiers?"

"Certainly," answered the Patriarch, "the most irritating incident of
your highness's reign was the fate of Ursel, who, submitting, it is
said, upon capitulation, for life, limb, and liberty, was starved to
death by your orders, in the dungeons of the Blacquernal, and whose
courage, liberality, and other popular virtues, are still fondly
remembered by the citizens of this metropolis, and by the soldiers of
the guard, called Immortal."

"And this," said the Emperor, fixing his eye upon his confessor, "your
reverence esteems actually the most dangerous point of the popular
tumult?"

"I cannot doubt," said the Patriarch, "that his very name, boldly
pronounced, and artfully repeated, will be the watchword, as has been
plotted, of a horrible tumult."

"I thank Heaven!" said the Emperor; "on that particular I will be on my
guard. Good-night to your reverence! and, believe me, that all in this
scroll, to which I have set my hand, shall be with the utmost fidelity
accomplished. Be not, however, over-impatient in this business;--such a
shower of benefits falling at once upon the Church, would make men
suspicious that the prelates and ministers proceeded rather as acting
upon a bargain between the Emperor and Patriarch, than as paying or
receiving an atonement offered by a sinner in excuse of his crimes.
This would be injurious, father, both to yourself and me."

"All regular delay," said the Patriarch, "shall be interposed at your
highness's pleasure; and we shall trust to you for recollection that
the bargain, if it could be termed one, was of your own seeking, and
that the benefit to the Church was contingent upon the pardon and the
support which she has afforded to your majesty."

"True," said the Emperor--"most true--nor shall I forget it. Once more
adieu, and forget not what I have told thee. This is a night, Zosimus,
in which the Emperor must toil like a slave, if he means not to return
to the humble Alexius Comnenus, and even then there were no
resting-place."

So saying, he took leave of the Patriarch, who was highly gratified
with the advantages he had obtained for the Church, which many of his
predecessors had struggled for in vain. He resolved, therefore, to
support the staggering Alexius.




CHAPTER THE TWENTY-FIFTH.

     Heaven knows its time; the bullet has its billet,
     Arrow and javelin each its destined purpose;
     The fated beasts of Nature's lower strain
     Have each their separate task.
                                            OLD PLAY.


Agelastes, after crossing the Emperor in the manner we have already
described, and after having taken such measures as occurred to him to
ensure the success of the conspiracy, returned to the lodge of his
garden, where the lady of the Count of Paris still remained, her only
companion being an old woman named Vexhelia, the wife of the soldier
who accompanied Bertha to the camp of the Crusaders; the kind-hearted
maiden having stipulated that, during her absence, her mistress was not
to be left without an attendant, and that attendant connected with the
Varangian guard. He had been all day playing the part of the ambitious
politician, the selfish time-server, the dark and subtle conspirator;
and now it seemed, as if to exhaust the catalogue of his various parts
in the human drama, he chose to exhibit himself in the character of the
wily sophist, and justify, or seem to justify, the arts by which he had
risen to wealth and eminence, and hoped even now to arise to royalty
itself.

"Fair Countess," he said, "what occasion is there for your wearing this
veil of sadness over a countenance so lovely?"

"Do you suppose me," said Brenhilda, "a stock, or stone, or a creature
without the feelings of a sensitive being, that I should endure
mortification, imprisonment, danger and distress, without expressing
the natural feelings of humanity? Do you imagine that to a lady like
me, as free as the unreclaimed falcon, you can offer the insult of
captivity, without my being sensible to the disgrace, or incensed
against the authors of it? And dost thou think that I will receive
consolation at thy hands--at thine--one of the most active artificers
in this web of treachery in which I am so basely entangled?"

"Not entangled certainly by my means"--answered Agelastes; "clap your
hands, call for what you wish, and the slave who refuses instant
obedience had better been unborn. Had I not, with reference to your
safety and your honour, agreed for a short time to be your keeper, that
office would have been usurped by the Caesar, whose object you know,
and may partly guess the modes by which it would be pursued. Why then
dost thou childishly weep at being held for a short space in an
honourable restraint, which the renowned arms of your husband will
probably put an end to long ere to-morrow at noon?"

"Canst thou not comprehend," said the Countess, "thou man of many
words, but of few honourable thoughts, that a heart like mine, which
has been trained in the feelings of reliance upon my own worth and
valour, must be necessarily affected with shame at being obliged to
accept, even from the sword of a husband, that safety which I would
gladly have owed only to my own?"

"Thou art misled, Countess," answered the philosopher, "by thy pride, a
failing predominant in woman. Thinkest thou there has been no offensive
assumption in laving aside the character of a mother and a wife, and
adopting that of one of those brain-sick female fools, who, like the
bravoes of the other sex, sacrifice every thing that is honourable or
useful to a frantic and insane affectation of courage? Believe me, fair
lady, that the true system of virtue consists in filling thine own
place gracefully in society, breeding up thy children, and delighting
those of the other sex, and any thing beyond this, may well render thee
hateful or terrible, but can add nothing to thy amiable qualities."

"Thou pretendest," said the Countess, "to be a philosopher; methinks
thou shouldst know, that the fame which hangs its chaplet on the tomb
of a brave hero or heroine, is worth all the petty engagements in which
ordinary persons spend the current of their time. One hour of life,
crowded to the full with glorious action, and filled with noble risks,
is worth whole years of those mean observances of paltry decorum, in
which men steal through existence, like sluggish waters through a
marsh, without either honour or observation."

"Daughter," said Agelastes, approaching near to the lady, "it is with
pain I see you bewildered in errors which a little calm reflection
might remove. We may flatter ourselves, and human vanity usually does
so, that beings infinitely more powerful than those belonging to mere
humanity, are employed daily in measuring out the good and evil of this
world, the termination of combats, or the fate of empires, according to
their own ideas of what is right or wrong, or, more properly, according
to what we ourselves conceive to be such. The Greek heathens, renowned
for their wisdom, and glorious for their actions, explained to men of
ordinary minds the supposed existence of Jupiter and his Pantheon,
where various deities presided over various virtues and vices, and
regulated the temporal fortune and future happiness of such as
practised them. The more learned and wise of the ancients rejected such
the vulgar interpretation, and wisely, although affecting a deference
to the public faith, denied before their disciples in private, the
gross fallacies of Tartarus and Olympus, the vain doctrines concerning
the gods themselves, and the extravagant expectations which the vulgar
entertained of an immortality, supposed to be possessed by creatures
who were in every respect mortal, both in the conformation of their
bodies, and in the internal belief of their souls. Of these wrise and
good men some granted the existence of the supposed deities, but denied
that they cared about the actions of mankind any more than those of the
inferior animals. A merry, jovial, careless life, such as the followers
of Epicurus would choose for themselves, was what they assigned for
those gods whose being they admitted. Others, more bold or more
consistent, entirely denied the existence of deities who apparently had
no proper object or purpose, and believed that such of them, whose
being and attributes were proved to us by no supernatural appearances,
had in reality no existence whatever."

"Stop, wretch!" said the Countess, "and know that thou speakest not to
one of those blinded heathens, of whose abominable doctrines you are
detailing the result. Know, that if an erring, I am nevertheless a
sincere daughter of the Church, and this cross displayed on my
shoulder, is a sufficient emblem of the vows I have undertaken in its
cause. Bo therefore wary, as thou art wily; for, believe me, if thou
scoffest or utterest reproach against my holy religion, what I am
unable to answer in language, I will reply to, without hesitation, with
the point of my dagger."

"To that argument" said Agelastes, drawing back from the neighbourhood
of Brenhilda, "believe me, fair lady, I am very willing to urge your
gentleness. But although I shall not venture to say any thing of those
superior and benevolent powers to whom you ascribe the management of
the world, you will surely not take offence at my noticing those base
superstitions which have been adopted in explanation of what is called
by the Magi, the Evil Principle. Was there ever received into a human
creed, a being so mean--almost so ridiculous--as the Christian Satan? A
goatish figure and limbs, with grotesque features, formed to express
the most execrable passions; a degree of power scarce inferior to that
of the Deity; and a talent at the same time scarce equal to that of the
stupidest of the lowest order! What is he, this being, who is at least
the second arbiter of the human race, save an immortal spirit, with the
petty spleen and spite of a vindictive old man or old woman?"

Agelastes made a singular pause in this part of his discourse. A mirror
of considerable size hung in the apartment, so that the philosopher
could see in its reflection the figure of Brenhilda, and remark the
change of her countenance, though she had averted her face from him in
hatred of the doctrines which he promulgated. On this glass the
philosopher had his eyes naturally fixed, and he was confounded at
perceiving a figure glide from behind the shadow of a curtain, and
glare at him with the supposed mien and expression of the Satan of
