After the siege was over Lord Willoughby knighted twelve of
his principal officers, foremost among whom was Francis Vere, who
was now sent home with despatches by his general, and remained in
England until the end of January, when he was appointed sergeant
major general of the forces, a post of great responsibility and much
honour, by Lord Willoughby, with the full approval of the queen's
government. He was accompanied on his return by his brother Robert.

A month after Sir Francis Vere's return Lord Willoughby left
for England, and the whole burden of operations in the field fell
upon Vere. His first trouble arose from the mutinous conduct of
the garrison of Gertruydenberg. This was an important town on the
banks of the old Maas, and was strongly fortified, one side being
protected by the Maas while the river Douge swept round two other
sides of its walls. Its governor, Count Hohenlohe, had been unpopular,
the troops had received no pay, and there had been a partial mutiny
before the siege of Bergen op Zoom began. This was appeased, by
the appointment of Sir John Wingfield, Lord Willoughby's brother
in law, as its governor.

In the winter the discontent broke out again. The soldiers had been
most unjustly treated by the States, and there were long arrears
of pay, and at first Sir John Wingfield espoused the cause of the
men. Sir Francis Vere tried in vain to arrange matters. The Dutch
authorities would not pay up the arrears, the men would not return
to their duty until they did so, and at last became so exasperated
that they ceased to obey their governor and opened communications
with the enemy. Prince Maurice, who was now three and twenty years
old, and devoted to martial pursuits and the cause of his countrymen,
after consultation with Sir Francis Vere, laid siege to the town
and made a furious assault upon it on the water aide. But the Dutch
troops, although led by Count Solms and Count Philip of Nassau,
were repulsed with great loss. The prince then promised not only
a pardon, but that the demands of the garrison should be complied
with; but it was too late, and four days later Gertruydenberg was
delivered up by the mutineers to the Duke of Parma, the soldiers
being received into the Spanish service, while Wingfield and the
officers were permitted to retire.

The States were furious, as this was the third city commanded by
Englishmen that had been handed over to the enemy. The bad feeling
excited by the treachery of Sir William Stanley and Roland Yorke
at Deventer and Zutphen had died out after the gallant defence of
the English at Sluys, but now broke out again afresh, and charges
of treachery were brought not only against Wingfield but against
many other English officers, including Sir Francis Vere. The
queen, however, wrote so indignantly to the States that they had
to withdraw their charges against most of the English officers.

In May Lord Willoughby, who was still in London, resigned his command.
A number of old officers of distinction who might have laid claims
to succeed him, among them Sir John Norris, Sir Roger Williams,
Sir Thomas Wilford, Sir William Drury, Sir Thomas Baskerville, and
Sir John Burrough, were withdrawn from the Netherlands to serve in
France or Ireland, and no general in chief or lieutenant general was
appointed, Sir Francis Vere as sergeant major receiving authority
to command all soldiers already in the field or to be sent out during
the absence of the general and lieutenant general. His official
title was Her Majesty's Sergeant Major in the Field. The garrisons
in the towns were under the command of their own governors, and
those could supply troops for service in the field according to
their discretion.

The appointment of so young a man as Sir Francis Vere to a post
demanding not only military ability but great tact and diplomatic
power, was abundant proof of the high estimate formed of him
by the queen and her counsellors. The position was one of extreme
difficulty. He had to keep on good terms with the queen and her
government, with the government of the States, the English agent at
the Hague, Prince Maurice in command of the army of the Netherlands,
the English governors of the towns, and the officers or men of the
force under his own command. Fortunately Barneveldt, who at that
time was the most prominent man in the States, had a high opinion
of Vere. Sir Thomas Bodley, the queen's agent, had much confidence
in him, and acted with him most cordially, and Prince Maurice
entertained a great respect for him, consulted him habitually in
all military matters, and placed him in the position of marshal
of the camp of the army of the Netherlands, in addition to his own
command of the English portion of that army.

Vere's first undertaking was to lead a force of 12,000 men, of
whom half were English, to prevent Count Mansfelt from crossing
the Maas with an army of equal strength. Prince Maurice was present
in person as general in chief. Intrenchments were thrown up and
artillery planted; but just as Mansfelt was preparing to cross his
troops mutinied, and he was obliged to fall back.

In October, with 900 of his own troops and twelve companies of Dutch
horse, Sir Francis Vere succeeded in throwing a convoy of provisions
into the town of Rheinberg, which was besieged by a large force
of the enemy. As soon as he returned the States requested him to
endeavour to throw in another convoy, as Count Mansfelt was marching
to swell the force of the besiegers, and, after his arrival it
would be well nigh impossible to send further aid into the town.
Vere took with him 900 English and 900 Dutch infantry, and 800
Dutch cavalry. The enemy had possession of a fortified country
house called Loo, close to which lay a thick wood traversed only by
a narrow path, with close undergrowth and swampy ground on either
side. The enemy were in great force around Loo, and came out to
attack the expedition as it passed through the wood. Sending the
Dutch troops on first, Vere attacked the enemy vigorously with his
infantry and drove them back to the inclosure of Loo. As soon as
his whole force had crossed the wood, he halted them and ordered
them to form in line of battle facing the wood through which they
had just passed, and from which the enemy were now pouring out in
great force.

In order to give time to his troops to prepare for the action Vere
took half his English infantry and advanced against them. They
moved forward, and a stubborn fight took place between the pikemen.
Vere's horse was killed, and fell on him so that he could not
rise; but the English closed round him, and he was rescued with
no other harm than a bruised leg and several pike thrusts through
his clothes. While the conflict between the pikemen was going on
the English arquebusiers opened fire on the flank of the enemy,
and they began to fall back. Four times they rallied and charged
the English, but were at last broken and scattered through the wood.
The cavalry stationed there left their horses and fled through the
undergrowth. Pressing forward the little English force next fell
upon twenty-four companies of Neapolitan infantry, who were defeated
without difficulty. The four hundred and fifty Englishmen then
joined the main force, which marched triumphantly with their convoy
of provisions into Rheinberg, and the next morning fortunately turning
thick and foggy the force made its way back without interruption
by the enemy.



CHAPTER XI

IN SPAIN


Alone among the survivors of the great Spanish Armada, Geoffrey
Vickars saw the coast of Ireland fade away from sight without a
feeling of satisfaction or relief. His hope had been that the ship
would be wrecked on her progress down the coast. He knew not that
the wild Irish were slaying all whom the sea spared, and that
ignorant as they were of the English tongue, he would undoubtedly
have shared the fate of his Spanish companions. He thought only
of the risk of being drowned, and would have preferred taking this
to the certainty of a captivity perhaps for life in the Spanish
prisons. The part that he had played since he had been picked up
off Gravelines could not be sustained indefinitely. He might as
well spend his life in prison, where at least there would be some
faint hope of being exchanged, as wander about Spain all his life
as an imbecile beggar.

As soon, therefore, as he saw that the perils of the coast of
Ireland were passed, and that the vessel was likely to reach Spain
in safety, he determined that he would on reaching a port disclose
his real identity. There were on board several Scotch and Irish
volunteers, and he decided to throw himself upon the pity of one of
these rather than on that of the Spaniards. He did not think that
in any case his life was in danger. Had he been detected when
first picked up, or during the early part of the voyage, he would
doubtless have been thrown overboard without mercy; but now that
the passions of the combatants had subsided, and that he had been
so long among them, and had, as he believed, won the goodwill of
many by the assistance he had rendered to the sick and wounded, he
thought that there was little fear of his life being taken in cold
blood.

One of the Irish volunteers, Gerald Burke by name, had for a long
time been seriously ill, and Geoffrey had in many small ways shown
him kindness as he lay helpless on the deck, and he determined
finally to confide in him. Although still very weak, Burke was now
convalescent, and was sitting alone by the poop rail gazing upon
the coast of Spain with eager eyes, when Geoffrey, under the pretext
of coiling down a rope, approached him. The young man nodded kindly
to him.

"Our voyage is nearly over, my poor lad," he said in Spanish, "and
your troubles now will be worse than mine. You have given me many
a drink of water from your scanty supply, and I wish that I could
do something for you in return; but I know that you do not even
understand what I say to you."

"Would you give me an opportunity of speaking to you after nightfall,
Mr. Burke," Geoffrey said in English, "when no one will notice us
speaking?"

The Irishman gave a start of astonishment at hearing himself
addressed in English.

"My life is in your hands, sir; pray, do not betray me," Geoffrey
said rapidly as he went on coiling down the rope.

"I will be at this place an hour after nightfall," the young Irishman
replied when he recovered from his surprise. "Your secret will be
safe with me."

At the appointed time Geoffrey returned to the spot. The decks
were now deserted, for a drizzling rain was falling, and all save
those on duty had retired below, happy in the thought that on the
following morning they would be in port.

"Now, tell me who you are," the young Irishman began. "I thought you
were a Spanish sailor, one of those we picked up when the Spanish
galleon next to us foundered."

Geoffrey then told him how he had been knocked off an English ship
by the fall of a mast, had swum to the galleon and taken refuge
beneath her bowsprit until she sank, and how, when picked up and
carried on to the Spanish ship, he feigned to have lost his senses
in order to conceal his ignorance of Spanish.

"I knew," he said, "that were I recognized as English at the time
I should at once be killed, but I thought that if I could conceal
who I was for a time I should simply be sent to the galleys, where
I have heard that there are many English prisoners working."

"I think death would have been preferable to that lot," Mr. Burke
said.

"Yes, sir; but there is always the hope of escape or of exchange.
When you spoke kindly to me this afternoon I partly understood what
you said, for in this long time I have been on board I have come
to understand a little Spanish, and I thought that maybe you would
assist me in some way."

"I would gladly do so, though I regard Englishmen as the enemies
of my country; but in what way can I help you? I could furnish you
with a disguise, but your ignorance of Spanish would lead to your
detection immediately."

"I have been thinking it over, sir, and it seemed to me that
as there will be no objection to my landing tomorrow, thinking as
they do that I have lost my senses, I might join you after you once
got out of the town. I have some money in my waistbelt, and if you
would purchase some clothes for me I might then join you as your
servant as you ride along. At the next town you come to none would
know but that I had been in your service during the voyage, and
there would be nothing strange in you, an Irish gentleman, being
accompanied by an Irish servant who spoke but little Spanish.
I would serve you faithfully, sir, until perhaps some opportunity
might occur for my making my escape to England."

"Yes, I think that might be managed," the young Irishman said. "When
I land tomorrow I will buy some clothes suitable for a serving man.
I do not know the names of the hotels on shore, so you must watch
me when I land and see where I put up. Come there in the evening at
nine o'clock. I will issue out and give you the bundle of clothes,
and tell you at what hour in the morning I have arranged to start.
I will hire two horses; when they come round to the door, join me
in front of the hotel and busy yourself in packing my trunks on
the baggage mules. When you have done that, mount the second horse
and ride after me; the people who will go with us with the horses
will naturally suppose that you have landed with me. Should any of
our shipmates here see us start, it is not likely that they will
recognize you. If they do so, I need simply say that as you had shown
me such kindness on board ship I had resolved to take you with me
to Madrid in order to see if anything could be done to restore you
to reason. However, it is better that you should keep in the background
as much as possible. I will arrange to start at so early an hour
in the morning that none of those who may land with me from the
ship, and may put up at the same inn, are likely to be about."

The next morning the vessel entered port. They were soon surrounded
by boats full of people inquiring anxiously for news of other ships,
and for friends and acquaintances on board. Presently large boats
were sent off by the authorities, and the disembarkation of the sick
and the helpless began. This indeed included the greater portion
of the survivors, for there were but two or three score on board
who were capable of dragging themselves about, the rest being
completely prostrate by disease, exhaustion, hunger, and thirst.
Geoffrey was about to descend into one of the boats, when the officer
in command said roughly: "Remain on board and do your work, there
is no need for your going into the hospital." One of the ship's
officers, however, explained that the lad had altogether lost his
senses, and was unable either to understand when spoken to or to
reply to questions. Consequently he was permitted to take his place
in the boat.

As soon as he stepped ashore he wandered away among the crowd of
spectators. A woman, observing his wan face and feeble walk, called
him into her house, and set food and wine before him. He made a
hearty meal, but only shook his head when she addressed him, and
laughed childishly and muttered his thanks in Spanish when she
bestowed a dollar upon him as he left. He watched at the port while
boat load after boat load of sick came ashore, until at last one
containing the surviving officers and gentlemen with their baggage
reached the land. Then he kept Gerald Burke in sight until he
entered an inn, followed by two men carrying his baggage. Several
times during the day food and money were offered him, the inhabitants
being full of horror and pity at the sight of the famishing survivors
of the crew of the galleon.

At nine o'clock in the evening Geoffrey took up his station near
the door of the inn. A few minutes later Gerald Burke came out with
a bundle. "Here are the clothes," he said. "I have hired horses for
our journey to Madrid. They will be at the door at six o'clock in
the morning. I have arranged to travel by very short stages, for at
first neither you nor I could sit very long upon a horse; however,
I hope we shall soon gain strength as we go."

Taking the bundle, Geoffrey walked a short distance from the town
and lay down upon the ground under some trees. The night was a warm
one, and after the bitter cold they had suffered during the greater
part of the voyage, it felt almost sultry to him. At daybreak in
the morning he rose, put on the suit of clothes Gerald Burke had
provided, washed his face in a little stream, and proceeded to the
inn. He arrived there just as the clocks were striking six. A few
minutes later two men with two horses and four mules came up to
the door, and shortly afterwards Gerald Burke came out. Geoffrey at
once joined him; the servants of the inn brought out the baggage,
which was fastened by the muleteers on to two of the animals.
Gerald Burke mounted one of the horses and Geoffrey the other, and
at once rode on, the muleteers mounting the other two mules and
following with those carrying the baggage.

"That was well managed," Gerald Burke said as they rode out of the
town. "The muleteers can have no idea that you have but just joined
me, and there is little chance of any of my comrades on board ship
overtaking us, as all intend to stop for a few days to recruit
themselves before going on. If they did they would not be likely to
recognize you in your present attire, or to suspect that my Irish
servant is the crazy boy of the ship."

After riding at an easy pace for two hours, they halted under the
shade of some trees. Fruit, bread, and wine were produced from
a wallet on one of the mules, and they sat down and breakfasted.
After a halt of an hour they rode on until noon, when they again
halted until four in the afternoon, for the sun was extremely hot,
and both Gerald Burke and Geoffrey were so weak they scarce could
sit their horses. Two hours further riding took them to a large
village, where they put up at the inn. Geoffrey now fell into his
place as Mr. Burke's servant--saw to the baggage being taken
inside, and began for the first time to try his tongue at Spanish.
He got on better than he had expected; and as Mr. Burke spoke with
a good deal of foreign accent, it did not seem in any way singular
to the people of the inn that his servant should speak but little
of the language.

Quietly they journeyed on, doing but short distances for the first
three or four days, but as they gained strength pushing on faster,
and by the time they reached Madrid both were completely recovered
from the effects of their voyage. Madrid was in mourning, for there
was scarce a family but had lost relations in the Armada. Mr. Burke
at once took lodgings and installed Geoffrey as his servant. He
had many friends and acquaintances in the city, where he had been
residing for upwards of a year previous to the sailing of the
Armada.

For some weeks Geoffrey went out but little, spending his time in
reading Spanish books and mastering the language as much as possible.
He always conversed in that language with Mr. Burke, and at the
end of six weeks was able to talk Spanish with some fluency. He
now generally accompanied Mr. Burke if he went out, following him
in the streets and standing behind his chair when he dined abroad.
He was much amused at all he saw, making many acquaintances among
the lackeys of Mr. Burke's friends, dining with them downstairs after
the banquets were over, and often meeting them of an evening when
he had nothing to do, and going with them to places of entertainment.

In this way his knowledge of Spanish improved rapidly, and although
he still spoke with an accent he could pass well as one who had
been for some years in the country. He was now perfectly at ease
with the Spanish gentlemen of Mr. Burke's acquaintance. It was
only when Irish and Scotch friends called upon his master that he
feared awkward questions, and upon these occasions he showed himself
as little as possible. When alone with Gerald Burke the latter
always addressed Geoffrey as a friend rather than as a servant, and
made no secret with him as to his position and means. He had been
concerned in a rising in Ireland, and had fled the country, bringing
with him a fair amount of resources. Believing that the Armada was
certain to be crowned with success, and that he should ere long be
restored to his estates in Ireland, he had, upon his first coming
to Spain, spent his money freely. His outfit for the expedition
had made a large inroad upon his store, and his resources were now
nearly at an end.

"What is one to do, Geoffrey? I don't want to take a commission in
Philip's army, though my friends could obtain one for me at once;
but I have no desire to spend the rest of my life in the Netherlands
storming the towns of the Dutch burghers."

"Or rather trying to storm them," Geoffrey said, smiling; "there
have not been many towns taken of late years."

"Nor should I greatly prefer to be campaigning in France," Gerald
went on, paying no attention to the interruption. "I have no love
either for Dutch Calvinists or French Huguenots; but I have no
desire either to be cutting their throats or for them to be cutting
mine. I should like a snug berth under the crown here or at Cadiz,
or at Seville; but I see no chance whatever of my obtaining one.
I cannot take up the trade of a footpad, though disbanded soldiers
turned robbers are common enough in Spain. What is to be done?"

"If I am not mistaken," Geoffrey said with a smile, "your mind is
already made up. It is not quite by accident that you are in the
gardens of the Retiro every evening, and that a few words are always
exchanged with a certain young lady as she passes with her duenna."

"Oh! you have observed that," Gerald Burke replied with a laugh.
"Your eyes are sharper than I gave you credit for, Master Geoffrey.
Yes, that would set me on my legs without doubt, for Donna Inez
is the only daughter and heiress of the Marquis of Ribaldo; but
you see there is a father in the case, and if that father had the
slightest idea that plain Gerald Burke was lifting his eyes to his
daughter it would not be many hours before Gerald Burke had several
inches of steel in his body."

"That I can imagine," Geoffrey said, "since it is, as I learn from
my acquaintances among the lackeys, a matter of common talk that
the marquis intends to marry her to the son of the Duke of Sottomayor."

"Inez hates him," Gerald Burke said. "It is just like my ill luck,
that instead of being drowned as most of the others were, he has
had the luck to get safely back again. However, he is still ill,
and likely to be so for some time. He was not so accustomed to
starving as some of us, and he suffered accordingly. He is down at
his estates near Seville."

"But what do you think of doing?" Geoffrey asked.

"That is just what I am asking you."

"It seems to me, certainly," Geoffrey went on, "that unless you
really mean to run off with the young lady--for I suppose there
is no chance in the world of your marrying her in any other way--it
will be better both for you and her that you should avoid for
the future these meetings in the gardens or elsewhere, and cast your
thoughts in some other direction for the bettering of your fortunes."

"That is most sage advice, Geoffrey," the young Irishman laughed,
"and worthy of my father confessor; but it is not so easy to follow.
In the first place, I must tell you that I do not regard Inez as in
any way a step to fortune, but rather as a step towards a dungeon.
It would be vastly better for us both if she were the daughter of
some poor hidalgo like myself. I could settle down then with her,
and plant vines and make wine, and sell what I don't drink myself.
As it is, I have the chance of being put out of the way if it is
