of Burgundy (who was cousin to the French King) began to quarrel with the
Duke of Orleans (who was brother to the French King) about the whole
matter; and those two dukes made France even more wretched than ever.

As the idea of conquering Scotland was still popular at home, the King
marched to the river Tyne and demanded homage of the King of that
country.  This being refused, he advanced to Edinburgh, but did little
there; for, his army being in want of provisions, and the Scotch being
very careful to hold him in check without giving battle, he was obliged
to retire.  It is to his immortal honour that in this sally he burnt no
villages and slaughtered no people, but was particularly careful that his
army should be merciful and harmless.  It was a great example in those
ruthless times.

A war among the border people of England and Scotland went on for twelve
months, and then the Earl of Northumberland, the nobleman who had helped
Henry to the crown, began to rebel against him--probably because nothing
that Henry could do for him would satisfy his extravagant expectations.
There was a certain Welsh gentleman, named OWEN GLENDOWER, who had been a
student in one of the Inns of Court, and had afterwards been in the
service of the late King, whose Welsh property was taken from him by a
powerful lord related to the present King, who was his neighbour.
Appealing for redress, and getting none, he took up arms, was made an
outlaw, and declared himself sovereign of Wales.  He pretended to be a
magician; and not only were the Welsh people stupid enough to believe
him, but, even Henry believed him too; for, making three expeditions into
Wales, and being three times driven back by the wildness of the country,
the bad weather, and the skill of Glendower, he thought he was defeated
by the Welshman's magic arts.  However, he took Lord Grey and Sir Edmund
Mortimer, prisoners, and allowed the relatives of Lord Grey to ransom
him, but would not extend such favour to Sir Edmund Mortimer.  Now, Henry
Percy, called HOTSPUR, son of the Earl of Northumberland, who was married
to Mortimer's sister, is supposed to have taken offence at this; and,
therefore, in conjunction with his father and some others, to have joined
Owen Glendower, and risen against Henry.  It is by no means clear that
this was the real cause of the conspiracy; but perhaps it was made the
pretext.  It was formed, and was very powerful; including SCROOP,
Archbishop of York, and the EARL OF DOUGLAS, a powerful and brave
Scottish nobleman.  The King was prompt and active, and the two armies
met at Shrewsbury.

There were about fourteen thousand men in each.  The old Earl of
Northumberland being sick, the rebel forces were led by his son.  The
King wore plain armour to deceive the enemy; and four noblemen, with the
same object, wore the royal arms.  The rebel charge was so furious, that
every one of those gentlemen was killed, the royal standard was beaten
down, and the young Prince of Wales was severely wounded in the face.  But
he was one of the bravest and best soldiers that ever lived, and he
fought so well, and the King's troops were so encouraged by his bold
example, that they rallied immediately, and cut the enemy's forces all to
pieces.  Hotspur was killed by an arrow in the brain, and the rout was so
complete that the whole rebellion was struck down by this one blow.  The
Earl of Northumberland surrendered himself soon after hearing of the
death of his son, and received a pardon for all his offences.

There were some lingerings of rebellion yet: Owen Glendower being retired
to Wales, and a preposterous story being spread among the ignorant people
that King Richard was still alive.  How they could have believed such
nonsense it is difficult to imagine; but they certainly did suppose that
the Court fool of the late King, who was something like him, was he,
himself; so that it seemed as if, after giving so much trouble to the
country in his life, he was still to trouble it after his death.  This
was not the worst.  The young Earl of March and his brother were stolen
out of Windsor Castle.  Being retaken, and being found to have been
spirited away by one Lady Spencer, she accused her own brother, that Earl
of Rutland who was in the former conspiracy and was now Duke of York, of
being in the plot.  For this he was ruined in fortune, though not put to
death; and then another plot arose among the old Earl of Northumberland,
some other lords, and that same Scroop, Archbishop of York, who was with
the rebels before.  These conspirators caused a writing to be posted on
the church doors, accusing the King of a variety of crimes; but, the King
being eager and vigilant to oppose them, they were all taken, and the
Archbishop was executed.  This was the first time that a great churchman
had been slain by the law in England; but the King was resolved that it
should be done, and done it was.

The next most remarkable event of this time was the seizure, by Henry, of
the heir to the Scottish throne--James, a boy of nine years old.  He had
been put aboard-ship by his father, the Scottish King Robert, to save him
from the designs of his uncle, when, on his way to France, he was
accidentally taken by some English cruisers.  He remained a prisoner in
England for nineteen years, and became in his prison a student and a
famous poet.

With the exception of occasional troubles with the Welsh and with the
French, the rest of King Henry's reign was quiet enough.  But, the King
was far from happy, and probably was troubled in his conscience by
knowing that he had usurped the crown, and had occasioned the death of
his miserable cousin.  The Prince of Wales, though brave and generous, is
said to have been wild and dissipated, and even to have drawn his sword
on GASCOIGNE, the Chief Justice of the King's Bench, because he was firm
in dealing impartially with one of his dissolute companions.  Upon this
the Chief Justice is said to have ordered him immediately to prison; the
Prince of Wales is said to have submitted with a good grace; and the King
is said to have exclaimed, 'Happy is the monarch who has so just a judge,
and a son so willing to obey the laws.'  This is all very doubtful, and
so is another story (of which Shakespeare has made beautiful use), that
the Prince once took the crown out of his father's chamber as he was
sleeping, and tried it on his own head.

The King's health sank more and more, and he became subject to violent
eruptions on the face and to bad epileptic fits, and his spirits sank
every day.  At last, as he was praying before the shrine of St. Edward at
Westminster Abbey, he was seized with a terrible fit, and was carried
into the Abbot's chamber, where he presently died.  It had been foretold
that he would die at Jerusalem, which certainly is not, and never was,
Westminster.  But, as the Abbot's room had long been called the Jerusalem
chamber, people said it was all the same thing, and were quite satisfied
with the prediction.

The King died on the 20th of March, 1413, in the forty-seventh year of
his age, and the fourteenth of his reign.  He was buried in Canterbury
Cathedral.  He had been twice married, and had, by his first wife, a
family of four sons and two daughters.  Considering his duplicity before
he came to the throne, his unjust seizure of it, and above all, his
making that monstrous law for the burning of what the priests called
heretics, he was a reasonably good king, as kings went.




CHAPTER XXI--ENGLAND UNDER HENRY THE FIFTH


FIRST PART


The Prince of Wales began his reign like a generous and honest man.  He
set the young Earl of March free; he restored their estates and their
honours to the Percy family, who had lost them by their rebellion against
his father; he ordered the imbecile and unfortunate Richard to be
honourably buried among the Kings of England; and he dismissed all his
wild companions, with assurances that they should not want, if they would
resolve to be steady, faithful, and true.

It is much easier to burn men than to burn their opinions; and those of
the Lollards were spreading every day.  The Lollards were represented by
the priests--probably falsely for the most part--to entertain treasonable
designs against the new King; and Henry, suffering himself to be worked
upon by these representations, sacrificed his friend Sir John Oldcastle,
the Lord Cobham, to them, after trying in vain to convert him by
arguments.  He was declared guilty, as the head of the sect, and
sentenced to the flames; but he escaped from the Tower before the day of
execution (postponed for fifty days by the King himself), and summoned
the Lollards to meet him near London on a certain day.  So the priests
told the King, at least.  I doubt whether there was any conspiracy beyond
such as was got up by their agents.  On the day appointed, instead of
five-and-twenty thousand men, under the command of Sir John Oldcastle, in
the meadows of St. Giles, the King found only eighty men, and no Sir John
at all.  There was, in another place, an addle-headed brewer, who had
gold trappings to his horses, and a pair of gilt spurs in his
breast--expecting to be made a knight next day by Sir John, and so to
gain the right to wear them--but there was no Sir John, nor did anybody
give information respecting him, though the King offered great rewards
for such intelligence.  Thirty of these unfortunate Lollards were hanged
and drawn immediately, and were then burnt, gallows and all; and the
various prisons in and around London were crammed full of others.  Some
of these unfortunate men made various confessions of treasonable designs;
but, such confessions were easily got, under torture and the fear of
fire, and are very little to be trusted.  To finish the sad story of Sir
John Oldcastle at once, I may mention that he escaped into Wales, and
remained there safely, for four years.  When discovered by Lord Powis, it
is very doubtful if he would have been taken alive--so great was the old
soldier's bravery--if a miserable old woman had not come behind him and
broken his legs with a stool.  He was carried to London in a
horse-litter, was fastened by an iron chain to a gibbet, and so roasted
to death.

To make the state of France as plain as I can in a few words, I should
tell you that the Duke of Orleans, and the Duke of Burgundy, commonly
called 'John without fear,' had had a grand reconciliation of their
quarrel in the last reign, and had appeared to be quite in a heavenly
state of mind.  Immediately after which, on a Sunday, in the public
streets of Paris, the Duke of Orleans was murdered by a party of twenty
men, set on by the Duke of Burgundy--according to his own deliberate
confession.  The widow of King Richard had been married in France to the
eldest son of the Duke of Orleans.  The poor mad King was quite powerless
to help her, and the Duke of Burgundy became the real master of France.
Isabella dying, her husband (Duke of Orleans since the death of his
father) married the daughter of the Count of Armagnac, who, being a much
abler man than his young son-in-law, headed his party; thence called
after him Armagnacs.  Thus, France was now in this terrible condition,
that it had in it the party of the King's son, the Dauphin Louis; the
party of the Duke of Burgundy, who was the father of the Dauphin's ill-
used wife; and the party of the Armagnacs; all hating each other; all
fighting together; all composed of the most depraved nobles that the
earth has ever known; and all tearing unhappy France to pieces.

The late King had watched these dissensions from England, sensible (like
the French people) that no enemy of France could injure her more than her
own nobility.  The present King now advanced a claim to the French
throne.  His demand being, of course, refused, he reduced his proposal to
a certain large amount of French territory, and to demanding the French
princess, Catherine, in marriage, with a fortune of two millions of
golden crowns.  He was offered less territory and fewer crowns, and no
princess; but he called his ambassadors home and prepared for war.  Then,
he proposed to take the princess with one million of crowns.  The French
Court replied that he should have the princess with two hundred thousand
crowns less; he said this would not do (he had never seen the princess in
his life), and assembled his army at Southampton.  There was a short plot
at home just at that time, for deposing him, and making the Earl of March
king; but the conspirators were all speedily condemned and executed, and
the King embarked for France.

It is dreadful to observe how long a bad example will be followed; but,
it is encouraging to know that a good example is never thrown away.  The
King's first act on disembarking at the mouth of the river Seine, three
miles from Harfleur, was to imitate his father, and to proclaim his
solemn orders that the lives and property of the peaceable inhabitants
should be respected on pain of death.  It is agreed by French writers, to
his lasting renown, that even while his soldiers were suffering the
greatest distress from want of food, these commands were rigidly obeyed.

With an army in all of thirty thousand men, he besieged the town of
Harfleur both by sea and land for five weeks; at the end of which time
the town surrendered, and the inhabitants were allowed to depart with
only fivepence each, and a part of their clothes.  All the rest of their
possessions was divided amongst the English army.  But, that army
suffered so much, in spite of its successes, from disease and privation,
that it was already reduced one half.  Still, the King was determined not
to retire until he had struck a greater blow.  Therefore, against the
advice of all his counsellors, he moved on with his little force towards
Calais.  When he came up to the river Somme he was unable to cross, in
consequence of the fort being fortified; and, as the English moved up the
left bank of the river looking for a crossing, the French, who had broken
all the bridges, moved up the right bank, watching them, and waiting to
attack them when they should try to pass it.  At last the English found a
crossing and got safely over.  The French held a council of war at Rouen,
resolved to give the English battle, and sent heralds to King Henry to
know by which road he was going.  'By the road that will take me straight
to Calais!' said the King, and sent them away with a present of a hundred
crowns.

The English moved on, until they beheld the French, and then the King
gave orders to form in line of battle.  The French not coming on, the
army broke up after remaining in battle array till night, and got good
rest and refreshment at a neighbouring village.  The French were now all
lying in another village, through which they knew the English must pass.
They were resolved that the English should begin the battle.  The English
had no means of retreat, if their King had any such intention; and so the
two armies passed the night, close together.

To understand these armies well, you must bear in mind that the immense
French army had, among its notable persons, almost the whole of that
wicked nobility, whose debauchery had made France a desert; and so
besotted were they by pride, and by contempt for the common people, that
they had scarcely any bowmen (if indeed they had any at all) in their
whole enormous number: which, compared with the English army, was at
least as six to one.  For these proud fools had said that the bow was not
a fit weapon for knightly hands, and that France must be defended by
gentlemen only.  We shall see, presently, what hand the gentlemen made of
it.

Now, on the English side, among the little force, there was a good
proportion of men who were not gentlemen by any means, but who were good
stout archers for all that.  Among them, in the morning--having slept
little at night, while the French were carousing and making sure of
victory--the King rode, on a grey horse; wearing on his head a helmet of
shining steel, surmounted by a crown of gold, sparkling with precious
stones; and bearing over his armour, embroidered together, the arms of
England and the arms of France.  The archers looked at the shining helmet
and the crown of gold and the sparkling jewels, and admired them all;
but, what they admired most was the King's cheerful face, and his bright
blue eye, as he told them that, for himself, he had made up his mind to
conquer there or to die there, and that England should never have a
ransom to pay for _him_.  There was one brave knight who chanced to say
that he wished some of the many gallant gentlemen and good soldiers, who
were then idle at home in England, were there to increase their numbers.
But the King told him that, for his part, he did not wish for one more
man.  'The fewer we have,' said he, 'the greater will be the honour we
shall win!'  His men, being now all in good heart, were refreshed with
bread and wine, and heard prayers, and waited quietly for the French.  The
King waited for the French, because they were drawn up thirty deep (the
little English force was only three deep), on very difficult and heavy
ground; and he knew that when they moved, there must be confusion among
them.

As they did not move, he sent off two parties:--one to lie concealed in a
wood on the left of the French: the other, to set fire to some houses
behind the French after the battle should be begun.  This was scarcely
done, when three of the proud French gentlemen, who were to defend their
country without any help from the base peasants, came riding out, calling
upon the English to surrender.  The King warned those gentlemen himself
to retire with all speed if they cared for their lives, and ordered the
English banners to advance.  Upon that, Sir Thomas Erpingham, a great
English general, who commanded the archers, threw his truncheon into the
air, joyfully, and all the English men, kneeling down upon the ground and
biting it as if they took possession of the country, rose up with a great
shout and fell upon the French.

Every archer was furnished with a great stake tipped with iron; and his
orders were, to thrust this stake into the ground, to discharge his
arrow, and then to fall back, when the French horsemen came on.  As the
haughty French gentlemen, who were to break the English archers and
utterly destroy them with their knightly lances, came riding up, they
were received with such a blinding storm of arrows, that they broke and
turned.  Horses and men rolled over one another, and the confusion was
terrific.  Those who rallied and charged the archers got among the stakes
on slippery and boggy ground, and were so bewildered that the English
archers--who wore no armour, and even took off their leathern coats to be
more active--cut them to pieces, root and branch.  Only three French
horsemen got within the stakes, and those were instantly despatched.  All
this time the dense French army, being in armour, were sinking knee-deep
into the mire; while the light English archers, half-naked, were as fresh
and active as if they were fighting on a marble floor.

But now, the second division of the French coming to the relief of the
first, closed up in a firm mass; the English, headed by the King,
attacked them; and the deadliest part of the battle began.  The King's
brother, the Duke of Clarence, was struck down, and numbers of the French
surrounded him; but, King Henry, standing over the body, fought like a
lion until they were beaten off.

Presently, came up a band of eighteen French knights, bearing the banner
of a certain French lord, who had sworn to kill or take the English King.
One of them struck him such a blow with a battle-axe that he reeled and
fell upon his knees; but, his faithful men, immediately closing round
him, killed every one of those eighteen knights, and so that French lord
never kept his oath.

The French Duke of Alencon, seeing this, made a desperate charge, and cut
his way close up to the Royal Standard of England.  He beat down the Duke
of York, who was standing near it; and, when the King came to his rescue,
struck off a piece of the crown he wore.  But, he never struck another
blow in this world; for, even as he was in the act of saying who he was,
and that he surrendered to the King; and even as the King stretched out
his hand to give him a safe and honourable acceptance of the offer; he
fell dead, pierced by innumerable wounds.

The death of this nobleman decided the battle.  The third division of the
French army, which had never struck a blow yet, and which was, in itself,
more than double the whole English power, broke and fled.  At this time
of the fight, the English, who as yet had made no prisoners, began to
take them in immense numbers, and were still occupied in doing so, or in
killing those who would not surrender, when a great noise arose in the
rear of the French--their flying banners were seen to stop--and King
Henry, supposing a great reinforcement to have arrived, gave orders that
all the prisoners should be put to death.  As soon, however, as it was
found that the noise was only occasioned by a body of plundering
peasants, the terrible massacre was stopped.

Then King Henry called to him the French herald, and asked him to whom
the victory belonged.

The herald replied, 'To the King of England.'

'_We_ have not made this havoc and slaughter,' said the King.  'It is the
wrath of Heaven on the sins of France.  What is the name of that castle
yonder?'

The herald answered him, 'My lord, it is the castle of Azincourt.'  Said
the King, 'From henceforth this battle shall be known to posterity, by
the name of the battle of Azincourt.'

Our English historians have made it Agincourt; but, under that name, it
will ever be famous in English annals.

The loss upon the French side was enormous.  Three Dukes were killed, two
more were taken prisoners, seven Counts were killed, three more were
taken prisoners, and ten thousand knights and gentlemen were slain upon
the field.  The English loss amounted to sixteen hundred men, among whom
were the Duke of York and the Earl of Suffolk.

War is a dreadful thing; and it is appalling to know how the English were
obliged, next morning, to kill those prisoners mortally wounded, who yet
writhed in agony upon the ground; how the dead upon the French side were
stripped by their own countrymen and countrywomen, and afterwards buried
in great pits; how the dead upon the English side were piled up in a
great barn, and how their bodies and the barn were all burned together.
It is in such things, and in many more much too horrible to relate, that
the real desolation and wickedness of war consist.  Nothing can make war
otherwise than horrible.  But the dark side of it was little thought of
and soon forgotten; and it cast no shade of trouble on the English
people, except on those who had lost friends or relations in the fight.
They welcomed their King home with shouts of rejoicing, and plunged into
the water to bear him ashore on their shoulders, and flocked out in
crowds to welcome him in every town through which he passed, and hung
rich carpets and tapestries out of the windows, and strewed the streets
with flowers, and made the fountains run with wine, as the great field of
Agincourt had run with blood.



SECOND PART


That proud and wicked French nobility who dragged their country to
destruction, and who were every day and every year regarded with deeper
hatred and detestation in the hearts of the French people, learnt
nothing, even from the defeat of Agincourt.  So far from uniting against
the common enemy, they became, among themselves, more violent, more
bloody, and more false--if that were possible--than they had been before.
The Count of Armagnac persuaded the French king to plunder of her
treasures Queen Isabella of Bavaria, and to make her a prisoner.  She,
who had hitherto been the bitter enemy of the Duke of Burgundy, proposed
to join him, in revenge.  He carried her off to Troyes, where she
proclaimed herself Regent of France, and made him her lieutenant.  The
Armagnac party were at that time possessed of Paris; but, one of the
gates of the city being secretly opened on a certain night to a party of
the duke's men, they got into Paris, threw into the prisons all the
Armagnacs upon whom they could lay their hands, and, a few nights
afterwards, with the aid of a furious mob of sixty thousand people, broke
the prisons open, and killed them all.  The former Dauphin was now dead,
and the King's third son bore the title.  Him, in the height of this
murderous scene, a French knight hurried out of bed, wrapped in a sheet,
and bore away to Poitiers.  So, when the revengeful Isabella and the Duke
of Burgundy entered Paris in triumph after the slaughter of their
enemies, the Dauphin was proclaimed at Poitiers as the real Regent.

King Henry had not been idle since his victory of Agincourt, but had
repulsed a brave attempt of the French to recover Harfleur; had gradually
conquered a great part of Normandy; and, at this crisis of affairs, took
the important town of Rouen, after a siege of half a year.  This great
loss so alarmed the French, that the Duke of Burgundy proposed that a
meeting to treat of peace should be held between the French and the
English kings in a plain by the river Seine.  On the appointed day, King
Henry appeared there, with his two brothers, Clarence and Gloucester, and
a thousand men.  The unfortunate French King, being more mad than usual
that day, could not come; but the Queen came, and with her the Princess
Catherine: who was a very lovely creature, and who made a real impression
on King Henry, now that he saw her for the first time.  This was the most
important circumstance that arose out of the meeting.

As if it were impossible for a French nobleman of that time to be true to
his word of honour in anything, Henry discovered that the Duke of
Burgundy was, at that very moment, in secret treaty with the Dauphin; and
he therefore abandoned the negotiation.

The Duke of Burgundy and the Dauphin, each of whom with the best reason
distrusted the other as a noble ruffian surrounded by a party of noble
ruffians, were rather at a loss how to proceed after this; but, at length
they agreed to meet, on a bridge over the river Yonne, where it was
arranged that there should be two strong gates put up, with an empty
space between them; and that the Duke of Burgundy should come into that
space by one gate, with ten men only; and that the Dauphin should come
into that space by the other gate, also with ten men, and no more.

So far the Dauphin kept his word, but no farther.  When the Duke of
Burgundy was on his knee before him in the act of speaking, one of the
Dauphin's noble ruffians cut the said duke down with a small axe, and
others speedily finished him.

It was in vain for the Dauphin to pretend that this base murder was not
done with his consent; it was too bad, even for France, and caused a
general horror.  The duke's heir hastened to make a treaty with King
Henry, and the French Queen engaged that her husband should consent to
it, whatever it was.  Henry made peace, on condition of receiving the
Princess Catherine in marriage, and being made Regent of France during
the rest of the King's lifetime, and succeeding to the French crown at
his death.  He was soon married to the beautiful Princess, and took her
proudly home to England, where she was crowned with great honour and
glory.

This peace was called the Perpetual Peace; we shall soon see how long it
lasted.  It gave great satisfaction to the French people, although they
were so poor and miserable, that, at the time of the celebration of the
Royal marriage, numbers of them were dying with starvation, on the
dunghills in the streets of Paris.  There was some resistance on the part
of the Dauphin in some few parts of France, but King Henry beat it all
down.

And now, with his great possessions in France secured, and his beautiful
wife to cheer him, and a son born to give him greater happiness, all
appeared bright before him.  But, in the fulness of his triumph and the
height of his power, Death came upon him, and his day was done.  When he
fell ill at Vincennes, and found that he could not recover, he was very
calm and quiet, and spoke serenely to those who wept around his bed.  His
wife and child, he said, he left to the loving care of his brother the
Duke of Bedford, and his other faithful nobles.  He gave them his advice
that England should establish a friendship with the new Duke of Burgundy,
and offer him the regency of France; that it should not set free the
royal princes who had been taken at Agincourt; and that, whatever quarrel
might arise with France, England should never make peace without holding
Normandy.  Then, he laid down his head, and asked the attendant priests
to chant the penitential psalms.  Amid which solemn sounds, on the thirty-
first of August, one thousand four hundred and twenty-two, in only the
thirty-fourth year of his age and the tenth of his reign, King Henry the
Fifth passed away.

Slowly and mournfully they carried his embalmed body in a procession of
great state to Paris, and thence to Rouen where his Queen was: from whom
the sad intelligence of his death was concealed until he had been dead
some days.  Thence, lying on a bed of crimson and gold, with a golden
crown upon the head, and a golden ball and sceptre lying in the nerveless
hands, they carried it to Calais, with such a great retinue as seemed to
dye the road black.  The King of Scotland acted as chief mourner, all the
Royal Household followed, the knights wore black armour and black plumes
of feathers, crowds of men bore torches, making the night as light as
day; and the widowed Princess followed last of all.  At Calais there was
a fleet of ships to bring the funeral host to Dover.  And so, by way of
London Bridge, where the service for the dead was chanted as it passed
along, they brought the body to Westminster Abbey, and there buried it
with great respect.




