thy will, brother, thou mayest go to Vineland in my ship."

At that Thorvald rejoiced greatly, and gathering thirty men he
set sail, crossed the sea without adventure, and came to the place
where Leif had built his house.

There he and his company remained during the winter.  Then in the
spring they set forth to explore the coast.  After some time they
came upon a fair country where there were many trees.

When Thorvald saw it he said, "It is so fair a country that I should
like to make my home here."

Until this time the Norsemen had seen no inhabitants of the land.
But now as they returned to their ship they saw three mounds upon
the shore.  When the Norsemen came near they saw that these three
mounds were three canoes, and under each were three men armed with
bows and arrows, who lay in wait to slay them.  When the Norsemen
saw that, they divided their company and put themselves in battle
array.  And after a fierce battle they slew the savages, save one
who fled to his canoe and so escaped.

When the fight was over the Norsemen climbed upon a, high headland
and looked round to see if there were signs of any more savages.
Below them they saw several mounds which they took to be the houses
of the savages, and knew that it behooved them therefore to be on
their guard.  But they were too weary to go further, and casting
themselves down upon the ground where they were they fell into a
heavy sleep.

Suddenly they were awakened by a great shout, and they seemed to
hear a voice cry aloud, "Awake, Thorvald, thou and all thy company,
if ye would save your lives.  Flee to thy ship with all thy men,
and sail with speed from this land."

So Thorvald and his companions fled speedily to their ship, and
set it in fighting array.  Soon a crowd of dark-skinned savages,
uttering fearful yells, rushed upon them.  They cast their arrows
at the Norsemen, and fought fiercely for some time.  But seeing that
their arrows availed little against the strangers, and that on the
other hand many of their braves were slain, they at last fled.

Then, the enemy being fled, Thorvald, turning to his men, asked,
"Are any of you wounded?"

"Nay," they answered, "we are all whole."

"That is well, " said Thorvald. "As for me, I am wounded in the
armpit by an arrow.  Here is the shaft.  Of a surety it will cause
my death.  And now I counsel you, turn homeward with all speed.  But
carry me first to that headland which seemed to me to promise so
pleasant a dwelling-place, and lay me there.  Thus it shall be seen
that I spoke truth when I wished to abide there.  And ye shall place
a cross at my feet, and another at my head, and call it Cross Ness
ever after."

So Thorvald died.  Then his companions buried him as he had bidden
them in the land which had seemed to him so fair.  And as he had
commanded they set a cross at his feet and another at his head, and
called the place Cross Ness.  Thus the first white man was laid to
rest in Vineland the Good.

Then when spring came the Norsemen sailed home to Greenland.  And
there they told Leif of all the things they had seen and done, and
how his brave brother had met his death.

Now when Leif's brother Thorstein heard how Thorvald had died he
longed to sail to Vineland to bring home his brother's body.  So once
again Leif's ship was made ready, and with five and twenty tall,
strong men Thorstein set forth, taking with him his wife Gudrid.

But Thorstein never saw Vineland the Good.  For storms beset his
ship, and after being driven hither and thither for many months,
he lost all reckoning, and at last came to land in Greenland once
more.  And there Thorstein died, and Gudrid went home to Leif.

Now there came to Greenland that summer a man of great wealth named
Thorfinn.  And when he saw Gudrid he loved her and sought her in
marriage, and Leif giving his consent to it, Thorfinn and Gudrid
were married.

At this time many people still talked of the voyages to Vineland,
and they urged Thorfinn to journey thither and seek to find out
more about these strange lands.  And more than all the others Gudrid
urged him to go.  So at length Thorfinn determined to undertake
the voyage.  But it came to his mind that he would not merely go to
Vineland and return home again.  He resolved rather to settle there
and make it his home.

Thorfinn therefore gathered about sixty men, and those who had
wives took also their wives with them, together with their cattle
and their household goods.

Then Thorfinn asked Leif to give him the house which he had built
in Vineland.  And Leif replied, "I will lend the house to you, but
I will not give it."

So Thorfinn and Gudrid and all their company sailed out to sea,
and without adventures arrived safely at Leif's house in Vineland.

There they lived all that winter in great comfort.  There was no lack
of food either for man or beast, and the cattle they had brought
with them roamed at will, and fed upon the wide prairie lands.

All winter and spring the Norsemen dwelt in Vineland, and they saw
no human beings save themselves.  Then one day in early summer they
saw a great troop of natives come out of the wood.  They were dark
and little, and it seemed to the Norsemen very ugly, with great
eyes and broad cheeks.  The cattle were near, and as the savages
appeared the bull began to bellow.  And when the savages heard that
sound they were afraid and fled.  For three whole weeks nothing more
was seen of them, after that time however they took courage again
and returned.  As they approached they made signs to show that they
came in peace, and with them they brought huge bales of furs which
they wished to barter.

The Norsemen, it is true, could not understand the language of
the natives, nor could the natives understand the Norsemen; but by
signs they made known that they wished to barter their furs for
weapons.  This, however, Thorfinn forbade.  Instead he gave them
strips of red cloth which they took very eagerly and bound about
their heads.  Thorfinn also commanded his men to take milk to the
savages.  And when they saw it they were eager to buy and drink it.
So that it was said many of them carried away their merchandise in
their stomachs.

Thus the days and months passed.  Then one summer day a little son
was born to Thorfinn and Gudrid.  They called him Snorri, and he
was the first white child to be born on the Continent which later
men called the New World.  Thus three years went past.  But the days
were not all peaceful.  For quarrels arose between the newcomers
and the natives, and the savages attacked the Norsemen and killed
many of them.

Then Thorfinn said he would no longer stay in Vineland, but would
return to Greenland.  So he and all his company made ready their
ship, and sailed out upon the seas, and came at length safely to
Greenland.

Then after a time Thorfinn sailed to Iceland.  There he made his home
for the rest of his life, the people holding him in high honour.
Snorri also, his son who had been born in Vineland, grew to be a
man of great renown.

Such are some of the old Norse stories of the first finding of
America.  The country which Leif called Helluland was most likely
Labrador, Markland Newfoundland, and Vineland Nova Scotia.

Besides these there were many other tales of voyages to Vineland.
For after Leif and his brothers many other Vikings of the North
sailed, both from Greenland and from Norway, to the fair western
lands.  Yet although they sailed there so often these old Norsemen
had no idea that they had discovered a vast continent.  They thought
that Vineland was merely an island, and the discovery of it made
no stir in Europe.  By degrees too the voyages thither ceased.  In
days of wild warfare at home the Norsemen forgot the fair western
land which Leif had discovered.  They heard of it only in minstrel
tales, and it came to be for them a sort of fairy-land which had
no existence save in a poet's dream.

But now wise men have read these tales with care, and many have
come to believe that they are not mere fairy stories.  They have
come to believe that hundreds of years before Columbus lived the
Vikings of the North sailed the western seas and found the land
which lay beyond, the land which we now call America.

__________





Chapter 2 - The Sea of Darkness and the Great Faith of Columbus




In those far-off times besides the Vikings of the North other
daring sailors sailed the seas.  But all their sailings took them
eastward.  For it was from the east that all the trade and the riches
came in those days.  To India and to far Cathay sailed the merchant
through the Red Sea and the Indian Ocean, to return with a rich
and fragrant cargo of silks and spices, pearls and priceless gems.

None thought of sailing westward.  For to men of those days the
Atlantic Ocean was known as the Outer Sea or the Sea of Darkness.
There was nothing to be gained by venturing upon it, much to be
dreaded.  It was said that huge and horrible sea-dragons lived there,
ready to wreck and swallow down any vessel that might venture near.
An enormous bird also hovered in the skies waiting to pounce upon
vessels and bear them away to some unknown eyrie.  Even if any
foolhardy adventurers should defy these dangers, and escape the
horror of the dragons and the bird, other perils threatened them.
For far in the west there lay a bottomless pit of seething fire.
That was easy of proof.  Did not the face of the setting sun glow
with the reflected light as it sank in the west? There would be no
hope nor rescue for any ship that should be drawn into that awful
pit.

Again it was believed that the ocean flowed downhill, and that if a
ship sailed down too far it would never be able to get back again.
These and many other dangers, said the ignorant people of those
days, threatened the rash sailors who should attempt to sail upon
the Sea of Darkness.  So it was not wonderful that for hundreds of
years men contented themselves with the well-known routes which
indeed offered adventure enough to satisfy the heart of the most
daring.

But as time passed these old trade-routes fell more and more into
the hands of Turks and Infidels.  Port after port came under their
rule, and infidel pirates swarmed in the Indian Ocean and Mediterranean
until no Christian vessel was safe.  At every step Christian traders
found themselves hampered and hindered, and in danger of their
lives, and they began to long for another way to the lands of spice
and pearls.

Then it was that men turned their thoughts to the dread Sea of
Darkness.  The less ignorant among them had begun to disbelieve the
tales of dragons and fiery pits.  The world was round, said wise
men.  Why then, if that were so, India could be reached by sailing
west as well as by sailing east.

Many men now came to this conclusion, among them an Italian sailor
named Christopher Columbus.  The more Columbus thought about his
plan of sailing west to reach India, the more he believed in it,
and the more he longed to set out.  But without a great deal of money
such an expedition was impossible, and Columbus was poor.  His only
hope was to win the help and friendship of a king or some other
great and wealthy person.

The Portuguese were in those days a sea-faring people, and their
ships were to be found wherever ships dared go.  Indeed Prince Henry
of Portugal did so much to encourage voyages of discovery that he
was called Henry the Navigator.  And although he was by this time
dead, the people still took great interest in voyages of discovery.
So at length Columbus determined to go to King John of Portugal to
tell him of his plans, and ask for his aid.

King John listened kindly enough, it seemed, to what Columbus had
to say.  But before giving him any answer he said that he must
consult his wise men.  These wise men looked upon the whole idea
of sailing to the west to reach the east as absurd.  So King John
refused to give Columbus any help.

Yet although most of King John's wise men thought little of the
plan, King John himself thought that there was something in it.
But instead of helping Columbus he meanly resolved to send out
an expedition of his own.  This he did, and when Columbus heard of
it he was so angry that he left Portugal, which for more than ten
years he had made his home.  He was poor and in debt, so he left
the country secretly, in fear of the King, and of those to whom he
owed money.

When Columbus thus fled from Portugal, penniless and in debt, he
was a man over forty.  He was a bitterly disappointed man, too, but
he still clung to his great idea.  So he sent his brother Bartholomew
to England to beg King Henry VII to help him, while he himself
turned towards Spain.  Bartholomew, however, reached England in an
evil hour for his quest.  For Henry VII had but newly wrested the
crown from Richard III, and so had no thought to spare for unknown
lands.  Christopher also arrived in Spain at an unfortunate time.
For the Spaniards were carrying on a fierce warfare against the
Moors, and King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella had little thought
or money to spare for any other undertaking.  Therefore, although
Ferdinand listened to what Columbus had to say, for the time being
he could promise no help.

So years passed.  Columbus remained in Spain.  For in spite of all
his rebuffs and disappointments he did not despair.  As the court
moved from place to place he followed it, hoping always that the
day would come when the King and Queen would listen to him, and
believe in his great enterprise.

Meanwhile he lived in want and misery, and just kept himself from
starvation by making and selling maps.  To the common people he
seemed a madman, and as he passed through the streets in his worn
and threadbare garments children jeered and pointed fingers of
scorn at him.

Yet in spite of mockery and derision Columbus clung to his faith.
Indeed it burned in him so strongly that at length he made others
share it too, and men who were powerful at court became his friends.

At last the war with the Moors ended victoriously for Spain.  Then
these friends persuaded Queen Isabella to listen again to what
Columbus had to say.  To this the Queen consented, and when she
heard how poor Columbus was she sent him some money, so that he
might buy clothes fit to appear at court.

When Columbus heard the good news he was overjoyed.  As quickly as
might be he bought new clothes, and mounting upon a mule he rode
towards Granada.  But when Columbus arrived he found the court
still in the midst of rejoicings to celebrate victory.  Among
the light-hearted, gaily dressed throng there was no one who had
a thought to spare for the melancholy, white-haired dreamer who
passed like a dark shadow amidst them.  With his fate, as it were,
trembling in the balance, Columbus had no heart for rejoicing.  So
he looked on "with indifference, almost with contempt."

But at length his day came.  At length all the jubilation was over,
and Ferdinand and Isabella turned their thoughts to Columbus.  He
came before them and talked so earnestly of his great project that
they could not but believe in it.  The day was won.  Both King and
Queen, but more especially the Queen, were willing to help the
great enterprise.  Now however Columbus himself all but wrecked
his chances.  He had dreamed so long about this splendid adventure,
he was so filled with belief in its grandeur, that he demanded
conditions such as would hardly have been granted to the greatest
prince in the land.

Columbus demanded that he should be made admiral and viceroy of all
the lands he might discover, and that after his death this honour
should descend to his son and to his son's son for ever and ever.
He also demanded a tenth part of all the pearls, precious stones,
gold, silver and spices, or whatever else he might gain by trade
or barter.

At these demands the grandees of Spain stood aghast.  What! This
shabby dreamer, this penniless beggar aspired to honour and dignities
fit for a prince! It was absurd, and not to be thought of.  If this
beggarly sailor would have Spain assist him he must needs be more
humble in suit.

But not one jot would Columbus abate of his demands.  So the Council
broke up, and Columbus, with anger and disappointment in his heart,
mounted his mule and turned his face towards the Court of France.
All the seven long years during which he had waited, and hoped,
and prayed, in Spain had been wasted.  Now he would go to the King
of France, and make his last appeal there.

But Columbus had left friends behind him, friends who had begun
to picture to themselves almost as vividly as he the splendours of
the conquest he was to make.  Now these friends sought out the Queen.
In glowing words they painted to her the glory and the honour which
would come to Spain if Columbus succeeded.  And if he failed, why,
what were a few thousand crowns, they asked.  And as the Queen
listened her heart beat fast; the magnificence of the enterprise
took hold upon her, and she resolved that, come what might, Columbus
should go forth on his adventure.

Ferdinand, however, still looked coldly on.  The war against the
Moors had been long and bitter, his treasury was empty.  Whence, he
asked himself, was money forthcoming for this mad scheme? Isabella,
however, had done with prudence and caution. "If there is not money
enough in Aragon," she cried, "I will undertake this adventure for
my own kingdom of Castile, and if need be I will pawn my jewels to
do it."

While these things were happening Columbus, sick at heart, was
slowly plodding on the road to France.  But he only went a little
way on his long journey.  For just as he was entering a narrow pass
not far from Granada, where the mountains towered above him, he
heard the thud of horses' hoofs.

It was a lonely and silent spot among the hills, where robbers
lurked, and where many a man had been slain for the money and jewels
he carried.  Columbus, however, had nothing to dread: he carried
with him neither gold nor jewels.  He went forth from Spain a beggar,
even as he had come.  But if fear he had any, it was soon turned to
incredulous joy.  For when the horsemen came up they told Columbus
that his friends had won the day for him, and that he must return.

At first Columbus hesitated.  He found it hard to believe that truly
at last he had his heart's desire.  When, however, the messenger
told him that the Queen herself bade him return, he hesitated no
longer.  Joyfully turning his mule he hastened back to Granada.

At last Columbus had won his heart's desire, and he had only to gather
ships and men and set forth westward.  But now a new difficulty
arose.  For it was out upon the terrible Sea of Darkness that Columbus
wished to sail, and men feared to face its terrors.

Week after week went past and not a ship or a man could Columbus
get.  He persuaded and implored in vain: no man was brave enough to
follow him to the unknown horrors of the Sea of Darkness.  Therefore
as entreaty and persuasion proved of no avail, Columbus sought help
from the King, who gave him power to force men to go with him.

Even then all sorts of difficulties were thrown in the way.
Columbus, however, overcame them all, and at length his three ships
were ready.  But it had taken many months.  It was February when he
turned back so gladly to Granada; it was the third of August before
everything was in order.

Before dawn upon the day he sailed Columbus entered the church, in
the little sea-faring town of Palos where his ships lay at anchor.
There he humbly confessed his sins, received the Sacrament, and
committed himself to God's all-powerful guidance.  The crew, wild,
rough fellows, many of them, followed his example.  Then Columbus
stepped on board his ship, the Santa Maria, and turned his face
westward.

He was filled with exaltation.  But all Palos was filled with gloom,
and upon the shore a great crowd gathered to bid a last farewell
to these daring adventurers.  And as the ships spread their sails
and sped forth in the morning light the people wept and lamented
sorely, for they never thought again to see their loved ones, who
were about to adventure forth upon the terrible Sea of Darkness.

__________





Chapter 3 - How Columbus Fared Forth Upon The Sea of Darkness and
Came to Pleasant Lands Beyond




At first the voyage upon which Columbus and his daring companions
now set forth lay through seas already known; but soon the last
land-mark was left behind, and the three little vessels, smaller
than river craft of today, were alone upon the trackless waste of
waters.  And when the men saw the last trace of land vanish their
hearts sank, and they shed bitter tears, weeping for home and the
loved ones they thought never more to see.

On and on they sailed, and as day after day no land appeared the
men grew restless.  Seeing them thus restless, and lest they should
be utterly terrified at being so far from home upon this seemingly
endless waste of waters, Columbus determined to keep them from
knowing how far they had really gone.  So he kept two reckonings.
One, in which the real length of the ships' daily journey was given
he kept to himself: the other, in which the journey was given as
much shorter, he showed to the sailors.

A month went past, six weeks went past, and still there was no
trace of land.  Then at length came signs.  Snow birds which never
ventured far to sea flew round the ships.  Now the waves bore to
them a rudely carved stick, now the ships ploughed a way through
masses of floating weeds.  All these signs were at first greeted
with joy and hope, and the sailors took heart.  But as still the
days went past and no land appeared, they lost heart again.

The fields of weeds which they had at first greeted with joy now
became an added terror.  Would they not be caught in this tangle
of weeds, they asked, and never more win a way out of it? To their
fearful and superstitious minds the very breeze which had borne
them softly onward became a menace.  For if the wind always blew
steadily from the east how was it possible ever to return to Spain? So
Columbus was almost glad when a contrary wind blew.  For it proved
to his trembling sailors that one at least of their fears was
groundless.  But it made little difference.  The men were now utterly
given over to gloomy terrors.

Fear robbed them of all ambition.  Ferdinand and Isabella had
promised a large sum of money to the man who should first discover
land.  But none cared now to win it.  All they desired was to turn
home once more.

Fear made them mutinous also.  So they whispered together and planned
in secret to rid themselves of Columbus.  It would be easy, they
thought, to throw him overboard some dark night, and then give out
that he had fallen into the sea by accident.  No one would know.  No
one in Spain would care, for Columbus was after all but a foreigner
and an upstart.  The great ocean would keep the secret.  They would
be free to turn homeward.

Columbus saw their dark looks, heard the murmurs of the crews, and
did his best to hearten them again.  He spoke to them cheerfully,
persuading and encouraging, "laughing at them, while in his heart
he wept."

Still the men went sullenly about their work.  But at length one
morning a sudden cry from the Pinta shook them from out their sullen
thoughts.

It was the captain of the Pinta who shouted. "Land, land, my lord!"
he cried. "I claim the reward."

And when Columbus heard that shout his heart was filled with joy
and thankfulness, and baring his head he sank upon his knees, giving
praise to God.  The crew followed his example.  Then, their hearts
suddenly light and joyous, they swarmed up the masts and into the
rigging to feast their eyes upon the goodly sight.

All day they sailed onward toward the promised land.  The sun sank
and still all night the ships sped on their joyous way.  But when
morning dawned the land seemed no nearer than before.  Hope died
away again, and sorrowfully as the day went on the woeful truth
that the fancied land had been but a bank of clouds was forced upon
Columbus.

Again for days the ships sailed on, and as still no land appeared
the men again began to murmur.  Then one day when Columbus walked
on deck he was met, not merely with sullen looks, but with angry
words.  The men clamoured to return.  And if the Admiral refused,
why, so much the worse for him.  They would endure no longer.

Bravely the Admiral faced the mutineers.  He talked to them cheerfully.
He reminded them of what honour and gain would be theirs when they
returned home having found the new way to India, of what wealth
they might win by trading.  Then he ended sternly:

"Complain how you may," he said, "I have to go to the Indies, and
I will go on till I find them, so help me God."

For the time being the Admiral's stern, brave words cowed
the mutineers.  But not for much longer, Columbus knew right well,
would they obey him if land did not soon appear.  And in his heart
he prayed God that it might not be long delayed.

The next night Columbus stood alone upon the poop of the Santa
Maria.  Full of anxious thoughts he gazed out into the darkness.
Then suddenly it seemed to him that far in the distance he saw a
glimmering light appear and disappear once and again.  It was as if
some one walking carried a light.  But so fearful was Columbus lest
his fervent hopes had caused him to imagine this light that he would
not trust his own eyes alone.  So he called to one of his officers
and asked him if he saw any light.

"Yes," replied the officer, "I see a light."

Then Columbus called a second man.  He could not at first see the
light, and in any case neither of them thought much of it.  Columbus,
however, made sure that land was close, and calling the men about
him he bade them keep a sharp look-out, promising a silken doublet
to the man who should first see land.

So till two o'clock in the morning the ships held on their way.  Then
from the Pinta there came again a joyful shout of "Land!  Land!"

This time it proved no vision, it was land indeed; and at last the
long-looked-for goal was reached.  The land proved to be an island
covered with beautiful trees, and as they neared the shore the men
saw naked savages crowding to the beach.

In awed wonder these savages watched the huge white birds, as the
ships with their great sails seemed to them.  Nearer and nearer
they came, and when they reached the shore and folded their wings
the natives fled in terror to the shelter of the forest.  But
seeing that they were not pursued, their curiosity got the better
of their fear, and returning again they stood in silent astonishment
to watch the Spaniards land.

First of all came Columbus; over his glittering steel armour he
wore a rich cloak of scarlet, and in his hand he bore the Royal
Standard of Spain.  Then, each at the head of his own ship's crew,
came the captains of the Pinta and the Nina, each carrying in his
hand a white banner with a green cross and the crowned initials
of the King and Queen, which was the special banner devised for
the great adventure.  Every man was dressed in his best, and the
gay-coloured clothes, the shining armour, and fluttering banners
made a gorgeous pageant.  Upon it the sun shone in splendour and the
blue sky was reflected in a bluer sea: while scarlet flamingoes,
startled at the approach of the white men, rose in brilliant flight.

As Columbus landed he fell upon his knees and kissed the ground,
and with tears of joy running down his cheeks he gave thanks to
God, the whole company following his example.  Then rising again to
his feet, Columbus drew his sword, and solemnly took possession of
the island in the name of Ferdinand and Isabella.

When the ceremony was over the crew burst forth into shouts of
triumph and joy.  They crowded round Columbus, kneeling before him
to kiss his hands and feet praying forgiveness for their insolence
and mutiny, and promising in the future to obey him without question.
For Columbus it was a moment of pure joy and triumph.  All his long
years of struggle and waiting had come to a glorious end.

Yet he knew already that his search was not finished, his triumph
not yet complete.  He had not reached the eastern shores of India,
the land of spice and pearls.  He had not even reached Cipango, the
rich and golden isle.  But he had at least, he thought, found some
outlying island off the coast of India, and that India itself could
not be far away.  He never discovered his mistake, so the group of
islands nowhere near India, but lying between the two great Continents
of America, are known as the West Indies.

Columbus called the island upon which he first landed San Salvador,
and for a long time it was thought to be the island which is still
called San Salvador or Cat Island.  But lately people have come to
believe that Columbus first landed upon an island a little further
south, now called, Watling Island.

From San Salvador Columbus sailed about and landed upon several
other islands, naming them and taking possession of them for Spain.
He saw many strange and beautiful fruits: "trees of a thousand
sorts, straight and tall enough to make masts for the largest ships
of Spain." He saw flocks of gaily coloured parrots and many other
birds that sang most sweetly.  He saw fair harbours so safe and
spacious that he thought they might hold all the ships of the world.

But of such things Columbus was not in search.  He was seeking for
gold and jewels, and at every place he touched he hoped to find
some great eastern potentate, robed in splendour and seated upon
a golden throne; instead everywhere he found only naked savages.
They were friendly and gentle, and what gold they had - but it was
little indeed - they willingly bartered for a few glass beads, or
little tinkling bells.

By signs, however, some of these savages made Columbus understand
that further south there was a great king who was so wealthy that
he ate off dishes of wrought gold.  Others told him of a land where
the people gathered gold on the beach at night time by the light of
torches; others again told him of a land where gold was so common
that the people wore it on their arms and legs, and in their ears
and noses as ornaments.  Others still told of islands where there
was more gold than earth.  But Columbus sought these lands in vain.

In his cruisings Columbus found Cuba, and thought at first it must
be the island of Cipango, but finding himself mistaken he decided
at length that he had landed upon the most easterly point of India.
He could not be far, he thought, from the palace of the Grand Khan,
and choosing out two of his company he sent them as ambassadors
to him.  But after six days the ambassadors returned, having found
no gold; and instead of the Grand Khan having seen only a savage
chieftain.

These ambassadors found no gold, but, had they only known it, they
found something quite as valuable.  For they told how they had met
men and women with firebrands in their hands made of herbs, the end
of which they put in their mouths and sucked, blowing forth smoke.
And these fire-brands they called tabacos.

The Spaniards also discovered that the natives of these islands used
for food a root which they dug out of the earth.  But they thought
nothing of these things.  For what were roots and dried herbs to
those who came in search of gold, and gems, and precious spices?
So they brought home neither potatoes nor tobacco.

So far the three little vessels had kept together, but now the
captain of the Pinta parted company with the others, not because
of bad weather, says Columbus in his diary, but because he chose,
and out of greed, for he thought "that the Indians would show him
where there was much gold." This desertion grieved Columbus greatly,
for he feared that Pinzon might find gold, and sailing home before
him cheat him of all the honour and glory of the quest.  But still
the Admiral did not give up, but steered his course "in the name
of God and in search of gold and spices, and to discover land."

So from island to island he went seeking gold, and finding everywhere
gentle, kindly savages, fair birds and flowers, and stately trees.

__________





Chapter 4 - How Columbus Returned Home in Triumph




Christmas Eve came, and the Admiral, being very weary, went below
to sleep, leaving a sailor to steer the ship.  But this sailor thought
he too would like to sleep, so he gave the tiller in charge of a
boy.

Now throughout the whole voyage the Admiral had forbidden this.
Whether it was stormy or calm he had commanded that the helm was
never to be entrusted to a boy.  This boy knew very little of how
to steer a ship, and being caught in a current it was cast upon a
sand-bank and wrecked.  By good luck every one was saved and landed
upon the island of Haiti.  But Columbus had now only one little
vessel, and it was not large enough to carry all the company.  Many
of them, however, were so delighted with the islands that they
wanted to stay there, and they had often asked the Admiral's leave
to do so.

Columbus therefore now determined to allow some of his men to
remain to found a little colony, and trade with the Indians, "and
he trusted in God that when he came back from Spain - as he intended
to do - he would find a ton of gold collected by them, and that
they would have found a gold mine, and such quantities of spices
that the Sovereigns would in the space of three years be able to
undertake a Crusade and conquer the Holy Sepulchre."

So out of the wreck of the Santa Maria Columbus built a fort, and
from the many who begged to be left behind he chose forty-four,
appointing one of them, Diego de Arana, as Governor.  He called the
fort La Navida or The Nativity in memory of the day upon which it
was founded.  The island itself he called Española or Little Spain.

Then on Friday the 4th of January, 1493, the Nina spread her sails
and slowly glided away, leaving in that far island amid the unknown
seas the first colony of white men ever settled in the west.

Two days after Columbus set forth upon his homeward voyage, he
fell in again with the Pinta.  The master had found no gold, so he
determined to join Columbus once more.  He now came on board and
tried to make his peace with Columbus, but the Admiral received him
coldly, for he had little faith in his excuses.  And now once more
