
"Then I have lived as my fathers in life, and shall live with their glory
in death!" said Gryffyth; "and so the shadow hath passed from my soul."
Then turning round, still propped upon his elbow, he fixed his proud eye
upon Aldyth, and said gravely, "Wife, pale is thy face, and gloomy thy
brow; mournest thou the throne or the man?"

Aldyth cast on her wild lord a look of more terror than compassion, a
look without the grief that is gentle, or the love that reveres; and
answered:

"What matter to thee my thoughts or my sufferings?  The sword or the
famine is the doom thou hast chosen.  Listening to vain dreams from thy
bard, or thine own pride as idle, thou disdainest life for us both: be it
so; let us die!"

A strange blending of fondness and wrath troubled the pride on Gryffyth's
features, uncouth and half savage as they were, but still noble and
kingly.

"And what terror has death, if thou lovest me?" said he.

Aldyth shivered and turned aside.  The unhappy King gazed hard on that
face, which, despite sore trial and recent exposure to rough wind and
weather, still retained the proverbial beauty of the Saxon women--but
beauty without the glow of the heart, as a landscape from which sunlight
has vanished; and as he gazed, at the colour went and came fitfully over
his swarthy cheeks whose hue contrasted the blue of his eye and the red
tawny gold of his shaggy hair.

"Thou wouldst have me," he said at length, "send to Harold thy
countryman; thou wouldst have me, me--rightful lord of all Britain--beg
for mercy, and sue for life.  Ah, traitress, and child of robber-sires,
fair as Rowena art thou, but no Vortimer am I!  Thou turnest in loathing
from the lord whose marriage-gift was a crown; and the sleek form of thy
Saxon Harold rises up through the clouds of the carnage."

All the fierce and dangerous jealousy of man's most human passion--when
man loves and hates in a breath--trembled in the Cymrian's voice, and
fired his troubled eye; for Aldyth's pale cheek blushed like the rose,
but she folded her arms haughtily on her breast, and made no reply.

"No," said Gryffyth, grinding teeth, white [169] and strong as those of a
young hound.  "No, Harold in vain sent me the casket; the jewel was gone.
In vain thy form returned to my side; thy heart was away with thy captor:
and not to save my life (were I so base as to seek it), but to see once
more the face of him to whom this cold hand, in whose veins no pulse
answers my own, had been given, if thy House had consulted its daughter,
wouldst thou have me crouch like a lashed dog at the feet of my foe!  Oh
Shame! shame! shame!  Oh worst perfidy of all!  Oh sharp--sharper than
Saxon sword or serpent's tooth, is--is--"

Tears gushed to those fierce eyes, and the proud King dared not trust to
his voice.

Aldyth rose coldly.  "Slay me if thou wilt--not insult me.  I have said,
'Let us die!'"

With these words, and vouchsafing no look on her lord, she moved away
towards the largest tower or cell, in which the single and rude chamber
it contained had been set apart for her.

Gryffyth's eye followed her, softening gradually as her form receded,
till lost to his sight.  And then that peculiar household love, which in
uncultivated breasts often survives trust and esteem, rushed back on his
rough heart, and weakened it, as woman only can weaken the strong to whom
Death is a thought of scorn.

He signed to his bard, who, during the conference between wife and lord,
had retired to a distance, and said, with a writhing attempt to smile:

"Was there truth, thinkest thou, in the legend, that Guenever was false
to King Arthur?"

"No," answered the bard, divining his lord's thought, "for Guenever
survived not the King, and they were buried side by side in the Vale of
Avallon."

"Thou art wise in the lore of the heart, and love hath been thy study
from youth to grey hairs.  Is it love, is it hate, that prefers death for
the loved one, to the thought of her life as another's?"  A look of the
tenderest compassion passed over the bard's wan face, but vanished in
reverence, as he bowed his head and answered:

"O King, who shall say what note the wind calls from the harp, what
impulse love wakes in the soul--now soft and now stern?  But," he added,
raising his form, and, with a dread calm on his brow, "but the love of a
king brooks no thought of dishonour; and she who hath laid her head on
his breast should sleep in his grave."

"Thou wilt outlive me," said Gryffyth, abruptly.  "This carn be my tomb!"

"And if so," said the bard, "thou shalt sleep not alone.  In this carn
what thou lovest best shall be buried by thy side; the bard shall raise
his song over thy grave, and the bosses of shields shall be placed at
intervals, as rises and falls the sound of song.  Over the grave of two
shall a new mound arise, and we will bid the mound speak to others in the
fair days to come.  But distant yet be the hour when the mighty shall be
laid low! and the tongue of thy bard may yet chant the rush of the lion
from the toils and the spears.  Hope still!"

Gryffyth, for answer, leant on the harper's shoulder, and pointed
silently to the sea, that lay, lake-like at the distance, dark-studded
with the Saxon fleet.  Then turning, his hands stretched over the forms
that, hollow-eyed and ghost-like, flitted between the walls, or lay
dying, but mute, around the waterspring.  His hand then dropped, and
rested on the hilt of his sword.

At this moment there was a sudden commotion at the outer entrance of the
wall; the crowd gathered to one spot, and there was a loud hum of voices.
In a few moments one of the Welch scouts came into the enclosure, and the
chiefs of the royal tribes followed him to the carn on which the King
stood.

"Of what tellest thou?" said Gryffyth, resuming on the instant all the
royalty of his bearing.

"At the mouth of the pass," said the scout, kneeling, "there are a monk
bearing the holy rood, and a chief, unarmed.  And the monk is Evan, the
Cymrian, of Gwentland; and the chief, by his voice, seemeth not to be
Saxon.  The monk bade me give thee these tokens" (and the scout displayed
the broken torque which the King had left in the grasp of Harold,
together with a live falcon belled and blinded), "and bade me say thus to
the King: Harold the Earl greets Gryffyth, son of Llewellyn, and sends
him, in proof of good will, the richest prize he hath ever won from a
foe; and a hawk, from Llandudno;--that bird which chief and equal give to
equal and chief.  And he prays Gryffyth, son of Llewellyn, for the sake
of his realm and his people, to grant hearing to his nuncius."

A murmur broke from the chiefs--a murmur of joy and surprise from all,
save the three conspirators, who interchanged anxious and fiery glances.
Gryffyth's hand had already closed, while he uttered a cry that seemed of
rapture, on the collar of gold; for the loss of that collar had stung
him, perhaps more than the loss of the crown of all Wales.  And his
heart, so generous and large, amidst all its rude passions, was touched
by the speech and the tokens that honoured the fallen outlaw both as foe
and as king.  Yet in his face there was still seen a moody and proud
struggle; he paused before he turned to the chiefs.

"What counsel ye--ye strong in battle, and wise in debate?" said he.

With one voice all, save the Fatal Three, exclaimed: "Hear the monk, O
King!"

"Shall we dissuade?" whispered Modred to the old chief, his accomplice.

"No; for so doing, we shall offend all:--and we must win all."

Then the bard stepped into the ring.  And the ring was hushed, for wise
is ever the counsel of him whose book is the human heart.

"Hear the Saxons," said he, briefly, and with an air of command when
addressing others, which contrasted strongly his tender respect to the
King; "hear the Saxons, but not in these walls.  Let no man from the foe
see our strength or our weakness.  We are still mighty and impregnable,
while our dwelling is in the realm of the Unknown.  Let the King, and his
officers of state, and his chieftains of battle, descend to the pass.
And behind, at the distance, let the spearmen range from cliff to cliff,
as a ladder of steel; so will their numbers seem the greater."

"Thou speakest well," said the King.

Meanwhile the knight and the monk waited below at that terrible pass
[170], which then lay between mountain and river, and over which the
precipices frowned, with a sense of horror and weight.  Looking up, the
knight murmured:

"With those stones and crags to roll down on a marching army, the place
well defies storm and assault; and a hundred on the height would
overmatch thousands below."

He then turned to address a few words, with all the far-famed courtesy of
Norman and Frank, to the Welch guards at the outpost.  They were picked
men; the strongest and best armed and best fed of the group. But they
shook their heads and answered not, gazing at him fiercely, and showing
their white teeth, as dogs at a bear before they are loosened from the
band.

"They understand me not, poor languageless savages!" said Mallet de
Graville, turning to the monk, who stood by with the lifted rood; "speak
to them in their own jargon."

"Nay," said the Welch monk, who, though of a rival tribe from South
Wales, and at the service of Harold, was esteemed throughout the land for
piety and learning, "they will not open mouth till the King's orders come
to receive or dismiss us unheard."

"Dismiss us unheard!" repeated the punctilious Norman; "even this poor
barbarous King can scarcely be so strange to all comely and gentle usage,
as to put such insult on Guillaume Mallet de Graville.  But," added the
knight, colouring, "I forgot that he is not advised of my name and land;
and, indeed, sith thou art to be spokesman, I marvel why Harold should
have prayed my service at all, at the risk of subjecting a Norman knight
to affronts contumelious."

"Peradventure," replied Evan, "peradventure thou hast something to
whisper apart to the King, which, as stranger and warrior, none will
venture to question; but which from me, as countryman and priest, would
excite the jealous suspicions of those around him."

"I conceive thee," said De Graville.  "And see, spears are gleaming down
the path; and per pedes Domini, yon chief with the mantle, and circlet of
gold on his head, is the cat-king that so spitted and scratched in the
melee last night."

"Heed well thy tongue," said Evan, alarmed; "no jests with the leader of
men."

"Knowest thou, good monk, that a facete and most gentil Roman (if the
saintly writer from whom I take the citation reports aright--for, alas! I
know not where myself to purchase, or to steal, one copy of Horatius
Flaccus) hath said 'Dulce est desipere in loco.'  It is sweet to jest,
but not within reach of claws, whether of kaisars or cats."

Therewith the knight drew up his spare but stately figure, and arranging
his robe with grace and dignity, awaited the coming chief.

Down the paths, one by one, came first the chiefs, privileged by birth to
attend the King; and each, as he reached the mouth of the pass, drew on
the upper side, among the stones of the rough ground.  Then a banner,
tattered and torn, with the lion ensign that the Welch princes had
substituted for the old national dragon, which the Saxon of Wessex had
appropriated to themselves [171], preceded the steps of the King. Behind
him came his falconer and bard, and the rest of his scanty household.
The King halted in the pass, a few steps from the Norman knight; and
Mallet de Graville, though accustomed to the majestic mien of Duke
William, and the practised state of the princes of France and Flanders,
felt an involuntary thrill of admiration at the bearing of the great
child of Nature with his foot on his father's soil.

Small and slight as was his stature, worn and ragged his mantle of state,
there was that in the erect mien and steady eye of the Cymrian hero,
which showed one conscious of authority, and potent in will; and the wave
of his hand to the knight was the gesture of a prince on his throne.
Nor, indeed, was that brave and ill-fated chief without some irregular
gleams of mental cultivation, which under happier auspices, might have
centred into steadfast light.  Though the learning which had once existed
in Wales (the last legacy of Rome) had long since expired in broil and
blood, and youths no longer flocked to the colleges of Caerleon, and
priests no longer adorned the casuistical theology of the age, Gryffyth
himself, the son of a wise and famous father [172], had received an
education beyond the average of Saxon kings.  But, intensely national,
his mind had turned from all other literature, to the legends, and songs,
and chronicles of his land; and if he is the best scholar who best
understands his own tongue and its treasures, Gryffyth was the most
erudite prince of his age.

His natural talents, for war especially, were considerable; and judged
fairly--not as mated with an empty treasury, without other army than the
capricious will of his subjects afforded, and amidst his bitterest foes
in the jealous chiefs of his own country, against the disciplined force
and comparative civilisation of the Saxon--but as compared with all the
other princes of Wales, in warfare, to which he was habituated, and in
which chances were even, the fallen son of Llewellyn had been the most
renowned leader that Cymry had known since the death of the great
Roderic.

So there he stood; his attendants ghastly with famine, drawn up on the
unequal ground; above, on the heights, and rising from the stone crags,
long lines of spears artfully placed; and, watching him with deathful
eyes, somewhat in his rear, the Traitor Three.

"Speak, father, or chief," said the Welch King in his native tongue;
"what would Harold the Earl of Gryffyth the King?"

Then the monk took up the word and spoke.

"Health to Gryffyth-ap-Llewellyn, his chiefs and his people!  Thus saith
Harold, King Edward's thegn:  By land all the passes are watched; by sea
all the waves are our own.  Our swords rest in our sheaths; but famine
marches each hour to gride and to slay.  Instead of sure death from the
hunger, take sure life from the foe.  Free pardon to all, chiefs and
people, and safe return to their homes,--save Gryffyth alone.  Let him
come forth, not as victim and outlaw, not with bent form and clasped
hands, but as chief meeting chief, with his household of state.  Harold
will meet him, in honour, at the gates of the fort.  Let Gryffyth submit
to King Edward, and ride with Harold to the Court of the Basileus.
Harold promises him life, and will plead for his pardon.  And though the
peace of this realm, and the fortune of war, forbid Harold to say, 'Thou
shalt yet be a king;' yet thy crown, son of Llewellyn, shall at least be
assured in the line of thy fathers, and the race of Cadwallader shall
still reign in Cymry."

The monk paused, and hope and joy were in the faces of the famished
chiefs; while two of the Traitor Three suddenly left their post, and sped
to tell the message to the spearmen and multitudes above. Modred, the
third conspirator, laid his hand on his hilt, and stole near to see the
face of the King;--the face of the King was dark and angry, as a midnight
of storm.

Then, raising the cross on high, Evan resumed.

"And I, though of the people of Gwentland, which the arms of Gryffyth
have wasted, and whose prince fell beneath Gryffyth's sword on the hearth
of his hall--I, as God's servant, the brother of all I behold, and, as
son of the soil, mourning over the slaughter of its latest defenders--I,
by this symbol of love and command, which I raise to the heaven, adjure
thee, O King, to give ear to the mission of peace,--to cast down the grim
pride of earth.  And instead of the crown of a day, fix thy hopes on the
crown everlasting.  For much shall be pardoned to thee in thine hour of
pomp and of conquest, if now thou savest from doom and from death the
last lives over which thou art lord."

It was during this solemn appeal that the knight, marking the sign
announced to him, and drawing close to Gryffyth, pressed the ring into
the King's hand, and whispered:

"Obey by this pledge.  Thou knowest Harold is true, and thy head is sold
by thine own people."

The King cast a haggard eye at the speaker, and then at the ring, over
which his hand closed with a convulsive spasm.  And at that dread instant
the man prevailed over the King; and far away from people and monk, from
adjuration and duty, fled his heart on the wings of the storm--fled to
the cold wife he distrusted: and the pledge that should assure him of
life, seemed as a love-token insulting his fall:--Amidst all the roar of
roused passions, loudest of all was the hiss of the jealous fiend.

As the monk ceased, the thrill of the audience was perceptible, and a
deep silence was followed by a general murmur, as if to constrain the
King.

Then the pride of the despot chief rose up to second the wrath of the
suspecting man.  The red spot flushed the dark cheek, and he tossed the
neglected hair from his brow.

He made one stride towards the monk, and said, in a voice loud, and deep,
and slow, rolling far up the hill:

"Monk, thou hast said; and now hear the reply of the son of Llewellyn,
the true heir of Roderic the Great, who from the heights of Eryri saw all
the lands of the Cymrian sleeping under the dragon of Uther.  King was I
born, and king will I die.  I will not ride by the side of the Saxon to
the feet of Edward, the son of the spoiler.  I will not, to purchase base
life, surrender the claim, vain before men and the hour, but solemn
before God and posterity--the claim of my line and my people.  All
Britain is ours--all the island of Pines.  And the children of Hengist
are traitors and rebels--not the heirs of Ambrosius and Uther.  Say to
Harold the Saxon, Ye have left us but the tomb of the Druid and the hills
of the eagle; but freedom and royalty are ours, in life and in death--not
for you to demand them, not for us to betray.  Nor fear ye, O my chiefs,
few, but unmatched in glory and truth; fear not ye to perish by the
hunger thus denounced as our doom, on these heights that command the
fruits of our own fields!  No, die we may, but not mute and revengeless.
Go back, whispering warrior; go back, false son of Cymry--and tell Harold
to look well to his walls and his trenches.  We will vouchsafe him grace
for his grace--we will not take him by surprise, nor under cloud of the
night.  With the gleam of our spears and the clash of our shields, we
will come from the hill: and, famine-worn as he deems us, hold a feast in
his walls which the eagles of Snowdon spread their pinions to share!"

"Rash man and unhappy!" cried the monk; "what curse drawest thou down on
thy head!  Wilt thou be the murtherer of thy men, in strife unavailing
and vain?  Heaven holds thee guilty of all the blood thou shalt cause to
be shed."

"Be dumb!--hush thy screech, lying raven!" exclaimed Gryffyth, his eyes
darting fire and, his slight form dilating.  "Once, priest and monk went
before us to inspire, not to daunt; and our cry, Alleluia! was taught us
by the saints of the Church, on the day when Saxons, fierce and many as
Harold's, fell on the field of Maes-Garmon.  No, the curse is on the head
of the invader, not on those who defend hearth and altar.  Yea, as the
song to the bard, the CURSE leaps through my veins, and rushes forth from
my lips.  By the land they have ravaged; by the gore they have spilt; on
these crags, our last refuge; below the carn on yon heights, where the
Dead stir to hear me,--I launch the curse of the wronged and the doomed
on the children of Hengist!  They in turn shall know the steel of the
stranger--their crown shall be shivered as glass, and their nobles be as
slaves in the land.  And the line of Hengist and Cerdic shall be rased
from the roll of empire.  And the ghosts of our fathers shall glide,
appeased, over the grave of their nation.  But we--WE, though weak in the
body, in the soul shall be strong to the last!  The ploughshare may pass
over our cities, but the soil shall be trod by our steps, and our deeds
keep our language alive in the songs of our bards.  Nor in the great
Judgment Day, shall any race but the race of Cymry rise from their graves
in this corner of earth, to answer for the sins of the brave!" [173]

So impressive the voice, so grand the brow, and sublime the wild gesture
of the King, as he thus spoke, that not only the monk himself was awed;
not only, though he understood not the words, did the Norman knight bow
his head, as a child when the lightning he fears as by instinct flashes
out from the cloud,--but even the sullen and wide-spreading discontent at
work among most of the chiefs was arrested for a moment.  But the
spearmen and multitude above, excited by the tidings of safety to life,
and worn out by repeated defeat, and the dread fear of famine, too remote
to hear the King, were listening eagerly to the insidious addresses of
the two stealthy conspirators, creeping from rank to rank; and already
they began to sway and move, and sweep slowly down towards the King.

Recovering his surprise, the Norman again neared Gryffyth, and began to
re-urge his mission of peace.  But the chief waved him back sternly, and
said aloud, though in Saxon:

"No secrets can pass between Harold and me.  This much alone, take thou
back as answer: I thank the Earl, for myself, my Queen, and my people.
Noble have been his courtesies, as foe; as foe I thank him--as king,
defy.  The torque he hath returned to my hand, he shall see again ere the
sun set.  Messengers, ye are answered.  Withdraw, and speed fast, that we
may pass not your steps on the road."

The monk sighed, and cast a look of holy compassion over the circle; and
a pleased man was he to see in the faces of most there, that the King was
alone in his fierce defiance.  Then lifting again the rood, he turned
away, and with him went the Norman.

The retirement of the messengers was the signal for one burst of
remonstrance from the chiefs--the signal for the voice and the deeds of
the Fatal Three.  Down from the heights sprang and rushed the angry and
turbulent multitudes; round the King came the bard and the falconer, and
some faithful few.

The great uproar of many voices caused the monk and the knight to pause
abruptly in their descent, and turn to look behind.  They could see the
crowd rushing down from the higher steeps; but on the spot itself which
they had so lately left, the nature of the ground only permitted a
confused view of spear points, lifted swords, and heads crowned with
shaggy locks, swaying to and fro.

"What means all this commotion?" asked the knight, with his hand on his
sword.

"Hist!" said the monk, pale as ashes, and leaning for support upon the
cross.

Suddenly, above the hubbub, was heard the voice of the King, in accents
of menace and wrath, singularly distinct and clear; it was followed by a
moment's silence--a moment's silence followed by the clatter of arms, a
yell, and a howl, and the indescribable shock of men.

And suddenly again was heard a voice that seemed that of the King, but no
longer distinct and clear!--was it laugh?--was it groan?

All was hushed; the monk was on his knees in prayer; the knight's sword
was bare in his hand.  All was hushed--and the spears stood still in the
air; when there was again a cry, as multitudinous, but less savage than
before.  And the Welch came down the pass, and down the crags.

The knight placed his back to a rock.  "They have orders to murther us,"
he murmured; "but woe to the first who come within reach of my sword!"

Down swarmed the Welchmen, nearer and nearer; and in the midst of them
three chiefs--the Fatal Three.  And the old chief bore in his hand a pole
or spear, and on the top of that spear, trickling gore step by step, was
the trunkless head of Gryffyth the King.

"This," said the old chief, as he drew near, "this is our answer to
Harold the Earl.  We will go with ye."

"Food! food!" cried the multitude.

And the three chiefs (one on either side the trunkless head that the
third bore aloft) whispered, "We are avenged!"




BOOK VIII.
FATE.




CHAPTER I.

Some days after the tragical event with which the last chapter closed,
the ships of the Saxons were assembled in the wide waters of Conway; and
on the small fore-deck of the stateliest vessel, stood Harold,
bareheaded, before Aldyth, the widowed Queen.  For the faithful bard had
fallen by the side of his lord; . . . the dark promise was unfulfilled,
and the mangled clay of the jealous Gryffyth slept alone in the narrow
bed.  A chair of state, with dossel and canopy, was set for the daughter
of Algar, and behind stood maidens of Wales, selected in haste for her
attendants.

But Aldyth had not seated herself; and, side by side with her dead lord's
great victor, thus she spoke:

"Woe worth the day and the hour when Aldyth left the hall of her fathers
and the land of her birth!  Her robe of a queen has been rent and torn
over an aching heart, and the air she has breathed has reeked as with
blood.  I go forth, widowed, and homeless, and lonely; but my feet shall
press the soil of my sires, and my lips draw the breath which came sweet
and pure to my childhood.  And thou, O Harold, standest beside me, like
the shape of my own youth, and the dreams of old come back at the sound
of thy voice.  Fare thee well, noble heart and true Saxon.  Thou hast
twice saved the child of thy foe--first from shame, then from famine.
Thou wouldst have saved my dread lord from open force, and dark murder;
but the saints were wroth, the blood of my kinsfolk, shed by his hand,
called for vengeance, and the shrines he had pillaged and burned murmured
doom from their desolate altars.  Peace be with the dead, and peace with
the living!  I shall go back to my father and brethren; and if the fame
and life of child and sister be dear to them, their swords will never
more leave their sheaths against Harold.  So thy hand, and God guard
thee!"

Harold raised to his lips the hand which the Queen extended to him; and
to Aldyth now seemed restored the rare beauty of her youth; as pride and
sorrow gave her the charm of emotion, which love and duty had failed to
bestow.

"Life and health to thee, noble lady," said the Earl.  "Tell thy kindred
from me, that for thy sake, and thy grandsire's, I would fain be their
brother and friend; were they but united with me, all England were now
safe against every foe, and each peril.  Thy daughter already awaits thee
in the halls of Morcar; and when time has scarred the wounds of the past,
may thy joys re-bloom in the face of thy child. Farewell, noble Aldyth!"

He dropped the hand he had held till then, turned slowly to the side of
the vessel, and re-entered his boat.  As he was rowed back to shore, the
horn gave the signal for raising anchor, and the ship, righting itself,
moved majestically through the midst of the fleet. But Aldyth still stood
erect, and her eyes followed the boat that bore away the secret love of
her youth.

As Harold reached the shore, Tostig and the Norman, who had been
conversing amicably together on the beach, advanced towards the Earl.

"Brother," said Tostig, smiling, "it were easy for thee to console the
fair widow, and bring to our House all the force of East Anglia and
Mercia."  Harold's face slightly changed, but he made no answer.

"A marvellous fair dame," said the Norman, "notwithstanding her cheek be
somewhat pinched, and the hue sun-burnt.  And I wonder not that the poor
cat-king kept her so close to his side."

"Sir Norman," said the Earl, hastening to change the subject, "the war is
now over, and, for long years, Wales will leave our Marches in
peace.--This eve I propose to ride hence towards London, and we will
converse by the way."

"Go you so soon?" cried the knight, surprised.  "Shall you not take means
utterly to subjugate this troublesome race, parcel out the lands among
your thegns, to hold as martial fiefs at need, build towers and forts on
the heights, and at the river mouths?--where a site, like this, for some
fair castle and vawmure?  In a word, do you Saxons merely overrun, and
neglect to hold what you win?"

"We fight in self-defence, not for conquest, Sir Norman.  We have no
skill in building castles; and I pray you not to hint to my thegns the
conceit of dividing a land, as thieves would their plunder.  King
Gryffyth is dead, and his brothers will reign in his stead.  England has
guarded her realm, and chastised the aggressors.  What need England do
more?  We are not like our first barbarous fathers, carving out homes
with the scythe of their saexes.  The wave settles after the flood, and
the races of men after lawless convulsions."

Tostig smiled, in disdain, at the knight, who mused a little over the
strange words he had heard, and then silently followed the Earl to the
fort.

But when Harold gained his chamber, he found there an express, arrived in
haste from Chester, with the news that Algar, the sole enemy and single
rival of his power, was no more.  Fever, occasioned by neglected wounds,
had stretched him impotent on a bed of sickness, and his fierce passions
had aided the march of disease; the restless and profitless race was run.

The first emotion which these tidings called forth was that of pain. The
bold sympathise with the bold; and in great hearts, there is always a
certain friendship for a gallant foe.  But recovering the shock of that
first impression, Harold could not but feel that England was free from
its most dangerous subject--himself from the only obstacle apparent to
the fulfilment of his luminous career.

"Now, then, to London," whispered the voice of his ambition.  "Not a foe
rests to trouble the peace of that empire which thy conquests, O Harold,
have made more secure and compact than ever yet has been the realm of the
Saxon kings.  Thy way through the country that thou hast henceforth
delivered from the fire and sword of the mountain ravager, will be one
march of triumph, like a Roman's of old; and the voice of the people will
echo the hearts of the army; those hearts are thine own.  Verily Hilda is
a prophetess; and when Edward rests with the saints, from what English
heart will not burst the cry, 'LONG LIVE HAROLD THE KING?'"




CHAPTER II.

The Norman rode by the side of Harold, in the rear of the victorious
armament.  The ships sailed to their havens, and Tostig departed to his
northern earldom.

"And now," said Harold, "I am at leisure to thank thee, brave Norman, for
more than thine aid in council and war;--at leisure now to turn to the
last prayer of Sweyn, and the often-shed tears of Githa my mother, for
Wolnoth the exile.  Thou seest with thine own eyes that there is no
longer pretext or plea for thy Count to detain these hostages. Thou shalt
hear from Edward himself that he no longer asks sureties for the faith of
the House of Godwin; and I cannot think that Duke William would have
suffered thee to bring me over this news from the dead if he were not
prepared to do justice to the living."

"Your speech, Earl of Wessex, goes near to the truth.  But, to speak
plainly and frankly, I think William, my lord, hath a keen desire to
welcome in person a chief so illustrious as Harold, and I guess that he
keeps the hostages to make thee come to claim them."  The knight, as he
spoke, smiled gaily; but the cunning of the Norman gleamed in the quick
glance of his clear hazel eye.

"Fain must I feel pride at such wish, if you flatter me not," said
Harold; "and I would gladly myself, now the land is in peace, and my
presence not needful, visit a court of such fame.  I hear high praise
from cheapman and pilgrim of Count William's wise care for barter and
trade, and might learn much from the ports of the Seine that would profit
the marts of the Thames.  Much, too, I hear of Count William's zeal to
revive the learning of the Church, aided by Lanfranc the Lombard; much I
hear of the pomp of his buildings, and the grace of his court.  All this
would I cheerfully cross the ocean to see; but all this would but sadden
my heart if I returned without Haco and Wolnoth."

"I dare not speak so as to plight faith for the Duke," said the Norman,
who, though sharp to deceive, had that rein on his conscience that it did
not let him openly lie; "but this I do know, that there are few things in
his Countdom which my lord would not give to clasp the right hand of
Harold and feel assured of his friendship."

Though wise and farseeing, Harold was not suspicious;--no Englishman,
unless it were Edward himself, knew the secret pretensions of William to
the English throne; and he answered simply:

"It were well, indeed, both for Normandy and England, both against foes
and for trade, to be allied and well-liking.  I will think over your
words, Sire de Graville, and it shall not be my fault if old feuds be not
forgotten, and those now in thy court be the last hostages ever kept by
the Norman for the faith of the Saxon."

With that he turned the discourse; and the aspiring and able envoy,
exhilarated by the hope of a successful mission, animated the way by
remarks--alternately lively and shrewd--which drew the brooding Earl from
those musings, which had now grown habitual to a mind once clear and open
as the day.

Harold had not miscalculated the enthusiasm his victories had excited.
Where he passed, all the towns poured forth their populations to see and
to hail him; and on arriving at the metropolis, the rejoicings in his
honour seemed to equal those which had greeted, at the accession of
Edward, the restoration of the line of Cerdic.

According to the barbarous custom of the age, the head of the unfortunate
sub-king, and the prow of his special war-ship, had been sent to Edward
as the trophies of conquest: but Harold's uniform moderation respected
the living.  The race of Gryffyth [174] were re-established on the
tributary throne of that hero, in the persons of his brothers, Blethgent
and Rigwatle, "and they swore oaths," says the graphic old chronicler,
"and delivered hostages to the King and the Earl that they would be
faithful to him in all things, and be everywhere ready for him, by water,
and by land, and make such renders from the land as had been done before
to any other king."

Not long after this, Mallet de Graville returned to Normandy, with gifts
for William from King Edward, and special requests from that prince, as
well as from the Earl, to restore the hostages.  But Mallet's acuteness
readily perceived, that in much Edward's mind had been alienated from
William.  It was clear, that the Duke's marriage and the pledges that had
crowned the union were distasteful to the asceticism of the saint king:
and with Godwin's death, and Tostig's absence from the court, seemed to
have expired all Edward's bitterness towards that powerful family of
which Harold was now the head.  Still, as no subject out of the House of
Cerdic had ever yet been elected to the Saxon throne, there was no
apprehension on Mallet's mind that in Harold was the true rival to
William's cherished aspirations.  Though Edward the Atheling was dead,
his son Edgar lived, the natural heir to the throne; and the Norman,
(whose liege had succeeded to the Duchy at the age of eight,) was not
sufficiently cognisant of the invariable custom of the Anglo-Saxons, to
set aside, whether for kingdoms or for earldoms, all claimants unfitted
for rule by their tender years.  He could indeed perceive that the young
Atheling's minority was in favour of his Norman liege, and would render
him but a weak defender of the realm, and that there seemed no popular
attachment to the infant orphan of the Germanised exile: his name was
never mentioned at the court, nor had Edward acknowledged him as heir,--a
circumstance which he interpreted auspiciously for William.
Nevertheless, it was clear that, both at court and amongst the people,
the Norman influence in England was at the lowest ebb; and that the only
man who could restore it, and realise the cherished dreams of his
grasping lord, was Harold the all-powerful.




CHAPTER III.

Trusting, for the time, to the success of Edward's urgent demand for the
release of his kinsmen, as well as his own, Harold was now detained at
the court by all those arrears of business which had accumulated fast
under the inert hands of the monk-king during the prolonged campaigns
against the Welch; but he had leisure at least for frequent visits to the
old Roman house; and those visits were not more grateful to his love than
to the harder and more engrossing passion which divided his heart.

The nearer he grew to the dazzling object, to the possession of which
Fate seemed to have shaped all circumstances, the more he felt the charm
of those mystic influences which his colder reason had disdained.  He who
is ambitious of things afar, and uncertain, passes at once into the
Poet-Land of Imagination; to aspire and to imagine are yearnings
twin-born.

When in his fresh youth and his calm lofty manhood, Harold saw action,
how adventurous soever, limited to the barriers of noble duty; when he
lived but for his country, all spread clear before his vision in the
sunlight of day; but as the barriers receded, while the horizon extended,
his eye left the Certain to rest on the Vague.  As self, though still
half concealed from his conscience, gradually assumed the wide space love
of country had filled, the maze of delusion commenced: he was to shape
fate out of circumstance,--no longer defy fate through virtue; and thus
Hilda became to him as a voice that answered the questions of his own
restless heart.  He needed encouragement from the Unknown to sanction his
desires and confirm his ends.  But Edith, rejoicing in the fair fame of
her betrothed, and content in the pure rapture of beholding him again,
reposed in the divine credulity of the happy hour; she marked not, in
Harold's visits, that, on entrance, the Earl's eye sought first the stern
face of the Vala--she wondered not why those two conversed in whispers
together, or stood so often at moonlight by the Runic grave.  Alone, of
all womankind, she felt that Harold loved her, that that love had braved
time, absence, change, and hope deferred; and she knew not that what love
has most to dread in the wild heart of aspiring man, is not persons, but
things,--is not things, but their symbols.

So weeks and months rolled on, and Duke William returned no answer to the
demands for his hostages.  And Harold's heart smote him, that he
neglected his brother's prayer and his mother's accusing tears.
