something very unsound in itself.

The ball at the Duchesse de Tarascon's was a brilliant event. The summer
was far advanced; many of the Parisian holiday-makers had returned to
the capital, but the season had not commenced, and a ball at that time
of year was a very unwonted event. But there was a special occasion for
this fete,--a marriage between a niece of the Duchesse and the son of a
great official in high favour at the Imperial Court.

The dinner at Louvier's broke up early, and the music for the second
waltz was sounding when Enguerrand, Alain, and the Vicomte de Mauleon
ascended the stairs. Raoul did not accompany them; he went very rarely
to any balls,--never to one given by an Imperialist, however nearly
related to him the Imperialist might be. But in the sweet indulgence
of his good-nature, he had no blame for those who did go,--not for
Enguerrand, still less, of course, for Alain.

Something too might well here be said as to his feeling towards Victor
de Mauleon. He had joined in the family acquittal of that kinsman as to
the grave charge of the jewels; the proofs of innocence thereon seemed
to him unequivocal and decisive, therefore he had called on the Vicomte
and acquiesced in all formal civilities shown to him. But such acts of
justice to a fellow-gentilhomme and a kinsman duly performed, he desired
to see as little as possible of the Vicomte de Mauleon. He reasoned
thus: "Of every charge which society made against this man he is
guiltless; but of all the claims to admiration which society accorded to
him before it erroneously condemned, there are none which make me covet
his friendship, or suffice to dispel doubts as to what he may be when
society once more receives him. And the man is so captivating that I
should dread his influence over myself did I see much of him."

Raoul kept his reasonings to himself, for he had that sort of charity
which indisposes an amiable man to be severe on bygone offences. In the
eyes of Enguerrand and Alain, and such young votaries of the mode
as they could influence, Victor de Mauleon assumed almost heroic
proportions. In the affair which had inflicted on him a calumny so
odious, it was clear that he had acted with chivalrous delicacy of
honour. And the turbulence and recklessness of his earlier years,
redeemed as they were, in the traditions of his contemporaries, by
courage and generosity, were not offences to which young Frenchmen are
inclined to be harsh. All question as to the mode in which his life
might have been passed during his long absence from the capital was
merged in the respect due to the only facts known, and these were
clearly proved in his pieces justificatives: First, that he had
served under another name in the ranks of the army in Algiers; had
distinguished himself there for signal valour, and received, with
promotion, the decoration of the cross. His real name was known only
to his colonel, and on quitting the service, the colonel placed in his
hands a letter of warm eulogy on his conduct, and identifying him as
Victor de Mauleon. Secondly, that in California he had saved a wealthy
family from midnight murder, fighting single-handed against and
overmastering three ruffians, and declining all other reward from those
he had preserved than a written attestation of their gratitude. In all
countries, valour ranks high in the list of virtues; in no country does
it so absolve from vices as it does in France.

But as yet Victor de Mauleon's vindication was only known by a few, and
those belonging to the gayer circles of life. How he might be judged by
the sober middle class, which constitutes the most important section of
public opinion to a candidate for political trusts and distinctions, was
another question.

The Duchesse stood at the door to receive her visitors. Duplessis was
seated near the entrance, by the side of a distinguished member of
the Imperial Government, with whom he was carrying on a whispered
conversation. The eye of the financier, however, turned towards the
doorway as Alain and Enguerrand entered, and passing over their familiar
faces, fixed itself attentively on that of a mach older man whom
Enguerrand was presenting to the Duchesse, and in whom Duplessis
rightly divined the Vicomte de Mauleon. Certainly if no one could have
recognized M. Lebeau in the stately personage who had visited Louvier,
still less could one who had heard of the wild feats of the roi des
viveurs in his youth reconcile belief in such tales with the quiet
modesty of mien which distinguished the cavalier now replying, with
bended head and subdued accents, to the courteous welcome of the
brilliant hostess. But for such difference in attributes between the
past and the present De Mauleon, Duplessis had been prepared by the
conversation at the Maison Doree. And now, as the Vicomte, yielding his
place by the Duchesse to some new-comer, glided on, and, leaning against
a column, contemplated the gay scene before him with that expression of
countenance, half sarcastic, half mournful, with which men regard, after
long estrangement, the scenes of departed joys, Duplessis felt that no
change in that man had impaired the force of character which had made
him the hero of reckless coevals. Though wearing no beard, not even a
mustache, there was something emphatically masculine in the contour
of the close-shaven cheek and resolute jaw; in a forehead broad at the
temples, and protuberant in those organs over the eyebrows which are
said to be significant of quick perception and ready action; in the
lips, when in repose compressed, perhaps somewhat stern in their
expression, but pliant and mobile when speaking, and wonderfully
fascinating when they smiled. Altogether, about this Victor de Mauleon
there was a nameless distinction, apart from that of conventional
elegance. You would have said, "That is a man of some marked
individuality, an eminence of some kind in himself." You would not be
surprised to hear that he was a party-leader, a skilled diplomatist, a
daring soldier, an adventurous traveller; but you would not guess him to
be a student, an author, an artist.

While Duplessis thus observed the Vicomte de Mauleon, all the while
seeming to lend an attentive ear to the whispered voice of the Minister
by his side, Alain passed on into the ball-room. He was fresh enough to
feel the exhilaration of the dance. Enguerrand (who had survived that
excitement, and who habitually deserted any assembly at an early hour
for the cigar and whist of his club) had made his way to De Mauleon, and
there stationed himself. The lion of one generation has always a mixed
feeling of curiosity and respect for the lion of a generation before
him, and the young Vandemar had conceived a strong and almost an
affectionate interest in this discrowned king of that realm in fashion
which, once lost, is never to be regained; for it is only Youth that can
hold its sceptre and command its subjects.

"In this crowd, Vicomte," said Enguerrand, "there must be many old
acquaintances of yours?"

"Perhaps so, but as yet I have only seen new faces."

As he thus spoke, a middle-aged man, decorated with the grand cross of
the Legion and half-a-dozen foreign orders, lending his arm to a lady of
the same age radiant in diamonds, passed by towards the ball-room,
and in some sudden swerve of his person, occasioned by a pause of
his companion to adjust her train, he accidentally brushed against De
Mauleon, whom he had not before noticed. Turning round to apologize for
his awkwardness, he encountered the full gaze of the Vicomte, started,
changed countenance, and hurried on his companion.

"Do you not recognize his Excellency?" said Enguerrand, smiling. "His
cannot be a new face to you."

"Is it the Baron de Lacy?" asked De Mauleon.

"The Baron de Lacy, now Comte d'Epinay, ambassador at the Court of
-----, and, if report speak true, likely soon to exchange that post for
the porte feuille of Minister."

"He has got on in life since I saw him last, the little Baron. He was
then my devoted imitator, and I was not proud of the imitation."

"He has got on by always clinging to the skirts of some one stronger
than himself,--to yours, I dare say, when, being a parvenu despite his
usurped title of baron, he aspired to the entree into clubs and
salons. The entree thus obtained, the rest followed easily; he became a
millionaire through a wife's dot, and an ambassador through the wife's
lover, who is a power in the State."

"But he must have substance in himself. Empty bags can not be made to
stand upright. Ah! unless I mistake, I see some one I knew better.
Yon pale, thin man, also with the grand cross--surely that is Alfred
Hennequin. Is he too a decorated Imperialist? I left him a socialistic
Republican."

"But, I presume, even then an eloquent avocat. He got into the Chamber,
spoke well, defended the coup-d'etat. He has just been made Prefet
of the great department of the a popular appointment. He bears a high
character. Pray renew your acquaintance with him; he is coming this
way."

"Will so grave a dignitary renew acquaintance with me? I doubt it."

But as De Mauleon said this, he moved from the column, and advanced
towards the Prefet. Enguerrand followed him, and saw the Vicomte extend
his hand to his old acquaintance.

The Prefet stared, and said, with frigid courtesy, "Pardon me,--some
mistake."

"Allow me, Monsieur Hennequin," said Enguerrand, interposing, and
wishing good-naturedly to save De Mauleon the awkwardness of introducing
himself,--"allow me to reintroduce you to my kinsman, whom the lapse of
years may well excuse you for forgetting, the Vicomte de Mauleon."

Still the Prefet did not accept the hand. He bowed with formal ceremony,
said, "I was not aware that Monsieur le Vicomte had returned to Paris,"
and moving to the doorway, made his salutation to the hostess and
disappeared.

"The insolent!" muttered Enguerrand.

"Hush!" said De Mauleon, quietly, "I can fight no more
duels,--especially with a Prefet. But I own I am weak enough to
feel hurt at such a reception from Hennequin, for he owed me some
obligations,--small, perhaps, but still they were such as might have
made me select him, rather than Louvier, as the vindicator of my name,
had I known him to be so high placed. But a man who has raised himself
into an authority may well be excused for forgetting a friend whose
character needs defence. I forgive him."

There was something pathetic in the Vicomte's tone which touched
Enguerrand's warm if light heart. But De Mauleon did not allow him time
to answer. He went on quickly through an opening in the gay crowd,
which immediately closed behind him, and Enguerrand saw him no more that
evening.

Duplessis ere this had quitted his seat by the Minister, drawn thence by
a young and very pretty girl resigned to his charge by a cavalier with
whom she had been dancing. She was the only daughter of Duplessis, and
he valued her even more than the millions he had made at the Bourse.
"The Princess," she said, "has been swept off in the train of some
German Royalty; so, petit pere, I must impose myself on thee."

The Princess, a Russian of high rank, was the chaperon that evening of
Mademoiselle Valerie Duplessis.

"And I suppose I must take thee back into the ballroom," said the
financier, smiling proudly, "and find thee partners."

"I don't want your aid for that, Monsieur; except this quadrille, my
list is pretty well filled up."

"And I hope the partners will be pleasant. Let me know who they are," he
whispered, as they threaded their way into the ball-room.

The girl glanced at her tablet.

"Well, the first on the list is milord somebody, with an unpronounceable
English name."

"Beau cavalier?"

"No; ugly, old too; thirty at least."

Duplessis felt relieved. He did not wish his daughter to fall in love
with an Englishman.

"And the next?"

"The next?" she said hesitatingly, and he observed that a soft blush
accompanied the hesitation.

"Yes, the next. Not English too?"

"Oh, no; the Marquis de Rochebriant."

"Ah! who presented him to thee?"

"Thy friend, petit pere, M. de Braze."

Duplessis again glanced at his daughter's face; it was bent over her
bouquet.

"Is he ugly also?"

"Ugly!" exclaimed the girl, indignantly; "why, he is--" she checked
herself and turned away her head.

Duplessis became thoughtful. He was glad that he had accompanied his
child into the ball-room; he would stay there, and keep watch on her and
Rochebriant also.

Up to that moment he had felt a dislike to Rochebriant. That young
noble's too obvious pride of race had nettled him, not the less that the
financier himself was vain of his ancestry. Perhaps he still disliked
Alain, but the dislike was now accompanied with a certain, not hostile,
interest; and if he became connected with the race, the pride in it
might grow contagious.

They had not been long in the ball-room before Alain came up to claim
his promised partner. In saluting Duplessis, his manner was the same as
usual, not more cordial, not less ceremoniously distant. A man so able
as the financier cannot be without quick knowledge of the human heart.

"If disposed to fall in love with Valerie," thought Duplessis, "he would
have taken more pains to please her father. Well, thank heaven, there
are better matches to be found for her than a noble without fortune and
a Legitimist without career."

In fact, Alain felt no more for Valerie than for any other pretty girl
in the room. In talking with the Vicomte de Braze in the intervals of
the dance, he had made some passing remark on her beauty. De Braze had
said, "Yes, she is charming; I will present you," and hastened to do so
before Rochebriant even learned her name. So introduced, he could but
invite her to give him her first disengaged dance, and when that was
fixed, he had retired, without entering into conversation.

Now, as they took their places in the quadrille, he felt that effort
of speech had become a duty, if not a pleasure; and of course, he began
with the first commonplace which presented itself to his mind.

"Do you not think it a very pleasant ball, Mademoiselle?"

"Yes," dropped, in almost inaudible reply, from Valerie's rosy lips.

"And not over-crowded, as most balls are?"

Valerie's lips again moved, but this time quite inaudibly. The
obligations of the figure now caused a pause. Alain racked his brains
and began,

"They tell me the last season was more than usually gay; of that I
cannot judge, for it was well-nigh over when I came to Paris for the
first time."

Valerie looked up with a more animated expression than her childlike
face had yet shown, and said, this time distinctly, "This is my first
ball, Monsieur le Marquis."

"One has only to look at Mademoiselle to divine that fact," replied
Alain, gallantly.

Again the conversation was interrupted by the dance; but the ice between
the two was now broken; and when the quadrille was concluded, and
Rochebriant led the fair Valerie back to her father's side, she felt
as if she had been listening to the music of the spheres, and that the
music had now suddenly stopped. Alain, alas for her! was under no such
pleasing illusion. Her talk had seemed to him artless indeed, but
very insipid, compared with the brilliant conversation of the wedded
Parisiennes with whom he more habitually danced; and it was with rather
a sensation of relief that he made his parting bow, and receded into the
crowd of bystanders.

Meanwhile De Mauleon had quitted the assemblage, walking slowly through
the deserted streets towards his apartment. The civilities he had met
at Louvier's dinner-party, and the marked distinction paid to him by
kinsmen of rank and position so unequivocal as Alain and Enguerrand,
had softened his mood and cheered his spirits. He had begun to question
himself whether a fair opening to his political ambition was really
forbidden to him under the existent order of things, whether it
necessitated the employment of such dangerous tools as those to which
anger and despair had reconciled his intellect. But the pointed way in
which he had been shunned or slighted by the two men who belonged to
political life--two men who in youth had looked up to himself, and
whose dazzling career of honours was identified with the Imperial
system--reanimated his fiercer passions and his more perilous designs.
The frigid accost of Hennequin more especially galled him; it wounded
not only his pride but his heart; it had the venom of ingratitude, and
it is the peculiar privilege of ingratitude to wound hearts that have
learned to harden themselves to the hate or contempt of men to whom
no services have been rendered. In some private affair concerning his
property, De Mauleon had had occasion to consult Hennequin, then a
rising young avocat. Out of that consultation a friendship had sprung
up, despite the differing habits and social grades of the two men. One
day, calling on Hennequin, he found him in a state of great nervous
excitement. The avocat had received a public insult in the salon of a
noble, to whom De Mauleon had introduced him, from a man who pretended
to the hand of a young lady to whom Hennequin was attached, and indeed
almost affianced. The man was a notorious spadassin,--a duellist little
less renowned for skill in all weapons than De Mauleon himself. The
affair had been such that Hennequin's friends assured him he had no
choice but to challenge this bravo. Hennequin, brave enough at the bar,
was no hero before sword-point or pistol. He was utterly ignorant of the
use of either weapon; his death in the encounter with an antagonist
so formidable seemed to him certain, and life was so precious,--an
honourable and distinguished career opening before him, marriage with
the woman he loved. Still he had the Frenchman's point of honour. He had
been told that he must fight; well, then, he must. He asked De Mauleon
to be one of his seconds, and in asking him, sank in his chair, covered
his face with his hands, and burst into tears.

"Wait till to-morrow," said De Mauleon; "take no step till then.
Meanwhile, you are in my hands, and I answer for your honour."

On leaving Hennequin, Victor sought the spadassin at the club of which
they were both members, and contrived, without reference to Hennequin,
to pick a quarrel with him. A challenge ensued; a duel with swords took
place the next morning. De Mauleon disarmed and wounded his antagonist,
not gravely, but sufficiently to terminate the encounter. He assisted
to convey the wounded man to his apartment, and planted himself by his
bedside, as if he were a friend.

"Why on earth did you fasten a quarrel on me?" asked the spadassin; "and
why, having done so, did you spare my life; for your sword was at my
heart when you shifted its point, and pierced my shoulder?"

"I will tell you, and in so doing, beg you to accept my friendship
hereafter, on one condition. In the course of the day, write or dictate
a few civil words of apology to M. Hennequin. Ma foi! every one will
praise you for a generosity so becoming in a man who has given such
proofs of courage and skill to an avocat who has never handled a sword
nor fired a pistol."

That same day De Mauleon remitted to Hennequin an apology for heated
words freely retracted, which satisfied all his friends. For the service
thus rendered by De Mauleon, Hennequin declared himself everlastingly
indebted. In fact, he entirely owed to that friend his life, his
marriage, his honour, his career.

"And now," thought De Mauleon, "now, when he could so easily requite
me,--now he will not even take my hand. Is human nature itself at war
with me?"




CHAPTER III.

Nothing could be simpler than the apartment of the Vicomte de Mauleon,
in the second story of a quiet old-fashioned street. It had been
furnished at small cost out of his savings. Yet, on the whole, it
evinced the good taste of a man who had once been among the exquisites
of the polite world. You felt that you were in the apartment of a
gentleman, and a gentleman of somewhat severe tastes, and of sober
matured years. He was sitting the next morning in the room which he used
as a private study. Along the walls were arranged dwarf bookcases, as
yet occupied by few books, most of them books of reference, others cheap
editions of the French classics in prose--no poets, no romance-writers,
with a few Latin authors also in prose,--Cicero, Sallust, Tacitus. He
was engaged at his desk writing,--a book with its leaves open before
him, "Paul Louis Courier," that model of political irony and masculine
style of composition. There was a ring at his door-bell. The Vicomte
kept no servant. He rose and answered the summons. He recoiled a few
paces on recognizing his visitor in M. Hennequin.

The Prefet this time did not withdraw his hand; he extended it, but it
was with a certain awkwardness and timidity. "I thought it my duty to
call on you, Vicomte, thus early, having already seen M. Enguerrand de
Vandemar. He has shown me the copies of the pieces which were inspected
by your distinguished kinsmen, and which completely clear you of the
charge that--grant me your pardon when I say--seemed to me still to
remain unanswered when I had the honour to meet you last night."

"It appears to me, Monsieur Hennequin, that you, as an avocat so
eminent, might have convinced yourself very readily of that fact."

"Monsieur le Vicomte, I was in Switzerland with my wife at the time of
the unfortunate affair in which you were involved."

"But when you returned to Paris, you might perhaps have deigned to make
inquiries so affecting the honour of one you had called a friend, and
for whom you had professed"--De Mauleon paused; he disdained to add--"an
eternal gratitude."

Hennequin coloured slightly, but replied with self-possession.

"I certainly did inquire. I did hear that the charge against you with
regard to the abstraction of the jewels was withdrawn, that you were
therefore acquitted by law; but I heard also that society did not acquit
you, and that, finding this, you had quitted France. Pardon me again, no
one would listen to me when I attempted to speak on your behalf but
now that so many years have elapsed, that the story is imperfectly
remembered, that relations so high-placed receive you so cordially,--now
I rejoice to think that you will have no difficulty in regaining a
social position never really lost, but for a time resigned."

"I am duly sensible of the friendly joy you express. I was reading the
other day in a lively author some pleasant remarks on the effects of
medisance or calumny upon our impressionable Parisian public. 'If,'
says the writer, 'I found myself accused of having put the two towers
of Notre Dame into my waistcoat-pocket I should not dream of defending
myself; I should take to flight. And,' adds the writer, 'if my best
friend were under the same accusation, I should be so afraid of being
considered his accomplice that I should put my best friend outside the
door.' Perhaps, Monsieur Hennequin, I was seized with the first alarm.
Why should I blame you if seized with the second? Happily, this good
city of Paris has its reactions. And you can now offer me your hand.
Paris has by this time discovered that the two towers of Notre Dame are
not in my pocket."

There was a pause. De Mauleon had resettled himself at his desk, bending
over his papers, and his manner seemed to imply that he considered the
conversation at an end.

But a pang of shame, of remorse, of tender remembrance, shot across the
heart of the decorous, worldly, self-seeking man, who owed all that he
now was to the ci-devant vaurien before him. Again he stretched forth
his hand, and this time grasped De Mauleon's warmly. "Forgive me," he
said, feelingly and hoarsely; "forgive me, I was to blame. By character,
and perhaps by the necessities of my career, I am over-timid to public
opinion, public scandal. Forgive me. Say if in anything now I can
requite, though but slightly, the service I owe you."

De Mauleon looked steadily at the Prefet, and said slowly, "Would you
serve me in turn? Are you sincere?"

The Prefet hesitated a moment, then answered firmly, "Yes."

"Well, then, what I ask of you is a frank opinion,--not as lawyer, not
as Prefet, but as a man who knows the present state of French society.
Give that opinion without respect to my feelings one way or other. Let
it emanate solely from your practised judgment."

"Be it so," said Hennequin, wondering what was to come. De Mauleon
resumed, "As you may remember, during my former career I had no
political ambition. I did not meddle with politics. In the troubled
times that immediately succeeded the fall of Louis Philippe I was but
an epicurean looker-on. Grant that, so far as admission to the salons is
concerned, I shall encounter no difficulty in regaining position; but as
regards the Chamber, public life, a political career, can I have my
fair opening under the Empire? You pause. Answer as you have promised,
frankly."

"The difficulties in the way of a political career would be very great."

"Insuperable?"

"I fear so. Of course, in my capacity of Prefet, I have no small
influence in my department in support of a Government candidate. But
I do not think that the Imperial Government could, at this time
especially, in which it must be very cautious in selecting its
candidates, be induced to recommend you. The affair of the jewels would
be raked up; your vindication disputed, denied; the fact that for so
many years you have acquiesced in that charge without taking steps to
refute it; your antecedents, even apart from that charge; your present
want of property (M. Enguerrand tells me your income is but moderate);
the absence of all previous repute in public life. No; relinquish
the idea of political contest,--it would expose you to inevitable
mortifications, to a failure that would even jeopardize the admission
to the salons which you are now gaining. You could not be a Government
candidate."

"Granted. I may have no desire to be one; but an opposition candidate,
one of the Liberal party?"

"As an Imperialist," said Hennequin, smiling gravely, "and holding the
office I do, it would not become me to encourage a candidate against
the Emperor's Government. But speaking with the frankness you solicit, I
should say that your chances there are infinitely worse. The Opposition
are in a pitiful minority,--the most eminent of the Liberals can
scarcely gain seats for themselves; great local popularity or property,
high established repute for established patriotism, or proved talents
of oratory and statesmanship, are essential qualifications for a seat in
the Opposition; and even these do not suffice for a third of the persons
who possess them. Be again what you were before,--the hero of salons
remote from the turbulent vulgarity of politics."

"I am answered. Thank you once more. The service I rendered you once is
requited now."

"No, indeed,--no; but will you dine with me quietly today, and allow me
to present to you my wife and two children, born since we parted? I say
to-day, for to-morrow I return to my Prefecture."

"I am infinitely obliged by your invitation, but to-day I dine with the
Comte de Beauvilliers to meet some of the Corps Diplomatique. I must
make good my place in the salons, since you so clearly show me that I
have no chance of one in the Legislature--unless--"

"Unless what?"

"Unless there happen one of those revolutions in which the scum comes
uppermost."

"No fear of that. The subterranean barracks and railway have ended
forever the rise of the scum, the reign of the canaille and its
barricades."

"Adieu, my dear Hennequin. My respectful hommages a Madame."

After that day the writing of Pierre Firmin in "Le Sens Commun," though
still keeping within the pale of the law, became more decidedly hostile
to the Imperial system, still without committing their author to any
definite programme of the sort of government that should succeed it.




CHAPTER IV.

The weeks glided on. Isaura's manuscript bad passed into print; it came
out in the French fashion of feuilletons,--a small detachment at a time.
A previous flourish of trumpets by Savarin and the clique at his command
insured it attention, if not from the general public, at least from
critical and literary coteries. Before the fourth instalment appeared
it had outgrown the patronage of the coteries; it seized hold of the
public. It was not in the last school in fashion; incidents were not
crowded and violent,--they were few and simple, rather appertaining
to an elder school, in which poetry of sentiment and grace of diction
prevailed. That very resemblance to old favourites gave it the
attraction of novelty. In a word, it excited a pleased admiration, and
great curiosity was felt as to the authorship. When it oozed out that it
was by the young lady whose future success in the musical world had
been so sanguinely predicted by all who had heard her sing, the interest
wonderfully increased. Petitions to be introduced to her acquaintance
were showered upon Savarin. Before she scarcely realized her dawning
fame, she was drawn from her quiet home and retired habits; she was
fetee and courted in the literary circle of which Savarin was a chief.
That circle touched, on one side, Bohemia; on the other, that realm of
politer fashion which, in every intellectual metropolis, but especially
in Paris, seeks to gain borrowed light from luminaries in art and
letters. But the very admiration she obtained somewhat depressed,
somewhat troubled her; after all, it did not differ from that which was
at her command as a singer.

On the one hand, she shrank instinctively from the caresses of female
authors and the familiar greetings of male authors, who frankly lived
in philosophical disdain of the conventions respected by sober, decorous
mortals. On the other hand, in the civilities of those who, while they
courted a rising celebrity, still held their habitual existence apart
from the artistic world, there was a certain air of condescension,
of patronage, towards the young stranger with no other protector but
Signora Venosta, the ci-devant public singer, and who had made her debut
in a journal edited by M. Gustave Rameau, which, however disguised by
exaggerated terms of praise, wounded her pride of woman in flattering
her vanity as author. Among this latter set were wealthy, high-born men,
who addressed her as woman--as woman beautiful and young--with words of
gallantry that implied love, but certainly no thought of marriage,--many
of the most ardent were indeed married already. But once launched into
the thick of Parisian hospitalities, it was difficult to draw back. The
Venosta wept at the thought of missing some lively soiree, and Savarin
laughed at her shrinking fastidiousness as that of a child's ignorance
of the world. But still she had her mornings to herself; and in those
mornings, devoted to the continuance of her work (for the commencement
was in print before a third was completed), she forgot the commonplace
world that received her in the evenings. Insensibly to herself the tone
of this work had changed as it proceeded. It had begun seriously indeed,
but in the seriousness there was a certain latent joy. It might be the
joy of having found vent of utterance; it might be rather a joy still
more latent, inspired by the remembrance of Graham's words and looks,
and by the thought that she had renounced all idea of the professional
career which he had evidently disapproved. Life then seemed to her a
bright possession. We have seen that she had begun her roman without
planning how it should end. She had, however, then meant it to end,
somehow or other, happily. Now the lustre had gone from life; the tone
of the work was saddened; it foreboded a tragic close. But for the
general reader it became, with every chapter, still more interesting;
the poor child had a singularly musical gift of style,--a music which
lent itself naturally to pathos. Every very young writer knows how his
work, if one of feeling, will colour itself from the views of some
truth in his innermost self; and in proportion as it does so, how his
absorption in the work increases, till it becomes part and parcel of his
own mind and heart. The presence of a hidden sorrow may change the fate
of the beings he has created, and guide to the grave those whom, in a
happier vein, he would have united at the altar. It is not till a later
stage of experience and art that the writer escapes from the influence
of his individual personality, and lives in existences that take no
colourings from his own. Genius usually must pass through the subjective
process before it gains the objective. Even a Shakspeare represents
himself in the Sonnets before no trace of himself is visible in a
Falstaff or a Lear.

No news of the Englishman,--not a word. Isaura could not but feel that
in his words, his looks, that day in her own garden, and those yet
happier days at Enghien, there had been more than friendship; there
had been love,--love enough to justify her own pride in whispering to
herself, "And I love too." But then that last parting! how changed he
was! how cold! She conjectured that jealousy of Rameau might, in some
degree, account for the coldness when he first entered the room, but
surely not when he left; surely not when she had overpassed the reserve
of her sex, and implied by signs rarely misconstrued by those who love
that he had no cause for jealousy of another. Yet he had gone,--parted
with her pointedly as a friend, a mere friend. How foolish she had been
to think this rich ambitious foreigner could ever have meant to be more!
In the occupation of her work she thought to banish his image; but in
that work the image was never absent; there were passages in which
she pleadingly addressed it, and then would cease abruptly, stifled by
passionate tears. Still she fancied that the work would reunite them;
that in its pages he would hear her voice and comprehend her heart. And
thus all praise of the work became very, very dear to her.

At last, after many weeks, Savarin heard from Graham. The letter was
dated Aix-la-Chapelle, at which the Englishman said he might yet be some
time detained. In the letter Graham spoke chiefly of the new journal:
in polite compliment of Savarin's own effusions; in mixed praise
and condemnation of the political and social articles signed Pierre
Firmin,--praise of their intellectual power, condemnation of their moral
cynicism.

   "The writer," he said, "reminds me of a passage in which Montesquieu
   compares the heathen philosophers to those plants which the earth
   produces in places that have never seen the heavens. The soil of
   his experience does not grow a single belief; and as no community
   can exist without a belief of some kind, so a politician without
   belief can but help to destroy; he cannot reconstruct. Such writers
   corrupt a society; they do not reform a system."

He closed his letter with a reference to Isaura:

   "Do, in your reply, my dear Savarin, tell me something about your
   friends Signora Venosta and the Signorina, whose work, so far as yet
   published, I have read with admiring astonishment at the power of a
   female writer so young to rival the veteran practitioners of fiction
   in the creation of interest in imaginary characters, and in
   sentiments which, if they appear somewhat over-romantic and
   exaggerated, still touch very fine chords in human nature not
   awakened in our trite every-day existence. I presume that the
   beauty of the roman has been duly appreciated by a public so
   refined as the Parisian, and that the name of the author is
   generally known. No doubt she is now much the rage of the literary
   circles, and her career as a writer may be considered fixed. Pray
   present my congratulations to the Signorina when you see her."

Savarin had been in receipt of this letter some days before he called
on Isaura, and carelessly showed it to her. She took it to the window to
read, in order to conceal the trembling of her hands. In a few minutes
she returned it silently.

"Those Englishmen," said Savarin, "have not the heart of compliment. I
am by no means flattered by what he says of my trifles, and I dare say
you are still less pleased with this chilly praise of your charming
tale; but the man means to be civil."

"Certainly," said Isaura, smiling faintly.

"Only think of Rameau!" resumed Savarin. "On the strength of his salary
in the 'Sens Commun,' and on the chateaux en Espagne which he constructs
thereon, he has already furnished an apartment in the Chaussee d'Antin,
and talks of setting up a coupe in order to maintain the dignity of
letters when he goes to dine with the duchesses who are some day or
other to invite him. Yet I admire his self-confidence, though I laugh at
it. A man gets on by a spring in his own mechanism, and he should always
keep it wound up. Rameau will make a figure. I used to pity him; I begin
to respect. Nothing succeeds like success. But I see I am spoiling your
morning. Au revoir, mon enfant."

Left alone, Isaura brooded in a sort of mournful wonderment over the
words referring to herself in Graham's letter. Read though but once,
she knew them by heart. What! did he consider those characters she had
represented as wholly imaginary? In one--the most prominent, the
most attractive--could he detect no likeness to himself? What! did he
consider so "over-romantic and exaggerated" sentiments which couched
appeals from her heart to his? Alas! in matters of sentiment it is the
misfortune of us men that even the most refined of us often grate upon
some sentiment in a woman, though she may not be romantic,--not romantic
at all, as people go,--some sentiment which she thought must be so
obvious if we cared a straw about her, and which, though we prize
her above the Indies, is by our dim, horn-eyed, masculine vision
undiscernible. It may be something in itself the airiest of trifles: the
anniversary of a day in which the first kiss was interchanged, nay, of a
violet gathered, a misunderstanding cleared up; and of that anniversary
we remember no more than we do of our bells and coral. But she--she
remembers it; it is no bells and coral to her. Of course, much is to be
said in excuse of man, brute though he be. Consider the multiplicity
of his occupations, the practical nature of his cares. But granting the
validity of all such excuse, there is in man an original obtuseness of
fibre as regards sentiment in comparison with the delicacy of woman's.
It comes, perhaps, from the same hardness of constitution which forbids
us the luxury of ready tears. Thus it is very difficult for the wisest
man to understand thoroughly a woman. Goethe says somewhere that the
highest genius in man must have much of the woman in it. If this be
true, the highest genius alone in man can comprehend and explain the
nature of woman, because it is not remote from him, but an integral part
of his masculine self. I am not sure, however, that it necessitates the
highest genius, but rather a special idiosyncrasy in genius which the
highest may or may not have. I think Sophocles a higher genius than
Euripides; but Euripides has that idiosyncrasy, and Sophocles not. I
doubt whether women would accept Goethe as their interpreter with the
same readiness with which they would accept Schiller. Shakspeare, no
doubt, excels all poets in the comprehension of women, in his sympathy
with them in the woman-part of his nature which Goethe ascribes to the
highest genius; but, putting aside that "monster," I do not remember any
English poet whom we should consider conspicuously eminent in that lore,
unless it be the prose poet, nowadays generally underrated and little
read, who wrote the letters of Clarissa Harlowe. I say all this in
vindication of Graham Vane, if, though a very clever man in his way,
and by no means uninstructed in human nature, he had utterly failed in
comprehending the mysteries which to this poor woman-child seemed to
need no key for one who really loved her. But we have said somewhere
before in this book that music speaks in a language which cannot explain
itself except in music. So speaks, in the human heart, much which is
akin to music. Fiction (that is, poetry, whether in form of rhyme or
prose) speaks thus pretty often. A reader must be more commonplace
than, I trust, my gentle readers are, if he suppose that when Isaura
symbolized the real hero of her thoughts in the fabled hero of her
romance, she depicted him as one of whom the world could say, "That is
Graham Vane." I doubt if even a male poet would so vulgarize any woman
whom he thoroughly reverenced and loved. She is too sacred to him to
be thus unveiled to the public stare; as the sweetest of all ancient
love-poets says well--

        "Qui sapit in tacito gaudeat ille sinu."

But a girl, a girl in her first untold timid love, to let the world
know, "that is the man I love and would die for!"--if such a girl be,
she has no touch of the true woman-genius, and certainly she and Isaura
have nothing in common. Well, then, in Isaura's invented hero, though
she saw the archetypal form of Graham Vane,--saw him as in her young,
vague, romantic dreams idealized, beautified, transfigured,--he would
have been the vainest of men if he had seen therein the reflection of
himself. On the contrary he said, in the spirit of that jealousy to
which he was too prone, "Alas! this, then, is some ideal, already seen
perhaps, compared to which how commonplace am I!" and thus persuading
himself, no wonder that the sentiments surrounding this unrecognized
archetype appeared to him over-romantic. His taste acknowledged the
beauty of form which clothed them; his heart envied the ideal that
inspired them. But they seemed so remote from him; they put the
dreamland of the writer farther and farther from his workday real life.

In this frame of mind, then, he had written to Savarin, and the answer
he received hardened it still more. Savarin had replied, as was his
laudable wont in correspondence, the very day he received Graham's
letter, and therefore before he had even seen Isaura. In his reply,
he spoke much of the success her work had obtained; of the invitations
showered upon her, and the sensation she caused in the salons; of her
future career, with hope that she might even rival Madame de Grantmesnil
some day, when her ideas became emboldened by maturer experience, and
a closer study of that model of eloquent style,--saying that the young
editor was evidently becoming enamoured of his fair contributor; and
that Madame Savarin had ventured the prediction that the Signorina's
roman would end in the death of the heroine, and the marriage of the
writer.




CHAPTER V.

And still the weeks glided on: autumn succeeded to summer, the winter
to autumn; the season of Paris was at its height. The wondrous capital
seemed to repay its Imperial embellisher by the splendour and the joy
of its fetes. But the smiles on the face of Paris were hypocritical
and hollow. The Empire itself had passed out of fashion. Grave men
and impartial observers felt anxious. Napoleon had renounced les ideas
Napoleoniennes. He was passing into the category of constitutional
sovereigns, and reigning, not by his old undivided prestige, but by the
grace of party. The press was free to circulate complaints as to the
past and demands as to the future, beneath which the present reeled,
ominous of earthquake. People asked themselves if it were possible that
the Empire could co-exist with forms of government not imperial, yet not
genuinely constitutional, with a majority daily yielding to a minority.
The basis of universal suffrage was sapped. About this time the articles
in the "Sens Commun" signed Pierre Firmin were creating not only
considerable sensation, but marked effect on opinion; and the sale of
the journal was immense.

Necessarily the repute and the position of Gustave Rameau, as the avowed
editor of this potent journal, rose with its success. Nor only his
repute and position; bank-notes of considerable value were transmitted
to him by the publisher, with the brief statement that they were sent by
the sole proprietor of the paper as the editor's fair share of profit.
The proprietor was never named, but Rameau took it for granted that it
was M. Lebeau. M. Lebeau he had never seen since the day he had brought
him the list of contributors, and was then referred to the publisher,
whom he supposed M. Lebeau had secured, and received the first quarter
of his salary in advance. The salary was a trifle compared to the extra
profits thus generously volunteered. He called at Lebeau's office, and
saw only the clerk, who said that his chef was abroad.

Prosperity produced a marked change for the better, if not in the
substance of Rameau's character, at least in his manners and social
converse. He no longer exhibited that restless envy of rivals, which is
the most repulsive symptom of vanity diseased. He pardoned Isaura her
success; nay, he was even pleased at it. The nature of her work did not
clash with his own kind of writing. It was so thoroughly woman like
that one could not compare it to a man's. Moreover, that success had
contributed largely to the profits by which he had benefited, and to his
renown as editor of the journal which accorded place to this new-found
genius. But there was a deeper and more potent cause for sympathy with
the success of his fair young contributor. He had imperceptibly glided
into love with her,--a love very different from that with which poor
Julie Caumartin flattered herself she had inspired the young poet.
Isaura was one of those women for whom, even in natures the least
chivalric, love, however ardent, cannot fail to be accompanied with a
certain reverence,--the reverence with which the ancient knighthood, in
its love for women, honoured the ideal purity of womanhood itself. Till
then Rameau had never revered any one.

On her side, brought so frequently into communication with the young
conductor of the journal in which she wrote, Isaura entertained for him
a friendly, almost sister-like affection.

I do not think that, even if she had never known the Englishman, she
would have really become in love with Rameau, despite the picturesque
beauty of his countenance and the congeniality of literary pursuits; but
perhaps she might have fancied herself in love with him. And till one,
whether man or woman, has known real love, fancy is readily mistaken for
it. But little as she had seen of Graham, and that little not in itself
wholly favourable to him, she knew in her heart of hearts that his image
would never be replaced by one equally dear. Perhaps in those qualities
that placed him in opposition to her she felt his attractions. The
poetical in woman exaggerates the worth of the practical in man. Still
for Rameau her exquisitely kind and sympathizing nature conceived one of
those sentiments which in woman are almost angel-like. We have seen in
her letters to Madame de Grantmesnil that from the first he inspired her
with a compassionate interest; then the compassion was checked by her
perception of his more unamiable and envious attributes. But now those
attributes, if still existent, had ceased to be apparent to her, and the
compassion became unalloyed. Indeed, it was thus so far increased that
it was impossible for any friendly observer to look at the beautiful
face of this youth, prematurely wasted and worn, without the kindliness
of pity. His prosperity had brightened and sweetened the expression of
that face, but it had not effaced the vestiges of decay; rather perhaps
deepened them, for the duties of his post necessitated a regular labour,
to which he had been unaccustomed, and the regular labour necessitated,
or seemed to him to necessitate, an increase of fatal stimulants. He
imbibed absinthe with everything he drank, and to absinthe he united
opium. This, of course, Isaura knew not, any more than she knew of
his liaison with the "Ondine" of his muse; she saw only the increasing
delicacy of his face and form, contrasted by his increased geniality and
liveliness of spirits, and the contrast saddened her. Intellectually,
too, she felt for him compassion. She recognized and respected in him
the yearnings of a genius too weak to perform a tithe of what, in the
arrogance of youth, it promised to its ambition. She saw, too, those
struggles between a higher and a lower self, to which a weak degree of
genius united with a strong degree of arrogance is so often subjected.
Perhaps she overestimated the degree of genius, and what, if rightly
guided, it could do; but she did, in the desire of her own heavenlier
instinct, aspire to guide it heavenward. And as if she were twenty years
older than himself, she obeyed that desire in remonstrating and warning
and urging, and the young man took all these "preachments" with a
pleased submissive patience. Such, as the new year dawned upon the grave
of the old one, was the position between these two. And nothing more was
heard from Graham Vane.




CHAPTER VI.

It has now become due to Graham Vane, and to his place in the estimation
of my readers, to explain somewhat more distinctly the nature of the
quest in prosecution of which he had sought the aid of the Parisian
police, and under an assumed name made the acquaintance of M. Lebeau.

The best way of discharging this duty will perhaps be to place before
the reader the contents of the letter which passed under Graham's eyes
on the day in which the heart of the writer ceased to beat.

(Confidential. To be opened immediately after my death, and before the
perusal of my will.--Richard King.)

TO GRAHAM VANE, Esq.

