      in the frenzied despair of his breast--
  Debarred from the grace of the banquet,
      the service of goblets of gold,
  He flung on his children a curse
      for the splendour they dared to withhold,
  A curse prophetic and bitter--
      _The glory of wealth and of pride,
  With iron, not gold, in your hands,
      ye shall come, at the last, to divide_!
  Behold, how a shudder runs through me,
      lest now, in the fulness of time,
  The house-fiend awake and return,
      to mete out the measure of crime!
                                              [_Enter_ THE SPY.

THE SPY

  Take heart, ye daughters whom your mothers' milk
  Made milky-hearted! lo, our city stands,
  Saved from the yoke of servitude: the vaunts
  Of overweening men are silent now,
  And the State sails beneath a sky serene,
  Nor in the manifold and battering waves
  Hath shipped a single surge, and solid stands
  The rampart, and the gates are made secure,
  Each with a single champion's trusty guard.
  So in the main and at six gates we hold
  A victory assured; but, at the seventh,
  The god that on the seventh day was born,
  Royal Apollo, hath ta'en up his rest
  To wreak upon the sons of Oedipus
  Their grandsire's wilfulness of long ago.

CHORUS

  What further woefulness besets our home?

THE SPY

  The home stands safe--but ah, the princes twain--

CHORUS

  Who? what of them?  I am distraught with fear.

THE SPY

  Hear now, and mark! the sons of Oedipus--

CHORUS

  Ah, my prophetic soul!  I feel their doom.

THE SPY

  Have done with questions!--with their lives crushed out--

CHORUS

  Lie they out yonder? the full horror speak!
  Did hands meet hands more close than brotherly?
  Came fate on each, and in the selfsame hour?

THE SPY

  Yea, blotting out the lineage ill-starred!
  Now mix your exultation and your tears,
  Over a city saved, the while its lords,
  Twin leaders of the fight, have parcelled out
  With forged arbitrament of Scythian steel
  The full division of their fatherland,
  And, as their father's imprecation bade,
  Shall have their due of land, a twofold grave.
  So is the city saved; the earth has drunk
  Blood of twin princes, by each other slain.

CHORUS

  O mighty Zeus and guardian powers,
  The strength and stay of Cadmus' towers!
  Shall I send forth a joyous cry,
    _Hail to the lord of weal renewed_?
  Or weep the misbegotten twain,
  Born to a fatal destiny?
  Each numbered now among the slain,
     Each dying in ill fortitude,
  Each _truly named_, each _child of feud_?

  O dark and all-prevailing ill,
     That broods o'er Oedipus and all his line,
  Numbing my heart with mortal chill!
     Ah me, this song of mine,
  Which, Thyad-like, I woke, now falleth still,
     Or only tells of doom,
     And echoes round a tomb!

  Dead are they, dead! in their own blood they lie--
  Ill-omened the concent that hails our victory!
  The curse a father on his children spake
    Hath faltered not, nor failed!
  Nought, Laius! thy stubborn choice availed--
  First to beget, then, in the after day
      And for the city's sake,
      The child to slay!
      For nought can blunt nor mar
      The speech oracular!
    Children of teen! by disbelief ye erred--
  Yet in wild weeping came fulfilment of the word!
                          [ANTIGONE _and_ ISMENE _approach,
                             with a train of mourners, bearing the
                             bodies of_ ETEOCLES _and_ POLYNICES.

    Look up, look forth! the doom is plain,
    Nor spake the messenger in vain!
    A twofold sorrow, twofold strife--
    Each brave against a brother's life!
    In double doom hath sorrow come--
    How shall I speak it?--on the home!

  Alas, my sisters! be your sighs the gale,
  The smiting of your brows the plash of oars,
  Wafting the boat, to Acheron's dim shores
  That passeth ever, with its darkened sail,
  On its uncharted voyage and sunless way,
  Far from thy beams, Apollo, god of day--
    The melancholy bark
  Bound for the common bourn, the harbour of the dark!
    Look up, look yonder! from the home
    Antigone, Ismene come,
  On the last, saddest errand bound,
  To chant a dirge of doleful sound,
  With agony of equal pain
  Above their brethren slain!
  Their sister-bosoms surely swell,
  Heart with rent heart according well
  In grief for those who fought and fell!
  Yet--ere they utter forth their woe--
  We must awake the rueful strain
  To vengeful powers, in realms below,
  And mourn hell's triumph o'er the slain!

  Alas! of all, the breast who bind,--
  Yea, all the race of womankind--
    O maidens, ye are most bereaved!
  For you, for you the tear-drops start--
    Deem that in truth, and undeceived,
  Ye hear the sorrows of my heart!
    (_To the dead_.)
  Children of bitterness, and sternly brave--
    One, proud of heart against persuasion's voice,
    One, against exile proof! ye win your choice--
  Each in your fatherland, a separate grave!

    Alack, on house and heritage
  They brought a baneful doom, and death for wage!
  One strove through tottering walls to force his way,
  One claimed, in bitter arrogance, the sway,
    And both alike, even now and here,
  Have closed their suit, with steel for arbiter!
    And lo, the Fury-fiend of Oedipus, their sire,
  Hath brought his curse to consummation dire!
      Each in the left side smitten, see them laid--
        The children of one womb,
        Slain by a mutual doom!
      Alas, their fate! the combat murderous,
        The horror of the house,
      The curse of ancient bloodshed, now repaid!
      Yea, deep and to the heart the deathblow fell,
        Edged by their feud ineffable--
      By the grim curse, their sire did imprecate--
        Discord and deadly hate!
      Hark, how the city and its towers make moan--
      How the land mourns that held them for its own!
      Fierce greed and fell division did they blend,
        Till death made end!
      They strove to part the heritage in twain,
        Giving to each a gain--
      Yet that which struck the balance in the strife,
        The arbitrating sword,
      By those who loved the twain is held abhorred--
      Loathed is the god of death, who sundered each from life!
        Here, by the stroke of steel, behold! they lie--
          And rightly may we cry
    _Beside their fathers, let them here be laid--
    Iron gave their doom, with iron their graves be made--
    Alack, the slaying sword, alack, th' entombing spade_!

    Alas, a piercing shriek, a rending groan,
    A cry unfeigned of sorrow felt at heart!
    With shuddering of grief, with tears that start,
    With wailful escort, let them hither come--
    For one or other make divided moan!
    No light lament of pity mixed with gladness,
    But with true tears, poured from the soul of sadness,
  Over the princes dead and their bereaved home

    Say we, above these brethren dead,
      _On citizen, on foreign foe,
    Brave was their rush, and stern their blow--
      Now, lowly are they laid_!
    Beyond all women upon earth
    Woe, woe for her who gave them birth!
    Unknowingly, her son she wed--
    The children of that marriage-bed,
    Each in the self-same womb, were bred--
    Each by a brother's hand lies dead!

  Yea, from one seed they sprang, and by one fate
      Their heritage is desolate,
    The heart's division sundered claim from claim,
      And, from their feud, death came!
      Now is their hate allayed,
      Now is their life-stream shed,
    Ensanguining the earth with crimson dye--
  Lo, from one blood they sprang, and in one blood they lie!
    A grievous arbiter was given the twain--
      The stranger from the northern main,
        The sharp, dividing sword,
        Fresh from the forge and fire
    The War-god treacherous gave ill award
  And brought their father's curse to a fulfilment dire!
      They have their portion--each his lot and doom,
        Given from the gods on high!
      Yea, the piled wealth of fatherland, for tomb,
        Shall underneath them lie!
      Alas, alas!  with flowers of fame and pride
        Your home ye glorified;
      But, in the end, the Furies gathered round
        With chants of boding sound,

  Shrieking, _In wild defeat and disarray,
    Behold, ye pass away_!
  The sign of Ruin standeth at the gate,
    There, where they strove with Fate--
  And the ill power beheld the brothers' fall,
    And triumphed over all!
                                   ANTIGONE, ISMENE, _and_ CHORUS
                                     (_Processional Chant_)

  Thou wert smitten, in smiting,
    Thou didst slay, and wert slain--
  By the spear of each other
    Ye lie on the plain,
  And ruthless the deed that ye wrought was,
    and ruthless the death of the twain!

  Take voice, O my sorrow!
    Flow tear upon tear--
  Lay the slain by the slayer,
    Made one on the bier!
  Our soul in distraction is lost,
    and we mourn o'er the prey of the spear!

  Ah, woe for your ending,
    Unbrotherly wrought!
  And woe for the issue,
    The fray that ye fought,
  The doom of a mutual slaughter
    whereby to the grave ye are brought!

  Ah, twofold the sorrow--
    The heard and the seen!
  And double the tide
    Of our tears and our teen,
  As we stand by our brothers in death
    and wail for the love that has been!

  O grievous the fate
  That attends upon wrong!
  Stern ghost of our sire,
  Thy vengeance is long!
  Dark Fury of hell and of death, the hands of thy
  kingdom are strong!

  O dark were the sorrows
  That exile hath known!
  He slew, but returned not
  Alive to his own!
  He struck down a brother, but fell, in the moment of
  triumph hewn down!

  O lineage accurst,
  O doom and despair!
  Alas, for their quarrel,
  The brothers that were!
  And woe! for their pitiful end, who once were our
  love and our care!

  O grievous the fate
  That attends upon wrong!
  Stern ghost of our sire,
  Thy vengeance is long!
  Dark  Fury of hell and of death,  the hands of thy
  kingdom are strong!

  By proof have ye learnt it!
  At once and as one,
  O brothers beloved,
  To death ye were done!
  Ye came to the  strife of the sword, and behold! ye
  are both overthrown!

  O grievous the tale is,
  And grievous their fall,
  To the house, to the land,
  And to me above all!
  Ah God! for the curse that hath come, the sin and
  the ruin withal!

  O children distraught,
  Who in madness have died!
  Shall ye rest with old kings
  In the place of their pride?
  Alas for the wrath of your sire if he findeth you laid
  by his side!
                                           [_Enter a_ HERALD.

HERALD

  I bear command to tell to one and all
  What hath approved itself and now is law,
  Ruled by the counsellors of Cadmus' town.
  For this Eteocles, it is resolved
  To lay him on his earth-bed, in this soil,
  Not without care and kindly sepulture.
  For why? he hated those who hated us,
  And, with all duties blamelessly performed
  Unto the sacred ritual of his sires,
  He met such end as gains our city's grace,--
  With auspices that do ennoble death.
  Such words I have in charge to speak of him:
  But of his brother Polynices, this--
  Be he cast out unburied, for the dogs
  To rend and tear: for he presumed to waste
  The land of the Cadmeans, had not Heaven--
  Some god of those who aid our fatherland--
  Opposed his onset, by his brother's spear,
  To whom, tho' dead, shall consecration come!
  Against him stood this wretch, and brought a horde
  Of foreign foemen, to beset our town.
  He therefore shall receive his recompense,
  Buried ignobly in the maw of kites--
  No women-wailers to escort his corpse
  Nor pile his tomb nor shrill his dirge anew--
  Unhouselled, unattended, cast away!
  So, for these brothers, doth our State ordain.

ANTIGONE

  And I--to those who make such claims of rule
  In Cadmus' town--I, though no other help,
  (_Pointing to the body of_ POLYNICES)
  I, I will bury this my brother's corse
  And risk your wrath and what may come of it!
  It shames me not to face the State, and set
  Will against power, rebellion resolute:
  Deep in my heart is set my sisterhood,
  My common birthright with my brothers, born
  All of one womb, her children who, for woe,
  Brought forth sad offspring to a sire ill-starred.
  Therefore, my soul! take thou thy willing share,
  In aid of him who now can will no more,
  Against this outrage: be a sister true,
  While yet thou livest, to a brother dead!
  Him never shall the wolves with ravening maw
  Rend and devour: I do forbid the thought!
  I for him, I--albeit a woman weak--
  In place of burial-pit, will give him rest
  By this protecting handful of light dust
  Which, in the lap of this poor linen robe,
  I bear to hallow and bestrew his corpse
  With the due covering. Let none gainsay!
  Courage and craft shall arm me, this to do.

HERALD

  I charge thee, not to flout the city's law!

ANTIGONE

  I charge thee, use no useless heralding!

HERALD

  Stern is a people newly 'scaped from death.

ANTIGONE

  Whet thou their sternness! Burial he shall have.

HERALD

