against what they themselves sold to Philip. The former did not come to
us in exchange for the latter. Far from it! For had it not been for
them, not only should we have had the former, as we have now, but we
should have had the latter as well.

{91} You would doubtless admit, men of Athens, in general terms, that,
on the one hand, however many and terrible the disasters that have
befallen the city, your anger cannot justly be visited upon Aeschines,
if none of them has been caused by him; and that, on the other hand,
Aeschines is not entitled to be acquitted on account of any
satisfactory results that may have been accomplished through the action
of others. You must examine the acts of Aeschines himself, and then
show him your favour if he is worthy of it, or your resentment, on the
other hand, if his acts prove to be deserving ing of that. {92} How,
then, can you solve this problem fairly? You will do so if, instead of
allowing him to confound all questions with one another--the criminal
conduct of the generals, the war with Philip, the blessings that flow
from peace--you consider each point by itself. For instance, were we at
war with Philip? We were. Does any one accuse Aeschines on that ground?
Does any one wish to bring any charge against him in regard to things
that were done in the course of the war? No one whatever. He is
therefore acquitted in regard to such matters, and must not say
anything about them; for the witnesses and the proofs which a defendant
produces must bear upon the matters which are in dispute; he must not
deceive you by offering a defence upon points which are not disputed.
Take care, then, that you say nothing about the war; for no one charges
you with any responsibility for that. {93} Later on we were urged by
certain persons to make peace. We consented; we sent ambassadors; and
the ambassadors brought commissioners to Athens who were to conclude
the Peace. Once more, does any one blame Aeschines for this? Does any
one allege that Aeschines introduced the proposal of peace, or that he
committed any crime in bringing commissioners here to make it? No one
whatever. He must therefore say nothing in regard to the fact that the
city made peace; for he is not responsible for that. {94} 'Then what
_is_ your assertion, sir?' I may be asked. 'At what point _do_ your
charges begin?' They begin, men of Athens, from the time when the
question before you was not whether you should make peace or not (for
that had already been settled), but what sort of peace you should
make--when Aeschines opposed those who took the side of justice,
supported for a bribe the hireling mover of the decree, and afterwards,
when he had been chosen to receive the oaths, failed to carry out every
one of your instructions, destroyed those of your allies who had passed
unscathed through the war, and told you falsehoods whose enormity and
grossness has never been surpassed, either before or since. At the
outset, before Philip was given a hearing in regard to the Peace,
Ctesiphon and Aristodemus took the leading part in the work of
deception; but when the time had come for action, they surrendered
their role to Philocrates and Aeschines, who took it up and ruined
everything. {95} And then, when he is bound to answer for his actions
and to give satisfaction for them--like the unscrupulous God-forsaken
clerk that he is--he will defend himself as though it were the Peace
for which he was being tried. Not that he wishes to account for more
than is charged against him--that would be lunacy. No! He sees rather
that in all his own proceedings no good can be found--that his crimes
are his whole history; while a defence of the Peace, if it has no other
merits, has at least the kindly sound of the name to recommend it. {96}
I fear, indeed, men of Athens, I fear that, unconsciously, we are
enjoying this Peace like men who borrow at heavy interest. The
guarantees of its security--the Phocians and Thermopylae--they have
betrayed. But, be that as it may, it was not through _Aeschines_ that
we originally made it; for, paradoxical as it may seem, what I am about
to say is absolutely true--that if any one is honestly pleased at the
Peace, it is the generals, who are universally denounced, that he must
thank for it: for had they been conducting the war as you desired them
to do, {97}you would not have tolerated even the name of peace. For
peace, then, we must thank the generals; but the perilous, the
precarious, the untrustworthy nature of the Peace is due to the
corruption of these men. Cut him off, then, cut him off, I say, from
all arguments in defence of the Peace! Set him to defend his own
actions! Aeschines is not being tried on account of the Peace. On the
contrary, the Peace stands discredited owing to Aeschines. And here is
evidence of the fact:--if the Peace had been made, and if no subsequent
deception had been practised upon you, and none of your allies had been
ruined, who on earth would have been hurt by the Peace, except in so
far as it was inglorious? And for its inglorious character the
defendant in fact shares the responsibility, for he spoke in support of
Philocrates. At least no irreparable harm would have been done; whereas
now, I believe, much has been done, and the guilt rests with the
defendant. {98} That these men have been the agents in this shameful
and wicked work of ruin and destruction, I think you all know. Yet so
far am I, gentlemen of the jury, from putting any unfair construction
upon these facts or asking you to do so, that if it has been through
stupidity or simplicity, or ignorance in any form whatever, that such
results have been so brought about, I acquit Aeschines myself, and I
{99} recommend you also to acquit him. At the same time none of these
excuses is either constitutional[n] or justifiable. For you neither
command nor compel any one to undertake public business; but when any
one has satisfied himself of his own capacity and has entered political
life, then, like good-hearted, kindly men, you welcome him in a
friendly and ungrudging manner, and even elect him to office and place
your own interests in his hands. {100} Then, if a man succeeds, he will
receive honour and will so far have an advantage over the crowd. But if
he fails, is he to plead palliations and excuses? That is not fair. It
would not satisfy our ruined allies, or their children, or their wives,
or the rest of the victims, to know that it was through my
stupidity--not to speak of the stupidity of the defendant--that they
had suffered such a fate. Far from it! {101} Nevertheless, I bid you
forgive Aeschines for these atrocious and unparalleled crimes if he can
prove that it was simplicity of mind, or any form of ignorance
whatever, which led him to work such ruin. But if it was the rascality
of a man who had taken money and bribes--if he is plainly convicted of
this by the very facts themselves--then, if it be possible, put him to
death; or if not, make him, while he lives, an example to others.

And now give your thoughts to the proof by which he is convicted on
these points, and observe how straightforward it will be.

{102} If the defendant Aeschines was not deliberately deceiving you for
a price, he must necessarily, I presume, have had one of two reasons
for making the statements in question to you, in regard to the Phocians
and Thespiae and Euboea. Either he must have heard Philip promise in
express terms that such would be his policy and the steps he would
take; or else he must have been so far bewitched and deluded by
Philip's generosity in all other matters as to conceive these further
hopes of him. There is no possible alternative besides these two. {103}
Now in both these cases he, more than any living man, ought to detest
Philip. And why? Because, so far as Philip could bring it about, all
that is most dreadful and most shameful has fallen upon him. He has
deceived you; his reputation is gone [he is rightly ruined]; he is on
his trial; aye, and were the course of the proceedings in any way that
which his conduct called for, he would long ago have been impeached;[n]
{104-109} whereas now, thanks to your innocence and meekness, he
presents his report, and that at the time which suits his own wishes. I
ask, then, if there is one among you who has ever heard Aeschines raise
his voice in denunciation of Philip--one, I say, who has seen Aeschines
exposing him or saying a word against him? Not one! All Athens
denounces Philip before Aeschines does so. Every one whom you meet does
so, though not one of them has been injured by him--I mean, of course,
personally. On the assumption that Aeschines had not sold himself, I
should have expected to hear him use some such expressions as
these--'Men of Athens, deal with _me_ as you will. I trusted Philip; I
was deceived; I was wrong; I confess my error. But beware of _him_, men
of Athens. He is faithless--a cheat, a knave. Do you not see how he has
treated me? how he has deceived me?' {110} But I hear no such
expressions fall from him, nor do you. And why? Because he was _not_
misled; he was _not_ deceived; he made these statements, he betrayed
all to Philip, because he had sold his services and received the money
for them; and gallantly and loyally has he behaved--as Philip's
hireling. But as your ambassador, as your fellow citizen, he is a
traitor who deserves to die, not once, but thrice.

{111} This is not the only evidence which proves that all those
statements of his were made for money. For, recently, the Thessalians
came to you, and with them envoys from Philip, demanding that you
should decree the recognition of Philip as one of the Amphictyons. Who
then, of all men, should naturally have opposed the demand? The
defendant Aeschines. And why? Because Philip had acted in a manner
precisely contrary to the announcement which Aeschines had made to you.
{112} Aeschines declared that Philip would fortify Thespiae and
Plataeae; that he intended, not to destroy the Phocians, but to put
down the insolence of Thebes. But in fact Philip has raised the Thebans
to an undue height of power, while he has utterly destroyed the
Phocians; and instead of fortifying Thespiae and Plataeae, he has
brought Orchomenus and Coroneia into the same bondage with them. How
could any contradiction be greater than this? Aeschines did not oppose
the demand. He neither opened his lips nor uttered a sound in
opposition to it. {113} But even this, monstrous as it is, is not yet
the worst. For he, and he alone, in all Athens, actually supported the
demand. This not even Philocrates dared to do, abominable as he was; it
was left for the defendant Aeschines. And when you raised a clamour and
would not listen to him, he stepped down from the platform, and,
showing off before the envoys who had come from Philip, told them that
there were plenty of men who made a clamour, but few who took the field
when it was required of them--you remember the incident, no
doubt--being himself, of course, a marvellous soldier, God knows!

{114} Again, if we had been unable to prove that any of the ambassadors
had received anything--if the fact were not patent to all--we might
then have resorted to examination by torture,[n] and other such
methods. But if Philocrates not only admitted the fact frequently in
your presence at the Assembly, but used actually to make a parade of
his guilt--selling wheat, building houses, saying that he was going[n]
whether you elected him or not, importing timber, changing Macedonian
gold openly at the bank--it is surely impossible for _him_ to deny that
he received money, when he himself confesses and displays his guilt.
{115} Now, is any human being so senseless or so ill-starred that, in
order that Philocrates might receive money, while he himself incurred
infamy and disgrace, he would want to fight against those upright
citizens in whose ranks he might have stood, and to take the side of
Philocrates and face a trial? I am sure that there is no such man; but
in all these considerations, if you examine them aright, you will find
strong and evident signs of the corruption of the defendant.

{116} Consider next an incident which occurred last in order of time,
but which is second to none as an indication that Aeschines had sold
himself to Philip. You doubtless know that in the course of the recent
impeachment of Philocrates by Hypereides, I came forward and expressed
my dissatisfaction with one feature of the impeachment--namely, the
idea that Philocrates alone had been responsible for all these
monstrous crimes, and that the other nine ambassadors had no share in
them. I said that it was not so, for Philocrates by himself would have
been nowhere, had he not had some of them to co-operate with him. {117}
'And therefore,' I said, 'in order that I may not personally acquit or
accuse any one, and that the guilty may be detected, and those who have
had no share in the crime acquitted by the evidence of their own
conduct, let any one who wishes to do so rise and come forward into
your midst, and let him declare that he has no share in it, and that
the actions of Philocrates are displeasing to him. Any one who does
this,' I said, 'I acquit.' You remember the incident, I am sure. {118}
Well, no one came forward or showed himself. Each of the others has
some excuse. One was not liable to examination; another, perhaps, was
not present; a third is related to Philocrates. But Aeschines has no
such excuse. No! So completely has he sold himself, once for all--so
plain is it that his wages are not for past services only, but that, if
he escapes now, Philip can equally count upon his help against you in
the future--that to avoid letting fall even a word that would be
unfavourable to Philip, he does not accept his discharge[n] even when
you offer to discharge him, but chooses to suffer infamy, to stand his
trial and to endure any treatment in this court, rather than to take a
step that would not please Philip. {119} But what is the meaning of
this partnership, this careful forethought for Philocrates? For if
Philocrates had by his diplomacy accomplished the most honourable
results and achieved all that your interest required, and yet admitted
(as he did admit) that he had made money by his mission, this very fact
was one by which an uncorrupted colleague should have been repelled and
set him on his guard, and led to protest to the best of his power.
Aeschines has not acted in this way. Is it not all clear, men of
Athens? Do not the facts cry aloud and tell you that Aeschines has
taken money, that he is a rascal for a price, and that
consistently--not through stupidity, or ignorance, or bad luck? {120}
'But where is the witness who testifies to my corruption?' he asks.
Why, this is the finest thing of all![n] The witnesses, Aeschines, are
facts; and they are the surest of all witnesses: none can assert or
allege against them, that they are influenced by persuasion or by
favour to any one: what your treachery and mischief have made them,
such, when examined, they must appear. But, besides the facts, you
shall at once bear witness against yourself. Come, stand up[n] and
answer me! Surely you will not plead that you are so inexperienced as
not to know what to say. For when, under the ordinary limitations of
time, you prosecute and win cases that have all the novelty of a
play[n]--cases, too, that have no witness to support them--you must
plainly be a speaker of tremendous genius.

{121} Many and atrocious as are the crimes of the defendant Aeschines,
and great as is the wickedness which is implied by them (as I am sure
you also feel) there is none which is more atrocious than that of which
I am about to speak to you, and none which will afford more palpable
proof that he has taken bribes and sold everything. For when once more,
for the third time, you sent the ambassadors to Philip on the strength
of those high and noble expectations which the defendant's promises had
roused, you elected both Aeschines and myself, and most of those whom
you had previously sent. {122} For my part I came forward and declined
upon oath to serve;[n] and though some raised a clamour and bade me go,
I declared that I would not; but the defendant had already been
elected. Afterwards, when the Assembly had risen, he and his party met
and discussed whom they should leave behind in Athens. For while
everything was still in suspense, and the future doubtful, there were
all kinds of gatherings and discussions in the market-place. {123} They
were afraid, no doubt, that a special meeting of the Assembly might
suddenly be called, and that you might then hear the truth from me, and
pass some of the resolutions which it was your duty to pass in the
interest of the Phocians, and that so Philip's object might slip from
his grasp. For had you merely passed a resolution and shown them the
faintest ray of hope of any kind, the Phocians would have been saved.
It was absolutely impossible for Philip to stay where he was, unless
you were misled. There was no corn in the country, for, owing to the
war, the land had not been sown; and to import corn was impossible so
long as your ships were there and in command of the sea; while the
Phocian towns were many in number, and difficult to take except by a
prolonged siege. Even assuming that he were taking a town a day, there
are two and twenty of them. {124} For all these reasons they left
Aeschines in Athens, to guard against any alteration of the course
which you had been deluded into taking. Now to decline upon oath to
serve, without any cause, was a dangerous and highly suspicious
proceeding. 'What?' he would have been asked, 'are you not going on the
mission which is to secure all those wonderful good things which you
have foretold?' Yet he was bound to remain. How could it be done? He
pleads illness. His brother took with him Execestus the physician, came
before the Council, swore that Aeschines was too ill to serve, and was
himself elected in his place. {125} Five or six days later the ruin of
the Phocians had been accomplished, and Aeschines' contract--a mere
matter of business--had been fulfilled. Dercylus turned back, and on
his arrival here from Chalcis announced to you the destruction of the
Phocians, while you were holding an Assembly in the Peiraeus. On
hearing the news you were naturally struck with sympathy for them, and
with terror for yourselves. You passed resolutions to bring in your
children and wives from the country, to repair the garrison-forts, to
fortify the Peiraeus, and to celebrate the sacrifice to Heracles within
the city walls: {126} and in the midst of all this, in the midst of the
confusion and the tumult which had fallen upon the city, this learned
and able speaker, so loud of voice, though not elected[n] either by the
Council or by the people, set off as ambassador to the man who had
wrought the destruction, taking no account of the illness which he had
previously made his excuse, upon oath, for not serving, nor of the
election of another ambassador in his place, nor of the law which
imposes the penalty of death for such offences; {127} nor yet
reflecting how utterly atrocious it was, that after announcing that the
Thebans had placed a price on his head, he should choose the moment
when the Thebans had (in addition to all Boeotia, which they already
possessed) become masters of the territory of the Phocians as well, to
go into the very midst of Thebes, and into the very camp of the
Thebans. But so beside himself was he, so utterly bent upon his profits
and his bribe, that he ruled out and overlooked all such
considerations, and took his departure.

{128} Such was the nature of this transaction; and yet his proceedings
when he arrived at his destination are far worse. All of you who are
present, and all other Athenians as well, thought the treatment of the
unhappy Phocians so atrocious and so cruel that you sent to the Pythian
games neither the official deputation from the Council, nor the
Thesmothetae,[n] but abandoned that ancient representation of
yourselves at the festival. But Aeschines went to the triumphal
feast[n] with which the Thebans and Philip were celebrating the victory
of their cause and their arms. He joined in the festival: he shared in
the libations and the prayers which Philip offered over the ruined
walls and country and arms of your allies: with Philip he set garlands
on his head, and raised the paean, and drank the loving-cup. {129} Nor
is it possible for the defendant to give a different version of the
facts from that which I have given. As regards his sworn refusal to
serve, the facts are in your public records in the Metroon,[n] guarded
by your officer; and a decree stands recorded with express reference to
the name of Aeschines.[n] And as for his conduct there, his fellow
ambassadors, who were present, will bear witness against him. They told
me the story; for I was not with them on this Embassy, having entered a
sworn refusal to serve.

(_To the clerk._) {130} Now read me the resolution [and the record],
and call the witnesses.

[_The decree is read, and the witnesses called._]

What prayers, then, do you imagine Philip offered to the gods, when he
poured his libation, or the Thebans? Did they not ask them to give
success in war, and victory, to themselves and their allies, and the
contrary to the allies of the Phocians? In these prayers, therefore--in
these imprecations upon his own country--Aeschines joined. It is for
you to return them upon his own head to-day.

{131} His departure, then, was a contravention of the law which imposes
the penalty of death for the offence, and it has been shown that on his
arrival he acted in a manner for which he deserves to die again and
again, while his former proceedings and the work which he did as
ambassador, in their interest,[n] would justly slay him. Ask yourselves
what penalty can be found, which will adequately atone for all these
crimes? {132} It would surely be shameful, men of Athens, that while
all of you, and the whole people, denounce publicly all the
consequences of the Peace; while you decline to take part in the
business of the Amphictyons; while your attitude towards Philip is one
of vexation and mistrust, because the deeds that have been done are
impious and atrocious, instead of righteous and advantageous to you;
that nevertheless, when you have come into court as the sworn
representatives of the State, to sit in judgement upon the report of
these proceedings, you should acquit the author of all the evil, when
you have taken him red-handed in actions like these. {133} Who is there
of all your fellow citizens--nay, who of all the Hellenes--that would
not have good cause for complaint against you, when he saw that though
you were enraged against Philip, who in making peace after war was
merely purchasing the means to his end from those who offered them for
sale--a very pardonable transaction--you were yet acquitting Aeschines,
who sold your interests in this shameful manner, notwithstanding the
extreme penalties which the laws appoint for such conduct?

{134} Now it is possible that an argument may also be used by the other
side to some such effect as this--that the condemnation of those whose
diplomacy brought about the Peace will mean the beginning of enmity
with Philip. If this is true, then, I can imagine, upon consideration,
no more serious charge that I could bring against the defendant, than
this. If Philip, who spent his money on the Peace which he wished to
obtain, has become so formidable, so powerful, that you have already
ceased to regard your oaths and the justice of the case, and are
seeking how you can gratify Philip, what penalty, that those who are
responsible for this could suffer, would be adequate to the offence?
{135} I believe, however, that I shall actually show you that it would
more probably mean the beginning of a friendship, advantageous to you.
For you must be well assured, men of Athens, that Philip does not
despise your city; nor was it because he regarded you as less
serviceable than the Thebans, that he preferred them to you. No! {136}
He had been instructed by these men and had heard from them, what I
once told you in the Assembly, without contradiction from any of them,
that the People is the most unstable thing in the world, and the most
incalculable, inconstant as a wave of the sea, stirred by any chance
wind. One comes, another goes; but no one cares for the public
interest, or remembers it. Philip needs (he is told) friends upon whom
he can rely to execute and manage his business with you--such friends,
for instance, as his informant.[n] If this were secured for him, he
would easily effect all that he desired in Athens. {137} Now if he
heard that those who had used such language to him had immediately upon
their return been beaten to death, he would doubtless have behaved as
the Persian king did. And how was this? He had been deceived by
Timagoras,[n] and had given him, it is said, forty talents; but when he
heard that Timagoras had been put to death here, and had not even power
to secure his own life, much less to carry out the promises he had made
to him, he recognized that he had not paid the price to the man who had
the power to effect his object. For first, as you know, he sent a
dispatch, acknowledging once more your title to Amphipolis, which he
had previously described as in alliance and friendship with himself;
and secondly, he thenceforward wholly abstained from giving money to
any one. {138} This is exactly what Philip would have done, if he had
