Hakon Jarl now had the advantage, confident that the gods had accepted
the sacrifice of his son, and intended to give him the victory. It is
said that some saw the maidens of Odin, the Valkyrias, standing at the
prow of Hakon's ship, sending forth a deadly hail of unerring arrows.

The vikings fought half blindly, though they were sorely pressed, and
their decks were slippery with the slush of blood and melting hail, and
in spite of the twilight and the raging storm they still held their
own. But at last Earl Sigvaldi began to lose heart.

"It seems to me," he cried, "that it is not men whom we have to fight
today, but the worst fiends."

Some one reminded him of the vow he had taken at King Sweyn's
inheritance feast.

"I did not vow to fight against fiends!" he answered; and, seeing Earl
Hakon making ready for a renewed onslaught, he added: "Now I will flee,
and all my men with me, for the battle is worse than when I spoke of it
before, and I will stand it no longer."

He turned away his ship, shouting to Vagn and Bui, whose ships were now
close to his own, to follow in all haste. But these two champions were
braver than their chief. Vagn Akison saw Sigvaldi retreating, and cried
out to him in a frenzy of rage:

"Why dost thou flee, thou evil hound, and leave thy men in the lurch?
That shame shall cling to thee all the days of thy life!"

Earl Sigvaldi made no reply, and it was well for him that he did not;
for at the same instant a spear was hurled from Vagn's hand at the man
who was at the helm, in the post usually occupied by the chief. But
Sigvaldi, being cold, had taken one of the oars to warm himself, so
that the man at the rudder was killed instead.

Confusion now spread throughout the fleet of the vikings. The line was
broken, and five and twenty of their ships followed in the wake of Earl
Sigvaldi. At last only Vagn Akison and Bui the Thick were left. And now
Earl Hakon pulled up alongside the ship of Bui, and a combat ensued,
which has scarcely had its equal in all the battles of the Northmen.
Two great berserks of Jomsburg--Havard the Hewer and Aslak
Rockskull--vaulted over the gunwale of Hakon's ship and made tremendous
havoc, until an Icelander seized an anvil that lay on the deck and
dashed it against Aslak's head. Havard had both his feet cut off, but
fought on furiously, standing on his knees. The spears and arrows
whizzed about the head of Earl Hakon, and his coat of mail was so rent
and cut that it fell off from him. It seemed now that the few
Jomsvikings who were left would have the glory of victory all to
themselves. But in the thick of the fight Earl Erik Hakonson, with a
throng of men, boarded the galley of Bui the Thick, and in the first
onslaught Bui received a sword cut across his lips and chin. He did not
flinch, but tried to pass off his injury with a jest.

"The pretty women in Borgund holm will not now be so fond of kissing
me," said he.

Then the Norwegians pressed in a great throng against him, and he saw
that further resistance was useless. He took up two chests of gold, one
in either arm, and mounting the gunwale of his ship, cried out:
"Overboard all folk of Bui!" and sprang into the sea. Thereupon many of
his men followed his example, while the rest were slain. So was Bui's
ship cleared from stem to stern.

Vagn Akison and Olaf Triggvison were now the only two champions
remaining out of all the vikings of Jomsburg, and they had no more than
fifty men to support them. Earl Erik now boarded their dragonship, and
there was a fierce fight. But the Norwegians had the larger company,
and when all but thirty of the vikings were slain, Vagn Akison
surrendered and called upon Olaf to follow his example.

"Never shall it be said that I surrendered to any man!" cried Olaf
proudly. "Rather would I die fighting."

And, gripping his battleaxe, he prepared to resist all who should come
near him. But strong and valiant though he was, he could not hold his
own against the crowd of warriors then gathered about him. He was
seized from behind, disarmed, and bound hand and foot with strong
ropes. In like manner were Vagn Akison and all the other captives bound.

At nightfall they were taken to the shore where Earl Hakon had landed
and pitched his tents.

Now, it was a question with Earl Hakon what he should do with these
thirty captives. He did not doubt that, because they were all that
remained of the Jomsburgers, they were therefore the bravest and
stoutest of all the vikings who had engaged in the great battle, and he
feared that if they were allowed to live they would surely bring some
great trouble upon him. So he ordered them to be slain. This order,
added to the fact of his having sacrificed his own son for the sake of
victory, was remembered against him by the Norwegians in the after
time, and it went far towards gaining for him the hatred of his people.

Early in the morning Vagn and Olaf, with their thirty comrades, were
led out in front of the tents for execution. They were made to sit in a
row on the trunk of a fallen tree. Their feet were bound with ropes,
but their hands were left free. The man who was to act as executioner
was one Thorkel Leira, a stalwart warrior, who had done great deeds in
the battle. Now, this same Thorkel was an old enemy of Vagn Akison, and
at the arvel of King Sweyn, Vagn had taken a solemn oath that he would
be the death of him. It seemed that, like all the other vikings who had
spoken so boldly at that feast, Vagn was to be cheated of his vow, yet
he resolved to meet his death bravely.

When all was ready Thorkel appeared before the captives, carrying a
great axe. He put Vagn Akison at the end of the log, intending to keep
him to the last in order to increase his agony. But Vagn sat chatting
and joking with his companions, and there was much laughter. Earl Hakon
wanted to know if these men were as hardy, and if their disregard of
death were as firm, as report told, and each of them, when his turn
came to be dealt with by the executioner, was asked some question,
as--"How likest thou to die?" and each answered in his own fashion.

"I should not be a worthy Jomsviking if I were afraid of death," said
one; and then Thorkel dealt him the blow. Another said: "It is a great
satisfaction to die by the hand of a brave warrior, although I would
like better if I were allowed a chance of first striking a blow at
him." And a third: "I shall at least die in good company; but first,
let me tighten my belt." One of them said: "I like very well to die,
but strike me quickly; I have my cloak clasp in my hand, and I will
thrust it into the earth if I wot of anything after my head is off." So
the head was smitten from him, and down fell the clasp from his
nerveless hand.

Eighteen of the vikings had been slain when it came to the turn of Olaf
Triggvison, and at this moment Earl Erik came upon the scene. Olaf
bared his neck, and swept up his long golden hair in a coil over his
head.

"Let none of the blood fall upon my hair!" said he. So Thorkel told one
of the bystanders to hold the coil of hair while he struck off Olaf's
head. The man took the beautiful hair in his two hands and held it
fast, while Olaf stretched forth his neck. Thorkel hove up his axe.
Then Olaf snatched back his head sharply, and so it happened that the
blow hit the man who had hold of his hair, and the axe took off both
his hands.

"Who is this goodly young man?" asked Earl Erik, stepping forward in
front of Olaf.

"The lads call me Ole the Esthonian," Olaf replied.

"You are no Esthonian born," returned Erik. "Of what land are you,
then?"

"What matters it, so long as I am from Jomsburg?" asked Olaf.

"I had thought you were of Norway," Erik said, "and if that be so it
were not well that you should die. What is your age?"

Olaf answered: "If I live this winter I shall be three and twenty
winters old."

Erik said, "You shall live this winter if I have my will, for I do not
like to see one so handsome and strong put to such a death as this.
Will you have peace?"

"That depends upon who it is that offers me life," said Olaf.

"He offers it who has the power--Earl Erik himself," answered the earl.

"Then I gladly accept," said Olaf. And Earl Erik ordered his men to set
Olaf free from his tether.

At this Thorkel Leira grew wrothful, fearing that since the earl was in
a forgiving mood he himself would perhaps be thwarted in his vengeance
on Vagn Akison.

"Though you, Earl Erik, give peace to all these men," he cried, "yet
never shall Vagn Akison depart hence alive."  And brandishing his axe
he rushed towards his enemy. One of the men on the log, however, seeing
his chief's danger, flung himself forward so that Thorkel stumbled and
fell, dropping his axe. Instantly Vagn Akison sprang to his feet,
seized the axe, and dealt Thorkel Leira his death blow.

Thus Vagn Akison was the only one of the Jomsvikings who accomplished
what he had vowed to do.

Earl Erik, full of admiration of this feat, then said to Vagn:

"Will you have peace, Vagn Akison?"

"I will take peace gladly if it be that all my comrades have it also,"
answered the viking.

"Let them all be set free," ordered the earl. And so it was done.
Eighteen of the captives had already been executed, but fourteen had
peace.

These remaining fourteen, as the price of their liberty, were expected
to take service under Earl Hakon. Even Olaf made a pretence of agreeing
to this condition, and he helped the Norwegians to clear the
devastation of battle and to take possession of the various viking
ships that had been either deserted by their crews or whose fighting
men had all been slain. But he had no intention to abide by his
compact. In the general confusion he contrived to get on board his own
disabled dragonship. There he exchanged his tattered armour for a good
suit of seaman's clothes, with a large cloak, a sword, and a bag of
gold. He remained on board until nightfall, and then, dropping into a
small sailing boat that he had been careful to provide himself with, he
stole out of the bay and was soon far away among the skerries, safe
from all pursuit.

The disappearance of Olaf Triggvison was scarcely remarked by the
Norwegians, who were at that time holding high revel in celebration of
their victory. But had Earl Hakon of Lade been able to look into the
future, and see the disasters that awaited him at the hands of this
fair haired young viking, he would surely have swept every fiord and
channel in Norway in the endeavour to drag the runaway back and bring
him to the doom that he had so easily escaped.



CHAPTER XI: WEST-OVER-SEA.


Now when Earl Sigvaldi, finding that the chances of war were going so
directly against him, fled from the battle, many of the vikings
followed him in the belief that he was but intending to make a new
rally and to presently return to the fray. That the chief of Jomsburg
could be guilty of mean cowardice surpassed their understanding;
moreover, they were bound by their oaths to obey him in all things.
Some twenty of his ships followed him out of the bay, and the captains
watched him, ready to turn back with him at his first signal. But
Sigvaldi made no signal whatsoever, and only showed, by his extreme
haste, that he was indeed bent upon making an unworthy and cowardly
retreat.

Justin and Guthmund, two of the viking captains who were sailing in the
chief's wake, turned their ships and cried aloud to their neighbours to
go back with them to the battle and to the rescue of the brave men who
had been so heedlessly deserted; and many put about their prows. But
already it was too late: not only were the fortunes of the fight now
entirely in the hands of the Norwegians, but the storm of hail and
wind, which was growing every moment more severe, made it impossible
for the ships to make headway against its fury. All who followed
Sigvaldi were therefore ever afterwards accused of cowardice,
notwithstanding that the larger number of them were both willing and
anxious to return.

Southward before the wind sailed Sigvaldi in all haste, until he
entered one of the wider channels; and then the storm ceased as
suddenly as it had begun. In the evening the ships took shelter under
the lee of one of the islands, and there they were anchored, so that
the decks might be cleared and put in good order. That night, unknown
to the chief, a council was held, and the captains, headed by Guthmund,
decided that they would no longer serve or obey a leader who had so far
forgotten the strict laws of the vikings as to show fear in the face of
an enemy.

In the early morning, therefore, when Earl Sigvaldi hoisted his
standard and made out for the open sea, none followed him. He quickly
guessed the reason, and, instead of attempting to win over his former
friends, he had his sail set to the wind and sped out westward across
the sea.

Guthmund was then elected commander of the twenty longships, and when
Sigvaldi's vessel had passed out of sight the anchors were weighed and
the little fleet moved southward among the isles. Here, where the
channels were narrow, and dangerous with hidden rocks, sails were of
little use, and the men, wearied with fighting and smarting from their
wounds, had little strength left for labouring at the oars, so that
progress was slow.

The ships were still but a few miles to the south of Ulfasound very
early on the third morning, when they fell in with a small sailing boat
far out beyond the sight of land. The boat had only one man in it, and
he sat at the stern, holding the sheet in one hand and the tiller in
the other. His head was bowed, and his chin rested on his chest. He was
sound asleep.

Guthmund, whose ship was nearest, called aloud to him, asking if he had
caught any fish that night. But the boatman still slept. Then Guthmund
took up an arrow and fired it so that it struck the boat's mast. In an
instant the man started to his feet, threw off his cloak, and stood up.
The morning sunlight shone on his head of tangled gold hair and on part
of his coat of chain mail. He looked very noble and beautiful, and all
the shipmen stared at him in amazement.

"By the ravens of Odin! It is young Ole the Esthonian!" cried Guthmund.
And he called to Olaf to come aboard.

Olaf at first refused, saying that although he had been without food
for two days and was also sick and weak from loss of blood and the want
of rest, yet he would never demean himself by taking the hospitality of
men who had deserted their comrades in the heat of battle.

"Where is Earl Sigvaldi?" he cried. "Let me see him that I may tell him
to his face that he is a coward!"

"We have broken off from him, and are no longer his men," answered
Guthmund. "He has sailed west over the sea towards the Orkneys. We are
now without a chief, and would be very well satisfied if you, who are a
well proved champion, would take the command over us; and we will one
and all take oath to serve you and follow you wheresoever you may
choose to lead us."

"If that be so, and if there are none but brave men among you," said
Olaf, "then I will do as you suggest."

And he brought his boat to the quarter and climbed on board.

When he had taken drink and food and had washed himself and combed his
hair, he told of how the battle had ended and of how he had escaped.

Now the vikings were well pleased to have such a chief as Olaf
Triggvison, for not only had they the fullest confidence in his
prowess, in his skill as a leader of men, and in his unfailing bravery,
