"But if I threaten him with exposure?"

"Thou wouldst feed the fishes of the Darro," interrupted Ximen. "Nay,
even now, if Almamen learn that thou knowest his birth and race,
tremble! for thy days in the land will be numbered."

"Verily," exclaimed the Jew, in great alarm, "then have I fallen into
the snare; for these lips revealed to him that knowledge."

"Then is the righteous Elias a lost man, within ten days from that in
which Almamen returns to Granada. I know my master: and blood is to him
as water."

"Let the wicked be consumed!" cried Elias, furiously stamping his
foot, while fire flashed from his dark eyes, for the instinct of
self-preservation made him fierce. "Not from me, however," he added,
more calmly, "will come his danger. Know that there be more than a
hundred Jews in this city, who have sworn his death; Jews who, flying
hither from Cordova, have seen their parents murdered and their
substance seized, and who behold, in the son of Issachar, the cause of
the murder and the spoil. They have detected the impostor, and a hundred
knives are whetting even now for his blood: let him look to it. Ximen,
I have spoken to thee as the foolish speak; thou mayest betray me to
thy lord; but from what I have learned of thee from our brethren, I have
poured my heart into thy bosom without fear. Wilt thou betray Israel, or
assist us to smite the traitor?"

Ximen mused for a moment, and his meditation conjured up the treasures
of his master. He stretched forth his right hand to Elias; and when the
Israelites parted, they were friends.




CHAPTER VI. BOADBIL'S RETURN.--THE REAPPEARANCE OF GRANADA.

The third morning from this interview, a rumour reached Granada that
Boabdil had been repulsed in his assault on the citadel of Salobrena
with a severe loss; that Hernando del Pulgar had succeeded in conducting
to its relief a considerable force; and that the army of Ferdinand was
on its march against the Moorish king. In the midst of the excitement
occasioned by these reports, a courier arrived to confirm their truth,
and to announce the return of Boabdil.

At nightfall, the king, preceding his army, entered the city, and
hastened to bury himself in the Alhambra. As he passed dejectedly into
the women's apartments, his stern mother met him.

"My son," she said, bitterly, "dost thou return and not a conqueror?"

Before Boabdil could reply, a light and rapid step sped through the
glittering arcades; and weeping with joy, and breaking all the Oriental
restraints, Amine fell upon his bosom. "My beloved! my king! light of
mine eyes! thou hast returned. Welcome--for thou art safe."

The different form of these several salutations struck Boabdil forcibly.
"Thou seest, my mother," said he, "how great the contrast between
those who love us from affection, and those who love us from pride. In
adversity, God keep me, O my mother, from thy tongue!"

"But I love thee from pride, too," murmured Amine; "and for that reason
is thine adversity dear to me, for it takes thee from the world to make
thee more mine own and I am proud of the afflictions that my hero shares
with his slave."

"Lights there, and the banquet!" cried the king, turning from his
haughty mother; "we will feast and be merry while we may. My adored
Amine, kiss me!"

Proud, melancholy, and sensitive as he was in that hour of reverse,
Boabdil felt no grief: such balm has Love for our sorrows, when its
wings are borrowed from the dove! And although the laws of the Eastern
life confined to the narrow walls of a harem the sphere of Amine's
gentle influence; although, even in romance, THE NATURAL compels us to
portray her vivid and rich colours only in a faint and hasty sketch, yet
still are left to the outline the loveliest and the noblest features of
the sex--the spirit to arouse us to exertion, the softness to console us
in our fall!

While Boabdil and the body of the army remained in the city, Muza,
with a chosen detachment of the horse, scoured the country to visit the
newly-acquired cities, and sustain their courage.

From this charge he was recalled by the army of Ferdinand, which once
more poured down into the Vega, completely devastated its harvests, and
then swept back to consummate the conquests of the revolted towns.
To this irruption succeeded an interval of peace--the calm before the
storm. From every part of Spain, the most chivalric and resolute of the
Moors, taking advantage of the pause in the contest, flocked to Granada;
and that city became the focus of all that paganism in Europe possessed
of brave and determined spirits.

At length, Ferdinand, completing his conquests, and having refilled
his treasury, mustered the whole force of his dominions--forty thousand
foot, and ten thousand horse; and once more, and for the last
time, appeared before the walls of Granada. A solemn and prophetic
determination filled both besiegers and besieged: each felt that the
crowning crisis was at hand.




CHAPTER VII. THE CONFLAGRATION.--THE MAJESTY OF AN INDIVIDUAL PASSION IN THE MIDST OF
HOSTILE THOUSANDS.

It was the eve of a great and general assault upon Granada, deliberately
planned by the chiefs of the Christian army. The Spanish camp (the most
gorgeous Christendom had ever known) gradually grew calm and hushed. The
shades deepened--the stars burned forth more serene and clear. Bright,
in that azure air, streamed the silken tents of the court, blazoned with
heraldic devices, and crowned by gaudy banners, which, filled by a brisk
and murmuring wind from the mountains, flaunted gaily on their gilded
staves. In the centre of the camp rose the pavilion of the queen--a
palace in itself. Lances made its columns; brocade and painted arras
its walls; and the space covered by its numerous compartments would have
contained the halls and outworks of an ordinary castle. The pomp of
that camp realised the wildest dreams of Gothic, coupled with Oriental
splendour; something worthy of a Tasso to have imagined, or a Beckford
to create. Nor was the exceeding costliness of the more courtly tents
lessened in effect by those of the soldiery in the outskirts, many of
which were built from boughs, still retaining their leaves--savage and
picturesque huts;--as if, realising old legends, wild men of the woods
had taken up the cross, and followed the Christian warriors against the
swarthy followers of Termagaunt and Mahound. There, then, extended that
mighty camp in profound repose, as the midnight threw deeper and longer
shadows over the sward from the tented avenues and canvas streets.
It was at that hour that Isabel, in the most private recess of her
pavilion, was employed in prayer for the safety of the king, and the
issue of the Sacred War. Kneeling before the altar of that warlike
oratory, her spirit became rapt and absorbed from earth in the intensity
of her devotions; and in the whole camp (save the sentries), the eyes
of that pious queen were, perhaps, the only ones unclosed. All was
profoundly still; her guards, her attendants, were gone to rest; and
the tread of the sentinel, without that immense pavilion, was not heard
through the silken walls.

It was then that Isabel suddenly felt a strong grasp upon her shoulder,
as she still knelt by the altar. A faint shriek burst from her lips; she
turned, and the broad curved knife of an eastern warrior gleamed close
before her eyes.

"Hush! utter a cry, breathe more loudly than thy wont, and, queen though
thou art, in the centre of swarming thousands, thou diest!"

Such were the words that reached the ear of the royal Castilian,
whispered by a man of stern and commanding, though haggard aspect.

"What is thy purpose? wouldst thou murder me?" said the queen,
trembling, perhaps for the first time, before a mortal presence.

"Thy life is safe, if thou strivest not to delude or to deceive me. Our
time is short--answer me. I am Almamen, the Hebrew. Where is the hostage
rendered to thy hands? I claim my child. She is with thee--I know it. In
what corner of thy camp?"

"Rude stranger!" said Isabel, recovering somewhat from her alarm,--"thy
daughter is removed, I trust for ever, from thine impious reach. She is
not within the camp."

"Lie not, Queen of Castile," said Almamen, raising his knife; "for days
and weeks I have tracked thy steps, followed thy march, haunted even
thy slumbers, though men of mail stood as guards around them; and I
know that my daughter has been with thee. Think not I brave this danger
without resolves the most fierce and dread. Answer me, where is my
child?"

"Many days since," said Isabel, awed, despite herself, by her strange
position,--"thy daughter left the camp for the house of God. It was her
own desire. The Saviour hath received her into His fold."

Had a thousand lances pierced his heart, the vigour and energy of life
could scarce more suddenly have deserted Almamen. The rigid muscles
of his countenance relaxed at once, from resolve and menace, into
unutterable horror, anguish, and despair. He recoiled several steps; his
knees trembled violently; he seemed stunned by a death-blow. Isabel, the
boldest and haughtiest of her sex, seized that moment of reprieve;
she sprang forward, darted through the draperies into the apartments
occupied by her train, and, in a moment, the pavilion resounded with her
cries for aid. The sentinels were aroused; retainers sprang from their
pillows; they heard the cause of the alarm; they made to the spot; when,
ere they reached its partition of silk, a vivid and startling blaze
burst forth upon them. The tent was on fire. The materials fed the flame
like magic. Some of the guards had yet the courage to dash forward;
but the smoke and the glare drove them back, blinded and dizzy. Isabel
herself had scarcely time for escape, so rapid was the conflagration.
Alarmed for her husband, she rushed to his tent--to find him already
awakened by the noise, and issuing from its entrance, his drawn sword
in his hand. The wind, which had a few minutes before but curled the
triumphant banners, now circulated the destroying flame. It spread
from tent to tent, almost as a flash of lightning that shoots along
neighbouring clouds. The camp was in one continued blaze, ere a man
could dream of checking the conflagration.

Not waiting to hear the confused tale of his royal consort, Ferdinand,
exclaiming, "The Moors have done this--they will be on us!" ordered the
drums to beat and the trumpets to sound, and hastened in person,
wrapped merely in his long mantle, to alarm his chiefs. While that
well-disciplined and veteran army, fearing every moment the rally of the
foe, endeavoured rapidly to form themselves into some kind of order, the
flame continued to spread till the whole heavens were illumined. By its
light, cuirass and helmet glowed, as in the furnace, and the armed men
seemed rather like life-like and lurid meteors than human forms. The
city of Granada was brought near to them by the intensity of the glow;
and, as a detachment of cavalry spurred from the camp to meet the
anticipated surprise of the Paynims, they saw, upon the walls and roofs
of Granada, the Moslems clustering and their spears gleaming. But,
equally amazed with the Christians, and equally suspicious of craft
and design, the Moors did not issue from their gates. Meanwhile the
conflagration, as rapid to die as to begin, grew fitful and feeble; and
the night seemed to fall with a melancholy darkness over the ruin of
that silken city.

Ferdinand summoned his council. He had now perceived it was no ambush of
the Moors. The account of Isabel, which, at last, he comprehended; the
strange and almost miraculous manner in which Almamen had baffled his
guards, and penetrated to the royal tent; might have aroused his Gothic
superstition, while it relieved his more earthly apprehensions, if he
had not remembered the singular, but far from supernatural dexterity
with which Eastern warriors and even robbers continued then, as now, to
elude the most vigilant precautions and baffle the most wakeful guards;
and it was evident that the fire which burned the camp of an army had
been kindled merely to gratify the revenge, or favour the escape of an
individual. Shaking, therefore, from his kingly spirit the thrill of
superstitious awe that the greatness of the disaster, when associated
with the name of a sorcerer, at first occasioned, he resolved to make
advantage out of misfortune itself. The excitement, the wrath of the
troops, produced the temper most fit for action.

"And Heaven," said the King of Spain to his knights and chiefs, as
they assembled round him, "has, in this conflagration, announced to the
warriors of the Cross, that henceforth their camp shall be the palaces
of Granada! Woe to the Moslem with to-morrow's sun!"

Arms clanged, and swords leaped from their sheaths, as the Christian
knights echoed the anathema--"WOE TO THE MOSLEM!"






BOOK V.




CHAPTER I. THE GREAT BATTLE.

The day slowly dawned upon that awful night; and the Moors, still upon
the battlements of Granada, beheld the whole army of Ferdinand on its
march towards their wails. At a distance lay the wrecks of the blackened
and smouldering camp; while before them, gaudy and glittering pennons
waving, and trumpets sounding, came the exultant legions of the foe.
The Moors could scarcely believe their senses. Fondly anticipating
the retreat of the Christians, after so signal a disaster, the gay
and dazzling spectacle of their march to the assault filled them with
consternation and alarm.

While yet wondering and inactive, the trumpet of Boabdil was heard
behind; and they beheld the Moorish king, at the head of his guards,
emerging down the avenues that led to the gate. The sight restored and
exhilarated the gazers; and, when Boabdil halted in the space before
the portals, the shout of twenty thousand warriors rose ominously to the
ears of the advancing Christians.

"Men of Granada!" said Boabdil, as soon as the deep and breathless
silence had succeeded to that martial acclamation,--"the advance of the
enemy is to their destruction! In the fire of last night the hand of
Allah wrote their doom. Let us forth, each and all! We will leave our
homes unguarded--our hearts shall be their wall! True, that our numbers
are thinned by famine and by slaughter, but enough of us are yet left
for the redemption of Granada. Nor are the dead departed from us: the
dead fight with us--their souls animate our own. He who has lost a
brother, becomes twice a man. On this battle we will set all. Liberty or
chains! empire or exile! victory or death! Forward!"

He spoke, and gave the rein to his barb. It bounded forward, and cleared
the gloomy arch of the portals, and Boabdil el Chico was the first Moor
who issued from Granada, to that last and eventful field. Out, then,
poured, as a river that rushes from caverns into day, the burnished and
serried files of the Moorish cavalry. Muza came the last, closing the
array. Upon his dark and stern countenance there spoke not the ardent
enthusiasm of the sanguine king. It was locked and rigid; and the
anxieties of the last dismal weeks had thinned his cheeks, and ploughed
deep lines around the firm lips and iron jaw which bespoke the obstinate
and unconquerable resolution of his character.

As Muza now spurred forward, and, riding along the wheeling ranks,
marshalled them in order, arose the acclamation of female voices; and
the warriors, who looked back at the sound, saw that their women--their
wives and daughters, their mothers and their beloved (released from
their seclusion, by a policy which bespoke the desperation of
the cause)--were gazing at them, with outstretched arms, from the
battlements and towers. The Moors knew that they were now to fight for
their hearths and altars in the presence of those who, if they failed,
became slaves and harlots; and each Moslem felt his heart harden like
the steel of his own sabre.

While the cavalry formed themselves into regular squadrons, and the
tramp of the foemen came more near and near, the Moorish infantry,
in miscellaneous, eager, and undisciplined bands, poured out, until,
spreading wide and deep below the walls, Boabdil's charger was seen,
rapidly careering amongst them, as, in short but distinct directions,
or fiery adjurations, he sought at once to regulate their movements, and
confirm their hot but capricious valour.

Meanwhile the Christians had abruptly halted; and the politic Ferdinand
resolved not to incur the full brunt of a whole population, in the first
flush of their enthusiasm and despair. He summoned to his side Hernando
del Pulgar, and bade him, with a troop of the most adventurous and
practised horsemen, advance towards the Moorish cavalry, and endeavour
to draw the fiery valour of Muza away from the main army. Then,
splitting up his force into several sections, he dismissed each to
different stations; some to storm the adjacent towers, others to fire
the surrounding gardens and orchards; so that the action might consist
rather of many battles than of one, and the Moors might lose the
concentration and union, which made, at present, their most formidable
strength.

Thus, while the Mussulmans were waiting in order for the attack, they
suddenly beheld the main body of the Christians dispersing, and, while
yet in surprise and perplexed, they saw the fires breaking out from
their delicious gardens, to the right and left of the walls, and hear
the boom of the Christian artillery against the scattered bulwarks that
guarded the approaches of that city.

At that moment a cloud of dust rolled rapidly towards the post occupied
in the van by Muza, and the shock of the Christian knights, in their
mighty mail, broke upon the centre of the prince's squadron.

Higher, by several inches, than the plumage of his companions, waved
the crest of the gigantic del Pulgar; and, as Moor after Moor went
down before his headlong lance, his voice, sounding deep and sepulchral
through his visor, shouted out--"Death to the infidel!"

The rapid and dexterous horsemen of Granada were not, however,
discomfited by this fierce assault: opening their ranks with
extraordinary celerity, they suffered the charge to pass comparatively
harmless through their centre, and then, closing in one long and
bristling line, cut off the knights from retreat. The Christians wheeled
round, and charged again upon their foe.

