  somewhere near the mouth of the Red River. It was his purpose to send to
  Cuba for supplies, and, with this settlement as a base, make a farther
  search in the plains of the great West. He did not live to carry out his
  plan. Long exposure and anxiety had weakened him. The malaria of the
  swamps attacked him, and he died within a few days. His body was wrapped
  in mantles weighted with sand, carried in a canoe, and secretly lowered
  in the midst of the great river he had discovered.

  His successor tried to conceal De Soto's death from the Indians. The
  Spaniards had called their leader the Child of the Sun, and now he had
  died like any other mortal. They were afraid if the Indians found his
  body they would cease to believe that the strangers were immortal and
  would massacre them all. The Indians were told that the great leader had
  gone to Heaven, as he had often done before, and that he would return in
  a few days.

RESULTS OF DE SOTO'S JOURNEY. The weary survivors built boats,
  floated down the Mississippi into the Gulf, and sailed cautiously along
  the coasts to Mexico. They had been gone four years and three months,
  and half of the army which set out had perished. However, the expedition
  of De Soto will always remain one of the most remarkable journeys in the
  history of North America. It had extended the Spanish claims far into
  the interior. With it had begun the written history of the country now
  composing at least eight states in the United States, Florida, Georgia,
  South Carolina, North Carolina, Alabama, Mississippi, Tennessee, and
  Arkansas. It had perhaps reached the present Oklahoma and Texas, and had
  certainly passed down the Mississippi River through Louisiana.

THE STORY OF THE SEVEN CITIES. While De Soto was exploring the
  southeastern part of North America a second expedition searched the
  southwest. Both were looking for rich Indian kingdoms like Mexico and
  Peru. The second expedition came about in this manner. Some of the
  Indians from northern Mexico told the Spaniards a strange tale of how in
  the distant past their ancestors came forth from seven caves.

  [Illustration: AN INDIAN OF NORTHERN MEXICO]

  The Spaniards, however, confused the tale with a story of their own
  about Seven Cities. They believed that at the time Spain was overrun by
  the Moors in the eighth century, seven bishops, flying from persecution,
  had taken refuge, with a great company of followers, on an island or
  group of islands far out in the Atlantic Ocean, and that they had built
  Seven Cities. Wonderful stories were told in Spain of these cities, of
  their wealth and splendor, though nobody ever pretended to have actually
  seen them. The Spaniards thought the Indians meant to tell them of these
  Seven Cities instead of seven caves.

  The mistake was natural, as the Spanish explorers had much trouble in
  understanding the Indian languages. They had long expected to find the
  Seven Cities in America. Indeed there was rumor that white travelers had
  seen them north of Mexico.

THE JOURNEY OF FRIAR MARCOS. In 1539 the Viceroy of Mexico sent a
  frontier missionary, Friar Marcos by name, together with a negro,
  Stephen, and some Christianized Indians to look for them. Friar Marcos
  traveled far to the north. He inquired his way of the Indians, always
  asking them about Seven Cities. He described them as large cities with
  houses made of stone and mortar. The Indians, half-understanding him,
  directed him to seven Zuni villages or pueblos. The first of these they
  called Cibola. Friar Marcos henceforth spoke of them as the Seven Cities
  of Cibola.

  The good friar himself never entered even the first of them. His negro,
  Stephen, had been sent on in advance to prepare the way, but this rough,
  greedy fellow offended the Indians, who promptly murdered him. When the
  friar approached he found the Indians so excited and hostile that he
  dared not enter their village. He did, however, venture to climb a hill
  at a distance, from which he had a view of one of the cities of Cibola.
  The houses, built of light stone and whitish adobe, glistened in the
  wonderfully clear air and bright sunlight of that region, and gave him
  the idea of a much larger and richer city than really existed. Friar
  Marcos, by this time thoroughly frightened, hurriedly retraced
  his steps.

CORONADO. There was great excitement in Mexico over the story Friar
  Marcos told. The account of what had been seen grew, as such stories
  always do, in the telling and retelling. Nothing else was thought of in
  all New Spain. The Viceroy of Mexico made ready a great army for the
  conquest of the Seven Cities of Cibola. He gave the command to his
  intimate friend, Francisco de Coronado. Everybody wanted to accompany
  him, but it was necessary to have the consent of the viceroy. Sons of
  nobles, eager to go, traded with their more fortunate neighbors for the
  viceroy's permit. Some men who secured these sold them as special favors
  to their friends. Whoever obtained one of them counted it as good as a
  title of nobility. So high were the expectations of great wealth when
  the Seven Cities should be discovered!

  [Illustration: A ZUNI PUEBLO FROM A DISTANCE]

THE ARMY OF CORONADO. In the early part of 1540, Coronado set forth
  from his home in western Mexico near the Gulf of California. He had an
  army of three hundred Spaniards, nearly all the younger sons of nobles.
  They were fitted out with polished coats of mail and gilded armor,
  carried lances and swords, and were mounted on the choicest horses from
  the large stock-farms of the viceroy. There were in the army a few
  footmen armed with crossbows and harquebuses. A thousand negroes and
  Indians were taken along, mainly as servants for the white masters. Some
  led the spare horses. Others carried the baggage, or drove the oxen and
  cows, the sheep and swine which would be needed on the journey. A small
  fleet carried part of the baggage by way of the Gulf of California,
  prepared also to help Coronado in other ways, and to explore the Gulf
  to its head.

  [Illustration: THE ROUTE OF CORONADO]

THE ROUTE OF CORONADO TO CIBOLA. The large army marched slowly
  through the wild regions of the Gulf coast. Coronado soon became
  impatient and pushed ahead of the main body with a small following of
  picked horsemen. They went through the mountainous wilderness of
  northern Mexico and across the desert plains of southeastern Arizona.
  After a march lasting five months, over a distance equal to that from
  New York to Omaha, Coronado came upon the Seven Cities of Cibola; but
  the real Seven Cities of Cibola as Coronado found them bore little
  resemblance to what he had expected.

  [Illustration: A ZUNI PUEBLO]

THE REAL SEVEN CITIES OF CIBOLA. The first city of Cibola was an
  Indian pueblo of about two hundred flat-roofed houses, built of stone
  and sun-dried clay. The houses were entered by climbing ladders to the
  top and then passing down into the rooms as we enter ships through
  hatches. The people wore only such clothes as could be woven from the
  coarse fiber of native plants, or patched together from the tanned skins
  of the cat or the deer. They cultivated certain plants for food, but
  only small and poor varieties of corn, beans, and melons. They had some
  skill in making small things for house and personal decoration, mainly
  in the form of pottery and simple ornaments of green stone.

  The kingdom of rich cities dwindled to a small province of poor villages
  inhabited by an unwarlike people. We know now that Coronado had found
  the Zuni pueblos in the western part of New Mexico. The conquest of
  these was a wofully small thing for so grand and costly an expedition.
  No gold or silver or precious jewels had been found.

  [Illustration: CANYON OF THE COLORADO]

THE CANYON OF THE COLORADO. Yet the wonders of the natural world
  about them astonished and interested the Spaniards. Some of their number
  found the Grand Canyon of the Colorado River and vividly described it to
  their comrades. As they looked into its depths it seemed as if the water
  was six feet across, although in reality it was many hundred feet wide.
  Some tried without success to descend the steep cliff to the stream
  below or to discover a means of crossing to the opposite side. Those who
  staid above estimated that some huge rocks on the side of the cliff were
  about as tall as a man, but those who went down as far as they could
  swore that when they reached these rocks they found them bigger than the
  great tower of Seville, which is two hundred and seventy-five feet high.

  CORONADO IN NEW MEXICO. Coronado marched from the Cities of Cibola
  eastward to the valley of the Rio Grande River, and settled for the
  winter in an Indian village a short distance south of the present city
  of Albuquerque, New Mexico. The Spaniards drove the natives out, only
  allowing them to take the clothes they wore.

A WINTER IN AN INDIAN VILLAGE. The soldiers passed the severe
  winter of 1540-1541 comfortably quartered in the best houses of the
  Indian village. A plentiful supply of corn and beans had been left by
  the unfortunate owners. The live stock brought from Mexico furnished an
  abundance of fresh meat. Coronado required the Indians to furnish three
  hundred pieces of cloth for cloaks and blankets for his men, to take the
  place of their own, now worn out. Nor did the officers give the Indians
  time to secure the cloth that was demanded, but forced them to take
  their own cloaks and blankets off their backs. When a soldier came upon
  an Indian whose blanket was better than his, he compelled the unlucky
  fellow to exchange with him without more ado.

  Coronado's strenuous efforts to provide well for the comforts of his men
  made him much loved by them, but much hated by the Indians. It is no
  wonder that such treatment drove the Indians into rebellion, and that
  Coronado was obliged to carry on a cruel war of reconquest and revenge.

THE TALE OF QUIVIRA. An Indian slave in one of the villages cheered
  Coronado and his followers with a fabulous tale about a wonderful city,
  many days' journey across the plains to the northeast, which he called
  Quivira. The king of Quivira, he said, took his nap under a large tree,
  on which were hung little gold bells, which put him to sleep as they
  swung in the air. Every one in the city had jugs and bowls made of
  wrought gold. The slave was probably tempted by the eagerness of his
  hearers to make his tale bigger. He perhaps made it as enticing as he
  could in order to lead the strangers away to perish in the pathless
  plains where water would be scarce and corn unknown.

THE SEARCH FOR QUIVIRA. The slave's story deceived the Spaniards.
  Coronado grasped eagerly at the only hope left of finding a rich country
  and marched away in search of Quivira. He traveled to the northeast for
  seventy-seven days. There were no guiding land marks. Soldiers measured
  the distance traveled each day by counting the footsteps. The plains
  were flat, save for an occasional channel cut by some river half buried
  in the sand; they were barren, except for a short wiry grass and a small
  rim of shrubs and stunted trees along the watercourses.

QUIVIRA. The most marvelous sight of the long journey was the herds
  of buffaloes in countless numbers. The Indians guided Coronado in the
  end to a cluster of Indian villages which they called Quivira. This was
  somewhere in what is now central Kansas near Junction City. The Indians
  were in all probability the Wichitas. Here again the great explorer met
  with a bitter disappointment.

  [Illustration: INDIAN TEPEES]

  Instead of a fine city of stone and mortar, he found scattered Indian
  villages with mere tent-like houses formed by fastening grass or straw
  or buffalo skins to poles. The people were the poorest and most
  barbarous which he had met. Coronado was, however, fortunate in securing
  a supply of corn and buffalo meat in Quivira for his long
  return journey.

CORONADO'S OPINION OF THE WEST. A year later a crestfallen army of
  half-starved men clad in the skins of animals stumbled back homeward
  through Mexico in straggling groups. Great sadness prevailed in Mexico,
  for many had lost their fortunes besides friends and relatives in the
  enterprise. Coronado seemed to the people of the time to have led a
  costly army on a wild-goose chase. He himself thought that the regions
  he had crossed were valueless. He said they were cold and too far away
  from the sea to furnish a good site for a colony, and the country was
  neither rich enough nor populous enough to make it worth keeping.

RESULTS OF CORONADO'S EXPLORATIONS. We know better to-day the
  value of Coronado's great discoveries. He had solved the age-long
  mystery of the Seven Cities, and explored the southwest of the United
  States of our day. The rich region now included in the great states of
  Arizona, New Mexico, Texas, Oklahoma, and Kansas had been seen, and it
  was soon after described for the European world. His men had explored
  the Gulf of California to its head, and the Colorado River toward its
  source for two hundred miles. They had proved that lower California was
  not an island but a part of the mainland. Others soon explored the
  entire coast of California to the limits of the present state of Oregon.

HOW DE SOTO AND CORONADO CAME NEAR MEETING. De Soto and Coronado
  together pushed the Spanish frontier far northward to the center of
  North America. A story which was told by De Soto's men shows how close
  together the two great explorers were at one time. While Coronado was in
  Quivira, De Soto was wandering along the borders of the plains west of
  the Mississippi River, though neither knew of the nearness of the other.
  An Indian woman who ran away from Coronado's army fell in with De
  Soto's, nine days later. If De Soto and Coronado had met on the plains
  there would have been a finer story to tell, almost as dramatic as the
  meeting of Stanley and Livingstone in central Africa. One cannot refrain
  from wondering how different would have been the ending with the two
  great armies united and encouraged to continue their explorations.


    QUESTIONS

    1. What story had Ponce de Leon heard in the West Indies? What did
    he find? Why did he call the new country which he discovered
    Florida? What was included in Florida as the Spaniards
    understood it?

    2. What was De Soto looking for in North America? How long did he
    search? What did he find? Was he disappointed? What was he planning
    to do when he died? Why was his journey very remarkable? Through
    what present states of the United States did he pass?

    3. Where did the Spaniards expect to find the Seven Cities? Why did
    he expect to find them there? What was the story of the Seven
    Cities? Of the Seven Caves?

    4. What did Coronado expect to find at the Seven Cities of Cibola?
    What did he find there? Why did he go far on into North America in
    search of Quivira? What did he find on the way to Quivira? What did
    he find Quivira to be?

    5. What did Coronado think of his own discoveries? What had he found
    out of interest or value to the rest of the world? Which of the
    present states of the United States did his route touch?

    REVIEW

    1. Review the effect of the discoveries of Columbus,
    Magellan, De Soto, Coronado, on the knowledge of the new world.

    _Important date_--1541. The discovery of the Mississippi by De Soto.




CHAPTER XVIII

RIVALRY AND STRIFE IN EUROPE

THE RIVALS OF SPAIN. When the early voyages to America and Asia were
  ended, the French, the English, and the other northern peoples of
  Europe seemed to be beaten in the race for new lands and for new
  routes to old lands. The French had sent a few fishermen to the Banks
  of Newfoundland, and that was all. The English had made one or two
  voyages and appeared to be no longer interested. (See Chapter XIV,
  Cabot) The Dutch seemed to be only sturdy fishermen, thrifty farmers,
  or keen traders, occupied much of the time in the struggle against the
  North Sea, which threatened to burst the dikes and flood farms and
  cities.


THE TRADE-WINDS. The Portuguese and the Spaniards had a great
  advantage in living nearer the natural starting-point for such voyages.
  To go to Asia ships went by way of the Cape of Good Hope. To go to
  America a southern route was taken, for in the North Atlantic the
  prevailing winds are from the southwest, while south of Spain the
  trade-winds blow towards the southwest, making it easy to sail to
  America. To take the northern route, which was the natural one for
  French and English sailors, would be to battle against head winds and
  heavy seas.

THE SPANIARDS AND THE PORTUGUESE DIVIDE THE WORLD. The Spaniards
  and the Portuguese believed that their discoveries gave them the right
  to all new lands which should be found and to all trade by sea with the
  Golden East. Two years after the first voyage of Columbus the Spaniards
  agreed with the Portuguese that a line running 370 leagues west of the
  Cape Verde Islands should separate the regions claimed by each. The
  Spaniards were to hold all lands discovered west of that line, and the
  Portuguese all east of it. This left Brazil within the region claimed by
  the Portuguese. The rest of North and South America lay within the
  Spanish claims. It is the future history of this region that especially
  interests us as students of American history.

  [Illustration: CABOT MEMORIAL TOWER Erected at Bristol, England,
  in memory of the first sailor from England to visit America]

THE MAIN QUESTION. Were the Spaniards to keep what they claimed and
  continue to outstrip their northern rivals? The answer to this question
  is found in the history of Europe during the sixteenth century.
  Unfortunately for the Spaniards they were drawn into quarrels in Europe
  which cost them many men and much money. The consequence was that they
  were unable to make full use of their discoveries, even if they had
  known how. Before the century was ended their rivals, the English and
  the French, were stronger than they; and the Dutch, their own subjects,
  had rebelled against them.

THE ENGLISH AND THE FRENCH DESIRE A SHARE. Men had such great ideas
  of the immense wealth of the Indies that the successes of one nation
  made the other nations eager for some part of the spoil. Englishmen and
  Frenchmen were not likely to allow the Portuguese to take all they could
  find by sailing eastward around the Cape of Good Hope, and the Spaniards
  to keep whatever they discovered by sailing directly westward or by
  following the route marked out by Magellan. Both would search for new
  routes to the East, and both would lay claim to lands they saw by the
  way, regardless of any other nation. Many quarrels came from this
  rivalry, but quarrels arose also from other causes.

KING CHARLES AND KING FRANCIS. About the time Cortes conquered
  Mexico, his master, King Charles of Spain, began a war against Francis,
  the king of France. As long as these two kings lived they were either
  fighting or preparing to fight. Had Charles been king of Spain only,
  there might have been no trouble, but he ruled lands in Italy and
  claimed others which the French king ruled. He also ruled all the region
  north of France which is now Belgium and Holland, and he owned a
  district which forms part of eastern France near Switzerland. As he was
  the German emperor besides, the French king thought him too dangerous to
  be left in peace. These wars have little to do with American history,
  except that they helped to weaken the king of Spain and to prevent the
  Spaniards from making the most of their early successes in colonizing.

RELIGION A CAUSE OF STRIFE. Religion was the most serious cause of
  quarrel in the sixteenth century, and the king of Spain was the prince
  most injured by the struggle. At the time of Prince Henry of Portugal
  and of Columbus all peoples in western Europe worshiped in the same
  manner, taught their children the same beliefs, and in religious matters
  they all obeyed the pope. But by 1521 this had changed. The troubles
  began in Germany when Charles V was emperor. Before they were over
  Philip II, son of Charles, lost control of the Dutch, who rebelled and
  founded a republic of their own. The English finally became the
  principal enemies of Spain. The French, most of whom were of the same
  religion as the Spaniards, came to hate Spanish methods of defending
  religion, especially after the Spaniards had massacred a band of French
  settlers in America.
