halberds, and clad in the same maroon-coloured liveries.  After them a
huge bearded man, with his tunic off, and the sleeves of his coarse
shirt rolled up over his elbows, strode along with a great axe over his
left shoulder.  Behind him, a priest with an open missal pattered forth
prayers, and in his shadow was a woman, clad in black, her neck bared,
and a black shawl cast over her head and drooping in front of her bowed
face.  Within grip of her walked a tall, thin, fierce-faced man, with
harsh red features, and a great jutting nose.  He wore a flat velvet cap
with a single eagle feather fastened into it by a diamond clasp, which
gleamed in the morning light.  But bright as was his gem, his dark eyes
were brighter still, and sparkled from under his bushy brows with a mad
brilliancy which bore with it something of menace and of terror.
His limbs jerked as he walked, his features twisted, and he carried
himself like a man who strives hard to hold himself in when his whole
soul is aflame with exultation.  Behind him again twelve more
maroon-clad retainers brought up the rear of this singular procession.

The woman had faltered at the foot of the scaffold, but the man behind
her had thrust her forward with such force that she stumbled over the
lower step, and would have fallen had she not clutched at the arm of the
priest.  At the top of the ladder her eyes met the dreadful block, and
she burst into a scream, and shrunk backwards.  But again the man thrust
her on, and two of the followers caught her by either wrist and dragged
her forwards.

"Oh, Maurice!  Maurice!" she screamed.  "I am not fit to die!
Oh, forgive me, Maurice, as you hope for forgiveness yourself! Maurice!
Maurice!"  She strove to get towards him, to clutch at his wrist, at his
sleeve, but he stood with his hand on his sword, gazing at her with a
face which was all wreathed and contorted with merriment.  At the sight
of that dreadful mocking face the prayers froze upon her lips.  As well
pray for mercy to the dropping stone or to the rushing stream.  She
turned away, and threw back the mantle which had shrouded her features.

"Ah, sire!" she cried.  "Sire!  If you could see me now!"

And at the cry and at the sight of that fair pale face, De Catinat,
looking down from the window, was stricken as though by a dagger; for
there, standing beside the headsman's block, was she who had been the
most powerful, as well as the wittiest and the fairest, of the women of
France--none other than Francoise de Montespan, so lately the favourite
of the king.



CHAPTER XIX.


IN THE KING'S CABINET.

On the night upon which such strange chances had befallen his
messengers, the king sat alone in his cabinet.  Over his head a perfumed
lamp, held up by four little flying Cupids of crystal, who dangled by
golden chains from the painted ceiling, cast a brilliant light upon the
chamber, which was flashed back twenty-fold by the mirrors upon the
wall.  The ebony and silver furniture, the dainty carpet of La
Savonniere, the silks of Tours, the tapestries of the Gobelins, the
gold-work and the delicate chinaware of Sevres--the best of all that
France could produce was centred between these four walls.  Nothing had
ever passed through that door which was not a masterpiece of its kind.
And amid all this brilliance the master of it sat, his chin resting upon
his hands, his elbows upon the table, with eyes which stared vacantly at
the wall, a moody and a solemn man.

But though his dark eyes were fixed upon the wall, they saw nothing of
it.  They looked rather down the long vista of his own life, away to
those early years when what we dream and what we do shade so mistily
into one another.  Was it a dream or was it a fact, those two men who
used to stoop over his baby crib, the one with the dark coat and the
star upon his breast, whom he had been taught to call father, and the
other one with the long red gown and the little twinkling eyes?
Even now, after more than forty years, that wicked, astute, powerful
face flashed up, and he saw once more old Richelieu, the great
unanointed king of France.  And then the other cardinal, the long lean
one who had taken his pocket-money, and had grudged him his food, and
had dressed him in old clothes.  How well he could recall the day when
Mazarin had rouged himself for the last time, and how the court had
danced with joy at the news that he was no more!  And his mother, too,
how beautiful she was, and how masterful!  Could he not remember how
bravely she had borne herself during that war in which the power of the
great nobles had been broken, and how she had at last lain down to die,
imploring the priests not to stain her cap-strings with their holy oils!
And then he thought of what he had done himself, how he had shorn down
his great subjects until, instead of being like a tree among saplings,
he had been alone, far above all others, with his shadow covering the
whole land.  Then there were his wars and his laws and his treaties.
Under his care France had overflowed her frontiers both on the north and
on the east, and yet had been so welded together internally that she had
but one voice, with which she spoke through him.  And then there was
that line of beautiful faces which wavered up in front of him.  There
was Olympe de Mancini, whose Italian eyes had first taught him that
there is a power which can rule over a king; her sister, too, Marie de
Mancini; his wife, with her dark little sun-browned face; Henrietta of
England, whose death had first shown him the horrors which lie in life;
La Valliere, Montespan, Fontanges.  Some were dead; some were in
convents.  Some who had been wicked and beautiful were now only wicked.
And what had been the outcome of all this troubled, striving life of
his?  He was already at the outer verge of his middle years; he had lost
his taste for the pleasures of his youth; gout and vertigo were ever at
his foot and at his head to remind him that between them lay a kingdom
which he could not hope to govern.  And after all these years he had not
won a single true friend, not one, in his family, in his court, in his
country, save only this woman whom he was to wed that night.  And she,
how patient she was, how good, how lofty!  With her he might hope to
wipe off by the true glory of his remaining years all the sin and the
folly of the past.  Would that the archbishop might come, that he might
feel that she was indeed his, that he held her with hooks of steel which
would bind them as long as life should last!

There came a tap at the door.  He sprang up eagerly, thinking that the
ecclesiastic might have arrived.  It was, however, only his personal
attendant, to say that Louvois would crave an interview.  Close at his
heels came the minister himself, high-nosed and heavy-chinned.
Two leather bags were dangling from his hand.

"Sire," said he, when Bontems had retired, "I trust that I do not
intrude upon you."

"No, no, Louvois.  My thoughts were in truth beginning to be very
indifferent company, and I am glad to be rid of them."

"Your Majesty's thoughts can never, I am sure, be anything but
pleasant," said the courtier.  "But I have brought you here something
which I trust may make them even more so."

"Ah!  What is that?"

"When so many of our young nobles went into Germany and Hungary, you
were pleased in your wisdom to say that you would like well to see what
reports they sent home to their friends; also what news was sent out
from the court to them."

"Yes."

"I have them here--all that the courier has brought in, and all that are
gathered to go out, each in its own bag.  The wax has been softened in
spirit, the fastenings have been steamed, and they are now open."

The king took out a handful of the letters and glanced at the addresses.

"I should indeed like to read the hearts of these people," said he.
"Thus only can I tell the true thoughts of those who bow and simper
before my face.  I suppose," with a sudden flash of suspicion from his
eyes, "that you have not yourself looked into these?"

"Oh, sire, I had rather die!"

"You swear it?"

"As I hope for salvation!"

"Hum! There is one among these which I see is from your own son."

Louvois changed colour, and stammered as he looked at the envelope.
"Your Majesty will find that he is as loyal out of your presence as in
it, else he is no son of mine," said he.

"Then we shall begin with his.  Ha! it is but ten lines long.  'Dearest
Achille, how I long for you to come back!  The court is as dull as a
cloister now that you are gone.  My ridiculous father still struts about
like a turkey-cock, as if all his medals and crosses could cover the
fact that he is but a head lackey, with no more real power than I have.
He wheedles a good deal out of the king, but what he does with it I
cannot imagine, for little comes my way.  I still owe those ten thousand
livres to the man in the Rue Orfevre.  Unless I have some luck at
lansquenet, I shall have to come out soon and join you.'  Hem!  I did
you an injustice, Louvois.  I see that you have _not_ looked over these
letters."

The minister had sat with a face which was the colour of beetroot, and
eyes which projected from his head, while this epistle was being read.
It was with relief that he came to the end of it, for at least there was
nothing which compromised him seriously with the king; but every nerve
in his great body tingled with rage as he thought of the way in which
his young scape-grace had alluded to him.  "The viper!" he cried.
"Oh, the foul snake in the grass!  I will make him curse the day that he
was born."

"Tut, tut, Louvois!" said the king.  "You are a man who has seen much of
life, and you should be a philosopher.  Hot-headed youth says ever more
than it means.  Think no more of the matter.  But what have we here?
A letter from my dearest girl to her husband, the Prince de Conti.
I would pick her writing out of a thousand.  Ah, dear soul, she little
thought that my eyes would see her artless prattle!  Why should I read
it, since I already know every thought of her innocent heart?"  He
unfolded the sheet of pink scented paper with a fond smile upon his
face, but it faded away as his eyes glanced down the page, and he sprang
to his feet with a snarl of anger, his hand over his heart and his eyes
still glued to the paper.  "Minx!" he cried, in a choking voice.
"Impertinent, heartless minx! Louvois, you know what I have done for the
princess.  You know she has been the apple of my eye.  What have I ever
grudged her? What have I ever denied her?"

"You have been goodness itself, sire," said Louvois, whose own wounds
smarted less now that he saw his master writhing.

"Hear what she says of me: 'Old Father Grumpy is much as usual, save
that he gives a little at the knees.  You remember how we used to laugh
at his airs and graces!  Well, he has given up all that, and though he
still struts about on great high heels, like a Landes peasant on his
stilts, he has no brightness at all in his clothes.  Of course, all the
court follow his example, so you can imagine what a nightmare place this
is.  Then this woman still keeps in favour, and her frocks are as dismal
as Grumpy's coats; so when you come back we shall go into the country
together, and you shall dress in red velvet, and I shall wear blue silk,
and we shall have a little coloured court of our own in spite of my
majestic papa.'"

Louis sank his face in his hands.

"You hear how she speaks of me, Louvois."

"It is infamous, sire; infamous!"

"She calls me names--_me_, Louvois!"

"Atrocious, sire."

"And my knees! one would think that I was an old man!"

"Scandalous.  But, sire, I would beg to say that it is a case in which
your Majesty's philosophy may well soften your anger.  Youth is ever
hot-headed, and says more than it means.  Think no more of the matter."

"You speak like a fool, Louvois.  The child that I have loved turns upon
me, and you ask me to think no more of it.  Ah, it is one more lesson
that a king can trust least of all those who have his own blood in their
veins.  What writing is this?  It is the good Cardinal de Bouillon.
One may not have faith in one's own kin, but this sainted man loves me,
not only because I have placed him where he is, but because it is his
nature to look up to and love those whom God has placed above him.
I will read you his letter, Louvois, to show you that there is still
such a thing as loyalty and gratitude in France.  'My dear Prince de la
Roche-sur-Yon.'  Ah, it is to him he writes.  'I promised when you left
that I would let you know from time to time how things were going at
court, as you consulted me about bringing your daughter up from Anjou,
in the hope that she might catch the king's fancy.'  What!  What!
Louvois!  What villainy is this? 'The sultan goes from bad to worse.
The Fontanges was at least the prettiest woman in France, though between
ourselves there was just a shade too much of the red in her hair--an
excellent colour in a cardinal's gown, my dear duke, but nothing
brighter than chestnut is permissible in a lady.  The Montespan, too,
was a fine woman in her day, but fancy his picking up now with a widow
who is older than himself, a woman, too, who does not even try to make
herself attractive, but kneels at her _prie-dieu_ or works at her
tapestry from morning to night.  They say that December and May make a
bad match, but my own opinion is that two Novembers make an even worse
one.'  Louvois!  Louvois!  I can read no more!  Have you a _lettre de
cachet_?"

"There is one here, sire."

"For the Bastille?"

"No; for Vincennes."

"That will do very well.  Fill it up, Louvois!  Put this villain's name
in it!  Let him be arrested to-night, and taken there in his own
caleche.  The shameless, ungrateful, foul-mouthed villain!  Why did you
bring me these letters, Louvois?  Oh, why did you yield to my foolish
whim?  My God, is there no truth, or honour, or loyalty in the world?"
He stamped his feet, and shook his clenched hands in the air in the
frenzy of his anger and disappointment.

"Shall I, then, put back the others?" asked Louvois eagerly.  He had
been on thorns since the king had begun to read them, not knowing what
disclosures might come next.

"Put them back, but keep the bag."

"Both bags?"

"Ah! I had forgot the other one.  Perhaps if I have hypocrites around
me, I have at least some honest subjects at a distance.  Let us take one
haphazard.  Who is this from?  Ah! it is from the Duc de la
Rochefoucauld.  He has ever seemed to be a modest and dutiful young man.
What has he to say? The Danube--Belgrade--the grand vizier--Ah!"
He gave a cry as if he had been stabbed.

"What, then, sire?"  The minister had taken a step forward, for he was
frightened by the expression upon the king's face.

"Take them away, Louvois!  Take them away!" he cried, pushing the pile
of papers away from him.  "I would that I had never seen them!  I will
look at them no more!  He gibes even at my courage, I who was in the
trenches when he was in his cradle!  'This war would not suit the king,'
he says.  'For there are battles, and none of the nice little safe
sieges which are so dear to him.'  By God, he shall pay to me with his
head for that jest!  Ay, Louvois, it will be a dear gibe to him.
But take them away.  I have seen as much as I can bear."

The minister was thrusting them back into the bag when suddenly his eye
caught the bold, clear writing of Madame de Maintenon upon one of the
letters.  Some demon whispered to him that here was a weapon which had
been placed in his hands, with which he might strike one whose very name
filled him with jealousy and hatred.  Had she been guilty of some
indiscretion in this note, then he might even now, at this last hour,
turn the king's heart against her.  He was an astute man, and in an
instant he had seen his chance and grasped it.

"Ha!" said he, "it was hardly necessary to open this one."

"Which, Louvois?  Whose is it?"

The minister pushed forward the letter, and Louis started as his eyes
fell upon it.

"Madame's writing!" he gasped.

"Yes; it is to her nephew in Germany."

Louis took it in his hand.  Then, with a sudden motion, he threw it down
among the others, and then yet again his hand stole towards it.
His face was gray and haggard, and beads of moisture had broken out upon
his brow.  If this too were to prove to be as the others! He was shaken
to the soul at the very thought.  Twice he tried to pluck it out, and
twice his trembling fingers fumbled with the paper.  Then he tossed it
over to Louvois.  "Read it to me," said he.

The minister opened the letter out and flattened it upon the table, with
a malicious light dancing in his eyes, which might have cost him his
position had the king but read it aright.

"'My dear nephew,'" he read, "'what you ask me in your last is
absolutely impossible.  I have never abused the king's favour so far as
to ask for any profit for myself, and I should be equally sorry to
solicit any advance for my relatives.  No one would rejoice more than I
to see you rise to be major in your regiment, but your valour and your
loyalty must be the cause, and you must not hope to do it through any
word of mine.  To serve such a man as the king is its own reward, and I
am sure that whether you remain a cornet or rise to some higher rank,
you will be equally zealous in his cause.  He is surrounded, unhappily,
by many base parasites.  Some of these are mere fools, like Lauzun;
others are knaves, like the late Fouquet; and some seem to be both fools
and knaves, like Louvois, the minister of war.'"  Here the reader choked
with rage, and sat gurgling and drumming his fingers upon the table.

"Go on, Louvois, go on," said Louis, smiling up at the ceiling.

"'These are the clouds which surround the sun, my dear nephew; but the
sun is, believe me, shining brightly behind them.  For years I have
known that noble nature as few others can know it, and I can tell you
that his virtues are his own, but that if ever his glory is for an
instant dimmed over, it is because his kindness of heart has allowed him
to be swayed by those who are about him.  We hope soon to see you back
at Versailles, staggering under the weight of your laurels.  Meanwhile
accept my love and every wish for your speedy promotion, although it
cannot be obtained in the way which you suggest.'"

"Ah," cried the king, his love shining in his eyes, "how could I for an
instant doubt her!  And yet I had been so shaken by the others!
Francoise is as true as steel.  Was it not a beautiful letter, Louvois?"

"Madame is a very clever woman," said the minister evasively.

"And such a reader of hearts!  Has she not seen my character aright?"

"At least she has not read mine, sire."

There was a tap at the door, and Bontems peeped in.  "The archbishop has
arrived, sire."

"Very well, Bontems.  Ask madame to be so good as to step this way.
And order the witnesses to assemble in the ante-room."

As the valet hastened away, Louis turned to his minister: "I wish you to
be one of the witnesses, Louvois."

"To what, sire?"

"To my marriage."

The minister started.  "What, sire!  Already?"

"Now, Louvois; within five minutes."

"Very good, sire."  The unhappy courtier strove hard to assume a more
festive manner; but the night had been full of vexation to him, and to
be condemned to assist in making this woman the king's wife was the most
bitter drop of all.

"Put these letters away, Louvois.  The last one has made up for all the
rest.  But these rascals shall smart for it, all the same.  By-the-way,
there is that young nephew to whom madame wrote.  Gerard d'Aubigny is
his name, is it not?"

"Yes, sire."

"Make him out a colonel's commission, and give him the next vacancy,
Louvois."

"A colonel, sire!  Why, he is not yet twenty."

"Ay, Louvois.  Pray, am I the chief of the army, or are you?  Take care,
Louvois!  I have warned you once before.  I tell you, man, that if I
choose to promote one of my jack-boots to be the head of a brigade, you
shall not hesitate to make out the papers.  Now go into the ante-room,
and wait with the other witnesses until you are wanted."

There had meanwhile been busy goings-on in the small room where the red
lamp burned in front of the Virgin.  Francoise de Maintenon stood in the
centre, a little flush of excitement on her cheeks, and an unwonted
light in her placid gray eyes.  She was clad in a dress of shining white
brocade, trimmed and slashed with silver serge, and fringed at the
throat and arms with costly point lace.  Three women, grouped around
her, rose and stooped and swayed, putting a touch here and a touch
there, gathering in, looping up, and altering until all was to their
taste.

"There!" said the head dressmaker, giving a final pat to a rosette of
gray silk; "I think that will do, your Majes--that is to say, madame."

The lady smiled at the adroit slip of the courtier dressmaker.

"My tastes lean little towards dress," said she, "yet I would fain look
as he would wish me to look."

"Ah, it is easy to dress madame.  Madame has a figure.  Madame has a
carriage.  What costume would not look well with such a neck and waist
and arm to set it off?  But, ah, madame, what are we to do when we have
to make the figure as well as the dress?  There was the Princess
Charlotte Elizabeth.  It was but yesterday that we cut her gown.  She
was short, madame, but thick.  Oh, it is incredible how thick she was!
She uses more cloth than madame, though she is two hand-breadths
shorter.  Ah, I am sure that the good God never meant people to be as
thick as that.  But then, of course, she is Bavarian and not French."

But madame was paying little heed to the gossip of the dressmaker.
Her eyes were fixed upon the statue in the corner, and her lips were
moving in prayer--prayer that she might be worthy of this great destiny
which had come so suddenly upon her, a poor governess; that she might
walk straight among the pitfalls which surrounded her upon every side;
that this night's work might bring a blessing upon France and upon the
man whom she loved.  There came a discreet tap at the door to break in
upon her prayer.

"It is Bontems, madame," said Mademoiselle Nanon.  "He says that the
king is ready."

"Then we shall not keep him waiting.  Come, mademoiselle, and may God
shed His blessing upon what we are about to do!"

The little party assembled in the king's ante-room, and started from
there to the private chapel.  In front walked the portly bishop, clad in
a green vestment, puffed out with the importance of the function, his
missal in his hand, and his fingers between the pages at the service
_de matrimoniis_.  Beside him strode his almoner, and two little
servitors of the court in crimson cassocks bearing lighted torches.
The king and Madame de Maintenon walked side by side, she quiet and
composed, with gentle bearing and downcast eyes, he with a flush on his
dark cheeks, and a nervous, furtive look in his eyes, like a man who
knows that he is in the midst of one of the great crises of his life.
Behind them, in solemn silence, followed a little group of chosen
witnesses, the lean, silent Pere la Chaise, Louvois, scowling heavily at
the bride,  the Marquis de Charmarante, Bontems, and Mademoiselle Nanon.

The torches shed a strong yellow light upon this small band as they
advanced slowly through the corridors and _salons_ which led to the
chapel, and they threw a garish glare upon the painted walls and
ceilings, flashing back from gold-work and from mirror, but leaving long
trailing shadows in the corners.  The king glanced nervously at these
black recesses, and at the portraits of his ancestors and relations
which lined the walls.  As he passed that of his late queen, Maria
Theresa, he started and gasped with horror.

"My God!" he whispered; "she frowned and spat at me!"

Madame laid her cool hand upon his wrist.  "It is nothing, sire," she
murmured, in her soothing voice.  "It was but the light flickering over
the picture."

Her words had their usual effect upon him.  The startled look died away
from his eyes, and taking her hand in his he walked resolutely forwards.
A minute later they were before the altar, and the words were being read
which should bind them forever together.  As they turned away again, her
new ring blazing upon her finger, there was a buzz of congratulation
around her.  The king only said nothing, but he looked at her, and she
had no wish that he should say more.  She was still calm and pale, but
the blood throbbed in her temples.  "You are Queen of France now," it
seemed to be humming--"queen, queen, queen!"

But a sudden shadow had fallen across her, and a low voice was in her
ear.  "Remember your promise to the Church," it whispered.  She started,
and turned to see the pale, eager face of the Jesuit beside her.

"Your hand has turned cold, Francoise," said Louis.  "Let us go,
dearest.  We have been too long in this dismal church."
