then I told the fellow to go later to his lodgings and deliver my message
into Sir John's own hand, whence it seems that he thinks that he must
await him till he comes."

Upon a table near there lay the loaded whip; for she had felt it bolder
to let it lie there as if forgotten, because her pulse had sprung so at
first sight of it when she came down, and she had so quailed before the
desire to thrust it away, to hide it from her sight.  "And that I quail
before," she had said, "I must have the will to face--or I am lost."  So
she had let it stay.

A languishing beauty, with melting blue eyes and a pretty fashion of ever
keeping before the world of her admirers her waxen delicacy, lifted the
heavy thing in her frail white hand.

"How can your ladyship wield it?" she said.  "It is so heavy for a
woman--but your ladyship is--is not--"

"Not quite a woman," said the beautiful creature, standing at her full
great height, and smiling down at this blue and white piece of frailty
with the flashing splendour of her eyes.

"Not quite a woman," cried two wits at once.  "A goddess rather--an
Olympian goddess."

The languisher could not endure comparisons which so seemed to disparage
her ethereal charms.  She lifted the weapon with a great effort, which
showed the slimness of her delicate fair wrist and the sweet tracery of
blue veins upon it.

"Nay," she said lispingly, "it needs the muscle of a great man to lift
it.  I could not hold it--much less beat with it a horse."  And to show
how coarse a strength was needed and how far her femininity lacked such
vigour, she dropped it upon the floor--and it rolled beneath the edge of
the divan.

"Now," the thought shot through my lady's brain, as a bolt shoots from
the sky--"now--he _laughs_!"

She had no time to stir--there were upon their knees three beaux at once,
and each would sure have thrust his arm below the seat and rummaged, had
not God saved her!  Yes, 'twas of God she thought in that terrible mad
second--God!--and only a mind that is not human could have told why.

For Anne--poor Mistress Anne--white-faced and shaking, was before them
all, and with a strange adroitness stooped,--and thrust her hand below,
and drawing the thing forth, held it up to view.

"'Tis here," she said, "and in sooth, sister, I wonder not at its
falling--its weight is so great."

Clorinda took it from her hand.

"I shall break no more beasts like Devil," she said, "and for quieter
ones it weighs too much; I shall lay it by."

She crossed the room and laid it upon a shelf.

"It was ever heavy--but for Devil.  'Tis done with," she said; and there
came back to her face--which for a second had lost hue--a flood of
crimson so glowing, and a smile so strange, that those who looked and
heard, said to themselves that 'twas the thought of Osmonde who had so
changed her, which made her blush.  But a few moments later they beheld
the same glow mount again.  A lacquey entered, bearing a salver on which
lay two letters.  One was a large one, sealed with a ducal coronet, and
this she saw first, and took in her hand even before the man had time to
speak.

"His Grace's courier has arrived from France," he said; "the package was
ordered to be delivered at once."

"It must be that his Grace returns earlier than we had hoped," she said,
and then the other missive caught her eye.

"'Tis your ladyship's own," the lacquey explained somewhat anxiously.
"'Twas brought back, Sir John not having yet come home, and Jenfry having
waited three hours."

"'Twas long enough," quoth her ladyship.  "'Twill do to-morrow."

She did not lay Osmonde's letter aside, but kept it in her hand, and
seeing that she waited for their retirement to read it, her guests began
to make their farewells.  One by one or in groups of twos and threes they
left her, the men bowing low, and going away fretted by the memory of the
picture she made--a tall and regal figure in her flowered crimson, her
stateliness seeming relaxed and softened by the mere holding of the
sealed missive in her hand.  But the women were vaguely envious, not of
Osmonde, but of her before whom there lay outspread as far as life's
horizon reached, a future of such perfect love and joy; for Gerald
Mertoun had been marked by feminine eyes since his earliest youth, and
had seemed to embody all that woman's dreams or woman's ambitions or her
love could desire.

When the last was gone, Clorinda turned, tore her letter open, and held
it hard to her lips.  Before she read a word she kissed it passionately a
score of times, paying no heed that Anne sate gazing at her; and having
kissed it so, she fell to reading it, her cheeks warm with the glow of a
sweet and splendid passion, her bosom rising and falling in a tempest of
tender, fluttering breaths--and 'twas these words her eyes devoured:

   "If I should head this page I write to you 'Goddess and Queen, and
   Empress of my deepest soul,' what more should I be saying than 'My
   Love' and 'My Clorinda,' since these express all the soul of man could
   crave for or his body desire.  The body and soul of me so long for
   thee, sweetheart, and sweetest beautiful woman that the hand of Nature
   ever fashioned for the joy of mortals, that I have had need to pray
   Heaven's help to aid me to endure the passing of the days that lie
   between me and the hour which will make me the most strangely,
   rapturously, happy man, not in England, not in the world, but in all
   God's universe.  I must pray Heaven again, and indeed do and will, for
   humbleness which shall teach me to remember that I am not deity, but
   mere man--mere man--though I shall hold a goddess to my breast and
   gaze into eyes which are like deep pools of Paradise, and yet answer
   mine with the marvel of such love as none but such a soul could make a
   woman's, and so fit to mate with man's.  In the heavy days when I was
   wont to gaze at you from afar with burning heart, my unceasing anguish
   was that even high honour itself could not subdue and conquer the
   thoughts which leaped within me even as my pulse leaped, and even as
   my pulse could not be stilled unless by death.  And one that for ever
   haunted--aye, and taunted--me was the image of how your tall, beauteous
   body would yield itself to a strong man's arm, and your noble head
   with its heavy tower of hair resting upon his shoulder--the centres of
   his very being would be thrilled and shaken by the uplifting of such
   melting eyes as surely man ne'er gazed within on earth before, and the
   ripe and scarlet bow of a mouth so beauteous and so sweet with
   womanhood.  This beset me day and night, and with such torture that I
   feared betimes my brain might reel and I become a lost and ruined
   madman.  And now--it is no more forbidden me to dwell upon it--nay, I
   lie waking at night, wooing the picture to me, and at times I rise
   from my dreams to kneel by my bedside and thank God that He hath given
   me at last what surely is my own!--for so it seems to me, my love, that
   each of us is but a part of the other, and that such forces of Nature
   rush to meet together in us, that Nature herself would cry out were we
   rent apart.  If there were aught to rise like a ghost between us, if
   there were aught that could sunder us--noble soul, let us but swear
   that it shall weld us but the closer together, and that locked in each
   other's arms its blows shall not even make our united strength to
   sway.  Sweetest lady, your lovely lip will curve in smiles, and you
   will say, 'He is mad with his joy--my Gerald' (for never till my heart
   stops at its last beat and leaves me still, a dead man, cold upon my
   bed, can I forget the music of your speech when you spoke those words,
   'My Gerald!  My Gerald.')  And indeed I crave your pardon, for a man
   so filled with rapture cannot be quite sane, and sometimes I wonder if
   I walk through the palace gardens like one who is drunk, so does my
   brain reel.  But soon, my heavenly, noble love, my exile will be over,
   and this is in truth what my letter is to tell you, that in four days
   your lacqueys will throw open your doors to me and I shall enter, and
   being led to you, shall kneel at your feet and kiss the hem of your
   robe, and then rise standing to fold her who will so soon be my very
   wife to my throbbing breast."

Back to her face had come all the softness which had been lost, the hard
lines were gone, the tender curves had returned, her lashes looked as if
they were moist.  Anne, sitting rigidly and gazing at her, was afraid to
speak, knowing that she was not for the time on earth, but that the sound
of a voice would bring her back to it, and that 'twas well she should be
away as long as she might.

She read the letter, not once, but thrice, dwelling upon every word,
'twas plain; and when she had reached the last one, turning back the
pages and beginning again.  When she looked up at last, 'twas with an
almost wild little smile, for she had indeed for that one moment
forgotten.

"Locked in each other's arms," she said--"locked in each other's arms.  My
Gerald!  My Gerald!  'What surely is my own--my own'!"

Anne rose and came to her, laying her hand on her arm.  She spoke in a
voice low, hushed, and strained.

"Come away, sister," she said, "for a little while--come away."




CHAPTER XVIII--My Lady Dunstanwolde sits late alone and writes


That she must leave the Panelled Parlour at her usual hour, or attract
attention by doing that to which her household was unaccustomed, she well
knew, her manner of life being ever stately and ceremonious in its
regularity.  When she dined at home she and Anne partook of their repast
together in the large dining-room, the table loaded with silver dishes
and massive glittering glass, their powdered, gold-laced lacqueys in
attendance, as though a score of guests had shared the meal with them.
Since her lord's death there had been nights when her ladyship had sat
late writing letters and reading documents pertaining to her estates, the
management of which, though in a measure controlled by stewards and
attorneys, was not left to them, as the business of most great ladies is
generally left to others.  All papers were examined by her, all leases
and agreements clearly understood before she signed them, and if there
were aught unsatisfactory, both stewards and lawyers were called to her
presence to explain.

"Never did I--or any other man--meet with such a head upon a woman's
shoulders," her attorney said.  And the head steward of Dunstanwolde and
Helversly learned to quake at the sight of her bold handwriting upon the
outside of a letter.

"Such a lady!" he said--"such a lady!  Lie to her if you can; palter if
you know how; try upon her the smallest honest shrewd trick, and see how
it fares with you.  Were it not that she is generous as she is piercing
of eye, no man could serve her and make an honest living."

She went to her chamber and was attired again sumptuously for dinner.
Before she descended she dismissed her woman for a space on some errand,
and when she was alone, drawing near to her mirror, gazed steadfastly
within it at her face.  When she had read Osmonde's letter her cheeks had
glowed; but when she had come back to earth, and as she had sat under her
woman's hands at her toilette, bit by bit the crimson had died out as she
had thought of what was behind her and of what lay before.  The thing was
so stiffly rigid by this time, and its eyes still stared so.  Never had
she needed to put red upon her cheeks before, Nature having stained them
with such richness of hue; but as no lady of the day was unprovided with
her crimson, there was a little pot among her toilette ornaments which
contained all that any emergency might require.  She opened this small
receptacle and took from it the red she for the first time was in want
of.

"I must not wear a pale face, God knows," she said, and rubbed the colour
on her cheeks with boldness.

It would have seemed that she wore her finest crimson when she went forth
full dressed from her apartment; little Nero grinned to see her, the
lacqueys saying among themselves that his Grace's courier had surely
brought good news, and that they might expect his master soon.  At the
dinner-table 'twas Anne who was pale and ate but little, she having put
no red upon her cheeks, and having no appetite for what was spread before
her.  She looked strangely as though she were withered and shrunken, and
her face seemed even wrinkled.  My lady had small leaning towards food,
but she sent no food away untouched, forcing herself to eat, and letting
not the talk flag--though it was indeed true that 'twas she herself who
talked, Mistress Anne speaking rarely; but as it was always her way to be
silent, and a listener rather than one who conversed, this was not
greatly noticeable.

Her Ladyship of Dunstanwolde talked of her guests of the afternoon, and
was charming and witty in her speech of them; she repeated the _mots_ of
the wits, and told some brilliant stories of certain modish ladies and
gentlemen of fashion; she had things to say of statesmen and politics,
and was sparkling indeed in speaking of the lovely languisher whose
little wrist was too delicate and slender to support the loaded whip.
While she talked, Mistress Anne's soft, dull eyes were fixed upon her
with a sort of wonder which had some of the quality of bewilderment; but
this was no new thing either, for to the one woman the other was ever
something to marvel at.

"It is because you are so quiet a mouse, Anne," my lady said, with her
dazzling smile, "that you seem never in the way; and yet I should miss
you if I knew you were not within the house.  When the duke takes me to
Camylotte you must be with me even then.  It is so great a house that in
it I can find you a bower in which you can be happy even if you see us
but little.  'Tis a heavenly place I am told, and of great splendour and
beauty.  The park and flower-gardens are the envy of all England."

"You--will be very happy, sister," said Anne, "and--and like a queen."

"Yes," was her sister's answer--"yes."  And 'twas spoken with a deep in-
drawn breath.

After the repast was ended she went back to the Panelled Parlour.

"You may sit with me till bedtime if you desire, Anne," she said; "but
'twill be but dull for you, as I go to sit at work.  I have some
documents of import to examine and much writing to do.  I shall sit up
late."  And upon this she turned to the lacquey holding open the door for
her passing through.  "If before half-past ten there comes a message from
Sir John Oxon," she gave order, "it must be brought to me at once; but
later I must not be disturbed--it will keep until morning."

Yet as she spoke there was before her as distinct a picture as ever of
what lay waiting and gazing in the room to which she went.

Until twelve o'clock she sat at her table, a despatch box by her side,
papers outspread before her.  Within three feet of her was the divan, but
she gave no glance to it, sitting writing, reading, and comparing
documents.  At twelve o'clock she rose and rang the bell.

"I shall be later than I thought," she said.  "I need none of you who are
below stairs.  Go you all to bed.  Tell my woman that she also may lie
down.  I will ring when I come to my chamber and have need of her.  There
is yet no message from Sir John?"

"None, my lady," the man answered.

He went away with a relieved countenance, as she made no comment.  He
knew that his fellows as well as himself would be pleased enough to be
released from duty for the night.  They were a pampered lot, and had no
fancy for late hours when there were no great entertainments being held
which pleased them and gave them chances to receive vails.

Mistress Anne sat in a large chair, huddled into a small heap, and
looking colourless and shrunken.  As she heard bolts being shot and bars
put up for the closing of the house, she knew that her own dismissal was
at hand.  Doors were shut below stairs, and when all was done the silence
of night reigned as it does in all households when those who work have
gone to rest.  'Twas a common thing enough, and yet this night there was
one woman who felt the stillness so deep that it made her breathing seem
a sound too loud.

"Go to bed, Anne," she said.  "You have stayed up too long."

Anne arose from her chair and drew near to her.

"Sister," said she, as she had said before, "let me stay."

She was a poor weak creature, and so she looked with her pale
insignificant face and dull eyes, a wisp of loose hair lying damp on her
forehead.  She seemed indeed too weak a thing to stand even for a moment
in the way of what must be done this night, and 'twas almost irritating
to be stopped by her.

"Nay," said my Lady Dunstanwolde, her beautiful brow knitting as she
looked at her.  "Go to your chamber, Anne, and to sleep.  I must do my
work, and finish to-night what I have begun."

"But--but--" Anne stammered, dominated again, and made afraid, as she
ever was, by this strong nature, "in this work you must finish--is there
not something I could do to--aid you--even in some small and poor way.  Is
there--naught?"

"Naught," answered Clorinda, her form drawn to its great full height, her
lustrous eyes darkening.  "What should there be that you could
understand?"

"Not some small thing--not some poor thing?" Anne said, her fingers
nervously twisting each other, so borne down was she by her awful
timorousness, for awful it was indeed when she saw clouds gather on her
sister's brow.  "I have so loved you, sister--I have so loved you that my
mind is quickened somehow at times, and I can understand more than would
be thought--when I hope to serve you.  Once you said--once you said--"

She knew not then nor ever afterwards how it came to pass that in that
moment she found herself swept into her sister's white arms and strained
against her breast, wherein she felt the wild heart bounding; nor could
she, not being given to subtle reasoning, have comprehended the almost
fierce kiss on her cheek nor the hot drops that wet it.

"I said that I believed that if you saw me commit murder," Clorinda
cried, "you would love me still, and be my friend and comforter."

"I would, I would!" cried Anne.

"And I believe your word, poor, faithful soul--I do believe it," my lady
said, and kissed her hard again, but the next instant set her free and
laughed.  "But you will not be put to the test," she said, "for I have
done none.  And in two days' time my Gerald will be here, and I shall be
safe--saved and happy for evermore--for evermore.  There, leave me!  I
would be alone and end my work."

And she went back to her table and sat beside it, taking her pen to
write, and Anne knew that she dare say no more, and turning, went slowly
from the room, seeing for her last sight as she passed through the
doorway, the erect and splendid figure at its task, the light from the
candelabras shining upon the rubies round the snow-white neck and
wreathed about the tower of raven hair like lines of crimson.




CHAPTER XIX--A piteous story is told, and the old cellars walled in


It is, indeed, strangely easy in the great world for a man to lose his
importance, and from having been the target for all eyes and the subject
of all conversation, to step from his place, or find it so taken by some
rival that it would seem, judging from the general obliviousness to him,
that he had never existed.  But few years before no fashionable gathering
would have been felt complete had it not been graced by the presence of
the young and fascinating Lovelace, Sir John Oxon.  Women favoured him,
and men made themselves his boon companions; his wit was repeated; the
fashion of his hair and the cut of his waistcoat copied.  He was at first
rich and gay enough to be courted and made a favourite; but when his
fortune was squandered, and his marriage with the heiress came to naught,
those qualities which were vicious and base in him were more easy to be
seen.  Besides, there came new male beauties and new dandies with greater
resources and more of prudence, and these, beginning to set fashion, win
ladies' hearts, and make conquests, so drew the attention of the public
mind that he was less noticeable, being only one of many, instead of
ruling singly as it had seemed that by some strange chance he did at
first.  There were indeed so many stories told of his light ways, that
their novelty being worn off and new ones still repeated, such persons as
concerned themselves with matters of reputation either through conscience
or policy, began to speak of him with less of warmth or leniency.

"'Tis not well for a matron with daughters to marry and with sons to keep
an eye to," it was said, "to have in her household too often a young
gentleman who has squandered his fortune in dice and drink and wild
living, and who 'twas known was cast off by a reputable young lady of
fortune."

So there were fine ladies who began to avoid him, and those in power at
Court and in the world who regarded him with lessening favour day by day!
In truth, he had such debts, and his creditors pressed him so
ceaselessly, that even had the world's favour continued, his life must
have changed its aspect greatly.  His lodgings were no longer the most
luxurious in the fashionable part of the town, his brocades and laces
were no longer of the richest, nor his habit of the very latest and most
modish cut; he had no more an equipage attracting every eye as he drove
forth, nor a gentleman's gentleman whose swagger and pomp outdid that of
all others in his world.  Soon after the breaking of his marriage with
the heiress, his mother had died, and his relatives being few, and those
of an order strictly averse to the habits of ill-provided and extravagant
kinsmen, he had but few family ties.  Other ties he had, 'twas true, but
they were not such as were accounted legal or worthy of attention either
by himself or those related to him.

So it befell that when my Lady Dunstanwolde's lacquey could not find him
at his lodgings, and as the days went past neither his landlady nor his
creditors beheld him again, his absence from the scene was not considered
unaccountable by them, nor did it attract the notice it would have done
in times gone by.

"He hath made his way out of England to escape us," said the angry
tailors and mercers--who had besieged his door in vain for months, and
who were now infuriated at the thought of their own easiness and the
impudent gay airs which had befooled them.  "A good four hundred pounds
of mine hath he carried with him," said one.  "And two hundred of mine!"
"And more of mine, since I am a poor man to whom a pound means twenty
guineas!"  "We are all robbed, and he has cheated the debtors' prison,
wherein, if we had not been fools, he would have been clapped six months
ago."

"Think ye he will not come back, gentlemen?" quavered his landlady.  "God
knows when I have seen a guinea of his money--but he was such a handsome,
fine young nobleman, and had such a way with a poor body, and ever a
smile and a chuck o' the chin for my Jenny."

"Look well after poor Jenny if he hath left her behind," said the tailor.

He did not come back, indeed; and hearing the rumour that he had fled his
creditors, the world of fashion received the news with small disturbance,
all modish persons being at that time much engaged in discussion of the
approaching nuptials of her ladyship of Dunstanwolde and the Duke of
Osmonde.  Close upon the discussions of the preparations came the
nuptials themselves, and then all the town was agog, and had small
leisure to think of other things.  For those who were bidden to the
ceremonials and attendant entertainments, there were rich habits and
splendid robes to be prepared; and to those who had not been bidden,
there were bitter disappointments and thwarted wishes to think of.

"Sir John Oxon has fled England to escape seeing and hearing it all," was
said.

"He has fled to escape something more painful than the spleen," others
answered.  "He had reached his rope's end, and finding that my Lady
Dunstanwolde was not of a mind to lengthen it with her fortune, having
