pleaded his cause with all the eloquence at his command, and
painted in piteous words the misery the gentle girl had endured in
the midst of her unhallowed surroundings, the kind-hearted
ecclesiastic relented, and forthwith despatched Brother Lawrence to
examine and counsel the maid, hear her confession, and absolve her
from her offences, and then, if all seemed well, to perform the
rite of betrothal, which was almost as binding as the marriage
service itself, and generally preceded it by a few weeks or months,
as the case might be. So Jack rode off in high feather, and talked
so unceasingly of his Eva the whole way to the farm, that the good
brother was almost convinced beforehand of the virtue and devotion
of the maid, and was willing enough a few hours later to join their
hands in troth plight. After that, unless the father were prepared
to draw upon himself the fulminations of the Church, he could not
lay claim to his daughter, or try to give her in wedlock to
another. Her place was now with her betrothed's kindred, where she
would remain until the marriage ceremony itself took place, and
made her indeed the daughter of the farm.

Meantime Paul lay for a while sorely sick, and was tended with
motherly devotion by good Mistress Devenish, who learned to love
him almost as a son. Hardy and tough as he was, the fatigue and
suffering he had undergone had broken him down, and a fever set in
which for a time made them fear for his very life. But his hardy
constitution triumphed over the foe, and in a week's time from the
night he first set foot across the threshold of Figeon's Farm he
was held to be out of danger, though excessively weak and ill.

During the long nights when his hostess had watched beside him,
thinking that he was either unconscious or delirious, Paul had seen
and heard more than she knew. He had heard her read, as if to
herself, strange and beautiful words from a book upon her
knee--words that had seemed full of peace and light and comfort,
and which had sunk into his weary brain with strangely soothing
power. Some of these same words were not quite unfamiliar to
him--at least he knew their equivalents in the Latin tongue; but
somehow when spoken thus in the language of everyday life, they
came home to him with tenfold greater force, whilst some of the
sweetest and deepest and most comforting words were altogether new
to him.

And as his strength revived, Paul's anxiety to hear more of such
words grew with it; and one forenoon, as his nurse sat beside him
with her busy needle flying, he looked up at her and said, "You do
not read out of the book any more, and I would fain hear those
wonderful words again."

"I knew not that you had ever heard."

"Yes, I heard much, and it seemed to ease my pain and give me happy
thoughts. It is a beautiful and a goodly book. May I not hear
more?"

"I would that all the world might hear the life giving words of
that book, Paul," said the good woman with a sigh. "But they come
from Wycliffe's Bible, and the holy brothers tell us that it is a
wicked book, which none of us should read."

"It cannot be a wicked book which holds such goodly words--words
that in the Latin tongue the Holy Church herself makes use of,"
said Paul stoutly. "It may be bad for unlettered and ignorant men
to try to teach and expound the words they read, but the words
themselves are good words. May I not see the book myself?"

"You know the risk you run in so doing, Paul?"

"Ay; but I am a good son of the Church, and I fear not to see what
manner of book this be. If it is bad, I will no more of it."

The woman smiled slightly as she rose from her seat and touched a
spring in the wall hard by the chimney. A sliding panel sprang back
and disclosed a small shelf, upon which stood a large book, which
the woman placed in Paul's hands, closing the panel immediately.

He lay still, turning the leaves with his thin hands, and
marvelling what the Church found to condemn in so holy a book as
this seemed, breathing peace and goodwill and truest piety; but a
slight stir without the house, and the trampling of horse hoofs in
the court below, caused the woman to raise her head with an
instinct of caution, and Paul to thrust the volume hastily but
cautiously deep beneath the pillows on which he lay.

There were strange voices in the house, and the door was opened by
Brother Lawrence, who came in with a troubled look upon his face.
He was followed by three tall monks in a different habit, and with
none of the rubicund joviality upon their faces that was seen in
those of the brothers of Leighs Priory; whilst last of all, with a
cunning and malicious leer upon his face, followed the little
peddler, who, when he met the steady glance of Paul's eyes, shrank
back somewhat and looked discomfited.

But the foremost of the tall monks, scarce heeding the respectful
salutation made him by Paul and the mistress, turned upon the
peddler and said:

"Fellow, come forward and bear your testimony. It was, you who laid
the information that heretical books were hidden in this house, and
that you knew the hiding place. Make good your words, now that you
have brought us to the spot; for our worthy brother here speaks
well of those that live beneath this roof."

"May it please your reverence, I know the place well, and that
there are heretical books concealed there always. If you will press
that spring in the wall here, you will see for yourself. If you
find not the forbidden Bible there, call me a prating and a lying
knave.",

Brother Lawrence was looking both troubled and curious, but the
face of Mistress Devenish was perfectly calm, and Paul commanded
his countenance to a look of simple wonderment and surprise.

The monk obeyed the direction of the peddler; the secret spring,
gave a sharp click, and the door flew open. But the little shelf
was bare, and told no tales, and the face of the peddler fell.

"It has been removed--they have had notice of this visitation,"
stammered the discomfited man; but Brother Lawrence cut him short.

"Your reverence knows that that is impossible," he said, addressing
the tall monk: "no word of this visitation had reached even our
ears till your arrival this very morning. This house has ever been
well thought of by our fraternity, and pays its dues to Holy Church
as I would all other houses did. I trust your mind is satisfied."

The monk bent his head; but before he could speak, Paul had raised
himself on his pillows, and was speaking in quick, earnest tones.

"Holy father, listen, I pray you, to me," he said, "and trust not
the testimony of yon traitorous fellow, who, if he had had his
will, would have done to death the son of our sainted monarch King
Henry.

"Nay, let him not escape," he cried, as he saw the man make an
attempt to reach the door, which was promptly frustrated by the
sudden appearance of Jack Devenish, who had heard of this sudden
incursion of monks, and had rushed to the house in some fear of
what might be happening there.

"Hold him fast, Jack," cried Paul, with increasing energy, "till I
have told my tale;" and forthwith he described in graphic words how
this man had identified the prince, and had striven to sell him to
the enemy, that the House of York might triumph in his death, or in
possession of the heir whose life alone could redeem the cause of
Lancaster from destruction. The story was listened to with deep
attention and no little sympathy, for the visit, the peril, and the
flight of the prince were becoming known in this part of the
country, and the clergy of all degrees were thankful indeed that
the heir of England was safe, as they were all deeply attached to
the cause of the Red Rose.

So Paul's story roused a great wave of anger against the mean
fellow, who would thus earn his own living by betraying those whose
bread he had eaten, or one whose life it should be his care to
protect; and scarce had Paul done speaking before Brother Lawrence
took up the gauntlet, and addressing himself to the tall monk,
pointed to Paul, as he lay still white and weak upon his pillows.

"And hear farther, reverend father: this youth who now speaks to
you is he of whom I told you as we rode along, who bore torture
without yielding up the name of the hiding place to which he knew
the prince had escaped. But for him young Edward might yet have
fallen into the hands of these robbers; for they would have watched
our Priory and have set upon all who went or came, and ravaged the
whole country, so that even the habit of the monk would not have
protected or disguised him. And these good folks here at this farm
were they who rescued him from the hands of the robbers; for the
maiden alone, without the help of this stalwart youth, could not
have brought him, ill and fainting as he was, all these long weary
miles. And they took him in; and this woman, whom yon informer
would have you believe is a vile heretic, has nursed him like his
own mother, and brought him back from the very jaws of death. And
is she who has done a service that royal Henry will one day thank
her for publicly (for this pallid youth is as a brother in love to
young Edward, and his especial charge to us till he comes again to
claim him and bestow his well-earned knighthood upon him)--is she
to suffer from the unproven charges of a base spy and Yorkist tool
like yon fellow there, who would have betrayed his own king's son
to death? Away with such a fellow from the earth, I say; and let
those who have sheltered England's heir, and rescued this bold
youth from worse than death--let them, I say, live in peace and
honour for the service they have done their country! For I wot that
when young Edward comes in his own proper state again, his first
care will be for those who befriended him in his hour of need, his
first chastisement against those who have done aught to harm them,
if they be still cumbering the earth."

And with that the usually jovial brother, moved now by a great
access of wrath, which had given him unwonted eloquence, pointed a
finger significantly at the trembling peddler; and Jack, who held
him by the collar, gave him a shake and said:

"Give me leave to carry him to the village green and tell the good
folks there the tale, and I warrant that he will not cumber the
ground much longer."

"Do with him as you will," said the tall monk, "he is no charge of
mine; and if all be true that is said, he well deserves his fate."

The peddler was borne away, crying and entreating, and before an
hour had passed, his dead body was hanging on an oak tree nigh to
the blacksmith's forge--a warning to all informers; and when he had
gone the tall monk turned to Paul with a more benign air, and laid
his hand upon his head as he said:

"Thou art a stanch lad; and for their care to thee these honest
folks deserve the gratitude of the Church. I believe none of the
accusations of that lewd fellow. I trow this is a godly house,
where the Lord is rightly honoured in His holy ordinances."

"That indeed is so," answered Paul fervently.

The visitors departed well satisfied; whilst Paul heaved a great
sigh of relief, and wondered if he had in any way sinned by thought
or word or deed. But his conscience was clear; he could not see
that there was sin in reading holy words from God's own Book. Such
matters of dispute were too hard for him, and he closed his tired
eyes and was soon sound asleep. He saw the great Bible no more
whilst he remained beneath that roof; but many of its words were
engraved upon his heart, and were a guide to his steps and a light
to his path throughout his subsequent life.

"You have saved us from a great peril this day, Paul," said the
farmer that night, with a moisture in his eyes and a gravity upon
his jolly face. "If we have given shelter and protection to you,
your protection of us has been equally great. You must make this
your home, my boy, so long as you need one."

The next days were full of excitement for Much Waltham. The request
made by the people of Essex had been listened to by the great earl,
and though he could scarce credit the fact that the king's son had
been so near, he was convinced at last, and burned to avenge
himself on those who had tried to take him captive. A band of armed
men was sent down, and the forest swept clear of the marauders--at
least for a while. Will Ives had his wish, and met Simon Dowsett
face to face in a hand-to-hand struggle; and although the latter
did all to deserve his undesirable sobriquet, he was overpowered at
last and slain, and his head carried in triumph to his native
village, where, after the savage custom of the day, it was exposed
on a pike on the village green.

Paul heard of this fight by report alone, for he was able to get
only as far as the great kitchen fire, where he and Eva spent a
great part of their time in eagerly discussing the questions of the
day. Her father, the chief of the band, made his escape with some
few of his followers, and was heard of no more in those parts. His
daughter was glad he was not killed, though she could not desire to
see him more; and in a short time she and Jack were married, and
she almost forgot that she had been for so many years living
amongst the robbers of Black Notley.



Chapter 8: The Rally Of The Red Rose.


"Paul! Is it really you? Now indeed I feel that I have reached my
native land again. O Paul, I have wearied sorely for you. Why
followed you not me to France, as we planned? Every day I looked
for tidings of you, and none came. But this meeting atones for
all."

It was the bright dawn of an Easter day, and Paul, after a night's
hard riding, stood within the precincts of the Abbey of Cerne, not
far from the seaport of Weymouth. His hands were closely grasped in
those of young Edward, who was looking into his face with beaming
eyes.

It was no longer the fugitive Edward of the winter months, but a
royally equipped and accoutred youth, upon whose noble face and
figure Paul's eyes dwelt with fond pride. Weary and tempestuous as
had been the voyage from France to England--a voyage that had
lasted seventeen days, in lieu of scarce so many hours--yet the
bright face of the Prince of Wales bore no signs of fatigue or
disappointment. The weary days of waiting were over. He and his
mother had come to share his father's royal state, and drive from
the shores--if he came--the bold usurper who had hitherto triumphed
in the strife of the Roses. His heart beat high with hope and lofty
purpose; and in joy at the eager welcomes poured upon him by the
friends and warriors who came flocking to his standard he forgot
all the doubts and fears of the past, and looked upon himself as
the saviour of his country, as indeed he was regarded by all his
party.

The old comrades and friends looked each other well over with
smiling glances, and it seemed as if Edward marked in Paul as much
change in the outward man as he had done in the prince.

"By my troth, Paul, fair fortune has smiled upon you since last we
met. And the gold spurs of knighthood too--nay, now, what means
that, good comrade? Were we not to have knelt side by side to
receive that honour? Have you outstripped me from the first?"

"Pardon, my dear lord," answered Paul, blushing and smiling; "I
would sooner have received the honour at your hands than at those
of any other. But I was summoned to London, so soon as my wounds
were healed, by the great earl; and your royal father himself gave
me audience, to ask news of you (for it became known that you had
visited the realm by stealth); and after I had told him all my
tale, he with his own hand bestowed that honour upon me. Then the
noble earl made over to me a fair manor in the west country, which
I have not yet visited, but which has put money once more into my
purse. And here am I, your grace's loyal servant, to ask no better
than to follow and fight for you until the crown is safely placed
upon your head."

And he bent the knee and pressed his lips upon the prince's hand.

But Edward raised him, and linked his arm within that of his old
companion, walking with him along the pleasant green pathway of the
Abbey mead, not content till he had heard every detail of that
which had befallen Paul, from the moment they had parted up till
the present, and listening with intense excitement to his account
of what had befallen him in the robbers' cave, and how he had
escaped from thence, and had been tended and protected at Figeon's
by the kindly and honest folks there.

"When I am king," said young Edward, with flashing eyes, "I will go
thither again, and reward them royally for all they have done for
you and me. I am glad they loved me still, Lancastrian though they
knew me at last to be. Oh, if they were willing to follow my
fortunes and own me as their king, methinks others will not be far
behind! And, God helping me, I will try to show them what manner of
man a king should be."

