  Transfix'd his middle chest. He split the mail                 540
  Erewhile his bosom's faithful guard; shrill rang
  The shiver'd brass; sounding he fell; the beam
  Implanted in his palpitating heart
  Shook to its topmost point, but, its force spent,
  At last, quiescent, stood. Then loud exclaim'd                 545
  Idomeneus, exulting in his fall.
    What thinks Deiphobus? seems it to thee
  Vain boaster, that, three warriors slain for one,
  We yield thee just amends? else, stand thyself
  Against me; learn the valor of a Chief                         550
  The progeny of Jove; Jove first begat
  Crete's guardian, Minos, from which Minos sprang
  Deucalion, and from famed Deucalion, I;
  I, sovereign of the numerous race of Crete's
  Extensive isle, and whom my galleys brought                    555
  To these your shores at last, that I might prove
  Thy curse, thy father's, and a curse to Troy.
    He spake; Deiphobus uncertain stood
  Whether, retreating, to engage the help
  Of some heroic Trojan, or himself                              560
  To make the dread experiment alone.
  At length, as his discreeter course, he chose
  To seek AEneas; him he found afar
  Station'd, remotest of the host of Troy,
  For he resented evermore his worth                             565
  By Priam[11] recompensed with cold neglect.
  Approaching him, in accents wing'd he said.
    AEneas! Trojan Chief! If e'er thou lov'dst
  Thy sister's husband, duty calls thee now
  To prove it. Haste--defend with me the dead                    570
  Alcathoues, guardian of thy tender years,
  Slain by Idomeneus the spear-renown'd.
    So saying, he roused his spirit, and on fire
  To combat with the Cretan, forth he sprang.
  But fear seized not Idomeneus as fear                          575
  May seize a nursling boy; resolved he stood
  As in the mountains, conscious of his force,
  The wild boar waits a coming multitude
  Of boisterous hunters to his lone retreat;
  Arching his bristly spine he stands, his eyes                  580
  Beam fire, and whetting his bright tusks, he burns
  To drive, not dogs alone, but men to flight;
  So stood the royal Cretan, and fled not,
  Expecting brave AEneas; yet his friends
  He summon'd, on Ascalaphus his eyes                            585
  Fastening, on Aphareus, Deipyrus,
  Meriones, and Antilochus, all bold
  In battle, and in accents wing'd exclaim'd.
    Haste ye, my friends! to aid me, for I stand
  Alone, nor undismay'd the coming wait                          590
  Of swift AEneas, nor less brave than swift,
  And who possesses fresh his flower of youth,
  Man's prime advantage; were we match'd in years
  As in our spirits, either he should earn
  At once the meed of deathless fame, or I.                      595
    He said; they all unanimous approach'd,
  Sloping their shields, and stood. On the other side
  His aids AEneas call'd, with eyes toward
  Paris, Deiphobus, Agenor, turn'd,
  His fellow-warriors bold; them follow'd all                    600
  Their people as the pastured flock the ram
  To water, by the shepherd seen with joy;
  Such joy AEneas felt, seeing, so soon,
  That numerous host attendant at his call.
  Then, for Alcathoues, into contest close                        605
  Arm'd with long spears they rush'd; on every breast
  Dread rang the brazen corselet, each his foe
  Assailing opposite; but two, the rest
  Surpassing far, terrible both as Mars,
  AEneas and Idomeneus, alike                                     610
  Panted to pierce each other with the spear.
  AEneas, first, cast at Idomeneus,
  But, warn'd, he shunn'd the weapon, and it pass'd.
  Quivering in the soil AEneas' lance
  Stood, hurl'd in vain, though by a forceful arm.               615
  Not so the Cretan; at his waist he pierced
  Oenomaues, his hollow corselet clave,
  And in his midmost bowels drench'd the spear;
  Down fell the Chief, and dying, clench'd the dust.
  Instant, his massy spear the King of Crete                     620
  Pluck'd from the dead, but of his radiant arms
  Despoil'd him not, by numerous weapons urged;
  For now, time-worn, he could no longer make
  Brisk sally, spring to follow his own spear,
  Or shun another, or by swift retreat                           625
  Vanish from battle, but the evil day
  Warded in stationary fight alone.
  At him retiring, therefore, step by step
  Deiphobus, who had with bitterest hate
  Long time pursued him, hurl'd his splendid lance,              630
  But yet again erroneous, for he pierced
  Ascalaphus instead, offspring of Mars;
  Right through his shoulder flew the spear; he fell
  Incontinent, and dying, clench'd the dust.
  But tidings none the brazen-throated Mars                      635
  Tempestuous yet received, that his own son
  In bloody fight had fallen, for on the heights
  Olympian over-arch'd with clouds of gold
  He sat, where sat the other Powers divine,
  Prisoners together of the will of Jove.                        640
  Meantime, for slain Ascalaphus arose
  Conflict severe; Deiphobus his casque
  Resplendent seized, but swift as fiery Mars
  Assailing him, Meriones his arm
  Pierced with a spear, and from his idle hand                   645
  Fallen, the casque sonorous struck the ground.
  Again, as darts the vulture on his prey,
  Meriones assailing him, the lance
  Pluck'd from his arm, and to his band retired.
  Then, casting his fraternal arms around                        650
  Deiphobus, him young Polites led
  From the hoarse battle to his rapid steeds
  And his bright chariot in the distant rear,
  Which bore him back to Troy, languid and loud-
  Groaning, and bleeding from his recent wound.                  655
  Still raged the war, and infinite arose
  The clamor. Aphareus, Caletor's son,
  Turning to face AEneas, in his throat
  Instant the hero's pointed lance received.
  With head reclined, and bearing to the ground                  660
  Buckler and helmet with him, in dark shades
  Of soul-divorcing death involved, he fell.
  Antilochus, observing Thooen turn'd
  To flight, that moment pierced him; from his back
  He ripp'd the vein which through the trunk its course          665
  Winds upward to the neck; that vein he ripp'd
  All forth; supine he fell, and with both hands
  Extended to his fellow-warriors, died.
  Forth sprang Antilochus to strip his arms,
  But watch'd, meantime, the Trojans, who in crowds              670
  Encircling him, his splendid buckler broad
  Smote oft, but none with ruthless point prevail'd
  Even to inscribe the skin of Nestor's son,
  Whom Neptune, shaker of the shores, amid
  Innumerable darts kept still secure.                           675
  Yet never from his foes he shrank, but faced
  From side to side, nor idle slept his spear,
  But with rotation ceaseless turn'd and turn'd
  To every part, now levell'd at a foe
  Far-distant, at a foe, now, near at hand.                      680
  Nor he, thus occupied, unseen escaped
  By Asius' offspring Adamas, who close
  Advancing, struck the centre of his shield.
  But Neptune azure-hair'd so dear a life
  Denied to Adamas, and render'd vain                            685
  The weapon; part within his disk remain'd
  Like a seer'd stake, and part fell at his feet.
  Then Adamas, for his own life alarm'd,
  Retired, but as he went, Meriones
  Him reaching with his lance, the shame between                 690
  And navel pierced him, where the stroke of Mars
  Proves painful most to miserable man.
  There enter'd deep the weapon; down he fell,
  And in the dust lay panting as an ox
  Among the mountains pants by peasants held                     695
  In twisted bands, and dragg'd perforce along;
  So panted dying Adamas, but soon
  Ceased, for Meriones, approaching, pluck'd
  The weapon forth, and darkness veil'd his eyes.
  Helenus, with his heavy Thracian blade                         700
  Smiting the temples of Deipyrus,
  Dash'd off his helmet; from his brows remote
  It fell, and wandering roll'd, till at his feet
  Some warrior found it, and secured; meantime
  The sightless shades of death him wrapp'd around.              705
  Grief at that spectacle the bosom fill'd
  Of valiant Menelaus; high he shook
  His radiant spear, and threatening him, advanced
  On royal Helenus, who ready stood
  With his bow bent. They met; impatient, one,                   710
  To give his pointed lance its rapid course,
  And one, to start his arrow from the nerve.
  The arrow of the son of Priam struck
  Atrides' hollow corselet, but the reed
  Glanced wide. As vetches or as swarthy beans                   715
  Leap from the van and fly athwart the floor,
  By sharp winds driven, and by the winnower's force,
  So from the corselet of the glorious Greek
  Wide-wandering flew the bitter shaft away.
  But Menelaus the left-hand transpierced                        720
  Of Helenus, and with the lance's point
  Fasten'd it to his bow; shunning a stroke
  More fatal, Helenus into his band
  Retired, his arm dependent at his side,
  And trailing, as he went, the ashen beam;                      725
  There, bold Agenor from his hand the lance
  Drew forth, then folded it with softest wool
  Around, sling-wool, and borrow'd from the sling
  Which his attendant into battle bore.
  Then sprang Pisander on the glorious Chief                     730
  The son of Atreus, but his evil fate
  Beckon'd him to his death in conflict fierce,
  Oh Menelaus, mighty Chief! with thee.
  And now they met, small interval between.
  Atrides hurl'd his weapon, and it err'd.                       735
  Pisander with his spear struck full the shield
  Of glorious Menelaus, but his force
  Resisted by the stubborn buckler broad
  Fail'd to transpierce it, and the weapon fell
  Snapp'd at the neck. Yet, when he struck, the heart            740
  Rebounded of Pisander, full of hope.
  But Menelaus, drawing his bright blade,
  Sprang on him, while Pisander from behind
  His buckler drew a brazen battle-axe
  By its long haft of polish'd olive-wood,                       745
  And both Chiefs struck together. He the crest
  That crown'd the shaggy casque of Atreus' son
  Hew'd from its base, but Menelaus him
  In his swift onset smote full on the front
  Above his nose; sounded the shatter'd bone,                    750
  And his eyes both fell bloody at his feet.
  Convolved with pain he lay; then, on his breast
  Atrides setting fast his heel, tore off
  His armor, and exulting thus began.
    So shall ye leave at length the Grecian fleet,               755
  Traitors, and never satisfied with war!
  Nor want ye other guilt, dogs and profane!
  But me have injured also, and defied
  The hot displeasure of high-thundering Jove
  The hospitable, who shall waste in time,                       760
  And level with the dust your lofty Troy.
  I wrong'd not you, yet bore ye far away
  My youthful bride who welcomed you, and stole
  My treasures also, and ye now are bent
  To burn Achaia's gallant fleet with fire                       765
  And slay her heroes; but your furious thirst
  Of battle shall hereafter meet a check.
  Oh, Father Jove! Thee wisest we account
  In heaven or earth, yet from thyself proceed
  All these calamities, who favor show'st                        770
  To this flagitious race the Trojans, strong
  In wickedness alone, and whose delight
  In war and bloodshed never can be cloy'd.
  All pleasures breed satiety, sweet sleep,
  Soft dalliance, music, and the graceful dance,                 775
  Though sought with keener appetite by most
  Than bloody war; but Troy still covets blood.
    So spake the royal Chief, and to his friends
  Pisander's gory spoils consigning, flew
  To mingle in the foremost fight again.                         780
  Him, next, Harpalion, offspring of the King
  Pylaemenes assail'd; to Troy he came
  Following his sire, but never thence return'd.
  He, from small distance, smote the central boss
  Of Menelaus' buckler with his lance,                           785
  But wanting power to pierce it, with an eye
  Of cautious circumspection, lest perchance
  Some spear should reach him, to his band retired.
  But him retiring with a brazen shaft
  Meriones pursued; swift flew the dart                          790
  To his right buttock, slipp'd beneath the bone,
  His bladder grazed, and started through before.
  There ended his retreat; sudden he sank
  And like a worm lay on the ground, his life
  Exhaling in his fellow-warrior's arms,                         795
  And with his sable blood soaking the plain.
  Around him flock'd his Paphlagonians bold,
  And in his chariot placed drove him to Troy,
  With whom his father went, mourning with tears
  A son, whose death he never saw avenged.                       800
    Him slain with indignation Paris view'd,
  For he, with numerous Paphlagonians more
  His guest had been; he, therefore, in the thirst
  Of vengeance, sent a brazen arrow forth.
  There was a certain Greek, Euchenor, son                       805
  Of Polyides the soothsayer, rich
  And brave in fight, and who in Corinth dwelt
  He, knowing well his fate, yet sail'd to Troy
  For Polyides oft, his reverend sire,
  Had prophecied that he should either die                       810
  By some dire malady at home, or, slain
  By Trojan hands, amid the fleet of Greece.
  He, therefore, shunning the reproach alike
  Of the Achaians, and that dire disease,
  Had join'd the Grecian host; him Paris pierced                 815
  The ear and jaw beneath; life at the stroke
  Left him, and darkness overspread his eyes.
    So raged the battle like devouring fire.
  But Hector dear to Jove not yet had learn'd,
  Nor aught surmised the havoc of his host                       820
  Made on the left, where victory crown'd well-nigh
  The Grecians animated to the fight
  By Neptune seconding himself their arms.
  He, where he first had started through the gate
  After dispersion of the shielded Greeks                        825
  Compact, still persevered. The galleys there
  Of Ajax and Protesilaues stood
  Updrawn above the hoary Deep; the wall
  Was there of humblest structure, and the steeds
  And warriors there conflicted furious most.                    830
  The Epeans there and Iaeonians[12] robed-
  Prolix, the Phthians,[13] Locrians, and the bold
  Boetians check'd the terrible assault
  Of Hector, noble Chief, ardent as flame,
  Yet not repulsed him. Chosen Athenians form'd                  835
  The van, by Peteos' son, Menestheus, led,
  Whose high command undaunted Bias shared,
  Phidas and Stichius. The Epean host
  Under Amphion, Dracius, Meges, fought.
  Podarces brave in arms the Phthians ruled,                     840
  And Medon (Medon was by spurious birth
  Brother of Ajax Oiliades,
  And for his uncle's death, whom he had slain,
  The brother of Oileus' wife, abode
  In Phylace; but from Iphiclus sprang                           845
  Podarces;) these, all station'd in the front
  Of Phthias' hardy sons, together strove
  With the Boeotians for the fleet's defence.
  Ajax the swift swerved never from the side
  Of Ajax son of Telamon a step,                                 850
  But as in some deep fallow two black steers
  Labor combined, dragging the ponderous plow,
  The briny sweat around their rooted horns
  Oozes profuse; they, parted as they toil
  Along the furrow, by the yoke alone,                           855
  Cleave to its bottom sheer the stubborn glebe,
  So, side by side, they, persevering fought.[14]
  The son of Telamon a people led
  Numerous and bold, who, when his bulky limbs
  Fail'd overlabor'd, eased him of his shield.                   860
  Not so attended by his Locrians fought
  Oileus' valiant son; pitch'd battle them
  Suited not, unprovided with bright casques
  Of hairy crest, with ashen spears, and shields
  Of ample orb; for, trusting in the bow                         865
  And twisted sling alone, they came to Troy,
  And broke with shafts and volley'd stones the ranks.
  Thus occupying, clad in burnish'd arms,
  The van, these two with Hector and his host
  Conflicted, while the Locrians from behind                     870
  Vex'd them with shafts, secure; nor could the men
  Of Ilium stand, by such a shower confused.
  Then, driven with dreadful havoc thence, the foe
  To wind-swept Ilium had again retired.
  Had not Polydamas, at Hector's side                            875
  Standing, the dauntless hero thus address'd.
    Hector! Thou ne'er canst listen to advice;
  But think'st thou, that if heaven in feats of arms
  Give thee pre-eminence, thou must excel
  Therefore in council also all mankind?                         880
  No. All-sufficiency is not for thee.
  To one, superior force in arms is given,
  Skill to another in the graceful dance,
  Sweet song and powers of music to a third,
  And to a fourth loud-thundering Jove imparts                   885
  Wisdom, which profits many, and which saves
  Whole cities oft, though reverenced but by few.
  Yet hear; I speak as wisest seems to me.
  War, like a fiery circle, all around
  Environs thee; the Trojans, since they pass'd                  890
  The bulwark, either hold themselves aloof,
  Or, wide-dispersed among the galleys, cope
  With numbers far superior to their own.
  Retiring, therefore, summon all our Chiefs
  To consultation on the sum of all,                             895
  Whether (should heaven so prosper us) to rush
  Impetuous on the gallant barks of Greece,
  Or to retreat secure; for much I dread
  Lest the Achaians punctually refund
  All yesterday's arrear, since yonder Chief[15]                 900
  Insatiable with battle still abides
  Within the fleet, nor longer, as I judge,
  Will rest a mere spectator of the field.
    So spake Polydamas, whose safe advice
  Pleased Hector; from his chariot down he leap'd                905
  All arm'd, and in wing'd accents thus replied.
    Polydamas! here gather all the Chiefs;
  I haste into the fight, and my commands
  Once issued there, incontinent return.
    He ended, and conspicuous as the height                      910
  Of some snow-crested mountain, shouting ranged
  The Trojans and confederates of Troy.
  They swift around Polydamas, brave son
  Of Panthus, at the voice of Hector, ran.
  Himself with hasty strides the front, meantime,                915
  Of battle roam'd, seeking from rank to rank
  Asius Hyrtacides, with Asius' son
  Adamas, and Deiphobus, and the might
  Of Helenus, his royal brother bold.
  Them neither altogether free from hurt                         920
  He found, nor living all. Beneath the sterns
  Of the Achaian ships some slaughter'd lay
  By Grecian hands; some stricken by the spear
  Within the rampart sat, some by the sword.
  But leftward of the woful field he found,                      925
  Ere long, bright Helen's paramour his band
  Exhorting to the fight. Hector approach'd,
  And him, in fierce displeasure, thus bespake.
    Curst Paris, specious, fraudulent and lewd!
  Where is Deiphobus, and where the might                        930
  Of royal Helenus? Where Adamas
  Offspring of Asius, and where Asius, son
  Of Hyrtacus, and where Othryoneus?
  Now lofty Ilium from her topmost height
  Falls headlong, now is thy own ruin sure!                      935
    To whom the godlike Paris thus replied.
  Since Hector! thou art pleased with no just cause
  To censure me, I may decline, perchance,
  Much more the battle on some future day,
  For I profess some courage, even I.                            940
  Witness our constant conflict with the Greeks
  Here, on this spot, since first led on by thee
  The host of Troy waged battle at the ships.
  But those our friends of whom thou hast inquired
  Are slain, Deiphobus alone except                              945
  And royal Helenus, who in the hand
  Bear each a wound inflicted by the spear,
  And have retired; but Jove their life preserved.
  Come now--conduct us whither most thine heart
  Prompts thee, and thou shalt find us ardent all                950
  To face like danger; what we can, we will,
  The best and most determined can no more.
    So saying, the hero soothed his brother's mind.
  Then moved they both toward the hottest war
  Together, where Polydamas the brave,                           955
  Phalces, Cebriones, Orthaeus fought,
  Palmys and Polyphoetes, godlike Chief,
  And Morys and Ascanius, gallant sons
  Both of Hippotion. They at Troy arrived
  From fair Ascania the preceding morn,                          960
  In recompense for aid[16] by Priam lent
  Erewhile to Phrygia, and, by Jove impell'd,
  Now waged the furious battle side by side.
  The march of these at once, was as the sound
  Of mighty winds from deep-hung thunder-clouds                  965
  Descending; clamorous the blast and wild
  With ocean mingles; many a billow, then,
  Upridged rides turbulent the sounding flood,
  Foam-crested billow after billow driven,
  So moved the host of Troy, rank after rank                     970
  Behind their Chiefs, all dazzling bright in arms.
  Before them Priameian Hector strode
  Fierce as gore-tainted Mars, and his broad shield
  Advancing came, heavy with hides, and thick-
  Plated with brass; his helmet on his brows                     975
  Refulgent shook, and in its turn he tried
  The force of every phalanx, if perchance
  Behind his broad shield pacing he might shake
  Their steadfast order; but he bore not down
  The spirit of the firm Achaian host.                           980
  Then Ajax striding forth, him, first, defied.
    Approach. Why temptest thou the Greeks to fear?
  No babes are we in aught that appertains
  To arms, though humbled by the scourge of Jove.
  Thou cherishest the foolish hope to burn                       985
  Our fleet with fire; but even we have hearts
  Prepared to guard it, and your populous Troy,
  By us dismantled and to pillage given,
  Shall perish sooner far. Know this thyself
  Also; the hour is nigh when thou shalt ask                     990
  In prayer to Jove and all the Gods of heaven,
  That speed more rapid than the falcon's flight
  May wing thy coursers, while, exciting dense
  The dusty plain, they whirl thee back to Troy.
    While thus he spake, sublime on the right-hand               995
  An eagle soar'd; confident in the sign
  The whole Achaian host with loud acclaim
  Hail'd it. Then glorious Hector thus replied.
    Brainless and big, what means this boast of thine,
  Earth-cumberer Ajax? Would I were the son                     1000
  As sure, for ever, of almighty Jove
  And Juno, and such honor might receive
  Henceforth as Pallas and Apollo share,
  As comes this day with universal wo
  Fraught for the Grecians, among whom thyself                  1005
  Shalt also perish if thou dare abide
  My massy spear, which shall thy pamper'd flesh
  Disfigure, and amid the barks of Greece
  Falling, thou shalt the vultures with thy bulk
  Enormous satiate, and the dogs of Troy.                       1010
    He spake, and led his host; with clamor loud
  They follow'd him, and all the distant rear
  Came shouting on. On the other side the Greeks
  Re-echoed shout for shout, all undismay'd,
  And waiting firm the bravest of their foes.                   1015
  Upwent the double roar into the heights
  Ethereal, and among the beams of Jove.




                              THE ILIAD.

                              BOOK XIV.




                   ARGUMENT OF THE FOURTEENTH BOOK.


Agamemnon and the other wounded Chiefs taking Nestor with them, visit
the battle. Juno having borrowed the Cestus of Venus, first engages
the assistance of Sleep, then hastens to Ida to inveigle Jove. She
prevails. Jove sleeps; and Neptune takes that opportunity to succor
the Grecians.




                              BOOK XIV.


  Nor was that cry by Nestor unperceived
  Though drinking, who in words wing'd with surprise
  The son of AEsculapius thus address'd.
    Divine Machaon! think what this may bode.
  The cry of our young warriors at the ships                       5
  Grows louder; sitting here, the sable wine
  Quaff thou, while bright-hair'd Hecamede warms
  A bath, to cleanse thy crimson stains away.
  I from yon eminence will learn the cause.
    So saying, he took a shield radiant with brass                10
  There lying in the tent, the shield well-forged
  Of valiant Thrasymedes, his own son
  (For he had borne to fight his father's shield)
  And arming next his hand with a keen lance
  Stood forth before the tent. Thence soon he saw                 15
  Foul deeds and strange, the Grecian host confused,
  Their broken ranks flying before the host
  Of Ilium, and the rampart overthrown.
  As when the wide sea, darken'd over all
  Its silent flood, forebodes shrill winds to blow,               20
  The doubtful waves roll yet to neither side,
  Till swept at length by a decisive gale;[1]
  So stood the senior, with distressful doubts
  Conflicting anxious, whether first to seek
  The Grecian host, or Agamemnon's self                           25
  The sovereign, and at length that course preferr'd.
  Meantime with mutual carnage they the field
  Spread far and wide, and by spears double-edged
  Smitten, and by the sword their corselets rang.
    The royal Chiefs ascending from the fleet,                    30
  Ulysses, Diomede, and Atreus' son
  Imperial Agamemnon, who had each
  Bled in the battle, met him on his way.
  For from the war remote they had updrawn
  Their galleys on the shore of the gray Deep,                    35
  The foremost to the plain, and at the sterns
  Of that exterior line had built the wall.
  For, spacious though it were, the shore alone
  That fleet sufficed not, incommoding much
  The people; wherefore they had ranged the ships                 40
  Line above line gradual, and the bay
  Between both promontories, all was fill'd.
  They, therefore, curious to survey the fight,
  Came forth together, leaning on the spear,
  When Nestor met them; heavy were their hearts,                  45
  And at the sight of him still more alarm'd,
  Whom royal Agamemnon thus bespake.
    Neleian Nestor, glory of the Greeks!
  What moved thee to forsake yon bloody field,
  And urged thee hither? Cause I see of fear,                     50
  Lest furious Hector even now his threat
  Among the Trojans publish'd, verify,
  That he would never enter Ilium more
  Till he had burn'd our fleet, and slain ourselves.
  So threaten'd Hector, and shall now perform.                    55
  Alas! alas! the Achaians brazen-greaved
  All, like Achilles, have deserted me
  Resentful, and decline their fleet's defence.
    To whom Gerenian Nestor thus replied.
  Those threats are verified; nor Jove himself                    60
  The Thunderer can disappoint them now;
  For our chief strength in which we trusted most
  That it should guard impregnably secure
  Our navy and ourselves, the wall hath fallen.
  Hence all this conflict by our host sustain'd                   65
  Among the ships; nor could thy keenest sight
  Inform thee where in the Achaian camp
  Confusion most prevails, such deaths are dealt
  Promiscuous, and the cry ascends to heaven.
  But come--consult we on the sum of all,                         70
  If counsel yet may profit. As for you,
  Ye shall have exhortation none from me
  To seek the fight; the wounded have excuse.
    Whom Agamemnon answer'd, King of men.
  Ah Nestor! if beneath our very sterns                           75
  The battle rage, if neither trench nor wall
  Constructed with such labor, and supposed
  Of strength to guard impregnably secure
  Our navy and ourselves, avail us aught,
  It is because almighty Jove hath will'd                         80
  That the Achaian host should perish here
  Inglorious, from their country far remote.
  When he vouchsafed assistance to the Greeks,
  I knew it well; and now, not less I know
  That high as the immortal Gods he lifts                         85
  Our foes to glory, and depresses us.
  Haste therefore all, and act as I advise.
  Our ships--all those that nearest skirt the Deep,
  Launch we into the sacred flood, and moor
  With anchors safely, till o'ershadowing night                   90
  (If night itself may save us) shall arrive.
  Then may we launch the rest; for I no shame
  Account it, even by 'vantage of the night
  To fly destruction. Wiser him I deem
  Who 'scapes his foe, than whom his foe enthralls.               95
    But him Ulysses, frowning stern, reproved.
  What word, Atrides, now hath pass'd thy lips?
  Counsellor of despair! thou should'st command
  (And would to heaven thou didst) a different host,
  Some dastard race, not ours; whom Jove ordains                 100
  From youth to hoary age to weave the web
  Of toilsome warfare, till we perish all.
  Wilt thou the spacious city thus renounce
  For which such numerous woes we have endured?
  Hush! lest some other hear; it is a word                       105
  Which no man qualified by years mature
  To speak discreetly, no man bearing rule
  O'er such a people as confess thy sway,
  Should suffer to contaminate his lips.
  I from my soul condemn thee, and condemn                       110
  Thy counsel, who persuad'st us in the heat
  Of battle terrible as this, to launch
  Our fleet into the waves, that we may give
  Our too successful foes their full desire,
  And that our own prepondering scale                            115
  May plunge us past all hope; for while they draw
  Their galleys down, the Grecians shall but ill
  Sustain the fight, seaward will cast their eyes
  And shun the battle, bent on flight alone.
  Then, shall they rue thy counsel, King of men!                 120
    To whom the imperial leader of the Greeks.
  Thy sharp reproof, Ulysses, hath my soul
  Pierced deeply. Yet I gave no such command
  That the Achaians should their galleys launch,
  Would they, or would they not. No. I desire                    125
  That young or old, some other may advice
  More prudent give, and he shall please me well.
    Then thus the gallant Diomede replied.
  That man is near, and may ye but be found
  Tractable, our inquiry shall be short.                         130
  Be patient each, nor chide me nor reproach
  Because I am of greener years than ye,
  For I am sprung from an illustrious Sire,
  From Tydeus, who beneath his hill of earth
  Lies now entomb'd at Thebes. Three noble sons                  135
  Were born to Portheus, who in Pleuro dwelt,
  And on the heights of Calydon; the first
  Agrius; the second Melas; and the third
  Brave Oeneus, father of my father, famed
  For virtuous qualities above the rest.                         140
  Oeneus still dwelt at home; but wandering thence
  My father dwelt in Argos; so the will
  Of Jove appointed, and of all the Gods.
  There he espoused the daughter of the King
  Adrastus, occupied a mansion rich                              145
  In all abundance; many a field possess'd
  Of wheat, well-planted gardens, numerous flocks,
  And was expert in spearmanship esteem'd
  Past all the Grecians. I esteem'd it right
  That ye should hear these things, for they are true.           150
  Ye will not, therefore, as I were obscure
  And of ignoble origin, reject
  What I shall well advise. Expedience bids
  That, wounded as we are, we join the host.
  We will preserve due distance from the range                   155
  Of spears and arrows, lest already gall'd,
  We suffer worse; but we will others urge
  To combat, who have stood too long aloof,
  Attentive only to their own repose.
    He spake, whom all approved, and forth they went,            160
  Imperial Agamemnon at their head.
    Nor watch'd the glorious Shaker of the shores
  In vain, but like a man time-worn approach'd,
  And, seizing Agamemnon's better hand,
  In accents wing'd the monarch thus address'd.                  165
    Atrides! now exults the vengeful heart
  Of fierce Achilles, viewing at his ease
  The flight and slaughter of Achaia's host;
  For he is mad, and let him perish such,
  And may his portion from the Gods be shame!                    170
  But as for thee, not yet the powers of heaven
  Thee hate implacable; the Chiefs of Troy
  Shall cover yet with cloudy dust the breadth
  Of all the plain, and backward from the camp
  To Ilium's gates thyself shalt see them driven.                175
    He ceased, and shouting traversed swift the field.
  Loud as nine thousand or ten thousand shout
  In furious battle mingled, Neptune sent
  His voice abroad, force irresistible
  Infusing into every Grecian heart,                             180
  And thirst of battle not to be assuaged.
    But Juno of the golden throne stood forth
  On the Olympian summit, viewing thence
  The field, where clear distinguishing the God
  Of ocean, her own brother, sole engaged                        185
  Amid the glorious battle, glad was she.
  Seeing Jove also on the topmost point
  Of spring-fed Ida seated, she conceived
  Hatred against him, and thenceforth began
  Deliberate how best she might deceive                          190
  The Thunderer, and thus at last resolved;
  Attired with skill celestial to descend
  On Ida, with a hope to allure him first
  Won by her beauty to a fond embrace,
  Then closing fast in balmy sleep profound                      195
  His eyes, to elude his vigilance, secure.
  She sought her chamber; Vulcan her own son
  That chamber built. He framed the solid doors,
  And to the posts fast closed them with a key
  Mysterious, which, herself except, in heaven                   200
  None understood. Entering she secured
  The splendid portal. First, she laved all o'er
  Her beauteous body with ambrosial lymph,
  Then polish'd it with richest oil divine
  Of boundless fragrance;[2] oil that in the courts              205
  Eternal only shaken, through the skies
  Breathed odors, and through all the distant earth.
  Her whole fair body with those sweets bedew'd,
  She passed the comb through her ambrosial hair,
  And braided her bright locks streaming profuse                 210
  From her immortal brows; with golden studs
  She made her gorgeous mantle fast before,
  Ethereal texture, labor of the hands
  Of Pallas beautified with various art,
  And braced it with a zone fringed all around                   215
  A hundred fold; her pendants triple-gemm'd
  Luminous, graceful, in her ears she hung,
  And covering all her glories with a veil
  Sun-bright, new-woven, bound to her fair feet
  Her sandals elegant. Thus full attired,                        220
  In all her ornaments, she issued forth,
  And beckoning Venus from the other powers
  Of heaven apart, the Goddess thus bespake.
    Daughter beloved! shall I obtain my suit,
  Or wilt thou thwart me, angry that I aid                       225
  The Grecians, while thine aid is given to Troy?
    To whom Jove's daughter Venus thus replied.
  What would majestic Juno, daughter dread
  Of Saturn, sire of Jove? I feel a mind
  Disposed to gratify thee, if thou ask                          230
  Things possible, and possible to me.
    Then thus with wiles veiling her deep design
  Imperial Juno. Give me those desires,
  That love-enkindling power by which thou sway'st
  Immortal hearts and mortal, all alike;                         235
  For to the green earth's utmost bounds I go,
  To visit there the parent of the Gods,
  Oceanus, and Tethys his espoused,
  Mother of all. They kindly from the hands
  Of Rhea took, and with parental care                           240
  Sustain'd and cherish'd me, what time from heaven
  The Thunderer hurled down Saturn, and beneath
  The earth fast bound him and the barren Deep.
  Them go I now to visit, and their feuds
  Innumerable to compose; for long                               245
  They have from conjugal embrace abstain'd
  Through mutual wrath, whom by persuasive speech
  Might I restore into each other's arms,
  They would for ever love me and revere.
    Her, foam-born Venus then, Goddess of smiles,                250
  Thus answer'd. Thy request, who in the arms
  Of Jove reposest the omnipotent,
  Nor just it were nor seemly to refuse.
    So saying, the cincture from her breast she loosed
  Embroider'd, various, her all-charming zone.                   255
  It was an ambush of sweet snares, replete
  With love, desire, soft intercourse of hearts,
  And music of resistless whisper'd sounds
  That from the wisest steal their best resolves;
  She placed it in her hands and thus she said.                  260
    Take this--this girdle fraught with every charm.
  Hide this within thy bosom, and return,
  Whate'er thy purpose, mistress of it all.
    She spake; imperial Juno smiled, and still
  Smiling complacent, bosom'd safe the zone.                     265
  Then Venus to her father's court return'd,
  And Juno, starting from the Olympian height,
  O'erflew Pieria and the lovely plains
  Of broad Emathia; soaring thence she swept
  The snow-clad summits of the Thracian hills                    270
  Steed-famed, nor printed, as she passed, the soil.
  From Athos o'er the foaming billows borne
  She came to Lemnos, city and abode
  Of noble Thoas, and there meeting Sleep,
  Brother of Death, she press'd his hand, and said,              275
    Sleep, over all, both Gods and men, supreme!
  If ever thou hast heard, hear also now
  My suit; I will be grateful evermore.
  Seal for me fast the radiant eyes of Jove
  In the instant of his gratified desire.                        280
  Thy recompense shall be a throne of gold,
