Osmanli, and the hosts of Gog and Magog appear to exterminate the
Christians, and drink up the waters of the rivers, and at the last all
things perish before the Mahdi; then when the mountains are rent asunder
and the stars fall from Heaven, when the archangels Michael and Gabriel
open the tombs and bring forth the trembling, death-pale shapes, one by
one, before the face of Allah, and they all stand there as transparent
as crystal so that every thought of their hearts is visible--what then
will you answer, you in whose power it once stood to uphold the dominion
of Mahomet, you to whom it was given to have swords in your hands and
ideas in your heads to be used in its defence--what will you answer, I
say, when you hear the brazen voice cry: 'Ye who saw destruction coming,
did ye try to prevent it?' What will it profit you then, old Vuodi and
ye others, to say that ye never neglected the Abdestan, the Guezuel, and
the Thueharet ablutions, nor the five prayers of the Namazat, that ye
have kept the fast of Ramazan and the feast of Bejram, that ye have
richly distributed the Zakato[14] and the Sadakato,[15] that you have
made the pilgrimage to the Kaaba at Mecca so many times, or so many
times, that you have kissed the sin-remitting black stone, that you have
drunk from the well of Zemzem and seven times made the circuit of the
mountain of Arafat and flung stones at the Devil in the valley of
Dsemre--what will it profit you, I say, if you cannot answer that
question? Woe to you, woe to everyone of us who see, who hear, and yet
go on dreaming! For when we tread the Bridge of Alshirat, across whose
razor-sharp edge every true believer must pass on his way to Paradise,
the load of a single sin will drag you down into the abyss, down into
Hell, and not even into the first Hell, Gehenna, where the faithful do
penance, nor into the Hell of Ladhana, where the souls of the Jews are
purified, nor into the Hell of Hotama wherein the Christians perish, nor
into the Hell of Sair which is the abode of the Heretics, nor into the
Hell of Sakar wherein the fire-worshippers curse the fire, nor yet into
the Hell of Jahim which resounds with the yells of the idol-worshippers,
but into the seventh hell, the deepest and most accursed hell of all,
whose name is Al-Havija, where wallow those who only did God lip-service
and never felt the faith in their hearts, for we pray lying prayers when
we say that we worship Allah and yet allow His Temple to be defiled."

These words deeply moved the hearts of all present. Every sentence
alluded to the most weighty of the Moslem beliefs; the meshes of the net
with which Halil had taken their souls captive were composed of the very
essentials of their religious and political system, so they could but
put their hands to their breasts, bow down before him, and say:

"Command us and we will obey!"

Then Halil, with the inspiration of a seer, addressed the men before
him.

"Woe to us if we believe that the days of threatening are still far off!
Woe to us if we believe that the sins which will ruin the nation of
Osman have not yet been committed! While our ancestors dwelt in tents of
skin, half the world feared our name, but since the nation of Osman has
strutted about in silk and velvet it has become a laughing-stock to its
enemies. Our great men grow gardens in their palaces; they pass their
days in the embraces of women, drinking wine, and listening to music;
they loathe the battlefield, and oh, horrible! they blaspheme the name
of Allah. If among the Giaours, blasphemers of God are to be found, I
marvel not thereat, for their minds are corrupted by the multitude of
this world's knowledge; but how can a Mussulman raise his head against
God--a Mussulman who has never learnt anything in his life save to
glorify His Name? And what are we to think when on the eve of the Feast
of Halwet we hear a Sheik, a descendant of the family of the Prophet, a
Sheik before whom the people bow reverently when they meet him in the
street--what are we to think, I say, when we hear this Sheik say before
the great men of the palace all drunk with wine: 'There is no Allah, or
if there is an Allah he is not almighty; for if he were almighty he
would have prevented me from saying, there is no Allah!'"

A cry of horror arose from the assembled Mussulmans which only after a
while died away in an angry murmur like a gradually departing gust of
wind.

"Who was the accursed one?" exclaimed Mohammed dervish, shaking his
clenched fist threateningly.

"It was Uzun Abdi, the Aga of the Janissaries," replied Halil, "who said
that, and the others only laughed."

"Let them all be accursed!"

"Wealth has ruined the heart of the Osmanli," continued Halil. "Who are
they who now control the fate of the Realm? The creatures of the
Sultana, the slaves of the Kizlar-Aga, the Izoglani, whose
licentiousness will bring down upon Stambul the judgment of Sodom and
Gomorrah. It is from thence we get our rulers and our treasurers, and
if now and then Fate causes a hero to plump down among them he also
grows black like a drop of water that has fallen upon soot; for the
treasures, palaces, and odalisks of the fallen magnates are transferred
to the new favourite, and ruin him as quickly and as completely as they
ruined his predecessors; and so long as these palaces stand by the Sweet
Waters more curses than prayers will be heard within the walls of
Stambul, so that if ye want to save Stambul, ye must burn down these
palaces, for as sure as God exists these palaces will consume Stambul."

"We must go to the Sultan about it," said the dervish Mohammed.

"Pulled down they must be, for no righteous man dwells therein. The
whole of this Empire of Stone must come down, whoever is so much as a
head taller than his brethren is a sinner. Let us raise up those who are
lowest of all. Down from your perches, ye venal voivodes, khans, and
pashas, who buy the Empire piecemeal with money and for money barter it
away again! Let men of war, real men though Fame as yet knows them not,
step into your places. The very atmosphere in which ye live is
pestiferous because of you. For some time now, gold and silver pieces,
stamped with the heads of men and beasts, have been circulating in our
piazzas, although, as we all know, no figures of living things should
appear on the coins of the Mussulman. Neither Russia, nor Sweden, nor
yet Poland pay tribute to us; and yet, I say, these picture-coins still
circulate among us. Oh! ever since Baltaji suffered White[16] Mustache,
the Emperor of the North, to escape, full well ye know it! gold and
silver go further and hit the mark more surely than iron and lead. We
must create a new world, none belonging to the old order of things must
remain among us. Write down a long, long list, and carry it to the Grand
Vizier. If he refuses to accept it, write another in his place on the
list, and take it to the Sultan. Woe betide the nation of Osman if it
cannot find within it as many just men as its needs require!"

The assembled Mussulmans thereupon drew up in hot haste a long list of
names in which they proposed fresh candidates for all the chief offices
of the Empire. They put down Choja Dzhanum as the new Kapudan Pasha,
Mustafa Beg as the new Minister of the Interior, Musli as the new
Janissary Aga; the actual judges and treasurers were banished, the
banished judges and treasurers were restored to their places; instead of
Maurocordato, who had been educated abroad, they appointed his enemy,
Richard Rakovitsa, surnamed Djihan, Voivode of Wallachia; instead of
Ghyka they placed the butcher of Pera, Janaki, on the throne of
Moldavia; and instead of Mengli Giraj, Khan of the Crimea, Kaplan Giraj,
actually present among them, was called to ascend the throne of his
ancestors.

Kaplan Giraj pressed Halil's hand by way of expressing his gratitude for
this mark of confidence.

And, oddly enough, as Halil pressed the hand of the Khan, it seemed to
him as if his arm felt an electric shock. What could it mean?

But now Musli stood up before him.

"Allow me," said he, "to go with this writing to the Grand Vizier. You
have been in the Seraglio already, let mine be the glory of displaying
my valour by going thither likewise! Do not take all the glory to
yourself, allow others to have a little of it too! Besides, it does not
become you to carry your own messages to the Divan. Why even the Princes
of the Giaours do not go there themselves but send their ambassadors."

Halil Patrona gratefully pressed the Janissary's hand. He knew right
well that he spoke from no desire of glorification, he knew that Musli
only wanted to go instead of him because it was very possible that the
bearer of these demands might be beheaded.

Once again Musli begged earnestly of Halil that the delivery of these
demands might be entrusted to him, and so proudly did he make his
petition that it was impossible for Halil Patrona to deny him.

Now Musli was a sly dog. He knew very well that it was a very risky
business to present so many demands all at once, but he made up his mind
that he would so completely take the Grand Vizier by surprise, that
before he could find breath to refuse the demands of the people, he
would grant one of them after another, for if he swallowed the first of
them that was on the list, he might be hoodwinked into swallowing the
rest likewise.

The new Grand Vizier went by the name of Kabakulak, or Blunt-ear,
because he was hard of hearing, which suited Musli exactly, as he had,
by nature, a bad habit of bawling whenever he spoke.

At first Kabakulak would not listen to anything at all. He seemed to
have suddenly gone stone-deaf, and had every single word repeated to him
three times over; but when Musli said to him that if he would not listen
to what he was saying, he, Musli, would go off at once to the Sultan and
tell _him_, Kabakulak opened his ears a little wider, became somewhat
more gracious, and asked Musli, quite amicably, what he could do for
him.

Musli felt his courage rising many degrees since he began bawling at a
Grand Vizier.

"Halil Patrona _commands_ it to be done," he bellowed in Kabakulak's
ear.

The Vizier threw back his head.

"Come, come, my son!" said he, "don't shout in my ear like that, just
as if I were deaf. What did you say it was that Halil Patrona begs of
me?"

"Don't twist my words, you old owl!" said Musli, naturally _sotto voce_.
Then raising his voice, he added, "Halil Patrona wants Dzhanum Choja
appointed Kapudan Pasha."

"Good, good, my son! just the very thing I wanted done myself; that has
been resolved upon long ago, so you may go away home."

"Go away indeed! not yet! Then Wallachia wants a new voivode."

"It has got one already, got one already I tell you, my son. His name is
Maurocordato. Bear it in mind--Mau-ro-cor-da-to."

"I don't mean to bother my tongue with it at all. As I pronounce it it
is--Djihan."

"Djihan? Who is Djihan?"

"Djihan is the Voivode of Wallachia."

"Very well, you shall have it so. And what do you want for yourself, my
son, eh?"

Musli was inscribed in the list as the Aga of the Janissaries, but he
was too modest to speak of himself.

"Don't trouble your head about me, Kabakulak, while there are so many
worthier men unprovided for. We want the Khan of the Crimea deposed and
the banished Kaplan Giraj appointed in his stead."

"Very well, we will inform Kaplan Giraj of his promotion presently."

"Not presently, but instantly. Instantly, I say, without the least
delay."

Musli accompanied his eloquence with such gesticulations that the Grand
Vizier thought it prudent to fall back before him.

"Don't you feel well?" he asked Musli, who had suddenly become silent.
In his excitement he had forgotten the other demands.

"Ah! I have it," he said, and sitting down on the floor at his ease, he
took the list from his bosom and extending it on the floor, began
reciting Halil Patrona's nominations seriatim.

The Grand Vizier approved of the whole thing, he had no objection to
make to anything.

Musli left Janaki's elevation last of all: "He you must make Voivode of
Moldavia," said he.

Suddenly Kabakulak went quite deaf. He could not hear a word of Musli's
last demand.

Musli drew nearer to him, and making a speaking-trumpet out of his
hands, bawled in his ear:

"Janaki I am talking about."

"Yes, yes! I hear, I hear. You want him to be allowed to provide the
Sultan's kitchen with the flesh of bullocks and sheep. So be it! He
shall have the charge."

"Would that the angel Izrafil might blow his trumpet in thine ear!" said
Musli to himself _sotto voce_. "I am not talking of his trade as a
butcher," added he aloud. "I say that he is to be made Prince of
Moldavia."

Kabakulak now thought it just as well to show that he heard what had
been asked, and replied very gravely:

"You know not what you are asking. The Padishah, only four days ago,
gave this office to Prince Ghyka, who is a wise and distinguished man.
The Sultan cannot go back from his word."

"A wise and distinguished man!" cried Musli in amazement. "What am I to
understand by that? Is there any difference then between one Giaour and
another?"

"The Sultan has so ordered it, and without his knowledge I cannot take
upon myself to alter his decrees."

"Very well, go to the Sultan then and get him to undo again what he has
done. For the rest you can do what you like for what I care, only beware
of one thing, beware lest you lose the favour of Halil Patrona!"

Kabakulak by this time had had nearly enough of Musli, but the latter
still continued diligently to consult his list. He recollected that
Halil Patrona had charged him to say something else, but what it was he
could not for the life of him call to mind.

"Ah, yes! now I have it!" he cried at last. "Halil commands that those
nasty palaces which stand by the Sweet Waters shall be burnt to the
ground."

"I suppose, my worthy incendiaries, you will next ask permission to
plunder Stambul out and out?"

"It is too bad of you, Kabakulak, to speak like that. Halil does not
want the palaces burnt for the love of the thing, but because he does
not want the generals to have an asylum where they may hide, plant
flowers, and wallow in vile delights just when they ought to be
hastening to the camp. If every pasha had not his paradise here on earth
and now, many more of them would desire the heavenly Paradise. That is
why Halil Patrona would have all those houses of evil luxury burnt to
the ground."

"May Halil Patrona live long enough to see it come to pass. This also
will I report to the Sultan."

"Look sharp about it then! I will wait in your room here till you come
back."

"You will wait here?"

"Yes, never mind about me! I have given orders that my dinner is to be
sent after me here. I look to you for coffee and tobacco, and if you
happen to be delayed till early to-morrow morning, you will find me
sleeping here on the carpet."

Kabakulak could now see that he had to do with a man of character who
would not stir from the spot till everything had been settled completely
to his satisfaction. The most expeditious mode of ending matters would,
no doubt, have been to summon a couple of ciauses and make them lay the
rascal's head at his own feet, but the political horizon was not yet
sufficiently serene for such acts of daring. The bands of the insurgents
were still encamping in the public square outside. First of all they
must be hoodwinked and pacified, only after that would it be possible
to proceed to extreme measures against them.

All that the Grand Vizier could do, therefore, was frankly to present
all Halil Patrona's demands to the Sultan.

Mahmud granted everything on the spot.

In an hour's time the firmans and hatti-scherifs, deposing and elevating
the various functionaries, were in Musli's hands as desired.

Only as to the method of destroying the kiosks did the Sultan venture to
make a suggestion. They had better not be burnt to the ground, he
opined, for thereby the Mussulmans would make themselves the
laughing-stock of the whole Christian world; but he undertook to
dilapidate the walls and devastate the pleasure-gardens.

And within three days one hundred and twenty splendid kiosks, standing
beside the Sweet Waters, had become so many rubbish heaps; and the rare
and costly plants of the beautiful flower-gardens were chucked into the
water, and the groves of amorous dallying were cut down to the very
roots. Only ruins were now to be seen in the place of the fairy palaces
wherein all manner of earthly joys had hitherto built their nests, and
all this ruin was wrought in three days by Halil Patrona, just because
there is but one God, and therefore but one Paradise, and because this
Paradise is not on earth but in Heaven, and those who would attain
thereto must strive and struggle valiantly for it in this life.

FOOTNOTES:

[3] 1481 A.D.

[4] Ablutions before prayers.

[5] The first section of the Koran.

[6] The Imperial Treasury.

[7] The part of Stambul inhabited by the Greeks.

[8] Companies of horse.

[9] Tablets indicating the direction in which Mecca lies.

[10] "God be for ever gracious to him."

[11] Believer.

[12] Unbeliever.

[13] Anti-Christ.

[14] The prescribed almsgiving.

[15] Voluntary almsgiving.

[16] Peter the Great. The allusion is to the Peace of the Pruth.




CHAPTER XII.

HUMAN HOPES.


A time will come when the star has risen so high that it can rise no
higher, and perchance learns to know that before long it must begin its
inevitable descent!...

All Halil Patrona's wildest dreams had been realised. There he stood at
the very apex of sovereignty, whence the course of empires, the destiny
of worlds can be controlled. Ministers of State were pulled down or
lifted up at his bidding, armies were sent against foreign powers as he
directed, princes were strengthened on their thrones because Halil
Patrona wished it, and the great men of the empire lay in the dust at
his feet.

For whole days at a time he sat reading the books of the Ottoman
chroniclers, the famous Rashid and the wise Chelbizade, and after that
he would pore over maps and charts and draw lines of different colours
