
"Yes, I think that will be a wise precaution," the captain agreed.

"Thomaso, do you take twenty men and post them as you hear Messer
Francisco say. Tell them to lie in the bushes and keep out of sight,
and on no account to show themselves, unless someone comes along
sufficiently near to look over the edge of the cliff."

"Giuseppi," Francis said, "do you act as guide to the party. You will
have plenty of time to get to the top and to return before the galleys
come along."

A quarter of an hour later the captain, with Matteo and Francis, landed
on the ledge, and took the place of the sentries, and in twenty minutes
a simultaneous exclamation burst from them, as a Genoese galley was
seen rowing rapidly along.

"They have sent only one galley," Francis said. "Of course, they would
know that it was sufficiently strong to overpower us without
difficulty. I suppose one has gone west, and the others have put out to
sea in different directions. That certainly was the best course they
could have adopted, and it is very lucky that we did not attempt to
escape seaward, for they would assuredly have had us. I suppose,
captain, you intend to sail tonight."

"Certainly," the captain replied. "We will get everything in readiness
for hoisting the masts as soon as the galley has passed us on its way
back. There is no fear of their coming along again later on, for the
men will have had an eight hours' row of it; the first part, at any
rate, at full speed. Besides, they will not know, until all the galleys
return, that we have not been found, so I think it will be quite safe
to get up the masts as soon as they have passed. Then directly it is
dark we will man our oars and row to the southwest. We shall be far
away before morning, even if they look further for us, which they are
hardly likely to do."

"How about the prisoners, captain?"

"We have no choice but to take them with us, Messer Francisco. I am
sure I do not want to be bothered with them, but we cannot land them
before we leave, or they would carry the news to Girgenti in an hour,
and we should be caught the first thing in the morning."

It was late in the afternoon before the galley was seen returning,
rowing slowly and heavily.

"I expect," the captain said, "they kept up the racing pace at which
they started for some four hours. By that time they must have been
completely worn out, and no doubt they anchored and waited for some
hours for the men to feed and rest themselves, for from the hurry with
which they started you may be sure that they did not wait to break
their fast.

"I would give a month's pay to be in that harbour this evening. What
tempers they must be in when they find, after all their toil, that we
have slipped through their fingers, How they will talk the matter over,
and discuss which way we went. How the men in each ship will say that
the others cannot have used their eyes or exerted themselves, else we
must have been overtaken. Messer Francisco, I am indebted to you, not
only for having saved the ship, but for giving me a joke, which I shall
laugh over whenever I think of it. It will be a grand story to tell
over the wine cups, how we cheated a whole Genoese fleet, and carried
off the Lido from under their noses. What a tale it will be to relate
to a Genoese, when we meet in some port after the war is over; it will
be enough to make him dance with rage.

"Now, lads," he went on, turning to the men, "stand to your tackle. The
moment that galley gets out of sight round the point, up with the
mast."

Ten minutes later the masts were up, stout ropes were lashed round them
and the stumps, and wedges driven in to tighten the cords to the
utmost. The rigging was of the simplest description, and before dark
everything was in readiness for hoisting the sails.

"I don't think they can make us out now," the captain said.

"I don't think they could," Francis agreed; "but we had better wait
another quarter of an hour. It would be absurd to run any risk after
everything has turned out so well; but the men can get into the boats
and tow us out through the channel, then we can hoist the boats on
board, and by that time it should be nearly dark enough."

"I think there will be a breeze presently," the captain said, "and from
the right direction. However, the men won't mind working hard for a
bit. They have had an easy time for the last two days."

The oars were all manned, and the men set to work with hearty goodwill.
They were delighted at their escape from the island, for they might
have been there some time before they got a passage back; and still
more pleased at having tricked the Genoese; and the Lido, heavy laden
as she was, moved at a steady pace through the water, under the
impulsion of the oars.

For an hour they rowed parallel with the shore, as, had they made out
to sea, they might possibly have been seen by one of the galleys,
returning late from the search for them. At the end of that time the
captain turned her head from shore. As soon as they got well out from
under the shelter of the land the breeze made itself felt, and the
sails were hoisted.

For a time the men kept on rowing, but the breeze increased rapidly,
and the captain ordered the oars to be laid in. A double allowance of
wine was served out, and an hour or two spent in song and hilarity;
then the watch below was sent down, and Francis and Matteo turned into
their cots.

In the morning the breeze was blowing strong. The sails had been taken
off the mainmast, but that on the foremast was dragging the Lido
through the water at a good rate of speed, and before night they were
off Cape Spartivento. The wind held till next morning, when they were
abreast of the Gulf of Taranto. Then came a long spell of calms or
baffling winds, and it was a fortnight before the campaniles of Venice
were seen rising apparently from the water.

"I have been anxious about you," Signor Polani said when Francis
arrived. "One of our galleys brought the report that a Genoese fleet
was cruising on the coast of Sicily, and as, although war had not yet
been openly declared, both parties were making prizes, I was afraid
that they might have snapped you up."

"They did snap us up," Francis said smiling. "They caught us in the
port of Girgenti, and the standard of Genoa waved over the Lido."

"But how can that be," Polani said, "when you have returned in her? For
she was signalled as approaching the port hours ago. You could hardly
have persuaded the Genoese by fair words to release a prize that they
had once taken.

"Eh, captain?"

"No, that is not the Genoese way, nor ours either," the captain said.
"We did better than that, signor. We recaptured her, and carried her
off from under their noses."

"You are joking," Polani said, "for they signalled the Lido as
returning laden, and a laden ship could never get away from state
galleys, however long her start. A fat pig might as soon try to escape
from a hunting dog."

"That is so, Messer Polani, and we did not trust to our speed. We
tricked them famously, sir. At least, when I say we did, Messer
Francisco here did, for the credit is due solely to him. If it had not
been for this young gentleman, I and the crew would now have been
camping out in the forests of Sicily, without the slightest prospect of
being able to make our way home, and the Lido would now be moored in
the port of Genoa."

"That is so, Cousin Polani," Matteo said. "It is to Francisco that we
owe our escape, and you owe the safety of the Lido and her cargo."

"It was just a happy idea that occurred to me," Francis said, "as it
would assuredly have occurred to Captain Pesoro, if he had been with
us, or to anyone else, and after I had first suggested it the captain
carried out all the arrangements."

"Not at all, Messer Francisco," the captain said obstinately. "I had no
part or hand in the business, beyond doing what you suggested, and you
would have got the Lido off just as well if I hadn't been there."

"Well, I will judge for myself when I hear," Polani said. "But, as it
must be an interesting story, my daughters would like to hear it also.
So, come into the next room and tell the tale, and I will order up a
flagon of Cyprus wine to moisten your throats."

"First of all," the captain began, after the girls had greeted Francis,
and all had taken their seats, "I must tell how the Lido was captured."

And he then related how the Genoese fleet had suddenly appeared before
them, and how, seeing the impossibility of escape, he had sent all on
shore with the exception of four sailors, and how he had, with them,
been released and sent on shore.

"That's the Genoese all over," Polani said. "If they could have sent
forty prisoners home they would have done so; but the fact that there
were only five on board, when they took the vessel, would seem to them
to detract from the credit of the capture."

The captain then told how, fearing that the people of Girgenti might
give them all up to the Genoese, or that fights might ensue among the
Genoese sailors who landed, he had marched the crew away out of the
town.

"Now, captain," Matteo broke in, "I will tell the next bit, because I
was with Francis when he found a hiding place."

He then related how Francis had seen the ledge of rocks in the
distance, and had dragged him along the cliff two miles to observe them
more closely; and how he had come to the conclusion that his companion
had lost his senses. Then he described the exact position, and the
clearness of the water, and how he had been convinced that there was
not depth to float a rowboat inside the rocks; and how they had gone
down, swum out, fathomed the water, and then returned to the wood.

The captain then took up the tale again, and completed it to the end.

"There is no doubt you were right, captain," Polani said, "and that it
is entirely Francisco's quickness of observation, readiness of plan,
and determination to see if his ideas could be carried into effect,
which saved the Lido. That he possessed these qualities is not new to
me, for I have already greatly benefited by them. If he had not been
born a peaceful trader, he would have made a great captain some day;
but the qualities which would distinguish a man in war are also useful
in peace, and I think it fully as honourable to be a successful
merchant, as a successful soldier.

"Henceforth, Francisco, I shall no longer consider you as in leading
strings, and shall feel that I can confide important business to you,
young as you are."

The next voyage that Francis made was to Jaffa, and this was
accomplished without adventure. On his return, he found that Venice was
in a state of excitement--war had at last been declared, and every
effort was being made to fit out a fleet which could cope with that of
Genoa.

The command was entrusted to Vettore Pisani, who was invested in the
church of Saint Mark with the supreme command of the fleet by the doge
himself, who handed to the admiral the great banner of Venice, with the
words:

"You are destined by God to defend with your valour this republic, and
to retaliate upon those who have dared to insult her and to rob her of
that security which she owes to the virtue of her ancestors. Wherefore,
we confide to you this victorious and great standard, which it will be
your duty to restore to us unsullied and triumphant."

Carlo Zeno, a noble, who had gained a high reputation in various
capacities, was appointed commissioner and captain general of
Negropont. The three first divisions of those inscribed in the
register, as liable to serve in the navy, were called out, and on the
24th of April Pisani sailed from Venice with fourteen war galleys.

Pisani enjoyed the highest popularity among the people of Venice. His
manner was that of a bluff hearty sailor. He was always ready to share
in the hardships of his men, and to set them an example of good temper
and cheerfulness, as well as of bravery. He was quick tempered, and
when in a passion cared nothing whom he struck.

When governor of Candia, he had got into a serious scrape, by striking
Pietro Cornaro, an officer of the republic, from whom he happened to
differ on some point of routine. He was a relative of the Doge Andrea
Contarini, and had been employed not only as an officer in the navy,
but as a military engineer and as a diplomatist, and in each capacity
had shown equal talent.

He was connected with the Polani family, and was at their house several
times before he sailed. Here he heard from his kinsman an account of
the manner in which Francisco had saved the Bonito from being rammed by
the pirates, and how he had succeeded in getting the Lido out of the
hands of the Genoese; and he was so much pleased that he offered to
take him with him in his galley, but Polani advised Francis not to
accept the offer.

"It is quite true," he said, "that most of our noble families are, like
myself, engaged in commerce; and that one day they are trading as
merchants and the next fighting under the state; but at present, if you
take my advice, you will stick to the peaceful side of the profession;
especially as, being an Englishman, you are in no way called upon to
serve the state. In another five or six years, if we are then at war,
it will be different. I have frequently offered galleys for the service
of the state, and you can then take the command of one, and will, I
have no doubt, distinguish yourself; but were you to enter now, you
might remain in the service of the state for some years, and would be
losing your time as a merchant.

"There are countries in which, when a man once takes up the profession
of arms, he remains a soldier all his life, and may not only achieve
honour but wealth and wide possessions. It is not so in Venice. Here we
are all citizens as well as all soldiers if need be. We fight for the
state while a war lasts, and then return to our peaceful avocations.
Even my kinsman, Pisani, may be admiral of the fleet today, and a week
hence may be a private citizen. Therefore, my lad, I think it would be
very foolish of you to give up commerce at present to take military
service."

"I quite agree with you, signor," Francis said, although, in truth, for
a moment he had felt a strong mind to accept the offer of Pisani. "I am
just beginning to learn a little of trade, and desire nothing better
than to be a successful merchant; though I confess that I should like
to take part in such a glorious sea fight as that which is likely to
take place soon."

"Yes, and perhaps be killed in the first engagement, Francis, for
neither skill nor bravery avail against a bolt from a Genoese crossbow.
No, my lad, be content with trade, especially since you have seen
already that even the life of a trader has plenty of incident and
excitement. What with storms, what with pirates, what with the enemies
of the state and the treachery of the native peoples with whom we
trade, there is no lack of adventure in the life of a Venetian
merchant."

Francis felt that this was true, and that he had in the past six months
had fully his share in adventures. His stay on shore this time extended
over a month, and it was not until three weeks after Pisani sailed that
he again set out.

The notice was a short one. Polani had been sent for to attend the
council early in the morning, and on his return he said to Francis:

"You must go down to the port at once, Francis. News has been received
from Pisani that he has sailed almost into the port of Genoa, without
finding the fleet of Fieschi. The Genoese have been in a terrible state
of panic. The Lord of Fiesole, who is our ally, is menacing the city by
land; the Stella Company of Condottieri, which is in our pay, is also
marching against them; and the news that Pisani was close at hand seems
to have frightened them out of their senses. Their first step, as
usual, has been to depose their doge and choose another.

"However, that is not the point. Pisani has written asking that some
ships with provisions and stores shall be sent out to him. They are to
go through the Straits of Messina and up the coast of Italy until he
meets them. His force is far too small for him to think of making an
attack upon Genoa. He will wait in the neighbourhood of the city for a
short time in hopes of Fieschi's fleet returning. If it does not do so
he will come down the coast searching for it, and as he does not wish
to put in port, he desires the stores mentioned to be sent out to him.

"I have placed the Bonito at their service, and have promised that she
shall be ready to sail tomorrow morning, if they will send the stores
on board today. Three other merchants placed ships at their disposal,
but these may not sail for a day or two. They are particularly anxious
that the Bonito shall start at once, as, in addition to provisions, she
will carry a store of javelins, arrows, and other missiles of which
there was not a sufficiency in the arsenal when Pisani sailed.

"You will have a strong party on board, as speed is required, and the
oars must be kept going until you join the fleet. Therefore I shall
place the crew of the Lido on board as well as the Bonito's own
complement, and this will bring the number up to a hundred men. The
captain has had an accident, and will not be able to go in charge,
therefore the Lido's captain will command. This time I shall appoint
you specifically second in command, as well as my representative. Now
get off on board as quickly as you can, for there is enough to keep you
at work, till tomorrow morning, to get everything in readiness for a
start. You had best run in and say goodbye to my daughters, as it may
be that you will not find time to return before sailing. You can send
your boy ashore for what things you require. Matteo will accompany
you."

A few minutes later, Francis was on his way to the port, leaving
Giuseppi to charter a gondola and follow with his trunks. As Polani had
said, he was occupied without intermission until the time for sailing
next morning. The barges of the state kept coming alongside with stores
and provisions from the arsenal; while other boats brought out the
ship's stores; and Francis had to take a note of all that came on
board.

The captain superintended the setting up of the rigging, and the
getting of the ship into working order; while the under officers saw to
the hoisting in and storing of the cargo. Gangs of men were at work
tarring the sides of the ship, for she had only two days before
returned from a trip to Spain; and a number of sailors were unloading
the cargo from one hatchway, while her fresh freight was being taken in
at the other.

It seemed well nigh impossible that she could be ready to sail at the
hour named, but everyone worked with a will, and by daybreak things
were almost in order. Polani himself came down to the port as soon as
it was light, and expressed satisfaction at the work which had been
done; and half an hour afterwards the anchor was weighed.

Just as the sails had been hoisted, Matteo arrived.

"You are only just in time, Matteo," Polani said. "Why did you not come
off yesterday and help?"

"I was out," Matteo said, "when your message came, and only returned
just in time to go to the entertainment at the ducal palace. I knew I
could be of no use on board while they were only getting in the cargo."

"You will never be of any use on board, Matteo, if you go to
entertainments when there's work to be done. You could have taken the
marks on the bales as they came on board, just as well as another. I
suppose you thought that the dirt and dust wouldn't suit a fine
gentleman like you! Another time, unless you come on board when sent
for, and make yourself as useful as you can, while the ship is fitting
out and loading, you will not sail in her. One part of the duty is just
as important as the other, and seamanship does not consist solely in
strolling up and down the deck, and watching a vessel sail for her
destination."

Matteo was abashed at the reproach, but soon recovered his usual
spirits after Polani had left, when the vessel was under way.

"My cousin was rather in a sharp mood this morning," he said with a
laugh to Francis; "but really I did not think I could be of any good,
and the entertainment was a grand one. Everyone was there, and I should
have been very sorry to have missed it."

"Everyone to his taste, Matteo. For my part, I would very much rather
have been at work here all night watching the cargo got in and checking
it off, than have been standing about doing nothing in the palace."

"Doing nothing!" Matteo repeated indignantly. "Why, I was talking to
someone the whole time I was there."

"Talking about what, Matteo?"

"The heat, and the music, and the costumes, and the last bit of scandal
at the Piazza."

"I don't call that talk. I call it chatter. And now, Matteo, I shall
leave you to your own devices, for I am going to turn in and get a
sleep for a few hours."

"You look as if you wanted it," Matteo said; "but I think that you
stand in even more need of a wash. You are grimy with dust. It is just
as well that my cousin Giulia did not come on board with her father
this morning, for the sight of your face would have given her quite a
shock, and would have dissipated any illusions she may have had that
you were a good-looking fellow."

Francis went off to his cabin with a laugh, and took Matteo's advice as
to the wash before he turned in. In a few minutes he was asleep, and
did not wake until Giuseppi came to say that the midday meal was just
ready.

The Bonito made a rapid voyage. The winds were light, and for the most
part favourable, and the twenty-four oars were kept going night and
day, the men relieving each other every two hours, so that they had six
hours' rest between the spells of rowing.

When they rounded the southern point of Italy a sharp lookout was kept
for the fleet of Fieschi, but they passed through the straits without
catching sight of a single vessel carrying the Genoese flag. The most
vigilant watch was now kept for Pisani's galleys, and they always
anchored at the close of day, lest they should pass him in the dark.

Occasionally they overhauled a fishing boat, and endeavoured to obtain
news of the two squadrons; but beyond the fact that Fieschi had been
seen steering north some days before, and that no signs had been seen
of Pisani's returning fleet, they could learn nothing.



Chapter 11: The Battle Of Antium.
