"Why, sir," said Evans, "you see the man had a very fair pair of hose
on, and a bran-new kersey doublet, very warm-lined; and so, thinking it
a pity good clothes should be wasted on such noxious trade, we've just
brought them along with us."

"Spoiling the Egyptians," said Yeo as comment.

"And what have you done with the man?"

"Hove him over the bank, sir; he pitched into a big furze-bush, and for
aught I know, there he'll bide."

"You rascal, have you killed him?

"Never fear, sir," said Yeo, in his cool fashion. "A Jesuit has as many
lives as a cat, and, I believe, rides broomsticks post, like a witch. He
would be at Lydford now before us, if his master Satan had any business
for him there."

Leaving on their left Lydford and its ill-omened castle (which, a
century after, was one of the principal scenes of Judge Jeffreys's
cruelty), Amyas and his party trudged on through the mire toward
Okehampton till sunrise; and ere the vapors had lifted from the mountain
tops, they were descending the long slopes from Sourton down, while
Yestor and Amicombe slept steep and black beneath their misty pall; and
roaring far below unseen,

     "Ockment leapt from crag and cloud
     Down her cataracts, laughing loud."

The voice of the stream recalled these words to Amyas's mind. The nymph
of Torridge had spoken them upon the day of his triumph. He recollected,
too, his vexation on that day at not seeing Rose Salterne. Why, he had
never seen her since. Never seen her now for six years and more! Of her
ripened beauty he knew only by hearsay; she was still to him the lovely
fifteen years' girl for whose sake he had smitten the Barnstaple draper
over the quay. What a chain of petty accidents had kept them from
meeting, though so often within a mile of each other! "And what a lucky
one!" said practical old Amyas to himself. "If I had seen her as she is
now, I might have loved her as Frank does--poor Frank! what will he
say? What does he say, for he must know it already? And what ought I to
say--to do rather, for talking is no use on this side the grave, nor on
the other either, I expect!" And then he asked himself whether his old
oath meant nothing or something; whether it was a mere tavern frolic, or
a sacred duty. And he held, the more that he looked at it, that it meant
the latter.

But what could he do? He had nothing on earth but his sword, so he could
not travel to find her. After all, she might not be gone far. Perhaps
not gone at all. It might be a mistake, an exaggerated scandal. He
would hope so. And yet it was evident that there had been some passages
between her and Don Guzman. Eustace's mysterious words about the promise
at Lundy proved that. The villain! He had felt all along that he was a
villain; but just the one to win a woman's heart, too. Frank had been
away--all the Brotherhood away. What a fool he had been, to turn the
wolf loose into the sheepfold! And yet who would have dreamed of
it? . . .

"At all events," said Amyas, trying to comfort himself, "I need not
complain. I have lost nothing. I stood no more chance of her against
Frank than I should have stood against the Don. So there is no use for
me to cry about the matter." And he tried to hum a tune concerning the
general frailty of women, but nevertheless, like Sir Hugh, felt that "he
had a great disposition to cry."

He never had expected to win her, and yet it seemed bitter to know that
she was lost to him forever. It was not so easy for a heart of his make
to toss away the image of a first love; and all the less easy because
that image was stained and ruined.

"Curses on the man who had done that deed! I will yet have his heart's
blood somehow, if I go round the world again to find him. If there's no
law for it on earth, there's law in heaven, or I'm much mistaken."

With which determination he rode into the ugly, dirty, and stupid town
of Okehampton, with which fallen man (by some strange perversity) has
chosen to defile one of the loveliest sites in the pleasant land of
Devon. And heartily did Amyas abuse the old town that day; for he was
detained there, as he expected, full three hours, while the Justice
Shallow of the place was sent for from his farm (whither he had gone
at sunrise, after the early-rising fashion of those days) to take Yeo's
deposition concerning last night's affray. Moreover, when Shallow came,
he refused to take the depositions, because they ought to have been made
before a brother Shallow at Lydford; and in the wrangling which ensued,
was very near finding out what Amyas (fearing fresh loss of time and
worse evils beside) had commanded to be concealed, namely, the presence
of Jesuits in that Moorland Utopia. Then, in broadest Devon--

"And do you call this Christian conduct, sir, to set a quiet man like me
upon they Gubbings, as if I was going to risk my precious life--no, nor
ever a constable to Okehampton neither? Let Lydfor' men mind Lydfor'
roogs, and by Lydfor' law if they will, hang first and try after; but
as for me, I've rade my Bible, and 'He that meddleth with strife is like
him that taketh a dog by the ears.' So if you choose to sit down and ate
your breakfast with me, well and good: but depositions I'll have none.
If your man is enquired for, you'll be answerable for his appearing, in
course; but I expect mortally" (with a wink), "you wain't hear much more
of the matter from any hand. 'Leave well alone is a good rule, but leave
ill alone is a better.'--So we says round about here; and so you'll say,
captain, when you be so old as I."

So Amyas sat down and ate his breakfast, and went on afterwards a long
and weary day's journey, till he saw at last beneath him the broad
shining river, and the long bridge, and the white houses piled up the
hill-side; and beyond, over Raleigh downs, the dear old tower of Northam
Church.

Alas! Northam was altogether a desert to him then; and Bideford, as it
turned out, hardly less so. For when he rode up to Sir Richard's door,
he found that the good knight was still in Ireland, and Lady Grenville
at Stow. Whereupon he rode back again down the High Street to that same
bow-windowed Ship Tavern where the Brotherhood of the Rose made their
vow, and settled himself in the very room where they had supped.

"Ah! Mr. Leigh--Captain Leigh now, I beg pardon," quoth mine host.
"Bideford is an empty place now-a-days, and nothing stirring, sir. What
with Sir Richard to Ireland, and Sir John to London, and all the young
gentlemen to the wars, there's no one to buy good liquor, and no one to
court the young ladies, neither. Sack, sir? I hope so. I haven't brewed
a gallon of it this fortnight, if you'll believe me; ale, sir, and aqua
vitae, and such low-bred trade, is all I draw now-a-days. Try a pint of
sherry, sir, now, to give you an appetite. You mind my sherry of old?
Jane! Sherry and sugar, quick, while I pull off the captain's boots."

Amyas sat weary and sad, while the innkeeper chattered on.

"Ah, sir! two or three like you would set the young ladies all alive
again. By-the-by, there's been strange doings among them since you were
here last. You mind Mistress Salterne!"

"For God's sake, don't let us have that story, man! I heard enough of it
at Plymouth!" said Amyas, in so disturbed a tone that mine host looked
up, and said to himself--

"Ah, poor young gentleman, he's one of the hard-hit ones."

"How is the old man?" asked Amyas, after a pause.

"Bears it well enough, sir; but a changed man. Never speaks to a soul,
if he can help it. Some folk say he's not right in his head; or turned
miser, or somewhat, and takes naught but bread and water, and sits up
all night in the room as was hers, turning over her garments. Heaven
knows what's on his mind--they do say he was over hard on her, and that
drove her to it. All I know is, he has never been in here for a drop
of liquor (and he came as regular every evening as the town clock, sir)
since she went, except a ten days ago, and then he met young Mr. Cary at
the door, and I heard him ask Mr. Cary when you would be home, sir."

"Put on my boots again. I'll go and see him."

"Bless you, sir! What, without your sack?"

"Drink it yourself, man."

"But you wouldn't go out again this time o' night on an empty stomach,
now?"

"Fill my men's stomachs for them, and never mind mine. It's market-day,
is it not? Send out, and see whether Mr. Cary is still in town;" and
Amyas strode out, and along the quay to Bridgeland Street, and knocked
at Mr. Salterne's door.

Salterne himself opened it, with his usual stern courtesy.

"I saw you coming up the street, sir. I have been expecting this honor
from you for some time past. I dreamt of you only last night, and many
a night before that too. Welcome, sir, into a lonely house. I trust the
good knight your general is well."

"The good knight my general is with God who made him, Mr. Salterne."

"Dead, sir?"

"Foundered at sea on our way home; and the Delight lost too."

"Humph!" growled Salterne, after a minute's silence. "I had a venture in
her. I suppose it's gone. No matter--I can afford it, sir, and more,
I trust. And he was three years younger than I! And Draper Heard was
buried yesterday, five years younger.--How is it that every one can die,
except me? Come in, sir, come in; I have forgotten my manners."

And he led Amyas into his parlor, and called to the apprentices to run
one way, and to the cook to run another.

"You must not trouble yourself to get me supper, indeed."

"I must though, sir, and the best of wine too; and old Salterne had a
good tap of Alicant in old time, old time, old time, sir! and you must
drink it now, whether he does or not!" and out he bustled.

Amyas sat still, wondering what was coming next, and puzzled at the
sudden hilarity of the man, as well as his hospitality, so different
from what the innkeeper had led him to expect.

In a minute more one of the apprentices came in to lay the cloth, and
Amyas questioned him about his master.

"Thank the Lord that you are come, sir," said the lad.

"Why, then?"

"Because there'll be a chance of us poor fellows getting a little broken
meat. We'm half-starved this three months--bread and dripping, bread and
dripping, oh dear, sir! And now he's sent out to the inn for chickens,
and game, and salads, and all that money can buy, and down in the cellar
haling out the best of wine."--And the lad smacked his lips audibly at
the thought.

"Is he out of his mind?"

"I can't tell; he saith as how he must save mun's money now-a-days; for
he've a got a great venture on hand: but what a be he tell'th no man.
They call'th mun 'bread and dripping' now, sir, all town over," said the
prentice, confidentially, to Amyas.

"They do, do they, sirrah! Then they will call me bread and no dripping
to-morrow!" and old Salterne, entering from behind, made a dash at the
poor fellow's ears: but luckily thought better of it, having a couple of
bottles in each hand.

"My dear sir," said Amyas, "you don't mean us to drink all that wine?"

"Why not, sir?" answered Salterne, in a grim, half-sneering tone,
thrusting out his square-grizzled beard and chin. "Why not, sir? why
should I not make merry when I have the honor of a noble captain in my
house? one who has sailed the seas, sir, and cut Spaniards' throats; and
may cut them again too; eh, sir? Boy, where's the kettle and the sugar?"

"What on earth is the man at?" quoth Amyas to himself--"flattering me,
or laughing at me?"

"Yes," he ran on, half to himself, in a deliberate tone, evidently
intending to hint more than he said, as he began brewing the sack--in
plain English, hot negus; "Yes, bread and dripping for those who can't
fight Spaniards; but the best that money can buy for those who can. I
heard of you at Smerwick, sir--Yes, bread and dripping for me too--I
can't fight Spaniards: but for such as you. Look here, sir; I should
like to feed a crew of such up, as you'd feed a main of fighting-cocks,
and then start them with a pair of Sheffield spurs a-piece--you've a
good one there to your side, sir: but don't you think a man might carry
two now, and fight as they say those Chineses do, a sword to each hand?
You could kill more that way, Captain Leigh, I reckon?"

Amyas half laughed.

"One will do, Mr. Salterne, if one is quick enough with it."

"Humph!--Ah--No use being in a hurry. I haven't been in a hurry. No--I
waited for you; and here you are and welcome, sir! Here comes supper, a
light matter, sir, you see. A capon and a brace of partridges. I had no
time to feast you as you deserve."

And so he ran on all supper-time, hardly allowing Amyas to get a word
in edge-ways; but heaping him with coarse flattery, and urging him to
drink, till after the cloth was drawn, and the two left alone, he grew
so outrageous that Amyas was forced to take him to task good-humoredly.

"Now, my dear sir, you have feasted me royally, and better far than I
deserve, but why will you go about to make me drunk twice over, first
with vainglory and then with wine?"

Salterne looked at him a while fixedly, and then, sticking out his
chin--"Because, Captain Leigh, I am a man who has all his life tried the
crooked road first, and found the straight one the safer after all."

"Eh, sir? That is a strange speech for one who bears the character of
the most upright man in Bideford."

"Humph. So I thought myself once, sir; and well I have proved it. But
I'll be plain with you, sir. You've heard how--how I've fared since you
saw me last?"

Amyas nodded his head.

"I thought so. Shame rides post. Now then, Captain Leigh, listen to me.
I, being a plain man and a burgher, and one that never drew iron in my
life except to mend a pen, ask you, being a gentleman and a captain
and a man of honor, with a weapon to your side, and harness to your
back--what would you do in my place?"

"Humph!" said Amyas, "that would very much depend on whether 'my place'
was my own fault or not."

"And what if it were, sir? What if all that the charitable folks of
Bideford--(Heaven reward them for their tender mercies!)--have been
telling you in the last hour be true, sir,--true! and yet not half the
truth?"

Amyas gave a start.

"Ah, you shrink from me! Of course a man is too righteous to forgive
those who repent, though God is not."

"God knows, sir--"

"Yes, sir, God does know--all; and you shall know a little--as much as I
can tell--or you understand. Come upstairs with me, sir, as you'll drink
no more; I have a liking for you. I have watched you from your boyhood,
and I can trust you, and I'll show you what I never showed to mortal man
but one."

And, taking up a candle, he led the way upstairs, while Amyas followed
wondering.

He stopped at a door, and unlocked it.

"There, come in. Those shutters have not been opened since she--" and
the old man was silent.

Amyas looked round the room. It was a low wainscoted room, such as one
sees in old houses: everything was in the most perfect neatness.
The snow-white sheets on the bed were turned down as if ready for an
occupant. There were books arranged on the shelves, fresh flowers on the
table; the dressing-table had all its woman's mundus of pins, and rings,
and brushes; even the dressing-gown lay over the chair-back. Everything
was evidently just as it had been left.

"This was her room, sir," whispered the old man.

Amyas nodded silently, and half drew back.

"You need not be modest about entering it now, sir," whispered he, with
a sort of sneer. "There has been no frail flesh and blood in it for many
a day."

Amyas sighed.

"I sweep it out myself every morning, and keep all tidy. See here!"
and he pulled open a drawer. "Here are all her gowns, and there are her
hoods; and there--I know 'em all by heart now, and the place of every
one. And there, sir--"

And he opened a cupboard, where lay in rows all Rose's dolls, and the
worn-out playthings of her childhood.

"That's the pleasantest place of all in the room to me," said he,
whispering still, "for it minds me of when--and maybe, she may become a
little child once more, sir; it's written in the Scripture, you know--"

"Amen!" said Amyas, who felt, to his own wonder, a big tear stealing
down each cheek.

"And now," he whispered, "one thing more. Look here!"--and pulling out a
key, he unlocked a chest, and lifted up tray after tray of necklaces
and jewels, furs, lawns, cloth of gold. "Look there! Two thousand pound
won't buy that chest. Twenty years have I been getting those things
together. That's the cream of many a Levant voyage, and East Indian
voyage, and West Indian voyage. My Lady Bath can't match those pearls in
her grand house at Tawstock; I got 'em from a Genoese, though, and paid
for 'em. Look at that embroidered lawn! There's not such a piece in
London; no, nor in Alexandria, I'll warrant; nor short of Calicut, where
it came from. . . . Look here again, there's a golden cup! I bought that
of one that was out with Pizarro in Peru. And look here, again!"--and
the old man gloated over the treasure.

"And whom do you think I kept all these for? These were for her
wedding-day--for her wedding-day. For your wedding-day, if you'd been
minded, sir! Yes, yours, sir! And yet, I believe, I was so ambitious
that I would not have let her marry under an earl, all the while I was
pretending to be too proud to throw her at the head of a squire's son.
Ah, well! There was my idol, sir. I made her mad, I pampered her up with
gewgaws and vanity; and then, because my idol was just what I had made
her, I turned again and rent her.

"And now," said he, pointing to the open chest, "that was what I meant;
and that" (pointing to the empty bed) "was what God meant. Never mind.
Come downstairs and finish your wine. I see you don't care about it all.
Why should you! you are not her father, and you may thank God you are
not. Go, and be merry while you can, young sir! . . . And yet, all this
might have been yours. And--but I don't suppose you are one to be won
by money--but all this may be yours still, and twenty thousand pounds to
boot."

"I want no money, sir, but what I can earn with my own sword."

"Earn my money, then!"

"What on earth do you want of me!"

"To keep your oath," said Salterne, clutching his arm, and looking up
into his face with searching eyes.

"My oath! How did you know that I had one?"

"Ah! you were well ashamed of it, I suppose, next day! A drunken frolic
all about a poor merchant's daughter! But there is nothing hidden that
shall not be revealed, nor done in the closet that is not proclaimed on
the house-tops."

"Ashamed of it, sir, I never was: but I have a right to ask how you came
to know it?"

"What if a poor fat squinny rogue, a low-born fellow even as I am,
whom you had baffled and made a laughing-stock, had come to me in my
loneliness and sworn before God that if you honorable gentlemen would
not keep your words, he the clown would?"

"John Brimblecombe?"

"And what if I had brought him where I have brought you, and shown
him what I have shown you, and, instead of standing as stiff as any
Spaniard, as you do, he had thrown himself on his knees by that bedside,
and wept and prayed, sir, till he opened my hard heart for the first
and last time, and I fell down on my sinful knees and wept and prayed by
him?"

"I am not given to weeping, Mr. Salterne," said Amyas; "and as for
praying, I don't know yet what I have to pray for, on her account: my
business is to work. Show me what I can do; and when you have done that,
it will be full time to upbraid me with not doing it."

"You can cut that fellow's throat."

"It will take a long arm to reach him."

"I suppose it is as easy to sail to the Spanish Main as it was to sail
round the world."

"My good sir," said Amyas, "I have at this moment no more worldly goods
than my clothes and my sword, so how to sail to the Spanish Main, I
don't quite see."

"And do you suppose, sir, that I should hint to you of such a voyage if
I meant you to be at the charge of it? No, sir; if you want two thousand
pounds, or five, to fit a ship, take it! Take it, sir! I hoarded money
for my child: and now I will spend it to avenge her."

Amyas was silent for a while; the old man still held his arm, still
looked up steadfastly and fiercely in his face.

"Bring me home that man's head, and take ship, prizes--all! Keep the
gain, sir, and give me the revenge!"

"Gain? Do you think I need bribing, sir? What kept me silent was the
thought of my mother. I dare not go without her leave."

Salterne made a gesture of impatience.

"I dare not, sir; I must obey my parent, whatever else I do."

"Humph!" said he. "If others had obeyed theirs as well!--But you are
right, Captain Leigh, right. You will prosper, whoever else does not.
Now, sir, good-night, if you will let me be the first to say so. My old
eyes grow heavy early now-a-days. Perhaps it's old age, perhaps it's
sorrow."

So Amyas departed to the inn, and there, to his great joy, found Cary
waiting for him, from whom he learnt details, which must be kept for
another chapter, and which I shall tell, for convenience' sake, in my
own words and not in his.



CHAPTER XV

HOW MR. JOHN BRIMBLECOMBE UNDERSTOOD THE NATURE OF AN OATH

     "The Kynge of Spayn is a foul paynim,
     And lieveth on Mahound;
     And pity it were that lady fayre
     Should marry a heathen hound."

                           Kyng Estmere.

About six weeks after the duel, the miller at Stow had come up to
the great house in much tribulation, to borrow the bloodhounds. Rose
Salterne had vanished in the night, no man knew whither.

Sir Richard was in Bideford: but the old steward took on himself to send
for the keepers, and down went the serving-men to the mill with all the
idle lads of the parish at their heels, thinking a maiden-hunt very good
sport; and of course taking a view of the case as favorable as possible
to Rose.

They reviled the miller and his wife roundly for hard-hearted old
heathens; and had no doubt that they had driven the poor maid to throw
herself over cliff, or drown herself in the sea; while all the women of
Stow, on the other hand, were of unanimous opinion that the hussy had
"gone off" with some bad fellow; and that pride was sure to have a fall,
and so forth.

The facts of the case were, that all Rose's trinkets were left behind,
so that she had at least gone off honestly; and nothing seemed to be
missing, but some of her linen, which old Anthony the steward broadly
hinted was likely to be found in other people's boxes. The only trace
was a little footmark under her bedroom window. On that the bloodhound
was laid (of course in leash), and after a premonitory whimper, lifted
up his mighty voice, and started bell-mouthed through the garden gate,
and up the lane, towing behind him the panting keeper, till they reached
the downs above, and went straight away for Marslandmouth, where the
whole posse comitatus pulled up breathless at the door of Lucy Passmore.

Lucy, as perhaps I should have said before, was now a widow, and found
her widowhood not altogether contrary to her interest. Her augury about
her old man had been fulfilled; he had never returned since the night on
which he put to sea with Eustace and the Jesuits.

     *"Some natural tears she shed, but dried them soon"

as many of them, at least, as were not required for purposes of
business; and then determined to prevent suspicion by a bold move; she
started off to Stow, and told Lady Grenville a most pathetic tale: how
her husband had gone out to pollock fishing, and never returned: but how
she had heard horsemen gallop past her window in the dead of night, and
was sure they must have been the Jesuits, and that they had carried off
her old man by main force, and probably, after making use of his
services, had killed and salted him down for provision on their voyage
back to the Pope at Rome; after which she ended by entreating protection
against those "Popish skulkers up to Chapel," who were sworn to do her a
mischief; and by an appeal to Lady Grenville's sense of justice, as to
whether the queen ought not to allow her a pension, for having had her
heart's love turned into a sainted martyr by the hands of idolatrous
traitors.

Lady Grenville (who had a great opinion of Lucy's medical skill, and
always sent for her if one of the children had a "housty," i. e. sore
throat) went forth and pleaded the case before Sir Richard with such
effect, that Lucy was on the whole better off than ever for the next two
or three years.  But now--what had she to do with Rose's disappearance?
and, indeed, where was she herself?  Her door was fast; and round it her
flock of goats stood, crying in vain for her to come and milk them;
while from the down above, her donkeys, wandering at their own sweet
will, answered the bay of the bloodhound with a burst of harmony.

"They'm laughing at us, keper, they neddies; sure enough, we'm lost our
labor here."

But the bloodhound, after working about the door a while, turned down
the glen, and never stopped till he reached the margin of the sea.

"They'm taken water.  Let's go back, and rout out the old witch's
house."

"'Tis just like that old Lucy, to lock a poor maid into shame."

And returning, they attacked the cottage, and by a general plebiscitum,
ransacked the little dwelling, partly in indignation, and partly, if the
truth be told, in the hope of plunder; but plunder there was none.  Lucy
had decamped with all her movable wealth, saving the huge black cat
among the embers, who at the sight of the bloodhound vanished up the
chimney (some said with a strong smell of brimstone), and being viewed
outside, was chased into the woods, where she lived, I doubt not, many
happy years, a scourge to all the rabbits of the glen.

The goats and donkeys were driven off up to Stow; and the mob returned,
a little ashamed of themselves when their brief wrath was past; and a
little afraid, too, of what Sir Richard might say.

He, when he returned, sold the donkeys and goats, and gave the money to
the poor, promising to refund the same, if Lucy returned and gave
herself up to justice.  But Lucy did not return; and her cottage, from
which the neighbors shrank as from a haunted place, remained as she had
left it, and crumbled slowly down to four fern-covered walls, past which
the little stream went murmuring on from pool to pool--the only voice,
for many a year to come, which broke the silence of that lonely glen.

A few days afterwards, Sir Richard, on his way from Bideford to Stow,
looked in at Clovelly Court, and mentioned, with a "by the by," news
which made Will Cary leap from his seat almost to the ceiling.  What it
was we know already.

"And there is no clue?" asked old Cary; for his son was speechless.

"Only this; I hear that some fellow prowling about the cliffs that night
saw a pinnace running for Lundy."

Will rose, and went hastily out of the room.

In half an hour he and three or four armed servants were on board a
trawling-skiff, and away to Lundy.  He did not return for three days,
and then brought news: that an elderly man, seemingly a foreigner, had
been lodging for some months past in a part of the ruined Moresco
Castle, which was tenanted by one John Braund; that a few weeks since a
younger man, a foreigner also, had joined him from on board a ship: the
ship a Flushinger, or Easterling of some sort.  The ship came and went
more than once; and the young man in her.  A few days since, a lady and
her maid, a stout woman, came with him up to the castle, and talked with
the elder man a long while in secret; abode there all night; and then
all three sailed in the morning.  The fishermen on the beach had heard
the young man call the other father.  He was a very still man, much as a
mass-priest might be.  More they did not know, or did not choose to
know.

Whereon old Cary and Sir Richard sent Will on a second trip with the
parish constable of Hartland (in which huge parish, for its sins, is
situate the Isle of Lundy, ten miles out at sea); who returned with the
body of the hapless John Braund, farmer, fisherman, smuggler, etc.;
which worthy, after much fruitless examination (wherein examinate was
afflicted with extreme deafness and loss of memory), departed to Exeter
gaol, on a charge of "harboring priests, Jesuits, gipsies, and other
suspect and traitorous persons."

Poor John Braund, whose motive for entertaining the said ugly customers
had probably been not treason, but a wife, seven children, and arrears
of rent, did not thrive under the change from the pure air of Lundy to
the pestiferous one of Exeter gaol, made infamous, but two years after
(if I recollect right), by a "black assizes," nearly as fatal as that
more notorious one at Oxford; for in it, "whether by the stench of the
prisoners, or by a stream of foul air," judge, jury, counsel, and
bystanders, numbering among them many members of the best families in
Devon, sickened in court, and died miserably within a few days.

John Braund, then, took the gaol-fever in a week, and died raving in
that noisome den: his secret, if he had one, perished with him, and
nothing but vague suspicion was left as to Rose Salterne's fate.  That
she had gone off with the Spaniard, few doubted; but whither, and in
what character?  On that last subject, be sure, no mercy was shown to
her by many a Bideford dame, who had hated the poor girl simply for her
beauty; and by many a country lady, who had "always expected that the
girl would be brought to ruin by the absurd notice, beyond what her
station had a right to, which was taken of her," while every young
maiden aspired to fill the throne which Rose had abdicated.  So that, on
the whole, Bideford considered itself as going on as well without poor
Rose as it had done with her, or even better.  And though she lingered
in some hearts still as a fair dream, the business and the bustle of
each day soon swept that dream away, and her place knew her no more.

And Will Cary?

He was for a while like a man distracted.  He heaped himself with all
manner of superfluous reproaches, for having (as he said) first brought
the Rose into disgrace, and then driven her into the arms of the
Spaniard; while St. Leger, who was a sensible man enough, tried in vain
to persuade him that the fault was not his at all; that the two must
have been attached to each other long before the quarrel; that it must
have ended so, sooner or later; that old Salterne's harshness, rather
than Cary's wrath, had hastened the catastrophe; and finally, that the
Rose and her fortunes were, now that she had eloped with a Spaniard, not
worth troubling their heads about.  Poor Will would not be so comforted.
He wrote off to Frank at Whitehall, telling him the whole truth, calling
himself all fools and villains, and entreating Frank's forgiveness; to
which he received an answer, in which Frank said that Will had no reason
to accuse himself; that these strange attachments were due to a
synastria, or sympathy of the stars, which ruled the destinies of each
person, to fight against which was to fight against the heavens
themselves; that he, as a brother of the Rose, was bound to believe,
nay, to assert at the sword's point if need were, that the incomparable
Rose of Torridge could make none but a worthy and virtuous choice; and
that to the man whom she had honored by her affection was due on their
part, Spaniard and Papist though he might be, all friendship, worship,
and loyal faith for evermore.

And honest Will took it all for gospel, little dreaming what agony of
despair, what fearful suspicions, what bitter prayers, this letter had
cost to the gentle heart of Francis Leigh.

He showed the letter triumphantly to St. Leger; and he was quite wise
enough to gainsay no word of it, at least aloud; but quite wise enough,
also, to believe in secret that Frank looked on the matter in quite a
different light; however, he contented himself with saying:

"The man is an angel as his mother is!" and there the matter dropped for
a few days, till one came forward who had no mind to let it drop, and
that was Jack Brimblecombe, now curate of Hartland town, and "passing
rich on forty pounds a year.

"I hope no offence, Mr. William; but when are you and the rest going
after--after her?"  The name stuck in his throat.

Cary was taken aback.

"What's that to thee, Catiline the blood-drinker?" asked he, trying to
laugh it off.

"What?  Don't laugh at me, sir, for it's no laughing matter.  I drank
that night naught worse, I expect, than red wine.  Whatever it was, we
swore our oaths, Mr. Cary; and oaths are oaths, say I."

"Of course, Jack, of course; but to go to look for her--and when we've
found her, cut her lover's throat.  Absurd, Jack, even if she were worth
looking for, or his throat worth cutting.  Tut, tut, tut--"

But Jack looked steadfastly in his face, and after some silence:

How far is it to the Caracas, then, sir?"

"What is that to thee, man?"

"Why, he was made governor thereof, I hear; so that would be the place
to find her?"

"You don't mean to go thither to seek her?" shouted Cary, forcing a
laugh.

"That depends on whether I can go, sir; but if I can scrape the money
together, or get a berth on board some ship, why, God's will must be
done."

Will looked at him, to see if he had been drinking, or gone mad; but the
little pigs' eyes were both sane and sober.

Will knew no answer.  To laugh at the poor fellow was easy enough; to
deny that he was right, that he was a hero and cavalier, outdoing
romance itself in faithfulness, not so easy; and Cary, in the first
impulse, wished him at the bottom of the bay for shaming him.  Of
course, his own plan of letting ill alone was the rational, prudent,
irreproachable plan, and just what any gentleman in his senses would
have done; but here was a vulgar, fat curate, out of his senses,
determined not to let ill alone, but to do something, as Cary felt in
his heart, of a far diviner stamp.

"Well," said Jack, in his stupid steadfast way, "it's a very bad
look-out; but mother's pretty well off, if father dies, and the maidens
are stout wenches enough, and will make tidy servants, please the Lord.
And you'll see that they come to no harm, Mr. William, for old
acquaintance' sake, if I never come back."

Cary was silent with amazement.

"And, Mr. William, you know me for an honest man, I hope.  Will you lend
me a five pound, and take my books in pawn for them, just to help me
out?"

"Are you mad, or in a dream?  You will never find her!"

"That's no reason why I shouldn't do my duty in looking for her, Mr.
William."

"But, my good fellow, even if you get to the Indies, you will be clapt
into the Inquisition, and burnt alive, as sure as your name is Jack."

"I know that," said he, in a doleful tone; "and a sore struggle of the
flesh I have had about it; for I am a great coward, Mr. William, a dirty
coward, and always was, as you know: but maybe the Lord will take care
of me, as He does of little children and drunken men; and if not, Mr.
Will, I'd sooner burn, and have it over, than go on this way any longer,
I would!" and Jack burst out blubbering.

"What way, my dear old lad?" said Will, softened as he well might be.

"Why, not--not to know whether--whether--whether she's married to him or
not--her that I looked up to as an angel of God, as pure as the light of
day; and knew she was too good for a poor pot-head like me; and prayed
for her every night, God knows, that she might marry a king, if there
was one fit for her--and I not to know whether she's living in sin or
not, Mr. William.--It's more than I can bear, and there's an end of it.
And if she is married to him they keep no faith with heretics; they can
dissolve the marriage, or make away with her into the Inquisition; burn
her, Mr. Cary, as soon as burn me, the devils incarnate!"

Cary shuddered; the fact, true and palpable as it was, had never struck
him before.

"Yes! or make her deny her God by torments, if she hasn't done it
already for love to that--I know how love will make a body sell his
soul, for I've been in love.  Don't you laugh at me, Mr. Will, or I
shall go mad!"

"God knows, I was never less inclined to laugh at you in my life, my
brave old Jack."

"Is it so, then?  Bless you for that word!" and Jack held out his hand.
"But what will become of my soul, after my oath, if I don't seek her
out, just to speak to her, to warn her, for God's sake, even if it did
no good; just to set before her the Lord's curse on idolatry and
Antichrist, and those who deny Him for the sake of any creature, though
I can't think he would be hard on her,--for who could?  But I must speak
all the same.  The Lord has laid the burden on me, and done it must be.
God help me!"

"Jack," said Cary, "if this is your duty, it is others'."

"No, sir, I don't say that; you're a layman, but I am a deacon, and the
chaplain of you all, and sworn to seek out Christ's sheep scattered up
and down this naughty world, and that innocent lamb first of all."

"You have sheep at Hartland, Jack, already."

"There's plenty better than I will tend them, when I am gone; but none
that will tend her, because none love her like me, and they won't
venture.  Who will?  It can't be expected, and no shame to them?"

"I wonder what Amyas Leigh would say to all this, if he were at home?"

"Say?  He'd do.  He isn't one for talking.  He'd go through fire and
water for her, you trust him, Will Cary; and call me an ass if he
won't."

"Will you wait, then, till he comes back, and ask him?"

"He may not be back for a year and more."

"Hear reason, Jack.  If you will wait like a rational and patient man,
instead of rushing blindfold on your ruin, something may be done."

"You think so!"

"I cannot promise; but--"

"But promise me one thing.  Do you tell Mr. Frank what I say--or rather,
I'll warrant, if I knew the truth, he has said the very same thing
himself already."

"You are out there, old man; for here is his own handwriting."

Jack read the letter and sighed bitterly.  "Well, I did take him for
another guess sort of fine gentleman.  Still, if my duty isn't his, it's
mine all the same.  I judge no man; but I go, Mr. Cary."

"But go you shall not till Amyas returns.  As I live, I will tell your
father, Jack, unless you promise; and you dare not disobey him."

"I don't know even that, for conscience' sake," said Jack, doubtfully.

"At least, you stay and dine here, old fellow, and we will settle
whether you are to break the fifth commandment or not, over good brewed
sack."

Now a good dinner was (as we know) what Jack loved, and loved too oft in
vain; so he submitted for the nonce, and Cary thought, ere he went, that
he had talked him pretty well round.  At least he went home, and was
seen no more for a week.

But at the end of that time he returned, and said with a joyful voice--

"I have settled all, Mr. Will.  The parson of Welcombe will serve my
church for two Sundays, and I am away for London town, to speak to Mr.
Frank."

"To London?  How wilt get there?"

"On Shanks his mare," said Jack, pointing to his bandy legs.  "But I
expect I can get a lift on board of a coaster so far as Bristol, and
it's no way on to signify, I hear."

Cary tried in vain to dissuade him; and then forced on him a small loan,
with which away went Jack, and Cary heard no more of him for three
weeks.

At last he walked into Clovelly Court again just before supper-time,
thin and leg-weary, and sat himself down among the serving-men till Will
appeared.

Will took him up above the salt, and made much of him (which indeed the
honest fellow much needed), and after supper asked him in private how he
had sped.

"I have learnt a lesson, Mr. William.  I've learnt that there is one on
earth loves her better than I, if she had but had the wit to have taken
him."

"But what says he of going to seek her?"

"He says what I say, Go! and he says what you say, Wait."

"Go?  Impossible!  How can that agree with his letter?"

"That's no concern of mine.  Of course, being nearer heaven than I am,
he sees clearer what he should say and do than I can see for him.  Oh,
Mr. Will, that's not a man, he's an angel of God; but he's dying, Mr.
Will."

"Dying?"

"Yes, faith, of love for her.  I can see it in his eyes, and hear it in
his voice; but I am of tougher hide and stiffer clay, and so you see I
can't die even if I tried.  But I'll obey my betters, and wait."

And so Jack went home to his parish that very evening, weary as he was,
in spite of all entreaties to pass the night at Clovelly.  But he had
left behind him thoughts in Cary's mind, which gave their owner no rest
by day or night, till the touch of a seeming accident made them all
start suddenly into shape, as a touch of the freezing water covers it in
an instant with crystals of ice.

He was lounging (so he told Amyas) one murky day on Bideford quay, when
up came Mr. Salterne.  Cary had shunned him of late, partly from
delicacy, partly from dislike of his supposed hard-heartedness.  But
this time they happened to meet full; and Cary could not pass without
speaking to him.

"Well, Mr. Salterne, and how goes on the shipping trade?"

"Well enough, sir, if some of you young gentlemen would but follow Mr.
Leigh's example, and go forth to find us stay-at-homes new markets for
our ware."

"What? you want to be rid of us, eh?"

"I don't know why I should, sir.  We sha'n't cross each other now, sir,
whatever might have been once.  But if I were you, I should be in the
Indies about now, if I were not fighting the queen's battles nearer
home."

"In the Indies?  I should make but a poor hand of Drake's trade." And so
the conversation dropped; but Cary did not forget the hint.

"So, lad, to make an end of a long story," said he to Amyas; "if you are
minded to take the old man's offer, so am I: and Westward-ho with you,
come foul come fair."

"It will be but a wild-goose chase, Will."

"If she is with him, we shall find her at La Guayra.  If she is not, and
the villain has cast her off down the wind, that will be only an
additional reason for making an example of him."

"And if neither of them are there, Will, the Plate-fleets will be; so it
will be our own shame if we come home empty-handed.  But will your
father let you run such a risk?"

"My father!" said Cary, laughing.  "He has just now so good hope of a
long string of little Carys to fill my place, that he will be in no lack
of an heir, come what will."

"Little Carys?"

"I tell you truth.  I think he must have had a sly sup of that fountain
of perpetual youth, which our friend Don Guzman's grandfather went to
seek in Florida; for some twelvemonth since, he must needs marry a
tenant's buxom daughter; and Mistress Abishag Jewell has brought him one
fat baby already.  So I shall go, back to Ireland, or with you: but
somewhere.  I can't abide the thing's squalling, any more than I can
seeing Mistress Abishag sitting in my poor dear mother's place, and
informing me every other day that she is come of an illustrious house,
because she is (or is not) third cousin seven times removed to my
father's old friend, Bishop Jewell of glorious memory.  I had
three-parts of a quarrel with the dear old man the other day; for after
one of her peacock-bouts, I couldn't for the life of me help saying,
that as the Bishop had written an Apology for the people of England, my
father had better conjure up his ghost to write an apology for him, and
head it, 'Why green heads should grow on gray shoulders.'"

