
"Ah! is that you, comte?" he exclaimed, as soon as he perceived him,
doubly delighted, not only to see him again, but also to get rid of
Colbert, whose scowling face always put him out of humor. "So much the
better. I am very glad to see you; you will make one of the traveling
party, I suppose?"

"Of what traveling party are you speaking, sire?" inquired Saint-Aignan.

"The one we are making up to go to the fete the surintendant is about to
give at Vaux. Ah! Saint-Aignan, you will, at last, see a fete, a royal
fete, by the side of which all our amusements at Fontainebleau are
petty, contemptible affairs."

"At Vaux! the surintendant going to give a fete in your majesty's honor?
Nothing more than that!"

"'Nothing more that that,' do you say! It is very diverting to find you
treating it with so much disdain. Are you, who express such an
indifference on the subject, aware, that as soon as it is known that M.
Fouquet is going to receive me at Vaux next Sunday week, people will be
striving their very utmost to get invited to the fete. I repeat,
Saint-Aignan, you shall be one of the invited guests."

"Very well, sire; unless I shall, in the meantime, have undertaken a
longer and less agreeable journey."

"What journey do you allude to?"

"The one across the Styx, sire."

"Bah!" said Louis XIV., laughing.

"No, seriously, sire," replied Saint-Aignan, "I am invited there; and in
such a way, in truth, that I hardly know what to say, or how to act, in
order to refuse it."

"I do not understand you. I know that you are in a poetical vein; but
try not to sink from Apollo to Phoebus."

"Very well; if your majesty will deign to listen to me, I will not put
your mind on the rack any longer."

"Speak."

"Your majesty knows the Baron de Valon?"

"Yes, indeed; a good servant to my father, the late king, and an
admirable companion at table; for, I think, you are referring to the one
who dined with us at Fontainebleau?"

"Precisely so; but you have omitted to add to his other qualifications,
sire, that he is a most charming killer of other people."

"What! does M. de Valon wish to kill you?"

"Or to get me killed, which is the same thing."

"The deuce!"

"Do not laugh, sire, for I am not saying a word that is not the exact
truth."

"And you say he wishes to get you killed."

"That is that excellent person's present idea."

"Be easy; I will defend you, if he be in the wrong."

"Ah! There is an 'if!'"

"Of course: answer me as candidly as if it were some one else's affair
instead of your own, my poor Saint-Aignan; is he right or wrong?"

"Your majesty shall be the judge."

"What have you done to him?"

"To him, personally, nothing at all; but, it seems, I have to one of his
friends."

"It is all the same. Is his friend one of the celebrated 'four?'"

"No! It is the son of one of the celebrated 'four,' instead."

"What have you done to the son? Come, tell me."

"Why, it seems I have helped some one to take his mistress from him."

"You confess it, then?"

"I cannot help confessing it, for it is true."

"In that case, you are wrong; and if he were to kill you, he would be
acting perfectly right."

"Ah! that is your majesty's way of reasoning, then!"

"Do you think it a bad way?"


[Illustration: ATHOS BROKE HIS SWORD ACROSS HIS KNEE, SLOWLY PLACED
THE TWO PIECES UPON THE FLOOR, AND SALUTING THE KING, WHO WAS ALMOST
CHOKING FROM RAGE AND SHAME, HE QUITTED THE CABINET.--_Page 263._]


"It is a very expeditious way, at all events."

"'Good justice is prompt;' so my grandfather, Henry IV., used to say."

"In that case, your majesty will, perhaps, be good enough to sign my
adversary's pardon, for he is now waiting for me at the Minimes, for the
purpose of putting me out of my misery."

"His name, and a parchment!"

"There is a parchment upon your majesty's table; and as for his name--"

"Well, what is it?"

"The Vicomte de Bragelonne, sire."

"The Vicomte de Bragelonne!" exclaimed the king, changing from a fit of
laughter, to the most profound stupor; and then, after a moment's
silence, while he wiped his forehead, which was bedewed with
perspiration, he again murmured, "Bragelonne!"

"No other than he, sire."

"Bragelonne, who was affianced to--"

"Yes, sire."

"He was in London, however."

"Yes; but I can assure you, sire, he is there no longer."

"Is he in Paris, then?"

"He is at the Minimes, sire, where he is waiting for me, as I have
already had the honor of telling you."

"Does he know all?"

"Yes; and many things besides. Perhaps your majesty would like to look
at the letter I have received from him;" and Saint-Aignan drew from his
pocket the note which we are already acquainted with. "When your majesty
has read the letter, I will tell you how it reached me."

The king read it in great agitation, and immediately said, "Well?"

"Well, sire; your majesty knows a certain carved lock, closing a certain
door of ebony wood, which separates a certain apartment from a certain
blue and white sanctuary?"

"Of course; Louise's boudoir."

"Yes, sire. Well, it was in the keyhole of that lock that I found that
note."

"Who placed it there?"

"Either M. de Bragelonne, or the devil himself; but, inasmuch as the
note smells of amber and not of sulphur, I conclude that it must be,
not the devil, but M. de Bragelonne."

Louis bent down his head, and seemed absorbed in sad and melancholy
reflections. Perhaps something like remorse was at that moment passing
through his heart. "The secret is discovered," he said.

"Sire, I shall do my utmost, that the secret dies in the breast of the
man who possesses it," said Saint-Aignan, in a tone of bravado, as he
moved toward the door; but a gesture of the king made him pause.

"Where are you going?" he inquired.

"Where I am waited for, sire."

"What for?"

"To fight, in all probability."

"You fight!" exclaimed the king. "One moment, if you please, Monsieur le
Comte!"

Saint-Aignan shook his head, as a rebellious child does, whenever any
one interferes to prevent him throwing himself into a well, or playing
with a knife. "But yet, sire," he said.

"In the first place," continued the king, "I require to be enlightened a
little."

"Upon that point, if your majesty will be pleased to interrogate me,"
replied Saint-Aignan, "I will throw what light I can."

"Who told you that M. de Bragelonne had penetrated into that room?"

"The letter which I found in the keyhole told me so."

"Who told you that it was De Bragelonne who put it there?"

"Who but himself would have dared to undertake such a mission?"

"You are right. How was he able to get into your rooms?"

"Ah! that is very serious, inasmuch as all the doors were closed, and my
lackey, Basque, had the keys in his pocket."

"Your lackey must have been bribed."

"Impossible, sire; for if he had been bribed, those who did so would not
have sacrificed the poor fellow, whom, it is not unlikely, they might
want to turn to further use by and by, in showing so clearly that it
was he whom they had made use of."

"Quite true. And now I can only form one conjecture."

"Tell me what it is, sire, and we shall see if it is the same that has
presented itself to my mind."

"That he effected an entrance by means of the staircase."

"Alas, sire, that seems to me more than probable."

"There is no doubt that some one must have sold this secret of the
trap-door."

"Either sold it or given it."

"Why do you make that distinction?"

"Because there are certain persons, sire, who, being above the price of
a treason, give, and do not sell."

"What do you mean?"

"Oh, sire! Your majesty's mind is too clear-sighted not to guess what I
mean, and you will save me the embarrassment of naming the person I
allude to."

"You are right: you mean Madame! I suppose her suspicions were aroused
by your changing your lodgings."

"Madame has keys of the apartments of her maids of honor, and she is
powerful enough to discover what no one but yourself could do, or she
would not be able to discover anything."

"And you suppose, then, that my sister must have entered into an
alliance with Bragelonne, and has informed him of all the details of the
affair?"

"Perhaps even better still, for she perhaps accompanied him there."

"Which way? through your own apartments?"

"You think it impossible, sire? Well, listen to me. Your majesty knows
that Madame is very fond of perfumes?"

"Yes, she acquired that taste from my mother."

"Vervain particularly."

"Yes, it is the scent she prefers to all others."

"Very good, sire! my apartments happen to smell very strongly of
vervain."

The king remained silent and thoughtful for a few moments, and then
resumed: "But why should Madame take Bragelonne's part against me?"

Saint-Aignan could very easily have replied: "A woman's jealousy!" The
king probed his friend to the bottom of his heart to ascertain if he had
learned the secret of his flirtation with his sister-in-law. But
Saint-Aignan was not an ordinary courtier; he did not lightly run the
risk of finding out family secrets; and he was too good a friend of the
Muses not to think very frequently of poor Ovidius Naso, whose eyes shed
so many tears in expiation of his crime for having once beheld
something, one hardly knows what, in the palace of Augustus. He
therefore passed by Madame's secret very skillfully. But as he had shown
no ordinary sagacity in indicating Madame's presence in his rooms in
company with Bragelonne, it was necessary, of course, for him to repay
with interest the king's _amour propre_, and reply plainly to the
question which had been put to him of: "Why has Madame taken
Bragelonne's part against me?"

"Why?" replied Saint-Aignan. "Your majesty forgets, I presume, that the
Comte de Guiche is the intimate friend of the Vicomte de Bragelonne?"

"I do not see the connection, however," said the king.

"Ah! I beg your pardon, then, sire; but I thought the Comte de Guiche
was a very great friend of Madame's."

"Quite true," the king returned; "there is no occasion to search any
further; the blow came from that direction."

"And is not your majesty of opinion that, in order to ward it off, it
will be necessary to deal another blow?"

"Yes, but not one of the kind given in the Bois de Vincennes," replied
the king.

"You forget, sire," said Saint-Aignan, "that I am a gentleman, and that
I have been challenged."

"The challenge neither concerns nor was it intended for you."

"But it is I who have been expected at the Minimes, sire, during the
last hour and more; and I shall be dishonored if I do not go there."

"The first honor and duty of a gentleman is obedience to his sovereign."

"Sire!"

"I order you to remain."

"Sire!"

"Obey, monsieur."

"As your majesty pleases."

"Besides, I wish to have the whole of this affair explained; I wish to
know how it is that I have been so insolently trifled with as to have
the sanctuary of my affection pried into. It is not you, Saint-Aignan,
who ought to punish those who have acted in this manner, for it is not
your honor they have attacked, but my own."

"I implore your majesty not to overwhelm M. de Bragelonne with your
wrath, for although in the whole of this affair he may have shown
himself deficient in prudence, he has not been so in his feelings of
loyalty."

"Enough! I shall know how to decide between the just and the unjust,
even in the height of my anger. But take care that not a word of this is
breathed to Madame."

"But what am I to do with regard to M. de Bragelonne? He will be seeking
me in every direction, and--"

"I shall either have spoken to him, or taken care that he has been
spoken to, before the evening is over."

"Let me once more entreat your majesty to be indulgent toward him."

"I have been indulgent long enough, comte," said Louis XIV., frowning
severely; "it is now quite time to show certain persons that I am master
in my own palace."

The king had hardly pronounced these words, which betokened that a fresh
feeling of dissatisfaction was mingled with the remembrance of an old
one, when the usher appeared at the door of the cabinet. "What is the
matter?" inquired the king, "and why do you presume to come when I have
not summoned you?"

"Sire," said the usher, "your majesty desired me to permit M. le Comte
de la Fere to pass freely on any and every occasion, when he might wish
to speak to your majesty."

"Well, monsieur?"

"M. le Comte de la Fere is now waiting to see your majesty."

The king and Saint-Aignan at this reply exchanged a look which betrayed
more uneasiness than surprise. Louis hesitated for a moment, but
immediately afterward, seeming to make up his mind, he said:

"Go, Saint-Aignan, and find Louise; inform her of the plot against us;
do not let her be ignorant that Madame will return to her system of
persecutions against her, and that she has set those to work for whom it
would have been far better to have remained neuter."

"Sire--"

"If Louise gets nervous and frightened, reassure her as much as you can;
tell her that the king's affection is an impenetrable shield over her;
if, which I suspect is the case, she already knows everything, or if she
has already been herself subjected to an attack of some kind or other
from any quarter, tell her, be sure to tell her, Saint-Aignan," added
the king, trembling with passion, "tell her, I say, that this time,
instead of defending her, I will avenge her, and that too so terribly
that no one will in future even dare to raise his eyes toward her."

"Is that all, sire?"

"Yes, all. Go as quickly as you can, and remain faithful; for you who
live in the midst of this state of infernal torments have not, like
myself, the hope of the paradise beyond it."

Saint-Aignan exhausted himself almost in protestations of devotion, took
the king's hand, kissed it, and left the room radiant with delight.




CHAPTER LXV.

KING AND NOBILITY.


The king endeavored to recover his self-possession as quickly as
possible, in order to meet M. de la Fere with an undisturbed
countenance. He clearly saw it was not mere chance that had induced the
comte's visit, he had some vague impression of its importance; but he
felt that to a man of Athos' tone of mind, to one of his high order of
intellect, his first reception ought not to present anything either
disagreeable or otherwise than kind and courteous. As soon as the king
had satisfied himself that, as far as appearances were concerned, he was
perfectly calm again, he gave directions to the ushers to introduce the
comte. A few minutes afterward Athos, in full court dress, and with his
breast covered with the orders that he alone had the right to wear at
the court of France, presented himself with so grave and solemn an air,
that the king perceived, at the first glance, that he was not deceived
in his anticipations. Louis advanced a step toward the comte, and, with
a smile, held out his hand to him, over which Athos bowed with the air
of the deepest respect.

"Monsieur le Comte de la Fere," said the king, rapidly, "you are so
seldom here, that it is a real piece of good fortune to see you."

Athos bowed and replied, "I should wish always to enjoy the happiness of
being near your majesty."

The tone, however, in which this reply was conveyed, evidently
signified, "I should wish to be one of your majesty's advisers, to save
you the commission of faults." The king felt it so, and determined in
this man's presence to preserve all the advantages which could be
derived from his command over himself, as well as from his rank and
position.

"I see you have something to say to me," he said.

"Had it not been so, I should not have presumed to present myself before
your majesty."

"Speak quickly; I am anxious to satisfy you," returned the king, seating
himself.

"I am persuaded," replied Athos, in a slightly agitated tone of voice,
"that your majesty will give me every satisfaction."

"Ah!" said the king, with a certain haughtiness of manner, "you have
come to lodge a complaint here, then."

"It would be a complaint," returned Athos, "only in the event of your
majesty--, but if you will deign to permit me, sire, I will repeat the
conversation from the very commencement."

"Do so; I am listening."

"Your majesty will remember that at the period of the Duke of
Buckingham's departure, I had the honor of an interview with you."

"At or about that period, I think I remember you did; only with regard
to the subject of the conversation, I have quite forgotten it."

Athos started, as he replied, "I shall have the honor to remind your
majesty of it. It was with regard to a formal demand I had addressed to
you respecting a marriage which M. de Bragelonne wished to contract with
Mademoiselle de la Valliere."

"Ah!" thought the king, "we have come to it now. I remember," he said,
aloud.

"At that period," pursued Athos, "your majesty was so kind and generous
toward M. de Bragelonne and myself, that not a single word which then
fell from your lips has escaped my memory; and, when I asked your
majesty to accord me Mademoiselle de la Valliere's hand for M. de
Bragelonne, you refused."

"Quite true," said Louis, dryly.

"Alleging," Athos hastened to say, "that the young lady had no position
in society." Louis could hardly force himself to listen patiently.

"That," added Athos, "she had but little fortune." The king threw
himself back in his armchair.

"That her extraction was indifferent." A renewed impatience on the part
of the king.

"And little beauty," added Athos, pitilessly. This last bolt buried
itself deep in the king's heart, and made him almost bound from his
seat.

"You have a good memory, monsieur," he said.

"I invariably have, on all occasions when I have had the distinguished
honor of an interview with your majesty," retorted the comte, without
being in the least disconcerted.

"Very good; it is admitted I said all that."

"And I thanked your majesty for your remarks at the time, because they
testified an interest in M. de Bragelonne, which did him much honor."

"And you may possibly remember," said the king, very deliberately, "that
you had the greatest repugnance for this marriage."

"Quite true, sire."

"And that you solicited my permission, much against your own
inclination?"

"Yes, sire."

"And, finally, I remember, for I have a memory nearly as good as your
own; I remember, I say, that you observed at the time: 'I do not believe
that Mademoiselle de la Valliere loves M. de Bragelonne.' Is that true?"

The blow told well, but Athos did not draw back. "Sire," he said, "I
have already begged your majesty's forgiveness; but there are certain
particulars in that conversation which are only intelligible from the
_denouement_."

"Well, what is the _denouement_, monsieur?"

"This: your majesty then said, that you would defer the marriage out of
regard for M. de Bragelonne's own interests."

The king remained silent. "M. de Bragelonne is now so exceedingly
unhappy that he cannot any longer defer asking your majesty for a
solution of the matter."

The king turned pale; Athos looked at him with fixed attention.

"And what," said the king, with considerable hesitation, "does M. de
Bragelonne request?"

"Precisely the very thing that I came to ask your majesty for at my last
audience, namely, your majesty's consent to his marriage."

The king remained perfectly silent.

"The questions which referred to the different obstacles in the way are
all now quite removed for us," continued Athos. "Mademoiselle de la
Valliere, without fortune, birth, or beauty, is not the less on that
account the only good match in the world for M. de Bragelonne, since he
loves this young girl."

The king pressed his hands impatiently together. "Does your majesty
hesitate?" inquired the comte, without losing a particle either of his
firmness or his politeness.

"I do not hesitate--I refuse," replied the king.

Athos paused a moment, as if to collect himself: "I have had the honor,"
he said, in a mild tone, "to observe to your majesty that no obstacle
now interferes with M. de Bragelonne's affections, and that his
determination seems unalterable."

"There is my will--and that is an obstacle, I should imagine!"

"That is the most serious of all," Athos replied quickly.

"Ah!"

"And may we, therefore, be permitted to ask your majesty, with the
greatest humility, for your reason for this refusal?"

"The reason!--A question to me!" exclaimed the king.

"A demand, sire!"

The king, leaning with both his hands upon the table, said, in a deep
tone of concentrated passion: "You have lost all recollection of what is
usual at court. At court, please to remember, no one ventures to put a
question to the king."

"Very true, sire; but if men do not question, they conjecture."

"Conjecture! What may that mean, monsieur?"

"Very frequently, sire, conjecture with regard to a particular subject
implies a want of frankness on the part of the king--"

"Monsieur!"

"And a want of confidence on the part of the subject," pursued Athos,
intrepidly.

"You are forgetting yourself," said the king, hurried away by his anger
in spite of his control over himself.

"Sire, I am obliged to seek elsewhere for what I thought I should find
in your majesty. Instead of obtaining a reply from you, I am compelled
to make one for myself."

The king rose. "Monsieur le Comte," he said, "I have now given you all
the time I had at my disposal." This was a dismissal.

"Sire," replied the comte, "I have not yet had time to tell your majesty
what I came with the express object of saying, and I so rarely see your
majesty that I ought to avail myself of the opportunity."

"Just now you spoke of conjectures; you are now becoming offensive,
monsieur."

"Oh, sire! offend your majesty! I? Never! All my life through have I
maintained that kings are above all other men, not only from their rank
and power, but from their nobleness of heart and their true dignity of
mind. I never can bring myself to believe that my sovereign, he who
passed his word to me, did so with a mental reservation."

"What do you mean? What mental reservation do you allude to?"

"I will explain my meaning," said Athos, coldly. "If, in refusing
Mademoiselle de la Valliere to Monsieur de Bragelonne, your majesty had
some other object in view than the happiness and fortune of the
vicomte--"

"You perceive, monsieur, that you are offending me."

"If in requiring the vicomte to delay his marriage your majesty's only
object was to remove the gentleman to whom Mademoiselle de la Valliere
was engaged--"

"Monsieur! monsieur!"

"I have heard it said so in every direction, sire. Your majesty's
affection for Mademoiselle de la Valliere is spoken of on all sides."

The king tore his gloves, which he had been biting for some time. "Woe
to those," he cried, "who interfere in my affairs. I have made up my
mind to take a particular course, and I will break through every
obstacle in my way."

"What obstacle?" said Athos.

The king stopped short, like a horse which, having taken the bit between
his teeth and run away, finds it had slipped back again, and that his
career was checked. "I love Mademoiselle de la Valliere," he said,
suddenly, with mingled nobleness of feeling and passion.

"But," interrupted Athos, "that does not preclude your majesty from
allowing M. de Bragelonne to marry Mademoiselle de la Valliere. The
sacrifice is worthy of so great a monarch; it is fully merited by M. de
Bragelonne, who has already rendered great service to your majesty, and
who may well be regarded as a brave and worthy man. Your majesty,
therefore, in renouncing the affection you entertain, offers a proof at
once of generosity, latitude, and good policy."

"Mademoiselle de la Valliere does not love M. de Bragelonne," said the
king, hoarsely.

"Does your majesty know that to be the case?" remarked Athos, with a
searching look.

"I do know it."

"Since a very short time, then; for, doubtlessly, had your majesty known
it when I first preferred my request, you would have taken the trouble
to inform me of it."

"Since a very short time, truly, monsieur."

Athos remained silent for a moment, and then resumed: "In that case, I
do not understand why your majesty should have sent M. de Bragelonne to
London. That exile, and most properly so too, is a matter of
astonishment to every one who regards your majesty's honor with sincere
affection."

"Who presumes to speak of my honor, Monsieur de la Fere?"

"The king's honor, sire, is made up of the honor of his whole nobility.
Whenever the king offends one of his gentlemen, that is, whenever he
deprives him of the smallest particle of his honor, it is from him, from
the king himself, that that portion of honor is stolen."

"Monsieur de la Fere!" said the king, haughtily.

"Sire, you sent M. de Bragelonne to London either before you were
Mademoiselle de la Valliere's lover, or since you have become so."

The king, irritated beyond measure, especially because he felt that he
was mastered, endeavored to dismiss Athos by a gesture.

"Sire," replied the comte, "I will tell you all; I will not leave your
presence until I have been satisfied either by your majesty or by
myself: satisfied, if you prove to me that you are right--satisfied, if
I prove to you that you are wrong. Nay, sire, you cannot but listen to
me. I am old now, and I am attached to everything that is really great
and really powerful in your kingdom. I am a gentleman who shed my blood
for your father and for yourself, without ever having asked a single
favor either from yourself or from your father. I have never inflicted
the slightest wrong or injury on any one in this world, and kings even
are still my debtors. You cannot but listen to me, I repeat. I have come
to ask you for an account of the honor of one of your servants whom you
have deceived by a falsehood, or betrayed by a want of heart or
judgment. I know that these words irritate your majesty, but the facts
themselves are killing us. I know you are endeavoring to find some means
whereby to chastise me for my frankness; but I know also the
chastisement I will implore God to inflict upon you when I relate to Him
your perjury and my son's unhappiness."

The king during these remarks was walking hurriedly to and fro, his hand
thrust into the breast of his coat, his head haughtily raised, his eyes
blazing with wrath. "Monsieur," he cried suddenly, "if I acted toward
you as the king, you would be already punished; but I am only a man, and
I have the right to love in this world every one who loves me--a
happiness which is so rarely found."

"You cannot pretend to such a right as a man any more than as a king,
sire; or if you intended to exercise that right in a loyal manner, you
should have told M. de Bragelonne so, and not have exiled him."

"I think I am condescending in discussing with you, monsieur!"
interrupted Louis XIV., with that majesty of air and manner which he
alone seemed able to give to his look and his voice.

"I was hoping that you would reply to me," said the comte.

"You shall know my reply, monsieur."

"You already know my thoughts on the subject," was the Comte de la
Fere's answer.

"You have forgotten you are speaking to the king, monsieur. It is a
crime."

"You have forgotten you are destroying the lives of two men, sire. It is
a mortal sin."

"Leave the room."

"Not until I have said this: 'Son of Louis XIII., you begin your reign
badly, for you begin it by abduction and disloyalty! My race--myself
too--are now freed from all that affection and respect toward you, which
I made my son swear to observe in the vaults of Saint-Denis, in the
presence of the relics of your noble forefathers. You are now become our
enemy, sire, and henceforth we have nothing to do save with Heaven
alone, our sole master. Be warned.'"

"Do you threaten?"

"Oh, no," said Athos, sadly, "I have as little bravado as fear in my
soul. The God of whom I spoke to you is now listening to me; He knows
that for the safety and honor of your crown I would even yet shed every
drop of blood which twenty years of civil and foreign warfare have left
in my veins. I can well say, then, that I threaten the king as little as
I threaten the man; but I tell you, sire, you lose two servants; for you
have destroyed faith in the heart of the father, and love in the heart
of the son; the one ceases to believe in the royal word, the other no
longer believes in the loyalty of man, or the purity of woman; the one
is dead to every feeling of respect, the other to obedience. Adieu!"

Thus saying, Athos broke his sword across his knee, slowly placed the
two pieces upon the floor, and saluting the king, who was almost choking
from rage and shame, he quitted the cabinet. Louis, who sat near the
table, completely overwhelmed, was several minutes before he could
collect himself; but he suddenly rose and rang the bell violently. "Tell
M. d'Artagnan to come here," he said to the terrified ushers.




CHAPTER LXVI.

AFTER THE STORM.


Our readers will doubtlessly have been asking themselves how it happened
that Athos, of whom not a word has been said for some time past, arrived
so very opportunely at court. We will, without delay, endeavor to
satisfy their curiosity.

Porthos, faithful to his duty as an arranger of affairs, had,
immediately after leaving the Palais Royal, set off to join Raoul at the
Minimes in the Bois de Vincennes, and had related everything, even to
the smallest details, which had passed between Saint-Aignan and himself.
He finished by saying that the message which the king had sent to his
favorite would not probably occasion more than a short delay, and that
Saint-Aignan, as soon as he could leave the king, would not lose a
moment in accepting the invitation which Raoul had sent him. But Raoul,
less credulous than his old friend, had concluded, from Porthos'
recital, that if Saint-Aignan was going to the king, Saint-Aignan would
tell the king everything; and that the king would, therefore, forbid
Saint-Aignan to obey the summons he had received to the hostile meeting.
The consequence of his reflections was, that he had left Porthos to
remain at the place appointed for the meeting, in the very improbable
case that Saint-Aignan would come there; and had endeavored to make
Porthos promise that he would not remain there more than an hour or an
hour and a half at the very longest. Porthos, however, formally refused
to do anything of the kind, but, on the contrary, installed himself in
the Minimes as if he were going to take root there, making Raoul promise
that when he had been to see his father, he would return to his own
apartments, in order that Porthos' servant might know where to find him,
in case M. de Saint-Aignan should happen to come to the rendezvous.

Bragelonne had left Vincennes, and had proceeded at once straight to the
apartments of Athos, who had been in Paris during the last two days, the
comte having been already informed of what, had taken place by a letter
from D'Artagnan. Raoul arrived at his father's; Athos, after having held
out his hand to him, and embraced him most affectionately, made a sign
for him to sit down.

"I know you come to me as a man would go to a friend, vicomte, whenever
he is suffering; tell me, therefore, what it is that brings you now."

The young man bowed, and began his recital; more than once in the course
of it his tears almost choked his utterance, and a sob, checked in his
throat, compelled him to suspend his narrative for a few minutes.
However, he finished at last. Athos most probably already knew how
matters stood, as we have just now said D'Artagnan had already written
to him; but, preserving until the conclusion that calm, unruffled
composure of manner which constituted the almost superhuman side of his
character, he replied, "Raoul, I do not believe there is a word of truth
in the rumors; I do not believe in the existence of what you fear,
although I do not deny that persons most entitled to the fullest credit
have already conversed with me on the subject. In my heart and soul I
think it utterly impossible that the king could be guilty of such an
outrage upon a gentleman. I will answer for the king, therefore, and
will soon bring you back the proof of what I say."

Raoul, wavering like a drunken man between what he had seen with his own
eyes, and the imperturbable faith he had in a man who had never told a
falsehood, bowed, and simply answered, "Go, then, Monsieur le Comte; I
will await your return." And he sat down, burying his face in his hands.
Athos dressed, and then left him, in order to wait upon the king; the
result of that interview is already known to our readers.

When he returned to his lodgings, Raoul, pale and dejected, had not
quitted his attitude of despair. At the sound, however, of the opening
doors, and of his father's footsteps as he approached him, the young man
raised his head. Athos' face was very pale, his head uncovered, and his
manner full of seriousness; he gave his cloak and hat to the lackey,
dismissed him with a gesture, and sat down near Raoul.

"Well, monsieur," inquired the young man, "are you quite convinced now?"

"I am, Raoul; the king loves Mademoiselle de la Valliere."

"He confesses it, then?" cried Raoul.

"Yes," replied Athos.

"And she?"

"I have not seen her."

"No; but the king spoke to you about her. What did he say?"

"He says that she loves him."

"Oh, you see--you see, monsieur!" said the young man, with a gesture of
despair.

"Raoul," resumed the comte, "I told the king, believe me, all that you
yourself could possibly have said; and I believe I did so in becoming
language, though sufficiently firm."

"And what did you say to him, monsieur?"

"I told him, Raoul, that everything was now at an end between him and
ourselves; that you would never serve him again. I told him that I, too,
should remain aloof. Nothing further remains for me, then, than to be
satisfied of one thing."

"What is that, monsieur?"

"Whether you have determined to adopt any steps."

"Any steps? Regarding what?"

"With reference to your disappointed affection, and--to your ideas of
vengeance."

"Oh, monsieur, with regard to my affection, I shall, perhaps, some day
or other, succeed in tearing it from my heart; I trust I shall do so,
aided by Heaven's merciful help, and your wise exhortations. As far as
vengeance is concerned, it occurred to me only when under the influence
of an evil thought, for I could not revenge myself upon the one who is
actually guilty; I have, therefore, already renounced every idea of
revenge."

"And so you no longer think of seeking a quarrel with M. de
Saint-Aignan?"

"No, monsieur; I sent him a challenge; if M. de Saint-Aignan accepts
it, I will maintain it; if he does not take it up, I will leave it where
it is."

"And La Valliere?"

"You cannot, I know, have seriously thought that I should dream of
revenging myself upon a woman?" replied Raoul, with a smile so sad that
a tear started even to the eyes of his father, who had so many times in
the course of his life been bowed beneath his own sorrows and those of
others.

He held out his hand to Raoul, which the latter seized most eagerly.

"And so, Monsieur le Comte, you are quite satisfied that the misfortune
is without a remedy?" inquired the young man.

"Poor boy!" he murmured.

"You think that I still live in hope," said Raoul, "and you pity me. Oh,
it is indeed a horrible suffering for me to despise, as I ought to do,
the one I have loved so devotedly. If I only had but some real cause of
complaint against her, I should be happy, and should be able to forgive
her."

Athos looked at his son with a sorrowful air, for the latter words which
Raoul had just pronounced, seemed to have issued out of his own heart.
At this moment the servant announced M. d'Artagnan. This name sounded
very differently to the ears of Athos and of Raoul. The musketeer
entered the room with a vague smile upon his lips. Raoul paused. Athos
walked toward his friend with an expression of face which did not escape
Bragelonne. D'Artagnan answered Athos' look by an imperceptible movement
of the eyelid; and then, advancing toward Raoul, whom he took by the
hand, he said, addressing both father and son, "Well, you are trying to
console this poor boy, it seems."

"And you, kind and good as usual, are come to help me in my difficult
task."

As he said this, Athos pressed D'Artagnan's hand between both his own;
Raoul fancied he observed in this pressure something beyond the sense
his mere words conveyed.

"Yes," replied the musketeer, smoothing his mustache with the hand that
Athos had left free, "yes, I have come also."

"You are most welcome, chevalier; not for the consolation you bring with
you, but on your own account. I am already consoled," said Raoul; and he
attempted to smile, but the effect was far more sad than any tears
D'Artagnan had ever seen shed.

"That is all well and good, then," said D'Artagnan.

"Only," continued Raoul, "you have arrived just as the comte was about
to give me the details of his interview with the king. You will allow
the comte to continue?" added the young man, as, with his eyes fixed on
the musketeer, he seemed to read into the very depths of his heart.

"His interview with the king?" said D'Artagnan, in a tone so natural and
unassumed that there was no means of suspecting that his astonishment
was feigned. "You have seen the king, then, Athos!"

Athos smiled as he said, "Yes, I have seen him."

"Ah, indeed; you were not aware, then, that the comte had seen his
majesty?" inquired Raoul, half reassured.

"Yes, indeed, quite so."

"In that case I am less uneasy," said Raoul.

"Uneasy--and about what?" inquired Athos.

"Forgive me, monsieur," said Raoul, "but knowing so well the regard and
affection you have for me, I was afraid you might possibly have
expressed somewhat plainly to his majesty my own sufferings and your
indignation, and that the king had consequently--"

"And that the king had consequently?" repeated D'Artagnan; "well, go on,
finish what you were going to say."

"I have now to ask you to forgive me, Monsieur d'Artagnan," said Raoul.
"For a moment, and I cannot help confessing it, I trembled lest you had
come here, not as M. d'Artagnan, but as captain of the musketeers."

"You are mad, my poor boy," cried D'Artagnan, with a burst of laughter,
in which an exact observer might perhaps have wished to have heard a
little more frankness.

"So much the better," said Raoul.

"Yes, mad; and do you know what I would advise you to do?"

"Tell me, monsieur, for the advice is sure to be good as it comes from
you."

"Very good, then; I advise you, after your long journey from England,
after your visit to M. de Guiche, after your visit to Madame, after your
visit to Porthos, after your journey to Vincennes, I advise you, I say,
to take a few hours' rest; go and lie down, sleep for a dozen hours, and
when you wake up, go and ride one of my horses until you have tired him
to death."

And drawing Raoul toward him, he embraced him as he would have done his
own child. Athos did the like; only it was very visible that the kiss
was more affectionate, and the pressure of his lips still warmer with
the father than with the friend. The young man again looked at both his
companions, endeavoring to penetrate their real meaning, or their real
feelings, with the utmost strength of his intelligence; but his look was
powerless upon the smiling countenance of the musketeer, or upon the
calm and composed features of the Comte de la Fere. "Where are you
going, Raoul?" inquired the latter, seeing that Bragelonne was preparing
to go out.

"To my own apartments," replied the latter, in his soft and sad voice.

"We shall be sure to find you there, then, if we should have anything to
say to you?"

"Yes, monsieur; but do you suppose it likely you will have something to
say to me?"

"How can I tell?" said Athos.

"Yes, something fresh to console you with," said D'Artagnan, pushing him
toward the door.

Raoul, observing the perfect composure which marked every gesture of his
two friends, quitted the comte's room, carrying away with him nothing
but the individual feeling of his own particular distress.

"Thank Heaven," he said, "since that is the case, I need only think of
myself."

And wrapping himself in his cloak, in order to conceal from the
passers-by in the streets his gloomy and sorrowful face, he quitted
them, for the purpose of returning to his own rooms, as he had promised
Porthos. The two friends watched the young man as he walked away with a
feeling akin to pity; only each expressed it in a very different way.

"Poor Raoul!" said Athos, sighing deeply.

"Poor Raoul!" said D'Artagnan, shrugging his shoulders.




CHAPTER LXVII.

HEU! MISER!


"Poor Raoul!" had said Athos. "Poor Raoul!" had said D'Artagnan; and, in
point of fact, to be pitied by both these men, Raoul must indeed have
been most unhappy. And therefore, when he found himself alone, face to
face, as it were, with his own troubles, leaving behind him the intrepid
friend and the indulgent father; when he recalled the avowal of the
king's affection, which had robbed him of Louise de la Valliere, whom he
loved so deeply, he felt his heart almost breaking, as indeed we all
have at least once in our lives, at the first illusion destroyed, at our
first affection betrayed. "Oh!" he murmured, "all is over then. Nothing
is now left me in this world. Nothing to look for, nothing to hope for.
Guiche has told me so, my father has told me so, and M. d'Artagnan
likewise. Everything is a mere idle dream in this life. That future
which I have been hopelessly pursuing for the last ten years, a dream!
that union of our hearts, a dream! that life formed of love and
happiness, a dream! Poor fool that I am," he continued, after a pause,
"to dream away my existence aloud, publicly, and in the face of others,
my friends and my enemies--and for what purpose, too? in order that my
friends may be saddened by my troubles, and that my enemies may laugh
at my sorrows. And so my unhappiness will soon become a notorious
disgrace, a public scandal; and who knows but that to-morrow I may not
even be ignominiously pointed at."

And, despite the composure which he had promised his father and
D'Artagnan to observe, Raoul could not resist uttering a few words of
dark menace. "And yet," he continued, "if my name were De Wardes, and if
I had the pliant character and strength of will of M. d'Artagnan, I
should laugh, with my lips at least; I should convince other women that
this perfidious girl, honored by the affection I have wasted on her,
leaves me only one regret, that of having been abused and deceived by
her resemblance of a modest and irreproachable conduct; a few men might
perhaps fawn upon the king by laughing at my expense; I should put
myself on the track of some of those jesters; I should chastise a few of
them, perhaps; the men would fear me, and by the time I had laid three
dying or dead at my feet, I should be adored by the women. Yes, yes,
that indeed would be the proper course to adopt, and the Comte de la
Fere himself would not object to it. Has not he also been tried, in his
earlier days, in the same manner as I have just been tried myself? Did
he not replace affection by intoxication? He has often told me so. Why
should not I replace love by pleasure? He must have suffered as much as
I suffer, even more so, perhaps. The history of one man is the history
of all men, a lengthened trial, more or less so at least, more or less
bitter or sorrowful. The voice of human nature is nothing but one
prolonged cry. But what are the sufferings of others compared to those
from which I am now suffering? Does the open wound in another's breast
soften the pain of the gaping wound in our own? Or does the blood which
is welling from another man's side stanch that which is pouring from our
own? Does the general anguish of our fellow-creatures lessen our own
private and particular anguish? No, no, each suffers on his own account,
each struggles with his own grief, each sheds his own tears.

"And besides," he went on, "what has my life been up to the present
moment? A cold, barren, sterile arena, in which I have always fought for
others, never for myself. Sometimes for a king, sometimes for a woman.
The king has betrayed me, the woman disdained me. Miserable, unhappy
wretch that I am! Women! Can I not make all expiate the crime of one of
their sex? What does that need? To have a heart no longer, or to forget
that I ever had one; to be strong, even against weakness itself; to lean
always, even when one feels that the support is giving way. What is
needed to attain, or succeed in all that? To be young, handsome, strong,
valiant, rich. I am, or shall be, all that. But honor?" he still
continued, "and what is honor after all? A theory which every man
understands in his own way. My father tells me: 'Honor is the respect of
that which is due to others, and particularly of what is due to one's
self.' But Guiche and Manicamp, and Saint-Aignan particularly, would say
to me: 'What's honor? Honor consists in studying and yielding to the
passions and pleasures of one's king.' Honor such as that indeed, is
easy and productive enough. With honor like that I can keep my post at
the court, become a gentleman of the chamber, and accept the command of
a regiment, which may have been presented to me. With honor such as
that, I can be both duke and peer.

"The stain which that woman has just stamped upon me, the grief with
which she has just broken my heart, the heart of the friend and playmate
of her childhood, in no way affect M. de Bragelonne, an excellent
officer, a courageous leader, who will cover himself with glory at the
first encounter, and who will become a hundred times greater than
Mademoiselle de la Valliere is to-day, the mistress of the king, for the
king will not marry her--and the more publicly he will proclaim her as
his mistress, the thicker will become the bandage of shame which he
casts in her face, in the guise of a crown; and in proportion as others
will despise her, as I despise her, I shall be gaining honors in the
field. Alas! we had walked together side by side, she and I, during the
earliest, the brightest, and best portion of our existence, hand in hand
along the charming path of life, covered with the flowers of youth; and
then, alas! we reach a cross road, where she separates herself from me,
in which we have to follow a different route, whereby we become more and
more widely separated from each other. And to attain the end of this
path, oh, Heaven! I am now alone in utter despair, and crushed to the
very earth!"

Such were the sinister reflections in which Raoul indulged, when his
foot mechanically paused at the door of his own dwelling. He had reached
it without remarking the streets through which he had passed, without
knowing how he had come; he pushed open the door, continued to advance,
and ascended the staircase. The staircase, as in most of the houses at
that period, was very dark, and the landings very obscure. Raoul lived
on the first floor; he paused in order to ring. Olivain appeared, took
his sword and cloak from his hands; Raoul himself opened the door which,
from the antechamber, led into a small salon, richly enough furnished
for the salon of a young man, and completely filled with flowers by
Olivain, who, knowing his master's tastes, had shown himself studiously
attentive in gratifying them, without caring whether his master
perceived his attention or not. There was a portrait of La Valliere in
the salon, which had been drawn by herself and given by her to Raoul.
This portrait, fastened above a large easy-chair covered with
dark-colored damask, was the first point toward which Raoul bent his
steps--the first object on which he fixed his eyes. It was, moreover,
Raoul's usual habit to do so; every time he entered his room, this
portrait, before anything else, attracted his attention. This time, as
usual, he walked straight up to the portrait, placed his knees upon the
armchair, and paused to look at it sadly. His arms were crossed upon his
breast, his head slightly thrown back, his eyes filled with tears, his
mouth worked into a bitter smile. He looked at the portrait of one whom
he so tenderly loved; and then all that he had said passed before his
mind again, and all that he had suffered seemed again to assail his
heart; and, after a long silence, he murmured for the third time,
"Miserable, unhappy wretch that I am!"

He had hardly pronounced these words, when he heard the sound of a sigh
and a groan behind him. He turned sharply round, and perceived, in the
angle of the salon, standing up, a bending veiled female figure, which
he had been the means of concealing behind the door as he opened it, and
which he had not perceived as he entered. He advanced toward this
figure, whose presence in his room had not been announced to him; and as
he bowed, and inquired at the same moment who she was, she suddenly
raised her head, and removed the veil from her face, revealing her pale
and sorrow-stricken features. Raoul staggered back, as if he had seen a
ghost.

"Louise!" he cried, in a tone of such utter despair, that one could
hardly have thought that the human voice were capable of so desponding a
cry, without some fibers of the human heart snapping.




CHAPTER LXVIII.

WOUNDS UPON WOUNDS.


Mademoiselle de La Valliere--for it was indeed she--advanced a few steps
toward him. "Yes--Louise," she murmured.

But this interval, short as it had been, was quite sufficient for Raoul
to recover himself. "You, mademoiselle?" he said; and then added, in an
indefinable tone, "You here!"

"Yes, Raoul," the young girl replied, "I have been waiting for you."

"I beg your pardon. When I came into the room I was not aware--"

"I know--but I entreated Olivain not to tell you--" She hesitated; and
as Raoul did not attempt to interrupt her, a moment's silence ensued,
during which the sound of their throbbing hearts might have been heard,
not in unison with each other, but the one beating as violently as the
other. It was for Louise to speak, and she made an effort to do so.

"I wished to speak to you," she said. "It was absolutely necessary that
I should see you--myself--alone. I have not hesitated adopting a step
which must remain secret; for no one, except yourself, could understand
my motive, Monsieur de Bragelonne."

"In fact, mademoiselle," Raoul stammered out, almost breathless from
emotion, "as far as I am concerned, and despite the good opinion you
have of me, I confess--"

"Will you do me the great kindness to sit down and listen to me?" said
Louise, interrupting him with her soft, sweet voice.

Bragelonne looked at her for a moment; then, mournfully shaking his
head, he sat, or rather fell down, on a chair. "Speak," he said.

She cast a glance all round her. This look was a timid entreaty, and
implored secrecy far more effectually than her expressed words had done
a few minutes before. Raoul rose, and went to the door, which he opened.
"Olivain," he said, "I am not within for any one." And then, turning
toward Louise, he added, "Is not that what you wished?"

Nothing could have produced a greater effect upon Louise than these few
words, which seemed to signify, "You see that I still understand you."
She passed a handkerchief across her eyes, in order to remove a
rebellious tear which she could not restrain; and then, having collected
herself for a moment, she said. "Raoul, do not turn your kind, frank
look away from me. You are not one of those men who despise a woman for
having given her heart to another, even though her affection might
render him unhappy, or might wound his pride." Raoul did not reply.

"Alas!" continued La Valliere, "it is only too true, my cause is a bad
one, and I cannot tell in what way to begin. It will be better for me,
I think, to relate to you, very simply, everything that has befallen me.
As I shall speak but the pure and simple truth, I shall always find my
path clear before me in the obscurity, hesitation, and obstacles which I
have to brave in order to solace my heart, which is full to overflowing,
and wishes to pour itself out at your feet."

Raoul continued to preserve the same unbroken silence. La Valliere
looked at him with an air that seemed to say, "Encourage me; for pity's
sake, but a single word!" But Raoul did not open his lips; and the young
girl was obliged to continue:

"Just now," she said, "M. de Saint-Aignan came to me by the king's
directions." She cast down her eyes as she said this; while Raoul, on
his side, turned his away, in order to avoid looking at her. "M. de
Saint-Aignan came to me from the king," she repeated, "and told me that
you knew all;" and she attempted to look Raoul in the face, after
inflicting this further wound upon him, in addition to the many others
he had already received; but it was impossible to meet Raoul's eyes.

"He told me you were incensed with me--and justly so, I admit."

This time Raoul looked at the young girl, and a smile full of disdain
passed across his lips.

"Oh!" she continued, "I entreat you, do not say that you have had any
other feeling against me than that of anger merely. Raoul, wait until I
have told you all--wait until I have said to you all that I had to
say--all that I came to say."

Raoul, by the strength of his own iron will, forced his features to
assume a calmer expression, and the disdainful smile upon his lip passed
away.

"In the first place," said La Valliere, "in the first place, with my
hands raised in entreaty toward you, with my forehead bowed to the
ground before you, I entreat you, as the most generous, as the noblest
of men, to pardon, to forgive me. If I have left you in ignorance of
what was passing in my own bosom, never, at least, would I have
consented to deceive you. Oh! I entreat you, Raoul--I implore you on my
knees--answer me one word, even though you wronged me in doing so.
Better, far better, an injurious word from your lips, than a suspicion
from your heart."

"I admire your subtlety of expression, mademoiselle," said Raoul, making
an effort to remain calm. "To leave another in ignorance that you are
deceiving him is loyal; but to deceive him--it seems that that would be
very wrong, and that you would not do it."

"Monsieur, for a long time I thought that I loved you better than
anything else; and so long as I believed in my affection for you, I told
you that I loved you. I could have sworn it on the altar; but a day came
when I was undeceived."

"Well, on that day, mademoiselle, knowing that I still continued to love
you, true loyalty of conduct ought to have obliged you to tell me you
had ceased to love me."

"But on that day, Raoul--on that day, when I read in the depths of my
own heart, when I confessed to myself that you no longer filled my mind
entirely, when I saw another future before me than that of being your
friend, your life-long companion, your wife--on that day, Raoul, you
were not, alas! anymore beside me."

"But you knew where I was, mademoiselle; you could have written to me."

"Raoul, I did not dare to do so. Raoul, I have been weak and cowardly. I
knew you so thoroughly--I knew how devotedly you loved me, that I
trembled at the bare idea of the grief I was going to cause you; and
that is so true, Raoul, that at this very moment I am now speaking to
you, bending thus before you, my heart crushed in my bosom, my voice
full of sighs, my eyes full of tears, it is so perfectly true, that I
have no other defense than my frankness, I have no other sorrow greater
than that which I read in your eyes."

Raoul attempted to smile.

"No!" said the young girl, with a profound conviction, "no, no; you will
not do me so foul a wrong as to disguise your feelings before me now!
You loved me; you were sure of your affection for me, you did not
deceive yourself; you did not lie to your own heart--while I--I--" And
pale as death, her arms thrown despairingly above her head, she fell
upon her knees.

"While you," said Raoul, "you told me you loved me, and yet you loved
another."

"Alas, yes!" cried the poor girl; "alas, yes! I do love another; and
that other--oh! for Heaven's sake let me say it, Raoul, for it is my
only excuse--that other I love better than my own life, better than my
own soul even. Forgive my fault, or punish my treason, Raoul. I came
here in no way to defend myself, but merely to say to you: 'You know
what it is to love!'--in that case I love! I love to that degree that I
would give my life, my very soul, to the man I love. If he should ever
cease to love me, I shall die of grief and despair, unless Heaven come
to my assistance; unless Heaven does show pity upon me. Raoul, I came
here to submit myself to your will, whatever it might be--to die, if it
were your wish I should die. Kill me then, Raoul! if in your heart you
believe I deserve death."

"Take care, mademoiselle!" said Raoul; "the woman who invites death is
one who has nothing but her heart's blood to offer to her deceived and
betrayed lover."

"You are right," she said.

Raoul uttered a deep sigh, as he exclaimed, "And you love without being
able to forget!"

"I love without a wish to forget; without a wish ever to love any one
else," replied La Valliere.

"Very well," said Raoul. "You have said to me, in fact, all you had to
say; all I could possibly wish to know. And now, mademoiselle, it is I
who ask your forgiveness, for it is I who have almost been an obstacle
in your life; I, too, who have been wrong, for, in deceiving myself, I
helped to deceive you."

"Oh!" said La Valliere, "I do not ask you so much as that, Raoul."

"I only am to blame, mademoiselle," continued Raoul; "better informed
than yourself of the difficulties of this life, I should have
enlightened you. I ought not to have relied upon uncertainty; I ought
to have extracted an answer from your heart, while I hardly even sought
an acknowledgment from your lips. Once more, mademoiselle, it is I who
ask your forgiveness."

"Impossible, impossible!" she cried, "you are mocking me."

"How, impossible!"

"Yes, it is impossible to be good, and excellent, and perfect to such a
degree as that."

"Take care!" said Raoul, with a bitter smile, "for presently you may say
perhaps that I did not love you."

"Oh! you love me like an affectionate brother; let me hope that, Raoul."

"As a brother! undeceive yourself, Louise. I loved you as a lover--as a
husband, with the deepest, the truest, the fondest affection."

"Raoul, Raoul!"

"As a brother! Oh, Louise! I loved you so deeply, that I would have shed
my blood for you, drop by drop; I would, oh! how willingly, have
suffered myself to be torn in pieces for your sake, have sacrificed my
very future for you. I loved you so deeply, Louise, that my heart feels
crushed and dead within me--that my faith in human nature is gone--that
my eyes seem to have lost their light; I loved you so deeply, that I now
no longer see, think of, care for, anything, either in this world or in
the next."

"Raoul--dear Raoul! spare me, I implore you!" cried La Valliere. "Oh! if
I had but known."

"It is too late, Louise; you love, you are happy in your affection; I
read your happiness through your tears--behind the tears which the
loyalty of your nature makes you shed; I feel the sighs which your
affection breathes forth. Louise, Louise, you have made me the most
abjectly wretched man living; leave me, I entreat you. Adieu! Adieu!"

"Forgive me! oh, forgive me, Raoul, for what I have done."

"Have I not done more? Have I not told you that I loved you still?" She
buried her face in her hands.

"And to tell you that--do you hear me, Louise?--to tell you that, at
such a moment as this, to tell you that, as I have told you, is to
pronounce my own sentence of death. Adieu!" La Valliere wished to hold
out her hands to him.

"We ought not to see each other again in this world," he said; and as
she was on the point of calling out in bitter agony at this remark, he
placed his hand on her mouth to stifle the exclamation. She pressed her
lips upon it and fell fainting to the ground. "Olivain," said Raoul,
"take this young lady and bear her to the carriage which is waiting for
her at the door." As Olivain lifted her up, Raoul made a movement as if
to dart toward La Valliere, in order to give her a first and last kiss,
but, stopping abruptly, he said, "No! she is not mine. I am not a thief,
like the king of France." And he returned to his room, while the lackey
carried La Valliere, still fainting, to the carriage.




CHAPTER LXIX.

WHAT RAOUL HAD GUESSED.


As soon as Raoul had quitted Athos and D'Artagnan, and as soon as the
two exclamations which had followed his departure had escaped their
lips, they found themselves face to face alone. Athos immediately
resumed the earnest air that he had assumed at D'Artagnan's arrival.

"Well," he said, "what have you come to announce to me, my friend?"

"I?" inquired D'Artagnan.

"Yes; I do not see you in this way without some reason for it," said
Athos, smiling.

"The deuce!" said D'Artagnan.

"I will place you at your ease. The king is furious, I suppose?"

"Well, I must say he is not altogether pleased."

"And you have come to arrest me, then?"

"My dear friend, you have hit the very mark."

"Oh, I expected it! I am quite ready to go with you."

"Deuce take it!" said D'Artagnan, "what a hurry you are in."

"I am afraid of delaying you," said Athos, smiling.

"I have plenty of time. Are you not curious, besides, to know how things
went on between the king and me?"

"If you will be good enough to tell me, I will listen with the greatest
pleasure," said Athos, pointing out to D'Artagnan a large chair, into
which the latter threw himself, assuming the easiest possible attitude.

"Well, I will do so willing enough," continued D'Artagnan, "for the
conversation is rather curious, I must say. In the first place, the king
sent for me."

"As soon as I had left?"

"You were just going down the last steps of the staircase, as the
musketeers told me. I arrived. My dear Athos, he was not red in the face
merely, he was positively purple. I was not aware, of course, of what
had passed; only, on the ground, lying on the floor, I saw a sword
broken in two.

"'Captain d'Artagnan,' cried the king, as soon as he saw me.

"'Sire,' I replied.

"'M. de la Fere has just left me; he is an insolent man.'

"'An insolent man!' I exclaimed, in such a tone that the king stopped
suddenly short.

"'Captain d'Artagnan,' resumed the king, with his teeth clenched, 'you
will be good enough to listen to and hear me.'

"'That is my duty, sire.'

"'I have, out of consideration for M. de la Fere, wished to spare him,
of whom I still retain some kind recollections, the discredit of being
arrested in my palace. You will therefore take a carriage.' At this I
made a slight movement.

"'If you object to arrest him yourself,' continued the king, 'send me my
captain of the guards here.'

"'Sire,' I replied, 'there is no necessity for the captain of the
guards, since I am on duty.'

"'I should not like to annoy you,' said the king, kindly, 'for you have
always served me well, Monsieur d'Artagnan.'

"'You do not "annoy" me, sire,' I replied; 'I am on duty, that is all.'

"'But,' said the king, in astonishment, 'I believe the comte is your
friend?'

"'If he were my father, sire, it would not make me less on duty than I
am.'

"The king looked at me; he saw how unmoved my face was, and seemed
satisfied. 'You will arrest M. le Comte de la Fere, then?' he inquired.

"'Most certainly, sire, if you give me the order to do so.'

"'Very well; I order you to do so.'

"I bowed and replied, 'Where is the comte, sire?'

"'You will look for him.'

"'And I am to arrest him, wherever he may be?'

"'Yes; but try that he may be at his own house. If he should have
started for his own estate, leave Paris at once, and arrest him on his
way thither.'

"I bowed; but as I did not move, he said, 'Well, what are you waiting
for?'

"'For the order to arrest the comte, signed by yourself.'

"The king seemed annoyed; for, in point of fact, it was the exercise of
a fresh act of authority; a repetition of the arbitrary act, if, indeed,
it is to be considered as such. He took hold of his pen slowly, and
evidently in no very good temper; and then he wrote, 'Order for M. le
Chevalier d'Artagnan, captain of my musketeers, to arrest M. le Comte de
la Fere, wherever he is to be found.' He then turned toward me; but I
was looking on without moving a muscle of my face. In all probability he
thought he perceived something like bravado in my tranquil manner, for
he signed hurriedly; and then, handing me the order, he said, 'Go,
monsieur!' I obeyed--and here I am."

Athos pressed his friend's hand. "Well, let us set off," he said.

"Oh! surely," said D'Artagnan, "you must have some trifling matters to
arrange before you leave your apartments in this manner."

"I?--not at all."

"Why not?"

"Why, you know, D'Artagnan, that I have always been a very simple
traveler on this earth, ready to go to the end of the world by the order
of my sovereign; ready to quit it at the summons of my Maker. What does
a man who is thus prepared require in such a case?--a portmanteau or a
shroud. I am ready at this moment, as I have always been, my dear
friend, and can accompany you at once."

"But Bragelonne--"

"I have brought him up in the same principles I laid down for my own
guidance; and you observed that as soon as he perceived you he guessed,
that very moment, the motive of your visit. We have thrown him off his
guard for a moment; but do not be uneasy, he is sufficiently prepared
for my disgrace to be too much alarmed at it. So let us go."

"Very well, 'let us go.'" said D'Artagnan, quietly.

"As I broke my sword in the king's presence, and threw the pieces at his
feet, I presume that will dispense with the necessity of delivering it
over to you."

"You are quite right; and besides that, what the deuce do you suppose I
could do with your sword?"

"Am I to walk behind, or before you?" inquired Athos, laughing.

"You will walk arm-in-arm with me," replied D'Artagnan, as he took the
comte's aim to descend the staircase; and in this manner they arrived at
the landing. Grimaud, whom they had met in the anteroom, looked at them,
as they went out together in this manner, with some little uneasiness;
his experience of affairs was quite sufficient to give him good reason
to suspect that there was something wrong.

"Ah! is that you, Grimaud?" said Athos, kindly. "We are going--"

"To take a turn in my carriage," interrupted D'Artagnan, with a friendly
nod of the head.

Grimaud thanked D'Artagnan by a grimace, which was evidently intended
for a smile, and accompanied both the friends to the door. Athos entered
first into the carriage; D'Artagnan followed him, without saying a word
to the coachman. The departure had taken place so quietly that it
excited no disturbance or attention even in the neighborhood. When the
carriage had reached the quays, "You are taking me to the Bastille, I
perceive," said Athos.

"I?" said D'Artagnan, "I take you wherever you may choose to go; nowhere
else. I can assure you."

"What do you mean?" said the comte, surprised.

"Why, surely, my dear friend," said D'Artagnan, "you quite understand
that I undertook the mission with no other object in view than that of
carrying it out exactly as you liked. You surely did not expect that I
was going to get you thrown into prison like that, brutally, and without
any reflection. If I had not anticipated that, I should have let the
captain of the guards undertake it."

"And so--?" said Athos.

"And so, I repeat again, we will go wherever you may choose."

"My dear friend," said Athos, embracing D'Artagnan, "how like you that
is."

"Well, it seems simple enough to me. The coachman will take you to the
barrier of the Cours-la-Reine; you will find a horse there which I have
ordered to be kept ready for you; with that horse, you will be able to
do three posts without stopping; and I, on my side, will take care not
to return to the king, to tell him that you have gone away, until the
very moment it will be impossible to overtake you. In the meantime you
will have reached Havre, and from Havre across to England, where you
will find the charming residence of which M. Monk made me a present,
without speaking of the hospitality which King Charles will not fail to
show you. Well, what do you think of this project?"

Athos shook his head, and then said, smiling as he did so, "No, no; take
me to the Bastille."

"You are an obstinate-headed fellow, dear Athos," returned D'Artagnan;
"reflect for a few moments."
