are too wise to destroy one who is both useful and obedient."

The suggestion had been made by the order of Taxmar, and the answer was
duly reported to him.

It took a long time to satisfy the chief that this man who seemed so
extraordinary was really what he seemed. He came at last to trust him
wholly, even making him the steward of his household and leaving him to
protect his women in his absence. Finding the chief thus disposed,
Aguilar ventured a suggestion. Guerrera had won great favor with his
master by his valor in war. Aguilar was shrewd enough to know that
though it was very pleasant to have his master's confidence, if anything
happened to Taxmar he might be all the worse off. The only sure way to
win the respect of these barbarians was by efficiency as a soldier.
Taxmar upon request gave his steward the military outfit of the
Mayas--bow and arrows, wicker-work shield, and war-club, with a dagger
of obsidian, a volcanic stone very hard and capable of being made very
keen of edge, but brittle. Jeronimo when a boy had been an expert
archer, and his old skill soon returned. He also remembered warlike
devices and stratagems he had seen and heard of. Old soldiers chatting
with his father in the purple twilight had often fought their battles
over again, and nearly every form of military tactics then known to
civilized armies had been used in the war in Granada. Naturally the
young friar had heard more or less discussion of military campaigns in
Darien. His suggestions were so much to the point that Taxmar had an
increased respect for the gods of that unknown land of his. If they
could do so much for this slave, without even demanding any offerings,
they must be very different from the gods of the Mayas.

In reply to Taxmar's questions, Aguilar, who now spoke the language
quite well, endeavored to explain the nature of his religion. Not many
of the Spaniards who expected to convert the Indians went so far as
this. If they could by any means whatever make their subjects call
themselves Christians and observe the customs of the Church, it was all
they attempted. Taxmar was not the sort of person to be converted in
that informal way. He demanded reasons. If Aguilar advised him against
having unhappy people murdered to bribe the gods for their help in the
coming campaign, he wished to know what the objection was, and what the
white chiefs did in such a case. The idea of sacrificing to one's god,
not the lives of men, but one's own will and selfish desires, was
entirely new to him.

While Jeronimo was still wrestling with the problem of making the
Christian faith clear to one single Indian out of the multitudes of the
heathen, a neighboring cacique appeared on the scene,--jealous, angry
and suspicious. He had heard, he said, that Taxmar sought the aid of a
stranger, who worshiped strange gods, in a campaign directed against his
neighbors. He wished to know if Taxmar considered this right. In his own
opinion this stranger ought to be sacrificed to the gods of the Mayas
after the usual custom, or the gods would be angry,--and then no one
knew what would happen.

Aguilar thought it possible that Taxmar might reply that the conduct of
an army was no one's business but the chief's. That would be in line
with the cacique's character as he knew it. He did not expect that any
chief in that ancient land would dare to defy its gods openly.

Taxmar did not meet the challenge at once. His deep set opaque black
eyes and mastiff-like mouth looked as immovable as the carving on the
basalt stool upon which he sat. The cacique thought he was impressed,
and concluded triumphantly,

"Who can resist the gods? Let the altar drink the blood of the stranger;
it is sweet to them and they will sleep, and not wake."

"I shall do nothing of the kind," said Taxmar, the clicking, bubbling
Maya talk dropping like water on hot stones. "When a man serves me well,
I do not reward him with death. My slave's wisdom is greater than the
craft of Coyotl, and if his gods help me it is because they know enough
to do right."

The other chief went home in rage and disappointment and offended
dignity.

No one, who has not tried it, can imagine the sensation of living in a
hostile land, removed from all that is familiar. Until his captivity
began Aguilar had never been obliged to act for himself. He had always
been under the authority of a superior. He had questioned and wondered,
seen the injustice of this thing and that, but only in his own mind.
When everything in his past life had been swept away at one stroke, his
faith alone was left him in the wrecked and distorted world. He had
never dreamed that Taxmar was learning to respect that faith.

The neighboring cacique now joined Taxmar's enemies with all his army,
and the councilors took alarm and repeated the suggestion that Aguilar
should be sacrificed to make sure of the help of the gods. Taxmar again
spoke plainly.

"Our gods," he said, "have helped us when we were strong and powerful
and sacrificed many captives in their honor. This man's gods help him
when he is a slave, alone, far from his people, with nothing to offer in
sacrifice. We will see now what they will do for my army."

In the battle which followed, the cacique adopted a plan which Aguilar
suggested. That loyal follower was placed in command of a force hidden
in the woods near the route by which the enemy would arrive. The hostile
forces marched past it, and charged upon the front of Taxmar's army. It
gave way, and they rushed in with triumphant yells. When they were well
past, Aguilar's division came out of the bushes and took them in the
rear. At the same instant Taxmar and his warriors faced about and sprang
at them like a host of panthers. There was a great slaughter, many
prisoners were taken, among them the cacique himself and many men of
importance; and Taxmar made a little speech to them upon the wisdom of
the white man's gods.

In the years that passed the captive's hope of escape faded. Once he had
thought he might slip away and reach the coast, but he was too carefully
watched. Even if he could get to the sea from so far inland, without the
help of the natives, he could not reach any Spanish colony without a
boat. There were rumors of strange ships filled with bearded men, whose
weapons were the thunder and the lightning. Old people wagged their
heads and recalled a prophecy of the priest Chilam Cambal many years
ago, that a white people, bearded, would come from the east, to overturn
the images of the gods, and conquer the land.

Hernando de Cordova's squadron came and went; Grijalva's came and went;
Aguilar heard of them but never saw them. At last, seven long years
after he came to Jamacana, three coast Indians from the island of
Cozumel came timidly to the cacique with gifts and a letter. The gifts
were for Taxmar, to buy his Christian slaves, if he had any, and the
letter was for them.

Hernando Cortes, coming from Cuba with a squadron to discover and
conquer the land ruled by the Lord of the Golden House, had stopped at
Cozumel and there heard of white men held as captives somewhere inland.
He had persuaded the Indians to send messengers for them, saying that if
the captives were sent to the sea-coast, at the cape of Cotoche, he
would leave two caravels there eight days, to wait for them.

While Aguilar read this letter the Indians were telling of the
water-houses of the strangers, their sharp weapons, their command of
thunder and lightning, and the wonderful presents they gave in exchange
for what they wanted. Aguilar's account of the squadron was even more
complete. He described the dress of the Spaniards, their weapons and
their manner of life without having seen them at all, and the Indians,
when asked, said it was so.

Taxmar's acute mind was adjusting itself to this event, which was not
altogether unexpected. He had heard more than Aguilar had about the
previous visits of the Spaniards to that coast. He asked Aguilar if he
thought that the strange warriors would accept him, their countryman, as
ambassador, and deal mildly with Taxmar and his people, if they let him
go. Aguilar answered that he thought they would.

Now freedom was within his grasp, and only one thing delayed him. He
could not leave his comrade Guerrero behind. The sailor had married the
daughter of a chief and become a great man in his adopted country.
Aguilar sent Indian messengers with the letter and a verbal message, and
waited.

Guerrero had never known much about reading, and he had forgotten nearly
all he knew. He understood, however, that he could now return to Spain.
Before his eyes rose a picture of the lofty austere sierras, the sunny
vineyards, the wine, so unlike pulque, the bread, so unlike flat cakes
of maize, the maidens of Barcelona and Malaga, so very different from
tattooed Indian girls. And then he surveyed his own brawny arms and
legs, and felt of his own grotesquely ornamented countenance.

To please the taste of his adopted people he had let himself be
decorated as they were, for life,--with tattooed pictures, with
nose-ring, with ear-rings of gold set with rudely cut gems and heavy
enough to drag down the lobe of the ear. He would cut a figure in the
streets of Seville. The little boys would run after him as if he were a
show. He grinned, sighed mightily, and sent word to Aguilar that he
thought it wiser to stay where he was. Aguilar set out for the coast
with the Cozumel Indians, but this delay had consumed all of the eight
days appointed, and when they reached Point Cotoche the caravels had
gone.

But a broken canoe and a stave from a water-barrel lay on the beach, and
with the help of the messengers Aguilar patched up the canoe, and with
the board for a paddle, made the canoe serve his need. Following the
coast they came to the narrowest part of the channel between the
mainland and Cozumel, and in spite of a very strong current got across
to the island. No sooner had they landed when some Spaniards rushed out
of the bushes, with drawn swords. The Indians were about to fly in
terror, but Aguilar called to them in their own language to have no
fear. Then he spoke to the Spaniards in broken Castilian, saying that he
was a Christian, fell on his knees and thanked God that he had lived to
hear his own language again.

The Spaniards looked at this strange figure in absolute bewilderment. He
was to all appearance an Indian. His long hair was braided and wound
about his head, he had a bow in his hand, a quiver of arrows on his
back, a bag of woven grass-work hung about his neck by a long cord. The
pattern of the weaving was a series of interwoven crosses. Cortes,
giving up hope of rescuing any Christian captives, had left the island,
but one of his ships had sprung a leak and he had put back. When he saw
an Indian canoe coming he had sent scouts to see what it might be. They
now led Jeronimo Aguilar and his Indian companions into the presence of
the captain-general and his staff. Aguilar saluted Cortes in the Indian
fashion, by carrying his hand from the ground to his forehead as he
knelt crouching before him. But Cortes, when he understood who this man
was, raised him to his feet, embraced him and flung about his shoulders
his own cloak. Aguilar became his interpreter, and thus was the prophecy
fulfilled concerning the gods of Taxmar.

[Illustration: "CORTES FLUNG ABOUT HIS SHOULDERS HIS OWN
CLOAK."--_Page_ 146]


NOTE

The story of Jeronimo Aguilar follows the actual facts very closely. The
account of his adventures will be found in Irving's "Life of Columbus"
and other works dealing with the history of the Spanish conquests.




A LEGEND OF MALINCHE


    O sorcerer Time, turn backward to the shore
      Where it is always morning, and the birds
    Are troubadours of all the hidden lore
      Deeper than any words!

    There lived a maiden once,--O long ago,
      Ere men were grown too wise to understand
    The ancient language that they used to know
      In Quezalcoatl's land.

    Though her own mother sold her for a slave,
      Her own bright beauty as her only dower,
    Into her slender hands the conqueror gave
      A more than queenly power.

    Between her people and the enemy--
      The fierce proud Spaniard on his conquest bent--
    Interpreter and interceder, she
      In safety came and went.

    And still among the wild shy forest folk
    The birds are singing of her, and her name
    Lives in that language that her people spoke
      Before the Spaniard came.

    She is not dead, the daughter of the Sun,--
      By love and loyalty divinely stirred,
    She lives forever--so the legends run,--
      Returning as a bird.

    Who but a white bird in her seaward flight
      Saw, borne upon the shoulders of the sea,
    Three tiny caravels--how small and light
      To hold a world in fee!

    Who but the quezal, when the Spaniards came
      And plundered all the white imperial town,
    Saw in a storm of red rapacious flame
      The Aztec throne go down!

    And when the very rivers talked of gold,
      The humming-bird upon her lichened nest
    Strange tales of wild adventure never told
      Hid in her tiny breast.

    The mountain eagle, circling with the stars,
      Watched the great Admiral swiftly come and go
    In his light ship that set at naught the bars
      Wrought by a giant foe.

    Dull are our years and hard to understand,
      We dream no more of mighty days to be,
    And we have lost through delving in the land
      The wisdom of the sea.

    Yet where beyond the sea the sunset burns,
      And the trees talk of kings dead long ago,
    Malinche sings among the giant ferns--
      Ask of the birds--they know!




XI

THE THUNDER BIRDS


"Glory is all very well," said Juan de Saavedra to Pedro de Alvarado as
the squadron left the island of Cozumel, "but my familiar spirit tells
me that there is gold somewhere in this barbaric land or Cortes would
not be with us."

Alvarado's peculiarly sunny smile shone out. He was a ruddy
golden-haired man, a type unusual in Spaniards, and the natives showed a
tendency to revere him as the sun-god. Life had treated him very well,
and he had an abounding good-nature.

"It will be the better," he said comfortably, "if we get both gold and
glory. I confess I have had my doubts of the gold, for after all, these
Indians may have more sense than they appear to have."

"People often do, but in what way, especially?"

"_Amigo_, put yourself in the place of one of these caciques, with white
men bedeviling you for a treasure which you never even troubled yourself
to pick up when it lay about loose. What can be more easy than to tell
them that there is plenty of it somewhere else--in the land of your
enemies? That is Pizarro's theory, at any rate."

Saavedra laughed. "Pizarro is wise in his way, but as I have said,
Cortes is our commander."

"What has that to do with it?"

"If you had been at Salamanca in his University days you wouldn't ask.
He never got caught in a scrape, and he always got what he was after."

"And kept it?"

"Is that a little more of Pizarro's wisdom? No; he always shared the
spoils as even-handedly as you please. But if any of us lost our heads
and got into a pickle he never was concerned in it--or about it."

