they succeed, he himself might perish. Even then they obeyed him,
so great was their reverence for his sacred royalty, and for a while
attacked the Spaniards no more. But further than this they would not
go. If Montezuma forbade them to kill the Spaniards, at least they
determined to starve them out, and from that hour a strait blockade
was kept up against the palace. Hundreds of the Aztec soldiers had been
slain already, but the loss was not all upon their side, for some of the
Spaniards and many of the Tlascalans had fallen into their hands. As
for these unlucky prisoners, their end was swift, for they were taken at
once to the temples of the great teocalli, and sacrificed there to the
gods in the sight of their comrades.

Now it was that Cortes returned with many more men, for he had conquered
Narvaez, whose followers joined the standard of Cortes, and with them
others, one of whom I had good reason to know. Cortes was suffered to
rejoin his comrades in the palace of Axa without attack, I do not know
why, and on the following day Cuitlahua, Montezuma's brother, king
of Palapan, was released by him that he might soothe the people. But
Cuitlahua was no coward. Once safe outside his prison walls, he called
the council together, of whom the chief was Guatemoc.

There they resolved on war to the end, giving it out that Montezuma had
forfeited his kingdom by his cowardice, and on that resolve they acted.
Had it been taken but two short months before, by this date no Spaniard
would have been left alive in Tenoctitlan. For after Marina, the love of
Cortes, whose subtle wit brought about his triumph, it was Montezuma
who was the chief cause of his own fall, and of that of the kingdom of
Anahuac.



CHAPTER XX

OTOMIE'S COUNSEL


On the day after the return of Cortes to Mexico, before the hour of
dawn I was awakened from my uneasy slumbers by the whistling cries of
thousands of warriors and the sound of atabals and drums.

Hurrying to my post of outlook on the little pyramid, where Otomie
joined me, I saw that the whole people were gathered for war. So far
as the eye could reach, in square, market place, and street, they were
massed in thousands and tens of thousands. Some were armed with slings,
some with bows and arrows, others with javelins tipped with copper,
and the club set with spikes of obsidian that is called maqua, and yet
others, citizens of the poorer sort, with stakes hardened in the fire.
The bodies of some were covered with golden coats of mail and mantles of
featherwork, and their skulls protected by painted wooden helms,
crested with hair, and fashioned like the heads of pumas, snakes, or
wolves--others wore escaupils, or coats of quilted cotton, but the
most of them were naked except for a cloth about the loins. On the flat
azoteas, or roofs of houses also, and even on the top of the teocalli of
sacrifice, were bands of men whose part it was to rain missiles into the
Spanish quarters. It was a strange sight to see in that red sunrise, and
one never to be forgotten, as the light flashed from temples and palace
walls, on to the glittering feather garments and gay banners, the points
of countless spears and the armour of the Spaniards, who hurried to and
fro behind their battlements making ready their defence.

So soon as the sun was up, a priest blew a shrill note upon a shell,
which was answered by a trumpet call from the Spanish quarters. Then
with a shriek of rage the thousands of the Aztecs rushed to the attack,
and the air grew dark with missiles. Instantly a wavering line of fire
and smoke, followed by a sound as of thunder, broke from the walls of
the palace of Axa, and the charging warriors fell like autumn leaves
beneath the cannon and arquebuss balls of the Christians.

For a moment they wavered and a great groan went up to heaven, but I saw
Guatemoc spring forward, a banner in his hand, and forming up again they
rushed after him. Now they were beneath the wall of the palace, and the
assault began. The Aztecs fought furiously. Time upon time they strove
to climb the wall, piling up the bodies of the dead to serve them as
ladders, and time upon time they were repulsed with cruel loss. Failing
in this, they set themselves to battering it down with heavy beams, but
when the breach was made and they clustered in it like herded sheep, the
cannon opened fire on them, tearing long lanes through their mass and
leaving them dead by scores. Then they took to the shooting of flaming
arrows, and by this means fired the outworks, but the palace was of
stone and would not burn. Thus for twelve long hours the struggle raged
unceasingly, till the sudden fall of darkness put an end to it, and
the only sight to be seen was the flare of countless torches carried by
those who sought out the dead, and the only sounds to be heard were the
voice of women lamenting, and the groans of the dying.

On the morrow the fight broke out again at dawn, when Cortes sallied
forth with the greater part of his soldiers, and some thousands of
his Tlascalan allies. At first I thought that he aimed his attack at
Montezuma's palace, and a breath of hope went through me, since then it
might become possible for me to escape in the confusion. But this was
not so, his object being to set fire to the houses, from the flat roofs
of which numberless missiles were hailed hourly upon his followers.
The charge was desperate and it succeeded, for the Indians could not
withstand the shock of horsemen any more than their naked skins could
turn the Spaniards' steel. Presently scores of houses were in flames,
and thick columns of smoke rolled up like those that float from the
mouth of Popo. But many of those who rode and ran from the gates of
Axa did not come back thither, for the Aztecs clung to the legs of
the horses and dragged their riders away living. That very day these
captives were sacrificed on the altar of Huitzel, and in the sight of
their comrades, and with them a horse was offered up, which had been
taken alive, and was borne and dragged with infinite labour up the steep
sides of the pyramid. Indeed never had the sacrifices been so many as
during these days of combat. All day long the altars ran red, and all
day long the cries of the victims rang in my ears, as the maddened
priests went about their work. For thus they thought to please the gods
who should give them victory over the Teules.

Even at night the sacrifices continued by the light of the sacred fires,
that from below gave those who wrought them the appearance of devils
flitting through the flames of hell, and inflicting its torments on
the damned, much as they are depicted in the 'Doom' painting of the
resurrection of the dead that is over the chancel arch in this church of
Ditchingham. And hour by hour through the darkness, a voice called out
threats and warnings to the Spaniards, saying, 'Huitzel is hungry for
your blood, ye Teules, ye shall surely follow where ye have seen your
fellows go: the cages are ready, the knives are sharp, and the irons
are hot for the torture. Prepare, ye Teules, for though ye slay many, ye
cannot escape.'

Thus the struggle went on day after day, till thousands of the Aztecs
were dead, and the Spaniards were well nigh worn out with hunger,
war, and wounds, for they could not rest a single hour. At length one
morning, when the assault was at its hottest, Montezuma himself appeared
upon the central tower of the palace, clad in splendid robes and wearing
the diadem. Before him stood heralds bearing golden wands, and about
him were the nobles who attended him in his captivity, and a guard of
Spaniards. He stretched out his hand, and suddenly the fighting was
stayed and a silence fell upon the place, even the wounded ceased from
their groaning. Then he addressed the multitude. What he said I was too
far off to hear, though I learned its purport afterwards. He prayed his
people to cease from war, for the Spaniards were his friends and guests
and would presently leave the city of Tenoctitlan. When these cowardly
words had passed his lips, a fury took his subjects, who for long years
had worshipped him as a god, and a shriek rent the air that seemed to
say two words only:

'Woman! Traitor!'

Then I saw an arrow rush upwards and strike the emperor, and after the
arrow a shower of stones, so that he fell down there upon the tower
roof.

Now a voice cried, 'We have slain our king. Montezuma is dead,' and
instantly with a dreadful wailing the multitude fled this way and that,
so that presently no living man could be seen where there had been
thousands.

I turned to comfort Otomie, who was watching at my side, and had seen
her royal father fall, and led her weeping into the palace. Here we met
Guatemoc, the prince, and his mien was fierce and wild. He was fully
armed and carried a bow in his hand.

'Is Montezuma dead?' I asked.

'I neither know nor care,' he answered with a savage laugh, then added:

'Now curse me, Otomie my cousin, for it was my arrow that smote him
down, this king who has become a woman and a traitor, false to his
manhood and his country.'

Then Otomie ceased weeping and answered:

'I cannot curse you, Guatemoc, for the gods have smitten my father
with a madness as you smote him with your arrow, and it is best that
he should die, both for his own sake and for that of his people. Still,
Guatemoc, I am sure of this, that your crime will not go unpunished,
and that in payment for this sacrilege, you shall yourself come to a
shameful death.'

'It may be so,' said Guatemoc, 'but at least I shall not die betraying
my trust;' and he went.


Now I must tell that, as I believed, this was my last day on earth,
for on the morrow my year of godhead expired, and I, Thomas Wingfield,
should be led out to sacrifice. Notwithstanding all the tumult in the
city, the mourning for the dead and the fear that hung over it like a
cloud, the ceremonies of religion and its feasts were still celebrated
strictly, more strictly indeed than ever before. Thus on this night a
festival was held in my honour, and I must sit at the feast crowned
with flowers and surrounded by my wives, while those nobles who remained
alive in the city did me homage, and with them Cuitlahua, who, if
Montezuma were dead, would now be emperor. It was a dreary meal enough,
for I could scarcely be gay though I strove to drown my woes in drink,
and as for the guests, they had little jollity left in them. Hundreds
of their relatives were dead and with them thousands of the people; the
Spaniards still held their own in the fortress, and that day they had
seen their emperor, who to them was a god, smitten down by one of their
own number, and above all they felt that doom was upon themselves. What
wonder that they were not merry? Indeed no funeral feast could have been
more sad, for flowers and wine and fair women do not make pleasure, and
after all it was a funeral feast--for me.

At length it came to an end and I fled to my own apartments, whither my
three wives followed me, for Otomie did not come, calling me most happy
and blessed who to-morrow should be with myself, that is with my own
godhead, in heaven. But I did not call them blessed, for, rising in
wrath, I drove them away, saying that I had but one comfort left, and it
was that wherever I might go I should leave them behind.

Then I cast myself upon the cushions of my bed and mourned in my fear
and bitterness of heart. This was the end of the vengeance which I had
sworn to wreak on de Garcia, that I myself must have my heart torn from
my breast and offered to a devil. Truly Fonseca, my benefactor, had
spoken words of wisdom when he counselled me to take my fortune and
forget my oath. Had I done so, to-day I might have been my betrothed's
husband and happy in her love at home in peaceful England, instead of
what I was, a lost soul in the power of fiends and about to be offered
to a fiend. In the bitterness of the thought and the extremity of my
anguish I wept aloud and prayed to my Maker that I might be delivered
from this cruel death, or at the least that my sins should be forgiven
me, so that to-morrow night I might rest at peace in heaven.

Thus weeping and praying I sank into a half sleep, and dreamed that I
walked on the hillside near the church path that runs through the garden
of the Lodge at Ditchingham. The whispers of the wind were in the trees
which clothe the bank of the Vineyard Hills, the scent of the sweet
English flowers was in my nostrils and the balmy air of June blew on my
brow. It was night in this dream of mine, and I thought that the moon
shone sweetly on the meadows and the river, while from every side came
the music of the nightingale. But I was not thinking of these delightful
sights and sounds, though they were present in my mind, for my eyes
watched the church path which goes up the hill at the back of the house,
and my heart listened for a footstep that I longed to hear. Then there
came a sound of singing from beyond the hill, and the words of the song
were sad, for they told of one who had sailed away and returned no more,
and presently between the apple trees I saw a white figure on its crest.
Slowly it came towards me and I knew that it was she for whom I waited,
Lily my beloved. Now she ceased to sing, but drew on gently and her face
seemed very sad. Moreover it was the face of a woman in middle life,
but still most beautiful, more beautiful indeed than it had been in the
bloom of youth. She had reached the foot of the hill and was turning
towards the little garden gate, when I came forward from the shadow of
the trees, and stood before her. Back she started with a cry of fear,
then grew silent and gazed into my face.

'So changed,' she murmured; 'can it be the same? Thomas, is it you
come back to me from the dead, or is this but a vision?' and slowly and
doubtingly the dream wraith stretched out her arms as though to clasp
me.

Then I awoke. I awoke and lo! before me stood a fair woman clothed in
white, on whom the moonlight shone as in my dream, and her arms were
stretched towards me lovingly.

'It is I, beloved, and no vision,' I cried, springing from my bed and
clasping her to my breast to kiss her. But before my lips touched hers I
saw my error, for she whom I embraced was not Lily Bozard, my betrothed,
but Otomie, princess of the Otomie, who was called my wife. Then I knew
that this was the saddest and the most bitter of dreams that had been
sent to mock me, for all the truth rushed into my mind. Losing my hold
of Otomie, I fell back upon the bed and groaned aloud, and as I fell I
saw the flush of shame upon her brow and breast. For this woman loved
me, and thus my act and words were an insult to her, who could guess
well what prompted them. Still she spoke gently.

'Pardon me, Teule, I came but to watch and not to waken you. I came also
that I may see you alone before the daybreak, hoping that I might be of
service, or at the least, of comfort to you, for the end draws near. Say
then, in your sleep did you mistake me for some other woman dearer and
fairer than I am, that you would have embraced me?'

'I dreamed that you were my betrothed whom I love, and who is far
away across the sea,' I answered heavily. 'But enough of love and such
matters. What have I to do with them who go down into darkness?'

'In truth I cannot tell, Teule, still I have heard wise men say that if
love is to be found anywhere, it is in this same darkness of death, that
is light indeed. Grieve not, for if there is truth in the faith of which
you have told me or in our own, either on this earth or beyond it, with
the eyes of the spirit you will see your dear before another sun is set,
and I pray that you may find her faithful to you. Tell me now, how
much does she love you? Would SHE have lain by your side on the bed of
sacrifice as, had things gone otherwise between us, Teule, it was my
hope to do?'

'No,' I answered, 'it is not the custom of our women to kill themselves
because their husbands chance to die.'

'Perhaps they think it better to live and wed again,' answered Otomie
very quietly, but I saw her eyes flash and her breast heave in the
moonlight as she spoke.

'Enough of this foolish talk,' I said. 'Listen, Otomie; if you had cared
for me truly, surely you would have saved me from this dreadful doom,
or prevailed on Guatemoc to save me. You are Montezuma's daughter, could
you not have brought it about during all these months that he issued his
royal mandate, commanding that I should be spared?'

'Do you, then, take me for so poor a friend, Teule?' she answered hotly.
'Know that for all these months, by day and by night, I have worked and
striven to find a means to rescue you. Before he became a prisoner I
importuned my father the emperor, till he ordered me from his presence.
I have sought to bribe the priests, I have plotted ways of escape,
ay, and Guatemoc has helped, for he loves you. Had it not been for the
coming of these accursed Teules, and the war that they have levied in
the city, I had surely saved you, for a woman's thought leaps far, and
can find a path where none seems possible. But this war has changed
everything, and moreover the star-readers and diviners of auguries have
given a prophecy which seals your fate. For they have prophesied that
if your blood flows, and your heart is offered at the hour of noon
to-morrow on the altar of Tezcat, our people shall be victorious over
the Teules, and utterly destroy them. But if the sacrifice is celebrated
one moment before or after that propitious hour, then the doom of
Tenoctitlan is sealed. Also they have declared that you must die, not,
according to custom, at the Temple of Arms across the lake, but on the
great pyramid before the chief statue of the god. All this is known
throughout the land; thousands of priests are now offering up prayers
that the sacrifice may be fortunate, and a golden ring has been hung
over the stone of slaughter in such a fashion that the light of the
sun must strike upon the centre of your breast at the very moment of
mid-day. For weeks you have been watched as a jaguar watches its prey,
for it was feared that you would escape to the Teules, and we, your
wives, have been watched also. At this moment there is a triple ring
of guards about the palace, and priests are set without your doors and
beneath the window places. Judge, then, what chance there is of escape,
Teule.'

'Little indeed,' I said, 'and yet I know a road. If I kill myself, they
cannot kill me.'

'Nay,' she answered hastily, 'what shall that avail you? While you live
you may hope, but once dead, you are dead for ever. Also if you must
die, it is best that you should die by the hand of the priest. Believe
me, though the end is horrible,' and she shuddered, 'it is almost
painless, so they say, and very swift. They will not torture you, that
we have saved you, Guatemoc and I, though at first they wished thus to
honour the god more particularly on this great day.'

'O Teule,' Otomie went on, seating herself by me on the bed, and taking
my hand, 'think no more of these brief terrors, but look beyond them.
Is it so hard a thing to die, and swiftly? We all must die, to-day, or
to-night, or the next day, it matters little when--and your faith, like
ours, teaches that beyond the grave is endless blessedness. Think then,
my friend, to-morrow you will have passed far from this strife and
turmoil; the struggle and the sorrows and the daily fears for the future
that make the soul sick will be over for you, you will be taken to your
peace, where no one shall disturb you for ever. There you will find that
mother whom you have told me of, and who loved you, and there perhaps
one will join you who loves you better than your mother, mayhap even
I may meet you there, friend,' and she looked up at me strangely. 'The
road that you are doomed to walk is dark indeed, but surely it must
be well-trodden, and there is light shining beyond it. So be a man, my
friend, and do not grieve; rejoice rather that at so early an age you
have done with woes and doubts, and come to the gates of joy, that you
have passed the thorny, unwatered wilderness and see the smiling lakes
and gardens, and among them the temples of your eternal city.

'And now farewell. We meet no more till the hour of sacrifice, for we
women who masquerade as wives must accompany you to the first platforms
of the temple. Farewell, dear friend, and think upon my words; whether
they are acceptable to you or no, I am sure of this, that both for
the sake of your own honour and because I ask it of you, you will die
bravely as though the eyes of your own people were watching all.' And
bending suddenly, Otomie kissed me on the forehead gently as a sister
might, and was gone.

The curtains swung behind her, but the echoes of her noble words still
dwelt in my heart. Nothing can make man look on death lovingly, and that
awaiting me was one from which the bravest would shrink, yet I felt that
Otomie had spoken truth, and that, terrible as it seemed, it might prove
less terrible than life had shewn itself to be. An unnatural calm fell
upon my soul like some dense mist upon the face of the ocean. Beneath
that mist the waters might foam, above it the sun might shine, yet
around was one grey peace. In this hour I seemed to stand outside of my
earthly self, and to look on all things with a new sense. The tide of
life was ebbing away from me, the shore of death loomed very near, and
I understood then, as in extreme old age I understand to-day, how much
more part we mortals have in death than in this short accident of life.
I could consider all my past, I could wonder on the future of my spirit,
and even marvel at the gentleness and wisdom of the Indian woman, who
was able to think such thoughts and utter them.

Well, whatever befell, in one thing I would not disappoint her, I would
die bravely as an Englishman should do, leaving the rest to God. These
barbarians should never say of me that the foreigner was a coward. Who
was I that I should complain? Did not hundreds of men as good as I was
perish daily in yonder square, and without a murmur? Had not my mother
died also at the hand of a murderer? Was not that unhappy lady, Isabella
de Siguenza, walled up alive because she had been mad enough to love a
villain who betrayed her? The world is full of terrors and sorrows such
as mine, who was I that I should complain?


So I mused on till at length the day dawned, and with the rising sun
rose the clamour of men making ready for battle. For now the fight raged
from day to day, and this was to be one of the most terrible. But I
thought little then of the war between the Aztecs and the Spaniards,
who must prepare myself for the struggle of my own death that was now at
hand.



CHAPTER XXI

THE KISS OF LOVE


Presently there was a sound of music, and, accompanied by certain
artists, my pages entered, bearing with them apparel more gorgeous than
any that I had worn hitherto. First, these pages having stripped me of
my robes, the artists painted all my body in hideous designs of red, and
white, and blue, till I resembled a flag, not even sparing my face and
lips, which they coloured with carmine hues. Over my heart also they
drew a scarlet ring with much care and measurement. Then they did up my
hair that now hung upon my shoulders, after the fashion in which it was
worn by generals among the Indians, tying it on the top of my head
with an embroidered ribbon red in colour, and placed a plume of cock's
feathers above it. Next, having arrayed my body in gorgeous vestments
not unlike those used by popish priests at the celebration of the mass,
they set golden earrings in my ears, golden bracelets on my wrists and
ankles, and round my neck a collar of priceless emeralds. On my breast
also they hung a great gem that gleamed like moonlit water, and beneath
my chin a false beard made from pink sea shells. Then having twined me
round with wreaths of flowers till I thought of the maypole on Bungay
Common, they rested from their labours, filled with admiration at their
handiwork.

Now the music sounded again and they gave me two lutes, one of which
I must hold in either hand, and conducted me to the great hall of the
palace. Here a number of people of rank were gathered, all dressed in
festal attire, and here also on a dais to which I was led, stood my four
wives clad in the rich dresses of the four goddesses Xochi, Xilo, Atla,
and Clixto, after whom they were named for the days of their wifehood,
Atla being the princess Otomie. When I had taken my place upon the dais,
my wives came forward one by one, and kissing me on the brow, offered
me sweetmeats and meal cakes in golden platters, and cocoa and mescal
in golden cups. Of the mescal I drank, for it is a spirit and I
needed inward comfort, but the other dainties I could not touch. These
ceremonies being finished, there was silence for a while, till presently
a band of filthy priests entered at the far end of the chamber, clad
in their scarlet sacrificial robes. Blood was on them everywhere, their
long locks were matted with it, their hands were red with it, even their
fierce eyes seemed full of it. They advanced up the chamber till they
stood before the dais, then suddenly the head priest lifted up his
hands, crying aloud:

'Adore the immortal god, ye people,' and all those gathered there
prostrated themselves shouting:

'We adore the god.'

Thrice the priest cried aloud, and thrice they answered him thus,
prostrating themselves at every answer. Then they rose again, and the
priest addressed me, saying:

'Forgive us, O Tezcat, that we cannot honour you as it is meet, for our
sovereign should have been here to worship you with us. But you know,
O Tezcat, how sore is the strait of your servants, who must wage war in
their own city against those who blaspheme you and your brother gods.
You know that our beloved emperor lies wounded, a prisoner in their
unholy hands. When we have gratified your longing to pass beyond the
skies, O Tezcat, and when in your earthly person you have taught us the
lesson that human prosperity is but a shadow which flees away; in memory
of our love for you intercede for us, we beseech you, that we may smite
these wicked ones and honour you and them by the rite of their own
sacrifice. O Tezcat, you have dwelt with us but a little while, and now
you will not suffer that we hold you longer from your glory, for your
eyes have longed to see this happy day, and it is come at last. We have
loved you, Tezcat, and ministered to you, grant in return that we may
see you in your splendour, we who are your little children, and till we
come, watch well over our earthly welfare, and that of the people among
whom you have deigned to sojourn.'

Having spoken some such words as these, that at times could scarcely
be heard because of the sobbing of the people, and of my wives who wept
loudly, except Otomie alone, this villainous priest made a sign and once
more the music sounded. Then he and his band placed themselves about me,
my wives the goddesses going before and after, and led me down the hall
and on to the gateways of the palace, which were thrown wide for us to
pass. Looking round me with a stony wonder, for in this my last hour
nothing seemed to escape my notice, I saw that a strange play was being
played about us. Some hundreds of paces away the attack on the palace
of Axa, where the Spaniards were entrenched, raged with fury. Bands of
warriors were attempting to scale the walls and being driven back by the
deadly fire of the Spaniards and the pikes and clubs of their Tlascalan
allies, while from the roofs of such of the neighbouring houses as
remained unburned, and more especially from the platform of the great
teocalli, on which I must presently give up the ghost, arrows, javelins,
and stones were poured by thousands into the courtyards and outer works
of the Spanish quarters.

Five hundred yards away or so, raged this struggle to the death, but
about me, around the gates of Montezuma's palace on the hither side
of the square, was a different scene. Here were gathered a vast crowd,
among them many women and children, waiting to see me die. They came
with flowers in their hands, with the sound of music and joyous cries,
and when they saw me they set up such a shout of welcome that it almost
drowned the thunder of the guns and the angry roar of battle. Now and
