    Found there, and vowed to Phoebus, and the name
    "Laurentines" thence his settlers taught to claim.
    Here suddenly--behold a wondrous thing!--
    Borne with loud buzzing through the air, down came
    A swarm of bees. Around the top they cling,
And from a leafy branch in linked clusters swing.

X.  "Behold, from yon same quarter," cried a seer,
    "A stranger! see their swarming hosts conspire
    To lord it o'er Laurentum; see them near."
    He spake, but lo! while, standing by her sire,
    The chaste Lavinia feeds the sacred fire,
    The flames, O horror! on her locks lay hold:
    Her beauteous head-dress and her rich attire,
    Her hair, her coronal of gems and gold
Blaze, and the crackling flames her regal robe enfold.

XI. Wrapt, so it seemed, in clouds of smoke, but bright
    With yellow flames, through all the house she fled,
    Scattering a shower of sparkles. Sore affright
    And wonder seized them, as the seer with dread
    Explained the vision; 'twas a sign, he said,
    That bright and glorious in the rolls of Fate
    Her fame should flourish and her name be spread,
    But dark should lour the fortunes of the state,
Whelmed in a mighty war and sunk in evil strait.

XII. Forth hastes Latinus, by these sights distressed,
    To Faunus' oracle, his sire renowned,
    And seeks the grove, beneath Albunea's crest,
    And sacred spring, which, echoing from the ground,
    Leaps up and flings its sulphurous fumes around.
    Here, craving counsel when in doubtful plight,
    Italians and OEnotria's tribes are found.
    Here, when the priest, his offerings paid aright,
On skins of slaughtered beasts, in stillness of the night,

XIII. Lies down to sleep, in visions he beholds
    Weird shapes, and many a wondrous voice doth hear,
    And, borne in spirit to Avernus, holds
    Deep converse there with Acheron. 'Twas here
    Latinus sought for answer from the seer.
    A hundred ewes, obedient to the rite,
    He slew, then rested, with expectant ear,
    Stretched on their fleeces, when, at noon of night,
Straight from the grove's deep gloom forth pealed a voice of might:

XIV. "Seek not, my son, a Latin lord. Beware
    The purposed bridal. Lo! a foreign guest
    Is coming, born to raise thee as thine heir,
    And sons of sons shall see their power confessed
    From sea to sea, from farthest East to West."
    These words, in stillness of the night's noon-tide,
    Latinus hears, nor locks them in his breast.
    Ausonia's towns have heard them far and wide,
Or ere by Tiber's banks the Dardan fleet doth ride.

XV. Stretched on the grass beneath a tall tree lie
    Troy's chief and captains and Iulus fair,
    And wheaten platters for their meal supply
    ('Twas Jove's command), the wilding fruits to bear.
    When lack of food has forced them now to tear
    The tiny cakes, and tooth and hand with zest
    The fateful circles desecrate, nor spare
    The sacred squares upon the rounds impressed,
"What! eating boards as well?" Iulus cries in jest.

XVI. 'Twas all; the sally, as we heard it, sealed
    Our toils. AEneas caught it, as it flew,
    And hushed them, marvelling at the sign revealed.
    "Hail! land," he cries, "long destined for our due.
    Hail, household deities, to Troy still true!
    Here lies our home. Thus, thus, I mind the hour,
    Anchises brought Fate's hidden things to view:
    'My son, when famine on an unknown shore
Shall make thee, failing food, the very boards devour,

XVII. "'Then, worn and wearied, look to find a home,
    And build thy walls, and bank them with a mound.'
    This was that famine; this the last to come
    Of all our woes, the woful term to bound.
    Come then, at daybreak search the land around
    (Each from the harbour separate let us fare)
    And see what folk, and where their town, be found,
    Now pour to Jove libations, and with prayer
Invoke Anchises' shade, and back the wine-cups bear."

XVIII. So saying, his brows he garlands, and with prayer
    Invokes the Genius whom the place doth own,
    And Earth, first Goddess, and the Nymphs who there
    Inhabit, and the rivers yet unknown,
    Night and the stars that glitter in her zone
    He calls to aid him, and Idaean Jove,
    And Phrygia's Mother on her heavenly throne,
    And last, his parent deities to move,
Invokes his sire below and mother queen above.

XIX. Thrice Jove omnipotent from Heaven's blue height
    Thunders aloud, and flashes in the skies
    A cloud ablaze with rays of golden light.
    'Tis come--so Rumour through the Trojans flies--
    The day to bid their promised walls arise.
    Cheered by the mighty omen and the sign,
    They spread the feast, and each with other vies
    To range the goblets and to wreath the wine,
And gladdening hearts rejoice to greet the day divine.

XX. Soon as the morrow bathed the world once more
    In dawning light, by separate ways they fare
    To search the town, the frontiers and the shore.
    Here is Numicius' fountain, Tiber there,
    Here dwell the Latins. Then Anchises' heir
    Choice spokesmen to the monarch's city sends,
    Five score, their peaceful errand to declare,
    And royal presents to their charge commends,
And bids them claim of right the welcome due to friends.

XXI. At once the heralds hearken and obey,
    And each and all, with rapid steps, and crowned
    With Pallas' olive, hasten on their way.
    Himself with shallow trench marks out the ground,
    And, camp-like, girds with bastions and a mound
    The new-formed settlement. Meanwhile the train
    Of delegates their journey's end have found,
    And greet with joy, uprising o'er the plain,
The Latin towers and homes, and now the walls attain.

XXII. Before the city, boys and youths contend
    On horseback. Through the whirling dust they steer
    Their chariots and the practised steeds, or bend
    The tight-strung bow, or aim the limber spear,
    Or urge fist-combat or the foot's career.
    Now to their king a message quick has flown;
    Tall men and strange, in foreign garb are here.
    Latinus summons them within: anon,
Amidmost of his court he mounts the ancestral throne.

XXIII. Raised on a hundred columns, vast and tall,
    Above the city reared its reverend head
    A stately fabric, once the palace-hall
    Of Picus. Dark woods shrouded, and the dread
    Of ages filled, the precinct. Here, 'tis said,
    Kings took the sceptre and the axe of fate,
    Their senate house this temple; here were spread
    The tables for the sacred feast, where sate,
What time the ram was slain, the elders of the State.

XXIV. In ancient cedar o'er the doors appear
    The sculptured effigies of sires divine.
    Grey Saturn, Italus, Sabinus here,
    Curved hook in hand, the planter of the vine.
    There two-faced Janus, and, in ordered line,
    Old kings and patriot chieftains. Captive cars
    Hang round, and arms upon the doorposts shine,
    Curved axes, crests of helmets, towngates' bars,
Spears, shields and beaks of ships, the trophies of their wars.

XXV. There Picus sat, with his Quirinal wand,
    Tamer of steeds. The augur's gown he wore,
    Short, striped and belted; and his lifted hand
    The sacred buckler on the left upbore.
    Him Circe, his enamoured bride, of yore,
    Wild with desire, so ancient legends say,
    Smote with her golden rod, and sprinkling o'er
    His limbs her magic poisons, made a jay,
And sent to roam the air, with dappled plumage gay.

XXVI. Such is the temple, in whose sacred dome
    Latinus waits the Teucrians on his throne,
    And kindly thus accosts them as they come:
    'Speak, Dardans,--for the Dardan name ye own;
    Nor strange your race and city, nor unknown
    Sail ye the plains of Ocean--tell me now,
    What seek ye? By the tempest tost, or blown
    At random, needful of what help and how
Came ye to Latin shores the dark-blue deep to plough?

XXVII. "But, whether wandering from your course, or cast
    By storms--such ills as oft-times on the main
    O'ertake poor mariners--your ships at last
    Our stream have entered, and the port attain.
    Shun not a welcome, nor our cheer disdain.
    For dear to Saturn, whom our sires adored,
    Was Latium. Manners, not the laws, constrain
    To justice. Freely, of our own accord,
We mind the golden age, and virtues of our lord.

XXVIII. "Now, I remember, old Auruncans told
    (Age dims, but memory can the tale retrace)
    How, born in Latium, Dardanus of old
    Went forth to northern Samos, styled of Thrace,
    And reached the towns at Phrygian Ida's base.
    From Tuscan Corythus in days gone by
    He went, and now among the stars hath place,
    Throned in the golden palace of the sky.
On earth his altar marks one godhead more on high."

XXIX. He spake: Ilioneus this answer gave:
    "O King, blest seed of Faunus! Star nor strand
    Misled us, nor hath stress of storm or wave
    Forced us to seek the shelter of your land.
    Freewill hath brought us hither, forethought planned
    Our flight; for we are outcasts, every one,
    The toil-worn remnant of an exiled band,
    Driven from a mighty empire; mightier none
In bygone years was known beneath the wandering sun.

XXX. "From Jove we spring; Jove Dardans hail with joy
    Their parent; he who sends us is our lord
    AEneas, Jove-born and a prince of Troy.
    How fierce a tempest from Mycenae poured
    O'er Ida's fields; how Fate with fire and sword
    Made Europe clash with Asia, he hath known
    Whoe'er to Ocean's limits hath explored
    The utmost earth, or in the central zone
Dwells, if a man there be, in torrid climes unknown.

XXXI. "Swept by that deluge o'er the deep, we crave
    A home for home-gods, shelter on the strand,
    And man's free privilege of air and wave.
    We shall not shame the lustre of your land,
    Nor stint the gratitude kind deeds demand.
    Grant Troy a refuge, and Ausonians ne'er
    Shall rue the welcome proffered by your hand.
    Yea, scorn us not, that thus unsought we bear
The lowly suppliant's wreath, and speak the words of prayer.

XXXII. "Full many a people,--let the fates attest
    Of great AEneas, and his hand of might,
    Ne'er pledged in vain, our bravest and our best--
    Full many a tribe, though lowly be our plight,
    Have sought with ours their fortunes to unite.
    Fate bade us seek your country and her King.
    Hither, where Dardanus first saw the light,
    Apollo back the Dardan race would bring,
To Tuscan Tiber's banks and pure Numicius' spring.

XXXIII. "These gifts AEneas to our charge commends,
    Poor relics saved from Ilion, but a sign
    Of ancient greatness, and the gifts of friends.
    See, from this golden goblet at the shrine
    His sire Anchises poured the sacred wine;
    Clad in these robes sat Priam, when of old
    The laws he ministered. These robes are thine,
    This sceptre, this embroidered vest,--behold,
'Twas wrought by Trojan dames,--this diadem of gold."

XXXIV. Mute sat and motionless, with looks bent down,
    Latinus; but his restless eyes confessed
    His musings. Not the sceptre nor the gown
    Of purple moved him, but his pensive breast
    Dwelt on his daughter's marriage, till he guessed
    The meaning of old Faunus. This was he,
    His destined heir, the bridegroom and the guest,
    Whose glorious progeny, by Fate's decree,
The Latin throne should share, and rule from sea to sea.

XXXV. "Heaven prosper," joyfully he cried, "our deed,
    And heaven's own augury. Your wish shall stand;
    I take the gifts. Yours, Trojans, all ye need--
    The wealth of Troy, the fatness of the land,--
    Nought shall ye lack from King Latinus' hand.
    Let but AEneas, if he longs so fain
    To claim our friendship, and a home demand,
    Come here, nor fear to greet us. Not in vain
'Twixt monarchs stands the peace, which plighted hands ordain.

XXXVI. "Let now this message to your King be given.
    'A child, the daughter of my heart, is mine,
    Whom neither frequent prodigies from heaven,
    Nor voices uttered from my father's shrine,
    Permit with one of Latin birth to join.
    Strange sons--so Latin oracles conspire--
    Shall come, whose offspring shall exalt our line.
    Thy King the bridegroom whom the Fates require
I deem, and, if in aught I read the truth, desire.'"

XXXVII. So speaks Latinus, and with kindly care
    Choice steeds selects. Three hundred of the best
    Stand in his lofty stables, sleek and fair;
    And forth in order for each Teucrian guest
    His servants led them, at their King's behest.
    Rich housings, wrought in many a purple fold,
    And broidered rugs adorn them; o'er each breast
    Hang golden poitrels, glorious to behold.
Each champs with foaming mouth a chain of glittering gold.

XXXVIII. A car he orders for the Dardan sire,
    And twin-yoked coursers of ethereal seed,
    Whose snorting nostrils breathe the flames of fire.
    Half-mortal, half-immortal was each steed,
    The bastard birth of that celestial breed,
    Which cunning Circe from a mortal mare
    Raised to her sire the Sun-god. So with speed
    The mounted Trojans to their prince repair,
Pleased with the gifts and words, for peaceful news they bear.

XXXIX. Lo! from Inachian Argos through the skies
    Jove's consort her avenging flight pursues,
    And far off, from Pachynus, as she flies
    O'er Sicily, beholds the Dardan crews
    And great AEneas, gladdening at the news.
    The rising settlement, the new-tilled shore,
    The ships deserted for the land she views,
    And shaking her imperial brows, and sore
With anguish, from her breast these wrathful words doth pour:

XL. "Ah, hateful race! Ah, Phrygian fates abhorred!
    What, fell they not on the Sigean plain?
    Must captives be twice captured? Have the sword
    And flames of Troy avenged me but in vain?
    Have foes and fire found passage for the slain?
    Sooth, then, my godhead sleepeth, and that hand
    Is tired of hate, which whilom o'er the main
    Dared chase these outcasts and their paths withstand,
Where'er the deep sea rolled, far from their native land!

XLI. "Have sea and sky been wielded to destroy,
    Nor Syrtes yet, nor Scylla's fierce embrace,
    Nor vast Charybdis whelmed the sons of Troy,
    Who, safe in Tiber, flout me to the face?
    Yet Mars from earth, and for a less disgrace
    Could sweep the Lapithae, and Heaven's great Sire
    Doomed ancient Calydon and OEneus' race
    To rue the vengeance of Diana's ire.
Did ever crime of theirs the Dardans' meed require?

XLII. "But I, Jove's consort, who have stooped to seek
    All shifts, all ventures and devices, I
    Am vanquished by AEneas! If too weak
    Myself, some other godhead will I try,
    And Hell shall hear, if Heaven its aid deny.
    Grant that these Dardans must in Latium reign,
    That fixt and changeless stands the doom, whereby
    His bride shall be Lavinia, that in vain
Can Juno thwart whate'er the Destinies ordain;

XLIII. "Yet time delayed can make occasion lost,
    Yet mutual strife each nation may devour,
    And Kings plight marriage at their peoples' cost.
    Troy's blood and Latium's, maiden, be thy dower.
    Bellona lights thee to thy bridal bower.
    Not only Hecuba--Ah, sweet the joy!--
    Conceives a firebrand. Born in evil hour,
    The child of Venus shall her hopes destroy,
And, like another Paris, fire a new-born Troy."

XLIV. She spake, and earthward darting, fierce and fell,
    Calls sad Alecto from her dark retreat
    Among the Furies in the shades of Hell.
    Sweet are war's sorrows to her soul, and sweet
    Are evil deeds, and hatred and deceit.
    E'en Pluto, e'en her sister-fiends detest
    The monstrous shape, so many forms complete
    The grisly horrors of that hateful pest,
So many a coal-black snake sprouts from her threatening crest.

XLV. Her Juno finds, and thus new rage inspires:
    "Grant, virgin daughter of eternal Night,
    This boon, the labour that thy soul desires.
    Lest here my fame and honour lose their might,
    And Troy gain Italy, and craft unite
    Troy's prince with Latium's heiress. Thou can'st turn
    Fond hearts to feuds, and brethren arm for fight.
    Thou know'st, for savage is thy mood and stern,
To breed domestic strife and happy homes to burn.

XLVI. "A thousand names, a thousand means hast thou
    Of mischief. Search thy fertile breast, and break
    The plighted peace. Breed calumnies, and sow
    The strife. Let youth desire, demand and take
    Thy weapons."--Wreathed with many a Gorgon snake,
    To Latium's court Alecto flew unseen,
    And by Amata's chamber sate, nor spake;
    While, musing on her new-come guests, the queen,
Wroth for her Turnus, boiled with woman's rage and spleen.

XLVII. At her the goddess from her dark locks threw
    A snake, and lodged the monster in her breast,
    To make her fury all the house undo.
    In glides, impalpable, the maddening pest
    Between the dainty bosom and the vest,
    Breathing its venom. Like a necklace thin
    It hung, all golden, like a wreath, caressed
    Her temples, like a ribbon, wove within
Her hair its slippery coils, and wandered o'er her skin.

XLVIII. So, while the taint, first stealing through her frame,
    Slipped in, with slimy venom, and the pest
    Thrilled every sense, and wrapped her bones in flame,
    Nor yet her soul had caught it, or confessed
    The fiery fever that consumed her breast;
    Soft, like a mother, and with tears, she cried,
    Grieved for her child, and pondering with unrest
    The Phrygian match, "Ah, woe the day betide,
If Teucrian exiles win Lavinia for a bride!

XLIX. "Hast thou no pity for thy child, nor thee,
    O father! nor her mother, left forlorn,
    When, with the rising North-wind, o'er the sea
    Yon faithless pirate hath the maiden borne?
    Not so, forsooth, did Lacedaemon mourn
    Robbed Helen, when the Phrygian shepherd planned
    Her capture. Is thy sacred faith forsworn?
    Where is thy old affection? Where that hand
So oft to Turnus pledged, thy kinsman of the land?

L.  "If Latins for Lavinia needs must find
    A foreign mate; if so the Fates constrain,
    And Faunus' words weigh heavy on thy mind,
    All lands, that yield not to the Latin reign,
    I count as foreign; so the Gods speak plain;
    And foreign then is Turnus, if we trace
    The first beginning of his princely strain.
    Greeks were his grandsires; Argos was the place
Where old Acrisius ruled, where dwelt th' Inachian race."

LI. So pleading, and so weeping, she essayed
    To move the king; but when her prayers were vain,
    Nor tears Latinus from his purpose stayed,
    And now the viper with its deadly bane
    Crept to her inmost parts, and through each vein
    The maddening poison to her heartstrings stole,
    Then, scared by monstrous phantoms of the brain,
    Poor queen! she raved, and maddening past control,
Ran through the crowded streets in impotence of soul.

LII. Like as a whip-top by the lash is sent
    In widening orbs to spin, when lads among
    The empty courtyards urge their merriment;
    And, scourged in circling courses by the thong
    It wheels and eddies, while the beardless throng
    Bend over, lost in ignorant surprise,
    And marvel, as the boxwood whirls along,
    Stirred by each stroke; so fast Amata flies
From street to street, while crowds look on with lowering eyes.

LIII. Nay, simulating Bacchus, now she dares
    To feign new orgies, and her crime complete.
    Swift with her daughter to the woods she fares,
    And hides her on the mountains, fain to cheat
    The Trojans, and the purposed rites defeat.
    "Hail, thou alone art worthy of the fair!
    Evoe, Bacchus! for thy name is sweet.
    For thee she grows her dedicated hair,
For thee she leads the dance, the ivied wand doth bear."

LIV. The matrons then--so fast the rumour flew,--
    Fired like the Queen, and frenzied with despair,
    Rush forth, and leave their ancient homes for new,
    And to the breezes give their necks and hair.
    These with their tremulous wailings fill the air,
    And, girt about with fawn-skins, bear along
    The vine-branch javelins, and Amata there,
    Herself ablaze with fury, o'er the throng
A blazing pine-torch waves, and chants the nuptial song

LV. Of Turnus and Lavinia. Fiercely roll
    Her blood-shot eyes, and, frowning, suddenly
    She pours the frantic passions of her soul.
    "Ho! Latin mothers all, where'er ye be,
    Here, if ye love me, if a mother's plea
    Deserve your pity, let your hair be seen
    Loosed from the fillets, and be mad, like me."
    So through the woods, the wild-beasts' lairs between,
With Bacchanalian goads Alecto drives the Queen.

LVI. When now thus fairly was the work begun,
    The barbs of anger planted, pleased to view
    Latinus' purpose and his house undone,
    On dusky wings the Goddess soared, and through
    The liquid air to neighbouring Ardea flew,
    The bold Rutulian's city, built of yore
    By Danae, thither when the South-wind blew
    Her and her followers. Ardea's name it bore,
And Ardea's name still lives, though fortune smiles no more.

LVII. There in his palace, locked in sleep's embrace,
    Lay Turnus. Straight Alecto, versed in snares,
    Doffs the fiend's figure and her frowning face.
    The likeness of a withered crone she wears,
    With wrinkled forehead and with hoary hairs.
    Her fillet and her olive crown proclaim
    The priestess. Changed in semblance, she appears
    Like Calybe, great Juno's sacred dame;
Thus to the youth she comes, and hails him by his name.

LVIII. "Fie! Turnus, fie! wilt thou behold unstirred
    Such labours wasted, and thy hopes belied?
    Thy sceptre to a Dardan guest transferred?
    See, now, to thee Latinus hath denied
    Thy blood-bought dowry, and thy promised bride,
    And seeks a stranger for his throne. Away
    To thankless perils, while thy friends deride!
    Go, strew the Tuscans, scatter their array,
Till Latins, saved once more, their plighted word betray.

LIX. "This mandate great Saturnia bade me bear,
    Thou sleeping. Up, then! greet the welcome hour;
    Arm, arm the youth, and from the towngates fare!
    These Phrygian vessels with the flames devour,
    Moored yonder in fair Tiber. 'Tis the power
    Of Heaven that bids thee. Let Latinus, too,
