new--shaping them alike out of youth and age and bondmen; and the
slayers of our citizens delayed, and we gained strength and courage.
In every temple of the twelve gods it was the same prayer by day and
night: 'Grant us delay.  Grant us that the winter may find him in the
south!'  At last came the news that he was advancing to Capua, and
rumours of a Carthaginian party in the city.  From Capua, seized with
all its engines of war, was but a few days to Rome.  Then I took a
resolve and made a vow: tell me, am I beautiful?"

"Beautiful as Venus."

"Know, then, that I have dedicated this beauty to her, that she may
guard Rome and avenge me upon Rome's enemies."

He shook his head stupidly.

"Minerva does not favour me, lady," he replied; "for I do not
understand your words."

"Listen!" she went on, with the earnestness of desperation,  "He shall
_love_ me--he or one who can sway him--and they shall play the laggards
here, until the winter gives us time--and time brings safety."

He understood her now, but still he shook his head.

"If you speak truth," he said slowly, "you speak foolishness as well.
Hannibal will love no mistress but Carthage, and there is no man living
who shall sway him by a hair's breadth.  _Now_ I see why you spoke to
him of plots at Rome and of the wisdom of delay.  Ah! a woman to make
game of _him_!" and he threw back his head and laughed.  "Do you
imagine he has not divined your plot?  Give him your beauty if you
will.  He will take it, doubtless, if he have time, and march north
forthwith, after you have confessed your little plottings beneath the
hot tweezers.  Only one thing shall stay him--steel,--and in the hands
of man--not blandishments in the mouth of a girl."

Marcia was in despair.

"And is there no help," she cried, "for me, a Roman woman, from you, a
friend of Rome?  Surely we shall be stronger together, even if our
plots are different.  Two plans are better than one."

Before he could frame his answer they heard footsteps coming toward
them, and then a man, enveloped in the brown cloak of a slave, pushed
aside the foliage and glided out into the moonlight.  Perolla, wheeling
about, had half drawn his sword, while Marcia shrunk back into the
shadow.

"Put up your sword, my Perolla," said the newcomer, speaking in low
tones and throwing aside his mantle.

"Decius Magius, by all the gods!" cried the young man; "but why are you
disguised?"

"Because, my friend," said Magius, slowly "Capua is no longer free;
because spies of the Carthaginian and of our senate are watching my
house, making ready to seize me.  Decius Magius can no longer walk in
his own city, clad in his own gown, and to-morrow, doubtless, he cannot
walk at all.  Therefore I wish to speak with you, and I have put on
this disguise in order that I might gain your house unobserved, and
that your father might not die of fright, learning me to be here."

"But how did you enter? how find me?"

"I entered, my Perolla, because your porter, like every slave in Capua,
is drunk to-night, and because the boy whom he left to keep the gate
was only enough awake to mumble that you were in the garden."

Perolla frowned.  Then, suddenly, he remembered Marcia, concerning whom
his suspicions were not yet entirely removed, and he raised his hand in
warning.

"There is a woman here--a Roman woman, who tells a strange story," he
whispered.  "It is better to be discreet."

"The time for discretion is past for Decius Magius," said the other,
wearily.  "Let him at least speak freely upon his last night of
freedom."

Marcia came forward.

"Is it permitted a Roman maid to honour a Campanian who is true to his
city's faith?"

"Assuredly, daughter," replied Magius, quietly.  She could not see his
face except that it was stern and gray-bearded; but, kneeling down
beside him, she took his hand and poured out the story of her life, her
sorrow, her resolve, and its prosecution.  Here, at least, was a man
upon whose faith and judgment she could rely, and his manner grew more
gentle as she made an end of speaking.

"So you doubted her truth, my Perolla," he said softly.  "That is
because you have not felt her hand tremble, and because you are too
young and too much of a philosopher to judge of the honesty of a
woman's face.  The same instinct that tells me, doubtless warned
Hannibal also that this was not a courtesan, much less an immodest
woman well born, and, least of all, a coward who would flee her city,
or a traitress who would betray it.  You will know more of such things,
my Perolla, when you learn to study them less."  Then, turning to
Marcia, he went on: "What you have designed, my daughter, is noble and
worthy of your race--and yet, while I commend, I am slow to encourage.
Are you strong to carry your sacrifice to the uttermost?"

Marcia shuddered.

"Yes, if there be need," she said, in a low voice; "I look to no
marriage now.  Is not the Republic worthy of our best?"

"It is a hard thing," he said, doubtfully, "for a woman well born and
modest to belong to a man she hates."

"But it is easy to die, my father, as died Lucretia."

Decius Magius looked at her.  Several times his lips moved as if about
to speak, and, once, he turned away sharply for a moment, as if to gaze
up into the night.

"Tell me, my father," she said earnestly, "do you give me no hope?  Is
not my beauty worth the purchase of a few paltry months?  And then
comes the winter, bringing safety."

Still Magius said nothing for several minutes, and when he spoke, it
was in harsh, quick tones.

"Yes, it is all possible, as you say it."

"Hannibal to surrender his plans for a woman?" cried Perolla,
scornfully.  "Surely, my Decius, you jest.  Do you not know him--that
only the gods can turn him from his purpose?"

Marcia had wheeled about with flashing eyes and faced the last speaker.

"You have shown me the way," she cried.  "It is the gods who _shall_
delay him."

Perolla gazed at her in astonishment, as at one gone mad, but Magius
nodded and frowned.

"It is the best chance," he said slowly, "the only one."

"Still Minerva does not favour me," said Perolla, shaking his head; but
Marcia went on in a high, nervous voice and with a gayety that made the
older man draw his cloak up to his face in pity:--

"Come, my philosopher, you are indeed stupid to-night.  If you did not
observe it at the house of the Ninii, you should have heard me just now
when I told the story of the banquet to my lord Decius.  It is
Iddilcar, the priest of Melkarth, who shall bring his god to be my
ally--Rome's ally: Iddilcar, who could not so much as take his eyes
from me, through all their feasting.  There is the man who will prefer
my beauty, even to his god's favour; and surely your Hannibal will not
wage war against the auspices."

The face of Magius was still shaded by his cloak, and he said nothing;
but over the features of the younger man came strange expressions:
first amazement, then horror, then a look which had something of horror
but more of yearning.  He held out his hands in supplication.

"No--no," he cried.  "You shall not do it.  You are too beautiful.
First I hated you, when I dreamed you to be but a courtesan traitress.
Now--now--O gods favour me!  Listen! you shall not do it.  It is I who
will kill him--yes, and you also first," and, turning suddenly away, he
staggered.  Then, as Magius raised his hand to support him, he shook
himself free and ran furiously into the house.

Marcia turned to Magius in astonishment, and he smiled sadly.

"Even philosophers are not proof," he said; "and you are very
beautiful--and he is young--and half a Greek."  She blushed, and the
grim senator took her hand.  "May the gods grant, my daughter, that
your sacrifice be not for nothing.  You have spoken wisdom; but he--he
is a madman.  As for me, I am as one who is dead.  Farewell."

He dropped her hand, and she felt, rather than heard or saw him go;
only her voice would not obey her when she strove to detain him, if but
for a moment: the only man in Capua whom she could honour--upon whom
she could rely.  Surely he would not desert her thus?--yes, truly, he
was _gone_.

Then she ran several steps in the direction he had taken, and called,
though she dared not call his name, until a female attendant came
hurrying to answer her.

"My lord, Perolla," said the girl, "had but just rushed out into the
street, as if possessed of a daimon.  As for a strange slave, she had
observed no one; but if such there was, doubtless he had slipped by the
porter's boy--who was worthless."

Marcia groped her way to her sleeping apartment, harshly brushing aside
an offer of aid.  Once alone, she threw herself down upon the couch and
burst into a torrent of moans and sobs.

The girl, who had followed hesitatingly, listened in the hallway,
nodding her head with conscious satisfaction.  "And so the Roman women
loved, for all they were said to be so grand and stern.  What a fool
this one was, though, to prefer the son to the father, who was much
richer, and who, being old, would doubtless realize the necessity of
being more generous."

And she went back to the slaves' apartments, laughing softly to herself.




VII.

"FREEDOM."

The morning air of the Seplasia reeked with perfumes, more, even, than
was its wont; for Carthaginian and Capuan revellers had been carousing
there, and several of the shops had been broken open.  The gutters
streamed wine with which were mingled all the essences of India and
Asia.  Flowers, withered and soaked with coarser odours than their own,
floated on the pools and drifted down the rivulets.  Inert bodies,
drunk to repletion, lay scattered about, helpless, unable to drink
consciously, but absorbing the wasted liquor through every pore.  A
dead citizen, his head crushed in by a single blow, sprawled hideously
in the middle of the street; while his murderer, a gigantic Gaul, was
embracing the corpse with maudlin affection and whispering in its ear
to arise and guide him back to camp.  Those who passed, from time to
time, paused to join the soldier's comrades in laughter and rude jests
and suggestions of new methods of awakening his friend.

And now, down the street, extending from wall to wall, came a line of
young men, their faces flushed, their garments disordered or cast
aside, and their brows crowned with what had once been chaplets of
roses.  Three or four courtesans, with gowns and tunics torn from their
white shoulders, were being dragged along, half laughing, half
resisting, and wholly possessed by Bacchic frenzy.

In front of the company marched a slender youth with dark, curling hair
and delicate features.  In his hand was a thyrsis, and his eyes blazed
with the madness of the wine.

"Evoe! evoe!" he shouted.  "Comrades!  Bacchantes! there is no water in
Capua to mix with wine.  Equal mixture for poets and fools; undiluted
wine for victors and lovers!"

"Perolla is a good Carthaginian to-day," shouted one of his fellows.
"Behold how Bacchus has answered our prayers!  Kiss him, Cluvia, for a
reward."

Pushed forward, the courtesan fell upon the young man's neck, almost
bearing him to the street and overwhelming him with drunken caresses.
A moment later he freed himself from her arms.

"What is Roman beauty to our Capuan?" he hiccoughed.
"Marcia--Cluvia--all are one.  All are women, and we are Capuans;
braver than Romans, wiser than Carthaginians.  Listen, friends! when my
father rules Italy, you shall all be kings and queens.  Evoe! evoe!"

Shouts and shrieks of drunken joy greeted his words.  Several sought to
embrace him, and, staggering back, he stumbled over the Gaul and the
dead Capuan where they sprawled in the street.  Mingled laughter and
curses rose all around.  Blows and kisses were given and received, and
the mad company rolled on through the Seplasia and into the Forum.

Here, too, were intoxication and debauchery, but they were restrained
within some manner of bounds.  The fact that grave events were taking
place, seemed to exert a sobering influence on the populace, and they
gathered in a dense throng around the Senate House, whence ominous
rumours pursued each other in quick succession.

"The Senate was in session.  Hannibal was before them.  Decius Magius
had been arrested at his demand."  So ran the talk.

Guards of Carthaginian soldiery were posted at several points, but
especially at all the entrances to the chamber in which the fathers of
the city discussed--or obeyed; and against these lines the waves of the
rabble surged and broke and receded.  Men offered the soldiers money
for free passage or news; women offered them kisses for money; and the
soldiers took both and gave nothing but jeers and blows.

Perolla and his drunken company had but just poured out to swell the
tide of this ocean of popular passion, when a commotion of a different
character began at the other end of the Forum.  The closed door of the
Senate House swung open, and a man in the garb of a senator, but
chained and shackled, issued forth and stood on the steps, beneath the
porch.  Surrounded by a guard of Africans, it was fully a moment,
before the mob recognized Decius Magius, the partisan, of Rome.  Then a
chorus of howls and curses rose up.  Insults were hurled,--the grossest
that the minds of a licentious rabble could suggest, fists were shaken,
women spat toward the prisoner,--even a few stones were cast, and when
one of these happened to strike an African of the guard, he turned
quietly and cut down the nearest citizen.  Then, with their heavy
javelins so held as to be used either as spears or clubs, the soldiers
descended into the Forum, and, with the captive in their midst, began
their progress toward the street and gate that led to the Carthaginian
camp.  There was no weak delay in this progress, no requests for
passage; the escort clove through the mass of the people, as a war
galley dashes through the breakers of a turbulent sea.  A spray of
human beings that strove to escape but could not, boiled up about the
prow; a wake of bodies, writhing or senseless, fell behind the stern,
while, at either side, the stout javelins rose and fell like the
strokes of oars, splashing up blood for foam.

The taunts and threats that had assailed the prisoner died away amid
shrieks of terror or pain and the deep rumble of the mob.  Stupid with
drink, drunk with the exultation of ungoverned power, they wondered
vaguely, as they crushed back, why their new friends should strike,
merely because they,--the Capuan people,--allies of Carthage, strove to
punish a traitor and a common enemy.  The prisoner's lips were seen
moving, as his captors hurried him along; but no speech from them could
be heard, until the Forum had been nearly traversed.  Then, on the hush
born of surprise and efforts to escape blows, the words of Magius were
audible, at least to those nearest.

He was protesting against this violation of the treaty.  He was
speaking of himself; a Capuan, than whom no one was of higher rank,
being dragged in chains to the camp of an ally who had sworn that no
Carthaginian should have power over a citizen of Capua.  At the mention
of his rank, malice and envy lent to some of the cowed rabble courage
to jeer once more.  Then he had asked, how they expected that an ally
so careless of recently sworn obligations would respect his vow that no
Capuan would be compelled to do military service against his will;
whereupon, some of those who heard looked serious, for this seemed
reasonable, and brought the possibility of evil unpleasantly home to
them.  Finally, he congratulated them upon this marvellous, new-found
freedom which the Carthaginian alliance had brought, and which they had
been celebrating so earnestly.

Perolla and his companions had found themselves crushed against the
portico of the temple of Hercules, in which, only the day before, had
been established, also, the worship of the Tyrian Melkarth, out of
compliment to the new alliance.

At first they had realized but little of what was going on before and
around them.  They had listened vacantly to crazy rumours of how the
statue of Jupiter in the Senate House had bowed to Hannibal as he
entered, and how the Senate had forthwith saluted him as a god and
declared him the patron and protector of the city; and, again, to other
rumours even more wild of how the wives of all the Capuans had been
decreed to be given to the Carthaginians, in return for which the women
of Rome were to be surrendered to the Capuans by their victorious
allies.

When Decius Magius was led out in custody of the soldiers, Perolla was
trying to think whether, after all, he would not prefer Marcia to
Cluvia.  Then followed the passage through the crowded Forum, straight
toward the exit beside the temple of Hercules, and Perolla found
himself within a spear's length of his captive friend, whose words of
protest and warning fell upon his ears like molten lead, and whose
reproachful eyes gazed into his own, piercing through them to his brain
and dissipating the fumes of intoxication as sunlight melts the fog.
Decius had not spoken to him, for he was mindful that such speech might
bring suspicion upon the younger man, but his look had said all that
his tongue refrained from saying, and Perolla realized his degradation
and his shame.

He started forward and cried out:--

"I was mad, my father; _mad_! do you hear?  It was because I knew
suddenly that I loved her, and that she would never love me! and then I
rushed out and met others who were drinking, and we feasted and drank
until I knew nothing.  Pardon! pardon!"

Suddenly he became conscious that Decius and his guards were gone.  Had
he heard his plea?  Surely yes, for did not he, Perolla, now hear his
friend's eyes saying to him that he was but a fool who had added to
folly, philosophy, and to both, weakness, and to all, madness?  He
looked around at his companions.  Some were gaping at him vacantly,
some were laughing.  Cluvia tried to grasp his arm, and he shook her
off and saw her stumble and roll down the steps that led up to the
portico; then a new commotion arose in the direction of the Senate
House, and the attention of the bystanders was diverted.  More
Carthaginian soldiers were forming and marching through the mob that
now opened to give passage of double width; and, as the escort came
nearer, Perolla saw Hannibal, clad in the gown of a Capuan senator,
moving calmly in their midst.

A new frenzy came to his brain to take the place of the fumes of wine:
perhaps it was one compounded of that and of shame and horror and
revenge.  He groped under his torn tunic and found his dagger; then,
brandishing it, he burst down through the crowd, uttering incoherent
words, and threw himself, like a wild beast, upon the guards.

He had stabbed one through the throat and another in the shoulder,
before he was beaten down by a blow from the staff of a javelin.  A
moment later, the first soldier to recover from the surprise of the
incident bent over him with drawn sword.

A sharp exclamation from behind checked the descending thrust, and the
soldier turned quickly.  Hannibal stood beside him, with a thoughtful
smile upon his lips.

"Would you kill a citizen of Capua? a man of our allies?" he said
quietly.

The African looked around stupidly.  That he should not crush the
Italian vermin forthwith was beyond his comprehension, but evidently
such was not the schalischim's wish.  Grumbling, he slipped his sword
slowly back into its sheath, and, at that moment, several of the Capuan
senators in Hannibal's train gathered round him with protestations and
expressions of regret.  The general looked at them and frowned.

"I have been with you scarcely two days," he said, "and now you try to
murder me."

The senators fell upon their knees, kissing his gown and hands, in a
frenzy of horror at the thought.

"Who is this fellow?" asked Hannibal, turning Perolla over with his
foot.  Then, recognizing the son of Pacuvius Calavius, he went on:
"Some one of no consequence, doubtless; dust of the street that stings
when the wind drives it," and he glared around at the prostrate
senators.

They glanced at the senseless figure, as if hardly daring so much.
Some knew him, more did not; but all united in protesting their
ignorance.

Hannibal viewed them with drooping lids, and the smile returned to his
lips.  Perolla stirred slightly.

