him, and he remained for some time in the open street exposed to
constant danger of losing his life, and knowing not what to do.  At
length he induced the gatekeeper, by the present of some small pieces
of money, to call the principal of the college, and this man humanely
concealed him for three days. The massacre being then at an end, two
armed men in his father's pay sought him out and restored him to his
friends.  So near was France to losing her greatest minister, the Duke
de Sully.

To return to ourselves.  The lad out of sight, we instantly resumed our
purpose, and trying to shut our eyes and ears to the cruelty, and
ribaldry, and uproar through which we had still to pass, we counted our
turnings with a desperate exactness, intent only on one thing--to reach
Louis de Pavannes, to reach the house opposite to the Head of Erasmus,
as quickly as we could.  We presently entered a long, narrow street.
At the end of it the river was visible gleaming and sparkling in the
sunlight.  The street was quiet; quiet and empty.  There was no living
soul to be seen from end to end of it, only a prowling dog.  The noise
of the tumult raging in other parts was softened here by distance and
the intervening houses.  We seemed to be able to breathe more freely.

"This should be our street," said Croisette.

I nodded.  At the same moment I espied, half-way down it, the sign we
needed and pointed to it, But ah!  were we in time?  Or too late?  That
was the question.  By a single impulse we broke into a run, and shot
down the roadway at speed.  A few yards short of the Head of Erasmus we
came, one by one, Croisette first, to a full stop.  A full stop!

The house opposite the bookseller's was sacked!  gutted from top to
bottom.  It was a tall house, immediately fronting the street, and
every window in it was broken.  The door hung forlornly on one hinge,
glaring cracks in its surface showing where the axe had splintered it.
Fragments of glass and ware, hung out and shattered in sheer
wantonness, strewed the steps:  and down one corner of the latter a
dark red stream trickled--to curdle by and by in the gutter.  Whence
came the stream?  Alas!  there was something more to be seen yet,
something our eyes instinctively sought last of all.  The body of a man.

It lay on the threshold, the head hanging back, the wide glazed eyes
looking up to the summer sky whence the sweltering heat would soon pour
down upon it.  We looked shuddering at the face. It was that of a
servant, a valet who had been with Louis at Caylus.  We recognised him
at once for we had known and liked him.  He had carried our guns on the
hills a dozen times, and told us stories of the war.  The blood crawled
slowly from him. He was dead.

Croisette began to shake all over.  He clutched one of the pillars,
which bore up the porch, and pressed his face against its cold surface,
hiding his eyes from the sight.  The worst had come.  In our hearts I
think we had always fancied some accident would save our friend, some
stranger warn him.

"Oh, poor, poor Kit!"  Croisette cried, bursting suddenly into violent
sobs.  "Oh, Kit!  Kit!"



CHAPTER X.

HAU, HAU, HUGUENOTS!

His late Majesty, Henry the Fourth, I remember--than whom no braver man
wore sword, who loved danger indeed for its own sake, and courted it as
a mistress--could never sleep on the night before an action.  I have
heard him say himself that it was so before the fight at Arques.
Croisette partook of this nature too, being high-strung and apt to be
easily over-wrought, but never until the necessity for exertion had
passed away:  while Marie and I, though not a whit stouter at a pinch,
were slower to feel and less easy to move--more Germanic in fact.

I name this here partly lest it should be thought after what I have
just told of Croisette that there was anything of the woman about
him--save the tenderness; and partly to show that we acted at this
crisis each after his manner.  While Croisette turned pale and
trembled, and hid his eyes, I stood dazed, looking from the desolate
house to the face stiffening in the sunshine, and back again;
wondering, though I had seen scores of dead faces since daybreak, and a
plenitude of suffering in all dreadful shapes, how Providence could let
this happen to us.  To us!  In his instincts man is as selfish as any
animal that lives.

I saw nothing indeed of the dead face and dead house after the first
convincing glance.  I saw instead with hot, hot eyes the old castle at
home, the green fields about the brook, and the grey hills rising from
them; and the terrace, and Kit coming to meet us, Kit with white face
and parted lips and avid eyes that questioned us!  And we with no
comfort to give her, no lover to bring back to her!

A faint noise behind as of a sign creaking in the wind, roused me from
this most painful reverie.  I turned round, not quickly or in surprise
or fear.  Rather in the same dull wonder.  The upper part of the
bookseller's door was ajar.  It was that I had heard opened.  An old
woman was peering out at us.

As our eyes met, she made a slight movement to close the door again.
But I did not stir, and seeming to be reassured by a second glance, she
nodded to me in a stealthy fashion.  I drew a step nearer, listlessly.
"Pst!  Pst!"  she whispered.  Her wrinkled old face, which was like a
Normandy apple long kept, was soft with pity as she looked at
Croisette.  "Pst!"

"Well!"  I said, mechanically.

"Is he taken?"  she muttered.

"Who taken?"  I asked stupidly.

She nodded towards the forsaken house, and answered, "The young lord
who lodged there?  Ah!  sirs," she continued, "he looked gay and
handsome, if you'll believe me, as he came from the king's court yester
even!  As bonny a sight in his satin coat, and his ribbons, as my eyes
ever saw!  And to think that they should be hunting him like a rat
to-day!"

The woman's words were few and simple.  But what a change they made in
my world!  How my heart awoke from its stupor, and leapt up with a new
joy and a new-born hope!  "Did he get away?"  I cried eagerly.  "Did he
escape, mother, then?"

"Ay, that he did!"  she replied quickly.  "That poor fellow, yonder--he
lies quiet enough now God forgive him his heresy, say I!--kept the door
manfully while the gentleman got on the roof, and ran right down the
street on the tops of the houses, with them firing and hooting at him:
for all the world as if he had been a squirrel and they a pack of boys
with stones!"

"And he escaped?"

"Escaped!"  she answered more slowly, shaking her old head in doubt.
"I do not know about that I fear they have got him by now, gentlemen.
I have been shivering and shaking up stairs with my husband--he is in
bed, good man, and the safest place for him--the saints have mercy upon
us!  But I heard them go with their shouting and gunpowder right along
to the river, and I doubt they will take him between this and the
CHATELET!  I doubt they will."

"How long ago was it, dame?"  I cried.

"Oh!  may be half an hour.  Perhaps you are friends of his?"  she added
questioningly.

But I did not stay to answer her.  I shook Croisette, who had not heard
a word of this, by the shoulder. "There is a chance that he has
escaped!"  I cried in his ear.  "Escaped, do you hear?"  And I told him
hastily what she had said.

It was fine, indeed, and a sight, to see the blood rush to his cheeks,
and the tears dry in his eyes, and energy and decision spring to life
in every nerve and muscle of his face, "Then there is hope?"  he cried,
grasping my arm.  "Hope, Anne!  Come!  Come! Do not let us lose another
instant.  If he be alive let us join him!"

The old woman tried to detain us, but in vain.  Nay, pitying us, and
fearing, I think, that we were rushing on our deaths, she cast aside
her caution, and called after us aloud.  We took no heed, running after
Croisette, who had not waited for our answer, as fast as young limbs
could carry us down the street.  The exhaustion we had felt a moment
before when all seemed lost be it remembered that we had not been to
bed or tasted food for many hours--fell from us on the instant, and was
clean gone and forgotten in the joy of this respite.  Louis was living
and for the moment had escaped.

Escaped!  But for how long?  We soon had our answer.  The moment we
turned the corner by the river-side, the murmur of a multitude not loud
but continuous, struck our ears, even as the breeze off the water swept
our cheeks.  Across the river lay the thousand roofs of the Ile de la
Cite, all sparkling in the sunshine.  But we swept to the right,
thinking little of THAT sight, and checked our speed on finding
ourselves on the skirts of the crowd. Before us was a bridge--the Pont
au Change, I think--and at its head on our side of the water stood the
CHATELET, with its hoary turrets and battlements.  Between us and the
latter, and backed only by the river, was a great open space
half-filled with people, mostly silent and watchful, come together as
to a show, and betraying, at present at least, no desire to take an
active part in what was going on.

We hurriedly plunged into the throng, and soon caught the clue to the
quietness and the lack of movement which seemed to prevail, and which
at first sight had puzzled us.  For a moment the absence of the
dreadful symptoms we had come to know so well--the flying and pursuing,
the random blows, the shrieks and curses and batterings on doors, the
tipsy yells, had reassured us.  But the relief was short-lived.  The
people before us were under control. A tighter grip seemed to close
upon our hearts as we discerned this, for we knew that the wild fury of
the populace, like the rush of a bull, might have given some chance of
escape--in this case as in others.  But this cold-blooded ordered
search left none.

Every face about us was turned in the same direction; away from the
river and towards a block of old houses which stood opposite to it.
The space immediately in front of these was empty, the people being
kept back by a score or so of archers of the guard set at intervals,
and by as many horsemen, who kept riding up and down, belabouring the
bolder spirits with the flat of their swords, and so preserving a line.
At each extremity of this--more noticeably on our left where the line
curved round the angle of the buildings--stood a handful of riders,
seven in a group perhaps.  And alone in the middle of the space so kept
clear, walking his horse up and down and gazing at the houses rode a
man of great stature, booted and armed, the feather nodding in his
bonnet.  I could not see his face, but I had no need to see it. I knew
him, and groaned aloud.  It was Bezers!

I understood the scene better now.  The horsemen, stern, bearded
Switzers for the most part, who eyed the rabble about them with grim
disdain, and were by no means chary of their blows, were all in his
colours and armed to the teeth.  The order and discipline were of his
making:  the revenge of his seeking.  A grasp as of steel had settled
upon our friend, and I felt that his last chance was gone.  Louis de
Pavannes might as well be lying on his threshold with his dead servant
by his side, as be in hiding within that ring of ordered swords.

It was with despairing eyes we looked at the old wooden houses. They
seemed to be bowing themselves towards us, their upper stories
projected so far, they were so decrepit.  Their roofs were a wilderness
of gutters and crooked gables, of tottering chimneys and wooden
pinnacles and rotting beams, Amongst these I judged Kit's lover was
hiding.  Well, it was a good place for hide and seek--with any other
player than DEATH.  In the ground floors of the houses there were no
windows and no doors; by reason, I learned afterwards, of the frequent
flooding of the river.  But a long wooden gallery raised on struts ran
along the front, rather more than the height of a man from the ground,
and access to this was gained by a wooden staircase at each end. Above
this first gallery was a second, and above that a line of windows set
between the gables.  The block--it may have run for seventy or eighty
yards along the shore--contained four houses, each with a door opening
on to the lower gallery.  I saw indeed that but for the Vidame's
precautions Louis might well have escaped.  Had the mob once poured
helter-skelter into that labyrinth of rooms and passages he might with
luck have mingled with them, unheeded and unrecognized, and effected
his escape when they retreated.

But now there were sentries on each gallery and more on the roof.
Whenever one of the latter moved or seemed to be looking inward--where
a search party, I understood, were at work--indeed, if he did but turn
his head, a thrill ran through the crowd and a murmur arose, which once
or twice swelled to a savage roar such as earlier had made me tremble.
When this happened the impulse came, it seemed to me, from the farther
end of the line.  There the rougher elements were collected, and there
I more than once saw Bezers' troopers in conflict with the mob.  In
that quarter too a savage chant was presently struck up, the whole
gathering joining in and yelling with an indescribably appalling effect:

  "Hau!  Hau!  Huguenots!
   Faites place aux Papegots!"

in derision of the old song said to be popular amongst the Protestants.
But in the Huguenot version the last words were of course transposed.

We had worked our way by this time to the front of the line, and
looking into one another's eyes, mutely asked a question; but not even
Croisette had an answer ready.  There could be no answer but one.  What
could we do?  Nothing.  We were too late.  Too late again!  And yet how
dreadful it was to stand still among the cruel, thoughtless mob and see
our friend, the touch of whose hand we knew so well, done to death for
their sport!  Done to death as the old woman had said like any rat, not
a soul save ourselves pitying him!  Not a soul to turn sick at his cry
of agony, or shudder at the glance of his dying eyes.  It was dreadful
indeed.

"Ah, well," muttered a woman beside me to her companion--there were
many women in the crowd--"it is down with the Huguenots, say I!  It is
Lorraine is the fine man!  But after all yon is a bonny fellow and a
proper, Margot!  I saw him leap from roof to roof over Love Lane, as if
the blessed saints had carried him. And him a heretic!"

"It is the black art," the other answered, crossing herself.

"Maybe it is!  But he will need it all to give that big man the slip
to-day," replied the first speaker comfortably.

"That devil!"  Margot exclaimed, pointing with a stealthy gesture of
hate at the Vidame.  And then in a fierce whisper, with inarticulate
threats, she told a story of him, which made me shudder.  "He did!  And
she in religion too!"  she concluded. "May our Lady of Loretto reward
him."

The tale might be true for aught I knew, horrible as it was!  I had
heard similar ones attributing things almost as fiendish to him, times
and again; from that poor fellow lying dead on Pavannes' doorstep for
one, and from others besides.  As the Vidame in his pacing to and fro
turned towards us, I gazed at him fascinated by his grim visage and
that story.  His eye rested on the crowd about us, and I trembled, lest
even at that distance he should recognise us.

And he did!  I had forgotten his keenness of sight.  His face flashed
suddenly into a grim smile.  The tail of his eye resting upon us, and
seeming to forbid us to move, he gave some orders. The colour fled from
my face.  To escape indeed was impossible, for we were hemmed in by the
press and could scarcely stir a limb.  Yet I did make one effort.

"Croisette!"  I muttered he was the rearmost--"stoop down.  He may not
have seen you.  Stoop down, lad!"

But St. Croix was obstinate and would not stoop.  Nay, when one of the
mounted men came, and roughly ordered us into the open, it was
Croisette who pushing past us stepped out first with a lordly air.  I,
following him, saw that his lips were firmly compressed and that there
was an eager light in his eyes.  As we emerged, the crowd in our wake
broke the line, and tried to pursue us; either hostilely or through
eagerness to see what it meant.  But a dozen blows of the long pikes
drove them back, howling and cursing to their places.

I expected to be taken to Bezers; and what would follow I could not
tell.  But he did always it seemed what we least expected, for he only
scowled at us now, a grim mockery on his lip, and cried, "See that they
do not escape again!  But do them no harm, sirrah, until I have the
batch of them!"

He turned one way, and I another, my heart swelling with rage. Would he
dare to harm us?  Would even the Vidame dare to murder a Caylus' nephew
