
Thus then having spoken, he led the way, but they followed him with an
immense clamour. Then thunder-delighting Jove raised a storm of wind
from the Idaean mountains, which bore the dust directly towards the
ships; moreover, he weakened the courage of the Greeks, but bestowed
glory upon the Trojans and Hector: so that, relying upon his prodigies,
and [their own] strength, they endeavoured to break through the mighty
wall of the Greeks. They tore down the niched battlements of the towers,
and demolished the breast-works,[402] and with levers they upheaved the
projecting buttresses, which the Greeks had planted first in the earth,
as supporters of the towers. These then they tore down, and hoped to
break through the wall of the Greeks.

Yet did not the Greeks retire as yet from the way; but fencing up the
embrazures with their ox-hide shields, they wounded from behind them the
enemy coming up under the wall. And both the Ajaces ranged in every
direction upon the towers, cheering on, rousing the valour of the
Greeks. One [they addressed][403] with soothing, another they rebuked
with harsh expressions, whomsoever they beheld totally neglectful of
battle:

   [Footnote 401: Cf. Aristot. Rhet. ii. 22; Cicero Ep. ad Attic,
   ii. 3. See, also, Duport, Gnom. Horn. p. 73.]

   [Footnote 402: Observe the zeugma, and compare Il. O. 8, G. 327;
   Od. 291; and the most elaborate and accurate note on this
   construction of D'Orville on Charit. iv. 4, p. 440, sqq. ed.
   Lips., with Burm. and Schwabe on Phaedr. iv. 17, 31; Duker on
   Flor. iii. 21, 26.]

   [Footnote 403: Id.]

"O friends, whoever of the Greeks is excelling, or moderate, or inferior
(since all men are not alike in war), now is there work for all; and ye
yourselves, I ween, know this. Let not any one be turned back towards
the ships, hearing the threatener [Hector], but advance onwards, and
exhort each other, if perchance Olympic Jove, the darter of lightning,
may grant that, having repulsed the conflict, we may pursue the enemy to
the city."

Thus they, shouting in front, cheered on the attack of the Greeks. But
of them--as when frequent flakes of snow fall upon a winter's day, when
provident Jove has begun to snow, displaying his weapons in the sight of
men, and, having lulled the winds, pours it down incessantly, till he
covers the tops and highest peaks of the lofty mountains, and the lotus
plains and rich husbandry of men: and likewise it is poured out upon the
havens and shores of the hoary sea; but the approaching wave restrains
its progress, whilst all other things are covered beneath it, when the
shower of Jove comes down heavily; so flew the frequent stones from
those hurling on both sides, some indeed towards the Trojans, and others
from the Trojans towards the Greeks. And along the whole wall a tumult
arose.

Yet never would the Trojans and illustrious Hector have burst open the
gates of the wall, and the long bolt, had not provident Jove urged on
his son, Sarpedon, against the Greeks, like a lion against
crooked-horned oxen. But he immediately held before him his shield,
equal on all sides, beautiful, brazen, plated; which the brazier indeed
had plated over, and underneath had sewed together thick bulls' hides,
with successive golden wires round its orb. He then, holding this before
him, advanced, brandishing two spears, like a lion reared in the
mountains, which hath been long in want of flesh, and whose valiant mind
impels him to go even to the well-fenced fold, about to make an attempt
upon the sheep. And although he there find the shepherds keeping watch
about their flocks with dogs and spears, still he cannot bear to be
driven away, without having made trial of the fold, but, springing in,
he either carries [one] off, or is himself wounded among the first by a
javelin from a quick hand. Thus then did his mind impel godlike Sarpedon
to attack the wall, and to burst through the barriers; and instantly he
addressed Glaucus, son of Hippolochus:

"Glaucus,[404] why are we especially honoured in Lycia, both with the
[first] seat in banquet, and with full goblets, and why do all look to
us as to gods? Why do we also possess a great and beautiful enclosure of
the vine-bearing and corn-bearing land on the banks of Xanthus? Now,
therefore, it behoves us, advancing among the foremost Lycians, to stand
firm, and to bear the brunt of the raging fight; so that some one of the
closely-armed Lycians may say, 'By no means inglorious do our kings
govern Lycia, and eat the fat sheep, and [drink][405] the choice sweet
wine; but their valour likewise is excelling, because they fight among
the foremost Lycians.' O dear friend, if indeed, by escaping from this
war, we were destined to be ever free from old age, and immortal,
neither would I combat myself in the van, nor send thee into the
glorious battle. But now--for of a truth ten thousand Fates of death
press upon us, which it is not possible for a mortal to escape or
avoid--let us on: either we shall give glory to some one, or some one to
us."

Thus he spake, nor did Glaucus turn aside or disobey, but both advanced
straight forward, leading a numerous band of Lycians. But Menestheus,
the son of Peteus, beholding them, shuddered, for they were advancing
towards his company, bearing destruction. He looked round along the line
of the Greeks, if he might see any of the leaders who could ward off the
fight from his companions, and perceived the two Ajaces, insatiable of
war, standing, and Teucer, lately come from his tent, near at hand. Yet
was it not possible for him to be heard when shouting, so great was the
din; and the crash of stricken shields, and of horse-hair crested
helmets, and of the gates, reached to heaven. For they had assailed
all,[406] and they, standing beside them, endeavoured to enter, bursting
them open by force. But immediately he despatched the herald Thooetes to
Ajax:

   [Footnote 404: Milton, P.L. ii. 450:--

                  "---- wherefore do I assume
       These royalties, and not refuse to reign,
       Refusing to accept as great a share
       Of hazard as of honour, due alike
       To him who reigns, and so much to him due
       Of hazard more, as he above the rest
       High honoured sits?"]

   [Footnote 405: Zeugma. See on ver. 268.]

   [Footnote 406: Three interpretations are given for this line:--1.
   "All the gates were attacked." 2. "All the gates were
   bolted."--Butt. 3. Change the nominative case to the accusative,
   and translate--"They (the Lycians) had attacked all the
   gates."--Ed. Dubl.]

"Go, noble Thooetes, running, call Ajax, rather indeed both: for this
would be by far the best of all, since in a short while heavy
destruction will arise here. For so vigorously do the leaders of the
Lycians press on, who even before were impetuous in the sharp contest.
If, however, labour and contest have arisen to them there, at least let
brave Telamonian Ajax come, and with him let Teucer follow, well skilled
in archery."

Thus he spoke, nor did the herald, having heard him, disobey, but he
hastened to run along the wall of the brazen-mailed Greeks, and
proceeding, he stood beside the Ajaces and immediately addressed them:

"Ye Ajaces, leaders of the brazen-mailed Greeks, the beloved son of
Jove-nourished Peteus adjures you to come thither, that ye may
participate in his toil, though for a short time. Both indeed in
preference, for this would be by far the best of all things, since soon
will heavy destruction arise there. For so vigorously do the leaders of
the Lycians press on, who even before were impetuous in the sharp
contest. But if here also war and contest have arisen, at least let
brave Telamonian Ajax come alone, and with him let Teucer follow, well
skilled in archery."

Thus he spake, nor did mighty Telamonian Ajax disobey. Instantly he
addressed to the son of Oileus winged words:

"Ajax, do thou and gallant Lycomedes, standing here, incite the Greeks
to fight bravely, whilst I go thither and oppose the battle; but I will
return again instantly, after I shall have assisted them."

Thus then having spoken, Telamonian Ajax departed, and with him went
Teucer, his brother, sprung from the same father; and Pandion, along
with them, carried the bent bow of Teucer. As soon as they reached the
tower of magnanimous Menestheus, going within the wall (for they came to
[their friends] being hard pressed: and the brave leaders and chiefs of
the Lycians were mounting upon the breast-works like unto a dark
whirlwind), but they engaged to fight in opposition, and a clamour
arose. Telamonian Ajax first slew a man, the companion of Sarpedon,
magnanimous Epicles, striking him with a rugged stone, which, mighty in
size, lay highest up against a pinnacle within the wall. Not easily
would a man support it with both hands, such as mortals now are, not
although being very youthful; but he, raising it aloft, hurled it, and
burst the four-coned helmet, and along with it crushed all the bones of
the skull: but he, like unto a diver, fell from the lofty tower, and
life deserted his bones. Teucer likewise with a shaft wounded Glaucus,
the brave son of Hippolochus, as he was rushing on, against the lofty
wall, in a part where he perceived his arm naked; and made him cease
from combat. But he sprang back from the wall, concealing himself, that
none of the Greeks might perceive him wounded, and insult him with
words. Then grief came upon Sarpedon on account of Glaucus departing,
as soon as he observed it; though he nevertheless was not neglectful of
the contest: but he taking aim, wounded Alcmaon, son of Thestor, with
his spear, and extracted the spear; but he. following the weapon, fell
prone, and his armour, variously decked with brass, resounded upon him.
Sarpedon then seizing the buttress with his sturdy hands, pulled, and it
all followed entirely; but the wall was stripped away from above, and he
formed a way for many. Then Ajax and Teucer aiming at him together, the
one smote him with an arrow in the splendid belt of his mortal-girding
shield, around his breast; but Jove averted the fate from his son, that
he might not be slain at the sterns of the ships. But Ajax, springing
upon him, struck his shield, and pierced him quite through with his
spear, and forcibly checked him eager. And then he fell back for a
little from the buttress, but did not altogether retreat, because his
spirit hoped to bear off glory. And turning round, he encouraged the
godlike Lycians:

"O Lycians, why are ye thus remiss in your impetuous force? It is
difficult for me, although being brave, having alone burst through, to
form a way to the ships. But follow along with me; for the labour of the
greater number is better."

Thus he spake; and they, reverencing the exhortation of their king,
pressed on with more alacrity round their counsel-giving king. And the
Greeks, on the other side, strengthened their phalanxes within the wall,
because a great work presented itself to them. For neither could the
gallant Lycians, bursting through the wall of the Greeks, make their way
to the ships, nor could the warlike Greeks repulse the Lycians from the
wall, since first they approached it. But as two men, holding measures
in their hands, dispute, in a common field,[407] concerning their
boundaries, who in a small space contend for their equitable right; thus
did the buttresses separate these [warriors], and, for them, each smote
the well-rounded ox-hide shields around each other's breasts, and the
light bucklers of each other. And many were wounded upon the body with
the merciless brass, whether the back of any combatant, averted, was
laid bare, and many right through the shield itself. Everywhere the
towers and buttresses were sprinkled, on both sides, with the blood of
heroes, from the Trojans and the Greeks. Yet not even thus could they
cause a flight of the Greeks, but they held themselves, as a just woman,
who labours with her hands, does the scales,[408] who, poising both the
weight and the wool, draws them on either side to equalize them, that
she may procure a scanty pittance for the support of her children. Thus
equally was their battle and war extended, before the time when Jove
gave superior glory to Hector, the son of Priam, who first leaped within
the wall of the Greeks, and shouted with a penetrating voice, calling
out to the Trojans:

"Push on, ye horse-breaking Trojans, burst through the wall of the
Greeks, and hurl the fiercely-blazing fire against the ships."

Thus he spake, cheering them on; but they all heard him with their ears,
and rushed against the wall in great numbers, and then mounted the
battlements, carrying their pointed spears. But Hector seizing it, took
up a stone, which stood before the gates, widening out at the base,[409]
but sharp above; which two men, the strongest of the people, such as
mortals now are, could not easily raise from the ground upon a waggon.
He, however, brandished it easily and alone, because the son of wise
Saturn had rendered it light to him.

   [Footnote 407: _I.e._ a field, to part of which each lays claim.
   [Greek: Metra] seem to be the lines used in measuring ground
   ("linea mensuralis," Siculus Flaccus, p. 23, ed. Goes.).]

   [Footnote 408: Milton, P.L. vi. 245:--

                 ----"long time in even scale
         The battle hung."]

   [Footnote 409: See Eustathius.]

As when a shepherd without difficulty carries the fleece of a male
sheep, taking it in either hand, and but a small weight oppresses him;
so Hector, raising the stone, bore it right against the beams which
strengthened the closely-jointed gates, double and lofty; but two
cross-bars secured them within, and one key fitted them. But advancing,
he stood very near, and exerting his strength, struck them in the
middle, standing with his legs wide asunder, that the blow of the weapon
might not be weak. And he tore away both hinges, and the stone fell
within with a great weight; and the gates crashed around; nor did the
bars withstand it, but the beams were rent asunder in different
directions by the impulse of the stone. There illustrious Hector rushed
in, in aspect like unto the dreadful night; and he glittered in
terrible brass, with which he was girt around his body. And he held two
spears in his hands, nor could any one, opposing, restrain him, except
the gods, after he had leaped within the gates; but his eyes gleamed
with fire. And turning to the crowd, he cheered on the Trojans to ascend
the wall, and they obeyed him encouraging. Straightway indeed some
crossed the wall, and others were poured in through the well-wrought
gates, but the Greeks were routed towards the hollow barks, and an
unyielding[410] tumult ensued.

   [Footnote 410: See Buttm. Lexil. p. 405,]




                         BOOK THE THIRTEENTH.


                               ARGUMENT.

Neptune engages on the Grecian side, and the battle proceeds. Deiphobus
is repulsed by Meriones. Teucer kills Imbrius, and Hector Amphimachus.
Neptune, assuming the likeness of Thoas, exhorts Idomeneus, who goes
forth with Meriones to battle, when the former slays Othryoneus and
Asius. Deiphobus attacks Idomeneus, but misses him, and slays Hypsenor.
Idomeneus slays Alcathous, over whose body a sharp contest ensues.


But after Jove, then, had brought the Trojans and Hector near the ships,
he left them to endure labour and toil at them incessantly; but he
himself turned back his shining eyes apart, looking towards the land of
the equestrian Thracians and the close-fighting Mysians, and the
illustrious Hippomolgi, milk-nourished, simple in living, and most just
men.[411] But to Troy he no longer now turned his bright eyes; for he
did not suppose in his mind that any one of the immortals, going, would
aid either the Trojans or the Greeks.

   [Footnote 411: Arrian, Exp. Alex. iv. p. 239, referring to this
   passage of Homer, observes, [Greek: oikousi de en te Asia outoi
   autonomoi, ouch ekista dia penian te kai dikaioteta]. Dionysius,
   Perieg. 309, seems, as Hill observes, to consider the name
   [Greek: ippemolgoi] as applicable not to one single clan, but to
   the whole of the Sarmatian nomads, milk being one of the
   principal articles of their diet, as among the Suevi (Caesar, B.G.
   iv. 1), and the ancient Germans (id. vi. 22). Callimachus, Hymn
   iii., applies the epithet to the Cimmerians. The epithet [Greek:
   abion] (or [Greek: abion]=_bowless_, not living by archery: cf.
   Alberti on Hesych. t. i. pp. 17, 794) is involved in doubt, and
   the ancients themselves were uncertain whether to regard it as a
   proper name or an epithet. (Cf. Steph. Byz. s. v., p. 7, ed.
   Pined.; Villois on Apoll. Lex. p. 14; Duport, Gnom. Horn. p. 74,
   sqq.) It seems best to understand with Strabo, vii. p. 460,
   nations [Greek: ap' oligon eytelos xontas]. Knight wished to
   throw out these verses altogether, alleging that allusion is made
   in them to the discipline of Zamolxis, with which Homer must have
   been wholly unacquainted.]

Nor did king Neptune keep a vain watch; for he sat aloft upon the
highest summit of the woody Thracian Samos, admiring the war and the
battle. For from thence all Ida was visible, and the city of Priam was
visible, and the ships of the Greeks. Then coming out of the sea, he sat
down, and he pitied the Greeks, subdued by the Trojans, and was very
indignant with Jove. But presently he descended down, from the rugged
mountain, rapidly advancing on foot, and the high hills and woods
trembled beneath the immortal feet of Neptune, advancing. Thrice indeed
he strode, advancing, and with the fourth step he reached AEgae, his
destined goal. There distinguished mansions, golden, glittering, ever
incorruptible, were erected to him in the depths of the sea. Coming
thither, he yoked beneath his chariot the brazen-footed steeds, swiftly
flying, crested with golden manes. But he himself placed gold around his
person, took his golden lash, well wrought, and ascended his chariot. He
proceeded to drive over the billows, and the monsters of the deep[412]
sported beneath him on all sides from their recesses, nor were ignorant
of their king. For joy the sea separated; and they flew very rapidly,
nor was the brazen axle moist beneath. And his well-bounding steeds bore
him to the ships of the Greeks.

Now there is an ample cave[413] in the recesses of the deep sea, between
Tenedos and rugged Imbrus. There earth-shaking Neptune stopped his
horses, loosing them from the chariot, and cast beside [them] ambrosial
fodder to eat. And round their feet he threw golden fetters,
irrefragable, indissoluble, that they might there steadily await their
king returning, but he departed towards the army of the Greeks.

   [Footnote 412: So I have ventured to render [Greek: ketea]. Nonius
   Marcell. v. Cetarii--"cete in mari majora sunt piscium genera."
   Thus Quintus Calaber, v. 94, imitating this passage, has [Greek:
   delphines], and Hesychius defines [Greek: keton] by [Greek:
   thunnon phora], the word evidently meaning any huge fish. Cf.
   Buttm. Lexil. p. 378, sq.]

   [Footnote 413: Compare the description of the cave of Nereus, in
   Apoll. Rhod. iv. 771, sqq., and of the river Peneus, in Virg.
   Georg. iv. 359, sqq., with my note on AEsch. Prom. p. 11, ed.
   Bohn.]

The Trojans, however, in crowds, like unto a flame or a whirlwind,
followed Hector, the son of Priam, with insatiable ardour, shouting
loudly, and exclaiming; for they hoped to capture the ships of the
Greeks, and slay all the Greeks beside them. But earth-ruling,
earth-shaking Neptune, coming from the deep sea, aroused the Greeks,
assimilating his person and indefatigable voice to Calchas. The Ajaces
he first addressed, though themselves were earnest:

"Ye Ajaces, ye indeed, mindful of valour, not of direful flight, will
preserve the people of the Greeks. For in any other place, indeed, I do
not dread the audacious hands of the Trojans, who in great numbers have
surmounted the great wall, because the well-greaved Greeks will sustain
them all. But in that place I grievously fear lest we suffer any thing,
where infuriated Hector, like unto a flame, leads on who boasts to be
the son of almighty Jove. But may some of the gods thus put it in your
minds, that ye stand firmly yourselves, and exhort others; thus may ye
drive him, although impetuous, from the swift-sailing ships, even if
Jove himself excites him."

He said, and earth-ruling Neptune, striking both with his sceptre,
filled them with violent might, and made their limbs light and their
feet and hands above. But he, like as a swift-winged hawk is impelled to
fly, which, lifted up from a rugged, lofty rock, has hastened to pursue
another bird over the plain; so darted earth-shaking Neptune from them.
But fleet Ajax, the son of Oileus, recognized him first of the two, and
straightway addressed Ajax, the son of Telamon:

"O Ajax, since some one of the gods, who possess Olympus, likening
himself to the soothsayer, exhorts us to fight beside the ships (neither
is this Calchas, the prophesying augur; for I readily recognized the
traces of his feet and legs when departing; for the gods are easily
distinguished), even to myself, the soul within my bosom is more incited
to war and to fight, and my feet beneath and hands above eagerly desire
it."

But him Telamonian Ajax answering, addressed: "So also to me are my
strong hands upon my spear eager, and my courage is aroused, and I am
hurried along by both my feet under me; and I eagerly long, even alone,
to combat with Hector, the son of Priam, insatiably raging."

Thus they addressed these words to each other, joyful in the desire of
battle[414] which the god had infused into their minds. In the meanwhile
the Earth-ruler (Neptune) aroused the Achaeans in the rear, who were
recruiting their spirit at the swift ships; whose limbs were at the same
time relaxed with toilsome labour, and grief was arising in their minds,
beholding the Trojans, who with a tumult had surmounted the vast wall.
But beholding them, they poured forth tears from beneath their eyebrows,
for they expected not to escape destruction: but the Earth-shaker
intervening, easily aroused the brave phalanxes. To Teucer and Leius he
first came, exhorting them, and to the hero Peneleus, and Thoas, and
Deipyrus, and to Meriones and Antilochus, skilful in war. These he
encouraging, spoke winged words:

   [Footnote 414: See Heyne, who compares the Latin _gestire_.
   Hesych.: [Greek: Charme, e reta charas mache].]

"O shame! Argives, young men, I trust that our ships will be preserved
by your fighting; but if ye be remiss in the destructive battle, the day
is now come [for us] to be subdued by the Trojans. Ye gods, surely I
behold with my eyes a great marvel, terrible, which I never expected
would be brought to pass, that the Trojans should approach our ships;
who formerly, like unto timid stags, which through the wood are the prey
of lynxes, pards, and wolves, foolishly straying about, weak, nor fit
for combat: so the Trojans formerly would not stand even for a little
against the might and prowess of the Greeks. But now, far away from the
city, they combat at the hollow ships, through the perverseness of our
general, and the indifference of the troops; who, disputing with him,
are unwilling to defend the swift ships, but are slain among them. Yet
although in reality the hero, the son of Atreus, wide-ruling Agamemnon,
be altogether in fault, in that he hath dishonoured the swift-footed son
of Peleus, still it is by no means our duty to be remiss in battle, but
let us the sooner repair [the mischief];[415] the minds of the brave are
easily appeased. But they by no means honourably remit your impetuous
valour, being all the bravest in the army: I indeed would not quarrel
with a man who should desist from combat, being unwarlike; but with you
I am indignant from my heart. O soft ones! surely will ye soon create
some greater evil by this inertness: but do each of you in his mind
ponder on the shame and reproach; for certainly a mighty contest hath
arisen. Now indeed brave Hector, good in the din of war, combats at the
ships, and hath burst through the gates and the long bar."

   [Footnote 415: [Greek: To gegonos amartema]: Schol. For the
   metaphorical use of [Greek: akestai], cf. Soph. Ant. 1026.
   [Greek: Ostis es kakon Peson okeitai med' akinetos pelei]. So
   [Greek: eyuiatoteros dia to metapeisthenai an]. Aristot. Eth.
   vii. 2.]

Thus then Neptune, exhorting, aroused the Greeks. But round the two
Ajaces firm phalanxes stood, which not even Mars, coming amongst them,
would have found fault with, nor Minerva, the confounder of armies; for
the bravest selected awaited the Trojans and noble Hector; knitting
spear with spear, shield with shield,[416] one upon another,[417] so
that shield pressed upon shield, helmet upon helmet, and man upon man.
And the horse-haired helmets of them, nodding, touched each other with
their splendid ridges,[418] so closely stood they to one another; and
spears in the act of being hurled, were brandishing from their daring
hands, whilst they wished [to go] straight [against the enemy], and were
eager to fight. But the combined Trojans first made the attack, and
impetuous Hector first rushed against them: as a destructively-rolling
stone from a rock, which a wintry torrent drives down the brow, having
burst with a mighty shower the stays of the rugged rock, and bounding
along, it rolls, and the forest resounds beneath it: but straightway it
runs on uninterruptedly until it reach the plain, but then it rolls no
longer, though impelled; so Hector for a while threatened that he would
easily come as far as the sea, to the tents and ships of the Greeks,
slaughtering. But when now he met the firm phalanxes, he stopped, being
come into close contact; and the sons of the Greeks, opposing, repulsed
him from them, striking him with their swords and two-edged spears; but
retiring, he was compelled to withdraw; and he cried out shouting
audibly to the Trojans:

"Ye Trojans and Lycians, and close-fighting Dardanians, stand firm. Not
long will the Greeks withstand me, although they have drawn themselves
up in very dense array.[419] But, I conceive, they will retire from my
spear, if in truth the most powerful of the gods, the high-thundering
husband of Juno, hath urged me on."

   [Footnote 416: See the learned remarks of Duport, p. 76, sq. To
   quote parallel passages would be endless.]

   [Footnote 417: Literally, "from the roots." So [Greek:
   oichetai--prothelumna], Tryphiodor. 388. Cf. Alberti on Hesych.
   t. ii. p. 1029; Apoll. Lex. p. 676.]

   [Footnote 418: See Buttm. Lexil. p. 523. The [Greek: phalos]
   formed a socket for the plume.]

   [Footnote 419: Lit. "tower-wise," forming a solid square.]

So saying, he aroused the might and courage of each. But Deiphobus, the
son of Priam, walked amongst them, high-minded, and he held his shield
equal on all sides before him, proceeding with light step, and advancing
under protection of his shield. Then Meriones took aim with his shining
spear, and struck him (nor did he miss) upon the bull's-hide shield,
equal on all sides, which he did not pierce; for the long spear, far
before was broken at the socket. But Deiphobus held his bull's-hide
shield far from him, for he dreaded in his mind the spear of warlike
Meriones; but that hero fell back into the column of his companions, for
he was grievously enraged on both accounts, both for [the loss] of the
victory, and of the spear which he had broken. Accordingly he proceeded
to pass by the tents and ships of the Greeks, to bring a long spear
which had been left in his tent; whilst the others fought, and a mighty
tumult arose.

Then Telamonian Teucer first slew a hero, the warrior Imbrius, son of
Mentor, rich in steeds; and he dwelt at Pedaeum before the sons of the
Greeks arrived, and had married Medesicaste, the illegitimate daughter
of Priam. But when the equally-plied ships of the Greeks arrived, he
came back to Ilium, and excelled among the Trojans; and dwelt with
Priam, who honoured him equally with his sons. Him the son of Telamon
smote under the ear with his long javelin, and plucked out the spear;
but he indeed fell, like an ash, which, on the summit of a mountain
conspicuous from afar, cut down with a brazen axe, strews its tender
foliage on the earth. Thus he fell, and his armour, variegated with
brass, rang about him. Then Teucer rushed on, eager to strip him of his
armour; but Hector hurled his shining spear at him, hastening. He,
however, seeing it from the opposite side, avoided, by a small space,
the brazen spear; and [Hector] wounded with his javelin, on the breast,
Amphimachus, son of Cteas, the son of Actor, advancing to the battle;
and, falling, he gave a crash, and his arms rang upon him. Then Hector
rushed to tear from the head of magnanimous Amphimachus the helmet
fitted to his temples, but Ajax hurled with his shining spear at Hector,
rushing on. Yet it never reached his body, for he was protected all over
with terrible brass; but he smote him upon the boss of the shield, and
repulsed him with great violence; and he retired from both bodies, and
the Greeks drew them away. Then Stichius and noble Menestheus, the
leaders of the Athenians, carried Amphimachus to the army of the Greeks,
but the two Ajaces, eager for impetuous combat, [carried] Imbrius. As
two lions bear a goat through the thick copse-wood, snatching it from
the sharp-toothed dogs, holding it high above the earth in their jaws;
so the two warriors, the Ajaces, holding him [Imbrius] aloft, stripped
off his armour; but the son of Oileus, enraged on account of
Amphimachus, severed his head from his tender neck, and sent it rolling
like a ball through the crowd; but it fell before the feet of Hector in
the dust.

Then indeed was Neptune grieved at heart for his grandson, slain in the
grievous fight; and he proceeded to go along the tents and ships of the
Greeks, exhorting the Greeks, and prepared disasters for the Trojans.
But spear-renowned Idomeneus then met him, returning from a companion
who had lately come to him from the battle, wounded in the ham with the
sharp brass, whom his comrades had carried in, and he, having given
directions to the surgeons, was returning from his tent; for he still
desired to participate in the fight. Him king Neptune addressed,
assimilating himself, as to his voice, to Thoas, son of Andraemon, who
governed the AEtolians throughout all Pleuron and lofty Calydon, and who
was honoured by the people as a god:

"Idomeneus, thou counsellor of the Cretans, where indeed are the threats
gone, with which the sons of the Greeks threatened the Trojans?" Whom
again in return, Idomeneus, the leader of the Cretans, addressed: "No
man, O Thoas, as far as I know, is at present to blame; for we are all
skilled in warring. Neither does disheartening fear detain any one, nor
does any one, yielding to sloth, shirk evil strife; but thus, doubtless,
it will be agreeable to the all-powerful son of Saturn, that here, far
away from Argos, the Greeks shall perish inglorious. But, Thoas--for
formerly thou wast warlike, and urged on others when thou didst behold
them negligent--so now desist not thyself, but exhort each man."

But him earth-shaking Neptune then answered: "Never may that man, O
Idomeneus, return from Troy, but let him here be the sport of the dogs,
whosoever voluntarily this day shall relax from fighting. But come,
taking up arms, advance hither; for it behoves us to hasten these
things, if we may be of any service, although but two; for useful is the
valour of men, even the very pusillanimous, if combined, whereas we both
understand how to fight even with the brave."

So saying, the god departed again to the toil of heroes. But Idomeneus,
when now he had reached his well-made tent, put on his rich armour
around his body, and seized two spears, and hastened to go, like unto
the lightning, which the son of Saturn, seizing in his hand, brandishes
from glittering Olympus, showing a sign to mortals; and brilliant are
its rays: so shone the brass around the breast of him running. Then
Meriones, his good attendant, met him yet near the tent,--for he was
going to fetch a brazen spear; and the strength of Idomeneus addressed
him:

"Meriones, son of Molus, swift of foot, dearest of my companions, why
comest thou thus, quitting the war and the contest? Art thou at all
wounded, and does the point of a spear afflict thee? Or comest thou to
me on any message? For I myself am not desirous to sit within my tent,
but to fight."

But him prudent Meriones in turn answered: "Idomeneus, thou counsellor
of the brazen-mailed Cretans, I come, if there be any spear left within
thy tents, to take it: because I indeed have broken that which I
formerly had, having struck the shield of ferocious Deiphobus." Whom
again in turn Idomeneus, leader of the Cretans, addressed: "Thou wilt
find, if thou desirest [to select from them], one-and-twenty spears
standing in my tent against the shining walls, which I have taken from
the slain Trojans; for I affirm that I do not fight with hostile men,
standing at a distance from them. Hence I have both spears, and bossy
shields, and helmets, and corslets, brightly polished."

But him again prudent Meriones addressed in turn: "At my tent also and
black ship are there many spoils of the Trojans; but they are not near,
so that I might take them. For neither do I conceive that I am forgetful
of valour, but I stand among the foremost in glory-giving battle,
whenever the contest of war has arisen. I am rather unobserved perhaps,
when fighting by some other of the brazen-mailed Greeks; but I think
that thou knowest me."

Whom again Idomeneus, leader of the Cretans, addressed in turn: "I know
what thou art as to valour: what necessity is there for thee to
enumerate these things? For if now all we the bravest at the ships
should be selected for an ambuscade, where the courage of men is
especially distinguished, where both the coward as well as the brave man
is made apparent--for the complexion of the coward on the one hand is
changed from this to that, nor is his heart calm within his bosom, so
that he can rest without trembling, but he shifts his position, and sits
upon both his feet, whilst his heart greatly palpitates within his
breast, as he is expecting death; and a chattering of his teeth arises.
But neither is the complexion of the brave man changed, nor is he at all
disturbed, after he first sits down in the ambush of heroes; but he
burns to be mingled with all haste in direful fight--[no one], in that
case, would find fault with thy courage and might. For if, labouring [in
the battle], thou wert wounded from a distance, or smitten in close
fight, the weapon would not fall upon thy neck behind, nor upon thy
back; but it would pierce through either thy breast, or thy stomach, as
thou wast rushing forward amid the conflict[420] of foremost combatants.
But come, no longer let us speak of these things, standing like
infatuated persons, lest perhaps some one chide us inordinately; but do
thou, going to the tent, take a strong spear."

   [Footnote 420: Hesych. [Greek: Oaristyn machen]. Etym. M. fol.
   131, B. 2. [Greek: Anti tou en te ton trotagoniston omilia] which
   is its proper meaning, as derived from [Greek: gar kai
   sunanastrophe].]

Thus be spake, and Meriones, equal to swift Mars, quickly took from the
tent a brazen spear; and he went along with Idomeneus, very eager for
war. But as man-destroying Mars enters the battle--with whom Terror, his
dear son, at the same time powerful and undismayed, follows, who strikes
fear into the warrior even of resolute soul: these indeed are armed from
Thrace, along with the Ephyri or with the magnanimous Phlegyans; neither
do they hear both, but they give glory to one or the other--so Meriones
and Idomeneus, leaders of heroes, advanced to battle equipped with
helmets of glittering brass; and Meriones first addressed him in these
words:

"Son of Deucalion, where dost thou meditate to enter the throng? To the
right of all the army, or at the centre, or upon the left? Since nowhere
[else][421] in the battle do I conceive that the long-haired Greeks so
much require support."

   [Footnote 421: _I.e._ nowhere so much as on the left.]

But him Idomeneus, the leader of the Cretans, in turn addressed: "Among
the centre ships indeed there are others to aid them, both the Ajaces
and Teucer, who is the most skilful of the Greeks in archery, and brave
also in standing fight; who will sufficiently harass, even to satiety,
Hector, the son of Priam, although most urgent of battle, and although
being very gallant. Hard will it be for him, although very desirous of
fighting, having overpowered their strength and invincible hands, to
fire the ships, unless the son of Saturn himself cast a flaming torch
