a burning thirst; and as there was soon no one left to care for the
sick, they painfully dragged themselves to the sides of the fountains,
where many of them died.

Not only were the sick uncared for, but it was also nearly impossible to
dispose of the dead; and the bodies lay in the streets day after day,
waiting for burial.

When the Athenians were in the greatest distress, Pericles heard that
there was a Greek doctor, named Hip-poc'ra-tes, who had a cure for the
plague; and he wrote to him, imploring his help.

Hippocrates received Pericles' letter at the same time that a message
arrived from Artaxerxes, King of Persia. The king asked him to come and
save the Persians, who were suffering from the same disease, and offered
the doctor great wealth.

The noble doctor did not hesitate a moment, but sent away the Persian
messenger, saying that it was his duty first to save his own countrymen.
Then he immediately set out for the plague-stricken city of Athens,
where he worked bravely night and day.

His care and skill restored many sufferers; and, although thousands died
of the plague, the remaining Athenians knew that they owed him their
lives. When the danger was over, they all voted that Hippocrates should
have a golden crown, and said he should be called an Athenian
citizen,--an honor which they seldom granted to any outsider.

The plague had not only carried away many of the poorer citizens, but
had also stricken down the nobles and the rich. Pericles' family
suffered from it too. All his children took it and died, with the
exception of one.

The great man, in spite of his private cares and sorrows, was always in
and out among the people, helping and encouraging them, and he finally
caught the plague himself.

His friends soon saw, that, in spite of all their efforts, he would die.
They crowded around his bed in tears, praising him in low tones, and
saying how much he had done for the Athenians and for the improvement of
their city.

"Why," said one of them warmly, "he found the city bricks, and leaves it
marble!"

Pericles, whose eyes had been closed, and who seemed unconscious, now
suddenly roused himself, and said, "Why do you mention those things?
They were mostly owing to my large fortune. The thing of which I am
proudest is that I never caused any fellow-citizen to put on mourning!"

Pericles then sank back, and soon died; but his friends always
remembered that he had ruled Athens for more than thirty years without
ever punishing any one unjustly, and that he had always proved helpful
and merciful to all.




LXII. THE PHILOSOPHER SOCRATES.


When Pericles died, the Peloponnesian War had already been carried on
for more than three years, but was not nearly at an end. As the
Athenians felt the need of a leader, they soon chose Nic'ias to take the
place left vacant by Pericles.

This Nicias was an honest man; but he was unfortunately rather dull, and
very slow about deciding anything. Whenever he was called upon to see to
matters of state, he hesitated so long, and was so uncertain, that the
Greeks often had cause to regret the loss of Pericles.

There was another man of note in Athens at this time, the philosopher
Socrates, a truly wise and good man. He was no politician, however; and,
instead of troubling himself about the state, he spent all his spare
moments in studying, or in teaching the young men of Athens.

Like his friend Anaxagoras, Socrates was a very deep thinker. He, too,
always tried to find out the exact truth about everything. He was
specially anxious to know how the earth had been created, who the Being
was who gave us life, and whether the soul died with the body, or
continued to live after the body had fallen into dust.

Socrates was a poor man, a stonecutter by trade; but he spent every
moment he could spare from his work in thinking, studying, and
questioning others. Little by little, in spite of the contrary opinion
of his fellow-citizens, he began to understand that the stories of the
Greek gods and goddesses could not be true.

He thought that there must surely be a God far greater than they,--a God
who was good and powerful and just, who governed the world he had
created, and who rewarded the virtuous and punished the wicked.

[Illustration: Socrates.]

Socrates believed that everybody should be as good and gentle as
possible, and freely forgive all injuries. This belief was very
different from that of all ancient nations, who, on the contrary,
thought that they should try to avenge every insult, and return evil for
evil.

The philosopher Socrates not only taught this gentleness, but practiced
it carefully at home and abroad. He had plenty of opportunity to make
use of it; for he had such a cross wife, that her name, Xan-thip'pe, is
still used to describe a scolding and bad-tempered woman.

Whenever Xanthippe was angry, she used to scold poor Socrates roundly.
He always listened without flying into a passion, or even answering her;
and when her temper was too unbearable, he quietly left the house, and
went about his business elsewhere.

This gentleness and meekness only angered Xanthippe the more; and one
day, when he was escaping as usual, she caught up a jug full of water
and poured it over his head.

Socrates good-naturedly shook off the water, smiled, and merely remarked
to his companions, "After the thunder comes the rain."




LXIII. SOCRATES' FAVORITE PUPIL.


As you have already heard, Socrates was a teacher. He did not, however,
have a school like yours, with desks, and books, and maps, and
blackboards. His pupils gathered about him at his workshop, or in the
cool porticoes, or under the trees in the garden of the Academy.

Then, while hammering his stone, or while slowly pacing up and down, the
philosopher talked to his scholars so gently and wisely, that even the
richest and noblest youths of Athens were proud to call him their
teacher. He also visited the house of the noted Aspasia, and was a
friend of Pericles, Phidias, and Anaxagoras, besides being the teacher
of three very celebrated men,--Pla'to, Xen'o-phon, and Al-ci-bi'a-des.

[Illustration: Alcibiades dared the Driver to come on.]

Plato and Xenophon, even in their youth, were noted for their coolness
and right-mindedness; but Alcibiades, a general favorite, was very
different from them both. He was an orphan, and the ward of Pericles.
His father had left him a large fortune; and, as Alcibiades was
handsome, intelligent, and very high-spirited, he was made much of and
greatly spoiled.

Even as a little child he was very headstrong, and, as he had no father
and mother to check him, he was often led by his willfulness into great
danger. We are told that once, when he saw a wagon coming down the
street where he and his playmates were playing, he called to the man to
stop. The man, who cared nothing for their game, drove on, and the other
children quickly sprang aside so as not to be run over. Alcibiades,
however, flung himself down across the road, in front of his playthings,
and dared the driver to come on.

This was of course very foolish; and if the driver had given him a few
sharp cuts with his whip, it might have done Alcibiades a great deal of
good. But the man was so amused by the little fellow's pluck, that he
actually turned around and drove through another street.

When Alcibiades grew a little older, he went to listen to the teachings
of Socrates. In the presence of this wise man, Alcibiades forgot all his
vanity and willfulness, talked sensibly, and showed himself well
informed and kind-hearted.

He seemed so earnest and simple that Socrates soon grew very fond of
him. They often walked together on the street; and it must have been
pleasing to see this tall, handsome, and aristocratic youth, eagerly
listening to the wise words of the homely, toil-worn workman beside
him.

Unfortunately, however, Alcibiades could not pass all his time with the
good philosopher, and when he left him it was to spend the rest of the
day with his own class. As he was rich, generous, and handsome, his
companions always flattered him, approved of all he did, and admired
everything he said.

This constant flattery was very bad for the young man; and, as he was
anxious to please everybody, it often led him to do foolish things. He
gave costly banquets, drove fast horses, boasted a great deal, and even
started out for his first battle in a magnificent suit of armor all
inlaid with gold.

His shield was also inlaid with gold and ivory, and on it was a picture
of Cu'pid throwing the thunderbolts of Jove (Zeus). All his flatterers,
instead of telling him frankly that such armor was ridiculous, admired
him greatly, and vowed that he looked like the god of the sun.

In the midst of the battle, Alcibiades, who was very brave, rushed into
the thick of the foe. His armor was not as strong as a plainer suit
would have been; and he soon found himself hemmed round, and almost
ready to fall. His fine friends had of course deserted the lad; but,
fortunately for him, Socrates was there. The philosopher rushed into the
midst of the fray, caught up the young man in his strong arms, and bore
him off the battlefield to a place of safety, where he tenderly bound up
his wounds.

As Alcibiades was a good-hearted youth, he felt deeply grateful to
Socrates for saving his life, and ever after proudly claimed him as a
friend. In spite of the philosopher's advice, however, the young man
continued to frequent the same society; and, as he was genial and
open-handed with all, he daily grew more popular.




LXIV. YOUTH OF ALCIBIADES.


As the Greeks all loved the Olympic games, Alcibiades was always seen
there. He took part in the chariot races especially; and his horses won
three prizes in succession, to the delight of his admirers.

Alcibiades was shrewd enough, in spite of all his vanity, to understand
that the people of Athens loved him principally because he was handsome
and rich. He also knew that they delighted in gossip, and he sometimes
did a thing merely to hear them talk about it.

He had a very handsome dog, for instance; and for a little while its
beauty was praised by every one. But the Athenians soon grew used to the
animal, and ceased to talk about it. Then Alcibiades had the dog's tail
cut off, and of course every one began to exclaim about that.

Some of the Athenians became so inquisitive that they asked why he had
done so, and he laughingly answered that it was merely in order to
supply them with material for conversation and wonder.

Alcibiades was so merry and light-hearted that he treated even serious
matters in a joking way. We are told, that, when he was first admitted
to the city council, he acted like a schoolboy, and mischievously let
loose a captive quail, which ran in and out among the feet of the
councilors, and fluttered about so wildly as to upset the gravity of the
whole assembly.

On another occasion the councilors were all waiting for Alcibiades to
begin their proceedings. He entered the hall with a crown of flowers on
his head; begged them to excuse him, because he could really not attend
to business, as he had a banquet at his house; and asked them to adjourn
and go home with him.

Strange to relate, his manner was so fascinating that the grave
councilors did as he wished, and dropped their important business to
feast with him. It was on account of this influence that an Athenian
citizen once bitterly exclaimed, "Go on, my brave boy! Your prosperity
will bring ruin on this crowd."

Alcibiades was such a favorite among rich and poor, that the Athenians
would gladly have made him king. Fortunately, however, the young man
still had sense enough to refuse this honor; but, although he would not
accept the title, he exercised much of the power of a king, and soon he
and Nicias were the principal politicians of the day.

Alcibiades was as ambitious as Nicias was careful; and while the latter
was always trying to keep the Athenians as quiet and contented as
possible, Alcibiades was always ready to think of some plan by which the
power of the city could be extended.

This ambition of Alcibiades was destined to have a very bad effect upon
his own fortunes and upon those of his native land, as you will see by
the end of his career.




LXV. GREEK COLONIES IN ITALY.


The Greeks, as you know, had founded colonies all along the coast of
Asia Minor and on many of the islands. They had also sailed as far as
Italy and Sicily, where they built many towns.

Little by little these colonies grew richer and stronger. As the Greek
settlers increased in number, they claimed more and more land. In Sicily
and southern Italy the soil was so fertile that the people soon grew
very rich; and, as they had vessels in plenty, they traded everywhere,
and became noted for their commercial enterprise.

The first of the Greek colonies in southern Italy was the city of
Syb'a-ris. It was so prosperous that the people had more money than they
knew what to do with; and they spent large sums in making their houses
beautiful and in securing every comfort.

The Syb'a-rites soon became so luxurious in their habits, that they were
noted all over the country for their love of ease. We are told that one
Sybarite, for instance, once ordered his slaves to prepare a couch for
him of fresh rose leaves.

When it was ready, he stretched himself out upon it and slept. In a
short time he awoke with cries of great distress, saying that he could
not sleep because a rose leaf was crumpled under him, and chafed his
tender skin.

Ever since then, when people make a great fuss about a trifle, they are
apt to hear the remark, "'Tis the crumpled rose leaf!" and when they
spend too much thought upon their bodily comfort, and indulge in too
much luxury, they are called Sybarites.

The people of this town continued to flourish for some time, but they
finally quarreled with the neighboring colony of Croton. A war followed,
in which the ease-loving Sybarites were defeated and their city was
destroyed.

Croton and Ta-ren'tum on the mainland, and Messina and Syr'a-cuse on the
Island of Sicily, were now the principal colonies. They were all very
rich and prosperous, so Alcibiades told the Athenians that it would be a
good plan to send out a fleet to conquer and annex them.

Nicias and his party opposed this plan; but when it was put to the vote,
it was found that the eloquence of Alcibiades had prevailed. A large
