    Soon follow'd signs portentous sent from heav'n.
    The skins all crept, and on the spits the flesh
    Both roast and raw bellow'd, as with the voice
    Of living beeves. Thus my devoted friends
    Driving the fattest oxen of the Sun,
    Feasted six days entire; but when the sev'nth
    By mandate of Saturnian Jove appeared,
    The storm then ceased to rage, and we, again
    Embarking, launch'd our galley, rear'd the mast,
    And gave our unfurl'd canvas to the wind.                        470
      The island left afar, and other land
    Appearing none, but sky alone and sea,
    Right o'er the hollow bark Saturnian Jove
    Hung a caerulean cloud, dark'ning the Deep.
    Not long my vessel ran, for, blowing wild,
    Now came shrill Zephyrus; a stormy gust
    Snapp'd sheer the shrouds on both sides; backward fell
    The mast, and with loose tackle strew'd the hold;
    Striking the pilot in the stern, it crush'd
    His scull together; he a diver's plunge                          480
    Made downward, and his noble spirit fled.
    Meantime, Jove thund'ring, hurl'd into the ship
    His bolts; she, smitten by the fires of Jove,
    Quaked all her length; with sulphur fill'd she reek'd,
    And o'er her sides headlong my people plunged
    Like sea-mews, interdicted by that stroke
    Of wrath divine to hope their country more.
    But I, the vessel still paced to and fro,
    Till, fever'd by the boist'rous waves, her sides
    Forsook the keel now left to float alone.                        490
    Snapp'd where it join'd the keel the mast had fall'n,
    But fell encircled with a leathern brace,
    Which it retain'd; binding with this the mast
    And keel together, on them both I sat,
    Borne helpless onward by the dreadful gale.
    And now the West subsided, and the South
    Arose instead, with mis'ry charged for me,
    That I might measure back my course again
    To dire Charybdis. All night long I drove,
    And when the sun arose, at Scylla's rock                         500
    Once more, and at Charybdis' gulph arrived.
    It was the time when she absorb'd profound
    The briny flood, but by a wave upborne
    I seized the branches fast of the wild-fig.[57]
    To which, bat-like, I clung; yet where to fix
    My foot secure found not, or where to ascend,
    For distant lay the roots, and distant shot
    The largest arms erect into the air,
    O'ershadowing all Charybdis; therefore hard
    I clench'd the boughs, till she disgorg'd again                  510
    Both keel and mast. Not undesired by me
    They came, though late; for at what hour the judge,
    After decision made of num'rous strifes[58]
    Between young candidates for honour, leaves
    The forum for refreshment' sake at home,
    Then was it that the mast and keel emerged.
    Deliver'd to a voluntary fall,
    Fast by those beams I dash'd into the flood,
    And seated on them both, with oary palms
    Impell'd them; nor the Sire of Gods and men                      520
    Permitted Scylla to discern me more,
    Else had I perish'd by her fangs at last.
    Nine days I floated thence, and, on the tenth
    Dark night, the Gods convey'd me to the isle
    Ogygia, habitation of divine
    Calypso, by whose hospitable aid
    And assiduity, my strength revived.
    But wherefore this? ye have already learn'd
    That hist'ry, thou and thy illustrious spouse;
    I told it yesterday, and hate a tale                             530
    Once amply told, then, needless, traced again.


FOOTNOTES:

[56] They passed the line through a pipe of horn, to secure it against
the fishes' bite.

[57] See line 120.

[58] He had therefore held by the fig-tree from sunrise till afternoon.




BOOK XIII

ARGUMENT

Ulysses, having finished his narrative, and received additional presents
from the Phaeacians, embarks; he is conveyed in his sleep to Ithaca, and
in his sleep is landed on that island. The ship that carried him is in
her return transformed by Neptune to a rock.

Minerva meets him on the shore, enables him to recollect his country,
which, till enlightened by her, he believed to be a country strange to
him, and they concert together the means of destroying the suitors. The
Goddess then repairs to Sparta to call thence Telemachus, and Ulysses, by
her aid disguised like a beggar, proceeds towards the cottage of Eumaeus.


    He ceas'd; the whole assembly silent sat,
    Charm'd into ecstacy with his discourse
    Throughout the twilight hall. Then, thus the King.
      Ulysses, since beneath my brazen dome
    Sublime thou hast arrived, like woes, I trust,
    Thou shalt not in thy voyage hence sustain
    By tempests tost, though much to woe inured.
    To you, who daily in my presence quaff
    Your princely meed of gen'rous wine and hear
    The sacred bard, my pleasure, thus I speak.                       10
    The robes, wrought gold, and all the other gifts
    To this our guest, by the Phaeacian Chiefs
    Brought hither in the sumptuous coffer lie.
    But come--present ye to the stranger, each,
    An ample tripod also, with a vase
    Of smaller size, for which we will be paid
    By public impost; for the charge of all
    Excessive were by one alone defray'd.
      So spake Alcinoues, and his counsel pleased;
    Then, all retiring, sought repose at home.                        20
    But when Aurora, daughter of the dawn,
    Look'd rosy forth, each hasted to the bark
    With his illustrious present, which the might
    Of King Alcinoues, who himself her sides
    Ascended, safe beneath the seats bestowed,
    Lest it should harm or hinder, while he toil'd
    In rowing, some Phaeacian of the crew.
    The palace of Alcinoues seeking next,
    Together, they prepared a new regale.
      For them, in sacrifice, the sacred might[59]                    30
    Of King Alcinoues slew an ox to Jove
    Saturnian, cloud-girt governor of all.
    The thighs with fire prepared, all glad partook
    The noble feast; meantime, the bard divine
    Sang, sweet Demodocus, the people's joy.
    But oft Ulysses to the radiant sun
    Turn'd wistful eyes, anxious for his decline,
    Nor longer, now, patient of dull delay.
    As when some hungry swain whose sable beeves
    Have through the fallow dragg'd his pond'rous plow                40
    All day, the setting sun views with delight
    For supper' sake, which with tir'd feet he seeks,
    So welcome to Ulysses' eyes appear'd
    The sun-set of that eve; directing, then,
    His speech to maritime Phaeacia's sons,
    But to Alcinoues chiefly, thus he said.
      Alcinoues, o'er Phaeacia's realm supreme!
    Libation made, dismiss ye me in peace,
    And farewell all! for what I wish'd, I have,
    Conductors hence, and honourable gifts                            50
    With which heav'n prosper me! and may the Gods
    Vouchsafe to me, at my return, to find
    All safe, my spotless consort and my friends!
    May ye, whom here I leave, gladden your wives
    And see your children blest, and may the pow'rs
    Immortal with all good enrich you all,
    And from calamity preserve the land!
      He ended, they unanimous, his speech
    Applauded loud, and bade dismiss the guest
    Who had so wisely spoken and so well.                             60
    Then thus Alcinoues to his herald spake.
      Pontonoues! charging high the beaker, bear
    To ev'ry guest beneath our roof the wine,
    That, pray'r preferr'd to the eternal Sire,
    We may dismiss our inmate to his home.
      Then, bore Pontonoues to ev'ry guest
    The brimming cup; they, where they sat, perform'd
    Libation due; but the illustrious Chief
    Ulysses, from his seat arising, placed
    A massy goblet in Areta's hand,                                   70
    To whom in accents wing'd, grateful, he said.
      Farewell, O Queen, a long farewell, till age
    Arrive, and death, the appointed lot of all!
    I go; but be this people, and the King
    Alcinoues, and thy progeny, thy joy
    Yet many a year beneath this glorious roof!
      So saying, the Hero through the palace-gate
    Issued, whom, by Alcinoues' command,
    The royal herald to his vessel led.
    Three maidens also of Areta's train                               80
    His steps attended; one, the robe well-bleach'd
    And tunic bore; the corded coffer, one;
    And food the third, with wine of crimson hue.
    Arriving where the galley rode, each gave
    Her charge to some brave mariner on board,
    And all was safely stow'd. Meantime were spread
    Linen and arras on the deck astern,
    For his secure repose. And now the Chief
    Himself embarking, silent lay'd him down.
    Then, ev'ry rower to his bench repair'd;                          90
    They drew the loosen'd cable from its hold
    In the drill'd rock, and, resupine, at once
    With lusty strokes upturn'd the flashing waves.
    _His_ eye-lids, soon, sleep, falling as a dew,
    Closed fast, death's simular, in sight the same.
    She, as four harness'd stallions o'er the plain
    Shooting together at the scourge's stroke,
    Toss high their manes, and rapid scour along,
    So mounted she the waves, while dark the flood
    Roll'd after her of the resounding Deep.                         100
    Steady she ran and safe, passing in speed
    The falcon, swiftest of the fowls of heav'n;
    With such rapidity she cut the waves,
    An hero bearing like the Gods above
    In wisdom, one familiar long with woe
    In fight sustain'd, and on the perilous flood,
    Though sleeping now serenely, and resign'd
    To sweet oblivion of all sorrow past.
    The brightest star of heav'n, precursor chief
    Of day-spring, now arose, when at the isle                       110
    (Her voyage soon perform'd) the bark arrived.
      There is a port sacred in Ithaca
    To Phorcys, hoary ancient of the Deep,
    Form'd by converging shores, prominent both
    And both abrupt, which from the spacious bay
    Exclude all boist'rous winds; within it, ships
    (The port once gain'd) uncabled ride secure.
    An olive, at the haven's head, expands
    Her branches wide, near to a pleasant cave
    Umbrageous, to the nymphs devoted named                          120
    The Naiads. In that cave beakers of stone
    And jars are seen; bees lodge their honey there;
    And there, on slender spindles of the rock
    The nymphs of rivers weave their wond'rous robes.
    Perennial springs water it, and it shows
    A twofold entrance; ingress one affords
    To mortal man, which Northward looks direct,
    But holier is the Southern far; by that
    No mortal enters, but the Gods alone.
    Familiar with that port before, they push'd                      130
    The vessel in; she, rapid, plow'd the sands
    With half her keel, such rowers urged her on.
    Descending from the well-bench'd bark ashore,
    They lifted forth Ulysses first, with all
    His splendid couch complete, then, lay'd him down
    Still wrapt in balmy slumber on the sands.
    His treasures, next, by the Phaeacian Chiefs
    At his departure given him as the meed
    Due to his wisdom, at the olive's foot
    They heap'd, without the road, lest, while he slept              140
    Some passing traveller should rifle them.
    Then homeward thence they sped. Nor Ocean's God
    His threats forgot denounced against divine
    Ulysses, but with Jove thus first advised.
      Eternal Sire! I shall no longer share
    Respect and reverence among the Gods,
    Since, now, Phaeacia's mortal race have ceas'd
    To honour me, though from myself derived.
    It was my purpose, that by many an ill
    Harass'd, Ulysses should have reach'd his home,                  150
    Although to intercept him, whose return
    Thyself had promis'd, ne'er was my intent.
    But him fast-sleeping swiftly o'er the waves
    They have conducted, and have set him down
    In Ithaca, with countless gifts enrich'd,
    With brass, and tissued raiment, and with gold;
    Much treasure! more than he had home convey'd
    Even had he arrived with all his share
    Allotted to him of the spoils of Troy.
      To whom the cloud-assembler God replied.                       160
    What hast thou spoken, Shaker of the shores,
    Wide-ruling Neptune? Fear not; thee the Gods
    Will ne'er despise; dangerous were the deed
    To cast dishonour on a God by birth
    More ancient, and more potent far than they.
    But if, profanely rash, a mortal man
    Should dare to slight thee, to avenge the wrong
    Some future day is ever in thy pow'r.
    Accomplish all thy pleasure, thou art free.
      Him answer'd, then, the Shaker of the shores.                  170
    Jove cloud-enthroned! that pleasure I would soon
    Perform, as thou hast said, but that I watch
    Thy mind continual, fearful to offend.
    My purpose is, now to destroy amid
    The dreary Deep yon fair Phaeacian bark,
    Return'd from safe conveyance of her freight;
    So shall they waft such wand'rers home no more,
    And she shall hide their city, to a rock
    Transform'd of mountainous o'ershadowing size.
      Him, then, Jove answer'd, gath'rer of the clouds.              180
    Perform it, O my brother, and the deed
    Thus done, shall best be done--What time the people
    Shall from the city her approach descry,
    Fix her to stone transform'd, but still in shape
    A gallant bark, near to the coast, that all
    May wonder, seeing her transform'd to stone
    Of size to hide their city from the view.
      These words once heard, the Shaker of the shores
    Instant to Scheria, maritime abode
    Of the Phaeacians, went. Arrived, he watch'd.                     190
    And now the flying bark full near approach'd,
    When Neptune, meeting her, with out-spread palm
    Depress'd her at a stroke, and she became
    Deep-rooted stone. Then Neptune went his way.
    Phaeacia's ship-ennobled sons meantime
    Conferring stood, and thus, in accents wing'd,
    Th' amazed spectator to his fellow spake.
      Ah! who hath sudden check'd the vessel's course
    Homeward? this moment she was all in view.
      Thus they, unconscious of the cause, to whom                   200
    Alcinoues, instructing them, replied.
      Ye Gods! a prophecy now strikes my mind
    With force, my father's. He was wont to say--
    Neptune resents it, that we safe conduct
    Natives of ev'ry region to their home.
    He also spake, prophetic, of a day
    When a Phaeacian gallant bark, return'd
    After conveyance of a stranger hence,
    Should perish in the dreary Deep, and changed
    To a huge mountain, cover all the town.                          210
      So spake my father, all whose words we see
    This day fulfill'd. Thus, therefore, act we all
    Unanimous; henceforth no longer bear
    The stranger home, when such shall here arrive;
    And we will sacrifice, without delay,
    Twelve chosen bulls to Neptune, if, perchance,
    He will commiserate us, and forbear
    To hide our town behind a mountain's height.
      He spake, they, terrified, the bulls prepared.
    Thus all Phaeacia's Senators and Chiefs                           220
    His altar compassing, in pray'r adored
    The Ocean's God. Meantime, Ulysses woke,
    Unconscious where; stretch'd on his native soil
    He lay, and knew it not, long-time exiled.
    For Pallas, progeny of Jove, a cloud
    Drew dense around him, that, ere yet agnized
    By others, he might wisdom learn from her,
    Neither to citizens, nor yet to friends
    Reveal'd, nor even to his own espoused,
    Till, first, he should avenge complete his wrongs                230
    Domestic from those suitors proud sustained.
    All objects, therefore, in the Hero's eyes
    Seem'd alien, foot-paths long, commodious ports,
    Heav'n-climbing rocks, and trees of amplest growth.
    Arising, fixt he stood, his native soil
    Contemplating, till with expanded palms
    Both thighs he smote, and, plaintive, thus began.
      Ah me! what mortal race inhabits here?
    Rude are they, contumacious and unjust,
    Or hospitable, and who fear the Gods?                            240
    Where now shall I secrete these num'rous stores?
    Where wander I, myself? I would that still
    Phaeacians own'd them, and I had arrived
    In the dominions of some other King
    Magnanimous, who would have entertain'd
    And sent me to my native home secure!
    Now, neither know I where to place my wealth,
    Nor can I leave it here, lest it become
    Another's prey. Alas! Phaeacia's Chiefs
    Not altogether wise I deem or just,                              250
    Who have misplaced me in another land,
    Promis'd to bear me to the pleasant shores
    Of Ithaca, but have not so perform'd.
    Jove, guardian of the suppliant's rights, who all
    Transgressors marks, and punishes all wrong,
    Avenge me on the treach'rous race!--but hold--
    I will revise my stores, so shall I know
    If they have left me here of aught despoiled.
      So saying, he number'd carefully the gold,
    The vases, tripods bright, and tissued robes,                    260
    But nothing miss'd of all. Then he bewail'd
    His native isle, with pensive steps and slow
    Pacing the border of the billowy flood,
    Forlorn; but while he wept, Pallas approach'd,
    In form a shepherd stripling, girlish fair
    In feature, such as are the sons of Kings;
    A sumptuous mantle o'er his shoulders hung
    Twice-folded, sandals his nice feet upbore,
    And a smooth javelin glitter'd in his hand.
    Ulysses, joyful at the sight, his steps                          270
    Turn'd brisk toward her, whom he thus address'd.
      Sweet youth! since thee, of all mankind, I first
    Encounter in this land unknown, all hail!
    Come not with purposes of harm to me!
    These save, and save me also. I prefer
    To thee, as to some God, my pray'r, and clasp
    Thy knees a suppliant. Say, and tell me true,
    What land? what people? who inhabit here?
    Is this some isle delightful, or a shore
    Of fruitful main-land sloping to the sea?                        280
      Then Pallas, thus, Goddess caerulean-eyed.
    Stranger! thou sure art simple, or hast dwelt
    Far distant hence, if of this land thou ask.
    It is not, trust me, of so little note,
    But known to many, both to those who dwell
    Toward the sun-rise, and to others placed
    Behind it, distant in the dusky West.
    Rugged it is, not yielding level course
    To the swift steed, and yet no barren spot,
    However small, but rich in wheat and wine;                       290
    Nor wants it rain or fertilising dew,
    But pasture green to goats and beeves affords,
    Trees of all kinds, and fountains never dry.
    Ithaca therefore, stranger, is a name
    Known ev'n at Troy, a city, by report,
    At no small distance from Achaia's shore.
      The Goddess ceased; then, toil-enduring Chief
    Ulysses, happy in his native land,
    (So taught by Pallas, progeny of Jove)
    In accents wing'd her answ'ring, utter'd prompt                  300
    Not truth, but figments to truth opposite,
    For guile, in him, stood never at a pause.
      O'er yonder flood, even in spacious Crete[60]
    I heard of Ithaca, where now, it seems,
    I have, myself, with these my stores arrived;
    Not richer stores than, flying thence, I left
    To my own children; for from Crete I fled
    For slaughter of Orsilochus the swift,
    Son of Idomeneus, whom none in speed
    Could equal throughout all that spacious isle.                   310
    His purpose was to plunder me of all
    My Trojan spoils, which to obtain, much woe
    I had in battle and by storms endured,
    For that I would not gratify his Sire,
    Fighting beside him in the fields of Troy,
    But led a diff'rent band. Him from the field
    Returning homeward, with my brazen spear
    I smote, in ambush waiting his return
    At the road-side, with a confed'rate friend.
    Unwonted darkness over all the heav'ns                           320
    That night prevailed, nor any eye of man
    Observed us, but, unseen, I slew the youth.
    No sooner, then, with my sharp spear of life
    I had bereft him, than I sought a ship
    Mann'd by renown'd Phaeacians, whom with gifts
    Part of my spoils, and by requests, I won.
    I bade them land me on the Pylian shore,
    Or in fair Elis by th' Epeans ruled,
    But they, reluctant, were by violent winds
    Driv'n devious thence, for fraud they purposed none.             330
    Thus through constraint we here arrived by night,
    And with much difficulty push'd the ship
    Into safe harbour, nor was mention made
    Of food by any, though all needed food,
    But, disembark'd in haste, on shore we lay.
    I, weary, slept profound, and they my goods
    Forth heaving from the bark, beside me placed
    The treasures on the sea-beach where I slept,
    Then, reimbarking, to the populous coast
    Steer'd of Sidonia, and me left forlorn.                         340
      He ceased; then smiled Minerva azure-eyed
    And stroaked his cheek, in form a woman now,
    Beauteous, majestic, in all elegant arts
    Accomplish'd, and with accents wing'd replied.
      Who passes thee in artifice well-framed
    And in imposture various, need shall find
    Of all his policy, although a God.
    Canst thou not cease, inventive as thou art
    And subtle, from the wiles which thou hast lov'd
    Since thou wast infant, and from tricks of speech                350
    Delusive, even in thy native land?
    But come, dismiss we these ingenious shifts
    From our discourse, in which we both excel;
    For thou of all men in expedients most
    Abound'st and eloquence, and I, throughout
    All heav'n have praise for wisdom and for art.
    And know'st thou not thine Athenaean aid,
    Pallas, Jove's daughter, who in all thy toils
    Assist thee and defend? I gave thee pow'r
    T' engage the hearts of all Phaeacia's sons,                      360
    And here arrive ev'n now, counsels to frame
    Discrete with thee, and to conceal the stores
    Giv'n to thee by the rich Phaeacian Chiefs
    On my suggestion, at thy going thence.
    I will inform thee also what distress
    And hardship under thy own palace-roof
    Thou must endure; which, since constraint enjoins,
    Bear patiently, and neither man apprize
    Nor woman that thou hast arrived forlorn
    And vagabond, but silent undergo                                 370
    What wrongs soever from the hands of men.
      To whom Ulysses, ever-wise, replied.
    O Goddess! thou art able to elude,
    Wherever met, the keenest eye of man,
    For thou all shapes assum'st; yet this I know
    Certainly, that I ever found thee kind,
    Long as Achaia's Heroes fought at Troy;
    But when (the lofty tow'rs of Priam laid
    In dust) we re-embark'd, and by the will
    Of heav'n Achaia's fleet was scatter'd wide,                     380
    Thenceforth, O daughter wise of Jove, I thee
    Saw not, nor thy appearance in my ship
    Once mark'd, to rid me of my num'rous woes,
    But always bearing in my breast a heart
    With anguish riv'n, I roam'd, till by the Gods
    Relieved at length, and till with gracious words
    Thyself didst in Phaeacia's opulent land
    Confirm my courage, and becam'st my guide.
    But I adjure thee in thy father's name--
    O tell me truly, (for I cannot hope                              390
    That I have reach'd fair Ithaca; I tread
    Some other soil, and thou affirm'st it mine
    To mock me merely, and deceive) oh say--
    Am I in Ithaca? in truth, at home?
      Thus then Minerva the caerulean-eyed.
    Such caution in thy breast always prevails
    Distrustful; but I know thee eloquent,
    With wisdom and with ready thought endued,
    And cannot leave thee, therefore, thus distress'd
    For what man, save Ulysses, new-return'd                         400
    After long wand'rings, would not pant to see
    At once his home, his children, and his wife?
    But thou preferr'st neither to know nor ask
    Concerning them, till some experience first
    Thou make of her whose wasted youth is spent
    In barren solitude, and who in tears
    Ceaseless her nights and woeful days consumes.
    I ne'er was ignorant, but well foreknew
    That not till after loss of all thy friends
    Thou should'st return; but loth I was to oppose                  410
    Neptune, my father's brother, sore incensed
    For his son's sake deprived of sight by thee.
    But, I will give thee proof--come now--survey
    These marks of Ithaca, and be convinced.
      This is the port of Phorcys, sea-born sage;
    That, the huge olive at the haven's head;
    Fast by it, thou behold'st the pleasant cove
    Umbrageous, to the nymphs devoted named
    The Naiads; this the broad-arch'd cavern is
    Where thou wast wont to offer to the nymphs                      420
    Many a whole hecatomb; and yonder stands
    The mountain Neritus with forests cloath'd.
      So saying, the Goddess scatter'd from before
    His eyes all darkness, and he knew the land.
    Then felt Ulysses, Hero toil-inured,
    Transport unutterable, seeing plain
    Once more his native isle. He kiss'd the glebe,
    And with uplifted hands the nymphs ador'd.
      Nymphs, Naiads, Jove's own daughters! I despair'd
    To see you more, whom yet with happy vows                        430
    I now can hail again. Gifts, as of old,
    We will hereafter at your shrines present,
    If Jove-born Pallas, huntress of the spoils,
    Grant life to me, and manhood to my son.
      Then Pallas, blue-eyed progeny of Jove.
    Take courage; trouble not thy mind with thoughts
    Now needless. Haste--delay not--far within
    This hallow'd cave's recess place we at once
    Thy precious stores, that they may thine remain,
    Then muse together on thy wisest course.                         440
      So saying, the Goddess enter'd deep the cave
    Caliginous, and its secret nooks explored
    From side to side; meantime, Ulysses brought
    All his stores into it, the gold, the brass,
    And robes magnificent, his gifts received
    From the Phaeacians; safe he lodg'd them all,
    And Pallas, daughter of Jove AEgis-arm'd,
    Closed fast, herself, the cavern with a stone.
      Then, on the consecrated olive's root
    Both seated, they in consultation plann'd                        450
    The deaths of those injurious suitors proud,
    And Pallas, blue-eyed Goddess, thus began.
      Laertes' noble son, Ulysses! think
    By what means likeliest thou shalt assail
    Those shameless suitors, who have now controuled
    Three years thy family, thy matchless wife
    With language amorous and with spousal gifts
    Urging importunate; but she, with tears
    Watching thy wish'd return, hope gives to all
    By messages of promise sent to each,                             460
    Framing far other purposes the while.
      Then answer thus Ulysses wise return'd.
    Ah, Agamemnon's miserable fate
    Had surely met me in my own abode,
    But for thy gracious warning, pow'r divine!
    Come then--Devise the means; teach me, thyself,
    The way to vengeance, and my soul inspire
    With daring fortitude, as when we loos'd
    Her radiant frontlet from the brows of Troy.
    Would'st thou with equal zeal, O Pallas! aid                     470
    Thy servant here, I would encounter thrice
    An hundred enemies, let me but perceive
    Thy dread divinity my prompt ally.
      Him answer'd then Pallas caerulean-eyed.
    And such I will be; not unmark'd by me,
