dost thou call me, Achilles, what need hast thou of me?"

Then swift-footed Achilles answered him and spake: "Noble son of
Menoitios, dear to my heart, now methinks that the Achaians will stand
in prayer about my knees, for need no longer tolerable cometh upon them.
But go now, Patroklos dear to Zeus, and ask Nestor who is this that he
bringeth wounded from the war. Verily from behind he is most like
Machaon, that child of Asklepios, but I beheld not the eyes of the man,
for the horses sped past me, straining forward eagerly."

So spake he and Patroklos obeyed his dear comrade, and started and ran
past the ships, and the huts of the Achaians.

Now when they came to the hut of the son of Neleus, they lighted down on
the bounteous earth, and the squire, Eurymedon, loosed the horses of
that old man from the car, and they dried the sweat from their doublets,
standing before the breeze, by the shore of the sea, and thereafter came
they to the hut, and sat them down on chairs. And fair-tressed Hekamede
mixed for them a mess, Hekamede that the old man won from Tenedos, when
Achilles sacked it, and she was the daughter of great-hearted Arsinoos,
and her the Achaians chose out for him, because always in counsel he
excelled them all. First she drew before them a fair table, polished
well, with feet of cyanus, and thereon a vessel of bronze, with onion,
for relish to the drink, and pale honey, and the grain of sacred barley,
and beside it a right goodly cup, that the old man brought from home,
embossed with studs of gold, and four handles there were to it, and
round each two golden doves were feeding, and to the cup were two feet
below. Another man could scarce have lifted the cup from the table, when
it was full, but Nestor the Old raised it easily. In this cup the woman,
like unto the goddesses, mixed a mess for them, with Pramnian wine, and
therein grated cheese of goats' milk, with a grater of bronze, and
scattered white barley thereover, and bade them drink, whenas she had
made ready the mess.

So when the twain had drunk, and driven away parching thirst, they took
their pleasure in discourse, speaking each to the other. Now Patroklos
stood at the doors, a godlike man, and when the old man beheld him, he
arose from his shining chair, and took him by the hand, and led him in,
and bade him be seated. But Patroklos, from over against him, was for
refusing, and spake and said: "No time to sit have I, old man,
fosterling of Zeus, nor wilt thou persuade me. Revered and dreaded is he
that sent me forth to ask thee who this man is that thou bringest home
wounded. Nay, but I know myself, for I see Machaon, shepherd of the
host. And now will I go back again, a messenger, to speak a word to
Achilles. And well dost thou know, old man, fosterling of Zeus, how
terrible a man he is; lightly would he blame even one that is
blameless."

Then knightly Nestor of Gerenia answered him again: "Wherefore is
Achilles thus sorry for the sons of the Achaians, for as many as are
wounded with darts? He knoweth not at all what grief hath arisen in the
camp: for the best men lie in the ships, wounded by shaft or smitten by
spear. Wounded with the shaft is strong Diomedes, son of Tydeus, and
smitten is Odysseus, spearman renowned, and Agamemnon, and this other
have I but newly carried out of battle, wounded with an arrow from the
bowstring. But Achilles, for all his valiance, careth not for the
Danaans, nor pities them at all. Doth he wait till the fleet ships hard
by the shore shall burn in the consuming fire, and till we be slain one
upon another? Nay, but even now speak thou thus and thus to wise-hearted
Achilles, if perchance he will obey thee. Who knows but that, God
helping, thou mightst stir his spirit with thy persuading? and good is
the persuasion of a friend. But if in his heart he be shunning some
oracle of God, and his lady mother hath told him somewhat from Zeus,
natheless let him send forth thee, and let the rest of the host of the
Myrmidons follow with thee, if perchance any light shall arise from thee
to the Danaans; and let him give thee his fair harness, to bear into the
war, if perchance the Trojans may take thee for him, and withhold them
from the strife, and the warlike sons of the Achaians might take breath,
being wearied; for brief is the breathing time in battle. And lightly
might ye, being unwearied, drive men wearied in the war unto the city,
away from the ships and the huts."

So spake he, and roused his heart within his breast, and he started and
ran by the ships to Achilles of the seed of Aiakos.



BOOK XII.

    How the Trojans and allies broke within the wall of the
    Achaians.

So in the huts the strong son of Menortios was tending the wounded
Eurypylos, but still they fought confusedly, the Argives and Trojans.
Nor were the fosse of the Danaans and their wide wall above long to
protect them, the wall they had builded for defence of the ships, and
the fosse they had drawn round about; for neither had they given goodly
hecatombs to the gods, that it might guard with its bounds their swift
ships and rich spoil. Nay, maugre the deathless gods was it builded,
wherefore it abode steadfast for no long time. While Hector yet lived,
and yet Achilles kept his wrath, and unsacked was the city of Priam the
king, so long the great wall of the Achaians likewise abode steadfast.
But when all the bravest of the Trojans died, and many of the
Argives,--some were taken, and some were left,--and the city of Priam
was sacked in the tenth year, and the Argives had gone back in their
ships to their own dear country, then verily did Poseidon and Apollo
take counsel to wash away the wall, bringing in the might of the rivers,
of all that flow from the hills of Ida to the sea. Rhesos there was, and
Heptaporos, and Karesos, and Rhodios, Grenikos, and Aisepos, and goodly
Skamandros, and Simoeis, whereby many shields and helms fell in the
dust, and the generation of men half divine; the mouths of all these
waters did Phoebus Apollo turn together, and for nine days he drave
their stream against the wall; and still Zeus rained unceasingly, that
the quicker he might mingle the wall with the salt sea. And the Shaker
of the earth, with his trident in his hands, was himself the leader, and
sent forth into the waves all the foundations of beams and stones that
the Achaians had laid with toil, and made all smooth by the strong
current of the Hellespont, and covered again the great beach with sand,
when he had swept away the wall, and turned the rivers back to flow in
their channel, where of old they poured down their fair flow of water.

So were Poseidon and Apollo to do in the aftertime; but then war and the
din of war sounded about the well-builded wall, and the beams of the
towers rang beneath the strokes; while the Argives, subdued by the
scourge of Zeus, were penned and driven in by the hollow ships, in dread
of Hector, the mighty maker of flight, but he, as aforetime, fought like
a whirlwind. And as when, among hounds and hunting men, a boar or lion
wheeleth him about, raging in his strength, and these array themselves
in fashion like a tower, and stand up against him, casting many javelins
from their hands; but never is his stout heart confused nor afraid, and
his courage is his bane, and often he wheeleth him about, and maketh
trial of the ranks of men, and wheresoever he maketh onset there the
ranks of men give way, even so Hector went and besought his comrades
through the press, and spurred them on to cross the dyke. But his
swift-footed horses dared not, but loud they neighed, standing by the
sheer edge, for the wide fosse affrighted them, neither easy to leap
from hard by, nor to cross, for overhanging banks stood round about it
all on either hand, and above it was furnished with sharp stakes that
the sons of the Achaians had planted there, thick set and great, a
bulwark against hostile men. Thereby not lightly might a horse enter,
drawing a well-wheeled chariot; but the footmen were eager, if they
might accomplish it. Then Polydamas drew near valiant Hector, and spake
to him: "Hector and ye other leaders of the Trojans and allies,
foolishly do we drive our fleet horses through the dyke; nay right hard
it is to cross, for sharp stakes stand in it, and over against them the
wall of the Achaians. Thereby none may go down and fight in chariots,
for strait is the place wherein, methinks, we might come by a mischief.
For if Zeus that thunders on high is utterly to destroy them in his evil
will, and is minded to help the Trojans, verily then I too would desire
that even instantly this might be, that the Achaians should perish here
nameless far from Argos: but and if they turn again, and we flee back
from among the ships, and rush into the delved ditch, then methinks that
not even one from among us to bear the tidings will win back to the city
before the force of the Achaians when they rally. But come as I declare,
let us all obey. Let our squires hold the horses by the dyke, while we
being harnessed in our gear as foot soldiers follow all together with
Hector, and the Achaians will not withstand us, if indeed the bands of
death be made fast upon them."

So spake Polydamas, and his wise word pleased Hector well, and
straightway in his harness he leaped from his chariot to the ground. Nor
were the other Trojans gathered upon the chariots, but they all leaped
forth, when they beheld goodly Hector. There each gave it into the
charge of his own charioteer, to keep the horses orderly there by the
fosse. And they divided, and arrayed themselves, and ordered in five
companies they followed with the leaders.

Now they that went with Hector and noble Polydamas, these were most, and
bravest, and most were eager to break the wall, and fight by the hollow
ships; and with them followed Kebriones for the third, for Hector had
left another man with his chariot, a weaker warrior than Kebriones. The
second company Paris led, and Alkathoos, and Agenor: and the third
company Helenos led, and godlike Deiphobos,--two sons of Priam,--the
third was the warrior Asios, Asios Hyrtakos' son, whom his tall sorrel
steeds brought out of Arisbe, from the river Selleeis. And of the fourth
company was the brave son of Anchises leader, even Aineias; and with
him were two sons of Antenor, Archelochos and Akamas, both well skilled
in all warfare.

And Sarpedon led the glorious allies, and to be with him he chose
Glaukos and warlike Asteropaios, for they seamed to him to be manifestly
the bravest of all after himself but he was excellent, yea, above all
the host. And these when they had arrayed one another with
well-fashioned shields of bulls' hide, went straight and eager against
the Danaans, nor deemed that they could longer resist them, but that
themselves should fall on the black ships.

Then the rest of the Trojans and the far-famed allies obeyed the counsel
of blameless Polydamas, but Asios, son of Hyrtakos, leader of men,
willed not to leave his horses there, and his squire the charioteer, but
with them he drew near the swift ships, fond man! for never was he,
avoiding evil Fates, to return, rejoicing in his horses and chariot,
back from the ships to windy Ilios. Nay, ere that the Fate of ill name
over-shadowed him, by the spear of Idomeneus, the haughty son of
Deukalion. For Asios went against the left flank of the ships, whereby
the Achaians returned out of the plain with chariots and horses: there
he drave through his horses and his car, nor found he the doors shut on
the gates, and the long bar, but men were holding them open if perchance
they might save any of their comrades fleeing out of the battle towards
the ships. Straight thereby held he his horses with unswerving aim, and
his men followed him, crying shrilly, for they deemed that the Achaians
could no longer hold them off, but that themselves would fall on the
black ships: fools, for in the gates they found two men of the bravest,
the high-hearted sons of the warrior Lapithae, one the son of
Peirithoos, strong Polypoites, and one Leonteus, peer of Ares the bane
of men. These twain stood in front of the lofty gates, like high-crested
oak trees in the hills, that for ever abide the wind and rain, firm
fixed with roots great and long; even so these twain, trusting to the
mightiness of their hands, abode the coming of great Asios, and fled
not. But straight came the Trojans against the well-builded wall,
holding their shields of dry bulls' hide on high, with mighty clamour,
round the prince Asios, and Iamenos, and Orestes, and Adamas, son of
Asios, and Thoon, and Oinomaos. But the other twain for a while, being
within the wall, urged the well-greaved Achaians to fight for the ships;
but when they saw the Trojans assailing the wall, while the Danaans
cried and turned in flight, then forth rushed the twain, and fought in
front of the gates like wild boars that in the mountains abide the
assailing crew of men and dogs, and charging on either flank they
crush the wood around them, cutting it at the root, and the clatter of
their tusks wages loud, till one smite them and take their life away: so
clattered the bright bronze on the breasts of the twain, as they were
smitten in close fight, for right hardily they fought, trusting to the
host above them, and to their own strength.

For the men above were casting with stones from the well-builded
towers, in defence of themselves and of the huts, and of the
swift-faring ships. And like snowflakes the stones fell earthward,
flakes that a tempestuous wind, as it driveth the dark clouds, rains
thickly down on the bounteous earth: so thick fell the missiles from the
hands of Achaians and Trojans alike, and their helms rang harsh and
their bossy shields, being smitten with mighty stones. Verily then
Asios, son of Hyrtakos, groaned and smote both his thighs, and
indignantly he spake: "Zeus, verily thou too dost greatly love a lie,
for I deemed not that the Achaian heroes could withstand our might and
our hands invincible. But they like wasps of nimble body, or bees that
have made their dwellings in a rugged path, and leave not their hollow
hold, but abide and keep the hunters at bay for the sake of their little
ones, even so these men have no will to give ground from the gates,
though they are but two, ere they slay or be slain."

So spake he, nor with his speech did he persuade the mind of Zeus, for
his will was to give renown to Hector.

But the others were fighting about the other gates, and hard it were for
me like a god to tell all these things, for everywhere around the wall
of stone rose the fire divine; the Argives, for all their sorrow,
defending the ships of necessity; and all the gods were grieved at
heart, as many as were defenders of the Danaans in battle. And together
the Lapithae waged war and strife.

There the son of Peirithoos, mighty Polypoites, smote Damasos with the
spear, through the helmet with cheekpieces of bronze; nor did the bronze
helm stay the spear, but the point of bronze brake clean through the
bone, and all the brain within was scattered, and the spear overcame him
in his eagerness. Thereafter he slew Pylon and Ormenos. And Leonteus of
the stock of Ares smote Hippomachos, son of Antimachos, with the spear,
striking him on the girdle. Then again he drew his sharp sword from the
sheath, and smote Antiphates first in close fight, rushing on him
through the throng, that he fell on his back on the ground; and
thereafter he brought down Menon, and Iamenos, and Orestes one after the
other, to the bounteous earth.

While they were stripping from these the shining arms, the young men who
followed with Polydamas and Hector, they that were most in number and
bravest, and most were eager to break the wall and set the ships on
fire, these still stood doubtful by the fosse, for as they were eager to
pass over a bird had appeared to them, an eagle of lofty flight,
skirting the host on the left hand. In its talons it bore a blood-red
monstrous snake, alive, and struggling still; yea, not yet had it
forgotten the joy of battle, but writhed backward and smote the bird
that held it on the breast, beside the neck, and the bird cast it from
him down to the earth, in sore pain, and dropped it in the midst of the
throng; then with a cry sped away down the gusts of the wind. And the
Trojans shuddered when they saw the gleaming snake lying in the midst of
them; an omen of aegis-bearing Zeus.

Then verily Polydamas stood by brave Hector, and spake: "Hector, ever
dost thou rebuke me in the assemblies, though I counsel wisely; since it
by no means beseemeth one of the people to speak contrary to thee, in
council or in war, but always to increase thy power; but now again will
I say all that seemeth to me to be best. Let us not advance and fight
with the Danaans for the ships. For even thus, methinks, the end will
be, if indeed this bird hath come for the Trojans when they were eager
to cross the dyke, this eagle of lofty flight, skirting the host on
the left hand, bearing in his talons a blood-red monstrous snake, yet
living; then straightway left he hold of him, before he reached his own
nest, nor brought him home in the end to give to his nestlings. Even so
shall we, though we burst with mighty force the gates and wall of the
Achaians, and the Achaians give ground, even so we shall return in
disarray from the ships by the way we came; for many of the Trojans
shall we leave behind, whom the Achaians will slay with the sword, in
defence of the ships. Even so would a soothsayer interpret that in his
heart had clear knowledge of omens, and whom the people obeyed."

Then Hector of the glancing helm lowered on him and said: "Polydamas,
that thou speakest is no longer pleasing to me; yea, thou knowest how to
conceive another counsel better than this. But if thou verily speakest
thus in earnest, then the gods themselves have utterly destroyed thy
wits; thou that bidst us forget the counsels of loud-thundering Zeus,
that himself promised me, and confirmed with a nod of his head! But thou
bidst us be obedient to birds long of wing, whereto I give no heed, nor
take any care thereof, whether they fare to the right, to the dawn and
to the sun, or to the left, to mist and darkness. Nay, for us, let us
trust to the counsel of mighty Zeus, who is king over all mortals and
immortals. One omen is best, to fight for our own country. And wherefore
dost thou fear war and battle? For if all the rest of us be slain by the
ships of the Argives, yet needst thou not fear to perish, for thy heart
is not warlike, nor enduring in battle. But if thou dost hold aloof from
the fight, or winnest any other with thy words to turn him from war,
straightway by my spear shalt thou be smitten, and lose thy life."

So spake he, and led on, and they followed with a wondrous din; and Zeus
that joyeth in the thunder roused from the hills of Ida, a blast of
wind, which bare the dust straight against the ships; and he made weak
the heart of the Achaians, but gave renown to the Trojans and to Hector.
Trusting then in his omens, and their might, they strove to break the
great wall of the Achaians. They dragged down the machicolations
[projecting galleries] of the towers, and overthrew the battlements, and
heaved up the projecting buttresses, that the Achaians set first in the
earth, to be the props of the towers. These they overthrew, and hoped to
break the wall of the Achaians. Nor even now did the Danaans give ground
from the path, but closed up the battlements with shields of bulls'
hides, and cast from them at the foemen as they went below the walls.

Now the two Aiantes went everywhere on the towers, ever urging, and
arousing the courage of the Achaians. One they would accost with honeyed
words, another with hard words they would rebuke, whomsoever they saw
utterly giving ground from the fight: "O friends, whosoever is eminent,
or whosoever is of middle station among the Argives, ay, or lower yet,
for in no wise are all men equal in war, now is there work for all, and
this yourselves well know. Let none turn back to the ships, for that he
hath heard one threatening aloud; nay, get ye forward, and cheer another
on, if perchance Olympian Zeus, the lord of lightning, will grant us to
drive back the assault, and push the foe to the city."

So these twain shouted in the front, and aroused the battle of the
Achaians. But as flakes of snow fall thick on a winter day, when Zeus
the Counsellor bath begun to snow, showing forth these arrows of his
to men, and he hath lulled the winds, and he snoweth continually, till
he hath covered the crests of the high hills, and the uttermost
headlands, and the grassy plains, and rich tillage of men; and the snow
is scattered over the havens and shores of the grey sea, and only the
wave as it rolleth in keeps off the snow, but all other things are
swathed over, when the shower of Zeus cometh heavily, so from both sides
their stones flew thick, some towards the Trojans, and some from the
Trojans against the Achaians, while both sides were smitten, and over
all the wall the din arose.

Yet never would the Trojans, then, and renowned Hector have broken the
gates of the wall, and the long bar, if Zeus the Counsellor had not
roused his son Sarpedon against the Argives, like a lion against the
kine of crooked horn. Straightway he held forth his fair round shield,
of hammered bronze, that the bronze-smith had hammered out, and within
had stitched many bulls' hides with rivets of gold, all round the
circle, this held he forth, and shook two spears; and sped on his way,
like a mountain-nurtured lion, that long lacketh meat, and his brave
spirit urgeth him to make assail on the sheep, and come even against a
well-builded homestead. Nay, even if he find herdsmen thereby, guarding
the sheep with hounds and spears, yet hath he no mind to be driven
without an effort from the steading, but he either leapeth on a sheep,
and seizeth it, or himself is smitten in the foremost place with a dart
from a strong hand. So did his heart then urge on the godlike Sarpedon
to rush against the wall, and break through the battlements. And
instantly he spake to Glaukos, son of Hippolochos: "Glaukos, wherefore
have we twain the chiefest honour,--seats of honour, and messes, and
full cups in Lykia, and all men look on us as gods? And wherefore hold
we a great demesne by the banks of Xanthos, a fair demesne of orchard-land,
and wheat-bearing tilth? Therefore now it behoveth us to take our
stand in the first rank of the Lykians, and encounter fiery battle,
that certain of the well-corsleted Lykians may say, 'Verily our kings
that rule Lykia be no inglorious men, they that eat fat sheep, and drink
the choice wine honey-sweet: nay, but they are also of excellent might,
for they war in the foremost ranks of the Lykians.' Ah, friend, if once
escaped from this battle we were for ever to be ageless and immortal,
neither would I fight myself in the foremost ranks, nor would I send
thee into the war that giveth men renown, but now--for assuredly ten
thousand fates of death do every way beset us, and these no mortal may
escape nor avoid--now let us go forward, whether we shall give glory to
other men, or others to us."

So spake he, and Glaukos turned not apart, nor disobeyed him, and they
twain went straight forward, leading the great host of the Lykians.

Then Menestheus son of Peteos shuddered when he beheld them, for against
his tower they went, bringing with them ruin; and he looked along the
tower of the Achaians if perchance he might see any of the leaders,
that would ward off destruction from his comrades, and he beheld the two
Aiantes, insatiate of war, standing there, and Teukros hard by, newly
come from his hut; but he could not cry to be heard of them, so great
was the din, and the noise went up unto heaven of smitten shields and
helms with horse-hair crests, and of the gates, for they had all been
shut, and the Trojans stood beside them, and strove by force to break
them, and enter in. Swiftly then to Aias he sent the herald Thootes:
"Go, noble Thootes, and run, and call Aias: or rather the twain, for
that will be far the best of all, since quickly here will there be
wrought utter ruin. For hereby press the leaders of the Lykians, who of
old are fierce in strong battle. But if beside them too war and toil
arise, yet at least let the strong Telamonian Aias come alone and let
Teukros the skilled bowman follow with him."

So spake he, and the herald listened and disobeyed him not, but started
and ran by the wall of the mail-clad Achaians, and came, and stood by
the Aiantes, and straightway spake: "Ye twain Aiantes, leaders of the
mail-clad Achaians, the dear son of Peteos, fosterling of Zeus, biddeth
you go thither, that, if it be but for a little while, ye may take your
part in battle: both of you he more desireth, for that will be far the
best of all, since quickly there will there be wrought utter ruin. For
thereby press the leaders of the Lykians, who of old are fierce in
strong battle. But if beside you too war and toil arise, yet at least
let the strong Telamonian Aias come alone, and let Teukros the skilled
bowman follow with him."

So spake he, nor did the strong Telamonian Aias disobey, but instantly
spake winged words to the son of Oileus: "Aias, do ye twain stand here,
thyself and strong Lykomedes, and urge the Danaans to war with all their
might; but I go thither, to take my part in battle, and quickly will I
come again, when I have well aided them."

So spake Telamonian Aias and departed, and Teukros went with him, his
brother by the same father, and with them Pandion bare the bended bow
of Teukros.

Now when they came to the tower of great-hearted Menestheus, passing
within the wall,--and to men sore pressed they came,--the foe were
climbing upon the battlements, like a dark whirlwind, even the strong
leaders and counsellors of the Lykians; and they hurled together into
