take his place.  As to the other seven proprietors they all had grand
sounding titles, such as Chamberlain, Chancellor, Constable, High
Steward, and so on.

Having settled all these grand sounding titles the proprietors went
on to frame a system of laws.  They called it the Grand Model or
Fundamental Constitutions, but it was more like some old English
feudal system than anything else.  It might have done for the
ancient Saxons of the ninth century; it was quite unsuitable for
rough colonists in a new and almost uninhabited country.  It was
quite unsuited for men who had left Europe because they wanted to
get away from old conventions and be more free.

Yet the Lords Proprietors said that the Grand Model was to be the
law of Carolina for ever and ever.  The settlers however, would
have nothing to do with the Grand Model, for it was altogether too
fanciful for them.  The proprietors on their side persisted.  But
when they found it impossible to force the settlers to obey their
laws they changed their Grand Model and tried again.  Still it was
of no use.  The colonists would not have it.  So at length, having
altered their unalterable rules five times, they gave them up
altogether and took to something more simple.

But among much that was foolish and unsuitable in the Grand Model
there was one good thing.  That was that every one was free to
worship God in the way he thought right.  If only seven men agreed
together, said the Grand Model, they were enough to form a church.
All it insisted upon was that people must acknowledge a God, and
that they must worship Him openly.  Nevertheless, in spite of this
they made no provision for worship.  No clergymen went with the
settlers, and indeed for many years no clergymen settled among
them.

But because there was religious freedom people of all religions came
to Carolina.  Quakers and dissenters of every description sought a
refuge there.  They came not only from England, but from the other
colonies and from foreign countries.

You remember that the Protestants of France were called Huguenots,
and that they had had to suffer many things at the hands of Catholic
rulers until the good King Henry of Navarre protected them by the
Edict of Nantes.  Now Louis XIV, who was at this time on the throne
of France, revoked that edict.  He forbade the Huguenots to worship
God in their own way, and he also forbade them to leave the country
on pain of death.

But thousands braved death rather than remain and be false to their
religion.  Some were caught and cruelly punished, but many succeeded
in escaping to Holland, England and even to America.  So many Huguenots
now settled in Carolina.  They were hard-working, high-minded people
and they brought a sturdiness and grit to the colony which it might
otherwise have lacked.  Germans too came from the Palatinate, driven
thence also by religious persecutions.  Irish Presbyterians came
fleeing from persecution in Ulster.  Jacobites who, having fought
for the Stuarts, found Scotland no longer a safe dwelling-place
came seeking a new home.

These were all hardy industrious people.  But besides these there
came many worthless idlers who came to be known as "poor whites."
These came because in the early days when the colony was but
sparsely peopled, and more settlers were wanted, a law was passed
that a new settler need not pay any debts he had made before he came
to the colony; and for a year after he came he need pay no taxes.
These laws of course brought many shiftless folk who, having got
hopelessly into debt somewhere else, ran away to Carolina to get
free of it.  Indeed so many of these undesirables came that the
Virginians called Carolina the Rogues' Harbour.

Besides all these white people there were a great many negroes
especially in South Carolina.  This came about naturally.  The climate
of Carolina is hot; there is also a lot of marshy ground good for
growing rice.  But the work in these rice fields was very unhealthy,
and white men could not stand it for long.  So a trade in slaves
sprang up.  Already men had begun to kidnap negroes from the West
Coast of Africa and sell them to the tobacco planters of Virginia.

In those days no one saw anything wrong in it.  And now that the
rice fields of South Carolina constantly required more workers the
trade in slaves increased.  Whole shiploads were brought at a time.
They were bought and sold like cattle, and if they died at their
unhealthy work it mattered little, for they were cheap, and there
were plenty more where they came from.

__________





Chapter 43 - War With the Indians in North and South Carolina




At first there had been no intention of making two provinces of
Carolina.  But the country was so large and the settlements made
so far apart that very soon it became divided into North and South
Carolina.  The first settlements made in North Carolina were made
round Albemarle Sound, and those of South Carolina at Charleston.
One Governor was supposed to rule both states, but sometimes each
had a governor.  And in all the early years there was trouble between
the governors and the people.  Sometimes the governors were good
men, but more often they were rascals who cared for nothing but
their own pockets.  So we hear of revolutions, of governors being
deposed and imprisoned, of colonists going to England to complain
of their governors, of governors going to complain of the colonists.

But far worse than the quarrel between people and governor were
the troubles with the Indians.  Many thousands of white people had
by this time settled in the Carolinas, and the Redman saw himself
year by year being driven further and further from his old hunting
grounds; so year by year his anger grew.  At first he had been
friendly to the white man because he brought with him beads and
copper ornaments and "fire water." But now he began to hate him.

At length the Indians in North Carolina plotted to kill all the
white people.  Many tribes of Indians dwelt round the settlements,
but the chief among them were the Tuscaroras.  These Tuscaroras
now arranged with all the other tribes that early on the morning
before the new moon they should all with one accord, tomahawk and
firebrand in hand, fall upon the Pale-faces and wipe them utterly
from the face of the earth.

From tribe to tribe the word was passed till hundreds knew the
secret.  But the Redman is silent and crafty, and neither by sign
nor word did he betray it to the Palefaces.

Suspecting nothing, with perfect faith in their friendship, the
white people allowed the Indians to come and go freely in their
settlements.  Then one night in 1711 a great many appeared, asking
for food.  Still the white people had no suspicion of evil, and many
Indians were allowed even to spend the night in their houses.

The Pale-faces slept peacefully, but for the Redmen there was
little rest.  They waited impatiently for the dawn.  At length the
first streaks of light shivered across the sky, and from the woods
came a loud fierce war whoop.  It was answered by the Indians within
the settlements, and with tomahawk in one hand and firebrand in
the other they fell upon the still sleeping settlers.

They spared neither man nor woman, neither the old nor the young;
and when they could find no more to slay they set fire to the houses.
Then those who had hidden themselves were forced to flee from the
flames, only to fall beneath the tomahawk.  The Swiss and Germans
round New Berne and the Huguenots of Bath were the chief sufferers.

But the wonder is that any white men escaped.  For their cruel
work at an end, and the settlements nought but flaming ruins, the
Indians marched through the woods seeking any who had escaped,
gathering at length to a spot arranged beforehand.  Here they drank
"fire water," rejoicing savagely over their victory.  Then drunk
with brandy and with blood they staggered forth again to continue
their horrible labours.  For three days the slaughter lasted, for
three days the forests rang with terrifying war cries, and village
after village was laid in ashes.  Then too weary and too drunk for
further effort, the Indians ceased their awful work.

At first the white people had been utterly stunned by the suddenness
and horror of the uprising, and they were quite incapable of
suppressing it by themselves.  But soon help came, both from South
Carolina and Virginia.  Friendly Indians too, who wished to prove
to the Pale-faces that they had had no part in the massacre, joined
the forces.

Hundreds of the Indians were slain in battle, others were driven from
fort to fort.  But not for two years were they thoroughly subdued.
Then at length, finding themselves no match for the white men, those
who were left fled from the province and joined the Five Nations
in New York, making from this time forward Six Nations.

In South Carolina too there was war with the Indians.  The Yamassees
had been among the Indians who marched from South Carolina to fight
against their brothers, the Tuscaroras.  Yet a little later they
too rose against the Pale-faces.

Several causes led to the war, but it was chiefly brought about by
the Spaniards who had a settlement at St.  Augustine to the south
of Carolina.  They hated the British, and although the two countries
were now at peace the Spaniards did all they could to injure the
British colonies in America and elsewhere.  So now they sympathised
with the Yamassees, both with their real and imaginary grievances,
and encouraged them to rise against the British.

Secretly and silently then the Redmen laid their plans.  But this
time the war did not burst forth entirely without warning.  For
when the Redman has truly given his faith and love nothing makes
him false.

Now there was a chieftain named Sanute who had given his friendship
to a Scotsman named Fraser, and he could not bear to think of his
friend being slaughtered.  So one day Sanute came to Fraser's wife
to warn her.

"The British are all bad," he said, "they will all go to an
evil place.  The Yamassees also will go there if they allow these
Pale-faces to remain longer in the land.  So we will slay them all.
We only wait for the sign of a bloody stick which the Creeks will
send.  Then the Creeks, the Yamassees, and many other nations will
join with the Spaniards to slay the British.  So fly in all haste
to Charleston.  And if your own boat is not large enough I will lend
you my canoe."

Mrs.  Fraser was very much frightened when she heard Sanute speak
like this.  But when she told her husband he laughed at her fears.
The idea that the Spaniards should join with the Indians against
the British seemed to him quite absurd.

"How can the Spaniards go to war with us," he said, "while they
are at peace with Great Britain?"

"I know not," replied Sanute." But the Spanish Governor has said
that soon there will be a great war between the British and the
Spaniards, and while we attack on land he will send great ships to
block up the harbours, so that neither man nor woman may escape."

Then laying his hand upon his heart Sanute implored his white friends
to flee with all haste. "But if you are determined to stay," he
added, "then I will take on myself one last office of friendship,
and so that you may not be tortured I will slay you with my own
hand."

Still Fraser doubted.  But his wife was so terrified that he yielded
to her entreaties.  And gathering his goods together he got into
his canoe with his wife and child, and paddled away to Charleston.

Unfortunately in the hurry of departure Fraser either forgot to warn
his friends in the plantation near him, or they, being warned,
disregarded it; and a few days later the slaughter began.  At
daybreak the signal was given, and at the sound of the war whoop
the seemingly peaceful Indians were turned suddenly into raging
demons who, with tomahawk and torch in hand, sowed destruction
and death around.  So the land was filled with blood and wailing,
pleasant homesteads were laid in ruins, and only heaps of smouldering
ashes marked where they had been.

But Governor Craven was one of the best governors of his time.  He
was a man of action and courage as well as a wise ruler, and he
quickly gathered an army with which to march against the savages.
The North Carolinians too, remembering gratefully the help which
South Carolina had given to them in their need, sent men.  Soon
the Yamassees, and their friends were defeated and driven from the
province.  They fled across the border and took refuge in Spanish
territory, where they were received with great rejoicing.  They might
indeed have been heroes returning from a victorious campaign, for
the church bells were rung and salutes were fired in their honour.

The Yamassees were crushed, but they were not utterly conquered,
from henceforth their hearts were filled with hatred against all
the Carolinians.  This hatred the Spaniards did their best to keep
alive.  They supplied the Indians with weapons, and made them valiant
with "fire water." Thus encouraged they broke across the borders in
small scalping parties, seizing and slaying, often with unspeakable
tortures, all those who dwelt in lonely places.  These frays were
so unceasing, and so deadly, that at length hardly any one dared
live in all the border region.

Meanwhile the war against the Indians had cost a great deal of
money.  And as the Lords Proprietor made a good deal of money out
of the colony, the settlers thought they might as well bear some
of the expense also.  So they sent messengers home to arrange this
matter.  But the Lords Proprietor seemed to care little about their
possessions except as a means of making money.  And they refused to
pay any of the cost of the war.  This made the settlers angry.

The settlers revolt and Carolina becomes a royal province, 1719
They had never liked the rule of the Lords Proprietor; now they
were heartily tired of it and they refused to stand it longer.  King
William III was now upon the throne, and the settlers asked him to
make South Carolina a Crown Colony.  To this King William agreed.
Ten years later North Carolina also became a Crown Colony, and the
two Carolinas from henceforth continued to be separate states.

__________





Chapter 44 - The Founding of Georgia




South Carolina extended as far as the River Savannah, and between
that river and the Spanish settlement at St.  Augustine there stretched
a great waste of country inhabited only by the Redmen who ever and
anon made raids into Carolina.  Southward from this the Spaniards
claimed the land and called it Florida; but they made no effort to
colonise the wilderness which stretched between Florida and the
borders of South Carolina.  So at length the idea of founding a
British colony there occurred to an Englishman named James Oglethorpe.

He was a truly great man, and in an age when men were cruel to each
other out of mere thoughtlessness he tried to make people kinder
to their fellows.

In those days in England people could be imprisoned for debt.  And
if they could not pay they remained in prison often for years, and
sometimes till they died.  They were starved and tortured, loaded
with fetters, locked up in filthy dungeons, herded together with
thieves and murderers, or those suffering from smallpox and other
loathsome diseases.  It was horrible, but no one troubled about it.
There had always been misery in the world, there always would be,
men thought, and no one had pity for prisoners.

But now young Oglethorpe had a friend who was imprisoned for debt,
and, being treated in this horrible fashion, he died of smallpox.
Oglethorpe's generous heart was grieved at the death of his
friend, and he began to enquire into the causes of it.  The things
he discovered were so awful that he stood aghast with horror at
the misery of the imprisoned debtors.  And what was more he did not
rest until he had made other people see the horror of it also.  Soon
there was an outcry all over England, and some of the worst evils
were done away with.

Then the idea came to Oglethorpe that he would found a colony in
America, where poor debtors who had regained their freedom might
find a refuge and make a new start in life.  He decided to found
this colony to the south of South Carolina, so that it might not
only be a refuge for the oppressed, but also form a buffer state
between the Carolinas and Spanish Florida.  So from George II
Oglethorpe got a charter for the land lying between the Savannah
and the Altamaha rivers, and in honour of the King the colony was
called Georgia.

Many well-to-do people were by this time interested in his scheme.
They gave him money for it, and he also got a large grant from
Parliament.  This was the first time that Parliament ever voted
money to found a colony in America.  Of all the thirteen colonies
now founded Georgia alone received aid from the State.

Trustees were appointed to frame the laws, and a kind of proprietory
government was created.  The colonists were to be granted all the
liberties of Englishmen, but they were not to be allowed to frame
the laws or take any part in the government.  After twenty-one years
the rule of the trustees was to come to an end, and Georgia was to
become a Crown Colony.

All these matters being arranged, men were sent round to visit the
jails, and choose from among the prisoners those who were really
good men and who through misfortune, rather than roguery, found
themselves in prison.  The Commissioners refused to take lazy or
bad men, or those who, in going to Georgia, would leave wife or
children in want at home.  Besides poor debtors those who were being
persecuted because of their religion in any European State were
invited to come and find a refuge in Georgia.  No slavery was to
be allowed, and the sale of rum was forbidden throughout the whole
colony.  For Oglethorpe knew how the Redman loved "fire-water" and
how bad it was for him, and he wanted the settlement of Georgia
to be a blessing and not a curse to the Redman, as well as to the
white man.

Soon far more people wanted to go than Oglethorpe could take.  So
crowds of poor wretches had to be turned away, bitterly disappointed
that they could not go to this new land which, after their terrible
sufferings, seemed to them a very paradise.

The preparations took some time, and it was about the middle of
November, 1732, when at length the Anne hoisted her sails and turned
her prow towards the west.  There were about a hundred and twenty
colonists on board with Oglethorpe as Governor, and it was nearly
the end of January when the colonists landed on the southern shores
of the Savannah and founded the town of the same name.

One of the first things Oglethorpe did was to make a treaty with
the Indians, for he knew how greatly the peace and safety of the
little colony depended on their friendship.

There were eight tribes of Creeks who claimed the land upon which
Oglethorpe had settled.  But before he allowed the colonists to land
he himself went ashore and sought out the chieftain whose village
was close to the spot he had chosen for his town.  This chieftain
was an old man of over ninety years, and at first he did not seem
at all pleased at the idea of white men settling on his land.  But
Oglethorpe was kindly and friendly, he spoke gently to the old
chief, and soon won his consent to the settlement, and a promise
of friendship.

When then the colonists landed, instead of being greeted with
a flight of arrows they were received with solemn ceremony, the
braves coming down to the water's edge to greet them.  First came the
Medicine Man carrying in either hand a fan made of white feathers
as signs of peace and friendship.  Behind him followed the chieftain
and his squaw, with twenty or thirty braves, who filled the air
with wild yells of welcome.

When the Medicine Man reached Oglethorpe he paused, and dancing
round him he swept him on every side with the white feather fans,
chanting the while a tale of brave deeds.  This done the chieftain
next drew near, and in flowery words bade the White Chief and his
followers welcome.  Thus peacefully the settlement was begun.

But Oglethorpe wanted to be friends with the other tribes round,
so he asked Tomo-chi-chi, the old chieftain, to invite them
to a conference.  And a few months later they all came.  Oglethorpe
received them in one of the new houses built by the settlers, and
when they were all solemnly seated an old and very tall man stood
up and made a long speech.  He claimed for the Creeks all the land
south of the Savannah.

"We are poor and ignorant," he said, "but the Great Spirit who gave
the Pale-faces breath gave the Redmen breath also.  But the Great
Spirit who made us both has given more wisdom to the Pale-faces."

Then he spread his arms abroad and lengthened the sound of his words.
"So we feel sure," he cried, "that the Great Spirit who lives in
heaven and all around has sent you to teach us and our wives and
children.  Therefore we give you freely the land we do not use.  That
is my thought and not mine alone but the thought of all the eight
nations of the Creeks.  And in token thereof we bring you gifts of
skins which is our wealth."

Then one by one the chief men of each nation rose up and laid a
bundle of buck skins at Oglethorpe's feet.

In return Oglethorpe gave each of the chiefs a coat and hat trimmed
with gold lace.  Each of the braves likewise received some present.
So a treaty of peace was signed, the Redmen promising to keep the
good talk in their hearts as long as the sun shone, or water ran in
the rivers.  And so just and wise was Oglethorpe in all his dealings
with the natives that in the early days of the settlement there
were no wars with the natives.

Oglethorpe worked unceasingly for the good of the colony.  He kept
no state, but slept in a tent and ate the plainest of food, his
every thought being given to the happiness of his people.  And in
return they loved him and called him father.  If any one were sick
he visited him, and when they quarreled they came to him to settle
their disputes.  Yet he kept strict discipline and allowed neither
drinking nor swearing.

The work of the colony went on apace.  About six weeks after the
settlers landed some of the settlers from Charleston came to visit
Oglethorpe, and they were astonished to find how quickly things
had got on.

"It is surprising," one wrote, "to see how cheerfully the men work,
considering they have not been bred to it.  There are no idlers
there.  Even the boys and girls do their parts.  There are four houses
already up, but none finished. . . .  He has ploughed up some land,
part of which he has sowed with wheat. . . .  He has two or three
gardens, which he has sowed with divers sort of seeds. . . .  He was
palisading the town round. . . .  In short he has done a vast deal
of work for the time, and I think his name justly deserves to be
immortalised."

But if Georgia had peace with the Indians it was far otherwise with
the Spaniards.  For the Spaniards were very angry with the British
for daring to settle south of the Savannah.  They vowed to root them
out of America, and they set out to attack the little colony.

But Oglethorpe was a daring soldier as well as a wise statesman,
and he succeeded in beating the Spaniards.  It was at Frederica
where the greatest battle took place.  This town had been founded
after Savannah and named Frederica, in honour of Frederick, Prince
of Wales.  It was built on an island off the coast called St.  Simon,
and, being near the Spanish border, it was well fortified.  At
the little village of St.  Simon which was at the south end of the
island, there were barricades and a high watch-tower where a constant
watch was kept for ships.  As soon as they were sighted a gun was
fired, and a horseman sped off to the barracks with the news.

they attack the settlements, 1742 Here one day in July, 1742, a
great fleet of Spanish vessels came sailing.  They made a brave show
with their high painted prows and shining sails, and they brought
five thousand men who vowed to give no quarter.

Oglethorpe had but eight hundred men.  Some were regular soldiers,
some were fierce Highlanders glad to have a chance of a shot at the
Spaniards, and not a few were friendly Indians.  But small though
his force was Oglethorpe did not despair.  He had sent to Carolina
for help which he was sure would come if he could but hold out for
a few days.  He thought, however, that the position at St.  Simon
was too dangerous.  So he spiked his guns, destroyed all stores,
and retreated to Frederica.

The Spaniards soon landed and, taking possession of St.  Simon, set
out to attack Frederica.  But they found it no easy matter, for the
town was surrounded by dense and pathless woods.  And struggling
through them the Spaniards stumbled into marshes, or got entangled
in the dense undergrowth until in their weariness they declared
that not the Evil One himself could force a passage through.  Added
to their other difficulties they were constantly harassed by scouting
parties of wild Indians, and almost as wild Highlanders, sent out
from Frederica by Oglethorpe.

But meanwhile no help appeared, and at length Oglethorpe, having
discovered that the Spanish force was divided, decided to make a
sortie and surprise one part of it.  So with three hundred chosen
men he marched out one dark night, and stole silently through the
woods until he had almost reached the enemy's camp.

Then suddenly a Frenchman who was with the little British force
discharged his musket, and fled towards the Spanish camp.

All hope of a surprise was at an end, and Oglethorpe returned
hastily to the fort.  But that the surprise had failed was not the
worst.  It was certain that the deserter would tell the Spaniards
how weak the British were, and that thus heartened they would soon
attack in force.  Something, Oglethorpe decided, must be done to
prevent that.

So he wrote a letter in French addressing it to the French deserter.
This letter was written as if coming from a friend.  It begged the
Frenchman to tell the Spaniards that Frederica was in an utterly
defenseless state, and to bring them on to an attack.  Or if he
could not persuade them to attack at least he must persuade them
to remain three days longer at Fort Simon.  For within that time
two thousand men would arrive from Carolina and six British ships
of war "which he doubted not would be able to give a good account
of themselves to the Spanish invaders." Above all things the writer
bade the Frenchman beware of saying anything about Admiral Vernon,
the British admiral who was coming against St.  Augustine.  He ended
by assuring him that the British King would not forget such good
services, and that he should be richly rewarded.

This letter Oglethorpe gave to one of the Spanish prisoners they
had taken, who for a small sum of money and his liberty, promised
to deliver it to the French deserter.  But instead of doing that
he gave it, as Oglethorpe had expected he would, to the leader of
the Spanish army.

The French deserter at once denied all knowledge of the letter or
its writer, but all the same he was fettered and kept a prisoner
while the Spanish leaders held a council of war.  They knew not what
to do.  Some thought that the letter was a ruse (as indeed it was)
merely meant to deceive them.  But others thought that the British
really had them in a trap.  And while they were thus debating by
good luck some British vessels appeared off the coast.  And thinking
them to be the men-of-war mentioned in the letter the Spaniards
fled in such haste that although they had time to set fire to the
barracks at St.  Simon they left behind them a great cannon and
large stores of food and ammunition.

Thus was the little colony saved from destruction.

By his brave stand and clever ruse Oglethorpe had saved not only
Georgia but Carolina too.  Yet South Carolina had cause for shame,
for her Governor had paid no heed to Oglethorpe's call for help,
and so far as he was concerned Georgia might have been wiped out.
He indeed cared so little about it that when the governors of the
other more northerly colonies wrote to Oglethorpe thanking and
praising him he did not join with them.  But much to his disgust,
seeing their Governor so lax, some of the people of South Carolina
themselves wrote to Oglethorpe to thank him.

"It was very certain," they wrote, "had the Spaniards succeeded in
those attempts against your Excellency they would also have entirely
destroyed us, laid our province waste and desolate, and filled our
habitation with waste and slaughter.  We are very sensible of the
great protection and safety we have long enjoyed, by your Excellency
being to the southwards of us, and keeping your armed sloops cruising
on the coasts, which has secured our trade and fortunes more than
all the ships of war ever stationed at Charleston.  But more by
your late resolution against the Spaniards when nothing could have
saved us from utter ruin, next to the Providence of Almighty God,
but your Excellency's singular conduct, and the bravery of the
troops under your command.  We think it our duty to pray God to
protect your Excellency and send you success in all your undertakings."

But, although Oglethorpe had many friends, he had also enemies,
some even within the colony he had done so much to serve.  There
were those within the colony who wanted rum and wanted slavery and
said that it would never prosper until they were allowed.  Oglethorpe,
with all his might, opposed them, so they hated him.  Others were
discontented for far better reasons: because they had no share in
the government, and because the land laws were bad.

Oglethorpe, too, had his own troubles, for he had spent so much on
the colony that he was deeply in debt.  So, having ruled for twelve
years, he went home, and although be lived to a great old age, he
never returned again to Georgia.  At the age of fifty-five he married;
then he settled down to the quiet life of an English gentleman.
Learned men and fine ladies called him friend, poets sang of his
deeds, and the great Samuel Johnson wanted to write his life.

"Heroic, romantic, and full of the old gallantry" to the end,
he lived out his last days in the great manor house of an English
village, and was laid to rest in the peaceful village church in
1785.

"But the Savannah repeats to the Altamaha the story of his virtues
and of his valor, and the Atlantic publishes to the mountains the
greatness of his fame, for all Georgia is his living, speaking
monument."

Oglethorpe was the only one of all the founders of British colonies
in America who lived to see their separation from the mother-country.
But long ere that he had to see many changes in the settlement.
For the colonists would not be contented without rum and slaves,
and in 1749 both were allowed.  A few years later the trustees gave
up their claims and Georgia became a Crown Colony, and the people
were given the right to vote and help to frame the laws under which
they had to live.

PART V STORIES OF THE FRENCH IN AMERICA

__________





Chapter 45 - How the Mississippi was Discovered




While the shores of the Atlantic from Nova Scotia to Georgia were
being claimed and peopled by the British another and very different
nation laid claim also to the mighty continent.  Before Jamestown
was founded the French had already set foot upon the St.  Lawrence.
Long before the Pilgrim Fathers sailed from Plymouth the flag of
France was floating from the citadel of Quebec; and the French laid
claim to the whole of Canada.

But the French and the British claimed these new lands in very
different ways.  The Englishmen came seeking freedom and a new home.
The Frenchmen came seeking adventure.  The Englishman painfully
felled trees and cleared land, toiling by the sweat of his brow for
the comfort of a home.  The Frenchman set up crosses on the edge of
pathless forests, claiming unknown lands for God and his King.  He
came as missionary, trader and adventurer rather than as farmer.
And, led on by zeal for religion or desire for adventure, he pushed
his settlements far into the wilderness.

So, long years went by.  All along the Atlantic coasts spread fertile
fields and fair homesteads.  The British were content to live on the
lands which they had cleared and tilled, and no adventurer sought
to know what lay beyond the blue mountain range which shut him from
the West.

Far otherwise was it with the French.  Priests and traders were
both full of a desire for conquest and adventure.  Many of them
indeed were so driven by the roving spirit that they left the
towns altogether and lived alone among the forests, tracking the
wild animals, and only coming to towns to sell the skins and get
provisions.

These trappers brought back with them many strange tales of the
forests and unknown wilds.  They spoke of the Mississippi or "great
water" of which the Indians told marvelous tales.  And at length
it seemed to their hearers that this great water could be no other
than the long sought passage to India and the East.

Many people, fired by these tales, went in search of this great
water.  In 1673 two priests named Marquette and Joliet were the first
to discover it.  For many miles they floated down the Mississippi.
On either side stretched endless forests and plains of waving grass,
haunts of wild animals and of the Indians, - almost as wild.  On
they went, past the mouth of the yellow Missouri, on still till
they came to the river Arkansas.  At last, sure that the great river
went southward and not westward as they had supposed, they decided
to return.

It had been easy enough floating down, but now they had to battle
against the stream, and it was only after weeks of toil that they
at length reached Canada again with their news.

When he heard their story another adventurer named René Robert
Cavelier Sieur de la Salle became eager to make certain of their
discovery, and follow the river all the way to its mouth.

With great care and trouble he made his arrangements.  He thought
it would be impossible to compass so great a journey by canoes,
so he built a little ship which he called the Griffin.  It was the
first ship which had been seen by the Indians round Lake Erie, and
in amazement and fear they came to stare at it.  In their ignorant
terror they would have destroyed it had not careful watch been
kept.

From the very beginning of his expedition La Salle found many
difficulties.  But at length they all seemed to be overcome, and he
set out with his friend, Henri de Tonty, and about forty men.

Tonty was a man of courage, as bold and enterprising as La Salle
himself.  He was, too, much feared by the Indians, who thought him
a great Medicine Man.  For while fighting in Europe he had had one
hand shot off.  But he had replaced it with an iron hand, which he
always wore covered with a glove.  The Indians did not know this,
and once or twice when they had been troublesome he had brought
them to order by knocking them down with this hand.  Not knowing the
secret of it they marvelled greatly at his strength, and, fearing
him accordingly, called him Iron Hand.

One of La Salle's great difficulties was lack of money.  So before
