Tomlins that there was a shyness between the lieutenant and him on
my account; the rancorous villain having taken the opportunity of my
absence to fill the captain's ears with a thousand scandalous stories
to my prejudice; among other things affirming, that I had been once
transported for theft, and that when I was in the Thunder man-of-war,
I had been whipped for the same crime. The surgeon, on the other hand,
having heard my whole story from my own mouth, defended me strenuously,
and in the course of that good-natured office recounted all the
instances of Crampley's malice against me while I remained on board
of that ship. Which declaration, while it satisfied the captain of my
innocence, made the lieutenant as much my defender's enemy as mine. The
infernal behaviour of Crampley, with regard to me, added such fuel to
his former resentment, that, at certain times, I was quite beside myself
with the desire of revenge, and was even tempted to pistol him on the
quarter-deck, though an infamous death must inevitably have been my
reward. But the surgeon, who was my confidant, argued against such a
desperate action so effectually, that I stifled the flame which
consumed me for the present, and resolved to wait for a more convenient
opportunity. In the meantime, that Mr. Tomlins might be the more
convinced of the wrongs I suffered by this fellow's slander, I begged he
would go and visit Mr. Thompson, whose wonderful escape I had made him
acquainted with, and inquire of him into the particulars of my conduct,
while he was my fellow-mate.

This request the surgeon complied with, more through curiosity to see
a person whose fate had been so extraordinary, than to confirm his good
opinion of me, which he assured me was already firmly established. He
therefore set out for the dwelling-place of my friend, with a letter
of introduction from me; and being received with all the civility and
kindness I expected, returned to the ship, not only satisfied with my
character beyond the power of doubt or insinuation, but also charmed
with the affability and conversation of Thompson, who loaded him and
me with presents of fresh stock, liquors, and fruit. As he would not
venture to come and see us on board, lest Cramplay should know and
detain him; when the time of our departure approached, I obtained
leave to go and bid him farewell. After we had vowed an everlasting
friendship, he pressed upon me a purse, with four doubloons, which I
refused as long as I could without giving umbrage; and, having cordially
embraced each other, I returned on board, where I found a small box,
with a letter directed for me, to the care of Mr. Tomlins. Knowing the
superscription to be of Thompson's handwriting, I opened it with some
surprise, and learned that this generous friend, not content with
loading me with the presents already mentioned, had sent, for my use and
acceptance, half a dozen fine shirts, and as many linen waistcoats and
caps, with twelve pair of new thread stockings. Being thus provided with
money and all necessaries for the comfort of life, I began to look upon
myself as a gentleman of some consequence, and felt my pride dilate a
pace.

Next day we sailed for Port Royal, where we arrived safely with our
prizes; and, as there was nothing to do on board, I went ashore, and
having purchased a laced waistcoat, with some other clothes, at a
sale, made a swaggering figure for some days among the taverns, where I
ventured to play a little at hazard, and came off with fifty pistoles in
my pocket. Meanwhile our captain was promoted to a ship of twenty guns,
and the command of the Lizard given to a man turned of fourscore,
who had been lieutenant since the reign of King William, and,
notwithstanding his long service, would have probably died in that
station, had he not applied some prize-money he had lately received,
to make interest with his superiors. My friend Brayl was also made
an officer about the same time, after he had served in quality of
a midshipman and mate for five and twenty years. Soon after these
alterations, the admiral pitched upon our ship to carry home dispatches
for the ministry; and we set sail for England, having first scrubbed her
bottom, and taken in provision and water for the occasion.






CHAPTER XXXVII

We depart for Europe--a misunderstanding arises between the Captain and
the Surgeon, through the scandalous aspersions of Crampley--the Captain
dies--Crampley tyrannises over the surgeon, who falls a Victim for his
Cruelty--I am also ill-used--the Ship strikes--the behaviour of Crampley
and the Seamen on that occasion---I get on shore, challenge the Captain
to single combat--am treacherously knocked down, wounded, and robbed

Now that I could return to my native country in a creditable way, I felt
excessive pleasure in finding myself out of sight of that fatal
island, which has been the grave of so many Europeans: and, as I was
accommodated with everything to make the passage agreeable, I resolved
to enjoy myself as much as the insolence of Crampley would permit. This
insidious slanderer had found means already to cause a misunderstanding
between the surgeon and captain, who, by his age and infirmities, was
rendered intolerably peevish, his disposition having also been soured
by a long course of disappointments. He had a particular aversion to
all young men, especially to surgeons, whom he considered unnecessary
animals on board of a ship; and, in consequence of these sentiments,
never consulted the doctor, notwithstanding his being seized with a
violent fit of the gout and gravel, but applied to a cask of Holland
gin, which was his sovereign prescription against all distempers:
whether he was at this time too sparing, or took an overdose of his
cordial, certain it is, he departed in the night, without any ceremony,
which indeed was a thing he always despised, and was found stiff next
morning, to the no small satisfaction of Crampley, who succeeded to the
command of the vessel. For that very reason, Mr. Tomlins and I had no
cause to rejoice at this event, fearing that the tyranny of our new
commander would now be as unlimited as his power. The first day of his
command justified our apprehensions: for, on pretence that the decks
were too much crowded, he ordered the surgeon's hencoops, with all his
fowls, to be thrown overboard; and at the same time prohibited him and
me from walking on the quarter-deck.

Mr. Tomlins could not help complaining of these injuries, and in the
course of his expostulation dropped some hasty words, of which Crampley
taking hold, confined him to his cabin, where, in a few days, for want
of air he was attacked by a fever, which soon put an end to his life,
after he had made his will, by which he bequeathed all his estate,
personal and real, to his sister, and left to me his watch and
instruments as memorials of his friendship. I was penetrated with grief
on this melancholy occasion; the more because there was nobody on board
to whom I could communicate my sorrows, or of whom I could receive the
least consolation or advice. Crampley was so far from discovering the
least remorse for his barbarity, at the news of the surgeon's death,
that he insulted his memory in the most abusive manner, and affirmed
he had poisoned himself out of pure fear, dreading to be brought to
a court-martial for mutiny; for which reason he would not suffer the
service of the dead to be read over his body before it was thrown
overboard.

Nothing but a speedy deliverance could have supported me under the
brutal sway of this bashaw, who, to render my life more irksome,
signified to my messmates a desire that I should be expelled from their
society. This was no sooner hinted, than they granted his request; and
I was fain to eat in a solitary manner by myself during the rest of the
passage, which, however, soon drew to a period.

We had been seven weeks at sea, when the gunner told the captain that,
by his reckoning, we must be in soundings, and desired he would order
the lead to be heaved. Crampley swore he did not know how to keep the
ship's way, for we were not within a hundred leagues of soundings,
and therefore he would not give himself the trouble to cast the lead.
Accordingly we continued our course all that afternoon and night,
without shortening sail, although the gunner pretended to discover
Scilly light; and next morning protested in form against the captain's
conduct, for which he was put in confinement, We discovered no land all
that day, and Crampley was still so infatuated as to neglect sounding;
but at three o'clock in the morning the ship struck, and remained fast
on a sand-bank. This accident alarmed the whole crew; the boat was
immediately hoisted out, but as we could not discern which way the shore
lay, we were obliged to wait for daylight. In the meantime, the wind
increased, and the waves beat against the sloop with such violence, that
we expected she would have gone to pieces. The gunner was released and
consulted: he advised the captain to cut away the mast, in order to
lighten her; this expedient was performed without success: the sailors,
seeing things in a desperate situation, according to custom, broke
up the chests belonging to the officers, dressed themselves in their
clothes, drank their liquors without ceremony, and drunkenness, tumult,
and confusion ensued.

In the midst of this uproar, I went below to secure my own effects,
and found the carpenter's mate hewing down the purser's cabin with his
hatchet, whistling all the while with great composure. When I asked his
intention in so doing, he replied, very calmly, "I only want to taste
the purser's rum, that's all, master." At that instant the purser coming
down, and seeing his effects going to wreck, complained bitterly of the
injustice done to him, and asked the fellow what occasion he had
for liquor when, in all likelihood, he would be in eternity in a few
minutes. "All's one for that," said plunderer, "let us live while we
can." "Miserable wretch that thou art!" cried the purser, "what must be
thy lot in another world, if thou diest in the commission of robbery?"
"Why, hell, I suppose," replied the other, with great deliberation,
while the purser fell on his knees, and begged of Heaven that we might
not all perish for the sake of Jonas.

During this dialogue I clothed myself in my bed apparel, girded on
my hanger, stuck my pistols, loaded, in my belt, disposed of all my
valuable moveables about my person, and came upon deck with a resolution
of taking the first opportunity to get on shore, which, when the day
broke, appeared at the distance of three miles ahead. Crampley, finding
his efforts to get the ship off ineffectual, determined to consult his
own safety, by going into the boat, which he had no sooner done, than
the ship's company followed so fast, that she would have sunk alongside,
had not some one wiser than the rest cut the rope and put off. But
before this happened, I had made several attempts to get in, and was
always balked by the captain, who was so eager in excluding me, that he
did not mind the endeavours of any other body. Enraged at this inhuman
partiality, and seeing the rope cut, I pulled one of my pistols from my
belt, and cocking it, swore I would shoot any man who would presume to
obstruct my entrance. So saying, I leaped with my full exertion, and got
on board of the boat with the loss of the skin of my shins. I chanced in
my descent to overturn Crampley, who no sooner got up than he struck
at me several times with a cutlass, and ordered the men to throw me
overboard; but they were too anxious about their own safety to mind what
he said. Though the boat was very deeply loaded, and the sea terribly
high, we made shift to get upon dry land in less than an hour after
we parted from the sloop. As soon as I set my foot on terra firma,
my indignation, which had boiled so long within me, broke out against
Crampley, whom I immediately challenged to single combat, presenting my
pistols, that he might take his choice: he took one without hesitation,
and, before I could cock the other, fired in my face, throwing the
pistol after the shot. I felt myself stunned, and imagining the bullet
had entered my brain, discharged mine as quick as possible, that I might
not die unrevenged: then flying upon my antagonist, knocked out several
of his fore-teeth with the butt-end of the piece, and would certainly
have made an end of him with that instrument, had he not disengaged
himself, and seized his cutlass, which he had given to his servant
when he received the pistol. Seeing him armed in this manner, I drew my
hanger, and, having flung my pistol at his head, closed with him in
a transport of fury, and thrust my weapon into his mouth, which it
enlarged on one side to his ear. Whether the smart of this wound
disconcerted him, or the unevenness of the ground made him reel, I know
not, but he staggered some paces back: I followed close, and with one
stroke cut the tendons of the back of his hand, Upon which his cutlass
dropped, and he remained defenceless. I know not with what cruelty my
rage might have inspired me, if I had not at that instant been felled to
the ground by a blow on the back part of my head, which deprived me of
all sensation. In this deplorable situation, exposed to the rage of an
incensed barbarian, and the rapine of an inhuman crew, I remained for
some time; and whether any disputes arose among them during the state
of my annihilation, I cannot pretend to determine; but in one particular
they seemed to have been unanimous, and acted with equal dexterity and
dispatch; for when I recovered the use of my understanding, I found
myself alone in a desolate place, stripped of my clothes, money, watch,
buckles, and everything but my shoes, stockings, breeches and shirt.
What a discovery must this have been to me, who, but an hour before, was
worth sixty guineas in cash! I cursed the hour of my birth, the parents
that gave me being, the sea that did not swallow me up, the poniard of
the enemy, which could not find the way to my heart, the villainy of
those who had left me in that miserable condition; and in the ecstacy of
despair resolved to be still where I was, and perish.






CHAPTER XXXVIII

I get up and crawl into a barn, where I am in danger of perishing,
through the fear of the country people--their inhumanity--I am succoured
by a reputed witch--her story--her advice--she recommends me as a valet
to a single lady, whose character she explains

But as I lay ruminating, my passion insensibly abated; I considered my
situation in quite another light, from that in which it appeared to me
at first, and the result of my deliberation was to rise if I could, and
crawl to the next inhabited place for assistance. With some difficulty
I got upon my legs, and having examined my body, found I had received no
other injury than two large contused wounds, one on the fore and another
on the hinder part of my head, which seemed to be occasioned by the same
weapon, namely, the butt-end of a pistol. I looked towards the sea, but
could discern no remains of the ship; so that I concluded she was gone
to pieces, and that those who remained in her had perished: but, as I
afterwards learned, the gunner, who had more sagacity than Crampley,
observing that it was flood when he left her, and that she would
probably float at high water, made no noise about getting on shore,
but continued on deck, in hopes of bringing her safe into some harbour,
after her commander should have deserted her, for which piece of
service he expected, no doubt, to be handsomely rewarded. This scheme he
accordingly executed, and was promised great things by the Admiralty for
saving his Majesty's ship: but I never heard he reaped the fruits of his
expectation. As for my own part, I directed my course towards a small
cottage I perceived, and in the road picked up a seaman's old jacket,
which I suppose the thief who dressed himself in my clothes had thrown
away: this was a very comfortable acquisition to me, who was almost
stiff with cold: I therefore put it on; and, as my natural heat revived,
my wounds, which had left off bleeding, burst out afresh; so that,
finding myself excessively exhausted, I was about to lie down in the
fields, when I discovered a barn on my left hand, within a few yards of
me; thither I made shift to stagger, and finding the door open, went in,
but saw nobody; however, I threw myself upon a truss of straw, hoping
to be soon relieved by some person or other. I had not lain here many
minutes, when I saw a countryman come in with a pitchfork in his hand,
which he was upon the point of thrusting into the straw that concealed
me, and in all probability would have done my business, had I not
uttered a dreadful groan, after having essayed in vain to speak. This
melancholy note alarmed the clown, who started back, and discovering
a body all besmeared with blood, stood trembling, with the pitchfork
extended before him, his hair bristling up, his eyes staring, his
nostrils dilated, and his mouth wide open. At another time I should have
been much diverted by this figure, which preserved the same attitude
very near ten minutes, during which time I made many unsuccessful
efforts to implore his compassion and assistance; but my tongue failed
me, and my language was only a repetition of groans. At length an old
man arrived, who, seeing the other in such a posture, cried, "Mercy upon
en! the leaad's bewitched! why, Dick, beest thou besayd thyself!" Dick,
without moving his eyes from the object that terrified him, replied,
"O vather! vatber! here be either the devil or a dead mon: I doant know
which o'en, but a groans woundily." The father, whose eyesight was none
of the best, pulled out his spectacles, and, having applied them to
his nose reconnoitered me over his son's shoulder: but no sooner did he
behold me, than he was seized with a fit of shaking, even more violent
than Dick's, and, with a broken accent, addressed me thus: "In the name
of the Vather, Zun, and Holy Ghost, I charge you, an you been Satan, to
be gone to the Red Zen; but an you be a moordered mon, speak, that you
may have a Christom burial."

As I was not in a condition to satisfy him in this particular, he
repeated his conjuration to no purpose, and they continued a good while
in the agonies of fear. At length the father proposed that the son
should draw nearer, and take a more distinct view of the apparition; but
Dick was of opinion that his father should advance first, he being an
old man past his labour and, if he received any mischief, the loss would
be the smaller; whereas he himself might escape, and be useful, in his
generation. This prudential reason had no effect upon the senior, who
still kept Dick between me and him. In the meantime I endeavoured to
raise one hand as a signal of distress, but had only strength sufficient
to produce a rustling among the straw, which discomposed the young
peasant so much, that he sprang out at the door, and overthrew his
father in his flight. The old gentleman would not spend time in getting
up, but crawled backwards like a crab, with great speed, till he had got
over the threshold, mumbling exorcisms all the way. I was exceedingly
mortified to find myself in danger of perishing through the ignorance
and cowardice of these clowns; and felt my spirits decay apace, when an
old woman entered the barn, followed by the two fugitives and with great
intrepidity advanced to the place where I lay, saying, "If it be the
devil I fearen not, and for a dead mon a can do us no harm." When she
saw my condition, she cried, "Here be no devil, but in your en fool's
head. Here be a poor miserable wretch bleeding to death, and if a dies,
we must be at the charge of burying him; therefore, Dick, go vetch the
old wheelbarrow and put en in, and carry en to goodman Hodge's backdoor;
he is more able than we to pay out money upon poor vagrants." Her advice
was taken, and immediately put in execution; I was rolled to the other
farmer's door, where I was tumbled out like a heap of dung; and should
certainly have fallen a prey to the hogs, if my groans had not disturbed
the family, and brought some of them out to view my situation. But Hodge
resembled the Jew more than the good Samaritan, and ordered me to be
carried to the house of the parson, whose business it was to practise as
well as to preach charity; observing that it was sufficient for him to
pay his quota towards the maintenance of the poor belonging to his own
parish. When I was set down at the vicar's gate, he fell into a mighty
passion, and threatened to excommunicate him who sent, as well as those
who brought me, unless they would move me immediately to another
place. About this time I fainted with the fatigue I had undergone, and
afterwards understood that I was bandied from door to door through a
whole village, nobody having humanity enough to administer the least
relief to me, Until an old woman, who was suspected of witchcraft by the
neighbourhood, hearing of my distress, received me into her house, and,
having dressed my wounds, brought me to myself with cordials of her own
preparing. I was treated with great care and tenderness by this grave
matron, who, after I had recovered some strength, desired to know the
particulars of my last disaster. This piece of satisfaction I could not
refuse to one who had saved my life, therefore related all my
adventures without exaggeration or reserve. She seemed surprised at the
vicissitudes I had undergone, and drew a happy presage of my future life
from my past suffering, then launched out into the praise of adversity,
with so much ardour and good sense, that I concluded she was a person
who had seen better days, and conceived a longing desire to hear her
story. She perceived my drift by some words I dropped, and smiling told
me, there was nothing either entertaining or extraordinary in the
course of her fortune; but, however, she would communicate it to me, in
consideration of the confidence I had reposed in her. "It is of little
consequence," said she, "to tell the names of my parents, who are dead
many years ago; let it suffice to assure you, they were wealthy, and
had no other child than me; so that I was looked upon as heiress to a
considerable estate, and teased with addresses on that account. Among
the number of my admirers, there was a young gentleman of no fortune,
whose sole dependence was on his promotion in the army, in which, at
that time, he bore a lieutenant's commission. I conceived an affection
for this amiable officer, which, in a short time, increased to a violent
passion, and without entering into minute circumstances, married him
privately. We had not enjoyed one another long in stolen interviews,
when he was ordered with his regiment to Flanders; but, before he set
out, it was agreed between us, that we should declare our marriage to
my father by letter, and implore his pardon for the step we had taken
without his approbation." This discovery was made while I was abroad
visiting, and just as I was about to return home, I received a letter
from my father, importing that, since I had acted so undutifully and
meanly as to marry a beggar, without his privity or consent, to the
disgrace of his family as well as the disappointment of his hopes,
he renounced me to the miserable fate I had entailed upon myself, and
charged me never to set foot within his doors again. This rigid sentence
was confirmed by my mother, who, in a postscript, gave me to understand
that her sentiments were exactly conformable to those of my father, and
that I might save myself the trouble of making any applications, for
her resolutions were unalterable. Thunderstruck with my evil fortune I
called a coach, and drove to my husband's lodgings, where I found him
waiting the event of his letter. Though he could easily divine by my
looks the issue of his declaration, he read with great steadiness the
epistle I had received; and with a smile full of tenderness, which I
shall never forget, embraced me, saying, "I believe the good lady your
mother might have spared herself the trouble of the last part of her
postscript. Well, my dear Betty, you must lay aside all thoughts of a
coach, till I can procure the command of a regiment." This unconcerned
behaviour, while it enabled me to support my reverse of fortune, at
the same time endeared him to me the more, by convincing me of his
disinterested views in espousing me. I was next day boarded in company
with the wife of another officer, who had long been the friend and
confidant of my husband, at a village not far from London, where they
parted with us in the most melting manner, went to Flanders, and were
killed in sight of one another at the battle of the Wood.

"Why should I tire you with a description of our unutterable sorrow at
the fatal news of this event, the remembrance of which now fills my aged
eyes with tears! When our grief subsided a little, and reflection came
to our aid, we found ourselves deserted by the whole world, and in
danger of perishing by want; whereupon we made application for the
pension, and were put upon the list. Then, vowing eternal friendship,
sold our jewels and superfluous clothes, retired to this place (which is
in the county of Sussex) bought this little house, where we lived many
years in a solitary manner, indulging our mutual sorrow, till it pleased
Heaven to call away my companion two years ago; since which time I have
lingered out an unhappy being, in hopes of a speedy dissolution, when
I promise myself the eternal reward of all my cares. In the meantime,"
continued she, "I must inform you of the character I bear among my
neighbours. My conversation being different from that of the inhabitants
of the village, my recluse way of life, my skill in curing distempers,
which I acquired from books since I settled here, and lastly, my age
having made the common people look upon me as something preternatural,
and I am actually, at this hour, believed to be a witch. The parson
of the parish, whose acquaintance I have not been at much pains to
cultivate, taking umbrage at my supposed disrespect, has contributed not
a little towards the confirmation of this opinion, by dropping
certain hints to my prejudice among the vulgar, who are also very much
scandalised at my entertaining this poor tabby cat with the collar about
her neck, which was a favourite of my deceased companion."

The whole behaviour of this venerable person was so primitive, innocent,
sensible, and humane, that I contracted a filial respect for her, and
begged her advice with regard to my future conduct, as soon as I was
in a condition to act for myself. She dissuaded me from a design I had
formed of travelling to Louder, in hopes of retrieving my clothes and
pay, by returning to my ship, which by this time I read in the newspaper
was safely arrived in the River Thames: "because," said she, "you run
the hazard of being treated not only as a deserter in quitting the
sloop, but also as a mutineer, in assaulting your commanding officer,
to the malice of whose revenge you will moreover be exposed." She
then promised to recommend me, as servant to a single lady of her
acquaintance, who lived in the neighbourhood with her nephew, who was a
young foxhunter of great fortune, where I might be very happy, provided
I could bear with the disposition and manners of my mistress, which were
somewhat whimsical and particular. But, above all things, she counselled
me to conceal my story, the knowledge of which would effectually poison
my entertainment; for it was a maxim, among most people of condition,
that no gentleman ought to be admitted into a family as a domestic,
lest he become lazy, and insolent. I was fain to embrace this humble
proposal, because my affairs were desperate; and in a few days was
hired by this lady, to serve in quality of her footman, having been
represented by my hostess as a young man who was bred up to the sea by
his relations against his will, and had suffered shipwreck, which had
increased his disgust to that way of life so much, that he rather chose
to go to service on shore, than enter himself on board of any other
ship. Before I took possession of my new place, she gave me a sketch
of my mistress's character, that I might know better how to regulate my
conduct.

"Your lady," said she, "is a maiden of forty years, not so remarkable
for her beauty as her learning and taste, which is famous all over the
country. Indeed, she is a perfect female virtuoso, and so eager after
the pursuit of knowledge that she neglects her person even to a degree
of sluttishness; this negligence, together with her contempt of the male
part of the creation, gives her nephew no great concern, as by these
means he will probably keep her fortune, which is considerable in
the family. He therefore permits her to live in her own way, which is
something extraordinary, and gratifies her in all her whimsical desires.
Her apartment is at some distance from the other inhabited parts of the
house; and consists of a dining-room, bedchamber, and study; she keeps a
cook maid, a waiting-woman, and footman, of her own, and seldom eats
or converses with any of the family but her niece, who is a very lovely
creature, and humours her aunt often to the prejudice of her own health
by sitting up with her whole nights together; for your mistress is too
much of a philosopher to be swayed by the custom of the world, and
never sleeps nor eats like other people. Among other odd notions, she
professes the principles of Rosicrucius, and believes the earth, air,
and sea, are inhabited by invisible beings, with whom it is possible for
the human species to entertain correspondence and intimacy, on the easy
condition of living chaste. As she hopes one day to be admitted into an
acquaintance of this kind, she no sooner heard of me and my cat,
than she paid me a visit, with a view, as she has since owned, to be
introduced to my familiar; and was greatly mortified to find herself
disappointed in her expectation. Being by this visionary turn of mind
abstracted as it were from the world, she cannot advert to the common
occurrences of life; and therefore is frequently so absent as to commit
very strange mistakes and extravagancies, which you will do well to
rectify and repair, as your prudence shall suggest."






CHAPTER XXXIX

My Reception by that Lady--I become enamoured of Narcissa--recount
the particulars of my last misfortune--acquire the good opinion of my
Mistress--an Account of the young Squire--I am made acquainted with more
particulars of Narcissa's Situation--conceive a mortal hatred against
Sir Timothy--examine my Lady's library and performances--her extravagant
behaviour

Fraught with these useful instructions, I repaired to the place of her
habitation, and was introduced by the waiting-woman to the presence of
my lady, who had not before seen me. She sat in her study, with one foot
on the ground, and the other upon a high stool at some distance from her
seat; her sandy locks hung down, in a disorder I cannot call beautiful,
from her head, which was deprived of its coif, for the benefit of
scratching with one hand, while she held the stump of a pen in the
other. Her forehead was high and wrinkled; her eyes were large, gray,
and prominent; her nose was long, and aquiline: her mouth of vast
capacity, her visage meagre and freckled, and her chin peaked like a
shoemaker's paring knife; her upper lip contained a large quantity of
plain Spanish, which, by continual falling, had embroidered her neck,
that was not naturally very white, and the breast of her gown, that
flowed loose about her with a negligence that was truly poetic,
discovering linen that was very fine, and, to all appearance, never
washed but in Castalian streams. Around her lay heaps of books, globes,
quadrants, telescopes, and other learned apparatus; her snuff-box stood
at her right hand: at her left hand lay her handkerchief, sufficiently
used, and a convenience to spit in appeared on one side of her chair.
She being in a reverie when we entered, the maid did not think proper
to disturb her; so that we waited some minutes unobserved, during which
time she bit the quill several times, altered her position, made many
wry faces, and, at length, with an air of triumph, repeated aloud:

"Nor dare th'immortal gods my rage oppose!"

Having committed her success to paper, she turned towards the door,
and perceiving us, cried, "What's the matter?" "Here's the young man,"
replied my conductress, "whom Mrs. Sagely recommended as a footman
to your ladyship." On this information she stared in my face for a
considerable time, and then asked my name, which I thought proper
to conceal under that of John Brown. After having surveyed me with
a curious eye, she broke out into, "O! ay, thou wast shipwrecked, I
remember. Whether didst thou come on shore on the back of a whale or a
dolphin?" To this I answered, I had swam ashore without any assistance.
Then she demanded to know if I had ever been at the Hellespont, and swam
from Sestos to Abydos. I replied in the negative; upon which she bade
the maid order a suit of new livery for me, and instruct me in the
articles of my duty: so she spit in her snuff-box, and wiped her nose
with her cap, which lay on the table, instead of a handkerchief.

We returned to the kitchen, where I was regaled by the maids, who seemed
to vie with each other in expressing their regard for me; and from them
I understood, that my business consisted in cleaning knives and forks,
laying the cloth, waiting at table, carrying messages, and attending my
lady when she went abroad. There was a very good suit of livery in the
house, which had belonged to my predecessor deceased, and it fitted
me exactly; so that there was no occasion for employing a tailor on my
account. I had not been long equipped in this manner, when my lady's
bell rung; upon which, I ran up stairs, and found her stalking about
the room in her shift and under petticoat only; I would immediately have
retired as became me, but she bade me come in, and air a clean shift for
her; which operation I having performed with some backwardness, she put
it on before me without any ceremony, and I verily believe was ignorant
of my sex all that time, as being quite absorbed in contemplation. About
four o'clock in the afternoon I was ordered to lay the cloth, and place
two covers, which I understood were for my mistress and her niece, whom
I had not as yet seen. Though I was not very dexterous at this work, I
performed it pretty well for a beginner, and, when dinner was upon the
table, saw my mistress approach, accompanied by the young lady, whose
name for the present shall be Narcissa. So much sweetness appeared in
the countenance and carriage of this amiable apparition, that my heart
was captivated at first sight, and while dinner lasted, I gazed upon her
without intermission. Her age seemed to be seventeen, her stature tall,
her shape unexceptionable, her hair, that fell down upon her ivory neck
in ringlets, black as jet; her arched eyebrows of the same colour;
her eyes piercing, yet tender; her lips of the consistence and hue of
cherries; her complexion clear, delicate and healthy; her aspect noble,
ingenuous, and humane; and the whole person so ravishingly delightful,
that it was impossible for any creature endued with sensibility, to see
without admiring, and admire without loving her to excess. I began to
curse the servile station that placed me so far beneath the regard of
this idol of my adoration! and yet I blessed my fate, that enabled me to
enjoy daily the sight of so much perfection! When she spoke I listened
with pleasure; but when she spoke to me, my soul was thrilled with an
extacy of tumultuous joy. I was even so happy as to be the subject of
their conversation; for Narcissa, having observed me, said to her aunt,
"I see your new footman is come." Then addressing herself to me, asked,
with ineffable complacency, if I was the person who had been so cruelly
used by robbers? When I had satisfied her in this; she expressed a
desire of knowing the other particulars of my fortune, both before and
since my being shipwrecked: hereupon (as Mrs. Sagely had counselled me)
I told her that I had been bound apprentice to the master of a ship,
contrary to my inclination, which ship had foundered at sea; that I and
four more, who chanced to be on deck when she went down, made shift
to swim to the shore, when my companions, after having overpowered me,
stripped me to the shirt, and left me, as they imagined, dead of the
wounds I received in my own defence. Then I related the circumstances
of being found in a barn, with the inhuman treatment I met with from the
country people and parson; the description of which, I perceived, drew
tears from the charming creature's eyes. When I had finished my recital,
my mistress, said, "Ma foi! le garcon est bien fait!" To which opinion
Narcissa assented, with a compliment to my understanding, in the same
language, that flattered my vanity extremely.

The conversation, among other subjects, turned upon the young squire,
