You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this etext,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the etext,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

[Portions of this header are copyright (C) 2001 by Michael S. Hart
and may be reprinted only when these Etexts are free of all fees.]
[Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be used in any sales
of Project Gutenberg Etexts or other materials be they hardware or
software or any other related product without express permission.]

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.10/04/01*END*





This etext was produced by David Widger  <widger@cecomet.net>





VITTORIA


By George Meredith



BOOK 6.

XXIX.     EPISODES OF THE REVOLT AND THE WAR--THE TOBACCO RIOTS
          --RINALDO GUIDASCARPI
XXX.      EPISODES OF THE REVOLT AND THE WAR--THE FIVE DAYS OF MILAN
XXXI.     EPISODES OF THE REVOLT AND THE WAR--VITTORIA DISOBEYS HER LOVER
XXXII.    EPISODES OF THE REVOLT AND THE WAR--THE TREACHERY OF
          PERICLES--THE WHITE UMBRELLA--THE DEATH OF RINALDO GUIDASCARPI



CHAPTER XXIX

EPISODES OF THE REVOLT AND THE WAR--THE TOBACCO-RIOTS--RINALDO GUIDASCARPI

Anna von Lenkenstein was one who could wait for vengeance.  Lena punished
on the spot, and punished herself most.  She broke off her engagement
with Wilfrid, while at the same time she caused a secret message to be
conveyed to him, telling him that the prolongation of his residence in
Meran would restore him to his position in the army.

Wilfrid remained at Meran till the last days of December.

It was winter in Milan, turning to the new year--the year of flames for
continental Europe.  A young man with a military stride, but out of
uniform, had stepped from a travelling carriage and entered a cigar-shop.
Upon calling for cigars, he was surprised to observe the woman who was
serving there keep her arms under her apron.  She cast a look into the
street, where a crowd of boys and one or two lean men had gathered about
the door.  After some delay, she entreated her customer to let her pluck
his cloak halfway over the counter; at the same time she thrust a cigar-
box under that concealment, together with a printed song in the Milanese
dialect.  He lifted the paper to read it, and found it tough as Russ.
She translated some of the more salient couplets.  Tobacco had become a
dead business, she said, now that the popular edict had gone forth
against 'smoking gold into the pockets of the Tedeschi.'  None smoked
except officers and Englishmen.

"I am an Englishman," he said.

"And not an officer?"  she asked; but he gave no answer.  "Englishmen are
rare in winter, and don't like being mobbed," said the woman.

Nodding to her urgent petition, he deferred the lighting of his cigar.
The vetturino requested him to jump up quickly, and a howl of "No smoking
in Milan--fuori!--down with tobacco-smokers!" beset the carriage.  He
tossed half-a-dozen cigars on the pavement derisively.  They were
scrambled for, as when a pack of wolves are diverted by a garment dropped
from the flying sledge, but the unluckier hands came after his heels in
fuller howl.  He noticed the singular appearance of the streets.  Bands
of the scum of the population hung at various points: from time to time a
shout was raised at a distance, "Abasso il zigarro!  "and "Away with the
cigar!"  went an organized file-firing of cries along the open place.
Several gentlemen were mobbed, and compelled to fling the cigars from
their teeth.  He saw the polizta in twos and threes taking counsel and
shrugging, evidently too anxious to avoid a collision.  Austrian soldiers
and subalterns alone smoked freely; they puffed the harder when the yells
and hootings and whistlings thickened at their heels.  Sometimes they
walked on at their own pace; or, when the noise swelled to a crisis,
turned and stood fast, making an exhibition of curling smoke, as a mute
form of contempt.  Then commenced hustlings and a tremendous uproar;
sabres were drawn, the whitecoats planted themselves back to back.  Milan
was clearly in a condition of raging disease.  The soldiery not only
accepted the challenge of the mob, but assumed the offensive.  Here and
there they were seen crossing the street to puff obnoxiously in the faces
of people.  Numerous subalterns were abroad, lively for strife, and
bright with the signal of their readiness.  An icy wind blew down from
the Alps, whitening the housetops and the ways, but every street, torso,
and piazza was dense with loungers, as on a summer evening; the clamour
of a skirmish anywhere attracted streams of disciplined rioters on all
sides; it was the holiday of rascals.

Our traveller had ordered his vetturino to drive slowly to his hotel,
that he might take the features of this novel scene.  He soon showed his
view of the case by putting an unlighted cigar in his mouth.  The
vetturino noted that his conveyance acted as a kindling-match to awaken
cries in quiet quarters, looked round, and grinned savagely at the sight
of the cigar.

"Drop it, or I drop you," he said; and hearing the command to drive on,
pulled up short.

They were in a narrow way leading to the Piazza de' Mercanti.  While the
altercation was going on between them, a great push of men emerged from
one of the close courts some dozen paces ahead of the horse, bearing
forth a single young officer in their midst.

"Signore, would you like to be the froth of a boiling of that sort?"  The
vetturino seized the image at once to strike home his instance of the
danger of outraging the will of the people.

Our traveller immediately unlocked a case that lay on the seat in front
of him, and drew out a steel scabbard, from which he plucked the sword,
and straightway leaped to the ground.  The officer's cigar had been
dashed from his mouth: he stood at bay, sword in hand, meeting a rush
with a desperate stroke.  The assistance of a second sword got him clear
of the fray.  Both hastened forward as the crush melted with the hiss of
a withdrawing wave.  They interchanged exclamations:
"Is it you, Jenna!"

"In the devil's name, Pierson, have you come to keep your appointment in
mid-winter?"

"Come on: I'll stick beside you."

"On, then!"

They glanced behind them, heeding little the tail of ruffians whom they
had silenced.

"We shall have plenty of fighting soon, so we'll smoke a cordial cigar
together," said Lieutenant Jenna, and at once struck a light and blazed
defiance to Milan afresh--an example that was necessarily followed by his
comrade.  "What has happened to you, Pierson?  Of course, I knew you were
ready for our bit of play--though you'll hear what I said of you.  How
the deuce could you think of running off with that opera girl, and
getting a fellow in the mountains to stab our merry old Weisspriess, just
because you fancied he was going to slip a word or so over the back of
his hand in Countess Lena's ear?  No wonder she's shy of you now."

"So, that's the tale afloat," said Wilfrid.  "Come to my hotel and dine
with me.  I suppose that cur has driven my luggage there."

Jenna informed him that officers had to muster in barracks every evening.

"Come and see your old comrades; they'll like you better in bad luck--
there's the comfort of it: hang the human nature!  She's a good old
brute, if you don't drive her hard.  Our regiment left Verona in
November.  There we had tolerable cookery; come and take the best we can
give you."

But this invitation Wilfrid had to decline.

"Why?"  said Jenna.

He replied: "I've stuck at Meran three months.  I did it, in obedience to
what I understood from Colonel Zofel to be the General's orders.  When I
was as perfectly dry as a baked Egyptian, I determined to believe that I
was not only in disgrace, but dismissed the service.  I posted to Botzen
and Riva, on to Milan; and here I am.  The least I can do is to show
myself here."

"Very well, then, come and show yourself at our table," said Jenna.
"Listen: we'll make a furious row after supper, and get hauled in by the
collar before the General.  You can swear you have never been absent from
duty: swear the General never gave you forcible furlough.  I'll swear it;
all our fellows will swear it.  The General will say, 'Oh! a very big
lie's equal to a truth; big brother to a fact, or something; as he always
does, you know.  Face it out.  We can't spare a good stout sword in these
times.  On with me, my Pierson."

"I would," said Wilfrid, doubtfully.

A douse of water from a window extinguished their cigars.

Lieutenant Jenna wiped his face deliberately, and lighting another cigar,
remarked--"This is the fifth poor devil who has come to an untimely end
within an hour.  It is brisk work.  Now, I'll swear I'll smoke this one
out."

The cigar was scattered in sparks from his lips by a hat skilfully flung.
He picked it up miry and cleaned it, observing that his honour was
pledged to this fellow.  The hat he trampled into a muddy lump.  Wilfrid
found it impossible to ape his coolness.  He swung about for an
adversary.  Jenna pulled him on.

"A salute from a window," he said.  "We can't storm the houses.  The
time'll come for it--and then, you cats!"

Wilfrid inquired how long this state of things had been going on.  Jenna
replied that they appeared to be in the middle of it;--nearly a week.
Another week, and their, day would arrive; and then!

"Have you heard anything of a Count Ammiani here?" said Wilfrid.

"Oh! he's one of the lot, I believe.  We have him fast, as we'll have the
