
"So that is what you covet, you greedy curmudgeon--that is it? Do not
all the crimes you have committed out of avarice weigh upon you heavily
enough? Gold, and yet more gold--that is the end, the foul end, of all
your desires. A fat morsel, no doubt: the Mukaukas' estates, his talents
of gold, his gems, slaves, and horses; I admit that. But thank God the
All-merciful, we are not thieves and robbers!"

"And who was it that dug out the hidden millions from beneath the
reservoir of Peter the Egyptian, and who made him bite the dust?"

"I--I. But--as you know--only to send the money to Medina. Peter had
hidden it before we killed him. The Mukaukas and his son have declared
all their possessions to the uttermost dinar and hide of land; they have
faithfully paid the taxes, and consequently their property belongs to
them as our swords, our horses, our wives belong to you or me. What
will not your grasping spirit lead you to!--Take your hand from your
dagger!--Not a copper coin from them shall fall into your hungry maw, so
help me God! Do not again cast an evil eye on the Mukaukas' son! Do
not try my patience too far, man, or else--Hold your head tight on your
shoulders or you will have to seek it at your feet; and what I say
I mean!--Now, good-night! To-morrow morning in the divan you are to
explain your scheme for the new distribution of the land; it will not
suit me in any way, and I shall have other projects to propose for
discussion."

With this the Arab turned his back on the Vekeel; but no sooner had the
door closed on him than Obada clenched his fist in fury at his lord
and master, who had hitherto said nothing of his having had purloined a
portion of the consignment of gold which Amru had charged him to escort
to Medina. Then he rushed up and down the room, snorting and foaming
till slaves came in to clear the tables.




CHAPTER XXV.

Orion made his way home under the moonlit and starry night. He held his
head high, and not since that evening on the water with Paula had he
felt so glad or so hopeful. On the other side of the bridge he did not
at once turn his horse's head homewards; the fresh night air was so
delightful, his heart beat so high that he shrunk from the oppression
of a room. Full of renewed life, freed from a burden as it were, he made
his way at a round pace to the house that held his beloved, picturing
to himself how gladly she would welcome the news that he had found Amru
ready to encourage him in his projects, indeed, to be a fatherly friend.

The Arab general, whose lofty character, intellect, and rectitude his
father had esteemed highly, had impressed him, too, as the ideal of
noble manliness, and as he compared him with the highest officials and
warriors he had met at the Court of Byzantium he could not help smiling.
By the side of this dignified, but impetuous and warm-hearted man they
appeared like the old, rigid idols of his ancestors in comparison with
the freely-wrought works of Greek art. He could bless the memory of
his father for having freed the land from that degenerate race. Now,
he felt, that lost parent, whose image lived in his soul, was satisfied
with him, and this gave him a sense of happiness which he meant to
cling to and enhance by every thought and deed in the future. "Life is a
function, a ministry, and a duty!" this watchword, which had been given
him by those beloved lips, should keep him in the new path; and soon he
hoped to feel sure of himself, to be able to look back on such deeds of
valor as would give him a right in his own judgment to unite his lot to
that of this noblest of women.

Full of such thoughts as these, he made his way to the house of Rufinus.
The windows of the corner room on the upper floor were lighted up; two
of these windows looked out on the river and the quay. He did not know
which rooms were Paula's, but he looked up at the late-burning light
with a vague feeling that it must be hers; a female figure which now
appeared framed in the opening, showed him that he was not mistaken; it
was that of Perpetua. The sound of hoofs had roused her curiosity, but
she did not seem to recognize him in the dim starlight.

He slowly rode past, and when he presently turned back and again
looked up, in the hope this time of seeing Paula, the place was vacant:
however, he perceived a tall dark shadow moving across from one side of
the room to the other, which could not be that of the nurse nor of her
slender mistress. It must indeed be that of a remarkably big man, and
stopping to gaze with anxious and unpleasant apprehension, he plainly
recognized Philippus.

It was past midnight. How could he account for his being with Paula at
this hour?--Was she ill?--Was this room hers after all?--Was it merely
by chance that the nurse was in Rufinus' room with the physician.

No. The woman whom he could now see pass across the window and go
straight up to the man, with outstretched hands, was Paula and none
other. Isis heart was already beating fast, and now a suspicion grew
strong in him which his vanity had hitherto held in check, though he had
often seen the friendly relations that subsisted between Paula and the
leech.--Perhaps it was a warmer feeling than friendship and guileless
trust, which had led her so unreservedly to claim this man's protection
and service. Could he have won Paula's heart--Paula's love?

Was it conceivable!--But why not?

What was there against Philippus but his homely face and humble birth?
And how many a woman had he not seen set her heart on quite other
things! The physician was not more than five years his senior; and
recalling the expression in his eyes as he looked at Paula only that
morning Orion felt more and more uneasy.

Philippus loved Paula.--A trifling incident suddenly occurred to
his mind which made him certain on that point; he had only too much
experience in such matters. Yesterday, it had struck him that ever
since his father's death--that was ever since Paula's change of
residence--Philippus dressed more carefully than had been his wont. "Now
this," thought he, "is a change that does not come over so serious a man
unless it is caused by love."

A mingled torment of pain and rage shot through him as he again saw the
tall shadow cross the window. For the first time in his life he felt the
pangs of jealousy, which he had so often laughed at in his friends; but
was it not absurd to allow it to torture him; was he not sure, since
that morning's meeting, quite sure of Paula? And Philippus! Even if he,
Orion, must retire into the background before a higher judge, in the
eyes of a woman he surely had the advantage!--But in spite of all this
it troubled him to know that the physician was with Paula at such an
hour; he angrily pulled his horse's head round, and it was a pleasure
to him to feel the fiery creature, unused as it was to such rough
treatment, turn restive at it now. By the time he had gone a hundred
steps from those windows with their cursed glare, the horse was
displaying all the temper and vice that had been taken out of him as a
foal. Orion had to fight a pitched battle with his steed, and it was a
relief to him to exercise his power with curb and knee. In vain did
the creature dance round and round; in vain did he rear and plunge; the
steady rider was his master; and it was not till he had brought him to
quietness and submission that Orion drew breath and looked about him
while he patted the horse's smooth neck.

Close at hand, behind a low hedge, spread the thick, dark groves of
Susannah's garden and between them the back of the house was visible,
being more brilliantly lighted than even Paula's rooms. Three of the
windows showed lights; two were rather dim, however, the result probably
of one lamp only.

All this could not matter to him; nevertheless he remained gazing at the
roof of the colonnade which went round the house below the upper floor;
for, on the terrace it formed, leaning against a window-frame, stood a
small figure with her head thrust so far forth to listen that the light
shone through the curls that framed it. Katharina was trying to overhear
a dialogue between the Patriarch Benjamin--whose bearded and
apostolic head Orion could clearly recognize--and the priest John,
an insignificant looking little man, of whom, however, the deceased
Mukaukas had testified that he was far superior to old Plotinus the
Bishop in intellect and energy.

The young man could easily have watched Katharina's every movement,
but he did not think it worth while. Nevertheless, as he rode on, the
water-wagtail's little figure dwelt in his mind; not alone, however, for
that of Paula immediately rose by her side; and the smaller Katharina's
seemed, the more ample and noble did the other appear. Every word he
had heard that day from Paula's lips rushed to his remembrance, and the
vivid and lovely memory drove out all care. That woman, who only a few
hours since, had declared herself ready, with him, to hope all things,
to believe all things, and to accept his protection--that lordly maiden
whom he had been glad to bid fix her eye, with him, on the goal of
his future efforts, whose pure gaze could restrain his passion and
impetuosity as by a charm, and who yet granted him the right to strive
to possess her--that proud daughter of heroes, whom even his father
would have clasped to his heart as a daughter--was it possible that
she should betray him like some pleasure-seeking city beauty? Could she
forget her dignity as a woman?--No! and a thousand times no. To doubt
her was to insult her--was to wrong her and himself.

The physician loved her; but it certainly was not any warmer feeling
than friendship on her part that made her receive him at this late hour.
The shame would be his own, if he ever again allowed such base suspicion
to find place in his soul!

He breathed a deep sigh of relief. And when his servant, who had
lingered to pay the toll at the bridge, came up with him, Orion
dismounted and desired him to lead his horse home, for he himself wished
to return on foot, alone with his thoughts. He walked meditatively and
slowly under the sycamores, but he had not gone far when, on the other
side of the deserted road, he heard some one overtaking him with long,
quick strides. He recognized the leech Philippus at a glance and was
glad, for this proved to him how senseless and unjust his doubts had
been, and how little ground he had for regarding the physician as a
rival; for indeed this man did not look like a happy lover. He hurried
on with his head bent, as though under a heavy burthen, and clasped
his hand to his forehead with a gesture of despair. No, this nocturnal
wanderer had left no hour of bliss behind him; and if his demeanor was
calculated to rouse any feeling it was not envy, but pity.

Philippus did not heed Orion; absorbed in himself, he strode on, moaning
dully, as if in pain. For a few minutes he disappeared into a house
whence came loud cries of suffering, and when he came out again, he
walked on, shaking his head now and then, as a man who sees many things
happen which his understanding fails to account for.

The end of his walk was a large, palatial building. The stucco had
fallen off in places, and in the upper story the windows had been broken
away till their open ings were a world too wide. In former times this
house had accommodated the State officers of Finance for the province,
and the ground-floor rooms had been suitably and comfortably fitted
up for the Ideologos--the supreme controller of this department, who
usually resided at Alexandria, but who often spent some weeks at Memphis
when on a tour of inspection. But the Arabians had transferred the
management of the finances of the whole country to the new capital of
Fostat on the other shore of the river, and that of the monetary
affairs of the decaying city had been incorporated with the treasurer's
department of the Mukaukas' household. The senate of the city had found
the expense of this huge building too heavy, and had been well content
to let the lower rooms to Philippus and his Egyptian friend, Horapollo.

The two men occupied different rooms, but the same slaves attended to
their common housekeeping and also waited on the physician's assistant,
a modest and well-informed Alexandrian.

When Philippus entered his old friend's lofty and spacious study
he found him still up, sitting before a great number of rolls of
manuscript, and so absorbed in his work that he did not notice his
late-coming comrade till the leech bid him good-evening. His only reply
was an unintelligible murmur, for some minutes longer the old man was
lost in study; at last, however, he looked up at Philippus, impatiently
tossing an ivory ruler-which he had been using to open and smooth the
papyrus on to the table; and at the same moment a dark bundle under it
began to move--this was the old man's slave who had long been sleeping
there.

Three lamps on the writing-table threw a bright light on the old man and
his surroundings, while the physician, who had thrown himself on a couch
in a corner of the large room, remained in the dark.

What startled the midnight student was his housemate's unwonted silence;
it disturbed him as the cessation of the clatter of the wheel disturbs a
man who lives in a mill. He looked at his friend with surprised enquiry,
but Philippus was dumb, and the old man turned once more to his rolls of
manuscript. But he had lost the necessary concentration; his brown hand,
in which the blue veins stood out like cords, fidgeted with the scrolls
and the ivory rule, and his sunken lips, which had before been firmly
closed, were now twitching restlessly.

The man's whole aspect was singular and not altogether pleasing: his
lean brown figure was bent with age, his thoroughly Egyptian face, with
broad cheekbones and outstanding ears, was seamed and wrinkled
like oak-bark; his scalp was bare of its last hair, and his face
clean-shaved, but for a few tufts of grey hair by way of beard,
sprouting from the deep furrows on his cheeks and chin, like reeds from
the narrow bed of a brook; the razor could not reach them there, and
they gave him an untidy and uncared-for appearance. His dress answered
to his face--if indeed that could be called dress which consisted of
a linen apron and a white kerchief thrown over his shoulders after
sundown. Still, no one meeting him in the road could have taken him for
a beggar; for his linen was fine and as white as snow, and his keen,
far-seeing eyes, above which, exactly in the middle, his bristly
eyebrows grew strangely long and thick, shone and sparkled with clear
intelligence, firm self-reliance, and a repellent severity which would
no more have become an intending mendicant than the resolute and often
scornful expression which played about his lips. There was nothing
amiable, nothing prepossessing, nothing soft in this man's face; and
those who knew what his life had been could not wonder that the years
had failed to sweeten his abrupt and contradictory acerbity or to
transmute them into that kindly forbearance which old men, remembering
how often they have stumbled and how many they have seen fall, sometimes
find pleasure in practising.

He had been born, eighty years before, in the lovely island of Philae,
beyond the cataract in the district of the temple of Isis, and under the
shadow of the only Egyptian sanctuary in which the heathen cultus was
kept up, and that publicly, as late as in his youth. Since Theodosius
the Great, one emperor and one Praefectus Augustalis after another had
sent foot-soldiers and cavalry above the falls to put an end to idolatry
in the beautiful isle; but they had always been routed or destroyed by
the brave Blemmyes who haunted the desert between the Nile and the Red
Sea. These restless nomad tribes acknowledged the Isis of Philae as
their tutelary goddess, and, by a very ancient agreement, the image
of their patroness was carried every year by her priests in a solemn
procession to the Blemmyes, and then remained for a few weeks in their
keeping. Horapollo's father was the last of the horoscope readers, and
his grandfather had been the last high-priest of the Isis of Philae. His
childhood had been passed on the island but then a Byzantine legion
had succeeded in beating the Blemmyes, in investing the island, and
in plundering and closing the temple. The priests of Isis escaped the
imperial raid and Horapollo had spent all his early years with his
father, his grandfather, and two younger sisters, in constant peril and
flight. His youthful spirit was unremittingly fed with hatred of the
persecutors, the cruel contemners and exterminators of the faith of his
forefathers; and this hatred rose to irreconcilable bitterness after
the massacre at Antioch where the imperial soldiery fell upon all his
family, and his grandfather and two innocent sisters were murdered.
These horrors were committed at the instigation of the Bishop, who
denounced the Egyptian strangers as idolaters, and to whom the Roman
prefect, a proud and haughty patrician, had readily lent the support of
an armed force. It was owing to the narrowest chance--or, as the old man
would have it, to the interposition of great Isis, that his father had
been so happy as to get away with him and the treasures he had brought
from the temple at Philae. Thus they had means to enable them to travel
farther under an assumed name, and they finally settled in Alexandria.
Here the persecuted youth changed his name, Horus, to its Greek
equivalent, and henceforth he was known at home and in the schools as
Apollo. He was highly gifted by nature, and availed himself with the
utmost zeal of the means of learning that abounded in Alexandria; he
labored indefatigably and dug deep into every field of Greek science,
gaining, under his father's guidance, all the knowledge of Egyptian
horoscopy, which was not wholly lost even at this late period.

In the midst of the contentious Christian sects of the capital, both
father and son remained heathen and worshippers of Isis; and when the
old priest died at an advanced age, Horapollo moved to Memphis where he
led the quiet and secluded life of a student, mingling only now and
then with the astronomers, astrologers, and calendar-makers at the
observatory, or visiting the alchemists' laboratories, where, even in
Christian Egypt, they still devoted themselves to attempts to transmute
the baser into the noble metals. Alchemists and star-readers alike soon
detected the old man's superior knowledge, and in spite of his acrid and
often offensively-repellent demeanor, took counsel of him on difficult
questions. His fame had even reached the Arabs, and, when it was
necessary to find the exact direction towards Mecca for the prayer niche
in Amru's new mosque, he was appealed to, and his decision was final.

Philippus had, some years since, been called to the old man's bedside
in sickness, and being then a beginner and in no great request, he had
given the best of his time and powers to the case. Horapollo had
been much attracted by the young physician's wide culture and earnest
studiousness; he had conceived a warm liking for him, the warmest
perhaps that he had ever felt for any fellow-human since the death of
his own family. At last the elder took the younger man into his heart
with such overflowing affection, that it seemed as though his spirit
longed to make up now for the stint of love it had hitherto shown. No
father could have clung to his son with more fervent devotion, and when
a relapse once more brought him to death's door he took Philippus wholly
into his confidence, unrolled before his eyes the scroll of his inner
and outer life from its beginnings, and made him his heir on condition
that he should abide by him to the end.

Philippus, who, from the first, had felt a sympathetic attraction to
this venerable and talented man, agreed to the bargain; and when
he subsequently became associated with the old man in his studies,
assisting him from time to time, Horapollo desired that he would help
him to complete a work he hoped to finish before he died. It was a
treatise on hieroglyphic writing, and was to interpret the various signs
so far as was still possible, and make them intelligible to posterity.

The old man disliked writing anything but Egyptian, using Greek
unwillingly and clumsily, so he entrusted to his young friend the task
of rendering his explanations into that language. Thus the two men--so
different in age and character, but so closely allied in intellectual
aims--led a joint existence which was both pleasant and helpful to both,
in spite of the various eccentricities, the harshness and severity of
the elder.

Horapollo lived after the manner of the early Egyptian priests,
subjecting himself to much ablution and shaving; eating little but
bread, vegetables, and poultry, and abstaining from pulse and the flesh
of all beasts--not merely of the prohibited animal, swine; wearing
nothing but pure linen clothing, and setting apart certain hours for
the recitation of those heathen forms of prayer whose magic power was to
compel the gods to grant the desires of those who thus appealed to them.

And if the old man had given his full confidence to Philippus, the
leech, on his part, had no secrets from him; or, if he withheld
anything, Horapollo, with wonderful acumen, was at once aware of it.
Philippus had often spoken of Paula to his parental friend, describing
her charms with all the fervor of a lover, but the old man was already
prejudiced against her, if only as the daughter of a patrician and a
prefect. All who bore these titles were to him objects of hatred, for
a patrician and a prefect had been guilty of the blood of those he had
held most dear. The Governor of Antioch, to be sure, had acted only
under the orders of the bishop; but old Horapollo, and his father before
him, from the first had chosen to throw all the blame on the prefect,
for it afforded some satisfaction to the descendant of an ancestral race
of priests to be able to vent all his wrathful spite on any one rather
than on the minister of a god--be that god who or what he might.

So when Philippus praised Paula's dignified grandeur, her superior
elegance, the height of her stature or the loftiness of her mind, the
old man would bound up exclaiming: "Of course--of course!--Beware boy,
beware! You are disguising haughtiness, conceit, and arrogance under
noble names. The word 'patrician' includes everything we can conceive of
as most insolent and inhuman; and those apes in purple who disgrace the
Imperial throne pick out the worst of them, the most cold-hearted
and covetous, to make prefects of them. And as they are, so are their
children! Everything which they in their vainglory regard as 'beneath
them' they tread into the dust--and we--you and I, all who labor with
their hands in the service of the state--we, in their dull eyes,
are beneath them. Mark me, boy! To-day the governor's daughter, the
patrician maiden, can smile at you because she needs you; tomorrow she
will cast you aside as I push away the old panther-skin which keeps my
feet warm in winter, as soon as the March days come!"

Nor was his aversion less for the son of the Mukaukas, whom, however,
he had never seen; when the leech had confessed to him how deep a grudge
against Orion dwelt in the heart of Paula, old Horapollo had chuckled
scornfully, and he exclaimed, as though he could read hearts and look
into the future--: "They snap at each other now, and in a day or two
they will kiss again! Hatred and love are the opposite ends of the same
rod; and how easily it is reversed!--Those two!--Like in blood is like
in kind;--such people attract each other as the lodestone tends towards
the iron and the iron towards the lodestone!"

But these and similar admonitions had produced little effect on the
physician's sentiments; even Paula's repulse of his ardent appeal after
she had moved to the house of Rufinus had failed to extinguish his
hope of winning her at last. This very morning, in the course of the
discussion as to the stewardship of her fortune, Paula had been
ready and glad to accept him as her Kyrios--her legal protector and
representative; but he now thought that he could perceive by various
signs that his venerable friend was right: that the rod had been
reversed, and that aversion had been transformed to love in the girl's
heart. The anguish of this discovery was hard to bear. And yet Paula had
never shown him such hearty warmth of manner, never had she spoken to
him in a voice so soft and so full of feeling, as this evening in the
garden. More cheerful and talkative than usual, she had constantly
turned to address him, while he had felt his pain and torment of mind
gradually eased, till in him too, sentiment had blossomed anew, and his
intellectual power had expanded. Never--so he believed--had he expressed
his thoughts better or more brilliantly than in that hour. Nor had she
withheld her approval; she had heartily agreed with his views; and
when, half an hour before midnight, he had gone with her to visit
his patients, rapturous hopes had sprung once more in his breast.
Ecstatically happy, like a man intoxicated, he had, by her own desire,
accompanied her into her sitting-room, and then--and there....

Poor, disappointed man, sitting on the divan in a dark corner of the
spacious room! In his soul hitherto the intellect had alone made itself
heard, the voice of the heart had never been listened to.

How he had found his way home he never knew. All he remembered was
that, in the course of duty, he had gone into the house of a man whose
wife--the mother of several children--he had left at noon in a dying
state; that he had seen her a corpse, surrounded by loud but sincere
mourners; that he had gone on his way, weighed down by their grief and
his own, and that he had entered his friend's rooms rather than his
own, to feel safe from himself. Life had no charm, no value for him now;
still, he felt ashamed to think that a woman could thus divert him from
the fairest aims of life, that he could allow her to destroy the peace
of mind he needed to enable him to carry out his calling in the spirit
of his friend Rufinus. He knew his house-mate well and felt that he
would only pour vitriol into his wounds, but it was best so. The old
man had already often tried to bring down Paula's image from its high
pedestal in his soul, but always in vain; and even now he should not
succeed. He would mar nothing, scatter nothing to the winds, tread
nothing in the dust but the burning passion, the fevered longing
for her, which had fired his blood ever since that night when he had
vanquished the raving Masdakite. That old sage by the table, on whose
stern, cold features the light fell so brightly, was the very man to
accomplish such a work of destruction, and Philippus awaited his first
words as a wounded man watches the surgeon heating the iron with which
to cauterize the sore.

Poor disappointed wretch, sorely in need of a healing hand!

He lay back on the divan, and saw how his friend leaned over his scroll
as if listening, and fidgeted up and down in his arm-chair.

It was clear that Horapollo was uneasy at Philippus' long silence, and
his pointed eyebrows, raised high on his brow, plainly showed that he
was drawing his own conclusions from it--no doubt the right ones. The
peace must soon be broken, and Philippus awaited the attack. He was
prepared for the worst; but how could he bring himself to make his
torturer's task easy for him. Thus many minutes slipped away; while
the leech was waiting for the old man to speak, Horapollo waited for
Philippus. However, the impatience and curiosity of the elder were
stronger than the young man's craving for comfort; he suddenly laid down
the roll of manuscript, impatiently snatched up the ivory stick which he
had thrown aside, set his heavy seat at an angle with a shove of amazing
vigor for his age, turned full on Philippus, and asked him, in a loud
voice, pointing his ruler at him as if threatening him with it:

"So the play is out. A tragedy, of course!"

"Hardly, since I am still alive," replied the other.

"But there is inward bleeding, and the wound is painful," retorted the
old man. Then, after a short pause, he went on: "Those who will not
listen must feel! The fox was warned of the trap, but the bait was too
tempting! Yesterday there would still have been time to pull his foot
out of the spring, if only he had sincerely desired it; he knew the
hunter's guile. Now the foe is down on the victim; he has not spared his
weapons, and there lies the prey dumb with pain and ignominy, cursing
his own folly.--You seem inclined for silence this evening. Shall I tell
you just how it all came about?"

"I know only too well," said Philippus.

"While I, to be sure, can only imagine it!" growled the old man. "So
long as that patrician hussy needed the poor beast of burthen she could
pet it and throw barley and dates to it. Now she is rolling in gold and
living under a sheltering roof, and hey presto, the discarded protector
is sent to the right about in no time. This mistress of the hearts of
our weak and bondage-loving sex raises this rich Adonis to fill the
place of the hapless, overgrown leech, just as the sky lets the sun rise
when the pale moon sinks behind the hills. If that is not the fact give
me the lie!"

"I only wish I could," sighed Philippus. "You have seen rightly,
wonderfully rightly--and yet, as wrongly as possible."

"Dark indeed!" said the old man quietly. "But I can see even in the
dark. The facts are certain, though you are still so blinded as not
to see their first cause. However, I am satisfied to know that your
delusion has come to so abrupt, and in my opinion so happy, an end. To
its cause--a woman, as usual--I am perfectly indifferent. Why should I
needlessly ascribe to her any worse sin than she had committed? If only
for your sake I will avoid doing so, for an honorable soul clings to
those whom it sees maligned. Still, it seems to me that it is for you
to speak, not for me. I should know you for a philosopher, without such
persistent silence; and as for myself, I am not altogether bereft of
curiosity, in spite of my eighty years."

At this Philippus hastily rose and pacing the room while he spoke, or
pausing occasionally in front of the old man, he poured out with glowing
cheeks and eager gestures, the history of his hopes and sufferings--how
Paula had filled him with fresh confidence, and had invited him to her
rooms--only to show him her whole heart; she had been strongly moved,
surprised at herself, but unable and unwilling to conceal from him the
happiness that had come into her life. She had spoken to him, her best
friend, as a burthened soul pours itself out to a priest: had confessed
all that she had felt since the funeral of the deceased Mukaukas, and
said that she felt convinced now that Orion had come to a right mind
again after his great sin.

"And that there, was so much joy over him in heaven," interrupted
Horapollo, "that she really could not delay doing her cast-off lover the
honor of inviting his sympathy!"

"On the contrary. It was with the utmost effort that she uttered all
her heart prompted her to tell; she had nothing to look for from me but
mockery, warning, and reproach, and yet she opened her heart to me."

"But why? To what end?" shrieked the old man. "Shall I tell you. Because
a man who is a friend must still be half a lover, and a woman cannot
bear to give up even a quarter of one."

"Not so!" exclaimed Philippus, indignantly interrupting him. "It was
because she esteems and values me,--because she regards me as a brother,
and--I am not a vain man--and could not bear--those were her very
words--to cheat me of my affection for even an hour! It was noble,
it was generous, worthy of her! And though every fibre of my nature
rebelled I found myself compelled to admire her sincerity, her
true friendship, her disregard of her own feelings, and her womanly
tenderness!--Nay, do not interrupt me again, do not laugh at me. It is
no small matter for a proud girl, conscious of her own dignity, to lay
bare her heart's weakness to a man who, as she knows, loves her, as she
did just now to me. She called me her benefactor and said she would be
a sister to me; and whatever motive you--who hate her out of a habit of
prejudice without really knowing her--may choose to ascribe her conduct
to, I--I believe in her, and understand her.

"Could I refuse to grasp the hand she held out to me as she entreated
me with tears in her eyes to be still her friend, her protector, and her
Kyrios! And yet, and yet!--Where shall I find resolution enough to
ask of her who excites me to the height of passion no more than a kind
glance, a clasp of the hand, an intelligent interest in what I say? How
am I to preserve self-control, calmness, patience, when I see her in the
arms of that handsome young demi-god whom I scorned only yesterday as a
worthless scoundrel? What ice may cool the fire of this burning heart?
What spear can transfix the dragon of passion which rages here? I have
lived almost half my life without ever feeling or yearning for the love
of which the poets sing. I have never known anything of such feelings
but through the pangs of some friend whose weakness had roused my pity;
and now, when love has come upon me so late with all its irresistible
force--has subjugated me, cast me into bondage--how shall I, how can I
get free?

"My faithful friend, you who call me your son, whom I am glad to hear
speak to me as 'boy,' and 'child,' who have taken the place of the
father I lost so young--there is but one issue: I must leave you and
this city--flee from her neighborhood--seek a new home far from her with
whom I could have been as happy as the Saints in bliss, and who has made
me more wretched than the damned in everlasting fire. Away, away! I will
go--I must go unless you, who can do so much, can teach me to kill this
passion or to transmute it into calm, brotherly regard."

He stood still, close in front of the old man and hid his face in his
hands. At his favorite's concluding words, Horapollo had started to his
feet with all the vigor of youth; he now snatched his hand down from his
face, and exclaimed in a voice hoarse with indignation and the deepest
concern:

"And you can say that in earnest? Can a sensible man like you have sunk
so deep in folly? Is it not enough that your own peace of mind should
have been sacrificed, flung at the feet of this--what can I call
her?--Do you understand at last why I warned you against the Patrician
brood?--The faith, gratitude, and love of a good man!--What does she
care for them? Unhook the whiting; away with him in the dust! Here comes
a fine large fish who perhaps may swallow the bait!--Do you want to
ruin, for her sake, and the sake of that rascally son of the governor,
the comfort and happiness of an old man's last years when he has become
accustomed to love you, who so well deserve it, as his own son? Will
you--an energetic student, you--a man of powerful intellect, zealous
in your duty, and in favor with the gods--will you pine like a deserted
maiden or spring from the Leucadian rock like love-sick Sappho in the
play while the spectators shake with laughter? You must stay, Boy, you
must stay; and I will show you how a man must deal with a passion that
dishonors him."

"Show me," replied Philippus in a dull voice. "I ask no more. Do you
suppose that I am not myself ashamed of my own weakness? It ill beseems
me of all men, formed by fate for anything rather than to be a sighing
and rapturous lover. I will struggle with it, wrestle with it with all
the strength that is in me; but here, in Memphis, close to her and as
her Kyrios, I should be forced every day to see her, and day after day
be exposed to fresh and humiliating defeat! Here, constantly near her
and with her, the struggle must wear me out--I should perish, body and
soul. The same place, the same city, cannot hold her and me."

"Then she must make way for you," croaked Horus. Philippus raised his
bowed head and asked, in some surprise and with stern reproof:

"What do you mean by that?"

"Nothing," replied the other airily. He shrugged his shoulders and went
on more gently: "Memphis has greater need of you than of the patrician
hussy." Then he shook himself as if he were cold, struck his breast and
added: "All is turmoil here within; I can neither help nor advise you.
Day must soon be dawning in the east; we will try to sleep. A knot can
often be untied by daylight which by lamplight seems inextricable, and
perhaps on my sleepless couch the goddess may reveal to me the way I
have promised to show you. A little more lightness of heart would do
neither of us any harm.--Try to forget your own griefs in those of
others; you see enough of them every day. To wish you a good night would
probably be waste of words, but I may wish you a soothing one, You may
count on my aid; but you will not let me, a poor old man, hear another
word about flight and departure and the like, will you? No, no. I know
you better, Philippus--you will never treat your lonely old friend so!"

These were the tenderest words that the leech had ever heard from the
old man's lips, and it comforted him when Horapollo pressed him to his
heart in a hasty embrace. He thought no more of the hint that it was
Paula's part to make room for him. But the old man had spoken in all
seriousness, for, no sooner was he alone than he petulantly flung down
the ivory ruler on the table, and murmured, at first angrily and then
scornfully, his eyes sparkling the while:

"For this true heart, and to preserve myself and the world from losing
such a man, I would send a dozen such born hussies to Amentis--[The
Nether world of the ancient Egyptians.]--Hey, hey! My beauty! So this
noble leech is not good enough for the like of us; he may be tossed away
like a date-stone that we spit out? Well, every one to his taste;
but how would it be if old Horapollo taught us his value? Wait a bit,
wait!--With a definite aim before my eyes I have never yet failed to
find my way--in the realm of science, of course; but what is life--the
life of the sage but applied knowledge? And why should not old
Horapollo, for once before he dies, try what his brains can contrive to
achieve in the busy world of outside human existence? Pleasant as you
may think it to be in Memphis with your lover, fair heart-breaker,
you will have to make way for the plaything you have so lightly tossed
aside! Aye, you certainly will, depend upon that my beauty, depend upon
that!--Here, Anubis!"

He gave the slave, who had fallen asleep again under the table, a
kick with his bare foot, and while Anubis lighted his master to his
sleeping-room, and helped him in his long and elaborate ablutions,
Horapollo never ceased muttering broken sentences and curses, or
laughing maliciously to himself.





BOOK 2.




CHAPTER I.

If Philippus found no sleep that night, neither did Orion. He no longer
doubted Paula, but his heart was full of longing to hear her say once
more that she loved him and him alone, and the yearning kept him awake.
He sprang from his bed at the first glimmer of dawn, glad that the
night was past, and started to cross the Nile in order to place half
of Paula's fortune in the hands of Salech, the brother of Haschim the
merchant.

In Memphis all was still silent, and all he saw in the old town struck
him as strangely worn-out, torpid, and decayed; it seemed only fit to be
left to ruin, while on the other side of the river, in the new town of
Fostat, on all hands busy, eager, new-born vitality met his eyes.

He involuntarily compared the old capital of the Pharaohs to a
time-eaten mummy, and Amru's new city to a vigorous youth. Here every
one was astir and in brisk activity. The money-changer, who had risen,
like all Moslems, to perform his morning prayer, "as soon as a white
thread could be distinguished from a black one," was already busy with
his rolls of gold and silver coin; and how quick, clear, and decisive
the Arab was in concluding his bargain with Orion and with Nilus, who
had accompanied him!

Whichever way the young man turned, bright and flashing eyes met his
gaze, energetic, resolute, and enterprising faces; no bowed heads, no
dull, brooding looks, no gloomy resignation like those in his native
town on the other shore. Here, in Fostat, his blood flowed more swiftly;
there, existence was an oppressive burden. Everything attracted him to
the Arabs!

The changer's shop, like all those in the Sook or Bazaar of Fostat,
consisted of a wooden stall in which he sat with his assistants. On the
side open to the street he transacted business with his customers, who,
when the affair promised to be lengthy, were invited by the Arab to seat
themselves with him on his little platform.

Orion and Nilus had accepted such an invitation, and it happened that,
while they sat in treaty with Salech, visible to the passers-by, the
Vekeel Obada, who had so deeply stirred the wrath of the governor's son
on the previous evening, came by, close to him. To Orion's amazement he
greeted him with great amiability, and he, remembering Amru's warning,
responded, though not without an effort, to his hated foe's civility.
When Obada passed the stall a second and a third time, Orion felt that
he was watching him; however, it was quite possible that the Vekeel
might also have business with the money-changer and be waiting only for
the conclusion of his.

At any rate Orion ere long forgot the incident, for matters of more
pressing importance claimed his attention at home.

As often happens, the death of one man had changed everything in his
house so utterly as to make it unlike the same; though his removal had
made it neither richer nor poorer, and though his secluded presence of
late had scarcely had an appreciable influence. The rooms formerly
so full of life now seemed dead. Petitioners and suppliants no longer
crowded the anteroom, and all visits of condolence had, according to
the ancient custom, been received on the day after the funeral. The Lady
Neforis had ceased fussing and bustling, the clatter of her keys and
her scolding were no longer to be heard; she sat apart, either in her
sleeping-room or the cool hall with the fountain which had been her
husband's favorite room, excepting when she was at church whither she
went twice every day. She returned from thence with the same weary,
abstracted expression that she took there, and any one seeing her lying
on the divan which her husband had formerly occupied, idly absorbed in
gloomy thought, would hardly have recognized her as the same woman who
had but lately been so active and managing. She did not exactly mourn or
bewail her loss; indeed, she had no tears for her grief, as though she
had shed them all, once for all, during the night after his death and
burial. But she could not attain to that state of sadness made sacred
by memories with which consoling angels so often mingle some drops of
sweetness, after the first anguish is overpast. She felt--she knew--that
with her husband a portion of her own being had been riven from her, but
she could not yet perceive that this last portion was nothing less than
the very foundations of her whole moral and social being.

Her father and her husband's father had been the two leading men in
Memphis, nay, in all Egypt. She had given her hand and a heart full of
love to the son of Menas, a proud and happy woman. It was as one with
her, and not by himself alone, that he had risen to the highest dignity
attainable by a native Egyptian, and she had done everything that lay
in her power to uphold him in a position which many envied him, and in
filling it with dignity and effect. After many years of rare happiness
their grief at the loss of their murdered sons only bound the attached
couple more closely, and when her husband had fallen into bad health she
had gladly shared his seclusion, had devoted herself entirely to caring
for him, and divided all the doubts and anxieties which came upon him
from his political action. The consciousness of being not merely much
but everything to him, was her pride and her joy. Her dislike of Paula
had its rise, in the first instance, in the discovery that she, his
wife, was no longer indispensable to the sufferer when he had his fair
young niece's company. And now?

At night, after long lying awake, when she woke from a snatch of uneasy
sleep, she involuntarily listened for the faint panting breath, but no
heart now throbbed by her side; and when she quitted her lonely couch at
dawn the coming day lay before her as a desert and treeless solitude. By
night, as by day, she constantly tried to call up the image of the dead,
