  At least, let Telamon those towers defend,
  And Teucer haste with his unerring bow
  To share the danger, and repel the foe."

  Straight to the fort great Ajax turn'd his care,
  And thus bespoke his brothers of the war:
  "Now, valiant Lycomede! exert your might,
  And, brave Oileus, prove your force in fight;
  To you I trust the fortune of the field,
  Till by this arm the foe shall be repell'd:
  That done, expect me to complete the day
  Then with his sevenfold shield he strode away.
  With equal steps bold Teucer press'd the shore,
  Whose fatal bow the strong Pandion bore.

  High on the walls appear'd the Lycian powers,
  Like some black tempest gathering round the towers:
  The Greeks, oppress'd, their utmost force unite,
  Prepared to labour in the unequal fight:
  The war renews, mix'd shouts and groans arise;
  Tumultuous clamour mounts, and thickens in the skies.
  Fierce Ajax first the advancing host invades,
  And sends the brave Epicles to the shades,
  Sarpedon's friend. Across the warrior's way,
  Rent from the walls, a rocky fragment lay;
  In modern ages not the strongest swain
  Could heave the unwieldy burden from the plain:
  He poised, and swung it round; then toss'd on high,
  It flew with force, and labour'd up the sky;
  Full on the Lycian's helmet thundering down,
  The ponderous ruin crush'd his batter'd crown.
  As skilful divers from some airy steep
  Headlong descend, and shoot into the deep,
  So falls Epicles; then in groans expires,
  And murmuring to the shades the soul retires.

  While to the ramparts daring Glaucus drew,
  From Teucer's hand a winged arrow flew;
  The bearded shaft the destined passage found,
  And on his naked arm inflicts a wound.
  The chief, who fear'd some foe's insulting boast
  Might stop the progress of his warlike host,
  Conceal'd the wound, and, leaping from his height
  Retired reluctant from the unfinish'd fight.
  Divine Sarpedon with regret beheld
  Disabled Glaucus slowly quit the field;
  His beating breast with generous ardour glows,
  He springs to fight, and flies upon the foes.
  Alcmaon first was doom'd his force to feel;
  Deep in his breast he plunged the pointed steel;
  Then from the yawning wound with fury tore
  The spear, pursued by gushing streams of gore:
  Down sinks the warrior with a thundering sound,
  His brazen armour rings against the ground.

  Swift to the battlement the victor flies,
  Tugs with full force, and every nerve applies:
  It shakes; the ponderous stones disjointed yield;
  The rolling ruins smoke along the field.
  A mighty breach appears; the walls lie bare;
  And, like a deluge, rushes in the war.
  At once bold Teucer draws the twanging bow,
  And Ajax sends his javelin at the foe;
  Fix'd in his belt the feather'd weapon stood,
  And through his buckler drove the trembling wood;
  But Jove was present in the dire debate,
  To shield his offspring, and avert his fate.
  The prince gave back, not meditating flight,
  But urging vengeance, and severer fight;
  Then raised with hope, and fired with glory's charms,
  His fainting squadrons to new fury warms.
  "O where, ye Lycians, is the strength you boast?
  Your former fame and ancient virtue lost!
  The breach lies open, but your chief in vain
  Attempts alone the guarded pass to gain:
  Unite, and soon that hostile fleet shall fall:
  The force of powerful union conquers all."

  This just rebuke inflamed the Lycian crew;
  They join, they thicken, and the assault renew:
  Unmoved the embodied Greeks their fury dare,
  And fix'd support the weight of all the war;
  Nor could the Greeks repel the Lycian powers,
  Nor the bold Lycians force the Grecian towers.
  As on the confines of adjoining grounds,
  Two stubborn swains with blows dispute their bounds;
  They tug, they sweat; but neither gain, nor yield,
  One foot, one inch, of the contended field;
  Thus obstinate to death, they fight, they fall;
  Nor these can keep, nor those can win the wall.
  Their manly breasts are pierced with many a wound,
  Loud strokes are heard, and rattling arms resound;
  The copious slaughter covers all the shore,
  And the high ramparts drip with human gore.

  As when two scales are charged with doubtful loads,
  From side to side the trembling balance nods,
  (While some laborious matron, just and poor,
  With nice exactness weighs her woolly store,)
  Till poised aloft, the resting beam suspends
  Each equal weight; nor this, nor that, descends:(227)
  So stood the war, till Hector's matchless might,
  With fates prevailing, turn'd the scale of fight.
  Fierce as a whirlwind up the walls he flies,
  And fires his host with loud repeated cries.
  "Advance, ye Trojans! lend your valiant hands,
  Haste to the fleet, and toss the blazing brands!"
  They hear, they run; and, gathering at his call,
  Raise scaling engines, and ascend the wall:
  Around the works a wood of glittering spears
  Shoots up, and all the rising host appears.
  A ponderous stone bold Hector heaved to throw,
  Pointed above, and rough and gross below:
  Not two strong men the enormous weight could raise,
  Such men as live in these degenerate days:
  Yet this, as easy as a swain could bear
  The snowy fleece, he toss'd, and shook in air;
  For Jove upheld, and lighten'd of its load
  The unwieldy rock, the labour of a god.
  Thus arm'd, before the folded gates he came,
  Of massy substance, and stupendous frame;
  With iron bars and brazen hinges strong,
  On lofty beams of solid timber hung:
  Then thundering through the planks with forceful sway,
  Drives the sharp rock; the solid beams give way,
  The folds are shatter'd; from the crackling door
  Leap the resounding bars, the flying hinges roar.
  Now rushing in, the furious chief appears,
  Gloomy as night! and shakes two shining spears:(228)
  A dreadful gleam from his bright armour came,
  And from his eye-balls flash'd the living flame.
  He moves a god, resistless in his course,
  And seems a match for more than mortal force.
  Then pouring after, through the gaping space,
  A tide of Trojans flows, and fills the place;
  The Greeks behold, they tremble, and they fly;
  The shore is heap'd with death, and tumult rends the sky.

                       [Illustration: GREEK ALTAR.]

                               GREEK ALTAR.





BOOK XIII.


ARGUMENT.

THE FOURTH BATTLE CONTINUED, IN WHICH NEPTUNE ASSISTS THE GREEKS: THE ACTS
OF IDOMENEUS.

Neptune, concerned for the loss of the Grecians, upon seeing the
fortification forced by Hector, (who had entered the gate near the station
of the Ajaces,) assumes the shape of Calchas, and inspires those heroes to
oppose him: then, in the form of one of the generals, encourages the other
Greeks who had retired to their vessels. The Ajaces form their troops in a
close phalanx, and put a stop to Hector and the Trojans. Several deeds of
valour are performed; Meriones, losing his spear in the encounter, repairs
to seek another at the tent of Idomeneus: this occasions a conversation
between those two warriors, who return together to the battle. Idomeneus
signalizes his courage above the rest; he kills Othryoneus, Asius, and
Alcathous: Deiphobus and AEneas march against him, and at length Idomeneus
retires. Menelaus wounds Helenus, and kills Pisander. The Trojans are
repulsed on the left wing; Hector still keeps his ground against the
Ajaces, till, being galled by the Locrian slingers and archers, Polydamas
advises to call a council of war: Hector approves of his advice, but goes
first to rally the Trojans; upbraids Paris, rejoins Polydamas, meets Ajax
again, and renews the attack.

The eight-and-twentieth day still continues. The scene is between the
Grecian wall and the sea-shore.

  When now the Thunderer on the sea-beat coast
  Had fix'd great Hector and his conquering host,
  He left them to the fates, in bloody fray
  To toil and struggle through the well-fought day.
  Then turn'd to Thracia from the field of fight
  Those eyes that shed insufferable light,
  To where the Mysians prove their martial force,
  And hardy Thracians tame the savage horse;
  And where the far-famed Hippomolgian strays,
  Renown'd for justice and for length of days;(229)
  Thrice happy race! that, innocent of blood,
  From milk, innoxious, seek their simple food:
  Jove sees delighted; and avoids the scene
  Of guilty Troy, of arms, and dying men:
  No aid, he deems, to either host is given,
  While his high law suspends the powers of Heaven.

  Meantime the monarch of the watery main
  Observed the Thunderer, nor observed in vain.
  In Samothracia, on a mountain's brow,
  Whose waving woods o'erhung the deeps below,
  He sat; and round him cast his azure eyes
  Where Ida's misty tops confusedly rise;
  Below, fair Ilion's glittering spires were seen;
  The crowded ships and sable seas between.
  There, from the crystal chambers of the main
  Emerged, he sat, and mourn'd his Argives slain.
  At Jove incensed, with grief and fury stung,
  Prone down the rocky steep he rush'd along;
  Fierce as he pass'd, the lofty mountains nod,
  The forest shakes; earth trembled as he trod,
  And felt the footsteps of the immortal god.
  From realm to realm three ample strides he took,
  And, at the fourth, the distant AEgae shook.

  Far in the bay his shining palace stands,
  Eternal frame! not raised by mortal hands:
  This having reach'd, his brass-hoof'd steeds he reins,
  Fleet as the winds, and deck'd with golden manes.
  Refulgent arms his mighty limbs infold,
  Immortal arms of adamant and gold.
  He mounts the car, the golden scourge applies,
  He sits superior, and the chariot flies:
  His whirling wheels the glassy surface sweep;
  The enormous monsters rolling o'er the deep
  Gambol around him on the watery way,
  And heavy whales in awkward measures play;
  The sea subsiding spreads a level plain,
  Exults, and owns the monarch of the main;
  The parting waves before his coursers fly;
  The wondering waters leave his axle dry.

  Deep in the liquid regions lies a cave,
  Between where Tenedos the surges lave,
  And rocky Imbrus breaks the rolling wave:
  There the great ruler of the azure round
  Stopp'd his swift chariot, and his steeds unbound,
  Fed with ambrosial herbage from his hand,
  And link'd their fetlocks with a golden band,
  Infrangible, immortal: there they stay:
  The father of the floods pursues his way:
  Where, like a tempest, darkening heaven around,
  Or fiery deluge that devours the ground,
  The impatient Trojans, in a gloomy throng,
  Embattled roll'd, as Hector rush'd along:
  To the loud tumult and the barbarous cry
  The heavens re-echo, and the shores reply:
  They vow destruction to the Grecian name,
  And in their hopes the fleets already flame.

  But Neptune, rising from the seas profound,
  The god whose earthquakes rock the solid ground,
  Now wears a mortal form; like Calchas seen,
  Such his loud voice, and such his manly mien;
  His shouts incessant every Greek inspire,
  But most the Ajaces, adding fire to fire.

               [Illustration: NEPTUNE RISING FROM THE SEA.]

                       NEPTUNE RISING FROM THE SEA.


  "'Tis yours, O warriors, all our hopes to raise:
  Oh recollect your ancient worth and praise!
  'Tis yours to save us, if you cease to fear;
  Flight, more than shameful, is destructive here.
  On other works though Troy with fury fall,
  And pour her armies o'er our batter'd wall:
  There Greece has strength: but this, this part o'erthrown,
  Her strength were vain; I dread for you alone:
  Here Hector rages like the force of fire,
  Vaunts of his gods, and calls high Jove his sire:
  If yet some heavenly power your breast excite,
  Breathe in your hearts, and string your arms to fight,
  Greece yet may live, her threaten'd fleet maintain:
  And Hector's force, and Jove's own aid, be vain."

  Then with his sceptre, that the deep controls,
  He touch'd the chiefs, and steel'd their manly souls:
  Strength, not their own, the touch divine imparts,
  Prompts their light limbs, and swells their daring hearts.
  Then, as a falcon from the rocky height,
  Her quarry seen, impetuous at the sight,
  Forth-springing instant, darts herself from high,
  Shoots on the wing, and skims along the sky:
  Such, and so swift, the power of ocean flew;
  The wide horizon shut him from their view.

  The inspiring god Oileus' active son
  Perceived the first, and thus to Telamon:

  "Some god, my friend, some god in human form
  Favouring descends, and wills to stand the storm.
  Not Calchas this, the venerable seer;
  Short as he turned, I saw the power appear:
  I mark'd his parting, and the steps he trod;
  His own bright evidence reveals a god.
  Even now some energy divine I share,
  And seem to walk on wings, and tread in air!"

  "With equal ardour (Telamon returns)
  My soul is kindled, and my bosom burns;
  New rising spirits all my force alarm,
  Lift each impatient limb, and brace my arm.
  This ready arm, unthinking, shakes the dart;
  The blood pours back, and fortifies my heart:
  Singly, methinks, yon towering chief I meet,
  And stretch the dreadful Hector at my feet."

  Full of the god that urged their burning breast,
  The heroes thus their mutual warmth express'd.
  Neptune meanwhile the routed Greeks inspired;
  Who, breathless, pale, with length of labours tired,
  Pant in the ships; while Troy to conquest calls,
  And swarms victorious o'er their yielding walls:
  Trembling before the impending storm they lie,
  While tears of rage stand burning in their eye.
  Greece sunk they thought, and this their fatal hour;
  But breathe new courage as they feel the power.
  Teucer and Leitus first his words excite;
  Then stern Peneleus rises to the fight;
  Thoas, Deipyrus, in arms renown'd,
  And Merion next, the impulsive fury found;
  Last Nestor's son the same bold ardour takes,
  While thus the god the martial fire awakes:

  "Oh lasting infamy, oh dire disgrace
  To chiefs of vigorous youth, and manly race!
  I trusted in the gods, and you, to see
  Brave Greece victorious, and her navy free:
  Ah, no--the glorious combat you disclaim,
  And one black day clouds all her former fame.
  Heavens! what a prodigy these eyes survey,
  Unseen, unthought, till this amazing day!
  Fly we at length from Troy's oft-conquer'd bands?
  And falls our fleet by such inglorious hands?
  A rout undisciplined, a straggling train,
  Not born to glories of the dusty plain;
  Like frighted fawns from hill to hill pursued,
  A prey to every savage of the wood:
  Shall these, so late who trembled at your name,
  Invade your camps, involve your ships in flame?
  A change so shameful, say, what cause has wrought?
  The soldiers' baseness, or the general's fault?
  Fools! will ye perish for your leader's vice;
  The purchase infamy, and life the price?
  'Tis not your cause, Achilles' injured fame:
  Another's is the crime, but yours the shame.
  Grant that our chief offend through rage or lust,
  Must you be cowards, if your king's unjust?
  Prevent this evil, and your country save:
  Small thought retrieves the spirits of the brave.
  Think, and subdue! on dastards dead to fame
  I waste no anger, for they feel no shame:
  But you, the pride, the flower of all our host,
  My heart weeps blood to see your glory lost!
  Nor deem this day, this battle, all you lose;
  A day more black, a fate more vile, ensues.
  Let each reflect, who prizes fame or breath,
  On endless infamy, on instant death:
  For, lo! the fated time, the appointed shore:
  Hark! the gates burst, the brazen barriers roar!
  Impetuous Hector thunders at the wall;
  The hour, the spot, to conquer, or to fall."

  These words the Grecians' fainting hearts inspire,
  And listening armies catch the godlike fire.
  Fix'd at his post was each bold Ajax found,
  With well-ranged squadrons strongly circled round:
  So close their order, so disposed their fight,
  As Pallas' self might view with fix'd delight;
  Or had the god of war inclined his eyes,
  The god of war had own'd a just surprise.
  A chosen phalanx, firm, resolved as fate,
  Descending Hector and his battle wait.
  An iron scene gleams dreadful o'er the fields,
  Armour in armour lock'd, and shields in shields,
  Spears lean on spears, on targets targets throng,
  Helms stuck to helms, and man drove man along.
  The floating plumes unnumber'd wave above,
  As when an earthquake stirs the nodding grove;
  And levell'd at the skies with pointing rays,
  Their brandish'd lances at each motion blaze.

  Thus breathing death, in terrible array,
  The close compacted legions urged their way:
  Fierce they drove on, impatient to destroy;
  Troy charged the first, and Hector first of Troy.
  As from some mountain's craggy forehead torn,
  A rock's round fragment flies, with fury borne,
  (Which from the stubborn stone a torrent rends,)
  Precipitate the ponderous mass descends:
  From steep to steep the rolling ruin bounds;
  At every shock the crackling wood resounds;
  Still gathering force, it smokes; and urged amain,
  Whirls, leaps, and thunders down, impetuous to the plain:
  There stops--so Hector. Their whole force he proved,(230)
  Resistless when he raged, and, when he stopp'd, unmoved.

  On him the war is bent, the darts are shed,
  And all their falchions wave around his head:
  Repulsed he stands, nor from his stand retires;
  But with repeated shouts his army fires.
  "Trojans! be firm; this arm shall make your way
  Through yon square body, and that black array:
  Stand, and my spear shall rout their scattering power,
  Strong as they seem, embattled like a tower;
  For he that Juno's heavenly bosom warms,
  The first of gods, this day inspires our arms."

  He said; and roused the soul in every breast:
  Urged with desire of fame, beyond the rest,
  Forth march'd Deiphobus; but, marching, held
  Before his wary steps his ample shield.
  Bold Merion aim'd a stroke (nor aim'd it wide);
  The glittering javelin pierced the tough bull-hide;
  But pierced not through: unfaithful to his hand,
  The point broke short, and sparkled in the sand.
  The Trojan warrior, touch'd with timely fear,
  On the raised orb to distance bore the spear.
  The Greek, retreating, mourn'd his frustrate blow,
  And cursed the treacherous lance that spared a foe;
  Then to the ships with surly speed he went,
  To seek a surer javelin in his tent.

  Meanwhile with rising rage the battle glows,
  The tumult thickens, and the clamour grows.
  By Teucer's arm the warlike Imbrius bleeds,
  The son of Mentor, rich in generous steeds.
  Ere yet to Troy the sons of Greece were led,
  In fair Pedaeus' verdant pastures bred,
  The youth had dwelt, remote from war's alarms,
  And blest in bright Medesicaste's arms:
  (This nymph, the fruit of Priam's ravish'd joy,
  Allied the warrior to the house of Troy:)
  To Troy, when glory call'd his arms, he came,
  And match'd the bravest of her chiefs in fame:
  With Priam's sons, a guardian of the throne,
  He lived, beloved and honour'd as his own.
  Him Teucer pierced between the throat and ear:
  He groans beneath the Telamonian spear.
  As from some far-seen mountain's airy crown,
  Subdued by steel, a tall ash tumbles down,
  And soils its verdant tresses on the ground;
  So falls the youth; his arms the fall resound.
  Then Teucer rushing to despoil the dead,
  From Hector's hand a shining javelin fled:
  He saw, and shunn'd the death; the forceful dart
  Sung on, and pierced Amphimachus's heart,
  Cteatus' son, of Neptune's forceful line;
  Vain was his courage, and his race divine!
  Prostrate he falls; his clanging arms resound,
  And his broad buckler thunders on the ground.
  To seize his beamy helm the victor flies,
  And just had fastened on the dazzling prize,
  When Ajax' manly arm a javelin flung;
  Full on the shield's round boss the weapon rung;
  He felt the shock, nor more was doom'd to feel,
  Secure in mail, and sheath'd in shining steel.
  Repulsed he yields; the victor Greeks obtain
  The spoils contested, and bear off the slain.
  Between the leaders of the Athenian line,
  (Stichius the brave, Menestheus the divine,)
  Deplored Amphimachus, sad object! lies;
  Imbrius remains the fierce Ajaces' prize.
  As two grim lions bear across the lawn,
  Snatch'd from devouring hounds, a slaughter'd fawn.
  In their fell jaws high-lifting through the wood,
  And sprinkling all the shrubs with drops of blood;
  So these, the chief: great Ajax from the dead
  Strips his bright arms; Oileus lops his head:
  Toss'd like a ball, and whirl'd in air away,
  At Hector's feet the gory visage lay.

  The god of ocean, fired with stern disdain,
  And pierced with sorrow for his grandson slain,
  Inspires the Grecian hearts, confirms their hands,
  And breathes destruction on the Trojan bands.
  Swift as a whirlwind rushing to the fleet,
  He finds the lance-famed Idomen of Crete,
  His pensive brow the generous care express'd
  With which a wounded soldier touch'd his breast,
  Whom in the chance of war a javelin tore,
  And his sad comrades from the battle bore;
  Him to the surgeons of the camp he sent:
  That office paid, he issued from his tent
  Fierce for the fight: to whom the god begun,
  In Thoas' voice, Andraemon's valiant son,
  Who ruled where Calydon's white rocks arise,
  And Pleuron's chalky cliffs emblaze the skies:

  "Where's now the imperious vaunt, the daring boast,
  Of Greece victorious, and proud Ilion lost?"

  To whom the king: "On Greece no blame be thrown;
  Arms are her trade, and war is all her own.
  Her hardy heroes from the well-fought plains
  Nor fear withholds, nor shameful sloth detains:
  'Tis heaven, alas! and Jove's all-powerful doom,
  That far, far distant from our native home
  Wills us to fall inglorious! Oh, my friend!
  Once foremost in the fight, still prone to lend
  Or arms or counsels, now perform thy best,
  And what thou canst not singly, urge the rest."

  Thus he: and thus the god whose force can make
  The solid globe's eternal basis shake:
  "Ah! never may he see his native land,
  But feed the vultures on this hateful strand,
  Who seeks ignobly in his ships to stay,
  Nor dares to combat on this signal day!
  For this, behold! in horrid arms I shine,
  And urge thy soul to rival acts with mine.
  Together let us battle on the plain;
  Two, not the worst; nor even this succour vain:
  Not vain the weakest, if their force unite;
  But ours, the bravest have confess'd in fight."

  This said, he rushes where the combat burns;
  Swift to his tent the Cretan king returns:
  From thence, two javelins glittering in his hand,
  And clad in arms that lighten'd all the strand,
  Fierce on the foe the impetuous hero drove,
  Like lightning bursting from the arm of Jove,
  Which to pale man the wrath of heaven declares,
  Or terrifies the offending world with wars;
  In streamy sparkles, kindling all the skies,
  From pole to pole the trail of glory flies:
  Thus his bright armour o'er the dazzled throng
  Gleam'd dreadful, as the monarch flash'd along.

  Him, near his tent, Meriones attends;
  Whom thus he questions: "Ever best of friends!
  O say, in every art of battle skill'd,
  What holds thy courage from so brave a field?
  On some important message art thou bound,
  Or bleeds my friend by some unhappy wound?
  Inglorious here, my soul abhors to stay,
  And glows with prospects of th' approaching day."

  "O prince! (Meriones replies) whose care
  Leads forth the embattled sons of Crete to war;
  This speaks my grief: this headless lance I wield;
  The rest lies rooted in a Trojan shield."

  To whom the Cretan: "Enter, and receive
  The wonted weapons; those my tent can give;
  Spears I have store, (and Trojan lances all,)
  That shed a lustre round the illumined wall,
  Though I, disdainful of the distant war,
  Nor trust the dart, nor aim the uncertain spear,
  Yet hand to hand I fight, and spoil the slain;
  And thence these trophies, and these arms I gain.
  Enter, and see on heaps the helmets roll'd,
  And high-hung spears, and shields that flame with gold."

  "Nor vain (said Merion) are our martial toils;
  We too can boast of no ignoble spoils:
  But those my ship contains; whence distant far,
  I fight conspicuous in the van of war,
  What need I more? If any Greek there be
  Who knows not Merion, I appeal to thee."

  To this, Idomeneus: "The fields of fight
  Have proved thy valour, and unconquer'd might:
  And were some ambush for the foes design'd,
  Even there thy courage would not lag behind:
  In that sharp service, singled from the rest,
  The fear of each, or valour, stands confess'd.
  No force, no firmness, the pale coward shows;
  He shifts his place: his colour comes and goes:
  A dropping sweat creeps cold on every part;
  Against his bosom beats his quivering heart;
  Terror and death in his wild eye-balls stare;
  With chattering teeth he stands, and stiffening hair,
  And looks a bloodless image of despair!
  Not so the brave--still dauntless, still the same,
  Unchanged his colour, and unmoved his frame:
  Composed his thought, determined is his eye,
  And fix'd his soul, to conquer or to die:
  If aught disturb the tenour of his breast,
  'Tis but the wish to strike before the rest.

  "In such assays thy blameless worth is known,
  And every art of dangerous war thy own.
  By chance of fight whatever wounds you bore,
  Those wounds were glorious all, and all before;
  Such as may teach, 'twas still thy brave delight
  T'oppose thy bosom where thy foremost fight.
  But why, like infants, cold to honour's charms,
  Stand we to talk, when glory calls to arms?
  Go--from my conquer'd spears the choicest take,
  And to their owners send them nobly back."

  Swift at the word bold Merion snatch'd a spear
  And, breathing slaughter, follow'd to the war.
  So Mars armipotent invades the plain,
  (The wide destroyer of the race of man,)
  Terror, his best-beloved son, attends his course,
  Arm'd with stern boldness, and enormous force;
  The pride of haughty warriors to confound,
  And lay the strength of tyrants on the ground:
  From Thrace they fly, call'd to the dire alarms
  Of warring Phlegyans, and Ephyrian arms;
  Invoked by both, relentless they dispose,
  To these glad conquest, murderous rout to those.
  So march'd the leaders of the Cretan train,
  And their bright arms shot horror o'er the plain.

  Then first spake Merion: "Shall we join the right,
  Or combat in the centre of the fight?
  Or to the left our wonted succour lend?
  Hazard and fame all parts alike attend."

  "Not in the centre (Idomen replied:)
  Our ablest chieftains the main battle guide;
  Each godlike Ajax makes that post his care,
  And gallant Teucer deals destruction there,
  Skill'd or with shafts to gall the distant field,
  Or bear close battle on the sounding shield.
  These can the rage of haughty Hector tame:
  Safe in their arms, the navy fears no flame,
  Till Jove himself descends, his bolts to shed,
  And hurl the blazing ruin at our head.
  Great must he be, of more than human birth,
  Nor feed like mortals on the fruits of earth.
  Him neither rocks can crush, nor steel can wound,
  Whom Ajax fells not on the ensanguined ground.
  In standing fight he mates Achilles' force,
  Excell'd alone in swiftness in the course.
  Then to the left our ready arms apply,
  And live with glory, or with glory die."

  He said: and Merion to th' appointed place,
  Fierce as the god of battles, urged his pace.
  Soon as the foe the shining chiefs beheld
  Rush like a fiery torrent o'er the field,
  Their force embodied in a tide they pour;
  The rising combat sounds along the shore.
  As warring winds, in Sirius' sultry reign,
  From different quarters sweep the sandy plain;
  On every side the dusty whirlwinds rise,
  And the dry fields are lifted to the skies:
  Thus by despair, hope, rage, together driven,
  Met the black hosts, and, meeting, darken'd heaven.
  All dreadful glared the iron face of war,
  Bristled with upright spears, that flash'd afar;
  Dire was the gleam of breastplates, helms, and shields,
  And polish'd arms emblazed the flaming fields:
  Tremendous scene! that general horror gave,
  But touch'd with joy the bosoms of the brave.

  Saturn's great sons in fierce contention vied,
  And crowds of heroes in their anger died.
  The sire of earth and heaven, by Thetis won
  To crown with glory Peleus' godlike son,
  Will'd not destruction to the Grecian powers,
  But spared awhile the destined Trojan towers;
  While Neptune, rising from his azure main,
  Warr'd on the king of heaven with stern disdain,
  And breathed revenge, and fired the Grecian train.
  Gods of one source, of one ethereal race,
  Alike divine, and heaven their native place;
  But Jove the greater; first-born of the skies,
  And more than men, or gods, supremely wise.
  For this, of Jove's superior might afraid,
  Neptune in human form conceal'd his aid.
  These powers enfold the Greek and Trojan train
  In war and discord's adamantine chain,
  Indissolubly strong: the fatal tie
  Is stretch'd on both, and close compell'd they die.

  Dreadful in arms, and grown in combats grey,
  The bold Idomeneus controls the day.
  First by his hand Othryoneus was slain,
  Swell'd with false hopes, with mad ambition vain;
  Call'd by the voice of war to martial fame,
  From high Cabesus' distant walls he came;
  Cassandra's love he sought, with boasts of power,
  And promised conquest was the proffer'd dower.
  The king consented, by his vaunts abused;
  The king consented, but the fates refused.
  Proud of himself, and of the imagined bride,
  The field he measured with a larger stride.
  Him as he stalk'd, the Cretan javelin found;
  Vain was his breastplate to repel the wound:
  His dream of glory lost, he plunged to hell;
  His arms resounded as the boaster fell.
  The great Idomeneus bestrides the dead;
  "And thus (he cries) behold thy promise sped!
  Such is the help thy arms to Ilion bring,
  And such the contract of the Phrygian king!
  Our offers now, illustrious prince! receive;
  For such an aid what will not Argos give?
  To conquer Troy, with ours thy forces join,
  And count Atrides' fairest daughter thine.
  Meantime, on further methods to advise,
  Come, follow to the fleet thy new allies;
  There hear what Greece has on her part to say."
  He spoke, and dragg'd the gory corse away.
  This Asius view'd, unable to contain,
  Before his chariot warring on the plain:
  (His crowded coursers, to his squire consign'd,
  Impatient panted on his neck behind:)
  To vengeance rising with a sudden spring,
  He hoped the conquest of the Cretan king.
  The wary Cretan, as his foe drew near,
  Full on his throat discharged the forceful spear:
  Beneath the chin the point was seen to glide,
  And glitter'd, extant at the further side.
  As when the mountain-oak, or poplar tall,
  Or pine, fit mast for some great admiral,
  Groans to the oft-heaved axe, with many a wound,
  Then spreads a length of ruin o'er the ground:
  So sunk proud Asius in that dreadful day,
  And stretch'd before his much-loved coursers lay.
  He grinds the dust distain'd with streaming gore,
  And, fierce in death, lies foaming on the shore.
  Deprived of motion, stiff with stupid fear,
  Stands all aghast his trembling charioteer,
  Nor shuns the foe, nor turns the steeds away,
  But falls transfix'd, an unresisting prey:
  Pierced by Antilochus, he pants beneath
  The stately car, and labours out his breath.
  Thus Asius' steeds (their mighty master gone)
  Remain the prize of Nestor's youthful son.

  Stabb'd at the sight, Deiphobus drew nigh,
  And made, with force, the vengeful weapon fly.
  The Cretan saw; and, stooping, caused to glance
  From his slope shield the disappointed lance.
  Beneath the spacious targe, (a blazing round,
  Thick with bull-hides and brazen orbits bound,
  On his raised arm by two strong braces stay'd,)
  He lay collected in defensive shade.
  O'er his safe head the javelin idly sung,
  And on the tinkling verge more faintly rung.
  Even then the spear the vigorous arm confess'd,
  And pierced, obliquely, king Hypsenor's breast:
  Warm'd in his liver, to the ground it bore
  The chief, his people's guardian now no more!

  "Not unattended (the proud Trojan cries)
  Nor unrevenged, lamented Asius lies:
  For thee, through hell's black portals stand display'd,
  This mate shall joy thy melancholy shade."

  Heart-piercing anguish, at the haughty boast,
  Touch'd every Greek, but Nestor's son the most.
  Grieved as he was, his pious arms attend,
  And his broad buckler shields his slaughter'd friend:
  Till sad Mecistheus and Alastor bore
  His honour'd body to the tented shore.

  Nor yet from fight Idomeneus withdraws;
  Resolved to perish in his country's cause,
  Or find some foe, whom heaven and he shall doom
  To wail his fate in death's eternal gloom.
  He sees Alcathous in the front aspire:
  Great AEsyetes was the hero's sire;
  His spouse Hippodame, divinely fair,
  Anchises' eldest hope, and darling care:
  Who charm'd her parents' and her husband's heart
  With beauty, sense, and every work of art:
  He once of Ilion's youth the loveliest boy,
  The fairest she of all the fair of Troy.
  By Neptune now the hapless hero dies,
  Who covers with a cloud those beauteous eyes,
  And fetters every limb: yet bent to meet
  His fate he stands; nor shuns the lance of Crete.
  Fix'd as some column, or deep-rooted oak,
  While the winds sleep; his breast received the stroke.
  Before the ponderous stroke his corslet yields,
  Long used to ward the death in fighting fields.
  The riven armour sends a jarring sound;
  His labouring heart heaves with so strong a bound,
  The long lance shakes, and vibrates in the wound;
  Fast flowing from its source, as prone he lay,
  Life's purple tide impetuous gush'd away.

  Then Idomen, insulting o'er the slain:
  "Behold, Deiphobus! nor vaunt in vain:
  See! on one Greek three Trojan ghosts attend;
  This, my third victim, to the shades I send.
  Approaching now thy boasted might approve,
  And try the prowess of the seed of Jove.
  From Jove, enamour'd of a mortal dame,
  Great Minos, guardian of his country, came:
  Deucalion, blameless prince, was Minos' heir;
  His first-born I, the third from Jupiter:
  O'er spacious Crete, and her bold sons, I reign,
  And thence my ships transport me through the main:
  Lord of a host, o'er all my host I shine,
  A scourge to thee, thy father, and thy line."

  The Trojan heard; uncertain or to meet,
  Alone, with venturous arms the king of Crete,
  Or seek auxiliar force; at length decreed
  To call some hero to partake the deed,
  Forthwith AEneas rises to his thought:
  For him in Troy's remotest lines he sought,
  Where he, incensed at partial Priam, stands,
  And sees superior posts in meaner hands.
  To him, ambitious of so great an aid,
  The bold Deiphobus approach'd, and said:

  "Now, Trojan prince, employ thy pious arms,
  If e'er thy bosom felt fair honour's charms.
  Alcathous dies, thy brother and thy friend;
  Come, and the warrior's loved remains defend.
  Beneath his cares thy early youth was train'd,
  One table fed you, and one roof contain'd.
  This deed to fierce Idomeneus we owe;
  Haste, and revenge it on th' insulting foe."

  AEneas heard, and for a space resign'd
  To tender pity all his manly mind;
  Then rising in his rage, he burns to fight:
  The Greek awaits him with collected might.
  As the fell boar, on some rough mountain's head,
  Arm'd with wild terrors, and to slaughter bred,
  When the loud rustics rise, and shout from far,
  Attends the tumult, and expects the war;
  O'er his bent back the bristly horrors rise;
  Fires stream in lightning from his sanguine eyes,
  His foaming tusks both dogs and men engage;
  But most his hunters rouse his mighty rage:
  So stood Idomeneus, his javelin shook,
  And met the Trojan with a lowering look.
  Antilochus, Deipyrus, were near,
  The youthful offspring of the god of war,
  Merion, and Aphareus, in field renown'd:
  To these the warrior sent his voice around.
  "Fellows in arms! your timely aid unite;
  Lo, great AEneas rushes to the fight:
  Sprung from a god, and more than mortal bold;
  He fresh in youth, and I in arms grown old.
  Else should this hand, this hour decide the strife,
  The great dispute, of glory, or of life."

  He spoke, and all, as with one soul, obey'd;
  Their lifted bucklers cast a dreadful shade
  Around the chief. AEneas too demands
  Th' assisting forces of his native bands;
  Paris, Deiphobus, Agenor, join;
  (Co-aids and captains of the Trojan line;)
  In order follow all th' embodied train,
  Like Ida's flocks proceeding o'er the plain;
  Before his fleecy care, erect and bold,
  Stalks the proud ram, the father of the bold.
  With joy the swain surveys them, as he leads
  To the cool fountains, through the well-known meads:
  So joys AEneas, as his native band
  Moves on in rank, and stretches o'er the land.

  Round dread Alcathous now the battle rose;
  On every side the steely circle grows;
  Now batter'd breast-plates and hack'd helmets ring,
  And o'er their heads unheeded javelins sing.
  Above the rest, two towering chiefs appear,
  There great Idomeneus, AEneas here.
  Like gods of war, dispensing fate, they stood,
  And burn'd to drench the ground with mutual blood.
  The Trojan weapon whizz'd along in air;
  The Cretan saw, and shunn'd the brazen spear:
  Sent from an arm so strong, the missive wood
  Stuck deep in earth, and quiver'd where it stood.
  But OEnomas received the Cretan's stroke;
  The forceful spear his hollow corslet broke,
  It ripp'd his belly with a ghastly wound,
  And roll'd the smoking entrails on the ground.
  Stretch'd on the plain, he sobs away his breath,
  And, furious, grasps the bloody dust in death.
  The victor from his breast the weapon tears;
  His spoils he could not, for the shower of spears.
  Though now unfit an active war to wage,
  Heavy with cumbrous arms, stiff with cold age,
