some uncle, or other male relative, brought to India to keep his house,
until they should find themselves unexpectedly in one of their own. Dr.
Hartley happened to attend a public breakfast given on this occasion
by a gentleman high in the service. The roof of his friend had been
recently enriched by a consignment of three nieces, whom the old
gentleman, justly attached to his quiet hookah, and, it was said, to
a pretty girl of colour, desired to offer to the public, that he
might have the fairest chance to get rid of his new guests as soon as
possible. Hartley, who was thought a fish worth casting a fly for, was
contemplating this fair investment, with very little interest, when he
heard one of the company say to another in a low voice,--

"Angels and ministers! there is our old acquaintance, the Queen of
Sheba, returned upon our hands like unsaleable goods."

Hartley looked in the same direction with the two who were speaking, and
his eye was caught by a Semiramis-looking person, of unusual stature
and amplitude, arrayed in a sort of riding-habit, but so formed, and so
looped and gallooned with lace, as made it resemble the upper tunic of
a native chief. Her robe was composed of crimson silk, rich with flowers
of gold. She wore wide trowsers of light blue silk, a fine scarlet shawl
around her waist, in which was stuck a creeze with a richly ornamented
handle. Her throat and arms were loaded with chains and bracelets, and
her turban, formed of a shawl similar to that worn around her waist,
was decorated by a magnificent aigrette, from which a blue ostrich plume
flowed in one direction, and a red one in another. The brow, of European
complexion, on which this tiara rested, was too lofty for beauty, but
seemed made for command; the aquiline nose retained its form, but the
cheeks were a little sunken, and the complexion so very brilliant, as to
give strong evidence that the whole countenance had undergone a thorough
repair since the lady had left her couch. A black female slave, richly
dressed, stood behind her with a chowry, or cow's tail, having a silver
handle, which she used to keep off the flies. From the mode in which she
was addressed by those who spoke to her, this lady appeared a person of
too much importance to be affronted or neglected, and yet one with whom
none desired further communication than the occasion seemed in propriety
to demand.

She did not, however, stand in need of attention. The well-known captain
of an East Indian vessel lately arrived from Britain was sedulously
polite to her; and two or three gentlemen, whom Hartley knew to be
engaged in trade, tended upon her as they would have done upon the
safety of a rich argosy.

"For Heaven's sake, what is that for a Zenobia?" said Hartley, to the
gentleman whose whisper had first attracted his attention to this lofty
dame.

"Is it possible you do not know the Queen of Sheba?" said the person of
whom he enquired, no way both to communicate the information demanded.
"You must know, then, that she is the daughter of a Scotch emigrant,
who lived and died at Pondicherry, a sergeant in Lally's regiment.
She managed to marry a partisan officer named Montreville, a Swiss or
Frenchman, I cannot tell which. After the surrender of Pondicherry, this
hero and heroine--But hey--what the devil are you thinking of?--If you
stare at her that way, you will make a scene; for she will think nothing
of scolding you across the table."

But without attending to his friend's remonstrances, Hartley bolted from
the table at which he sat, and made his way, with something less than
the decorum which the rules of society enjoin, towards the place where
the lady in question was seated.

"The Doctor is surely mad this morning"--said his friend Major Mercer to
old Quartermaster Calder.

Indeed, Hartley was not perhaps strictly in his senses; for looking at
the Queen of Sheba as he listened to Major Mercer, his eye fell on a
light female form beside her, so placed as if she desired to be eclipsed
by the bulky form and flowing robes we have described, and to his
extreme astonishment, he recognised the friend of his childhood, the
love of his youth--Menie Gray herself!

To see her in India was in itself astonishing. To see her apparently
under such strange patronage, greatly increased his surprise. To make
his way to her, and address her, seemed the natural and direct mode of
satisfying the feelings which her appearance excited.

His impetuosity was, however, checked, when, advancing close upon Miss
Gray and her companion, he observed that the former, though she looked
at him, exhibited not the slightest token of recognition, unless he
could interpret as such, that she slightly touched her upper lip with
her fore-finger, which, if it happened otherwise than by mere accident,
might be construed to mean, "Do not speak to me just now." Hartley,
adopting such an interpretation, stood stock still, blushing deeply; for
he was aware that he made for the moment but a silly figure.

He was the rather convinced of this, when, with a voice which in
the force of its accents corresponded with her commanding air, Mrs.
Montreville addressed him in English, which savoured slightly of a Swiss
patois,--"You have come to us very fast, sir, to say nothing at all. Are
you sure you did not get your tongue stolen by de way?"

"I thought I had seen an old friend in that lady, madam," stammered
Hartley, "but it seems I am mistaken."

"The good people do tell me that you are one Doctors Hartley, sir. Now,
my friend and I do not know Doctors Hartley at all."

"I have not the presumption to pretend to your acquaintance, madam, but
him"--

Here Menie repeated the sign in such a manner, that though it was only
momentary, Hartley could not misunderstand its purpose; he therefore
changed the end of his sentence, and added, "But I have only to make my
bow, and ask pardon for my mistake."

He retired back accordingly among the company, unable to quit the room,
and enquiring at those whom he considered as the best newsmongers for
such information as--"Who is that stately-looking woman, Mr. Butler?"

"Oh, the Queen of Sheba, to be sure."

"And who is that pretty girl, who sits beside her?"

"Or rather behind her," answered Butler, a military chaplain; "faith,
I cannot say--Pretty did you call her?" turning his opera-glass that
way--"Yes, faith, she is pretty--very pretty--Gad, she shoots her
glances as smartly from behind the old pile yonder, as Teucer from
behind Ajax Telamon's shield."

"But who is she, can you tell me?"

"Some fair-skinned speculation of old Montreville's, I suppose, that she
has got either to toady herself, or take in some of her black friends
with.--Is it possible you have never heard of old Mother Montreville?"

"You know I have been so long absent from Madras"--

"Well," continued Butler, "this lady is the widow of a Swiss officer
in the French service, who after the surrender of Pondicherry, went
off into the interior, and commenced soldier on his own account. He got
possession of a fort, under pretence of keeping it for some simple Rajah
or other; assembled around him a parcel of desperate vagabonds, of every
colour in the rainbow; occupied a considerable territory, of which he
raised the duties in his own name, and declared for independence. But
Hyder Naig understood no such interloping proceedings, and down he came,
besieged the fort and took it, though some pretend it was betrayed to
him by this very woman. Be that as it may, the poor Swiss was found dead
on the ramparts. Certain it is, she received large sums of money, under
pretence of paying off her troops, surrendering of hill-forts, and
Heaven knows what besides. She was permitted also to retain some
insignia of royalty; and, as she was wont to talk of Hyder as the
Eastern Solomon, she generally became known by the title of Queen of
Sheba. She leaves her court when she pleases, and has been as far as
Fort St. George before now. In a word, she does pretty much as she
likes. The great folks here are civil to her, though they look on her as
little better than a spy. As to Hyder, it is supposed he has ensured her
fidelity by borrowing the greater part of her treasures, which prevents
her from daring to break with him--besides other causes that smack of
scandal of another sort."

"A singular story," replied Hartley to his companion, while his heart
dwelt on the question, How it was possible that the gentle and
simple Menie Gray should be in the train of such a character as this
adventuress?

"But Butler has not told you the best of it," said Major Mercer, who by
this time came round to finish his own story. "Your old acquaintance,
Mr. Tresham, or Mr. Middlemas, or whatever else he chooses to be called,
has been complimented by a report, that he stood very high in the good
graces of this same Boadicea. He certainly commanded some troops which
she stills keeps on foot, and acted at their head in the Nawaub's
service, who craftily employed him in whatever could render him odious
to his countrymen. The British prisoners were intrusted to his charge,
and, to judge by what I felt myself, the devil might take a lesson from
him in severity."

"And was he attached to, or connected with, this woman?"

"So Mrs. Rumour told us in our dungeon. Poor Jack Ward had the bastinado
for celebrating their merits in a parody on the playhouse song,

  'Sure such a pair were never seen,
    So aptly formed to meet by nature.'"

Hartley could listen no longer. The fate of Menie Gray, connected with
such a man and such a woman, rushed on his fancy in the most horrid
colours, and he was struggling through the throng to get to some place
where he might collect his ideas, and consider what could be done for
her protection, when a black attendant touched his arm, and at the
same time slipped a card into his hand. It bore, "Miss Gray, Mrs.
Montreville's, at the house of Ram Sing Cottah, in the Black Town." On
the reverse was written with a pencil, "Eight in the morning."

This intimation of her residence implied, of course, a permission, nay,
an invitation, to wait upon her at the hour specified. Hartley's heart
beat at the idea of seeing her once more, and still more highly at the
thought of being able to serve her. At least, he thought, if there
is danger near her, as is much to be suspected, she shall not want a
counsellor, or, if necessary, a protector. Yet, at the same time,
he felt the necessity of making himself better acquainted with the
circumstances of her case, and the persons with whom she seemed
connected. Butler and Mercer had both spoke to their disparagement; but
Butler was a little of a coxcomb, and Mercer a great deal of a gossip.
While he was considering what credit was due to their testimony, he
was unexpectedly encountered by a gentleman of his own profession, a
military surgeon, who had had the misfortune to have been in Hyder's
prison, till set at freedom by the late pacification. Mr. Esdale, for
so he was called, was generally esteemed a rising man, calm, steady, and
deliberate in forming his opinions. Hartley found it easy to turn the
subject on the Queen of Sheba, by asking whether her Majesty was not
somewhat of an adventuress.

"On my word, I cannot say," answered Esdale, smiling; "we are all upon
the adventure in India, more or less; but I do not see that the Begum
Montreville is more so than the rest."

"Why, that Amazonian dress and manner," said Hartley, "savour a little
of the _picaresca_."

"You must not," said Esdale, "expect a woman who has commanded soldiers,
and may again, to dress and look entirely like an ordinary person. But
I assure you, that even at this time of day, if she wished to marry, she
might easily find a respectable match."

"Why, I heard that she had betrayed her husband's fort to Hyder."

"Ay, that is a specimen of Madras gossip. The fact is, that she defended
the place long after her husband fell, and afterwards surrendered it
by capitulation. Hyder, who piques himself on observing the rules of
justice, would not otherwise have admitted her to such intimacy."

"Yes, I have heard," replied Hartley, "that their intimacy was rather of
the closest."

"Another calumny, if you mean any scandal," answered Esdale. "Hyder is
too zealous a Mahomedan to entertain a Christian mistress; and, besides,
to enjoy the sort of rank which is yielded to a woman in her condition,
she must refrain, in appearance at least, from all correspondence in the
way of gallantry. Just so they said that the poor woman had a connexion
with poor Middlemas of the ---- regiment."

"And was that also a false report?" said Hartley, in breathless anxiety.

"On my soul, I believe it was," answered Mr. Esdale. "They were friends,
Europeans in an Indian court, and therefore intimate; but I believe
nothing more. By the by, though, I believe there was some quarrel
between Middlemas, poor fellow, and you; yet I am sure that you will be
glad to hear there is a chance of his affair being made up."

"Indeed!" was again the only word which Hartley could utter.

"Ay, indeed," answered Esdale. "The duel is an old story now; and
it must be allowed that poor Middlemas, though he was rash in that
business, had provocation."

"But his desertion--his accepting of command under Hyder--his treatment
of our prisoners--How can all these be passed over?" replied Hartley.

"Why, it is possible--I speak to you as a cautious man, and in
confidence--that he may do us better service in Hyder's capital, or
Tippoo's camp, than he could have done if serving with his own regiment.
And then, for his treatment of prisoners, I am sure I can speak nothing
but good of him in that particular. He was obliged to take the office,
because those that serve Hyder Naig must do or die. But he told me
himself--and I believe him--that he accepted the office chiefly because,
while he made a great bullying at us before the black fellows, he could
privately be of assistance to us. Some fools could not understand this,
and answered him with abuse and lampoons; and he was obliged to punish
them, to avoid suspicion. Yes, yes, I and others can prove he was
willing to be kind, if men would give him leave. I hope to thank him at
Madras one day soon--All this in confidence--Good-morrow to you."

Distracted by the contradictory intelligence he had received, Hartley
went next to question old Captain Capstern, the Captain of the Indiaman,
whom he had observed in attendance upon the Begum Montreville. On
enquiring after that commander's female passengers, he heard a pretty
long catalogue of names, in which that he was so much interested in did
not occur. On closer enquiry, Capstern recollected that Menie Gray,
a young Scotchwoman, had come out under charge of Mrs. Duffer, the
master's wife. "A good decent girl," Capstern said, "and kept the mates
and guinea-pigs at a respectable distance. She came out," he believed,
"to be a sort of female companion, or upper servant in Madame
Montreville's family. Snug berth enough," he concluded, "if she can find
the length of the old girl's foot."

This was all that could be made of Capstern; so Hartley was compelled
to remain in a state of uncertainty until the next morning, when an
explanation might be expected with Menie Gray in person.




CHAPTER THE ELEVENTH.


The exact hour assigned found Hartley at the door of the rich native
merchant, who, having some reasons for wishing to oblige the Begum
Mon treville, had relinquished, for her accommodation and that of her
numerous retinue, almost the whole of his large and sumptuous residence
in the Black Town of Madras, as that district of the city is called
which the natives occupy.

A domestic, at the first summons, ushered the visitor into an apartment,
where he expected to be joined by Miss Gray. The room opened on one
side into a small garden or parterre, filled with the brilliant-coloured
flowers of Eastern climates; in the midst of which the waters of a
fountain rose upwards in a sparkling jet, and fell back again into a
white marble cistern.

A thousand dizzy recollections thronged on the mind of Hartley, whose
early feelings towards the companion of his youth, if they had slumbered
during distance and the various casualties of a busy life, were revived
when he found himself placed so near her, and in circumstances which
interested from their unexpected occurrence and mysterious character.
A step was heard--the door opened--a female appeared--but it was the
portly form of Madame de Montreville.

"What do you please to want, sir?" said the lady; "that is, if you have
found your tongue this morning, which you had lost yesterday."

"I proposed myself the honour of waiting upon the young person, whom I
saw in your excellency's company yesterday morning," answered Hartley,
with assumed respect. "I have had long the honour of being known to her
in Europe, and I desire to offer my services to her in India."

"Much obliged--much obliged; but Miss Gray is gone out, and does not
return for one or two days. You may leave your commands with me."

"Pardon me, madam," replied Hartley; "but I have some reason to hope you
may be mistaken in this matter--And here comes the lady herself."

"How is this, my dear?" said Mrs. Montreville, with unruffled front, to
Menie, as she entered; "are you not gone out for two or three days, as
I tell this gentleman?--_mais c'est egal_--it is all one thing. You will
say, How d'ye do, and good-bye, to Monsieur, who is so polite as to come
to ask after our healths, and as he sees us both very well, he will go
away home again."

"I believe, madam," said Miss Gray, with appearance of effort, "that I
must speak with this gentleman for a few minutes in private, if you will
permit me."

"That is to say, get you gone? but I do not allow that--I do not like
private conversation between young man and pretty young woman; _cela
n'est pas honnete_. It cannot be in my house."

"It may be out of it, then, madam," answered Miss Gray, not pettishly
nor pertly, but with the utmost simplicity.--"Mr. Hartley, will you step
into that garden?--and, you, madam, may observe us from the window, if
it be the fashion of the country to watch so closely."

As she spoke this she stepped through a lattice-door into the garden,
and with an air so simple, that she seemed as if she wished to comply
with her patroness's ideas of decorum, though they appeared strange
to her. The Queen of Sheba, notwithstanding her natural assurance, was
disconcerted by the composure of Miss Gray's manner, and left the room,
apparently in displeasure. Menie turned back to the door which opened
into the garden, and said in the same manner as before, but with less
nonchalance,--

"I am sure I would not willingly break through the rules of a foreign
country; but I cannot refuse myself the pleasure of speaking to so old a
friend,--if indeed," she added, pausing and looking at Hartley, who was
much embarrassed, "it be as much pleasure to Mr. Hartley as it is to
me."

"It would have been," said Hartley, scarce knowing what he said--"it
must be a pleasure to me in every circumstance--But this extraordinary
meeting--But your father"--

Menie Gray's handkerchief was at her eyes.--"He is gone, Mr. Hartley.
After he was left unassisted, his toilsome business became too much for
him--he caught a cold which hung about him, as you know he was the
last to attend to his own complaints, till it assumed a dangerous, and,
finally, a fatal character. I distress you, Mr. Hartley, but it becomes
you well to be affected. My father loved you dearly."

"Oh, Miss Gray!" said Hartley, "it should not have been thus with my
