at every pretty girl, like a merlin at a thrush--you will not always win
a gold chain for your labour--and, by the way, here I return to you your
fanfarona--keep it close, it is weighty, and may benefit you at a pinch
more ways than one. Thirdly, and to conclude, as our worthy preacher
says, beware of the pottle-pot--it has drenched the judgment of wiser
men than you. I could bring some instances of it, but I dare say it
needeth not; for if you should forget your own mishaps, you will scarce
fail to remember mine--And so farewell, my dear son."

Roland returned his good wishes, and failed not to send his humble duty
to his kind Lady, charging the falconer, at the same time, to express
his regret that he should have offended her, and his determination so
to bear him in the world that she would not be ashamed of the generous
protection she had afforded him.

The falconer embraced his young friend, mounted his stout, round-made,
trotting-nag, which the serving-man, who had attended him, held ready at
the door, and took the road to the southward. A sullen and heavy
sound echoed from the horse's feet, as if indicating the sorrow of the
good-natured rider. Every hoof-tread seemed to tap upon Roland's heart
as he heard his comrade withdraw with so little of his usual alert
activity, and felt that he was once more alone in the world.

He was roused from his reverie by Michael Wing-the-wind, who reminded
him that it was necessary they should instantly return to the palace,
as my Lord Regent went to the Sessions early in the morning. They went
thither accordingly, and Wing-the-wind, a favourite old domestic, who
was admitted nearer to the Regent's person and privacy, than many whose
posts were more ostensible, soon introduced Graeme into a small matted
chamber, where he had an audience of the present head of the troubled
State of Scotland. The Earl of Murray was clad in a sad-coloured
morning-gown, with a cap and slippers of the same cloth, but, even in
this easy deshabille, held his sheathed rapier in his hand, a precaution
which he adopted when receiving strangers, rather in compliance with
the earnest remonstrances of his friends and partisans, than from any
personal apprehensions of his own. He answered with a silent nod the
respectful obeisance of the page, and took one or two turns through
the small apartment in silence, fixing his keen eye on Roland, as if he
wished to penetrate into his very soul. At length he broke silence.

"Your name is, I think, Julian Graeme?"

"Roland Graeme, my lord, not Julian," replied the page.

"Right--I was misled by some trick of my memory--Roland Graeme, from
the Debateable Land.--Roland, thou knowest the duties which belong to a
lady's service?"

"I should know them, my lord," replied Roland, "having been bred so
near the person of my Lady of Avenel; but I trust never more to practise
them, as the Knight hath promised----"

"Be silent, young man," said the Regent, "I am to speak, and you to hear
and obey. It is necessary that, for some space at least, you shall
again enter into the service of a lady, who, in rank, hath no equal in
Scotland; and this service accomplished, I give thee my word as Knight
and Prince, that it shall open to you a course of ambition, such as may
well gratify the aspiring wishes of one whom circumstances entitle
to entertain much higher views than thou. I will take thee into my
household and near to my person, or, at your own choice, I will give you
the command of a foot-company--either is a preferment which the proudest
laird in the land might be glad to ensure for a second son."

"May I presume to ask, my lord," said Roland, observing the Earl paused
for a reply, "to whom my poor services are in the first place destined?"

"You will be told hereafter," said the Regent; and then, as if
overcoming some internal reluctance to speak farther himself, he added,
"or why should I not myself tell you, that you are about to enter into
the service of a most illustrious--most unhappy lady--into the service
of Mary of Scotland."

"Of the Queen, my lord!" said the page, unable to suppress his surprise.

"Of her who was the Queen!" said Murray, with a singular mixture of
displeasure and embarrassment in his tone of voice. "You must be aware,
young man, that her son reigns in her stead."

He sighed from an emotion, partly natural, perhaps, and partly assumed.

"And am I to attend upon her Grace in her place of imprisonment,
my lord?" again demanded the page, with a straightforward and hardy
simplicity, which somewhat disconcerted the sage and powerful statesman.

"She is not imprisoned," answered Murray, angrily; "God forbid she
should--she is only sequestered from state affairs, and from the
business of the public, until the world be so effectually settled, that
she may enjoy her natural and uncontrolled freedom, without her royal
disposition being exposed to the practices of wicked and designing men.
It is for this purpose," he added, "that while she is to be furnished,
as right is, with such attendance as may befit her present secluded
state, it becomes necessary that those placed around her, are persons on
whose prudence I can have reliance. You see, therefore, you are at once
called on to discharge an office most honourable in itself, and so to
discharge it that you may make a friend of the Regent of Scotland. Thou
art, I have been told, a singularly apprehensive youth; and I perceive
by thy look, that thou dost already understand what I would say on this
matter. In this schedule your particular points of duty are set down
at length--but the sum required of you is fidelity--I mean fidelity
to myself and to the state. You are, therefore, to watch every attempt
which is made, or inclination displayed, to open any communication with
any of the lords who have become banders in the west--with Hamilton,
Seyton, with Fleming, or the like. It is true that my gracious sister,
reflecting upon the ill chances that have happened to the state of this
poor kingdom, from evil counsellors who have abused her royal nature in
time past, hath determined to sequestrate herself from state affairs in
future. But it is our duty, as acting for and in the name of our infant
nephew, to guard against the evils which may arise from any mutation or
vacillation in her royal resolutions. Wherefore, it will be thy duty to
watch, and report to our lady mother, whose guest our sister is for the
present, whatever may infer a disposition to withdraw her person from
the place of security in which she is lodged, or to open communication
with those without. If, however, your observation should detect any
thing of weight, and which may exceed mere suspicion, fail not to send
notice by an especial messenger to me directly, and this ring shall be
thy warrant to order horse and men on such service.--And now begone.
If there be half the wit in thy head that there is apprehension in
thy look, thou fully comprehendest all that I would say--Serve me
faithfully, and sure as I am belted earl, thy reward shall be great."

Roland Graeme made an obeisance, and was about to depart.

The Earl signed to him to remain. "I have trusted thee deeply," he said,
"young man, for thou art the only one of her suite who has been sent
to her by my own recommendation. Her gentlewomen are of her own
nomination--it were too hard to have barred her that privilege, though
some there were who reckoned it inconsistent with sure policy. Thou
art young and handsome. Mingle in their follies, and see they cover not
deeper designs under the appearance of female levity--if they do mine,
do thou countermine. For the rest, bear all decorum and respect to the
person of thy mistress--she is a princess, though a most unhappy one,
and hath been a queen! though now, alas! no longer such! Pay, therefore,
to her all honour and respect, consistent with thy fidelity to the King
and me--and now, farewell.--Yet stay--you travel with Lord Lindesay, a
man of the old world, rough and honest, though untaught; see that thou
offend him not, for he is not patient of raillery, and thou, I have
heard, art a crack-halter." This he said with a smile, then added, "I
could have wished the Lord Lindesay's mission had been intrusted to some
other and more gentle noble."

"And wherefore should you wish that, my lord?" said Morton, who even
then entered the apartment; "the council have decided for the best--we
have had but too many proofs of this lady's stubbornness of mind, and
the oak that resists the sharp steel axe, must be riven with the rugged
iron wedge.--And this is to be her page?--My Lord Regent hath doubtless
instructed you, young man, how you shall guide yourself in these
matters; I will add but a little hint on my part. You are going to the
castle of a Douglas, where treachery never thrives--the first moment of
suspicion will be the last of your life. My kinsman, William Douglas,
understands no raillery, and if he once have cause to think you false,
you will waver in the wind from the castle battlements ere the sun set
upon his anger.--And is the lady to have an almoner withal?"

"Occasionally, Douglas," said the Regent; "it were hard to deny the
spiritual consolation which she thinks essential to her salvation."

"You are ever too soft hearted, my lord--What! a false priest to
communicate her lamentations, not only to our unfriends in Scotland, but
to the Guises, to Rome, to Spain, and I know not where!"

"Fear not," said the Regent, "we will take such order that no treachery
shall happen."

"Look to it then." said Morton; "you know my mind respecting the wench
you have consented she shall receive as a waiting-woman--one of a
family, which, of all others, has ever been devoted to her, and inimical
to us. Had we not been wary, she would have been purveyed of a page as
much to her purpose as her waiting-damsel. I hear a rumour that an old
mad Romish pilgrimer, who passes for at least half a saint among them,
was employed to find a fit subject."

"We have escaped that danger at least," said Murray, "and converted it
into a point of advantage, by sending this boy of Glendinning's--and for
her waiting-damsel, you cannot grudge her one poor maiden instead of her
four noble Marys and all their silken train?"

"I care not so much for the waiting-maiden," said Morton, "but I cannot
brook the almoner--I think priests of all persuasions are much like
each other--Here is John Knox, who made such a noble puller-down, is
ambitious of becoming a setter-up, and a founder of schools and colleges
out of the Abbey lands, and bishops' rents, and other spoils of Rome,
which the nobility of Scotland have won with their sword and bow, and
with which he would endow new hives to sing the old drone."

"John is a man of God," said the Regent, "and his scheme is a devout
imagination."

The sedate smile with which this was spoken, left it impossible to
conjecture whether the words were meant in approbation, or in derision,
of the plan of the Scottish Reformer. Turning then to Roland Graeme, as
if he thought he had been long enough a witness of this conversation,
he bade him get him presently to horse, since my Lord of Lindesay was
already mounted. The page made his reverence, and left the apartment.

Guided by Michael Wing-the-wind, he found his horse ready saddled and
prepared for the journey, in front of the palace porch, where hovered
about a score of men-at-arms, whose leader showed no small symptoms of
surly impatience.

"Is this the jackanape page for whom we have waited thus long?" said
he to Wing-the-wind.--"And my Lord Ruthven will reach the castle long
before us."

Michael assented, and added, that the boy had been detained by the
Regent to receive some parting instructions. The leader made an
inarticulate sound in his throat, expressive of sullen acquiescence, and
calling to one of his domestic attendants, "Edward," said he, "take the
gallant into your charge, and let him speak with no one else."

He then addressed, by the title of Sir Robert, an elderly and
respectable-looking gentleman, the only one of the party who seemed
above the rank of a retainer or domestic, and observed, that they must
get to horse with all speed.

During this discourse, and while they were riding slowly along the
street of the suburb, Roland had time to examine more accurately the
looks and figure of the Baron, who was at their head.

Lord Lindesay of the Byres was rather touched than stricken with years.
His upright stature and strong limbs, still showed him fully equal to
all the exertions and fatigues of war. His thick eyebrows, now partially
grizzled, lowered over large eyes full of dark fire, which seemed yet
darker from the uncommon depth at which they were set in his head. His
features, naturally strong and harsh, had their sternness exaggerated
by one or two scars received in battle. These features, naturally
calculated to express the harsher passions, were shaded by an open steel
cap, with a projecting front, but having no visor, over the gorget
of which fell the black and grizzled beard of the grim old Baron, and
totally hid the lower part of his face. The rest of his dress was a
loose buff-coat, which had once been lined with silk and adorned with
embroidery, but which seemed much stained with travel, and damaged with
cuts, received probably in battle. It covered a corslet, which had once
been of polished steel, fairly gilded, but was now somewhat injured with
rust. A sword of antique make and uncommon size, framed to be wielded
with both hands, a kind of weapon which was then beginning to go out
of use, hung from his neck in a baldrick, and was so disposed as
to traverse his whole person, the huge hilt appearing over his left
shoulder, and the point reaching well-nigh to the right heel, and
jarring against his spur as he walked. This unwieldy weapon could only
be unsheathed by pulling the handle over the left shoulder--for no human
arm was long enough to draw it in the usual manner. The whole
equipment was that of a rude warrior, negligent of his exterior even to
misanthropical sullenness; and the short, harsh, haughty tone, which he
used towards his attendants, belonged to the same unpolished character.

The personage who rode with Lord Lindesay, at the head of the party, was
an absolute contrast to him, in manner, form, and features. His thin and
silky hair was already white, though he seemed not above forty-five or
fifty years old. His tone of voice was soft and insinuating--his
form thin, spare, and bent by an habitual stoop--his pale cheek was
expressive of shrewdness and intelligence--his eye was quick though
placid, and his whole demeanour mild and conciliatory. He rode an
ambling nag, such as were used by ladies, clergymen, or others of
peaceful professions--wore a riding habit of black velvet, with a cap
and feather of the same hue, fastened up by a golden medal--and
for show, and as a mark of rank rather than for use, carried a
walking-sword, (as the short light rapiers were called,) without any
other arms, offensive or defensive.

The party had now quitted the town, and proceeded, at a steady trot,
towards the west.--As they prosecuted their journey, Roland Graeme
would gladly have learned something of its purpose and tendency, but
the countenance of the personage next to whom he had been placed in the
train, discouraged all approach to familiarity. The Baron himself did
not look more grim and inaccessible than his feudal retainer, whose
grisly beard fell over his mouth like the portcullis before the gate of
a castle, as if for the purpose of preventing the escape of any word, of
which absolute necessity did not demand the utterance. The rest of the
train seemed under the same taciturn influence, and journeyed on without
a word being exchanged amongst them--more like a troop of Carthusian
friars than a party of military retainers. Roland Graeme was surprised
at this extremity of discipline; for even in the household of the Knight
of Avenel, though somewhat distinguished for the accuracy with which
decorum was enforced, a journey was a period of license, during which
jest and song, and every thing within the limits of becoming mirth and
pastime were freely permitted. This unusual silence was, however, so far
acceptable, that it gave him time to bring any shadow of judgment which
he possessed to council on his own situation and prospects, which would
have appeared to any reasonable person in the highest degree dangerous
and perplexing.

It was quite evident that he had, through various circumstances not
under his own control, formed contradictory connexions with both the
contending factions, by whose strife the kingdom was distracted, without
being properly an adherent of either. It seemed also clear, that the
same situation in the household of the deposed Queen, to which he was
now promoted by the influence of the Regent, had been destined to him by
his enthusiastic grandmother, Magdalen Graeme; for on this subject, the
words which Morton had dropped had been a ray of light; yet it was no
less clear that these two persons, the one the declared enemy, the other
the enthusiastic votary, of the Catholic religion,--the one at the head
of the King's new government, the other, who regarded that government
as a criminal usurpation--must have required and expected very different
services from the individual whom they had thus united in recommending.
It required very little reflection to foresee that these contradictory
claims on his services might speedily place him in a situation where his
honour as well as his life might be endangered. But it was not in Roland
Graeme's nature to anticipate evil before it came, or to prepare to
combat difficulties before they arrived. "I will see this beautiful and
unfortunate Mary Stewart," said he, "of whom we have heard so much, and
then there will be time enough to determine whether I will be kingsman
or queensman. None of them can say I have given word or promise to
either of their factions; for they have led me up and down like a blind
Billy, without giving me any light into what I was to do. But it was
lucky that grim Douglas came into the Regent's closet this morning,
otherwise I had never got free of him without plighting my troth to do
all the Earl would have me, which seemed, after all, but foul play to
the poor imprisoned lady, to place her page as an espial on her."

Skipping thus lightly over a matter of such consequence, the thoughts of
the hare-brained boy went a wool-gathering after more agreeable
topics. Now he admired the Gothic towers of Barnbougle, rising from the
seabeaten rock, and overlooking one of the most glorious landscapes in
Scotland--and now he began to consider what notable sport for the hounds
and the hawks must be afforded by the variegated ground over which they
travelled--and now he compared the steady and dull trot at which they
were then prosecuting their journey, with the delight of sweeping
over hill and dale in pursuit of his favourite sports. As, under the
influence of these joyous recollections, he gave his horse the spur,
and made him execute a gambade, he instantly incurred the censure of his
grave neighbour, who hinted to him to keep the pace, and move quietly
and in order, unless he wished such notice to be taken of his eccentric
movements as was likely to be very displeasing to him.

The rebuke and the restraint under which the youth now found
himself, brought back to his recollection his late good-humoured and
accommodating associate and guide, Adam Woodcock; and from that topic
his imagination made a short flight to Avenel Castle, to the quiet
and unconfined life of its inhabitants, the goodness of his early
protectress, not forgetting the denizens of its stables, kennels, and
hawk-mews. In a brief space, all these subjects of meditation gave way
to the resemblance of that riddle of womankind, Catherine Seyton, who
appeared before the eye of his mind--now in her female form, now in
her male attire--now in both at once--like some strange dream, which
presents to us the same individual under two different characters at
the same instant. Her mysterious present also recurred to his
recollection--the sword which he now wore at his side, and which he was
not to draw save by command of his legitimate Sovereign! But the key of
this mystery he judged he was likely to find in the issue of his present
journey.

With such thoughts passing through his mind, Roland Graeme accompanied
the party of Lord Lindesay to the Queen's-Ferry, which they passed in
vessels that lay in readiness for them. They encountered no adventure
whatever in their passage, excepting one horse being lamed in getting
into the boat, an accident very common on such occasions, until a
few years ago, when the ferry was completely regulated. What was more
peculiarly characteristic of the olden age, was the discharge of a
culverin at the party from the battlements of the old castle of Rosythe,
on the north side of the Ferry, the lord of which happened to have some
public or private quarrel with the Lord Lindesay, and took this mode
of expressing his resentment. The insult, however, as it was harmless,
remained unnoticed and unavenged, nor did any thing else occur worth
notice until the band had come where Lochleven spread its magnificent
sheet of waters to the beams of a bright summer's sun.

The ancient castle, which occupies an island nearly in the centre of
the lake, recalled to the page that of Avenel, in which he had been
nurtured. But the lake was much larger, and adorned with several islets
besides that on which the fortress was situated; and instead of being
embosomed in hills like that of Avenel, had upon the southern side only
a splendid mountainous screen, being the descent of one of the Lomond
hills, and on the other was surrounded by the extensive and fertile
plain of Kinross. Roland Graeme looked with some degree of dismay on the
water-girdled fortress, which then, as now, consisted only of one
large donjon-keep, surrounded with a court-yard, with two round
flanking-towers at the angles, which contained within its circuit some
other buildings of inferior importance. A few old trees, clustered
together near the castle, gave some relief to the air of desolate
seclusion; but yet the page, while he gazed upon a building so
sequestrated, could not but feel for the situation of a captive Princess
doomed to dwell there, as well as for his own. "I must have been born,"
he thought, "under the star that presides over ladies and lakes of
water, for I cannot by any means escape from the service of the one, or
from dwelling in the other. But if they allow me not the fair freedom
of my sport and exercise, they shall find it as hard to confine a
wild-drake, as a youth who can swim like one."

The band had now reached the edge of the water, and one of the party
advancing displayed Lord Lindesay's pennon, waving it repeatedly to and
fro, while that Baron himself blew a clamorous blast on his bugle. A
banner was presently displayed from the roof of the castle in reply to
these signals, and one or two figures were seen busied as if unmooring a
boat which lay close to the islet.

"It will be some time ere they can reach us with the boat," said the
companion of Lord Lindesay; "should we not do well to proceed to
the town, and array ourselves in some better order, ere we appear
before----"

"You may do as you list, Sir Robert," replied Lindesay, "I have neither
time nor temper to waste on such vanities. She has cost me many a hard
ride, and must not now take offence at the threadbare cloak and soiled
doublet that I am arrayed in. It is the livery to which she has brought
all Scotland."

"Do not speak so harshly," said Sir Robert; "if she hath done wrong,
she hath dearly abied it; and in losing all real power, one would not
deprive her of the little external homage due at once to a lady and a
princess."

"I say to you once more, Sir Robert Melville," replied Lindesay, "do as
you will--for me, I am now too old to dink myself as a gallant to grace
the bower of dames."

"The bower of dames, my lord!" said Melville, looking at the rude old
tower--"is it yon dark and grated castle, the prison of a captive Queen,
to which you give so gay a name?"

"Name it as you list," replied Lindesay; "had the Regent desired to send
an envoy capable to speak to a captive Queen, there are many gallants
in his court who would have courted the occasion to make speeches out of
Amadis of Gaul, or the Mirror of Knighthood. But when he sent blunt old
Lindesay, he knew he would speak to a misguided woman, as her former
misdoings and her present state render necessary. I sought not this
employment--it has been thrust upon me; and I will not cumber myself
with more form in the discharge of it, than needs must be tacked to such
an occupation."

So saying, Lord Lindesay threw himself from horseback, and wrapping
his riding-cloak around him, lay down at lazy length upon the sward, to
await the arrival of the boat, which was now seen rowing from the castle
towards the shore. Sir Robert Melville, who had also dismounted, walked
at short turns to and fro upon the bank, his arms crossed on his breast,
often looking to the castle, and displaying in his countenance a mixture
of sorrow and of anxiety. The rest of the party sate like statues on
horseback, without moving so much as the points of their lances, which
they held upright in the air.

As soon as the boat approached a rude quay or landing-place, near to
which they had stationed themselves, Lord Lindesay started up from his
recumbent posture, and asked the person who steered, why he had not
brought a larger boat with him to transport his retinue.

"So please you," replied the boatman, "because it is the order of our
lady, that we bring not to the castle more than four persons."

"Thy lady is a wise woman," said Lindesay, "to suspect me of
treachery!--Or, had I intended it, what was to hinder us from throwing
you and your comrades into the lake, and filling the boat with my own
fellows?"

The steersman, on hearing this, made a hasty signal to his men to back
their oars, and hold off from the shore which they were approaching.

"Why, thou ass," said Lindesay, "thou didst not think that I meant
thy fool's head serious harm? Hark thee, friend--with fewer than three
servants I will go no whither--Sir Robert Melville will require at least
the attendance of one domestic; and it will be at your peril and your
lady's to refuse us admission, come hither as we are, on matters of
great national concern."

The steersman answered with firmness, but with great civility of
expression, that his orders were positive to bring no more than four
into the island, but he offered to row back to obtain a revisal of his
orders.

"Do so, my friend," said Sir Robert Melville, after he had in vain
endeavoured to persuade his stubborn companion to consent to a temporary
abatement of his train, "row back to the castle, sith it will be no
better, and obtain thy lady's orders to transport the Lord Lindesay,
myself, and our retinue hither."

"And hearken," said Lord Lindesay, "take with you this page, who comes
as an attendant on your lady's guest.--Dismount, sirrah," said he,
addressing Roland, "and embark with them in that boat."

"And what is to become of my horse?" said Graeme; "I am answerable for
him to my master."

"I will relieve you of the charge," said Lindesay; "thou wilt have
little enough to do with horse, saddle, or bridle, for ten years to
come--Thou mayst take the halter an thou wilt--it may stand thee in a
turn."

"If I thought so," said Roland--but he was interrupted by Sir Robert
Melville, who said to him good-humouredly, "Dispute it not, young
friend--resistance can do no good, but may well run thee into danger."

Roland Graeme felt the justice of what he said, and, though neither
delighted with the matter or manner of Lindesay's address, deemed it
best to submit to necessity, and to embark without farther remonstrance.
The men plied their oars. The quay, with the party of horse stationed
near it, receded from the page's eyes--the castle and the islet seemed
to draw near in the same proportion, and in a brief space he landed
under the shadow of a huge old tree which overhung the landing place.
The steersman and Graeme leaped ashore; the boatmen remained lying on
their oars ready for farther service.




Chapter the Twenty-First.


  Could valour aught avail or people's love,
    France had not wept Navarre's brave Henry slain;
  If wit or beauty could compassion move,
    The rose of Scotland had not wept in vain.
           _Elegy in a Royal Mausoleum._ LEWIS.

At the gate of the court-yard of Lochleven appeared the stately form of
the Lady Lochleven, a female whose early charms had captivated James V.,
by whom she became mother of the celebrated Regent Murray. As she was of
noble birth (being a daughter of the house of Mar) and of great beauty,
her intimacy with James did not prevent her being afterwards sought in
honourable marriage by many gallants of the time, among whom she had
preferred Sir William Douglas of Lochleven. But well has it been said

  ----"Our pleasant vices
  Are made the whips to scourge us"---

The station which the Lady of Lochleven now held as the wife of a man
of high rank and interest, and the mother of a lawful family, did not
prevent her nourishing a painful sense of degradation, even while she
was proud of the talents, the power, and the station of her son, now
prime ruler of the state, but still a pledge of her illicit intercourse.
"Had James done to her," she said, in her secret heart, "the justice he
owed her, she had seen in her son, as a source of unmixed delight and of
unchastened pride, the lawful monarch of Scotland, and one of the
ablest who ever swayed the sceptre." The House of Mar, not inferior in
antiquity or grandeur to that of Drummond, would then have also boasted
a Queen among its daughters, and escaped the stain attached to female
frailty, even when it has a royal lover for its apology. While such
feelings preyed on a bosom naturally proud and severe, they had a
corresponding effect on her countenance, where, with the remains of
great beauty, were mingled traits of inward discontent and peevish
melancholy. It perhaps contributed to increase this habitual
temperament, that the Lady Lochleven had adopted uncommonly rigid and
severe views of religion, imitating in her ideas of reformed faith
the very worst errors of the Catholics, in limiting the benefit of the
gospel to those who profess their own speculative tenets.

In every respect, the unfortunate Queen Mary, now the compulsory guest,
or rather prisoner, of this sullen lady, was obnoxious to her hostess.
Lady Lochleven disliked her as the daughter of Mary of Guise, the legal
possessor of those rights over James's heart and hand, of which she
conceived herself to have been injuriously deprived; and yet more so as
the professor of a religion which she detested worse than Paganism.

Such was the dame, who, with stately mien, and sharp yet handsome
features, shrouded by her black velvet coif, interrogated the domestic
who steered her barge to the shore, what had become of Lindesay and
Sir Robert Melville. The man related what had passed, and she smiled
scornfully as she replied, "Fools must be flattered, not foughten
with.--Row back--make thy excuse as thou canst--say Lord Ruthven
hath already reached this castle, and that he is impatient for Lord
Lindesay's presence. Away with thee, Randal--yet stay--what galopin is
that thou hast brought hither?"

"So please you, my lady, he is the page who is to wait upon----"

"Ay, the new male minion," said the Lady Lochleven; "the female
attendant arrived yesterday. I shall have a well-ordered house with this
lady and her retinue; but I trust they will soon find some others to
undertake such a charge. Begone, Randal--and you" (to Roland Graeme)
"follow me to the garden."

She led the way with a slow and stately step to the small garden, which,
enclosed by a stone wall ornamented with statues, and an artificial
fountain in the centre, extended its dull parterres on the side of
the court-yard, with which it communicated by a low and arched portal.
Within the narrow circuit of its formal and limited walks, Mary Stewart
was now learning to perform the weary part of a prisoner, which, with
little interval, she was doomed to sustain during the remainder of her
life. She was followed in her slow and melancholy exercise by two female
attendants; but in the first glance which Roland Graeme bestowed
upon one so illustrious by birth, so distinguished by her beauty,
accomplishments, and misfortunes, he was sensible of the presence of no
other than the unhappy Queen of Scotland.

Her face, her form, have been so deeply impressed upon the imagination,
that even at the distance of nearly three centuries, it is unnecessary
to remind the most ignorant and uninformed reader of the striking traits
which characterize that remarkable countenance, which seems at once
to combine our ideas of the majestic, the pleasing, and the brilliant,
leaving us to doubt whether they express most happily the queen, the
beauty, or the accomplished woman. Who is there, that, at the very
mention of Mary Stewart's name, has not her countenance before him,
familiar as that of the mistress of his youth, or the favourite daughter
of his advanced age? Even those who feel themselves compelled to believe
all, or much, of what her enemies laid to her charge, cannot think
without a sigh upon a countenance expressive of anything rather than
the foul crimes with which she was charged when living, and which still
continue to shade, if not to blacken, her memory. That brow, so truly
open and regal--those eyebrows, so regularly graceful, which yet were
saved from the charge of regular insipidity by the beautiful effect of
the hazel eyes which they overarched, and which seem to utter a thousand
histories--the nose, with all its Grecian precision of outline--the
mouth, so well proportioned, so sweetly formed, as if designed to speak
nothing but what was delightful to hear--the dimpled chin--the stately
swan-like neck, form a countenance, the like of which we know not to
have existed in any other character moving in that class of life,
where the actresses as well as the actors command general and undivided
attention. It is in vain to say that the portraits which exist of this
remarkable woman are not like each other; for, amidst their discrepancy,
each possesses general features which the eye at once acknowledges as
peculiar to the vision which our imagination has raised while we read
her history for the first time, and which has been impressed upon it by
the numerous prints and pictures which we have seen. Indeed we cannot
look on the worst of them, however deficient in point of execution,
without saying that it is meant for Queen Mary; and no small instance
it is of the power of beauty, that her charms should have remained the
subject not merely of admiration, but of warm and chivalrous interest,
after the lapse of such a length of time. We know that by far the most
acute of those who, in latter days, have adopted the unfavourable view
of Mary's character, longed, like the executioner before his dreadful
task was performed, to kiss the fair hand of her on whom he was about to
perform so horrible a duty.

Dressed, then, in a deep mourning robe, and with all those charms of
face, shape, and manner, with which faithful tradition has made each
reader familiar, Mary Stewart advanced to meet the Lady of Lochleven,
who, on her part, endeavoured to conceal dislike and apprehension under
the appearance of respectful indifference. The truth was, that she
had experienced repeatedly the Queen's superiority in that species of
disguised yet cutting sarcasm, with which women can successfully avenge
themselves, for real and substantial injuries. It may be well doubted,
whether this talent was not as fatal to its possessor as the many others
enjoyed by that highly gifted, but most unhappy female; for, while it
often afforded her a momentary triumph over her keepers, it failed not
to exasperate their resentment; and the satire and sarcasm in which she
had indulged were frequently retaliated by the deep and bitter hardships
which they had the power of inflicting. It is well known that her death
was at length hastened by a letter which she wrote to Queen Elizabeth,
in which she treated her jealous rival, and the Countess of Shrewsbury,
with the keenest irony and ridicule.

As the ladies met together, the Queen said, bending her head at the same
time, in return to the obeisance of the Lady Lochleven, "We are this
day fortunate--we enjoy the company of our amiable hostess at an unusual
hour, and during a period which we have hitherto been permitted to give
to our private exercise. But our good hostess knows well she has at all
times access to our presence, and need not observe the useless ceremony
of requiring our permission."

"I am sorry my presence is deemed an intrusion by your Grace," said the
Lady of Lochleven. "I came but to announce the arrival of an addition
to your train," motioning with her hand towards Roland Graeme; "a
circumstance to which ladies are seldom indifferent."

"Oh! I crave your ladyship's pardon; and am bent to the earth with
obligations for the kindness of my nobles--or my sovereigns, shall I
call them?--who have permitted me such a respectable addition to my
personal retinue."

"They have indeed studied, Madam," said the Lady of Lochleven, "to show
their kindness towards your Grace--something at the risk perhaps of
sound policy, and I trust their doings will not be misconstrued."

