one who holds his life at no rate. Thine anger can but slay; nor do I
think thy power extendeth, or thy will stretcheth, so far. The terrors
which your race produce upon others, are vain against me. My heart is
hardened against fear, as by a sense of despair. If I am, as thy words
infer, of a race more peculiarly the care of Heaven than thine, it is
mine to call, it must be thine to answer. I am the nobler being."

As he spoke, the figure looked upon him with a fierce and ireful
countenance, which, without losing the similitude of that which it
usually exhibited, had a wilder and more exaggerated cast of features.
The eyes seemed to contract and become more fiery, and slight
convulsions passed over the face, as if it was about to be transformed
into something hideous. The whole appearance resembled those faces which
the imagination summons up when it is disturbed by laudanum, but which
do not remain under the visionary's command, and, beautiful in their
first appearance, become wild and grotesque ere we can arrest them.

But when Halbert had concluded his bold speech, the White Lady stood
before him with the same pale, fixed, and melancholy aspect, which she
usually bore. He had expected the agitation which she exhibited would
conclude in some frightful metamorphosis. Folding her arms on her bosom,
the phantom replied,--

  "Daring youth! for thee it is well,
  Here calling me in haunted dell,
  That thy heart has not quail'd,
       Nor thy courage fail'd,
       And that thou couldst brook
  The angry look
       Of Her of Avenel.

  Did one limb shiver,
       Or an eyelid quiver,
  Thou wert lost for ever.
  Though I am form'd from the ether blue,
  And my blood is of the unfallen dew.
       And thou art framed of mud and dust,
  'Tis thine to speak, reply I must."

"I demand of thee, then," said the youth, "by what charm it is that I
am thus altered in mind and in wishes--that I think no longer of deer
or dog, of bow or bolt--that my soul spurns the bounds of this obscure
glen--that my blood boils at an insult from one by whose stirrup I
would some days since have run for a whole summer's morn, contented and
honoured by the notice of a single word? Why do I now seek to mate
me with princes, and knights, and nobles?--Am I the same, who but
yesterday, as it were, slumbered in contented obscurity, but who am
to-day awakened to glory and ambition?--Speak--tell me, if thou canst,
the meaning of this change?--Am I spell-bound?--or have I till now been
under the influence of a spell, that I feel as another being, yet
am conscious of remaining the same? Speak and tell me, is it to thy
influence that the change is owing?"

The White Lady replied,--

  "A mightier wizard far than I
    Wields o'er the universe his power;
  Him owns the eagle in the sky,
    The turtle in the bower.
  Chanceful in shape, yet mightiest still,
  He wields the heart of man at will,
  From ill to good, from good, to ill,
  In cot and castle-tower."

"Speak not thus darkly," said the youth, colouring so deeply, that
face, neck, and hands were in a sanguine glow; "make me sensible of thy
purpose."

The spirit answered,--

  "Ask thy heart,--whose secret cell
  Is fill'd with Marv Avenel!
  Ask thy pride,--why scornful look
  In Mary's view it will not brook?
  Ask it, why thou seek'st to rise
  Among the mighty and the wise?--
  Why thou spurn'st thy lowly lot?--
  Why thy pastimes are forgot?
  Why thou wouldst in bloody strife
  Mend thy luck or lose thy life?
  Ask thy heart, and it shall tell,
  Sighing from its secret cell,
  'Tis for Mary Avenel."

"Tell me, then," said Halbert, his cheek still deeply crimsoned, "thou
who hast said to me that which I dared not say to myself, by what means
shall I urge my passion--by what means make it known?"

The White Lady replied,--

  "Do not ask me;
  On doubts like these thou canst not task me.
  We only see the passing show
  Of human passions' ebb and flow;
  And view the pageant's idle glance
  As mortals eye the northern dance,
  When thousand streamers, flashing bright,
  Career it o'er the brow of night.
  And gazers mark their changeful gleams,
  But feel no influence from their beams."

"Yet thine own fate," replied Halbert, "unless men greatly err, is
linked with that of mortals?"

The phantom answered,

  "By ties mysterious link'd, our fated race
  Holds strange connexion with the sons of men.
  The star that rose upon the House of Avenel,
  When Norman Ulric first assumed the name,
  That star, when culminating in its orbit,
  Shot from its sphere a drop of diamond dew,
  And this bright font received it--and a Spirit
  Rose from the fountain, and her date of life
  Hath co-existence with the House of Avenel,
  And with the star that rules it."

"Speak yet more plainly," answered young Glendinning; "of this I
can understand nothing. Say, what hath forged thy wierded [Footnote:
_Wierded_--fated.] link of destiny with the House of Avenel? Say,
especially, what fate now overhangs that house?"

The White Lady replied,--

  "Look on my girdle--on this thread of gold--
  'Tis fine as web of lightest gossamer.
  And, but there is a spell on't, would not bind,
  Light as they are, the folds of my thin robe.
  But when 'twas donn'd, it was a massive chain,
  Such as might bind the champion of the Jews,

  Even when his looks were longest--it hath dwindled,
  Hath minish'd in its substance and its strength,
  As sunk the greatness of the House of Avenel.
  When this frail thread gives way. I to the elements
  Resign the principles of life they lent me.
  Ask me no more of this!--the stars forbid it."

"Then canst thou read the stars," answered the youth; "and mayest tell
me the fate of my passion, if thou canst not aid it?"

The White Lady again replied,--

  "Dim burns the once bright star of Avenel,
  Dim as the beacon when the morn is nigh,
  And the o'er-wearied warder leaves the light-house;
  There is an influence sorrowful and fearful.
  That dogs its downward course. Disastrous passion,
  Fierce hate and rivalry, are in the aspect
  That lowers upon its fortunes."

"And rivalry?" repeated Glendinning; "it is, then, as I feared!--But
shall that English silkworm presume to beard me in my father's house,
and in the presence of Mary Avenel?--Give me to meet him, spirit--give
me to do away the vain distinction of rank on which he refuses me the
combat. Place us on equal terms, and gleam the stars with what aspect
they will, the sword of my father shall control their influences."

She answered as promptly as before,--

  "Complain not of me, child of clay,
  If to thy harm I yield the way.
  We, who soar thy sphere above,
  Know not aught of hate or love;
  As will or wisdom rules thy mood,
  My gifts to evil turn, or good."

"Give me to redeem my honour," said Halbert Glendinning--"give me to
retort on my proud rival the insults he has thrown on me, and let the
rest fare as it will. If I cannot revenge my wrong, I shall sleep quiet,
and know nought of my disgrace."

The phantom failed not to reply,--

  "When Piercie Shafton boasteth high,
  Let this token meet his eye.
  The sun is westering from the dell,
  Thy wish is granted--fare thee well!"

As the White Lady spoke or chanted these last words, she undid from her
locks a silver bodkin around which they were twisted, and gave it to
Halbert Glendinning; then shaking her dishevelled hair till it fell like
a veil around her, the outlines of her form gradually became as diffuse
as her flowing tresses, her countenance grew pale as the moon in her
first quarter, her features became indistinguishable, and she melted
into the air.

Habit inures us to wonders; but the youth did not find himself alone
by the fountain without experiencing, though in a much less degree,
the revulsion of spirits which he had felt upon the phantom's former
disappearance. A doubt strongly pressed upon his mind, whether it
were safe to avail himself of the gifts of a spirit which did not even
pretend to belong to the class of angels, and might, for aught he knew,
have a much worse lineage than that which she was pleased to avow. "I
will speak of it," he said, "to Edward, who is clerkly learned, and will
tell me what I should do. And yet, no--Edward is scrupulous and wary.--I
will prove the effect of her gift on Sir Piercie Shafton, if he again
braves me, and by the issue, I will be myself a sufficient judge whether
there is danger in resorting to her counsel. Home, then, home--and we
shall soon learn whether that home shall longer hold me; for not again
will I brook insult, with my father's sword by my side, and Mary for the
spectator of my disgrace."




Chapter the Eighteenth.


  I give thee eighteenpence a-day,
    And my bow shall thou bear,
  And over all the north country,
    I make thee the chief rydere.
  And I thirteenpence a-day, quoth the queen,
    By God and by my faye,
  Come fetch thy payment when thou wilt,
    No man shall say thee nay.
              WILLIAM OF CLOUDESLEY.

The manners of the age did not permit the inhabitants of Glendearg to
partake of the collation which was placed in the spence of that ancient
tower, before the Lord Abbot and his attendants, and Sir Piercie
Shafton. Dame Glendinning was excluded, both by inferiority of rank and
by sex, for (though it was a rule often neglected) the Superior of Saint
Mary's was debarred from taking his meals in female society. To Mary
Avenel the latter, and to Edward Glendinning the former, incapacity
attached; but it pleased his lordship to require their presence in
the apartment, and to say sundry kind words to them upon the ready and
hospitable reception which they had afforded him.

The smoking haunch now stood upon the table; a napkin, white as snow,
was, with due reverence, tucked under the chin of the Abbot by the
Refectioner; and nought was wanting to commence the repast, save the
presence of Sir Piercie Shafton, who at length appeared, glittering
like the sun, in a carnation-velvet doublet, slashed and puffed out with
cloth of silver, his hat of the newest block, surrounded by a hatband
of goldsmith's work, while around his neck he wore a collar of gold, set
with rubies and topazes so rich, that it vindicated his anxiety for the
safety of his baggage from being founded upon his love of mere finery.
This gorgeous collar or chain, resembling those worn by the knights of
the highest orders of chivalry, fell down on his breast, and terminated
in a medallion.

"We waited for Sir Piercie Shafton," said the Abbot, hastily assuming
his place in the great chair which the Kitchener advanced to the table
with ready hand.

"I pray your pardon, reverend father, and my good lord," replied that
pink of courtesy; "I did but wait to cast my riding slough, and
to transmew myself into some civil form meeter for this worshipful
company."

"I cannot but praise your gallantry, Sir Knight," said the Abbot,
"and your prudence, also, for choosing the fitting time to appear thus
adorned. Certes, had that goodly chain been visible in some part of your
late progress, there was risk that the lawful owner might have parted
company therewith."

"This chain, said your reverence?" answered Sir Piercie; "surely it is
but a toy, a trifle, a slight thing which shows but poorly with this
doublet--marry, when I wear that of the murrey-coloured double-piled
Genoa velvet, puffed out with ciprus, the gems, being relieved and set
off by the darker and more grave ground of the stuff, show like stars
giving a lustre through dark clouds."

"I nothing doubt it," said the Abbot, "but I pray you to sit down at the
board."

But Sir Piercie had now got into his element, and was not easily
interrupted--"I own," he continued, "that slight as the toy is, it might
perchance have had some captivation for Julian--Santa Maria!" said
he, interrupting himself; "what was I about to say, and my fair and
beauteous Protection, or shall I rather term her my Discretion, here
in presence!--Indiscreet hath it been in your Affability, O most lovely
Discretion, to suffer a stray word to have broke out of the penfold of
his mouth, that might overleap the fence of civility, and trespass on
the manor of decorum."

"Marry!" said the Abbot, somewhat impatiently, "the greatest discretion
that I can see in the matter is, to eat our victuals being hot--Father
Eustace, say the Benedicite, and cut up the haunch."

The Sub-Prior readily obeyed the first part of the Abbot's injunction,
but paused upon the second--"It is Friday, most reverend," he said in
Latin, desirous that the hint should escape, if possible, the ears of
the stranger.

"We are travellers," said the Abbot, in reply, "and _viatoribus licitum
est_--You know the canon--a traveller must eat what food his hard fate
sets before him. I grant you all a dispensation to eat flesh this day,
conditionally that you, brethren, say the Confiteor at curfew time, that
the knight give alms to his ability, and that all and each of you
fast from flesh on such day within the next month that shall seem
most convenient;--wherefore fall to and eat your food with cheerful
countenances, and you, Father Refectioner, _da mixtus_."

While the Abbot was thus stating the conditions on which his indulgence
was granted, he had already half finished a slice of the noble haunch,
and now washed it down with a flagon of Rhenish, modestly tempered with
water.

"Well is it said," he observed, as he required from the Refectioner
another slice, "that virtue is its own reward; for though this is but
humble fare, and hastily prepared, and eaten in a poor chamber, I do not
remember me of having had such an appetite since I was a simple brother
in the Abbey of Dundrennan, and was wont to labour in the garden from
morning until nones, when our Abbot struck the _Cymbalum_. Then would I
enter keen with hunger, parched with thirst, (_da mihi vinum quaeso, et
merum sit_,) and partake with appetite of whatever was set before us,
according to our rule; feast or fast day, _caritas_ or _penitentia_, was
the same to me. I had no stomach complaints then, which now crave both
the aid of wine and choice cookery, to render my food acceptable to my
palate, and easy of digestion."

"It may be, holy father," said the Sub-Prior, "an occasional ride to the
extremity of Saint Mary's patrimony, may have the same happy effect on
your health as the air of the garden at Dundrennan."

"Perchance, with our patroness's blessing, such progresses may advantage
us," said the Abbot; "having an especial eye that our venison is
carefully killed by some woodsman that is master of his craft."

"If the Lord Abbot will permit me," said the Kitchener, "I think the
best way to assure his lordship on that important point, would be to
retain as a yeoman-pricker, or deputy-ranger, the eldest son of this
good woman, Dame Glendinning, who is here to wait upon us. I should
know by mine office what belongs to killing of game, and I can safely
pronounce, that never saw I, or any other _coquinarius_, a bolt so
justly shot. It has cloven the very heart of the buck."

"What speak you to us of one good shot, father?" said Sir Piercie;
"I would advise you that such no more maketh a shooter, than doth one
swallow make a summer--I have seen this springald of whom you speak, and
if his hand can send forth his shafts as boldly as his tongue doth utter
presumptuous speeches, I will own him as good an archer as Robin Hood."

"Marry," said the Abbot, "and it is fitting we know the truth of this
matter from the dame herself; for ill advised were we to give way to
any rashness in this matter, whereby the bounties which Heaven and our
patroness provide might be unskilfully mangled, and rendered unfit for
worthy men's use.--Stand forth, therefore, dame Glendinning, and tell to
us, as thy liege lord and spiritual Superior, using plainness and truth,
without either fear or favour, as being a matter wherein we are deeply
interested, Doth this son of thine use his bow as well as the Father
Kitchener avers to us?"

"So please your noble fatherhood," answered Dame Glendinning with a
deep curtsy, "I should know somewhat of archery to my cost, seeing my
husband--God assoilzie him!--was slain in the field of Pinkie with an
arrow-shot, while he was fighting under the Kirk's banner, as became
a liege vassal of the Halidome. He was a valiant man, please your
reverence, and an honest; and saving that he loved a bit of venison, and
shifted for his living at a time as Border-men will sometimes do, I wot
not of sin that he did. And yet, though I have paid for mass after mass
to the matter of a forty shilling, besides a quarter of wheat and four
firlocks of rye, I can have no assurance yet that he has been delivered
from purgatory."

"Dame," said the Lord Abbot, "this shall be looked into heedfully; and
since thy husband fell, as thou sayest, in the Kirk's quarrel, and
under her banner, rely upon it that we will have him out of purgatory
forthwith--that is, always provided he be there.--But it is not of
thy husband whom we now devise to speak, but of thy son; not of a shot
Scotsman, but of a shot deer--Wherefore, I say, answer me to the point,
is thy son a practised archer, ay or no?"

"Alack! my reverend lord," replied the widow, "and my croft would
be better tilled, if I could answer your reverence that he is
not.--Practised archer!--marry, holy sir, I would he would practise
something else--cross-bow and long-bow, hand-gun and hack-but, falconet
and saker, he can shoot with them all. And if it would please this right
honourable gentleman, our guest, to hold out his hat at the distance of
a hundred yards, our Halbert shall send shaft, bolt, or bullet through
it, (so that right honourable gentleman swerve not, but hold out
steady,) and I will forfeit a quarter of barley if he touch but a knot
of his ribands. I have seen our old Martin do as much, and so has our
right reverend the Sub-Prior, if he be pleased to remember it."

"I am not like to forget it, dame," said Father Eustace; "for I knew
not which most to admire, the composure of the young marksman, or the
steadiness of the old mark. Yet I presume not to advise Sir Piercie
Shafton to subject his valuable beaver, and yet more valuable person, to
such a risk, unless it should be his own special pleasure."

"Be assured it is not," said Sir Piercie Shafton, something hastily;
"be well assured, holy father, that it is not. I dispute not the lad's
qualities, for which your reverence vouches. But bows are but wood,
strings are but flax, or the silk-worm excrement at best; archers are
but men, fingers may slip, eyes may dazzle, the blindest may hit the
butt, the best marker may shoot a bow's length beside. Therefore will we
try no perilous experiments."

"Be that as you will, Sir Piercie," said the Abbot; "meantime we will
name this youth bow-bearer in the forest granted to us by good King
David, that the chase might recreate our wearied spirits, the flesh of
the dear improve our poor commons, and the hides cover the books of our
library; thus tending at once to the sustenance of body and soul."

"Kneel down, woman, kneel down," said the Refectioner and the Kitchener,
with one voice, to Dame Glendinning, "and kiss his lordship's hand, for
the grace which he has granted to thy son."

They then, as if they had been chanting the service and the responses,
set off in a sort of duetto, enumerating the advantages of the
situation.

"A green gown and a pair of leathern galligaskins every Pentecost," said
the Kitchener.

"Four marks by the year at Candlemas," answered the Refectioner.

"A hogshead of ale at Martlemas, of the double strike, and single ale at
pleasure, as he shall agree with the Cellarer--"

"Who is a reasonable man," said the Abbot, "and will encourage an active
servant of the convent."

"A mess of broth and a dole of mutton or beef, at the Kitchener's, on
each high holiday," resumed the Kitchener.

"The gang of two cows and a palfrey on our Lady's meadow." answered his
brother officer.

"An ox-hide to make buskins of yearly, because of the brambles," echoed
the Kitchener.

"And various other perquisites, _quae nunc praescribere longum_," said
the Abbot, summing, with his own lordly voice, the advantages attached
to the office of conventional bow-bearer.

Dame Glendinning was all this while on her knees, her head mechanically
turning from the one church officer to the other, which, as they stood
one on each side of her, had much the appearance of a figure moved by
clock-work, and so soon as they were silent, most devotedly did she
kiss the munificent hand of the Abbot. Conscious, however, of Halbert's
intractability in some points, she could not help qualifying her
grateful and reiterated thanks for the Abbot's bountiful proffer, with a
hope that Halbert would see his wisdom, and accept of it.

"How," said the Abbot, bending his brows, "accept of it?--Woman, is thy
son in his right wits?"

Elspeth, stunned by the tone in which this question was asked, was
altogether unable to reply to it. Indeed, any answer she might have made
could hardly have been heard, as it pleased the two office-bearers of
the Abbot's table again to recommence their alternate dialogue.

"Refuse!" said the Kitchener.

"Refuse!" answered the Refectioner, echoing the other's word in a tone
of still louder astonishment.

"Refuse four marks by the year!" said the one.

"Ale and beer--broth and mutton--cow's grass and palfrey's!" shouted the
Kitchener.

"Gown and galligaskins!" responded the Refectioner.

"A moment's patience, my brethren," answered the Sub-Prior, "and let us
not be thus astonished before cause is afforded of our amazement. This
good dame best knoweth the temper and spirit of her son--this much I can
say, that it lieth not towards letters or learning, of which I have in
vain endeavoured to instil into him some tincture. Nevertheless, he is
a youth of no common spirit, but much like those (in my weak judgment)
whom God raises up among a people when he meaneth that their deliverance
shall be wrought out with strength of hand and valour of heart. Such
men we have seen marked with a waywardness, and even an obstinacy of
character, which hath appeared intractability and stupidity to those
among whom they walked and were conversant, until the very opportunity
hath arrived in, which it was the will of Providence that they should be
the fitting instrument of great things."

"Now, in good time hast thou spoken, Father Eustace," said the Abbot;
"and we will see this swankie before we decide upon the means of
employing him.--How say you, Sir Piercie Shafton, is it not the court
fashion to suit the man to the office, and not the office to the man?"

"So please your reverence and lordship," answered the Northumbrian
knight, "I do partly, that is, in some sort, subscribe to what your
wisdom hath delivered--Nevertheless, under reverence of the Sub-Prior,
we do not look for gallant leaders and national deliverers in the hovels
of the mean common people. Credit me, that if there be some flashes of
martial spirit about this young person, which I am not called upon to
dispute, (though I have seldom seen that presumption and arrogance were
made good upon the upshot by deed and action,) yet still these will
prove insufficient to distinguish him, save in his own limited and lowly
sphere--even as the glowworm, which makes a goodly show among the grass
of the field, would be of little avail if deposited in a beacon-grate."

"Now, in good time," said the Sub-Prior, "and here comes the young
huntsman to speak for himself;" for, being placed opposite to the
window, he could observe Halbert as he ascended the little mound on
which the tower was situated.

"Summon him to our presence," said the Lord Abbot; and with an obedient
start the two attendant monks went off with emulous alertness. Dame
Glendinning sprung away at the same moment, partly to gain an instant to
recommend obedience to her son, partly to prevail with him to change his
apparel before coming in presence of the Abbot. But the Kitchener and
Refectioner, both speaking at once, had already seized each an arm, and
were leading Halbert in triumph into the apartment, so that she could
only ejaculate, "His will be done; but an he had but had on him his
Sunday's hose!"

Limited and humble as this desire was, the fates did not grant it, for
Halbert Glendinning was hurried into the presence of the Lord Abbot and
his party, without a word of explanation, and without a moment's time
being allowed to assume his holiday hose, which, in the language of the
time, implied both breeches and stockings.

Yet, though thus suddenly presented amid the centre of all eyes, there
was something in Halbert's appearance which commanded a certain degree
of respect from the company into which he was so unceremoniously
intruded, and the greater part of whom were disposed to consider him
with hauteur if not with absolute contempt. But his appearance and
reception we must devote to another chapter.

       *       *       *       *       *       *       *



Chapter the Nineteenth.


  Now choose thee, gallant, betwixt wealth and honour;
  There lies the pelf, in sum to bear thee through
  The dance of youth, and the turmoil of manhood,
  Yet leave enough for age's chimney-corner;
  But an thou grasp to it, farewell ambition,
  Farewell each hope of bettering thy condition,
  And raising thy low rank above the churls
  That till the earth for bread.
                                 OLD PLAY.

It is necessary to dwell for some brief space on the appearance and
demeanour of young Glendinning, ere we proceed to describe his interview
with the Abbot of St. Mary's, at this momentous crisis of his life.

Halbert was now about nineteen years old, tall and active rather than
strong, yet of that hardy conformation of limb and sinew, which promises
great strength when the growth shall be complete, and the system
confirmed. He was perfectly well made, and, like most men who have that
advantage, possessed a grace and natural ease of manner and carriage,
which prevented his height from being the distinguished part of his
external appearance. It was not until you had compared his stature with
that of those amongst or near to whom he stood, that you became
sensible that the young Glendinning was upwards of six feet high. In the
combination of unusual height with perfect symmetry, ease, and grace of
carriage, the young heir of Glendearg, notwithstanding his rustic birth
and education, had greatly the advantage even of Sir Piercie Shafton
himself, whose stature was lower, and his limbs, though there was
no particular point to object to, were on the whole less exactly
proportioned. On the other hand, Sir Piercie's very handsome countenance
afforded him as decided an advantage over the Scotsman, as regularity of
features and brilliance of complexion could give over traits which were
rather strongly marked than beautiful, and upon whose complexion the
"skyey influences," to which he was constantly exposed, had blended
the red and white into the purely nut-brown hue, which coloured alike
cheeks, neck, and forehead, and blushed only in a darker glow upon the
former.--Halbert's eyes supplied a marked and distinguished part of
his physiognomy. They were large and of a hazel colour, and sparkled in
moments of animation with such uncommon brilliancy, that it seemed as
if they actually emitted light. Nature had closely curled the locks of
dark-brown hair, which relieved and set off the features, such as we
have described them, displaying a bold and animated disposition, much
more than might have been expected from his situation, or from his
previous manners, which hitherto had seemed bashful, homely, and
awkward.

Halbert's dress was certainly not of that description which sets off to
the best advantage a presence of itself prepossessing. His jerkin and
hose were of coarse rustic cloth, and his cap of the same. A belt
round his waist served at once to sustain the broad-sword which we have
already mentioned, and to hold five or six arrows and bird-bolts, which
were stuck into it on the right side, along with a large knife hilted
with buck-horn, or, as it was then called, a dudgeon-dagger. To complete
his dress, we must notice his loose buskins of deer's hide, formed so as
to draw up on the leg as high as the knee, or at pleasure to be thrust
down lower than the calves. These were generally used at the period by
such as either had their principal occupation, or their chief pleasure,
in silvan sports, as they served to protect the legs against the rough
and tangled thickets into which the pursuit of game frequently led
them.--And these trifling particulars complete his external appearance.

It is not easy to do justice to the manner in which young Glendinning's
soul spoke through his eyes when ushered so suddenly into the company of
those whom his earliest education had taught him to treat with awe and
reverence. The degree of embarrassment, which his demeanor evinced, had
nothing in it either meanly servile, or utterly disconcerted. It was no
more than became a generous and ingenuous youth of a bold spirit, but
totally inexperienced, who should for the first time be called upon to
think and act for himself in such society and under such disadvantageous
circumstances. There was not in his carriage a grain either of
forwardness or of timidity, which a friend could have wished away.

He kneeled and kissed the Abbot's hand, then rose, and retiring two
paces, bowed respectfully to the circle around, smiling gently as he
received an encouraging nod from the Sub-Prior, to whom alone he was
personally known, and blushing as he encountered the anxious look of
Mary Avenel, who beheld with painful interest the sort of ordeal to
which her foster-brother was about to be subjected. Recovering from the
transient flurry of spirits into which the encounter of her glance had
thrown him, he stood composedly awaiting till the Abbot should express
his pleasure.

The ingenuous expression of countenance, noble form, and graceful
attitude of the young man, failed not to prepossess in his favor the
churchmen in whose presence he stood. The Abbot looked round, and
exchanged a gracious and approving glance with his counsellor Father
Eustace, although probably the appointment of a ranger, or bow-bearer,
was one in which he might have been disposed to proceed without the
Sub-Prior's advice, were it but to show his own free agency. But the
good mien of the young man now in nomination was such, that he rather
hastened to exchange congratulation on meeting with so proper a subject
of promotion, than to indulge any other feeling. Father Eustace enjoyed
the pleasure which a well-constituted mind derives from seeing a benefit
light on a deserving object; for as he had not seen Halbert since
circumstances had made so material a change in his manner and feelings,
