
"Oh, trust me, my lord, the franklin's head contains as much
north-country cunning as the noble's. They who would speed well must
feel their way cautiously."

"Twenty thousand men--impossible! Who art thou, to collect and head
them?"

"Plain Robin of Redesdale."

"Ha!" exclaimed Montagu, "is it indeed as I was taught to suspect?
Art thou that bold, strange, mad fellow, whom, by pike and brand--a
soldier's oath--I, a soldier, have often longed to see. Let me look at
thee. 'Fore Saint George, a tall man, and well knit, with dareiment on
thy brow. Why, there are as many tales of thee in the North as of my
brother the earl. Some say thou art a lord of degree and birth, others
that thou art the robber of Hexham to whom Margaret of Anjou trusted her
own life and her son's."

"Whatever they say of me," returned Robin, "they all agree in
this,--that I am a man of honest word and bold deed; that I can stir
up the hearts of men, as the wind stirreth fire; that I came an
unknown stranger into the parts where I abide; and that no peer in this
roiaulme, save Warwick himself, can do more to raise an army or shake a
throne."

"But by what spell?"

"By men's wrongs, lord," answered Robin, in a deep voice; "and now, ere
this moon wanes, Redesdale is a camp!"

"What the immediate cause of complaint?"

"The hospital of St. Leonard's has compelled us unjustly to render them
a thrave of corn."

"Thou art a cunning knave! Pinch the belly if you would make Englishmen
rise."

"True," said Robin, smiling grimly; "and now--what say you--will you
head us?"

"Head you! No!"

"Will you betray us?"

"It is not easy to betray twenty thousand men; if ye rise merely to free
yourselves from a corn-tax and England from the Woodvilles, I see no
treason in your revolt."

"I understand you, Lord Montagu," said Robin, with a stern and
half-scornful smile,--"you are not above thriving by our danger; but we
need now no lord and baron,--we will suffice for ourselves. And the hour
will come, believe me, when Lord Warwick, pursued by the king, must fly
to the Commons. Think well of these things and this prophecy, when the
news from the North startles Edward of March in the lap of his harlots."

Without saying another word, he turned and quitted the chamber as
abruptly as he had entered.

Lord Montagu was not, for his age, a bad man; though worldly, subtle,
and designing, with some of the craft of his prelate brother he united
something of the high soul of his brother soldier. But that age had
not the virtue of later times, and cannot be judged by its standard.
He heard this bold dare-devil menace his country with civil war upon
grounds not plainly stated nor clearly understood,--he aided not, but he
connived: "Twenty thousand men in arms," he muttered to himself,--"say
half-well, ten thousand--not against Edward, but the Woodvilles! It must
bring the king to his senses; must prove to him how odious the mushroom
race of the Woodvilles, and drive him for safety and for refuge to
Montagu and Warwick. If the knaves presume too far," (and Montagu
smiled), "what are undisciplined multitudes to the eye of a skilful
captain? Let the storm blow, we will guide the blast. In this world man
must make use of man."




CHAPTER IV. SIBYLL.

While Montagu in anxious forethought awaited the revolt that Robin of
Redesdale had predicted; while Edward feasted and laughed, merry-made
with his courtiers, and aided the conjugal duties of his good citizens
in London; while the queen and her father, Lord Rivers, more and more
in the absence of Warwick encroached on all the good things power can
bestow and avarice seize; while the Duchess of Bedford and Friar Bungey
toiled hard at the waxen effigies of the great earl, who still held his
royal son-in-law in his court at Calais,--the stream of our narrative
winds from its noisier channels, and lingers, with a quiet wave, around
the temple of a virgin's heart. Wherefore is Sibyll sad? Some short
month since and we beheld her gay with hope and basking in the sunny
atmosphere of pleasure and of love. The mind of this girl was a singular
combination of tenderness and pride,--the first wholly natural, the last
the result of circumstance and position. She was keenly conscious of her
gentle birth and her earlier prospects in the court of Margaret; and
the poverty and distress and solitude in which she had grown up from the
child into the woman had only served to strengthen what, in her nature,
was already strong, and to heighten whatever was already proud. Ever in
her youngest dreams of the future ambition had visibly blent itself with
the vague ideas of love. The imagined wooer was less to be young and
fair than renowned and stately. She viewed him through the mists of the
future, as the protector of her persecuted father, as the rebuilder of a
fallen House, as the ennobler of a humbled name; and from the moment in
which her girl's heart beat at the voice of Hastings, the ideal of her
soul seemed found. And when, transplanted to the court, she learned to
judge of her native grace and loveliness by the common admiration they
excited, her hopes grew justified to her inexperienced reason. Often and
ever the words of Hastings, at the house of Lady Longueville, rang in
her ear, and thrilled through the solitude of night,--"Whoever is fair
and chaste, gentle and loving, is in the eyes of William de Hastings the
mate and equal of a king." In visits that she had found opportunity to
make to the Lady Longueville, these hopes were duly fed; for the old
Lancastrian detested the Lady Bonville, as Lord Warwick's sister,
and she would have reconciled her pride to view with complacency his
alliance with the alchemist's daughter, if it led to his estrangement
from the memory of his first love; and, therefore, when her quick eye
penetrated the secret of Sibyll's heart, and when she witnessed--for
Hastings often encountered (and seemed to seek the encounter) the young
maid at Lady Longueville's house--the unconcealed admiration which
justified Sibyll in her high-placed affection, she scrupled not to
encourage the blushing girl by predictions in which she forced her own
better judgment to believe. Nor, when she learned Sibyll's descent from
a family that had once ranked as high as that of Hastings, would she
allow that there was any disparity in the alliance she foretold. But
more, far more than Lady Longueville's assurances, did the delicate
and unceasing gallantries of Hastings himself flatter the fond faith
of Sibyll. True, that he spoke not actually of love, but every look
implied, every whisper seemed to betray it. And to her he spoke as to an
equal, not in birth alone, but in mind; so superior was she in culture,
in natural gifts, and, above all, in that train of high thought and
elevated sentiment, in which genius ever finds a sympathy, to the
court-flutterers of her sex, that Hastings, whether or not he cherished
a warmer feeling, might well take pleasure in her converse, and feel
the lovely infant worthy the wise man's trust. He spoke to her without
reserve of the Lady Bonville, and he spoke with bitterness. "I
loved her," he said, "as woman is rarely loved. She deserted me for
another--rather should she have gone to the convent than the altar; and
now, forsooth, she deems she hath the right to taunt and to rate me, to
dictate to me the way I should walk, and to flaunt the honours I have
won."

"May that be no sign of a yet tender interest?" said Sibyll, timidly.

The eyes of Hastings sparkled for a moment, but the gleam vanished.
"Nay, you know her not. Her heart is marble, as hard and as cold;
her very virtue but the absence of emotion,--I would say, of gentler
emotion; for, pardieu, such emotions as come from ire and pride and
scorn are the daily growth of that stern soil. Oh, happy was my escape!
Happy the desertion which my young folly deemed a curse! No!" he added,
with a sarcastic quiver of his lip--"no; what stings and galls the Lady
of Harrington and Bonville, what makes her countenance change in my
presence, and her voice sharpen at my accost, is plainly this: in
wedding her dull lord and rejecting me, Katherine Nevile deemed she
wedded power and rank and station; and now, while we are both young,
how proves her choice? The Lord of Harrington and Bonville is so noted a
dolt, that even the Neviles cannot help him to rise,--the meanest office
is above his mind's level; and, dragged down by the heavy clay to which
her wings are yoked, Katherine, Lady of Harrington and Bonville--oh,
give her her due titles!--is but a pageant figure in the court. If the
war-trump blew, his very vassals would laugh at a Bonville's banner, and
beneath the flag of poor William Hastings would gladly march the
best chivalry of the land. And this it is, I say, that galls her. For
evermore she is driven to compare the state she holds as the dame of
the accepted Bonville with that she lost as the wife of the disdained
Hastings."

And if, in the heat and passion that such words betrayed, Sibyll sighed
to think that something of the old remembrance yet swelled and burned,
they but impressed her more with the value of a heart in which the
characters once writ endured so long, and roused her to a tender
ambition to heal and to console.

Then looking into her own deep soul, Sibyll beheld there a fund of such
generous, pure, and noble affection, such reverence as to the fame, such
love as to the man, that she proudly felt herself worthier of Hastings
than the haughty Katherine. She entered then, as it were, the lists with
this rival,--a memory rather, so she thought, than a corporeal being;
and her eye grew brighter, her step statelier, in the excitement of the
contest, the anticipation of the triumph. For what diamond without its
flaw? What rose without its canker? And bedded deep in that exquisite
and charming nature lay the dangerous and fatal weakness which has
cursed so many victims, broken so many hearts,--the vanity of the sex.
We may now readily conceive how little predisposed was Sibyll to the
blunt advances and displeasing warnings of the Lady Bonville, and the
more so from the time in which they chanced. For here comes the answer
to the question, "Why was Sibyll sad?"

The reader may determine for himself what were the ruling motives of
Lord Hastings in the court he paid to Sibyll. Whether to pique the Lady
Bonville, and force upon her the jealous pain he restlessly sought
to inflict; whether, from the habit of his careless life, seeking the
pleasure of the moment, with little forethought of the future, and
reconciling itself to much cruelty, by that profound contempt for human
beings, man, and still more for woman, which sad experience often brings
to acute intellect; or whether, from the purer and holier complacency
with which one whose youth has fed upon nobler aspirations than manhood
cares to pursue, suns itself back to something of its earlier lustre
in the presence and the converse of a young bright soul,--whatever,
in brief, the earlier motives of gallantries to Sibyll, once begun,
constantly renewed, by degrees wilder and warmer and guiltier emotions
roused up in the universal and all-conquering lover the vice of his
softer nature. When calm and unimpassioned, his conscience had said
to him, "Thou shalt spare that flower." But when once the passion was
roused within him, the purity of the flower was forgotten in the breath
of its voluptuous sweetness.

And but three days before the scene we have described with Katherine,
Sibyll's fabric of hope fell to the dust. For Hastings spoke for the
first time of love, for the first time knelt at her feet, for the
first time, clasping to his heart that virgin hand, poured forth the
protestation and the vow. And oh! woe--woe! for the first time she
learned how cheaply the great man held the poor maiden's love, how
little he deemed that purity and genius and affection equalled the
possessor of fame and wealth and power; for plainly visible, boldly
shown and spoken, the love that she had foreseen as a glory from the
heaven sought but to humble her to the dust.

The anguish of that moment was unspeakable,--and she spoke it not. But
as she broke from the profaning clasp, as escaping to the threshold she
cast on the unworthy wooer one look of such reproachful sorrow as told
at once all her love and all her horror, the first act in the eternal
tragedy of man's wrong and woman's grief was closed. And therefore was
Sibyll sad!




CHAPTER V. KATHERINE.

For several days Hastings avoided Sibyll; in truth, he felt remorse for
his design, and in his various, active, and brilliant life he had not
the leisure for obstinate and systematic siege to a single virtue, nor
was he, perhaps, any longer capable of deep and enduring passion; his
heart, like that of many a chevalier in the earlier day, had lavished
itself upon one object, and sullenly, upon regrets and dreams, and vain
anger and idle scorn, it had exhausted those sentiments which make
the sum of true love. And so, like Petrarch, whom his taste and fancy
worshipped, and many another votary of the gentil Dieu, while his
imagination devoted itself to the chaste and distant ideal--the
spiritual Laura--his senses, ever vagrant and disengaged, settled
without scruple upon the thousand Cynthias of the minute. But then those
Cynthias were, for the most part, and especially of late years, easy and
light-won nymphs; their coyest were of another clay from the tender but
lofty Sibyll. And Hastings shrunk from the cold-blooded and deliberate
seduction of one so pure, while he could not reconcile his mind to
contemplate marriage with a girl who could give nothing to his ambition;
and yet it was not in this last reluctance only his ambition that
startled and recoiled. In that strange tyranny over his whole soul which
Katherine Bonville secretly exercised, he did not dare to place a new
barrier evermore between her and himself. The Lord Bonville was of
infirm health; he had been more than once near to death's door; and
Hastings, in every succeeding fancy that beguiled his path, recalled the
thrill of his heart when it had whispered "Katherine, the loved of thy
youth, may yet be thine!" And then that Katherine rose before him,
not as she now swept the earth, with haughty step and frigid eye and
disdainful lip, but as--in all her bloom of maiden beauty, before the
temper was soured or the pride aroused--she had met him in the summer
twilight, by the trysting-tree, broken with him the golden ring of
faith, and wept upon his bosom.

And yet, during his brief and self-inflicted absence from Sibyll, this
wayward and singular personage, who was never weak but to women, and
ever weak to them, felt that she had made herself far dearer to him than
he had at first supposed it possible. He missed that face, ever,
till the last interview, so confiding in the unconsciously betrayed
affection. He felt how superior in sweetness and yet in intellect Sibyll
was to Katherine; there was more in common between her mind and his in
all things, save one. But oh, that one exception!--what a world lies
within it,--the memory of the spring of life! In fact, though Hastings
knew it not, he was in love with two objects at once; the one, a
chimera, a fancy, an ideal, an Eidolon, under the name of Katherine;
the other, youth and freshness and mind and heart and a living shape of
beauty, under the name of Sibyll. Often does this double love happen to
men; but when it does, alas for the human object! for the shadowy and
the spiritual one is immortal,--until, indeed, it be possessed!

It might be, perhaps, with a resolute desire to conquer the new love and
confirm the old that Hastings, one morning, repaired to the house of the
Lady Bonville, for her visit to the court had expired. It was a large
mansion, without the Lud Gate.

He found the dame in a comely chamber, seated in the sole chair the room
contained, to which was attached a foot-board that served as a
dais, while around her, on low stools, sat some spinning, others
broidering--some ten or twelve young maidens of good family, sent to
receive their nurturing under the high-born Katherine, [And strange
as it may seem to modern notions, the highest lady who received such
pensioners accepted a befitting salary for their board and education.]
while two other and somewhat elder virgins sat a little apart, but close
under the eye of the lady, practising the courtly game of "prime:" for
the diversion of cards was in its zenith of fashion under Edward IV.,
and even half a century later was considered one of the essential
accomplishments of a well-educated young lady. [So the Princess
Margaret, daughter of Henry VIL, at the age of fourteen, exhibits
her skill, in prime or trump, to her betrothed husband, James IV.
of Scotland; so, among the womanly arts of the unhappy Katherine of
Arragon, it is mentioned that she could play at "cards and dyce." (See
Strutt: Games and Pastimes, Hones' edition, p. 327.) The legislature
was very anxious to keep these games sacred to the aristocracy, and
very wroth with 'prentices and the vulgar for imitating the ruinous
amusements of their betters.] The exceeding stiffness, the solemn
silence of this female circle, but little accorded with the mood of
the graceful visitor. The demoiselles stirred not at his entrance, and
Katherine quietly motioned him to a seat at some distance.

"By your leave, fair lady," said Hastings, "I rebel against so distant
an exile from such sweet company;" and he moved the tabouret close to
the formidable chair of the presiding chieftainess.

Katherine smiled faintly, but not in displeasure.

"So gay a presence," she said, "must, I fear me, a little disturb these
learners."

Hastings glanced at the prim demureness written on each blooming visage,
and replied,--

"You wrong their ardour in such noble studies. I would wager that
nothing less than my entering your bower on horseback, with helm on
head and lance in rest, could provoke even a smile from one pair of
the twenty rosy lips round which, methinks, I behold Cupido hovering in
vain!"

The baroness bent her stately brows, and the twenty rosy lips were all
tightly pursed up, to prevent the indecorous exhibition which the wicked
courtier had provoked. But it would not do: one and all the twenty lips
broke into a smile,--but a smile so tortured, constrained, and nipped in
the bud, that it only gave an expression of pain to the features it was
forbidden to enliven.

"And what brings the Lord Hastings hither?" asked the baroness, in a
formal tone.

"Can you never allow for motive the desire of pleasure, fair dame?"

That peculiar and exquisite blush, which at moments changed the whole
physiognomy of Katherine, flitted across her smooth cheek, and vanished.
She said gravely,--

"So much do I allow it in you, my lord, that hence my question."

"Katherine!" exclaimed Hastings, in a voice of tender reproach, and
attempting to seize her hand, forgetful of all other presence save that
to which the blush, that spoke of old, gave back the ancient charm.

Katherine cast a hurried and startled glance over the maiden group,
and her eye detected on the automaton faces one common expression of
surprise. Humbled and deeply displeased, she rose from the awful chair,
and then, as suddenly reseating herself, she said, with a voice and
lip of the most cutting irony, "My lord chamberlain is, it seems, so
habituated to lackey his king amidst the goldsmiths and grocers, that he
forgets the form of language and respect of bearing which a noblewoman
of repute is accustomed to consider seemly."

Hastings bit his lip, and his falcon eye shot indignant fire.

"Pardon, my Lady of Bonville and Harrington, I did indeed forget what
reasons the dame of so wise and so renowned a lord hath to feel pride
in the titles she hath won. But I see that my visit hath chanced out of
season. My business, in truth, was rather with my lord, whose counsel in
peace is as famous as his truncheon in war!"

"It is enough," replied Katherine, with a dignity that rebuked the
taunt, "that Lord Bonville has the name of an honest man,--who never
rose at court."

"Woman, without one soft woman-feeling!" muttered Hastings, between his
ground teeth, as he approached the lady and made his profound obeisance.
The words were intended only for Katherine's ear, and they reached it.
Her bosom swelled beneath the brocaded gorget, and when the door closed
on Hastings, she pressed her hands convulsively together, and her dark
eyes were raised upward.

"My child, thou art entangling thy skein," said the lady of Bonville,
as she passed one of the maidens, towards the casement, which she
opened,--"the air to-day weighs heavily!"




CHAPTER VI. JOY FOR ADAM, AND HOPE FOR SIBYLL--AND POPULAR FRIAR BUNGEY!

Leaping on his palfrey, Hastings rode back to the Tower, dismounted at
the gate, passed on to the little postern in the inner court, and paused
not till he was in Warner's room. "How now, friend Adam? Thou art idle."

"Lord Hastings, I am ill."

"And thy child not with thee?"

"She is gone to her grace the duchess, to pray her to grant me leave to
go home, and waste no more life on making gold."

"Home! Go hence! We cannot hear it! The duchess must not grant it. I
will not suffer the king to lose so learned a philosopher."

"Then pray the king to let the philosopher achieve that which is in
the power of labour." He pointed to the Eureka. "Let me be heard in the
king's council, and prove to sufficing judges what this iron can do for
England."

"Is that all? So be it. I will speak to his highness forthwith. But
promise that thou wilt think no more of leaving the king's palace."

"Oh, no, no! If I may enter again into mine own palace, mine own royalty
of craft and hope, the court or the dungeon all one to me!"

"Father," said Sibyll, entering, "be comforted. The duchess forbids
thy departure, but we will yet flee--" She stopped short as she saw
Hastings. He approached her timidly, and with so repentant, so earnest a
respect in his mien and gesture, that she had not the heart to draw back
the fair hand he lifted to his lips.

"No, flee not, sweet donzell; leave not the desert court, without the
flower and the laurel, the beauty and the wisdom, that scent the hour,
and foretype eternity. I have conferred with thy father,--I will obtain
his prayer from the king. His mind shall be free to follow its own
impulse, and thou"--he whispered--"pardon--pardon an offence of too much
love. Never shall it wound again."

Her eyes, swimming with delicious tears, were fixed upon the floor.
Poor child! with so much love, how could she cherish anger? With so
much purity, how distrust herself? And while, at least, he spoke, the
dangerous lover was sincere. So from that hour peace was renewed between
Sibyll and Lord Hastings.--Fatal peace! alas for the girl who loves--and
has no mother!

True to his word, the courtier braved the displeasure of the Duchess of
Bedford, in inducing the king to consider the expediency of permitting
Adam to relinquish alchemy, and repair his model. Edward summoned a
deputation from the London merchants and traders, before whom Adam
appeared and explained his device. But these practical men at first
ridiculed the notion as a madman's fancy, and it required all the art of
Hastings to overcome their contempt, and appeal to the native acuteness
of the king. Edward, however, was only caught by Adam's incidental
allusions to the application of his principle to ships. The
merchant-king suddenly roused himself to attention, when it was promised
to him that his galleys should cross the seas without sail, and against
wind and tide.

"By Saint George!" said he, then, "let the honest man have his whim.
Mend thy model, and every saint in the calendar speed thee! Master
Heyford, tell thy comely wife that I and Hastings will sup with
her to-morrow, for her hippocras is a rare dainty. Good day to
you, worshipful my masters. Hastings, come hither; enough of these
trifles,--I must confer with thee on matters really pressing,--this
damnable marriage of gentle George's!"

And now Adam Warner was restored to his native element of thought; now
the crucible was at rest, and the Eureka began to rise from its ruins.
He knew not the hate that he had acquired in the permission he had
gained; for the London deputies, on their return home, talked of nothing
else for a whole week but the favour the king had shown to a strange
man, half-maniac, half-conjuror, who had undertaken to devise a
something which would throw all the artisans and journeymen out of work!
From merchant to mechanic travelled the news, and many an honest man
cursed the great scholar, as he looked at his young children, and wished
to have one good blow at the head that was hatching such devilish malice
against the poor! The name of Adam Warner became a byword of scorn and
horror. Nothing less than the deep ditch and strong walls of the Tower
could have saved him from the popular indignation; and these prejudices
were skilfully fed by the jealous enmity of his fellow-student, the
terrible Friar Bungey. This man, though in all matters of true learning
and science worthy the utmost contempt Adam could heap upon him, was by
no means of despicable abilities in the arts of imposing upon men. In
his youth he had been an itinerant mountebank, or, as it was called,
tregetour. He knew well all the curious tricks of juggling that then
amazed the vulgar, and, we fear, are lost to the craft of our modern
necromancers. He could clothe a wall with seeming vines, that vanished
as you approached; he could conjure up in his quiet cell the likeness
of a castle manned with soldiers, or a forest tenanted by deer. [See
Chaucer, House of Time, Book III.; also the account given by Baptista
Porta, of his own Magical Delusions, of which an extract may be seen in
the "Curiosities of Literature" Art., Dreams at the Dawn of Philosophy.]
Besides these illusions, probably produced by more powerful magic
lanterns than are now used, the friar had stumbled upon the wondrous
effects of animal magnetism, which was then unconsciously practised by
the alchemists and cultivators of white or sacred magic. He was an adept
in the craft of fortune-telling; and his intimate acquaintance with all
noted characters in the metropolis, their previous history and present
circumstances, enabled his natural shrewdness to hit the mark, at least
now and then, in his oracular predictions. He had taken, for safety and
for bread, the friar's robes, and had long enjoyed the confidence of
the Duchess of Bedford, the traditional descendant of the serpent-witch,
Melusina. Moreover, and in this the friar especially valued himself,
Bungey had, in the course of his hardy, vagrant early life, studied,
as shepherds and mariners do now, the signs of the weather; and as
weather-glasses were then unknown, nothing could be more convenient
to the royal planners of a summer chase or a hawking company than the
neighbourhood of a skilful predictor of storm and sunshine. In fact,
there was no part in the lore of magic which the popular seers found so
useful and studied so much as that which enabled them to prognosticate
the humours of the sky, at a period when the lives of all men were
principally spent in the open air.

The fame of Friar Bungey had travelled much farther than the repute of
Adam Warner: it was known in the distant provinces: and many a northern
peasant grew pale as he related to his gaping listeners the tales he had
heard of the Duchess Jacquetta's dread magician.

And yet, though the friar was an atrocious knave and a ludicrous
impostor, on the whole he was by no means unpopular, especially in
the metropolis, for he was naturally a jolly, social fellow; he often
ventured boldly forth into the different hostelries and reunions of the
populace, and enjoyed the admiration he there excited, and pocketed the
groats he there collected. He had no pride,--none in the least, this
Friar Bungey!--and was as affable as a magician could be to the
meanest mechanic who crossed his broad horn palm. A vulgar man is never
unpopular with the vulgar. Moreover, the friar, who was a very cunning
person, wished to keep well with the mob: he was fond of his own
impudent, cheating, burly carcass, and had the prudence to foresee that
a time might come when his royal patrons might forsake him, and a mob
might be a terrible monster to meet in his path; therefore he always
affected to love the poor, often told their fortunes gratis, now and
then gave them something to drink, and was esteemed a man exceedingly
good-natured, because he did not always have the devil at his back.

Now Friar Bungey had naturally enough evinced from the first a great
distaste and jealousy of Adam Warner; but occasionally profiting by the
science of the latter, he suffered his resentment to sleep latent till
it was roused into fury by learning the express favour shown to Adam by
the king, and the marvellous results expected from his contrivance. His
envy, then, forbade all tolerance and mercy; the world was not large
enough to contain two such giants,--Bungey and Warner, the genius and
the quack. To the best of our experience, the quacks have the same creed
to our own day. He vowed deep vengeance upon his associate, and spared
no arts to foment the popular hatred against him. Friar Bungey would
have been a great critic in our day!

But besides his jealousy, the fat friar had another motive for desiring
poor Adam's destruction; he coveted his model! True, he despised the
model, he jeered the model, he abhorred the model; but, nevertheless,
for the model every string in his bowels fondly yearned. He believed
that if that model were once repaired, and in his possession, he could
do--what he knew not, but certainly all that was wanting to complete his
glory, and to bubble the public.

Unconscious of all that was at work against him, Adam threw his whole
heart and soul into his labour; and happy in his happiness, Sibyll once
more smiled gratefully upon Hastings, from whom the rapture came.




CHAPTER VII. A LOVE SCENE.

More than ever chafed against Katherine, Hastings surrendered himself
without reserve to the charm he found in the society of Sibyll. Her
confidence being again restored, again her mind showed itself to
advantage, and the more because her pride was further roused to assert
the equality with rank and gold which she took from nature and from God.

It so often happens that the first love of woman is accompanied with
a bashful timidity, which overcomes the effort, while it increases the
desire, to shine, that the union of love and timidity has been called
inseparable, in the hackneyed language of every love-tale. But this is
no invariable rule, as Shakspeare has shown us in the artless Miranda,
in the eloquent Juliet, in the frank and healthful Rosalind;--and the
love of Sibyll was no common girl's spring-fever of sighs and blushes.
It lay in the mind, the imagination, the intelligence, as well as in the
heart and fancy. It was a breeze that stirred from the modest leaves
of the rose all their diviner odour. It was impossible but what this
strong, fresh young nature--with its free gayety when happy, its earnest
pathos when sad, its various faculties of judgment and sentiment, and
covert play of innocent wit--should not contrast forcibly, in the mind
of a man who had the want to be amused and interested, with the cold
pride of Katherine, the dull atmosphere in which her stiff, unbending
virtue breathed unintellectual air, and still more with the dressed
puppets, with painted cheeks and barren talk, who filled up the common
world, under the name of women.

His feelings for Sibyll, therefore, took a more grave and respectful
colour, and his attentions, if gallant ever, were those of a man wooing
one whom he would make his wife, and studying the qualities to which
he was disposed to intrust his happiness; and so pure was Sibyll's
affection, that she could have been contented to have lived forever
thus,--have seen and heard him daily, have talked but the words of
friendship though with the thoughts of love; for some passions refine
themselves through the very fire of the imagination into which the
senses are absorbed, and by the ideal purification elevated up to
spirit. Rapt in the exquisite happiness she now enjoyed, Sibyll
perceived not, or, if perceiving, scarcely heeded; that the admirers,
who had before fluttered round her, gradually dropped off; that the
ladies of the court, the damsels who shared her light duties, grew
distant and silent at her approach; that strange looks were bent on
her; that sometimes when she and Hastings were seen together, the stern
frowned and the godly crossed themselves.

The popular prejudices had reacted on the court. The wizard's daughter
was held to share the gifts of her sire, and the fascination of beauty
was imputed to evil spells. Lord Hastings was regarded--especially by
all the ladies he had once courted and forsaken--as a man egregiously
bewitched!

One day it chanced that Sibyll encountered Hastings in the walk that
girded the ramparts of the Tower. He was pacing musingly, with folded
arms, when he raised his eyes and beheld her.

"And whither go you thus alone, fair mistress?"

"The duchess bade me seek the queen, who is taking the air yonder. My
lady has received some tidings she would impart to her highness."

"I was thinking of thee, fair damsel, when thy face brightened on my
musings; and I was comparing thee to others who dwell in the world's
high places, and marvelling at the whims of fortune."

Sibyll smiled faintly, and answered, "Provoke not too much the aspiring
folly of my nature. Content is better than ambition."

"Thou ownest thy ambition?" asked Hastings, curiously.

"Ah, sir, who hath it not?"

"But for thy sweet sex ambition has so narrow and cribbed a field."

"Not so; for it lives in others. I would say," continued Sibyll,
colouring, fearful that she had betrayed herself, "for example, that
so long as my father toils for fame, I breathe in his hope, and am
ambitious for his honour."

"And so, if thou wert wedded to one worthy of thee, in his ambition thou
wouldst soar and dare?"

"Perhaps," answered Sibyll, coyly.

"But if thou wert wedded to sorrow and poverty and troublous care, thine
ambition, thus struck dead, would of consequence strike dead thy love?"

"Nay, noble lord, nay; canst thou so wrong womanhood in me unworthy? for
surely true ambition lives not only in the goods of fortune. Is there
no nobler ambition than that of the vanity? Is there no ambition of the
heart,--an ambition to console, to cheer the griefs of those who love
and trust us; an ambition to build a happiness out of the reach of
fate; an ambition to soothe some high soul, in its strife with a mean
world,--to lull to sleep its pain, to smile to serenity its cares? Oh,
methinks a woman's true ambition would rise the bravest when, in the
very sight of death itself, the voice of him in whom her glory had dwelt
through life should say, 'Thou fearest not to walk to the grave and to
heaven by my side!"'

Sweet and thrilling were the tones in which these words were said, lofty
and solemn the upward and tearful look with which they closed.

And the answer struck home to the native and original heroism of the
listener's nature, before debased into the cynic sourness of worldly
wisdom. Never had Katherine herself more forcibly recalled to Hastings
the pure and virgin glory of his youth.

"Oh, Sibyll!" he exclaimed passionately, and yielding to the impulse of
the moment,--"oh, that for me, as to me, such high words were said! Oh,
that all the triumphs of a life men call prosperous were excelled by the
one triumph of waking such an ambition in such a heart!"

Sibyll stood before him transformed,--pale, trembling, mute,--and
Hastings, clasping her hand and covering it with kisses, said,--

"Dare I arede thy silence? Sibyll, thou lovest me--O Sibyll, speak!"

With a convulsive effort, the girl's lips moved, then closed, then moved
again, into low and broken words.

"Why this, why this? Thou hadst promised not to--not to--"

"Not to insult thee by unworthy vows! Nor do I. But as my wife." He
paused abruptly, alarmed at his own impetuous words, and scared by the
phantom of the world that rose like a bodily thing before the generous
impulse, and grinned in scorn of his folly.

But Sibyll heard only that one holy word of WIFE, and so sudden and so
great was the transport it called forth, that her senses grew faint
and dizzy, and she would have fallen to the earth but for the arms that
circled her, and the breast upon which, now, the virgin might veil the
blush that did not speak of shame.

With various feelings, both were a moment silent. But oh, that moment!
what centuries of bliss were crowded into it for the nobler and fairer
nature!

At last, gently releasing herself, she put her hands before her eyes, as
if to convince herself she was awake, and then, turning her lovely face
full upon the wooer, Sibyll said ingenuously,--

"Oh, my lord--oh, Hastings! if thy calmer reason repent not these words,
if thou canst approve in me what thou didst admire in Elizabeth the
queen, if thou canst raise one who has no dower but her heart to the
state of thy wife and partner, by this hand, which I place fearlessly
in thine, I pledge thee to such a love as minstrel hath never sung. No!"
she continued, drawing loftily up her light stature,--"no, thou shalt
not find me unworthy of thy name,--mighty though it is, mightier though
it shall be. I have a mind that can share thine objects, I have pride
that can exult in thy power, courage to partake thy dangers, and
devotion--" she hesitated, with the most charming blush--"but of that,
sweet lord, thou shalt judge hereafter! This is my dowry,--it is all!"

"And all I ask or covet," said Hastings. But his cheek had lost its
first passionate glow. Lord of many a broad land and barony, victorious
captain in many a foughten field, wise statesman in many a thoughtful
stratagem, high in his king's favour, and linked with a nation's
history,--William de Hastings at that hour was as far below as earth is
to heaven the poor maiden whom he already repented to have so honoured,
and whose sublime answer woke no echo from his heart.

Fortunately, as he deemed it, at that very instant he heard many steps
rapidly approaching, and his own name called aloud by the voice of the
king's body-squire.

"Hark! Edward summons me," he said, with a feeling of reprieve.
"Farewell, dear Sibyll, farewell for a brief while,--we shall meet
anon."

At this time they were standing in that part of the rampart walk which
is now backed by the barracks of a modern soldiery, and before which,
on the other side of the moat, lay a space that had seemed solitary and
deserted; but as Hastings, in speaking his adieu, hurriedly pressed
his lips on Sibyll's forehead, from a tavern without the fortress, and
opposite the spot on which they stood, suddenly sallied a disorderly
troop of half-drunken soldiers, with a gang of the wretched women that
always continue the classic associations of a false Venus with a brutal
Mars; and the last words of Hastings were scarcely spoken, before a loud
laugh startled both himself and Sibyll, and a shudder came over her when
she beheld the tinsel robes of the tymbesteres glittering in the sun,
and heard their leader sing, as she darted from the arms of a reeling
soldier,--

              "Ha! death to the dove
               Is the falcon's love.
     Oh, sharp is the kiss of the falcon's beak!"




BOOK VII. THE POPULAR REBELLION.




CHAPTER I. THE WHITE LION OF MARCH SHAKES HIS MANE.

"And what news?" asked Hastings, as he found himself amidst the king's
squires; while yet was heard the laugh of the tymbesteres, and yet
gliding through the trees might be seen the retreating form of Sibyll.

"My lord, the king needs you instantly. A courier has just arrived from
the North. The Lords St. John, Rivers, De Fulke, and Scales are already
with his highness."

"Where?"

"In the great council chamber."

To that memorable room [it was from this room that Hastings was hurried
to execution, June 13, 1483] in the White Tower, in which the visitor,
on entrance, is first reminded of the name and fate of Hastings, strode
the unprophetic lord.

He found Edward not reclining on cushions and carpets, not womanlike in
loose robes, not with his lazy smile upon his sleek beauty. The king had
doffed his gown, and stood erect in the tight tunic, which gave in full
perfection the splendid proportions of a frame unsurpassed in activity
and strength. Before him, on the long table, lay two or three open
letters, beside the dagger with which Edward had cut the silk that bound
them. Around him gravely sat Lord Rivers, Anthony Woodville, Lord St.
John, Raoul de Fulke, the young and valiant D'Eyncourt, and many other
of the principal lords. Hastings saw at once that something of pith and
moment had occurred; and by the fire in the king's eye, the dilation of
his nostril, the cheerful and almost joyous pride of his mien and brow,
the experienced courtier read the signs of WAR.

"Welcome, brave Hastings," said Edward, in a voice wholly changed from
its wonted soft affectation,--loud, clear, and thrilling as it went
through the marrow and heart of all who heard its stirring and trumpet
accent,--"welcome now to the field as ever to the banquet! We have news
from the North that bids us brace on the burgonet and buckle-to the
brand,--a revolt that requires a king's arm to quell. In Yorkshire
fifteen thousand men are in arms, under a leader they call Robin of
Redesdale,--the pretext, a thrave of corn demanded by the Hospital of
St. Leonard's, the true design that of treason to our realm. At the same
time, we hear from our brother of Gloucester, now on the Border, that
the Scotch have lifted the Lancaster Rose. There is peril if these two
armies meet. No time to lose,--they are saddling our war-steeds; we
hasten to the van of our royal force. We shall have warm work, my lords.
But who is worthy of a throne that cannot guard it?"

"This is sad tidings indeed, sire," said Hastings, gravely.

"Sad! Say it not, Hastings! War is the chase of kings! Sir Raoul de
Fulke, why lookest thou so brooding and sorrowful?"

"Sire, I but thought that had Earl Warwick been in England, this--"

"Ha!" interrupted Edward, haughtily and hastily, "and is Warwick the sun
of heaven that no cloud can darken where his face may shine? The
rebels shall need no foe, my realm no regent, while I, the heir of the
Plantagenets, have the sword for one, the sceptre for the other. We
depart this evening ere the sun be set."

"My liege," said the Lord St. John, gravely, "on what forces do you
count to meet so formidable an array?"

"All England, Lord of St. John!"

"Alack! my liege, may you not deceive yourself! But in this crisis it is
right that your leal and trusty subjects should speak out, and plainly.
It seems that these insurgents clamour not against yourself, but against
the queen's relations,--yes, my Lord Rivers, against you and your
House,--and I fear me that the hearts of England are with them here."

"It is true, sire," put in Raoul de Fulke, boldly; "and if these--new
men are to head your armies, the warriors of Towton will stand
aloof,--Raoul de Fulke serves no Woodville's banner. Frown not, Lord de
Scales! it is the griping avarice of you and yours that has brought this
evil on the king. For you the commons have been pillaged; for you the
daughters of peers have been forced into monstrous marriages, at war
with birth and with nature herself; for you, the princely Warwick, near
to the throne in blood, and front and pillar of our time-honoured order
of seigneur and of knight, has been thrust from our suzerain's favour.
And if now ye are to march at the van of war,--you to be avengers of
the strife of which ye are the cause,--I say that the soldiers will lack
heart, and the provinces ye pass through will be the country of a foe!"

"Vain man!" began Anthony Woodville, when Hastings laid his hand on his
arm, while Edward, amazed at this outburst from two of the supporters
on whom he principally counted, had the prudence to suppress his
resentment, and remained silent,--but with the aspect of one resolved to
command obedience, when he once deemed it right to interfere.

"Hold, Sir Anthony!" said Hastings, who, the moment he found himself
with men, woke to all the manly spirit and profound wisdom that had
rendered his name illustrious--"hold, and let me have the word; my Lords
St. John and De Fulke, your charges are more against me than against
these gentlemen, for I am a new man,--a squire by birth, and proud to
derive mine honours from the same origin as all true nobility,--I mean
the grace of a noble liege and the happy fortune of a soldier's sword.
It may be" (and here the artful favourite, the most beloved of the whole
court, inclined himself meekly)--"it may be that I have not borne those
honours so mildly as to disarm blame. In the war to be, let me atone.
My liege, hear your servant: give me no command,--let me be a simple
soldier, fighting by your side. My example who will not follow?--proud
to ride but as a man of arms along the track which the sword of his
sovereign shall cut through the ranks of battle! Not you, Lord de
Scales, redoubtable and invincible with lance and axe; let us new men
soothe envy by our deeds; and you, Lords St. John and De Fulke, you
shall teach us how your fathers led warriors who did not fight more
gallantly than we will. And when rebellion is at rest, when we meet
again in our suzerain's hall, accuse us new men, if you can find us
faulty, and we will answer you as we best may."

This address, which could have come from no man with such effect as from
Hastings, touched all present. And though the Woodvilles, father and
son, saw in it much to gall their pride, and half believed it a snare
for their humiliation, they made no opposition. Raoul de Fulke, ever
generous as fiery, stretched forth his hand, and said,--

"Lord Hastings, you have spoken well. Be it as the king wills."

"My lords," returned Edward, gayly, "my will is that ye be friends while
a foe is in the field. Hasten, then, I beseech you, one and all, to
raise your vassals, and join our standard at Fotheringay. I will find ye
posts that shall content the bravest."

The king made a sign to break up the conference, and dismissing even the
Woodvilles, was left alone with Hastings.

"Thou hast served me at need, Will;" said the king. "But I shall
remember" (and his eye flashed a tiger's fire) "the mouthing of those
mock-pieces of the lords at Runnymede. I am no John, to be bearded by
my vassals. Enough of them now. Think you Warwick can have abetted this
revolt?"

"A revolt of peasants and yeomen! No, sire. If he did so, farewell
forever to the love the barons bear him."

"Um! and yet Montagu, whom I dismissed ten days since to the Borders,
hearing of disaffection, hath done nought to check it. But come what
may, his must be a bold lance that shivers against a king's mail. And
now one kiss of my lady Bessee, one cup of the bright canary, and then
God and Saint George for the White Rose!"




CHAPTER II. THE CAMP AT OLNEY.

It was some weeks after the citizens of London had seen their gallant
king, at the head of such forces as were collected in haste in the
metropolis, depart from their walls to the encounter of the rebels.
Surprising and disastrous had been the tidings in the interim. At first,
indeed, there were hopes that the insurrection had been put down by
Montagu, who had defeated the troops of Robin of Redesdale, near the
city of York, and was said to have beheaded their leader. But the spirit
of discontent was only fanned by an adverse wind. The popular hatred to
the Woodvilles was so great, that in proportion as Edward advanced to
the scene of action, the country rose in arms, as Raoul de Fulke had
predicted. Leaders of lordly birth now headed the rebellion; the sons
of the Lords Latimer and Fitzhugh (near kinsmen of the House of Nevile)
lent their names to the cause and Sir John Coniers, an experienced
soldier, whose claims had been disregarded by Edward, gave to the
insurgents the aid of a formidable capacity for war. In every mouth was
the story of the Duchess of Bedford's witchcraft; and the waxen figure
of the earl did more to rouse the people than perhaps the earl himself
could have done in person. [See "Parliamentary Rolls," vi. 232, for the
accusation of witchcraft, and the fabrication of a necromantic image
of Lord Warwick, circulated against the Duchess of Bedford. She
herself quotes and complains of them.] As yet, however, language of
the insurgents was tempered with all personal respect to the king; they
declared in their manifestoes that they desired only the banishment
of the Woodvilles and the recall of Warwick, whose name they used
unscrupulously, and whom they declared they were on their way to meet.
As soon as it was known that the kinsmen of the beloved earl were in the
revolt, and naturally supposed that the earl himself must countenance
the enterprise, the tumultuous camp swelled every hour, while knight
after knight, veteran after veteran, abandoned the royal standard. The
Lord d'Eyncourt (one of the few lords of the highest birth and greatest
following over whom the Neviles had no influence, and who bore the
