  How? Grace of burial, to the city's foe?

ANTIGONE

  God hath not judged him separate in guilt.

HERALD

  True--till he put this land in jeopardy.

ANTIGONE

  His rights usurped, he answered wrong with wrong.

HERALD

  Nay--but for one man's sin he smote the State.

ANTIGONE

  Contention doth out-talk all other gods!
  Prate thou no more--I will to bury him.

HERALD

  Will, an thou wilt! but I forbid the deed.
                                           [_Exit_ the HERALD.

CHORUS

  Exulting Fates, who waste the line
  And whelm the house of Oedipus!
  Fiends, who have slain, in wrath condign,
  The father and the children thus!
  What now befits it that I do,
  What meditate, what undergo?
  Can I the funeral rite refrain,
  Nor weep for Polynices slain?
  But yet, with fear I shrink and thrill,
  Presageful of the city's will!
  Thou, O Eteocles, shalt have
  Full rites, and mourners at thy grave,
  But he, thy brother slain, shall he,
  With none to weep or cry _Alas_,
  To unbefriended burial pass?
  Only one sister o'er his bier,
  To raise the cry and pour the tear--
  Who can obey such stern decree?

SEMI-CHORUS

  Let those who hold our city's sway
  Wreak, or forbear to wreak, their will
  On those who cry, _Ah, well-a-day_!
  Lamenting Polynices still!
  We will go forth and, side by side
  With her, due burial will provide!
  Royal he was; to him be paid
  Our grief, wherever he be laid!
  The crowd may sway, and change, and still
  Take its caprice for Justice' will!
  But we this dead Eteocles,
  As Justice wills and Right decrees,
  Will bear unto his grave!
  For--under those enthroned on high
  And Zeus' eternal royalty--
  He unto us salvation gave!
  He saved us from a foreign yoke,--
  A wild assault of outland folk,
  A savage, alien wave!
                                                 [_Exeunt_.




PROMETHEUS BOUND




ARGUMENT

In the beginning, Ouranos and Gaia held sway over Heaven and Earth.
And manifold children were born unto them, of whom were Cronos, and
Okeanos, and the Titans, and the Giants. But Cronos cast down his
father Ouranos, and ruled in his stead, until Zeus his son cast him
down in his turn, and became King of Gods and men. Then were the
Titans divided, for some had good will unto Cronos, and others unto
Zeus; until Prometheus, son of the Titan lapetos, by wise counsel,
gave the victory to Zeus. But Zeus held the race of mortal men in
scorn, and was fain to destroy them from the face of the earth; yet
Prometheus loved them, and gave secretly to them the gift of fire,
and arts whereby they could prosper upon the earth. Then was Zeus
sorely angered with Prometheus, and bound him upon a mountain, and
afterward overwhelmed him in an earthquake, and devised other
torments against him for many ages; yet could he not slay Prometheus,
for he was a God.




DRAMATIS PERSONAE

  STRENGTH AND FORCE.
  HEPHAESTUS.
  PROMETHEUS.
  CHORUS OF SEA-NYMPHS,
  DAUGHTERS OF OCEANUS.
  OCEANUS.
  IO.
  HERMES.

         _Scene--A rocky ravine in the mountains of Scythia_.


STRENGTH

  Lo, the earth's bound and limitary land,
  The Scythian steppe, the waste untrod of men!
  Look to it now, Hephaestus--thine it is,
  Thy Sire obeying, this arch-thief to clench
  Against the steep-down precipice of rock,
  With stubborn links of adamantine chain.
  Look thou: thy flower, the gleaming plastic fire,
  He stole and lent to mortal man--a sin
  That gods immortal make him rue to-day,
  Lessoned hereby to own th' omnipotence
  Of Zeus, and to repent his love to man!

HEPHAESTUS

  O Strength and Force, for you the best of Zeus
  Stands all achieved, and nothing bars your will:
  But I--I dare not bind to storm-vext cleft
  One of our race, immortal as are we.
  Yet, none the less, necessity constrains,
  For Zeus, defied, is heavy in revenge!
                                            (_To PROMETHEUS_)

  O deep-devising child of Themis sage,
  Small will have I to do, or thou to bear,
  What yet we must. Beyond the haunt of man
  Unto this rock, with fetters grimly forged,
  I must transfix and shackle up thy limbs,
  Where thou shalt mark no voice nor human form,
  But, parching in the glow and glare of sun,
  Thy body's flower shall suffer a sky-change;
  And gladly wilt thou hail the hour when Night
  Shall in her starry robe invest the day,
  Or when the Sun shall melt the morning rime.
  But, day or night, for ever shall the load
  Of wasting agony, that may not pass,
  Wear thee away; for know, the womb of Time
  Hath not conceived a power to set thee free.
  Such meed thou hast, for love toward mankind
  For thou, a god defying wrath of gods,
  Beyond the ordinance didst champion men,
  And for reward shalt keep a sleepless watch,
  Stiff-kneed, erect, nailed to this dismal rock,
  With manifold laments and useless cries
  Against the will inexorable of Zeus.
  Hard is the heart of fresh-usurped power!

STRENGTH

  Enough of useless ruth! why tarriest thou?
  Why pitiest one whom all gods wholly hate,
  One who to man gave o'er thy privilege?

HEPHAESTUS

  Kinship and friendship wring my heart for him.

STRENGTH

  Ay--but how disregard our Sire's command?
  Is not thy pity weaker than thy fear?

HEPHAESTUS

  Ruthless as ever, brutal to the full!

STRENGTH

  Tears can avail him nothing: strive not thou,
  Nor waste thine efforts thus unaidingly.


HEPHAESTUS

  Out on my cursed mastery of steel!

STRENGTH

  Why curse it thus? In sooth that craft of thine
  Standeth assoiled of all that here is wrought.

HEPHAESTUS

  Would that some other were endowed therewith!

STRENGTH

  All hath its burden, save the rule of Heaven,
  And freedom is for Zeus, and Zeus alone.

HEPHAESTUS

  I know it; I gainsay no word hereof.

STRENGTH

  Up, then, and hasten to do on his bonds,
  Lest Zeus behold thee indolent of will!

HEPHAESTUS

  Ah well--behold the armlets ready now!

STRENGTH

  Then cast them round his arms and with sheer strength
  Swing down the hammer, clinch him to the crags.

HEPHAESTUS

  Lo, 'tis toward--no weakness in the work!

STRENGTH

  Smite harder, wedge it home--no faltering here!
  He hath a craft can pass th' impassable!

HEPHAESTUS

  This arm is fast, inextricably bound.

STRENGTH

  Then shackle safe the other, that he know
  His utmost craft is weaker far than Zeus.

HEPHAESTUS

  He, but none other, can accuse mine art!

STRENGTH

  Now, strong and sheer, drive thro' from breast to back
  The adamantine wedge's stubborn fang.

HEPHAESTUS

  Alas, Prometheus!  I lament thy pain.

STRENGTH

  Thou, faltering and weeping sore for those
  Whom Zeus abhors! 'ware, lest thou rue thy tears!

HEPHAESTUS

  Thou gazest on a scene that poisons sight.

STRENGTH

  I gaze on one who suffers his desert.
  Now between rib and shoulder shackle him--

HEPHAESTUS

  Do it I must--hush thy superfluous charge!

STRENGTH

  Urge thee I will--ay, hound thee to the prey.
  Step downward now, enring his legs amain!

HEPHAESTUS

  Lo, it is done--'twas but a moment's toil.

STRENGTH

  Now, strongly strike, drive in the piercing gyves--
  Stern is the power that oversees thy task!

HEPHAESTUS

  Brutish thy form, thy speech brutality!

STRENGTH

  Be gentle, an thou wilt, but blame not me
   For this my stubbornness and anger fell!

HEPHAESTUS

  Let us go hence; his legs are firmly chained.

STRENGTH (_To_ PROMETHEUS)

  Aha!  there play the insolent, and steal,
  For creatures of a day, the rights of gods!
  O deep delusion of the powers that named thee
  Prometheus, the Fore-thinker! thou hast need
  Of others' forethought and device, whereby
  Thou may'st elude this handicraft of ours!
                                    [_Exeunt_ HEPHAESTUS, STRENGTH,
                                      _and_ FORCE.--_A pause_.


PROMETHEUS

  O Sky divine, O Winds of pinions swift,
  O fountain-heads of Rivers, and O thou,
  Illimitable laughter of the Sea!
  O Earth, the Mighty Mother, and thou Sun,
  Whose orbed light surveyeth all--attest,
  What ills I suffer from the gods, a god!
  Behold me, who must here sustain
  The marring agonies of pain,
  Wrestling with torture, doomed to bear
  Eternal ages, year on year!
  Such and so shameful is the chain
  Which Heaven's new tyrant doth ordain
  To bind me helpless here.
  Woe! for the ruthless present doom!
  Woe! for the Future's teeming womb!
  On what far dawn, in what dim skies,
  Shall star of my deliverance rise?

  Truce to this utterance!  to its dimmest verge
  I do foreknow the future, hour by hour,
  Nor can whatever pang may smite me now
  Smite with surprise. The destiny ordained
  I must endure to the best, for well I wot
  That none may challenge with Necessity.
  Yet is it past my patience, to reveal,
  Or to conceal, these issues of my doom.
  Since I to mortals brought prerogatives,
  Unto this durance dismal am I bound:
  Yea, I am he who in a fennel-stalk,
  By stealthy sleight, purveyed the fount of fire,
  The teacher, proven thus, and arch-resource
  Of every art that aideth mortal men.
  Such was my sin:  I earn its recompense,
  Rock-riveted, and chained in height and cold.
                                                    [_A pause_.
  Listen! what breath of sound,
  what fragrance soft hath risen
  Upward to me? is it some godlike essence,
  Or being half-divine, or mortal presence?
  Who to the world's end comes, unto my craggy prison?
  Craves he the sight of pain, or what would he behold?
  Gaze on a god in tortures manifold,
  Heinous to Zeus, and scorned by all
  Whose footsteps tread the heavenly hall,
  Because too deeply, from on high,
  I pitied man's mortality!
  Hark, and again! that fluttering sound
  Of wings that whirr and circle round,
  And their light rustle thrills the air--
  How all things that unseen draw near
  Are to me Fear!
                                  [_Enter the_ CHORUS OF OCEANIDES,
                                   _in winged cars_]
  CHORUS

  Ah, fear us not! as friends, with rivalry
  Of swiftly-vying wings, we came together
  Unto this rock and thee!
  With our sea-sire we pleaded hard, until
  We won him to our will,
  And swift the wafting breezes bore us hither.
  The heavy hammer's steely blow
  Thrilled to our ocean-cavern from afar,
  Banished soft shyness from our maiden brow,
  And with unsandalled feet we come, in winged car!

PROMETHEUS

  Ah well-a-day! ye come, ye come
  From the Sea-Mother's teeming home--
  Children of Tethys and the sire
  Who around Earth rolls, gyre on gyre,
  His sleepless ocean-tide!
  Look on me--shackled with what chain,
  Upon this chasm's beetling side
  I must my dismal watch sustain!

CHORUS
