
'Saw me there!' said Mr Tappertit. 'Yes, I should think you did see
me there. The place would be troubled to go on without me. Don't you
remember my thinking you liked the vagabond, and on that account going
to quarrel with you; and then finding you detested him worse than
poison, going to drink with you? Don't you remember that?'

'To be sure!' cried Hugh.

'Well! and are you in the same mind now?' said Mr Tappertit.

'Yes!' roared Hugh.

'You speak like a man,' said Mr Tappertit, 'and I'll shake hands with
you.' With these conciliatory expressions he suited the action to the
word; and Hugh meeting his advances readily, they performed the ceremony
with a show of great heartiness.

'I find,' said Mr Tappertit, looking round on the assembled guests,
'that brother What's-his-name and I are old acquaintance.--You never
heard anything more of that rascal, I suppose, eh?'

'Not a syllable,' replied Hugh. 'I never want to. I don't believe I ever
shall. He's dead long ago, I hope.'

'It's to be hoped, for the sake of mankind in general and the happiness
of society, that he is,' said Mr Tappertit, rubbing his palm upon his
legs, and looking at it between whiles. 'Is your other hand at all
cleaner? Much the same. Well, I'll owe you another shake. We'll suppose
it done, if you've no objection.'

Hugh laughed again, and with such thorough abandonment to his mad
humour, that his limbs seemed dislocated, and his whole frame in danger
of tumbling to pieces; but Mr Tappertit, so far from receiving this
extreme merriment with any irritation, was pleased to regard it with the
utmost favour, and even to join in it, so far as one of his gravity and
station could, with any regard to that decency and decorum which men in
high places are expected to maintain.

Mr Tappertit did not stop here, as many public characters might have
done, but calling up his brace of lieutenants, introduced Hugh to them
with high commendation; declaring him to be a man who, at such times as
those in which they lived, could not be too much cherished. Further, he
did him the honour to remark, that he would be an acquisition of which
even the United Bulldogs might be proud; and finding, upon sounding him,
that he was quite ready and willing to enter the society (for he was
not at all particular, and would have leagued himself that night with
anything, or anybody, for any purpose whatsoever), caused the necessary
preliminaries to be gone into upon the spot. This tribute to his great
merit delighted no man more than Mr Dennis, as he himself proclaimed
with several rare and surprising oaths; and indeed it gave unmingled
satisfaction to the whole assembly.

'Make anything you like of me!' cried Hugh, flourishing the can he had
emptied more than once. 'Put me on any duty you please. I'm your man.
I'll do it. Here's my captain--here's my leader. Ha ha ha! Let him
give me the word of command, and I'll fight the whole Parliament House
single-handed, or set a lighted torch to the King's Throne itself!' With
that, he smote Mr Tappertit on the back, with such violence that his
little body seemed to shrink into a mere nothing; and roared again until
the very foundlings near at hand were startled in their beds.

In fact, a sense of something whimsical in their companionship seemed to
have taken entire possession of his rude brain. The bare fact of being
patronised by a great man whom he could have crushed with one hand,
appeared in his eyes so eccentric and humorous, that a kind of ferocious
merriment gained the mastery over him, and quite subdued his brutal
nature. He roared and roared again; toasted Mr Tappertit a hundred
times; declared himself a Bulldog to the core; and vowed to be faithful
to him to the last drop of blood in his veins.

All these compliments Mr Tappertit received as matters of
course--flattering enough in their way, but entirely attributable to his
vast superiority. His dignified self-possession only delighted Hugh the
more; and in a word, this giant and dwarf struck up a friendship which
bade fair to be of long continuance, as the one held it to be his right
to command, and the other considered it an exquisite pleasantry to
obey. Nor was Hugh by any means a passive follower, who scrupled to act
without precise and definite orders; for when Mr Tappertit mounted on an
empty cask which stood by way of rostrum in the room, and volunteered a
speech upon the alarming crisis then at hand, he placed himself beside
the orator, and though he grinned from ear to ear at every word he said,
threw out such expressive hints to scoffers in the management of his
cudgel, that those who were at first the most disposed to interrupt,
became remarkably attentive, and were the loudest in their approbation.

It was not all noise and jest, however, at The Boot, nor were the whole
party listeners to the speech. There were some men at the other end of
the room (which was a long, low-roofed chamber) in earnest conversation
all the time; and when any of this group went out, fresh people were
sure to come in soon afterwards and sit down in their places, as though
the others had relieved them on some watch or duty; which it was pretty
clear they did, for these changes took place by the clock, at intervals
of half an hour. These persons whispered very much among themselves,
and kept aloof, and often looked round, as jealous of their speech being
overheard; some two or three among them entered in books what seemed
to be reports from the others; when they were not thus employed one of
them would turn to the newspapers which were strewn upon the table,
and from the St James's Chronicle, the Herald, Chronicle, or Public
Advertiser, would read to the rest in a low voice some passage having
reference to the topic in which they were all so deeply interested. But
the great attraction was a pamphlet called The Thunderer, which espoused
their own opinions, and was supposed at that time to emanate directly
from the Association. This was always in request; and whether read
aloud, to an eager knot of listeners, or by some solitary man, was
certain to be followed by stormy talking and excited looks.

In the midst of all his merriment, and admiration of his captain, Hugh
was made sensible by these and other tokens, of the presence of an air
of mystery, akin to that which had so much impressed him out of doors.
It was impossible to discard a sense that something serious was going
on, and that under the noisy revel of the public-house, there lurked
unseen and dangerous matter. Little affected by this, however, he was
perfectly satisfied with his quarters and would have remained there till
morning, but that his conductor rose soon after midnight, to go home; Mr
Tappertit following his example, left him no excuse to stay. So they all
three left the house together: roaring a No-Popery song until the fields
resounded with the dismal noise.

'Cheer up, captain!' cried Hugh, when they had roared themselves out of
breath. 'Another stave!'

Mr Tappertit, nothing loath, began again; and so the three went
staggering on, arm-in-arm, shouting like madmen, and defying the watch
with great valour. Indeed this did not require any unusual bravery or
boldness, as the watchmen of that time, being selected for the office
on account of excessive age and extraordinary infirmity, had a custom
of shutting themselves up tight in their boxes on the first symptoms
of disturbance, and remaining there until they disappeared. In these
proceedings, Mr Dennis, who had a gruff voice and lungs of considerable
power, distinguished himself very much, and acquired great credit with
his two companions.

'What a queer fellow you are!' said Mr Tappertit. 'You're so precious
sly and close. Why don't you ever tell what trade you're of?'

'Answer the captain instantly,' cried Hugh, beating his hat down on his
head; 'why don't you ever tell what trade you're of?'

'I'm of as gen-teel a calling, brother, as any man in England--as light
a business as any gentleman could desire.'

'Was you 'prenticed to it?' asked Mr Tappertit.

'No. Natural genius,' said Mr Dennis. 'No 'prenticing. It come
by natur'. Muster Gashford knows my calling. Look at that hand of
mine--many and many a job that hand has done, with a neatness and
dexterity, never known afore. When I look at that hand,' said Mr
Dennis, shaking it in the air, 'and remember the helegant bits of work
it has turned off, I feel quite molloncholy to think it should ever grow
old and feeble. But sich is life!'

He heaved a deep sigh as he indulged in these reflections, and putting
his fingers with an absent air on Hugh's throat, and particularly under
his left ear, as if he were studying the anatomical development of that
part of his frame, shook his head in a despondent manner and actually
shed tears.

'You're a kind of artist, I suppose--eh!' said Mr Tappertit.

'Yes,' rejoined Dennis; 'yes--I may call myself a artist--a fancy
workman--art improves natur'--that's my motto.'

'And what do you call this?' said Mr Tappertit taking his stick out of
his hand.

'That's my portrait atop,' Dennis replied; 'd'ye think it's like?'

'Why--it's a little too handsome,' said Mr Tappertit. 'Who did it? You?'

'I!' repeated Dennis, gazing fondly on his image. 'I wish I had the
talent. That was carved by a friend of mine, as is now no more. The very
day afore he died, he cut that with his pocket-knife from memory! "I'll
die game," says my friend, "and my last moments shall be dewoted to
making Dennis's picter." That's it.'

'That was a queer fancy, wasn't it?' said Mr Tappertit.

'It WAS a queer fancy,' rejoined the other, breathing on his fictitious
nose, and polishing it with the cuff of his coat, 'but he was a queer
subject altogether--a kind of gipsy--one of the finest, stand-up men,
you ever see. Ah! He told me some things that would startle you a bit,
did that friend of mine, on the morning when he died.'

'You were with him at the time, were you?' said Mr Tappertit.

'Yes,' he answered with a curious look, 'I was there. Oh! yes certainly,
I was there. He wouldn't have gone off half as comfortable without me. I
had been with three or four of his family under the same circumstances.
They were all fine fellows.'

'They must have been fond of you,' remarked Mr Tappertit, looking at him
sideways.

'I don't know that they was exactly fond of me,' said Dennis, with a
little hesitation, 'but they all had me near 'em when they departed. I
come in for their wardrobes too. This very handkecher that you see round
my neck, belonged to him that I've been speaking of--him as did that
likeness.'

Mr Tappertit glanced at the article referred to, and appeared to think
that the deceased's ideas of dress were of a peculiar and by no means an
expensive kind. He made no remark upon the point, however, and suffered
his mysterious companion to proceed without interruption.

'These smalls,' said Dennis, rubbing his legs; 'these very smalls--they
belonged to a friend of mine that's left off sich incumbrances for ever:
this coat too--I've often walked behind this coat, in the street, and
wondered whether it would ever come to me: this pair of shoes have
danced a hornpipe for another man, afore my eyes, full half-a-dozen
times at least: and as to my hat,' he said, taking it off, and whirling
it round upon his fist--'Lord! I've seen this hat go up Holborn on the
box of a hackney-coach--ah, many and many a day!'

'You don't mean to say their old wearers are ALL dead, I hope?' said Mr
Tappertit, falling a little distance from him as he spoke.

'Every one of 'em,' replied Dennis. 'Every man Jack!'

There was something so very ghastly in this circumstance, and it
appeared to account, in such a very strange and dismal manner, for his
faded dress--which, in this new aspect, seemed discoloured by the earth
from graves--that Mr Tappertit abruptly found he was going another way,
and, stopping short, bade him good night with the utmost heartiness. As
they happened to be near the Old Bailey, and Mr Dennis knew there were
turnkeys in the lodge with whom he could pass the night, and discuss
professional subjects of common interest among them before a rousing
fire, and over a social glass, he separated from his companions without
any great regret, and warmly shaking hands with Hugh, and making an
early appointment for their meeting at The Boot, left them to pursue
their road.

'That's a strange sort of man,' said Mr Tappertit, watching the
hackney-coachman's hat as it went bobbing down the street. 'I don't know
what to make of him. Why can't he have his smalls made to order, or wear
live clothes at any rate?'

'He's a lucky man, captain,' cried Hugh. 'I should like to have such
friends as his.'

'I hope he don't get 'em to make their wills, and then knock 'em on the
head,' said Mr Tappertit, musing. 'But come. The United B.'s expect me.
On!--What's the matter?'

'I quite forgot,' said Hugh, who had started at the striking of a
neighbouring clock. 'I have somebody to see to-night--I must turn back
directly. The drinking and singing put it out of my head. It's well I
remembered it!'

Mr Tappertit looked at him as though he were about to give utterance to
some very majestic sentiments in reference to this act of desertion, but
as it was clear, from Hugh's hasty manner, that the engagement was one
of a pressing nature, he graciously forbore, and gave him his permission
to depart immediately, which Hugh acknowledged with a roar of laughter.

'Good night, captain!' he cried. 'I am yours to the death, remember!'

'Farewell!' said Mr Tappertit, waving his hand. 'Be bold and vigilant!'

'No Popery, captain!' roared Hugh.

'England in blood first!' cried his desperate leader. Whereat Hugh
cheered and laughed, and ran off like a greyhound.

'That man will prove a credit to my corps,' said Simon, turning
thoughtfully upon his heel. 'And let me see. In an altered state of
society--which must ensue if we break out and are victorious--when the
locksmith's child is mine, Miggs must be got rid of somehow, or she'll
poison the tea-kettle one evening when I'm out. He might marry Miggs, if
he was drunk enough. It shall be done. I'll make a note of it.'



Chapter 40


Little thinking of the plan for his happy settlement in life which had
suggested itself to the teeming brain of his provident commander, Hugh
made no pause until Saint Dunstan's giants struck the hour above him,
when he worked the handle of a pump which stood hard by, with great
vigour, and thrusting his head under the spout, let the water gush upon
him until a little stream ran down from every uncombed hair, and he was
wet to the waist. Considerably refreshed by this ablution, both in mind
and body, and almost sobered for the time, he dried himself as he best
could; then crossed the road, and plied the knocker of the Middle Temple
gate.

The night-porter looked through a small grating in the portal with a
surly eye, and cried 'Halloa!' which greeting Hugh returned in kind, and
bade him open quickly.

'We don't sell beer here,' cried the man; 'what else do you want?'

'To come in,' Hugh replied, with a kick at the door.

'Where to go?'

'Paper Buildings.'

'Whose chambers?'

'Sir John Chester's.' Each of which answers, he emphasised with another
kick.

After a little growling on the other side, the gate was opened, and he
passed in: undergoing a close inspection from the porter as he did so.

'YOU wanting Sir John, at this time of night!' said the man.

'Ay!' said Hugh. 'I! What of that?'

'Why, I must go with you and see that you do, for I don't believe it.'

'Come along then.'

Eyeing him with suspicious looks, the man, with key and lantern, walked
on at his side, and attended him to Sir John Chester's door, at which
Hugh gave one knock, that echoed through the dark staircase like a
ghostly summons, and made the dull light tremble in the drowsy lamp.

'Do you think he wants me now?' said Hugh.

Before the man had time to answer, a footstep was heard within, a light
appeared, and Sir John, in his dressing-gown and slippers, opened the
door.

'I ask your pardon, Sir John,' said the porter, pulling off his hat.
'Here's a young man says he wants to speak to you. It's late for
strangers. I thought it best to see that all was right.'

'Aha!' cried Sir John, raising his eyebrows. 'It's you, messenger, is
it? Go in. Quite right, friend. I commend your prudence highly. Thank
you. God bless you. Good night.'

To be commended, thanked, God-blessed, and bade good night by one who
carried 'Sir' before his name, and wrote himself M.P. to boot, was
something for a porter. He withdrew with much humility and reverence.
Sir John followed his late visitor into the dressing-room, and sitting
in his easy-chair before the fire, and moving it so that he could see
him as he stood, hat in hand, beside the door, looked at him from head
to foot.

The old face, calm and pleasant as ever; the complexion, quite juvenile
in its bloom and clearness; the same smile; the wonted precision and
elegance of dress; the white, well-ordered teeth; the delicate hands;
the composed and quiet manner; everything as it used to be: no mark of
age or passion, envy, hate, or discontent: all unruffled and serene, and
quite delightful to behold.

He wrote himself M.P.--but how? Why, thus. It was a proud family--more
proud, indeed, than wealthy. He had stood in danger of arrest; of
bailiffs, and a jail--a vulgar jail, to which the common people with
small incomes went. Gentlemen of ancient houses have no privilege of
exemption from such cruel laws--unless they are of one great house, and
then they have. A proud man of his stock and kindred had the means of
sending him there. He offered--not indeed to pay his debts, but to let
him sit for a close borough until his own son came of age, which, if he
lived, would come to pass in twenty years. It was quite as good as an
Insolvent Act, and infinitely more genteel. So Sir John Chester was a
member of Parliament.

But how Sir John? Nothing so simple, or so easy. One touch with a sword
of state, and the transformation was effected. John Chester, Esquire,
M.P., attended court--went up with an address--headed a deputation.
Such elegance of manner, so many graces of deportment, such powers of
conversation, could never pass unnoticed. Mr was too common for
such merit. A man so gentlemanly should have been--but Fortune is
capricious--born a Duke: just as some dukes should have been born
labourers. He caught the fancy of the king, knelt down a grub, and rose
a butterfly. John Chester, Esquire, was knighted and became Sir John.

'I thought when you left me this evening, my esteemed acquaintance,'
said Sir John after a pretty long silence, 'that you intended to return
with all despatch?'

'So I did, master.'

'And so you have?' he retorted, glancing at his watch. 'Is that what you
would say?'

Instead of replying, Hugh changed the leg on which he leant, shuffled
his cap from one hand to the other, looked at the ground, the wall, the
ceiling, and finally at Sir John himself; before whose pleasant face he
lowered his eyes again, and fixed them on the floor.

'And how have you been employing yourself in the meanwhile?' quoth Sir
John, lazily crossing his legs. 'Where have you been? what harm have you
been doing?'

'No harm at all, master,' growled Hugh, with humility. 'I have only done
as you ordered.'

'As I WHAT?' returned Sir John.

'Well then,' said Hugh uneasily, 'as you advised, or said I ought, or
said I might, or said that you would do, if you was me. Don't be so hard
upon me, master.'

Something like an expression of triumph in the perfect control he had
established over this rough instrument appeared in the knight's face for
an instant; but it vanished directly, as he said--paring his nails while
speaking:

'When you say I ordered you, my good fellow, you imply that I directed
you to do something for me--something I wanted done--something for my
own ends and purposes--you see? Now I am sure I needn't enlarge upon the
extreme absurdity of such an idea, however unintentional; so please--'
and here he turned his eyes upon him--'to be more guarded. Will you?'

'I meant to give you no offence,' said Hugh. 'I don't know what to say.
You catch me up so very short.'

'You will be caught up much shorter, my good friend--infinitely
shorter--one of these days, depend upon it,' replied his patron calmly.
'By-the-bye, instead of wondering why you have been so long, my wonder
should be why you came at all. Why did you?'

'You know, master,' said Hugh, 'that I couldn't read the bill I found,
and that supposing it to be something particular from the way it was
wrapped up, I brought it here.'

'And could you ask no one else to read it, Bruin?' said Sir John.

'No one that I could trust with secrets, master. Since Barnaby Rudge
was lost sight of for good and all--and that's five years ago--I haven't
talked with any one but you.'

'You have done me honour, I am sure.'

'I have come to and fro, master, all through that time, when there was
anything to tell, because I knew that you'd be angry with me if I stayed
away,' said Hugh, blurting the words out, after an embarrassed silence;
'and because I wished to please you if I could, and not to have you go
against me. There. That's the true reason why I came to-night. You know
that, master, I am sure.'

'You are a specious fellow,' returned Sir John, fixing his eyes upon
him, 'and carry two faces under your hood, as well as the best. Didn't
you give me in this room, this evening, any other reason; no dislike
of anybody who has slighted you lately, on all occasions, abused you,
treated you with rudeness; acted towards you, more as if you were a
mongrel dog than a man like himself?'

'To be sure I did!' cried Hugh, his passion rising, as the other meant
it should; 'and I say it all over now, again. I'd do anything to have
some revenge on him--anything. And when you told me that he and all
the Catholics would suffer from those who joined together under that
handbill, I said I'd make one of 'em, if their master was the devil
himself. I AM one of 'em. See whether I am as good as my word and turn
out to be among the foremost, or no. I mayn't have much head, master,
but I've head enough to remember those that use me ill. You shall see,
and so shall he, and so shall hundreds more, how my spirit backs me
when the time comes. My bark is nothing to my bite. Some that I know had
better have a wild lion among 'em than me, when I am fairly loose--they
had!'

The knight looked at him with a smile of far deeper meaning than
ordinary; and pointing to the old cupboard, followed him with his eyes
while he filled and drank a glass of liquor; and smiled when his back
was turned, with deeper meaning yet.

'You are in a blustering mood, my friend,' he said, when Hugh confronted
him again.

'Not I, master!' cried Hugh. 'I don't say half I mean. I can't. I
haven't got the gift. There are talkers enough among us; I'll be one of
the doers.'

'Oh! you have joined those fellows then?' said Sir John, with an air of
most profound indifference.

'Yes. I went up to the house you told me of; and got put down upon the
muster. There was another man there, named Dennis--'

'Dennis, eh!' cried Sir John, laughing. 'Ay, ay! a pleasant fellow, I
believe?'

'A roaring dog, master--one after my own heart--hot upon the matter
too--red hot.'

'So I have heard,' replied Sir John, carelessly. 'You don't happen to
know his trade, do you?'

'He wouldn't say,' cried Hugh. 'He keeps it secret.'

'Ha ha!' laughed Sir John. 'A strange fancy--a weakness with some
persons--you'll know it one day, I dare swear.'

'We're intimate already,' said Hugh.

'Quite natural! And have been drinking together, eh?' pursued Sir John.
'Did you say what place you went to in company, when you left Lord
George's?'

Hugh had not said or thought of saying, but he told him; and this
inquiry being followed by a long train of questions, he related all that
had passed both in and out of doors, the kind of people he had seen,
their numbers, state of feeling, mode of conversation, apparent
expectations and intentions. His questioning was so artfully contrived,
that he seemed even in his own eyes to volunteer all this information
rather than to have it wrested from him; and he was brought to this
state of feeling so naturally, that when Mr Chester yawned at length and
declared himself quite wearied out, he made a rough kind of excuse for
having talked so much.

'There--get you gone,' said Sir John, holding the door open in his hand.
'You have made a pretty evening's work. I told you not to do this. You
may get into trouble. You'll have an opportunity of revenging yourself
on your proud friend Haredale, though, and for that, you'd hazard
anything, I suppose?'

'I would,' retorted Hugh, stopping in his passage out and looking
back; 'but what do I risk! What do I stand a chance of losing, master?
Friends, home? A fig for 'em all; I have none; they are nothing to me.
Give me a good scuffle; let me pay off old scores in a bold riot where
there are men to stand by me; and then use me as you like--it don't
matter much to me what the end is!'

'What have you done with that paper?' said Sir John.

'I have it here, master.'

'Drop it again as you go along; it's as well not to keep such things
about you.'

Hugh nodded, and touching his cap with an air of as much respect as he
could summon up, departed.

Sir John, fastening the doors behind him, went back to his
dressing-room, and sat down once again before the fire, at which he
gazed for a long time, in earnest meditation.

'This happens fortunately,' he said, breaking into a smile, 'and
promises well. Let me see. My relative and I, who are the most
Protestant fellows in the world, give our worst wishes to the Roman
Catholic cause; and to Saville, who introduces their bill, I have a
personal objection besides; but as each of us has himself for the first
article in his creed, we cannot commit ourselves by joining with a very
extravagant madman, such as this Gordon most undoubtedly is. Now really,
to foment his disturbances in secret, through the medium of such a very
apt instrument as my savage friend here, may further our real ends;
and to express at all becoming seasons, in moderate and polite terms,
a disapprobation of his proceedings, though we agree with him in
principle, will certainly be to gain a character for honesty and
uprightness of purpose, which cannot fail to do us infinite service, and
to raise us into some importance. Good! So much for public grounds. As
to private considerations, I confess that if these vagabonds WOULD make
some riotous demonstration (which does not appear impossible), and WOULD
inflict some little chastisement on Haredale as a not inactive man among
his sect, it would be extremely agreeable to my feelings, and would
amuse me beyond measure. Good again! Perhaps better!'

When he came to this point, he took a pinch of snuff; then beginning
slowly to undress, he resumed his meditations, by saying with a smile:

'I fear, I DO fear exceedingly, that my friend is following fast in the
footsteps of his mother. His intimacy with Mr Dennis is very ominous.
But I have no doubt he must have come to that end any way. If I lend
him a helping hand, the only difference is, that he may, upon the whole,
possibly drink a few gallons, or puncheons, or hogsheads, less in this
life than he otherwise would. It's no business of mine. It's a matter of
very small importance!'

So he took another pinch of snuff, and went to bed.



Chapter 41


From the workshop of the Golden Key, there issued forth a tinkling
sound, so merry and good-humoured, that it suggested the idea of some
one working blithely, and made quite pleasant music. No man who hammered
on at a dull monotonous duty, could have brought such cheerful notes
from steel and iron; none but a chirping, healthy, honest-hearted
fellow, who made the best of everything, and felt kindly towards
everybody, could have done it for an instant. He might have been a
coppersmith, and still been musical. If he had sat in a jolting waggon,
full of rods of iron, it seemed as if he would have brought some harmony
out of it.

Tink, tink, tink--clear as a silver bell, and audible at every pause of
the streets' harsher noises, as though it said, 'I don't care; nothing
puts me out; I am resolved to be happy.' Women scolded, children
squalled, heavy carts went rumbling by, horrible cries proceeded from
the lungs of hawkers; still it struck in again, no higher, no lower,
no louder, no softer; not thrusting itself on people's notice a bit the
more for having been outdone by louder sounds--tink, tink, tink, tink,
tink.

It was a perfect embodiment of the still small voice, free from
all cold, hoarseness, huskiness, or unhealthiness of any kind;
foot-passengers slackened their pace, and were disposed to linger near
it; neighbours who had got up splenetic that morning, felt good-humour
stealing on them as they heard it, and by degrees became quite
sprightly; mothers danced their babies to its ringing; still the same
magical tink, tink, tink, came gaily from the workshop of the Golden
Key.

Who but the locksmith could have made such music! A gleam of sun shining
through the unsashed window, and chequering the dark workshop with a
broad patch of light, fell full upon him, as though attracted by his
sunny heart. There he stood working at his anvil, his face all radiant
with exercise and gladness, his sleeves turned up, his wig pushed off
his shining forehead--the easiest, freest, happiest man in all the
world. Beside him sat a sleek cat, purring and winking in the light, and
falling every now and then into an idle doze, as from excess of comfort.
Toby looked on from a tall bench hard by; one beaming smile, from his
broad nut-brown face down to the slack-baked buckles in his shoes. The
very locks that hung around had something jovial in their rust, and
seemed like gouty gentlemen of hearty natures, disposed to joke on their
infirmities. There was nothing surly or severe in the whole scene.
It seemed impossible that any one of the innumerable keys could fit a
churlish strong-box or a prison-door. Cellars of beer and wine, rooms
where there were fires, books, gossip, and cheering laughter--these
were their proper sphere of action. Places of distrust and cruelty, and
restraint, they would have left quadruple-locked for ever.

Tink, tink, tink. The locksmith paused at last, and wiped his brow. The
silence roused the cat, who, jumping softly down, crept to the door,
and watched with tiger eyes a bird-cage in an opposite window. Gabriel
lifted Toby to his mouth, and took a hearty draught.

Then, as he stood upright, with his head flung back, and his portly
chest thrown out, you would have seen that Gabriel's lower man was
clothed in military gear. Glancing at the wall beyond, there might
have been espied, hanging on their several pegs, a cap and feather,
broadsword, sash, and coat of scarlet; which any man learned in such
matters would have known from their make and pattern to be the uniform
of a serjeant in the Royal East London Volunteers.

As the locksmith put his mug down, empty, on the bench whence it had
smiled on him before, he glanced at these articles with a laughing eye,
and looking at them with his head a little on one side, as though he
would get them all into a focus, said, leaning on his hammer:

'Time was, now, I remember, when I was like to run mad with the desire
to wear a coat of that colour. If any one (except my father) had called
me a fool for my pains, how I should have fired and fumed! But what a
fool I must have been, sure-ly!'

'Ah!' sighed Mrs Varden, who had entered unobserved. 'A fool indeed. A
man at your time of life, Varden, should know better now.'

'Why, what a ridiculous woman you are, Martha,' said the locksmith,
turning round with a smile.

'Certainly,' replied Mrs V. with great demureness. 'Of course I am. I
know that, Varden. Thank you.'

'I mean--' began the locksmith.

'Yes,' said his wife, 'I know what you mean. You speak quite plain
enough to be understood, Varden. It's very kind of you to adapt yourself
to my capacity, I am sure.'

'Tut, tut, Martha,' rejoined the locksmith; 'don't take offence at
nothing. I mean, how strange it is of you to run down volunteering, when
it's done to defend you and all the other women, and our own fireside
and everybody else's, in case of need.'

'It's unchristian,' cried Mrs Varden, shaking her head.

'Unchristian!' said the locksmith. 'Why, what the devil--'

Mrs Varden looked at the ceiling, as in expectation that the consequence
of this profanity would be the immediate descent of the four-post
bedstead on the second floor, together with the best sitting-room on the
first; but no visible judgment occurring, she heaved a deep sigh, and
begged her husband, in a tone of resignation, to go on, and by all means
to blaspheme as much as possible, because he knew she liked it.

The locksmith did for a moment seem disposed to gratify her, but he gave
a great gulp, and mildly rejoined:

'I was going to say, what on earth do you call it unchristian for?
Which would be most unchristian, Martha--to sit quietly down and let our
houses be sacked by a foreign army, or to turn out like men and drive
'em off? Shouldn't I be a nice sort of a Christian, if I crept into
a corner of my own chimney and looked on while a parcel of whiskered
savages bore off Dolly--or you?'

When he said 'or you,' Mrs Varden, despite herself, relaxed into a
smile. There was something complimentary in the idea. 'In such a state
of things as that, indeed--' she simpered.

'As that!' repeated the locksmith. 'Well, that would be the state of
things directly. Even Miggs would go. Some black tambourine-player,
with a great turban on, would be bearing HER off, and, unless the
tambourine-player was proof against kicking and scratching, it's
my belief he'd have the worst of it. Ha ha ha! I'd forgive the
tambourine-player. I wouldn't have him interfered with on any account,
poor fellow.' And here the locksmith laughed again so heartily, that
tears came into his eyes--much to Mrs Varden's indignation, who thought
the capture of so sound a Protestant and estimable a private character
as Miggs by a pagan negro, a circumstance too shocking and awful for
contemplation.

The picture Gabriel had drawn, indeed, threatened serious consequences,
and would indubitably have led to them, but luckily at that moment a
light footstep crossed the threshold, and Dolly, running in, threw her
arms round her old father's neck and hugged him tight.

'Here she is at last!' cried Gabriel. 'And how well you look, Doll, and
how late you are, my darling!'

How well she looked? Well? Why, if he had exhausted every laudatory
adjective in the dictionary, it wouldn't have been praise enough. When
and where was there ever such a plump, roguish, comely, bright-eyed,
enticing, bewitching, captivating, maddening little puss in all this
world, as Dolly! What was the Dolly of five years ago, to the Dolly of
that day! How many coachmakers, saddlers, cabinet-makers, and professors
of other useful arts, had deserted their fathers, mothers, sisters,
brothers, and, most of all, their cousins, for the love of her! How many
unknown gentlemen--supposed to be of mighty fortunes, if not titles--had
waited round the corner after dark, and tempted Miggs the incorruptible,
with golden guineas, to deliver offers of marriage folded up in
love-letters! How many disconsolate fathers and substantial tradesmen
had waited on the locksmith for the same purpose, with dismal tales of
how their sons had lost their appetites, and taken to shut themselves up
in dark bedrooms, and wandering in desolate suburbs with pale faces,
and all because of Dolly Varden's loveliness and cruelty! How many
young men, in all previous times of unprecedented steadiness, had turned
suddenly wild and wicked for the same reason, and, in an ecstasy of
unrequited love, taken to wrench off door-knockers, and invert the boxes
of rheumatic watchmen! How had she recruited the king's service, both
by sea and land, through rendering desperate his loving subjects between
the ages of eighteen and twenty-five! How many young ladies had publicly
professed, with tears in their eyes, that for their tastes she was much
too short, too tall, too bold, too cold, too stout, too thin, too fair,
too dark--too everything but handsome! How many old ladies, taking
counsel together, had thanked Heaven their daughters were not like her,
and had hoped she might come to no harm, and had thought she would come
to no good, and had wondered what people saw in her, and had arrived at
the conclusion that she was 'going off' in her looks, or had never
come on in them, and that she was a thorough imposition and a popular
mistake!

And yet here was this same Dolly Varden, so whimsical and hard to please
that she was Dolly Varden still, all smiles and dimples and pleasant
looks, and caring no more for the fifty or sixty young fellows who at
that very moment were breaking their hearts to marry her, than if so
many oysters had been crossed in love and opened afterwards.

Dolly hugged her father as has been already stated, and having hugged
her mother also, accompanied both into the little parlour where the
cloth was already laid for dinner, and where Miss Miggs--a trifle more
rigid and bony than of yore--received her with a sort of hysterical
gasp, intended for a smile. Into the hands of that young virgin, she
delivered her bonnet and walking dress (all of a dreadful, artful,
and designing kind), and then said with a laugh, which rivalled the
locksmith's music, 'How glad I always am to be at home again!'

'And how glad we always are, Doll,' said her father, putting back the
dark hair from her sparkling eyes, 'to have you at home. Give me a
kiss.'

If there had been anybody of the male kind there to see her do it--but
there was not--it was a mercy.

'I don't like your being at the Warren,' said the locksmith, 'I can't
bear to have you out of my sight. And what is the news over yonder,
Doll?'

'What news there is, I think you know already,' replied his daughter. 'I
am sure you do though.'

'Ay?' cried the locksmith. 'What's that?'

'Come, come,' said Dolly, 'you know very well. I want you to tell me why
Mr Haredale--oh, how gruff he is again, to be sure!--has been away from
home for some days past, and why he is travelling about (we know he IS
travelling, because of his letters) without telling his own niece why or
wherefore.'

'Miss Emma doesn't want to know, I'll swear,' returned the locksmith.

'I don't know that,' said Dolly; 'but I do, at any rate. Do tell me. Why
is he so secret, and what is this ghost story, which nobody is to tell
Miss Emma, and which seems to be mixed up with his going away? Now I see
you know by your colouring so.'

'What the story means, or is, or has to do with it, I know no more than
you, my dear,' returned the locksmith, 'except that it's some foolish
fear of little Solomon's--which has, indeed, no meaning in it, I
suppose. As to Mr Haredale's journey, he goes, as I believe--'

'Yes,' said Dolly.

'As I believe,' resumed the locksmith, pinching her cheek, 'on business,
Doll. What it may be, is quite another matter. Read Blue Beard, and
don't be too curious, pet; it's no business of yours or mine, depend
upon that; and here's dinner, which is much more to the purpose.'

Dolly might have remonstrated against this summary dismissal of the
subject, notwithstanding the appearance of dinner, but at the mention
of Blue Beard Mrs Varden interposed, protesting she could not find it
in her conscience to sit tamely by, and hear her child recommended to
peruse the adventures of a Turk and Mussulman--far less of a fabulous
Turk, which she considered that potentate to be. She held that, in such
stirring and tremendous times as those in which they lived, it would
be much more to the purpose if Dolly became a regular subscriber to the
Thunderer, where she would have an opportunity of reading Lord George
Gordon's speeches word for word, which would be a greater comfort and
solace to her, than a hundred and fifty Blue Beards ever could impart.
She appealed in support of this proposition to Miss Miggs, then in
waiting, who said that indeed the peace of mind she had derived from the
perusal of that paper generally, but especially of one article of the
very last week as ever was, entitled 'Great Britain drenched in gore,'
exceeded all belief; the same composition, she added, had also wrought
such a comforting effect on the mind of a married sister of hers, then
resident at Golden Lion Court, number twenty-sivin, second bell-handle
on the right-hand door-post, that, being in a delicate state of health,
and in fact expecting an addition to her family, she had been seized
with fits directly after its perusal, and had raved of the Inquisition
ever since; to the great improvement of her husband and friends. Miss
Miggs went on to say that she would recommend all those whose hearts
were hardened to hear Lord George themselves, whom she commended first,
in respect of his steady Protestantism, then of his oratory, then of
his eyes, then of his nose, then of his legs, and lastly of his figure
generally, which she looked upon as fit for any statue, prince, or
angel, to which sentiment Mrs Varden fully subscribed.

Mrs Varden having cut in, looked at a box upon the mantelshelf, painted
in imitation of a very red-brick dwelling-house, with a yellow roof;
having at top a real chimney, down which voluntary subscribers dropped
their silver, gold, or pence, into the parlour; and on the door the
counterfeit presentment of a brass plate, whereon was legibly inscribed
'Protestant Association:'--and looking at it, said, that it was to her
a source of poignant misery to think that Varden never had, of all his
substance, dropped anything into that temple, save once in secret--as
she afterwards discovered--two fragments of tobacco-pipe, which she
hoped would not be put down to his last account. That Dolly, she was
grieved to say, was no less backward in her contributions, better
loving, as it seemed, to purchase ribbons and such gauds, than to
encourage the great cause, then in such heavy tribulation; and that she
did entreat her (her father she much feared could not be moved) not to
despise, but imitate, the bright example of Miss Miggs, who flung her
wages, as it were, into the very countenance of the Pope, and bruised
his features with her quarter's money.

'Oh, mim,' said Miggs, 'don't relude to that. I had no intentions, mim,
that nobody should know. Such sacrifices as I can make, are quite a
widder's mite. It's all I have,' cried Miggs with a great burst of
tears--for with her they never came on by degrees--'but it's made up to
me in other ways; it's well made up.'

This was quite true, though not perhaps in the sense that Miggs
intended. As she never failed to keep her self-denial full in Mrs
Varden's view, it drew forth so many gifts of caps and gowns and other
articles of dress, that upon the whole the red-brick house was perhaps
the best investment for her small capital she could possibly have hit
upon; returning her interest, at the rate of seven or eight per cent in
money, and fifty at least in personal repute and credit.

'You needn't cry, Miggs,' said Mrs Varden, herself in tears; 'you
needn't be ashamed of it, though your poor mistress IS on the same
side.'

Miggs howled at this remark, in a peculiarly dismal way, and said she
knowed that master hated her. That it was a dreadful thing to live in
families and have dislikes, and not give satisfactions. That to make
divisions was a thing she could not abear to think of, neither could her
feelings let her do it. That if it was master's wishes as she and him
should part, it was best they should part, and she hoped he might be
the happier for it, and always wished him well, and that he might find
somebody as would meet his dispositions. It would be a hard trial, she
said, to part from such a missis, but she could meet any suffering when
her conscience told her she was in the rights, and therefore she was
willing even to go that lengths. She did not think, she added, that she
could long survive the separations, but, as she was hated and looked
upon unpleasant, perhaps her dying as soon as possible would be the best
endings for all parties. With this affecting conclusion, Miss Miggs shed
more tears, and sobbed abundantly.

'Can you bear this, Varden?' said his wife in a solemn voice, laying
down her knife and fork.

'Why, not very well, my dear,' rejoined the locksmith, 'but I try to
keep my temper.'

'Don't let there be words on my account, mim,' sobbed Miggs. 'It's much
the best that we should part. I wouldn't stay--oh, gracious me!--and
make dissensions, not for a annual gold mine, and found in tea and
sugar.'

Lest the reader should be at any loss to discover the cause of Miss
Miggs's deep emotion, it may be whispered apart that, happening to
be listening, as her custom sometimes was, when Gabriel and his wife
conversed together, she had heard the locksmith's joke relative to the
foreign black who played the tambourine, and bursting with the spiteful
feelings which the taunt awoke in her fair breast, exploded in the
manner we have witnessed. Matters having now arrived at a crisis, the
locksmith, as usual, and for the sake of peace and quietness, gave in.

'What are you crying for, girl?' he said. 'What's the matter with you?
What are you talking about hatred for? I don't hate you; I don't hate
anybody. Dry your eyes and make yourself agreeable, in Heaven's name,
and let us all be happy while we can.'

The allied powers deeming it good generalship to consider this a
sufficient apology on the part of the enemy, and confession of having
been in the wrong, did dry their eyes and take it in good part. Miss
Miggs observed that she bore no malice, no not to her greatest foe, whom
she rather loved the more indeed, the greater persecution she sustained.
Mrs Varden approved of this meek and forgiving spirit in high terms,
and incidentally declared as a closing article of agreement, that Dolly
should accompany her to the Clerkenwell branch of the association, that
very night. This was an extraordinary instance of her great prudence and
policy; having had this end in view from the first, and entertaining
a secret misgiving that the locksmith (who was bold when Dolly was in
question) would object, she had backed Miss Miggs up to this point, in
order that she might have him at a disadvantage. The manoeuvre succeeded
so well that Gabriel only made a wry face, and with the warning he had
just had, fresh in his mind, did not dare to say one word.

The difference ended, therefore, in Miggs being presented with a gown
by Mrs Varden and half-a-crown by Dolly, as if she had eminently
distinguished herself in the paths of morality and goodness. Mrs V.,
according to custom, expressed her hope that Varden would take a lesson
from what had passed and learn more generous conduct for the time to
come; and the dinner being now cold and nobody's appetite very much
