"Where art thou, O Moslem dog! that wouldst play the lion'?--Where art
thou, Muza Ben Abil Gazan'?"

"Before thee, Christian!" cried a stern and clear voice; and from
amongst the helmets of his people, gleamed the dazzling turban of the
Moor.

Hernando checked his steed, gazed a moment at his foe, turned back,
for greater impetus to his charge, and, in a moment more, the bravest
warriors of the two armies met, lance to lance.

The round shield of Muza received the Christian's weapon; his own spear
shivered, harmless, upon the breast of the giant. He drew his sword,
whirled it rapidly over his head, and, for some minutes, the eyes of
the bystanders could scarcely mark the marvellous rapidity with which
strokes were given and parried by those redoubted swordsmen.

At length, Hernando, anxious to bring to bear his superior strength,
spurred close to Muza; and, leaving his sword pendant by a thong to his
wrist, seized the shield of Muza in his formidable grasp, and plucked
it away, with a force that the Moor vainly endeavoured to resist:
Muza, therefore, suddenly released his bold; and, ere the Spaniard
had recovered his balance (which was lost by the success of his own
strength, put forth to the utmost), he dashed upon him the hoofs of his
black charger, and with a short but heavy mace, which he caught up from
the saddlebow, dealt Hernando so thundering a blow upon the helmet, that
the giant fell to the ground, stunned and senseless.

To dismount, to repossess himself of his shield, to resume his sabre, to
put one knee to the breast of his fallen foe, was the work of a moment;
and then had Don Hernando del Pulgar been sped, without priest or
surgeon, but that, alarmed by the peril of their most valiant comrade,
twenty knights spurred at once to the rescue, and the points of twenty
lances kept the Lion of Granada from his prey. Thither, with similar
speed, rushed the Moorish champions; and the fight became close and
deadly round the body of the still unconscious Christian. Not an instant
of leisure to unlace the helmet of Hernando, by removing which, alone,
the Moorish blade could find a mortal place, was permitted to Muza; and,
what with the spears and trampling hoofs around him, the situation of
the Paynim was more dangerous than that of the Christian. Meanwhile,
Hernando recovered his dizzy senses; and, made aware of his state,
watched his occasion, and suddenly shook off the knee of the Moor.
With another effort he was on his feet and the two champions stood
confronting each other, neither very eager to renew the combat. But
on foot, Muza, daring and rash as he was, could not but recognise his
disadvantage against the enormous strength and impenetrable armour of
the Christian. He drew back, whistled to his barb, that, piercing the
ranks of the horsemen, was by his side on the instant, remounted,
and was in the midst of the foe, almost ere the slower Spaniard was
conscious of his disappearance.

But Hernando was not delivered from his enemy. Clearing a space around
him, as three knights, mortally wounded, fell beneath his sabre, Muza
now drew from behind his shoulder his short Arabian bow, and shaft after
shaft came rattling upon the mail of the dismounted Christian with
so marvellous a celerity, that, encumbered as he was with his heavy
accoutrements, he was unable either to escape from the spot, or ward off
that arrowy rain; and felt that nothing but chance, or Our Lady, could
prevent the death which one such arrow would occasion, if it should find
the opening of the visor, or the joints of the hauberk.

"Mother of Mercy," groaned the knight, perplexed and enraged, "let not
thy servant be shot down like a hart, by this cowardly warfare; but, if
I must fall, be it with mine enemy, grappling hand to hand."

While yet muttering this short invocation, the war-cry of Spain was
heard hard by, and the gallant company of Villena was seen scouring
across the plain to the succour of their comrades. The deadly attention
of Muza was distracted from individual foes, however eminent; he wheeled
round, re-collected his men, and, in a serried charge, met the new enemy
in midway.

While the contest thus fared in that part of the field, the scheme of
Ferdinand had succeeded so far as to break up the battle in detached
sections. Far and near, plain, grove, garden, tower, presented each the
scene of obstinate and determined conflict. Boabdil, at the head of
his chosen guard, the flower of the haughtier tribe of nobles who were
jealous of the fame and blood of the tribe of Muza, and followed also
by his gigantic Ethiopians, exposed his person to every peril, with the
desperate valour of a man who feels his own stake is greatest in the
field. As he most distrusted the infantry, so amongst the infantry he
chiefly bestowed his presence; and wherever he appeared, he sufficed,
for the moment, to turn the changes of the engagement. At length, at
mid-day Ponce de Leon led against the largest detachment of the Moorish
foot a strong and numerous battalion of the best-disciplined and veteran
soldiery of Spain. He had succeeded in winning a fortress, from which
his artillery could play with effect; and the troops he led were
composed, partly of men flushed with recent triumph, and partly of
a fresh reserve, now first brought into the field. A comely and a
breathless spectacle it was to behold this Christian squadron emerging
from a blazing copse, which they fired on their march; the red light
gleaming on their complete armour, as, in steady and solemn order, they
swept on to the swaying and clamorous ranks of the Moorish infantry.
Boabdil learned the danger from his scouts; and hastily quitting a
tower from which he had for a while repulsed a hostile legion, he threw
himself into the midst of the battalions menaced by the skilful Ponce
de Leon. Almost at the same moment, the wild and ominous apparition of
Almamen, long absent from the eyes of the Moors, appeared in the same
quarter, so suddenly and unexpectedly, that none knew whence he had
emerged; the sacred standard in his left hand--his sabre, bared and
dripping gore, in his right--his face exposed, and its powerful features
working with an excitement that seemed inspired; his abrupt presence
breathed a new soul into the Moors.

"They come! they come!" he shrieked aloud. "The God of the East hath
delivered the Goth into your hands!" From rank to rank--from line to
line--sped the santon; and, as the mystic banner gleamed before
the soldiery, each closed his eyes and muttered an "amen" to his
adjurations. And now, to the cry of "Spain and St. Iago," came trampling
down the relentless charge of the Christian war. At the same instant,
from the fortress lately taken by Ponce de Leon, the artillery opened
upon the Moors, and did deadly havoc. The Moslems wavered a moment when
before them gleamed the white banner of Almamen; and they beheld him
rushing, alone and on foot, amidst the foe. Taught to believe the war
itself depended on the preservation of the enchanted banner, the Paynims
could not see it thus rashly adventured without anxiety and shame: they
rallied, advanced firmly, and Boabdil himself, with waving cimiter and
fierce exclamations, dashed impetuously at the head of his guards and
Ethiopians into the affray. The battle became obstinate and bloody.
Thrice the white banner disappeared amidst the closing ranks; and
thrice, like a moon from the clouds, it shone forth again--the light and
guide of the Pagan power.

The day ripened; and the hills already cast lengthening shadows over the
blazing groves and the still Darro, whose waters, in every creek where
the tide was arrested, ran red with blood, when Ferdinand, collecting
his whole reserve, descended from the eminence on which hitherto he had
posted himself. With him moved three thousand foot and a thousand horse,
fresh in their vigour, and panting for a share in that glorious day.
The king himself, who, though constitutionally fearless, from motives
of policy rarely perilled his person, save on imminent occasions, was
resolved not to be outdone by Boabdil; and armed cap-a-pied in mail, so
wrought with gold that it seemed nearly all of that costly metal, with
his snow-white plumage waving above a small diadem that surmounted his
lofty helm, he seemed a fit leader to that armament of heroes. Behind
him flaunted the great gonfanon of Spain, and trump and cymbal heralded
his approach. The Count de Tendilla rode by his side.

"Senor," said Ferdinand, "the infidels fight hard; but they are in the
snare--we are about to close the nets upon them. But what cavalcade is
this?"

The group that thus drew the king's attention consisted of six squires,
bearing, on a martial litter, composed of shields, the stalwart form of
Hernando del Pulgar.

"Ah, the dogs!" cried the king, as he recognised the pale features of
the darling of the army,--"have they murdered the bravest knight that
ever fought for Christendom?"

"Not that, your majesty," quoth he of the Exploits, faintly, "but I am
sorely stricken."

"It must have been more than man who struck thee down," said the king.

"It was the mace of Muza Ben Abil Gazan, an please you, sire," said one
of the squires; "but it came on the good knight unawares, and long after
his own arm had seemingly driven away the Pagan."

"We will avenge thee well," said the king, setting his teeth: "let our
own leeches tend thy wounds. Forward, sir knights! St. Iago and Spain!"

The battle had now gathered to a vortex; Muza and his cavalry had
joined Boabdil and the Moorish foot. On the other hand, Villena had
been reinforced by detachments that in almost every other quarter of the
field had routed the foe. The Moors had been driven back, though inch
by inch; they were now in the broad space before the very walls of the
city, which were still crowded by the pale and anxious faces of the aged
and the women: and, at every pause in the artillery, the voices that
spoke of HOME were borne by that lurid air to the ears of the infidels.
The shout that rang through the Christian force as Ferdinand now joined
it struck like a death-knell upon the last hope of Boabdil. But the
blood of his fierce ancestry burned in his veins, and the cheering
voice of Almamen, whom nothing daunted, inspired him with a kind of
superstitious frenzy.

"King against king--so be it! Let Allah decide between us!" cried the
Moorish monarch. "Bind up this wound 'tis well! A steed for the santon!
Now, my prophet and my friend, mount by the side of thy king--let us, at
least, fall together. Lelilies! Lelilies!"

Throughout the brave Christian ranks went a thrill of reluctant
admiration, as they beheld the Paynim king, conspicuous by his fair
beard and the jewels of his harness, lead the scanty guard yet left to
him once more into the thickest of their lines. Simultaneously Muza and
his Zegris made their fiery charge; and the Moorish infantry, excited by
the example of their leaders, followed with unslackened and dogged
zeal. The Christians gave way--they were beaten back: Ferdinand spurred
forward; and, ere either party were well aware of it, both kings met in
the same melee: all order and discipline, for the moment, lost, general
and monarch were, as common soldiers, fighting hand to hand. It was then
that Ferdinand, after bearing down before his lance Naim Reduon, second
only to Muza in the songs of Granada, beheld opposed to him a strange
form, that seemed to that royal Christian rather fiend than man: his
raven hair and beard, clotted with blood, hung like snakes about a
countenance whose features, naturally formed to give expression to the
darkest passions, were distorted with the madness of despairing rage.
Wounded in many places, the blood dabbled his mail; while, over
his head, he waved the banner wrought with mystic characters, which
Ferdinand had already been taught to believe the workmanship of demons.

"Now, perjured king of the Nazarenes!" shouted this formidable champion,
"we meet at last!--no longer host and guest, monarch and dervise, but
man to man! I am Almamen! Die!"

He spoke; and his sword descended so fiercely on that anointed head that
Ferdinand bent to his saddle-bow. But the king quickly recovered his
seat, and gallantly met the encounter; it was one that might have tasked
to the utmost the prowess of his bravest knight. Passions which, in
their number, their nature, and their excess, animated no other champion
on either side, gave to the arm of Almamen the Israelite a preternatural
strength; his blows fell like rain upon the harness of the king; and
the fiery eyes, the gleaming banner of the mysterious sorcerer, who
had eluded the tortures of his Inquisition,--who had walked unscathed
through the midst of his army,--whose single hand had consumed the
encampment of a host, filled the stout heart of a king with a belief
that he encountered no earthly foe. Fortunately, perhaps, for Ferdinand
and Spain, the contest did not last long. Twenty horsemen spurred into
the melee to the rescue of the plumed diadem: Tendilla arrived the
first; with a stroke of his two-handed sword, the white banner was cleft
from its staff, and fell to the earth. At that sight the Moors round
broke forth in a wild and despairing cry: that cry spread from rank to
rank, from horse to foot; the Moorish infantry, sorely pressed on all
sides, no sooner learned the disaster than they turned to fly: the rout
was as fatal as it was sudden. The Christian reserve, just brought into
the field, poured down upon them with a simultaneous charge. Boabdil,
too much engaged to be the first to learn the downfall of the sacred
insignia, suddenly saw himself almost alone, with his diminished
Ethiopians and a handful of his cavaliers.

"Yield thee, Boabdil el Chico!" cried Tendilla, from his rear, "or thou
canst not be saved."

"By the Prophet, never!" exclaimed the king: and he dashed his barb
against the wall of spears behind him; and with but a score or so of his
guard, cut his way through the ranks that were not unwilling, perhaps,
to spare so brave a foe. As he cleared the Spanish battalions, the
unfortunate monarch checked his horse for a moment and gazed along the
plain: he beheld his army flying in all directions, save in that single
spot where yet glittered the turban of Muza Ben Abil Gazan. As he
gazed, he heard the panting nostrils of the chargers behind, and saw the
levelled spears of a company despatched to take him, alive or dead, by
the command of Ferdinand. He laid the reins upon his horse's neck and
galloped into the city--three lances quivered against the portals as he
disappeared through the shadows of the arch. But while Muza remained,
all was not yet lost: he perceived the flight of the infantry and the
king, and with his followers galloped across the plain: he came in time
to encounter and slay, to a man, the pursuers of Boabdil; he then threw
himself before the flying Moors:

"Do ye fly in the sight of your wives and daughters? Would ye not rather
they beheld ye die?"

A thousand voices answered him. "The banner is in the hands of the
infidel--all is lost!" They swept by him, and stopped not till they
gained the gates.

But still a small and devoted remnant of the Moorish cavaliers remained
to shed a last glory over defeat itself. With Muza, their soul and
centre, they fought every atom of ground: it was, as the chronicler
expresses it, as if they grasped the soil with their arms. Twice they
charged into the midst of the foe: the slaughter they made doubled their
own number; but, gathering on and closing in, squadron upon squadron,
came the whole Christian army--they were encompassed, wearied out,
beaten back, as by an ocean. Like wild beasts, driven, at length, to
their lair, they retreated with their faces to the foe; and when Muza
came, the last--his cimiter shivered to the hilt,--he had scarcely
breath to command the gates to be closed and the portcullis lowered, ere
he fell from his charger in a sudden and deadly swoon, caused less by
his exhaustion than his agony and shame. So ended the last battle fought
for the Monarchy of Granada!




CHAPTER II. THE NOVICE.

It was in one of the cells of a convent renowned for the piety of its
inmates and the wholesome austerity of its laws that a young novice sat
alone. The narrow casement was placed so high in the cold grey wall as
to forbid to the tenant of the cell the solace of sad or the distraction
of pious thoughts, which a view of the world without might afford.
Lovely, indeed, was the landscape that spread below; but it was barred
from those youthful and melancholy eyes: for Nature might tempt to a
thousand thoughts, not of a tenor calculated to reconcile the heart to
an eternal sacrifice of the sweet human ties. But a faint and partial
gleam of sunshine broke through the aperture and made yet more cheerless
the dreary aspect and gloomy appurtenances of the cell. And the young
novice seemed to carry on within herself that struggle of emotions
without which there is no victory in the resolves of virtue: sometimes
she wept bitterly, but with a low, subdued sorrow, which spoke rather of
despondency than passion; sometimes she raised her head from her breast,
and smiled as she looked upward, or as her eyes rested on the crucifix
and the death's head that were placed on the rude table by the pallet
on which she sat. They were emblems of death here, and life hereafter,
which, perhaps, afforded to her the sources of a twofold consolation.

She was yet musing, when a slight tap at the door was heard, and the
abbess of the convent appeared.

"Daughter," said she, "I have brought thee the comfort of a sacred
visitor. The Queen of Spain, whose pious tenderness is maternally
anxious for thy full contentment with thy lot, has sent hither a holy
friar, whom she deems more soothing in his counsels than our brother
Tomas, whose ardent zeal often terrifies those whom his honest spirit
only desires to purify and guide. I will leave him with thee. May
the saints bless his ministry!" So saying the abbess retired from the
threshold, making way for a form in the garb of a monk, with the hood
drawn over the face. The monk bowed his head meekly, advanced into the
cell, closed the door, and seated himself, on a stool--which, save the
table and the pallet, seemed the sole furniture of the dismal chamber.

"Daughter," said he, after a pause, "it is a rugged and a mournful
lot this renunciation of earth and all its fair destinies and soft
affections, to one not wholly prepared and armed for the sacrifice.
Confide in me, my child; I am no dire inquisitor, seeking to distort
thy words to thine own peril. I am no bitter and morose ascetic. Beneath
these robes still beats a human heart that can sympathise with human
sorrows. Confide in me without fear. Dost thou not dread the fate they
would force upon thee? Dost thou not shrink back? Wouldst thou not be
free?"

"No," said the poor novice; but the denial came faint and irresolute
from her lips.

"Pause," said the friar, growing more earnest in his tone: "pause--there
is yet time."

"Nay," said the novice, looking up with some surprise in her
countenance; "nay, even were I so weak, escape now is impossible. What
hand could unbar the gates of the convent?"

"Mine!" cried the monk, with impetuosity. "Yes, I have that power. In
all Spain, but one man can save thee, and I am he."

"You!" faltered the novice, gazing at her strange visitor with mingled
astonishment and alarm. "And who are you that could resist the fiat of
that Tomas de Torquemada, before whom, they tell me, even the crowned
heads of Castile and Arragon veil low?"

The monk half rose, with an impatient and almost haughty start, at
this interrogatory; but, reseating himself, replied, in a deep and
