
  [Illustration: EMPEROR CHARLES V]

THE "REFORMERS." Many men became discontented at the way the Church
  was managed. At first all were agreed that the evils of which they
  complained could be removed if priests, bishops, and pope worked
  together to that end. After a while some teachers in different countries
  not only complained of evils, but refused to believe as the Church had
  taught and as most people still believed. They did not mean to divide
  the Christian Church into several churches, but they thought they
  understood the words of the Bible better than the teachers of
  the Church.

THE REFORMATION. At that time people who were not agreed in their
  religious beliefs did not live peaceably in the same countries. The
  princes and kings who were faithful to the Church ordered that the new
  teachers and their followers should be punished. Other princes accepted
  the views of the "reformers," and soon began to punish those of their
  subjects who continued to believe as the Church taught. In Germany these
  princes were called "Protestants," because they protested against the
  efforts of the Emperor Charles and his advisers to stop the spread of
  the new religion. This name was afterwards given to all who refused to
  remain in the older Church, subject to the bishops and the pope.

CATHOLIC AND PROTESTANT LEADERS. The most famous leaders of the
  Roman Catholics at this time were Ignatius Loyola, a Spaniard, Reginald
  Pole, an Englishman, and Carlo Borromeo, an Italian. Loyola had been a
  soldier in his youth, but while recovering from a serious wound,
  resolved to be a missionary. With several other young men of the same
  purpose he founded the Society of Jesus or the Jesuit Order. Of the
  Protestants the greatest leaders were Martin Luther, a German, and John
  Calvin, a Frenchman. Luther was a professor in the university at
  Wittenberg in Saxony, which was ruled by the Elector Frederick the Wise.
  Calvin had lived as a student in Paris, but when King Francis resolved
  to allow no Protestants in his kingdom, Calvin was obliged to leave the
  country. He settled in the Swiss city of Geneva.

THE LUTHERAN CHURCH. Luther's teachings were accepted by many
  Germans, especially in northern Germany. He translated the Bible into
  German. After a while his followers formed a Church of their own which
  was called Lutheran. It differed from the Roman Catholic Church in the
  way it was governed as well as in what it taught.

THE FRENCH HUGUENOTS. Calvin lived in Geneva, but most of those who
  accepted his teachings continued to live in France. The nickname
  Huguenots, or confederates, was given to them. They were not permitted
  by the French king to worship as Calvin taught, but by 1562 so many
  nobles had joined them that it was no longer possible to treat them as
  criminals. They were permitted to hold their meetings outside the walled
  towns. The leader whom they most honored was Admiral Gaspard de Coligny.
  Both he and they, as we shall see, soon had reason to fear and hate the
  Spaniards. But we must first understand the difficulties which the king
  of Spain had in dealing with his Dutch subjects.

THE KING OF SPAIN AND THE NETHERLANDS. Philip II inherited from his
  father Charles seventeen duchies, counties, and other districts north of
  France in what is now Belgium and Holland. Charles had known how to
  manage these people, because he was brought up among them. The task of
  managing them was not easy. Each district or city had its own special
  rights and its people demanded that these should be respected by the
  ruling prince. Charles had remembered this, but Philip wished to rule
  the Netherlanders, as these people were called, just as he ruled the
  people of Spain.

  [Illustration: THE DIKES ALONG THE YSSEL IN THE NETHERLANDS]

PROTESTANTS IN THE NETHERLANDS. The trouble was made worse because
  many of the Netherlanders became followers of Luther or Calvin, and
  brought their books into the country. Now Philip, like his father
  Charles, was faithful to the teachings of the Church, and thought it was
  his duty to punish such persons. The result was that Philip soon had two
  kinds of enemies in his Netherland provinces, those who did not like the
  way he ruled and those who refused to believe as the Church taught, and
  the two united against him. After a while most of the Lutherans were
  driven away, but the Calvinists kept coming in over the border
  from France.

THE NETHERLANDS. The Netherlands, or Low Countries, are well
  named, especially the northern part where the Dutch live, because much
  of the land is below the level of the sea at high tide, and some of it
  at low tide. For several hundred years the Dutch built dikes to keep
  back the sea, or pumped it out where it flowed in and covered the lower
  lands. Occasionally great storms broke through the dikes and caused the
  Dutch months or years of labor. A people so brave and industrious were
  not likely to submit to the will of Philip II. The chances that they
  would rebel were increased by the spread of the new religious views,
  which the Dutch accepted more readily than their neighbors, the southern
  Netherlanders. The southern Netherlanders who became Calvinists
  generally emigrated to the northern cities, like Amsterdam, where they
  were safer.

  [Illustration: Map Of The Netherlands]

WILLIAM OF ORANGE. William, Prince of Orange, was the leader of the
  Dutch against Philip II. He had been trusted by Charles, Philip's
  father, who had leaned on his shoulder at the great ceremony held in
  Brussels when Charles gave up his throne to Philip. William was called
  the "Silent," because he was careful not to tell his plans to any except
  his nearest friends. When Philip returned to Spain, William was made
  governor or _stadtholder_ of three of the Dutch provinces--Holland,
  Zealand, and Utrecht. Philip was angry because William and other great
  nobles in the Netherlands opposed his way of dealing with the heretics
  and of ruling the Netherlands. In this both the southern Netherlanders
  and the northern Netherlanders were united, although the southern
  Netherlanders remained faithful to the Roman Catholic religion.

SPAIN AND ENGLAND. The English at first had no reason to quarrel
  with the king of Spain. They were friendly to the Netherlanders, who
  were his subjects. During the Middle Ages they sold great quantities of
  wool to the Netherland cities of Bruges, Brussels, and Ghent, and bought
  fine cloth woven in those towns. The friendship of the ruler of the
  Netherlands seemed necessary, if this trade was to prosper. It was the
  trouble about religion which finally made the English and the
  Spaniards enemies.

HENRY VIII. During the reign of Henry VIII, King of England, the
  king, the parliament, and the clergy decided to refuse obedience to the
  pope. The king called himself the head of the Church in England.
  Lutheran views crept into the country as they had done into the
  Netherlands, but King Henry at first disliked the Lutherans quite as
  much as he grew to dislike the pope.

THE ENGLISH CHURCH. So long as Henry lived not much change was made
  in the beliefs or the manner of worship in the Church. During the short
  reign of his son, the English Church became more like the Protestant
  Churches on the Continent, except that in England there were still
  archbishops and bishops, and the government of the Church went on much
  as before. When Henry's daughter Mary was made queen she tried to stop
  these changes, and for a few years her subjects were again obedient to
  the pope, but she died in 1558 and her half-sister, Elizabeth,
  became queen.

  [Illustration: QUEEN ELIZABETH]

THE ENGLISH CHURCH AND THE CATHOLICS. In religious matters Queen
  Elizabeth did much as her father and her brother had done. All persons
  were forced to attend the religious services carried on in the manner
  ordered in the prayer-book. Roman Catholics could not hold any
  government office. They were punished if they tried to persuade others
  to remain faithful to the older Church. Philip did not like this, but
  for a time he preferred to be on friendly terms with the English.

  [Illustration: COSTUMES AT THE TIME OF ELIZABETH]

QUEEN ELIZABETH. Queen Elizabeth ruled England for forty-five
  years. The English regard her reign as the most glorious in their
  history. Before it was over they proved themselves more than a match for
  the Spaniards on the sea. They also began to seek for routes to the East
  and to attempt settlements in America. Their trade was increasing. The
  Greek and Roman writers were studied by English scholars at Oxford and
  Cambridge. Books and poems and plays were written which were to make the
  English language the rival of the languages of Greece and Rome. This was
  the time when Shakespeare wrote his first plays.



    QUESTIONS

    1. Why was it easier to sail toward America from Spain or Portugal
    than from England?

    2. What peoples divided the new world between them? Where did they
    draw the line of division?

    3. Why were the kings of France and Spain rivals? Over what
    countries did King Charles rule?

    4. When did religion become a cause of strife? What king was chiefly
    injured by such struggles?

    5. Who were called "reformers?" By what other names were they
    called?

    6. Who were the leaders of the Catholics? of the Protestants? Who
    were the Huguenots? What was their leader's name?

    7. Why did Philip II and his subjects in the Netherlands quarrel?

    8. What was strange about the land in which the Dutch lived? Who was
    the hero of the Dutch?

    9. Why were the English and the Spaniards at first friendly? What
    king of England refused to obey the pope?

    10. Why do Englishmen think Queen Elizabeth a great ruler? How did
    Elizabeth settle the question of religion?



    EXERCISE

    Collect pictures of the Dutch, of their canals, dikes, and towns.




CHAPTER XIX

FIRST FRENCH ATTEMPTS TO SETTLE AMERICA

CARTIER. During the reign of Francis I, the French made the first
  serious attempts to find a westward route to the Far East and to settle
  the new lands that seemed to lie directly across the pathway. In 1534
  Jacques Cartier was sent with two ships in search of a strait beyond the
  regions controlled by Spain or Portugal which would lead into the
  Pacific Ocean. Cartier passed around the northern side of Newfoundland
  and into the broad expanse of water west of it. This he called the Gulf
  of St. Lawrence.

CARTIER AT MONTREAL. Cartier made a second voyage in the following
  year, exploring the great river which he called the St. Lawrence. He
  went up the river until the heights of Mount Royal or Montreal, as he
  called them, appeared on his right hand, and swift rapids in the river
  blocked his way in front. The name Lachine rapids, or the China rapids,
  which was afterwards given to these, remains to remind us that Cartier
  was searching for a passage to China.

THE FIRST WINTER IN CANADA. Cartier spent the severe winter which
  followed at the foot of the cliffs which mark the site of the modern
  city of Quebec. The expedition returned to France with the coming
  of spring.

ATTEMPTS TO PLANT A COLONY AT QUEBEC. Several years later, in 1541,
  Cartier and others attempted to establish a permanent settlement on the
  St. Lawrence. As it was hard to get good colonists to settle in the cold
  climate so far north, the leaders were allowed to ransack the prisons
  for debtors and criminals to make up the necessary numbers. They
  selected the neighborhood of the cliffs where Cartier had wintered in
  1535, where Quebec now stands, as the most suitable place for their
  colony. But the settlers were ill-fitted for the hardships of a new
  settlement in so cold and barren a country. Diseases and the hostility
  of the Indians completely discouraged them, and all gladly returned
  to France.

  [Illustration: MAP SHOWING JACQUES CARTIER's VOYAGES
  Thus: 1st Voyage---- 2d Voyage.... 3d Voyage--> -->]

  The zeal of the French for American discovery and settlement on the St.
  Lawrence ceased with Cartier. His hope that the St. Lawrence would prove
  the long-sought passage to China had to be given up, but the river which
  he had discovered and so thoroughly explored proved to be a great
  highway into the center of North America.

COLIGNY'S PLAN FOR A HUGUENOT COLONY. Nearly thirty years later the
  French Protestant leader, Coligny, formed the plan of establishing a
  colony in America, which would be a refuge for the Huguenots if their
  enemies got the upper hand in France. An expedition left France in 1564,
  and selected a site for a settlement near the mouth of the St. Johns
  river in Florida. It seemed a good place. A fort, called Fort Caroline,
  was quickly built. But the first colonists were not well chosen. They
  were chiefly younger nobles, soldiers unused to labor, or discontented
  tradesmen and artisans. There were few farmers among them.

THE MISDEEDS OF THE COLONISTS. They spent their time visiting
  distant Indian tribes in a vain search for gold and silver, or
  plundering Spanish villages and ships in the West Indies. No one thought
  of preparing the soil and planting seeds for a food supply. It seemed
  easier to rob neighbors. The provisions which they had brought with them
  gave out. Game and fish abounded in the woods and rivers about them, but
  they were without skill in hunting and fishing. Before the first year
  had passed the miserable inhabitants of Fort Caroline were reduced to
  digging roots in the forest for food. Starvation and the revenge of
  angry Indians confronted them.

RELIEF SENT TO THE COLONY. In August, 1565, just as the
  half-starved colonists were preparing to leave the country, an
  expedition with fresh settlers--mostly discharged soldiers, a few young
  nobles, and some mechanics with their families, three hundred in
  all--arrived in the harbor. It brought an abundance of supplies and
  other things needed by a colony in a new country. It looked then as
  though these Frenchmen would succeed in their plan and establish a
  permanent colony in America.

  [Illustration: FORT CAROLINE, THE FRENCH SETTLEMENT IN FLORIDA
  From De Bry's Voyages]

FORT CAROLINE AND THE SPANIARDS. The French had, however, settled
  in Florida. Indeed, it would have been difficult to settle in America at
  any place along the Atlantic coast without doing so. The Spaniards
  regarded all North America from Mexico to Labrador as lying within
  Florida. The attempt of the French to settle on the lands claimed by the
  king of Spain was sure to bring on a war, sooner or later. The conduct
  of the French at Fort Caroline in plundering the Spanish colonies in the
  West Indies made all Spaniards anxious to drive out such a nest of
  robbers and murderers. Besides, the Spaniards hated Coligny's followers
  more than ordinary Frenchmen, because they were Huguenots.

MENENDEZ. At the time the news reached Spain of Coligny's
  settlement at Fort Caroline, a Spanish nobleman, Pedro Menendez, was
  preparing to establish a colony in Florida, and thus after a long delay
  carry out the task which De Soto had vainly attempted. Menendez was
  naturally as eager as the king to drive out the French intruders. So an
  expedition larger than was planned at first was hurried off. Menendez
  was to do three things: drive the French out, conquer and Christianize
  the Indians, and establish Spanish settlements in Florida.

THE DEFEAT OF THE FRENCH FLEET. Menendez with a part of his fleet
  arrived before Fort Caroline just one week after the relief expedition
  which Coligny had sent over came into harbor. His ships attacked and
  scattered those of the French. The vessels of the French for the most
  part sought refuge on the high seas. They were too swift to be
  overtaken, but no match for the Spanish in battle. Menendez decided to
  wait for the rest of his ships before making another attack on Fort
  Caroline. Meanwhile he sailed southward along the coast for fifty miles
  till he came to an inlet. He called the place St. Augustine.

ST. AUGUSTINE FOUNDED. A friendly Indian chief readily gave his
  dwelling to the Spaniards. It was a huge, barn-like structure, made of
  the entire trunks of trees, and thatched with palmetto leaves. Soldiers
  quickly dug a ditch around it and threw up a breastwork of earth and
  small sticks. The colonists who came with Menendez landed and set about
  the usual work of founding a settlement. Such was the beginning of the
  Spanish town of St. Augustine, founded in 1565, and the oldest town in
  the United States.

  [Illustration: ST. AUGUSTINE, FLORIDA, AS FOUNDED BY MENENDEZ
  Pagus Hispanorum as given in Montanus and Ogilby]

FRENCH SAIL TO ATTACK ST. AUGUSTINE. Both sides prepared for a
  terrible struggle, the French at Fort Caroline and the Spaniards in
  their new quarters at St. Augustine. The French struck the first blow. A
  few of the weaker and the sick soldiers were left at Fort Caroline to
  stand guard with the women and children. The main body aboard the ships
  advanced by sea to attack St. Augustine, but a furious tempest scattered
  and wrecked the French fleet before it arrived.

MENENDEZ DESTROYS FORT CAROLINE. Menendez now took advantage of the
  storm to march overland to Fort Caroline, wading through swamps and
  fording streams amid a fearful rain and gale. His drenched and hungry
  followers fell like wild beasts upon the few French left in the fort.
  About fifty of the women and children were spared to become captives. As
  many men escaped in the forests around the fort, but the greater part
  were killed.

CAPTURE OF THE SHIPWRECKED FRENCH. The French fleet had been
  wrecked off the coast of Florida a dozen miles south of St. Augustine. A
  few days later Menendez discovered some survivors wandering along the
  coast, half starved, trying to live on the shell-fish they found on the
  beach, and slowly and painfully working their way back toward Fort
  Caroline. The Frenchmen begged Menendez to be allowed to remain in the
  country till ships could be sent to take them off, but he was unwilling
  to make any terms with them.

MURDER OF THE CAPTIVES. The unhappy Frenchmen were taken prisoners,
  and, a few hours later, put to death. Other shipwrecked refugees were
  captured a few days later, and these suffered the same fate. Nearly
  three hundred perished in this cold-blooded manner. It was a merciless
  deed, and yet such was the character of all warfare at the time.
  Menendez believed that he was doing his duty. Nor did the king of Spain
  think Menendez unduly cruel, for when he heard the story of the fate of
  the Frenchmen of Fort Caroline he sent this message to Menendez: "Say to
  him that, as to those he has killed, he has done well; and as to those
  he has saved, they shall be sent to the galleys."

  [Illustration: NORTH AMERICA AS KNOWN AFTER THE EXPLORATIONS OF
  DE SOTO CORONADO AND CARTIER]

  [Illustration: (map)]


    QUESTIONS

    1. Who was the leader in the first French efforts to explore and
    settle in North America? Find as many reasons as possible why France
    had not tried to settle in America before. What parts of the
