am going to fight, I should like at least to know exactly what I am
fighting about."

"My dear fellow," Hume laughed, "you will never make a soldier if you
always want to know the ins and outs of every quarrel you have to fight
about; but for once the tenderest conscience may be satisfied as to
the justice of the contention. But Munro is much better versed in the
history of the affair than I am; for, to tell you the truth, beyond the
fact that it is a general row between the Protestants and Catholics, I
have not troubled myself much in the matter."

"You must know," Colonel Munro began, "that some twenty years ago the
Protestant princes of Germany formed a league for mutual protection and
support, which they called the Protestant Union; and a year later the
Catholics, on their side, constituted what they called the Holy League.
At that time the condition of the Protestants was not unbearable. In
Bohemia, where they constituted two-thirds of the population, Rudolph
II, and after him Mathias, gave conditions of religious freedom.

"Gradually, however, the Catholic party about the emperor gained the
upper hand; then various acts in breach of the conditions granted to the
Protestants were committed, and public spirit on both sides became
much embittered. On the 23d of May, 1618, the Estates of Bohemia met
at Prague, and the Protestant nobles, headed by Count Thurn, came there
armed, and demanded from the Imperial councillors an account of the high
handed proceedings. A violent quarrel ensued, and finally the Protestant
deputies seized the councillors Martinitz and Slavata, and their
secretary, and hurled them from the window into the dry ditch, fifty
feet below. Fortunately for the councillors the ditch contained a
quantity of light rubbish, and they and their secretary escaped without
serious damage. The incident, however, was the commencement of war.
Bohemia was almost independent of Austria, administering its own
internal affairs. The Estates invested Count Thurn with the command of
the army. The Protestant Union supported Bohemia in its action. Mathias,
who was himself a tolerant and well meaning man, tried to allay the
storm; but, failing to do so, marched an army into Bohemia.

"Had Mathias lived matters would probably have arranged themselves,
but he died the following spring, and was succeeded by Ferdinand II.
Ferdinand is one of the most bigoted Catholics living, and is at the
same time a bold and resolute man; and he had taken a solemn vow at
the shrine of Loretto that, if ever he came to the throne, he would
re-establish Catholicism throughout his dominions. Both parties prepared
for the strife; the Bohemians renounced their allegiance to him and
nominated the Elector Palatine Frederick V, the husband of our Scotch
princess, their king.

"The first blow was struck at Zablati. There a Union army, led by
Mansfeldt, was defeated by the Imperial general Bucquoi. A few days
later, however, Count Thurn, marching through Moravia and Upper Austria,
laid siege to Vienna. Ferdinand's own subjects were estranged from him,
and the cry of the Protestant army, 'Equal rights for all Christian
churches,' was approved by the whole population--for even in Austria
itself there were a very large number of Protestants. Ferdinand had but
a few soldiers, the population of the city were hostile, and had Thurn
only entered the town he could have seized the emperor without any
resistance.

"Thurn hesitated, and endeavoured instead to obtain the conditions of
toleration which the Protestants required; and sixteen Austrian barons
in the city were in the act of insisting upon Ferdinand signing these
when the head of the relieving army entered the city. Thurn retired
hastily. The Catholic princes and representatives met at Frankfort and
elected Ferdinand Emperor of Germany. He at once entered into a strict
agreement with Maximilian of Bavaria to crush Protestantism throughout
Germany. The Bohemians, however, in concert with Bethlem Gabor, king
of Hungary, again besieged Vienna; but as the winter set in they were
obliged to retire. From that moment the Protestant cause was lost;
Saxony and Hesse-Darmstadt left the Union and joined Ferdinand. Denmark,
which had promised its assistance to the Protestants, was persuaded to
remain quiet. Sweden was engaged in a war with the Poles.

"The Protestant army was assembled at Ulm; the army of the League, under
the order of Maximilian of Bavaria, was at Donauworth. Maximilian worked
upon the fears of the Protestant princes, who, frightened at the contest
they had undertaken, agreed to a peace, by which they bound themselves
to offer no aid to Frederick V.

"The Imperial forces then marched to Bohemia and attacked Frederick's
army outside Prague, and in less than an hour completely defeated it.
Frederick escaped with his family to Holland. Ferdinand then took steps
to carry out his oath. The religious freedom granted by Mathias was
abolished. In Bohemia, Moravia, Silesia, and Austria proper. Many of the
promoters of the rebellion were punished in life and property. The year
following all members of the Calvinistic sect were forced to leave their
country, a few months afterwards the Lutherans were also expelled, and
in 1627 the exercise of all religious forms except those of the Catholic
Church was forbidden; 200 of the noble, and 30,000 of the wealthier and
industrial classes, were driven into exile; and lands and property to
the amount of 5,000,000 or 6,000,000 pounds were confiscated.

"The hereditary dominions of Frederick V were invaded, the Protestants
were defeated, the Palatinate entirely subdued, and the electorate was
conferred upon Maximilian of Bavaria; and the rigid laws against the
Protestants were carried into effect in the Palatinate also. It had now
become evident to all Europe that the Emperor of Austria was determined
to stamp out Protestantism throughout Germany; and the Protestant
princes, now thoroughly alarmed, besought aid from the Protestant
countries, England, Holland, and Denmark. King James, who had seen
unmoved the misfortunes which had befallen his daughter and her husband,
and who had been dead to the general feeling of the country, could no
longer resist, and England agreed to supply an annual subsidy; Holland
consented to supply troops; and the King of Denmark joined the League,
and was to take command of the army.

"In Germany the Protestants of lower Saxony and Brunswick, and the
partisan leader Mansfeldt, were still in arms. The army under the king
of Denmark advanced into Brunswick, and was there confronted by that of
the league under Tilly, while an Austrian army, raised by Wallenstein,
also marched against it. Mansfeldt endeavoured to prevent Wallenstein
from joining Tilly, but was met and defeated by the former general.
Mansfeldt was, however, an enterprising leader, and falling back into
Brandenburg, recruited his army, joined the force under the Duke of
Saxe-Weimar, and started by forced marches to Silesia and Moravia, to
join Bethlem Gabor in Hungary. Wallenstein was therefore obliged to
abandon his campaign against the Danes and to follow him. Mansfeldt
joined the Hungarian army, but so rapid were his marches that his force
had dwindled away to a mere skeleton, and the assistance which it
would be to the Hungarians was so small that Bethlem Gabor refused to
cooperate with it against Austria.

"Mansfeldt disbanded his remaining soldiers, and two months afterwards
died. Wallenstein then marched north. In the meantime Tilly had attacked
King Christian at Lutter, and completely defeated him. I will tell you
about that battle some other time. When Wallenstein came north it
was decided that Tilly should carry the war into Holland, and that
Wallenstein should deal with the King of Denmark and the Protestant
princes. In the course of two years he drove the Danes from Silesia,
subdued Brandenburg and Mecklenburg, and, advancing into Pomerania,
besieged Stralsund.

"What a siege that was to be sure! Wallenstein had sworn to capture the
place, but he didn't reckon upon the Scots. After the siege had begun
Lieutenant General Sir Alexander Leslie, with 5000 Scots and Swedes,
fought his way into the town; and though Wallenstein raised fire upon
it, though we were half starved and ravaged by plague, we held out for
three months, repulsing every assault, till at last the Imperialists
were obliged to draw off; having lost 12,200 men.

"This, however, was the solitary success on our side, and a few months
since, Christian signed a peace, binding himself to interfere no more in
the affairs of Germany. When Ferdinand considered himself free to carry
out his plans, he issued an edict by which the Protestants throughout
Germany were required to restore to the Catholics all the monasteries
and land which had formerly belonged to the Catholic Church. The
Catholic service was alone to be performed, and the Catholic princes
of the empire were ordered to constrain their subjects, by force if
necessary, to conform to the Catholic faith; and it was intimated to the
Protestant princes that they would be equally forced to carry the edict
into effect. But this was too much. Even France disapproved, not from
any feeling of pity on the part of Richelieu for the Protestants, but
because it did not suit the interests of France that Ferdinand should
become the absolute monarch of all Germany.

"In these circumstances Gustavus of Sweden at once resolved to assist
the Protestants in arms, and ere long will take the field. That is
what has brought us here. Already in the Swedish army there are 10,000
Scotchmen, and in Denmark they also form the backbone of the force; and
both in the Swedish and Danish armies the greater part of the native
troops are officered and commanded by Scotchmen.

"Hitherto I myself have been in the Danish service, but my regiment is
about to take service with the Swedes. It has been quietly intimated to
us that there will be no objection to our doing so, although Christian
intends to remain neutral, at any rate for a time. We suffered very
heavily at Lutter, and I need 500 men to fill up my ranks to the full
strength.

"Now, Graheme, I quite rely upon you. You were at college with Hepburn,
Hume, and myself, and it will be a pleasure for us all to fight side by
side; and if I know anything of your disposition I am sure you cannot
be contented to be remaining here at the age of nine-and-twenty, rusting
out your life as a Scotch laird, while Hepburn has already won a name
which is known through Europe."



CHAPTER II SHIPWRECKED


Upon the following morning Nigel Graheme told his visitors that he had
determined to accept their offer, and would at once set to work to raise
a company.

"I have," he said, "as you know, a small patrimony of my own, and as
for the last eight years I have been living here looking after Malcolm
I have been laying by any rents, and can now furnish the arms and
accoutrements for a hundred men without difficulty. When Malcolm comes
of age he must act for himself, and can raise two or three hundred men
if he chooses; but at present he will march in my company. I understand
that I have the appointment of my own officers."

"Yes, until you join the regiment," Munro said. "You have the first
appointments. Afterwards the colonel will fill up vacancies. You must
decide how you will arm your men, for you must know that Gustavus'
regiments have their right and left wings composed of musketeers, while
the centre is formed of pikemen, so you must decide to which branch your
company shall belong."

"I would choose the pike," Nigel said, "for after all it must be by the
pike that the battle is decided."

"Quite right, Nigel. I have here with me a drawing of the armour in use
with us. You see they have helmets of an acorn shape, with a rim turning
up in front; gauntlets, buff coats well padded in front, and large
breast plates. The pikes vary from fourteen to eighteen feet long
according to the taste of the commander. We generally use about sixteen.
If your company is a hundred strong you will have two lieutenants and
three ensigns. Be careful in choosing your officers. I will fill in the
king's commission to you as captain of the company, authorizing you to
enlist men for his service and to appoint officers thereto."

An hour or two later Colonel Munro and Captain Hume proceeded on their
way. The news speedily spread through Nithsdale that Nigel Graheme had
received a commission from the King of Sweden to raise a company in his
service, and very speedily men began to pour in. The disbandment of the
Scottish army had left but few careers open at home to the youth of
that country, and very large numbers had consequently flocked to the
Continent and taken service in one or other of the armies there, any
opening of the sort, therefore, had only to be known to be freely
embraced. Consequently, in eight-and-forty hours Nigel Graheme had
applications from a far larger number than he could accept, and he was
enabled to pick and choose among the applicants. Many young men of
good family were among them, for in those days service in the ranks was
regarded as honourable, and great numbers of young men of good family
and education trailed a pike in the Scotch regiments in the service of
the various powers of Europe. Two young men whose property adjoined
his own, Herries and Farquhar, each of whom brought twenty of his own
tenants with him, were appointed lieutenants, while two others, Leslie
and Jamieson, were with Malcolm named as ensigns. The noncommissioned
officers were appointed from men who had served before. Many of the men
already possessed armour which was suitable, for in those day's there
was no strict uniformity of military attire, and the armies of the
various nationalities differed very slightly from each other. Colonel
Munro returned in the course of a fortnight, Nigel Graheme's company
completing the number of men required to fill up the ranks of his
regiment.

Captain Hume had proceeded further north. Colonel Munro stopped for
a week in Nithsdale, giving instructions to the officers and
noncommissioned officers as to the drill in use in the Swedish army.
Military manoeuvres were in these days very different to what they have
now become. The movements were few and simple, and easily acquired.
Gustavus had, however, introduced an entirely new formation into his
army. Hitherto troops had fought in solid masses, twenty or more deep.
Gustavus taught his men to fight six deep, maintaining that if troops
were steady this depth of formation should be able to sustain any
assault upon it, and that with a greater depth the men behind were
useless in the fight. His cavalry fought only three deep. The recruits
acquired the new tactics with little difficulty. In Scotland for
generations every man and boy had received a certain military training,
and all were instructed in the use of the pike; consequently, at the end
of a week Colonel Munro pronounced Nigel Graheme's company capable
of taking their place in the regiment without discredit, and so went
forward to see to the training of the companies of Hamilton, Balfour,
and Scott, having arranged with Graheme to march his company to Dunbar
in three weeks' time, when he would be joined by the other three
companies. Malcolm was delighted with the stir and bustle of his new
life. Accustomed to hard exercise, to climbing and swimming, he was a
strong and well grown lad, and was in appearance fully a year beyond
his age. He felt but little fatigued by the incessant drill in which the
days were passed, though he was glad enough of an evening to lay aside
his armour, of which the officers wore in those days considerably more
than the soldiers, the mounted officers being still clad in full armour,
while those on foot wore back and arm pieces, and often leg pieces, in
addition to the helmet and breastplate. They were armed with swords and
pistols, and carried besides what were called half pikes, or pikes some
7 feet long. They wore feathers in their helmets, and the armour was of
fine quality, and often richly damascened, or inlaid with gold.

Very proud did Malcolm feel as on the appointed day he marched with
the company from Nithsdale, with the sun glittering on their arms and a
drummer beating the march at their head. They arrived in due course
at Dunbar, and were in a few hours joined by the other three companies
under Munro himself. The regiment which was now commanded by Lieutenant
Colonel Munro had been raised in 1626 by Sir Donald Mackay of Farre and
Strathnaver, 1500 strong, for the service of the King of Denmark.
Munro was his cousin, and when Sir Donald went home shortly before, he
succeeded to the command of the regiment. They embarked at once on board
a ship which Munro had chartered, and were landed in Denmark and marched
to Flensberg, where the rest of the regiment was lying.

A fortnight was spent in severe drill, and then orders were received
from Oxenstiern, the chancellor of Sweden, to embark the regiment on
board two Swedish vessels, the Lillynichol and the Hound. On board
the former were the companies of Captains Robert Munro, Hector Munro,
Bullion, Nigel Graheme, and Hamilton. Colonel Munro sailed in this
ship, while Major Sennot commanded the wing of the regiment on board the
Hound. The baggage horses and ammunition were in a smaller vessel.

The orders were that they were to land at Wolgast on the southern shore
of the Baltic. Scarcely had they set sail than the weather changed, and
a sudden tempest burst upon them. Higher and higher grew the wind,
and the vessels were separated in the night. The Lillynichol laboured
heavily in the waves, and the discomfort of the troops, crowded together
between decks, was very great. Presently it was discovered that she had
made a leak, and that the water was entering fast. Munro at once called
forty-eight soldiers to the pumps. They were relieved every quarter
of an hour, and by dint of the greatest exertions barely succeeded in
keeping down the water. So heavily did the vessel labour that Munro bore
away for Dantzig; but when night came on the storm increased in fury.
They were now in shoal water, and the vessel, already half waterlogged,
became quite unmanageable in the furious waves. Beyond the fact that
they were fast driving on to the Pomeranian coast, they were ignorant of
their position.

"This is a rough beginning," Nigel said to his nephew. "We bargained to
run the risk of being killed by the Germans, but we did not expect to
run the hazard of being drowned. I doubt if the vessel can live till
morning. It is only eleven o'clock yet, and in spite of the pumps she is
getting lower and lower in the water."

Before Malcolm had time to answer him there was a tremendous crash which
threw them off their feet. All below struggled on deck, but nothing
could be seen in the darkness save masses of foam as the waves broke on
the rock on which they had struck. There were two more crashes, and
then another, even louder and more terrible, and the vessel broke in two
parts.

"Come aft all," Colonel Munro shouted; "this part of the wreck is
fixed."

With great efforts all on board managed to reach the after portion of
the vessel, which was wedged among the rocks, and soon afterwards the
forepart broke up and disappeared. For two hours the sea broke wildly
over the ship, and all had to hold on for life.

Malcolm, even in this time of danger, could not but admire the calmness
and coolness of his young colonel. He at once set men to work with
ropes to drag towards the vessel the floating pieces of wreck which
were tossing about in the boiling surf. The masts and yards were hauled
alongside, and the colonel instructed the men to make themselves fast to
these in case the vessel should go to pieces.

Hour after hour passed, and at last, to the joy of all, daylight
appeared. The boats had all been broken to pieces, and Munro now set the
men to work to bind the spars and timbers together into a raft. One
of the soldiers and a sailor volunteered to try to swim to shore with
lines, but both were dashed to pieces.

At one o'clock in the day some natives were seen collecting on the
shore, and these presently dragged down a boat and launched it, and with
great difficulty rowed out to the ship. A line was thrown to them, and
with this they returned to shore, where they made the line fast. The
storm was now abating somewhat, and Munro ordered the debarkation to
commence.

As many of the troops as could find a place on the raft, or could cling
to the ropes fastened on its sides, started first, and by means of the
line hauled the raft ashore. A small party then brought it back to the
ship, while others manned the boat; and so after a number of trips the
whole of the troops and crew were landed, together with all the weapons
and armour that could be saved.

From the peasantry Munro now learned that they had been wrecked upon
the coast of Rugenwalde, a low lying tract of country in the north
of Pomerania. The forts upon it were all in the possession of the
Imperialists, while the nearest post of the Swedes was eighty miles
away.

The position was not a pleasant one. Many of the arms had been lost, and
the gunpowder was of course destroyed. The men were exhausted and worn
out with their long struggle with the tempest. They were without food,
and might at any moment be attacked by their enemies.

"Something must be done, and that quickly," Munro said, "or our fate
will be well nigh as bad as that of the Sinclairs; but before night we
can do nothing, and we must hope that the Germans will not discover us
till then."

