just before dawn and immediately at the first assault routed his opponent
and pursued him, but failed to capture him; for Agrippa by chance met
Sosius on the way, so that he not only gained nothing from the victory
but perished[64] together with Tarcondimotus and many others.

Antony, because of his conflict and because he himself on his return had
been defeated in a cavalry battle by Caesar's advance guard, no longer
thought it well to encamp in two different places, but during the night
left the redoubt which was near his opponents and retired to the other
side of the narrows, where the larger part of his army had bivouacked.
When provisions also began to fail him because he was cut off from
foraging, he held a council to deliberate whether they should remain in
position and hazard an encounter or transfer their post somewhere else
and make the war a long one. [-15-] After several had given opinions
the advice of Cleopatra prevailed,--that the choicest sites be given in
possession of garrisons and that the rest of the force weigh anchor with
them for Egypt. She held this view as a result of being disturbed by
omens. Swallows had built their nests about her tent and on the flagship
on which she sailed, and milk and blood together had dripped from
beeswax. Their images with the forms of gods which the Athenians had
placed on their Acropolis were hurled down by thunderbolts into the
Theatre. This and the consequent dejection and listlessness of the army
began to alarm Cleopatra and she filled Antony with fears. They did not
wish, however, to sail out either secretly or openly as fugitives, for
fear they should strike terror to the hearts of their allies, but rather
with preparations made for a naval battle, in order that they might
equally well force their way through in case there should be any
resistance. Therefore they chose out first the best of the vessels, since
the sailors had become fewer by death and desertion, and burned the rest;
next they secretly put all their most prized valuables aboard of them by
night. When the boats were ready, Antony gathered his soldiers and spoke
as follows:--

[-16-] "All provisions that I was required to make for the war have
received due attention, fellow-soldiers, in advance. First, there is your
immense throng, all the chosen flower of our dependents and allies; and
to such a degree are you masters of every form of combat recognized among
us that alone by yourselves you are formidable to adversaries. Then
again, you yourselves can see how large and how fine a fleet we have and
how many fine hoplites, cavalry, slingers, peltasts, archers, mounted
archers. Most of these classes are not found at all on the other side,
and so far as they are found they are much fewer and weaker than
ours. The funds of the enemy are small, though obtained by forced
contributions, and can not last long, while they have rendered the
contributors better disposed toward us than toward the men who took them;
hence the population is in no way favorable to the oppressors and is
moreover on the point of open revolt. Our treasury, filled from abundant
resources, has harmed no one and will aid all of us. [-17-] In addition
to these considerations so numerous and of such great importance I am
on general principles disinclined to make any bombastic statement
about myself. Yet since this too is one of the factors contributing
to supremacy in war and is believed among all men to be of greatest
importance,--I mean that men who are to fight well must secure an
excellent general--necessity itself has rendered quite indispensable
some remarks about myself, their purpose being to enable you to realize
still more the fact that not only are you such soldiers that you could
conquer even without a good leader, but I am such a leader that I can
win even with poor soldiers. I am at that age when persons attain their
greatest perfection both of body and intellect and suffer deterioration
neither through the rashness of youth nor the feebleness of old age, but
are strongest because in a condition half-way between the two. Moreover I
possess such a nature and such a training that I can with greatest ease
discern what requires to be done and make it known. Experience, which
causes even the ignorant and the uneducated to appear to be of some
value, I have been acquiring through my whole political and whole
military career. From boyhood till now I have been continually exercised
in similar pursuits; I have been much ruled and done much ruling, from
which I have learned on the one hand what kind of orders and of what
magnitude must be issued, and on the other how far and in what way one
must render obedience. I have been subject to terror, to confidence: as a
result I have made it my custom neither to entertain any fear too readily
nor to venture on any hazard too heedlessly. I have met with good
fortune, I have met with failure: consequently I find it possible to
avoid both despair and excess of pride.

[-18-] "I speak to you who know these facts and make you who hear them
my witnesses not in the intention of uttering idle boasts about
myself,--your consciousness of the truth being sufficient glory for
me,--but to the end that you may in this way bring home to yourselves
how much better we are equipped than our opponents. For, while they are
inferior to us in quantity both of soldiers and of money and in diversity
of equipment, in no one respect are they so strikingly lacking as in the
age and inexperience of their general. About him I need in general make
no exact or detailed statement, but to sum up I will say this, which you
all understand, that he is a veritable weakling in body and has never
himself been victor in any important battle either on land or on the sea.
Indeed, at Phillipi and in the same conflict I won the day, whereas he
was defeated.

"To this degree do we differ from each other, and usually victories fall
to the better equipped. And if they have any strength at all, you would
find it to exist in their heavy-armed force on land; as for their ships,
they will not so much as be able to sail out against us. You yourselves
can of course see the size and stoutness of our vessels, which are such
that if the enemy's were equivalent to them in number, yet because of
these advantages the foe could do no damage either by charges from the
side or by charges from the front. For first the thickness of the timbers
and second the very height of the ships would certainly check them, even
if there were no one on board to defend them. Where will any one find a
chance to assail ships which carry so many archers and slingers striking
assailants, moreover, from the towers up aloft? If any one should
approach, how could he fail to get sunk by the very number of the oars
or how could he fail to be plunged under water when shot at by all the
warriors on the decks and in the towers? [-19-] Do not think that they
have any nautical ability because Agrippa won a sea-fight off Sicily:
they contended not against Sextus but against his slaves, not against a
like equipment with ours but against one far inferior. If, again, any one
makes much of their good fortune in that combat, he is bound to take into
equal consideration the defeat which Caesar himself suffered at the hands
of Sextus. By this comparison he will find that conditions are not the
same, but that all our advantages are more numerous and greater than
theirs. And, in general, how large a part does Sicily form of the whole
empire and how large a fraction of our equipment did the troops of Sextus
possess, that any one should properly fear Caesar's armament, which is
precisely the same as before and has grown neither larger nor better,
just on account of his good luck, instead of taking courage from the
defeat that he endured? Reflecting on this fact I have not cared to
risk our first engagement with the infantry, where they appear to have
strength in a way, in order that no one of you should be liable to
discouragement as a result of any failure in that department: instead,
I have chosen to begin with the ships where we are strongest and have a
vast superiority over our antagonists, to the end that after a victory
with these we may despise the infantry. You know well that the whole
outcome of the war depends on each side on our fleets. If we come out
victorious in this engagement, we shall suffer no harm from any of the
rest but cut them off on a kind of islet,--for all surrounding regions
are in our possession,--and without effort subdue them, if in no other
way, by hunger.

[-20-] "Now I do not think that further words are necessary to tell you
that we shall be struggling not for small or unimportant interests, but
it will prove true that if you are zealous you will obtain the greatest
rewards, but if careless will suffer the most frightful misfortunes.
What would they not do to us, if they should prevail, when they killed
practically all the followers of Sextus that had been of any prominence,
and even destroyed many followers of Lepidus that cooeperated with Caesar's
party? But why should I mention this, seeing that they have removed
Lepidus, who was guilty of no wrong and was further their ally, from
all his powers as general and keep him under guard as if he were some
captive? They have further hounded for money all the freedmen in Italy
and likewise other men who possess any land to such an extent as to
force some of them to take up arms, with the consequence that not a few
perished. Is it possible that those who spared not their allies will
spare us? Will those who seized for funds the property of their own
adherents refrain from our wealth? Will they show humanity as victors who
before victory have committed every conceivable outrage? Not to spend
time in speaking of the concerns of other people, I will enumerate the
audacity that they have displayed toward us who stand here. Who was
ignorant that I was chosen a partner and colleague of Caesar and received
charge of the management of public affairs equally with him, received
similar honors and offices, and have been a great while now in possession
of them? Yet of all of them, so far as is in his power, I have been
deprived; I have become a private citizen instead of a leader, an outcast
from the franchise instead of consul, and this not by the action of the
people or the senate but by his own act and that of his adherents, who do
not comprehend that they are preparing a sovereign for themselves first
of all. For how could one speak of enactments of people and senate, when
the consuls and some others fled straightway from the city, in order
to escape casting any such vote? How will that man spare either you or
anybody else, when he dared while I was alive, in possession of such
great power, a victor over the Armenians, to seek for my will, take it by
violence from those who had received it, open it, and read it publicly?
And how will he manifest any humanity to others with whom he has no
connection, when he has shown himself such a man toward me,--his friend,
his table companion, his relative?

[-21-] "Now in case we are to draw any inferences from his decrees, he
threatens you openly, having made the majority of you enemies outright,
but against me personally no such declaration has been made, though he is
at war with me and is already acting in every way like one who has not
only conquered me but murdered me. Hence, when he treated me in such a
way whom he pretends not yet even at this day to regard as an enemy, he
will surely not keep his hands off you, with whom he clearly admits that
he is at odds. What does it signify that he is threatening us all alike
with arms but in his decree declares he is at war with some and not
with others? It is not, by Jupiter, with the intention of making any
distinction between us, or treating one class in one way and another in
another, if he prevails, but it is in order to set us at variance and in
collision and thus render us weaker. He is not unaware that while we are
in accord and doing everything as one body he can never in any way get
the upper hand, but if we quarrel, and some choose one policy and the
rest another, he may perhaps prevail. [-22-] It is for this reason that
he assumes this kind of attitude toward us. I and the Romans that cleave
to me foresee the danger, although so far as the decrees are concerned we
enjoy a kind of amnesty: we comprehend his plot and neither abandon you
nor look personally to our own advantage. In like manner you, too, whom
he does not even himself deny that he regards as hostile, yes, most
hostile, ought to bear in mind all these facts, and embracing common
dangers and common hopes cooeperate in every way and show enthusiasm to an
equal degree in our enterprise and set over against each other carefully
first what we shall suffer (as I said), if defeated, and what we shall
gain, if victorious. For it is a great thing for us to escape being
worsted and so enduring any form of insult or rapacity, but greatest of
all to conquer and effect whatever any one of us may wish. On the other
hand, it is most disgraceful for us, who are so many and so valiant, who
have weapons and money and ships and horses, to choose the worse instead
of the better course, and when we might afford the other party liberty
to prefer to join them in slavery. Our aims are so utterly opposed that,
whereas he desires to reign as sovereign over you, I wish to free you and
them together, and this I have confirmed by oath. Therefore as men who
are to struggle for both sides alike and to win blessings that shall be
common to all, let us labor, fellow-soldiers, to prevail at the present
juncture and to gain happiness for all time."

[-23-] After delivering a speech of this sort Antony put all his most
prominent associates aboard the boats, to prevent them from concerting
revolutionary measures when they got by themselves, as Deillius and some
other deserters had done; he also embarked great numbers of archers,
slingers, and hoplites. And since the defeat of Sextus had been largely
due to the size of Caesar's ships and the number of his marines, Antony
had equipped his vessels to surpass greatly those of his opponents, for
he had had constructed only a few triremes, but the rest were ships with
four banks and with ten banks, and represented all the remaining degrees
of capacity: upon these he had built lofty towers, and he had put aboard
a crowd of men who could fight from behind walls, as it were. Caesar for
his part was observing their equipment and making his preparations; when
he learned from Deillius and others their intention he himself assembled
the army and spoke to this effect:--

[-24-] "Having discovered, fellow-soldiers, both from what I have learned
from hearsay and from what I have tested by experience, that the most and
greatest military enterprises, or, indeed, I might say human affairs in
general, turn out in favor of those persons who both think and act in a
more just and pious manner, I am keeping this strictly in mind myself and
I advise you to consider it. No matter how numerous and mighty the force
we possess, no matter if it be such that even a man who chose the less
just of two courses might expect to win with its aid, nevertheless I base
my confidence far more upon the causes underlying the war than upon this
factor. For that we who are Romans and lords of the greatest and best
portion of the world should be despised and trodden under foot of an
Egyptian woman is unworthy of our fathers who overthrew Pyrrhus, Philip,
Perseus, Antiochus, who uprooted the Numantini and the Carthaginians, who
cut down the Cimbri and the Ambrones; it is unworthy also of ourselves
who have subjugated the Gauls, have subdued the Pannonians, have advanced
as far as the Ister, have crossed the Rhine, have gone over into Britain.
How could all those who have had a hand in the exploits mentioned fail
to grieve vehemently, if they should learn that we had succumbed to an
accursed woman? Should we not be guilty of a gross deviation from right
conduct, if, after surpassing all men everywhere in valor, we should then
bear humbly the insults of this throng, who, O Hercules, are Alexandrians
and Egyptians (what worse or what truer name could one apply to them?),
who serve reptiles and other creatures as gods, who embalm their bodies
to secure a reputation for immortality, who are most reckless in
braggadocio but most deficient in bravery, and worst of all are slaves
to a woman instead of a man? Yet these have dared to lay claim to our
possessions and to acquire them through us, evidently expecting that we
will give up the prosperity which we possess for them. [-25-] Who can
help lamenting to see Roman soldiers acting as body-guards of their
queen? Who can help groaning when he hears Roman knights and senators
flattering her like eunuchs? Who can help weeping when he both hears and
sees Antony himself, the man twice consul, often imperator, to whom was
committed in common with me the superintendence of the public business,
who was entrusted with so many cities, so many legions,--when he sees
that this man has now abandoned all his ancestors' habits of life, has
emulated all alien and barbaric customs, that he pays no honor to us or
to the laws or to his fathers' gods, but worships that wench as if she
were some Isis or Selene, calling her children Sun and Moon, and finally
himself bearing the title of Osiris and Dionysus, in consequence of which
he has bestowed entire islands and some of the continents, as though he
were master of the whole earth and the whole sea? I am sure that this
appears marvelous and incredible to you, fellow-soldiers: therefore you
ought to be the more indignant. For if that is actually so which you do
not even believe on hearing it, and if that man in his voluptuary career
commits acts at which any one who learns of them must grieve, would you
not properly become exceedingly enraged?

[-26-] "Yet at the start I was so devoted to him that I gave him a share
of my leadership, married my sister to him, and granted him legions. Even
after this I felt so kindly, so affectionately toward him that I was
unwilling to wage war on him because of his insulting my sister, or
because he neglected the children she had borne him, or because he
preferred the Egyptian woman to her, or because he bestowed upon the
former's children practically all your possessions, or, in fine, for any
other reason. The cause is that, first of all, I did not think it proper
to assume the same attitude toward Antony as toward Cleopatra. I deemed
her by the very fact of her foreign birth to be at the outset hostile to
his career, but I believed that he, as a citizen, could be corrected.
Later I entertained the hope that if not voluntarily at least reluctantly
he might change his mind as a result of the decrees passed against her.
Consequently I did not declare war upon him. He, however, has looked
haughtily and disdainfully upon my efforts and will neither be released,
though we would fain release him, nor be pitied though we try to pity
him. He is either unreasonable or mad,--and this which I have heard I
do believe, that he has been bewitched by that accursed female,--and
therefore pays no heed to our kindness or humaneness, but being in
slavery to that woman he undertakes in her behalf both war and needless
dangers which are both against our interests and against those of his
country. What else, then, is our duty except to fight him back together
with Cleopatra? [-27-]Hence let no one call him a Roman but rather an
Egyptian, nor Antony but rather Serapio. Let no one think that he was
ever consul or imperator, but only gymnasiarch. He has himself of his own
free will chosen the latter title instead of the former, and casting away
all the august terms of his own land has become one of the cymbal players
from Canopus.[65] Again, let no one fear that he can give any unfavorable
turn to the war. Even previously he was of no ability, as you know
clearly who conquered him near Mutina. And even if once he did attain to
some capacity through campaigning with us, be well assured that he has
now ruined all of it by his changed manner of life. It is impossible for
one who leads an existence of royal luxury and coddles himself like a
woman to think any valorous thoughts or do valorous deeds, because it is
quite inevitable that a person takes the impress of the practices with
which he comes in contact. A proof of this is that in the one war which
he has waged in all this long time and the one campaign that he has made
he lost great numbers of citizens in the battles, returned in thorough
disgrace from Praaspa, and parted with very many additional men in
the flight. If any one of us were obliged to perform a set dance or
cordax[66] in an amusing way, such a person would surely yield the honors
to him; he has practiced this: but since it is a case of arms and
battle, what is there about him that any one should dread? His physical
condition? He has passed his prime and become effeminate. His strength of
mind? He plays the woman and has surrendered himself to unnatural lust.
His piety toward our gods? He is at war both with them and his country.
His faithfulness to his allies? But is any one unaware how he deceived
and imprisoned the Armenian? His liberal treatment of his friends? But
who has not seen the men who have miserably perished at his hands? His
reputation with the soldiers? But who even of them has not condemned him?
Evidence of their feeling is found in the fact that numbers daily come
over to our side. For my part I think that all our citizens will do this,
as on a former occasion when he was going from Brundusium into Gaul. So
long as they expected to get rich without danger, some were very glad
to cleave to him. But they will not care to fight against us, their own
countrymen, in behalf of what does not belong to them at all, especially
when they are given the opportunity to win without hazard both
preservation and prosperity by joining us.

[-28-] "Some one may say, however, that he has many allies and a store of
wealth. Well, how we have been accustomed to conquer the dwellers on Asia
the mainland is known to Scipio Asiaticus the renowned, is known to Sulla
the fortunate, to Lucullus, to Pompey, to my father Caesar, and to your
own selves, who vanquished the supporters of Brutus and Cassius. This
being so, if you think their wealth is so much more than others', you
must be all the more eager to make it your own. It is but fair that for
the greatest prizes the greatest conflicts should be undergone. And I
can tell you nothing else greater than that prize which lies within your
grasp,--namely, to preserve the renown of your forefathers, to guard your
individual pride, to take vengeance on those in revolt against us, to
repulse those who insult you, to conquer and rule all mankind, to allow
no woman to make herself equal to a man. Against the Taurisci and Iapudes
and Dalmatians and Pannonians you yourselves now before me battled most
zealously and frequently for some few walls and desert land; you subdued
all of them though they are admittedly a most warlike race; and, by
Jupiter, against Sextus also, for Sicily merely, and against this very
Antony, for Mutina merely, you carried on a similar struggle, so that
you came out victorious over both. And now will you show any less zeal
against a woman whose plots concern all your possessions, and against
her husband, who has distributed to her children all your property, and
against their noble associates and table companions whom they themselves
stigmatize as 'privy' councillors? Why should you? Because of their
number? But no number of persons can conquer valour. Because of their
race? But they have practiced carrying burdens rather than warfare.
Because of their experience? But they know better how to row than how
to fight at sea. I, for my part, am really ashamed that we are going to
contend with such creatures, by vanquishing whom we shall gain no glory,
whereas if we are defeated we shall be disgraced.

[-29-] "And surely you must not think that the size of their vessels or
the thickness of the timbers of their ships is a match for our valour.
What ship ever by itself either wounded or killed anybody? Will they not
by their very height and staunchness be more difficult for their rowers
to move and less obedient to their pilots? Of what use can they possibly
be to the fighting men on board of them, when these men can employ
neither frontal assault nor flank attack, manoeuvres which you know are
essential in naval contests? For surely they do not intend to employ
infantry tactics against us on the sea, nor on the other hand are they
prepared to shut themselves up as it were in wooden walls and undergo a
siege, since that would be decidedly to our advantage--I mean assaulting
wooden barriers. For if their ships remain in the same place, as if
fastened there, it will be possible for us to rip them open with our
beaks, it will be possible, too, to damage them with our engines from
a distance, and also possible to burn them to the water's edge with
incendiary missiles; and if they do venture to stir from their place,
they will not overtake anyone by pursuing nor escape by fleeing, since
they are so heavy that they are entirely too inert to inflict any damage,
and so huge that they are exceptionally liable to suffer it.

[-30-] "Indeed, what need is there to spend time in speaking further of
them, when we have already often made trial of them, not only off Leucas
but also here just the other day, and so far from proving inferior to
them, we have everywhere shown ourselves superior? Hence you should be
encouraged not so much by my words as by your own deeds, and should
desire to put an end forthwith to the whole war. For be well assured that
if we beat them to-day we shall have no further trouble. For in general
it is a natural characteristic of human nature everywhere, that whenever
a man fails in his first contests he becomes disheartened with respect to
what is to come; and as for us, we are so indisputably superior to them
on land that we could vanquish them even if they had never suffered any
injury. And they are themselves so conscious of this truth--for I am not
going to conceal from you what I have heard--that they are discouraged at
what has already happened and despair of saving their lives if they stay
where they are, and they are therefore endeavouring to make their escape
to some place or other, and are making this sally, not with the desire to
give battle, but in expectation of flight. In fact, they have placed in
their ships the best and most valuable of the possessions they have with
them, in order to escape with them if they can. Since, then, they admit
that they are weaker than we, and since they carry the prizes of victory
in their ships, let us not allows them to sail anywhere else, but let
us conquer them here on the spot and take all these treasures away from
them."

Such were Caesar's words. [-31-]After this he formed a plan to let them
slip by, intending to fall upon them from the rear: he himself by fast
sailing expected to capture them directly, and when the leaders had
plainly shown that they were attempting to run away he thought that the
remainder would make no contest about surrendering. He was restrained,
however, by Agrippa, who feared that they might not overtake the
fugitives, who would probably use sails, and he also felt some confidence
of conquering without much effort because meantime a squall of rain with
large quantities of spray had driven in the face of Antony's fleet alone
and had created disturbance all through it. Hence he abandoned this plan,
and after putting vast numbers of infantry aboard the ships himself
and placing all his associates into auxiliary boats for the purpose of
sailing about quickly, giving notice of requisite action to the warriors,
and reporting to him what he ought to know, he awaited the onset of the
foe. They weighed anchor to the sound of the trumpet and with ships
in close array drew up their line a little outside the narrows, not
advancing any farther: he in turn started out as if to come to close
quarters or even make them retire. When they neither made a corresponding
advance nor turned about, but remained in position and further made
their array extremely dense, he became doubtful what to do. Therefore he
ordered the sailors to let their oars rest in the water and waited for a
time: then suddenly at a given signal led forward both the wings and bent
around in the hope chiefly of surrounding the enemy, or otherwise of at
least breaking their formation. Antony was afraid of this movement of his
to wheel about and surround them, and hence adopted so far as he could
corresponding tactics, which brought him, though reluctantly, into close
combat. [-32-] So they attacked and began the conflict, both sides
uttering many exhortations in their own ranks as to both artifice and
zeal, and hearing many from the men on shore that shouted to them. The
struggle was not of a similar nature on the two sides, but Caesar's
followers having smaller and swifter ships went with a rush, and when
they rammed were fenced about on all sides to avoid being wounded. If
they sank any boat, well: if not, they would back water before a close
engagement could be begun, and would either ram the same vessels suddenly
again, or would let some go and turn their attention to others; and
