the fight on the other side. His story of the prowess of Custer, and of
his death, was probably concocted with a view to currying favor with
white men, as it appears evident that "Sitting Bull" showed his usual
cowardice, and ran away before there was a battle within twenty-four
hours' distance.

Major James McLaughlin, during his experience as Indian Agent at
Standing Rock Agency, North Dakota, had an opportunity of gathering a
great deal of important information with reference to the battle-field
and incidents connected with it. At the request of Mr. Wheeler, whose
researches into the legends and history of interesting spots within easy
access by means of the Northern Pacific Railroad were most successful,
obtained from the Major the following valuable information concerning
many points of detail which have been the subject of debate and dispute:

"It is difficult," says this undoubted authority, "to arrive at even
approximately the number of Indians who were encamped in the valley of
the Little Big Horn when Custer's command reached there on June 25th,
1876; the indifference of the Indians as to ascertaining their strength
by actual count, and their ideas at that time being too crude to know
themselves. I have been stationed at this Agency since the surrendered
hostiles were brought here in the summer of 1881, and have conversed
frequently with many of the Indians who were engaged in that fight, and
more particularly with 'Gall,' 'Crow King,' 'Big Road,' 'Hump,' 'Sitting
Bull,' 'Gray Eagle,' 'Spotted Horn Bull,' and other prominent men of the
Sioux, regarding the Custer affair. When questioned as to the number of
Indians engaged, the answer has invariably been, 'None of us knew; nina
wicoti,' which means 'very many lodges.' From this source of
information, which is the best obtainable, I place the number of male
adults then in the camp at 3,000; and that on June 25th, 1876, the
fighting strength of the Indians was between 2,500 and 3,000, and more
probably approximating the latter number.

"'Sitting Bull' was a recognized medicine man, and of great repute among
the Sioux, not so much for his powers of healing and curing the
sick--which, after he had regained such renown, was beneath his
dignity--as for his prophecies; and no matter how absurd his prophecies
might be, he found ready believers and willing followers, and when his
prophecies failed to come to pass, he always succeeded in satisfying his
over-credulous followers by giving some absurd reason. For instance, I
was in his camp on Grande River in the spring of 1888, sometime about
the end of June. There had been no rain for some weeks, and crops were
suffering from drouth, and I remarked to him, who was in an assemblage
of a large number of Indians of that district, that the crops needed
rain badly, and that if much longer without rain the crops would amount
to nothing. He, 'Sitting Bull,' replied: 'Yes, the crops need rain, and
my people have been importuning me to have it rain. I am considering the
matter as to whether I will or not. I can make it rain any time I wish,
but I fear hail. I cannot control hail, and should I make it rain, heavy
hail might follow, which would ruin the prairie grass as well as the
crops, and our horses and our cattle would thus be deprived of
subsistence.' He made this statement with as much apparent candor as it
was possible for a man to give expression to, and there was not an
Indian among his hearers but appeared to accept it as within his power.

"'Sitting Bull' was dull in intellect, and not near as able a man as
'Gall,' 'Hump,' 'Crow,' and many others who were regarded as subordinate
to him; but he was an adept schemer and very cunning, and could work
upon the credulity of the Indians to a wonderful degree, and this,
together with great obstinacy and tenacity, gained for him his
world-wide reputation. 'Sitting Bull' claimed in his statement to me
that he directed and led in the Custer fight; but all the other Indians
with whom I have talked contradict it, and said that 'Sitting Bull' fled
with his family as soon as the village was attacked by Major Reno's
command, and that he was making his way to a place of safety, several
miles out in the hills, when overtaken by some of his friends with news
of victory over the soldiers, whereupon he returned, and in his usual
style, took all the credit of victory to himself as having planned for
the outcome, and as having been on a bluff overlooking the battlefield,
appeasing the evil spirits and invoking the Great Spirit for the result
of the fight.

"And, when considering the ignorance and inherent superstition of the
average Sioux Indian at that time, it is not to be wondered at that the
majority, if not all, were willing to accept it, especially when united
in common cause and what they considered as their only safety from
annihilation. As a matter of fact, there was no one man who led or
directed that fight; it was a pell mell rush under a number of
recognized warriors as leaders, with 'Gall' of the Hunkpapas and 'Crazy
Horse' of the Cheyennes the more prominent.

"The Indians with whom I have talked deny having mutilated any of the
killed, but admit that many dead bodies were mutilated by women of the
camp. They also claim that the fight with Custer was of short duration.
They have no knowledge as to hours and minutes, but have explained by
the distance that could be walked while the fight lasted. They vary from
twenty minutes to three-quarters of an hour, none placing it longer than
forty-five minutes. This does not include the fight with Reno before his
retreat, but from the time that Custer's command advanced and the fight
with his command commenced. The opinion of the Indians regarding Reno's
first attack and short stand is, that it was his retreat that gave them
the victory over Custer's command. The helter skelter retreat of Reno's
men enthused the Indians to such an extent that, flushed with excitement
and this early success, they were reckless in their charge upon Custer's
command, and with the slight number of Indians thus fully enthused, that
small command was but a slight check to their sweeping impetuosity. The
Indians also state that the separated detachments made their victory
over the troops more certain."

Thus Custer fell. The mystery surrounding his death will probably never
be solved in a satisfactory manner, owing to the impossibility of
placing any reliance on statements made by the Indians. The way in which
the command was annihilated and the soldiers' bodies mutilated, should
go a long way towards disproving many of the theories now in existence
concerning the alleged ill treatment of Indians, and their natural
peacefulness and good disposition. Custer had so frequently befriended
the very men who surrounded his command and annihilated it, that the
baseness of their ingratitude should be apparent even to those who are
inclined to sympathize with the red men, and to denounce the alleged
severity with which they have been treated. Travelers through the Dakota
region find few spots of more melancholy, though marked, interest than
the one illustrated in connection with this chapter.





CHAPTER XII.


AMONG THE CREOLES.

Meaning of the Word "Creole"--An Old Aristocratic Relic--The Venice of
America--Origin of the Creole Carnivals--Rex and His Annual
Disguises--Creole Balls--The St. Louis Veiled Prophets--The French
Market and Other Landmarks in New Orleans--A Beautiful Ceremony and an
Unfinished Monument.


New Orleans is known throughout the world for the splendor of its
carnivals. As one of the great Creole cities of the world, it has for
more than half a century made merry once a year, and given quite a
business aspect to carnival festivities. The Creole is one of the
interesting characters to be met with in a tour through the United
States. As a rule, he or she is joyous in the extreme, and believes most
heartily in the wisdom of the command to "laugh and grow fat." The
genuine Creole scarcely knows what it is to be sad for more than a few
hours at a time, a very little pleasure more than offsetting a very
great deal of trouble and suffering. A desire to move around and to
enjoy changes of scene is a special feature of the Creole, and hence the
spectacular effects of the carnival procession appeal most eloquently to
him.

Many Eastern and Northern people confound the term "Creole" and
"Mulatto," believing that the former name is given to the offspring of
mixed marriages, which take place in spite of the vigilance of the laws
of most of the Southern States. This is entirely a mistake, for the
genuine Creole, instead of being an object of contempt and pity, is
rather an aristocrat and of a higher caste than the average white man.
Strictly speaking, the term implies birth in this country, but foreign
parentage or ancestry. It was originally applied to the children of
French and Spanish settlers in Louisiana, and in that application
applied only to quite a handful of people. As time has worn on, and
French emigration has ceased, and the Spaniard has been gradually pushed
south, the number of actual Creoles has of course diminished rapidly.
The name, however, by common consent, has been perpetuated and is
retained by descendants in the third and fourth generations of original
Creoles. Some of the Creoles of to-day are very wealthy, and many of the
others are comparatively poor, changes in modes and conditions of life
having affected them very much. Although the very name Creole suggests
Spanish origin, there is more French blood among the Creoles of to-day
than that of any other nation. The vivacious habits and general love of
change so common among French people, continue in their descendants. The
old plan of sending the children over to France to be educated has been
largely abandoned in these later days, but the influences of Parisian
life still have their effect on the race.

This is largely the reason why it is that New Orleans has been often
spoken of as the American Venice. To that beautiful European city, with
its gondolas and picturesque costumes, belongs the honor of having
originated high-class comedy. To New Orleans must be given the credit of
planting, or at any rate perpetuating, the idea in a tangible shape in
this country, and of having, for fully two generations, kept up the
annual celebration almost without a break. Masquerading came across the
Atlantic from Venice by way of France, where the idea took strong hold.
When emigration from France to the old Territory of Louisiana became
general, the idea came with it, and the practice of sending children to
Paris to be educated resulted in the latest ideas of aristocratic
festivities being brought over to the home which has since sheltered
them.

History tells us that on New Year's Eve of 1831, a number of
pleasure-seeking men spent the entire night in a Creole restaurant at
Mobile arranging for the first mystic order in that city, and from this
beginning the long line of Creole comedies sprang up. In 1857, the
Mystic Krewe of Comus made its first appearance upon the streets of New
Orleans. "Paradise Lost" was the subject selected for illustration. Year
after year the revelry was repeated on Shrove Tuesday, but the outbreak
of the war naturally put a stop to the annual rejoicing. Southern
enthusiasm is, however, hard to down, and directly the war was over,
Comus reappeared in all his glory. A few years later the Knights of
Momus were created, and in 1876 the Krewe of Proteus had its first
carnival. Many other orders have followed, but these are the more
magnificent and important.

It is difficult to convey an adequate idea of the feeling which prevails
in regard to these comedies. The mystery which surrounds the orders is
extraordinary, and the secret has been well kept, a fact which cynics
attribute to the exclusion of ladies from the secret circle. It is well
known that on many occasions men have pretended to leave the city on the
eve of the comedy, and to have returned to their homes a day or two
later, not even their own families knowing that they took a leading part
in the procession. The Carnival Kings issue royal edicts prior to their
arrival, commanding all business to cease on the occasion of the
rejoicings. The command is obeyed literally. Banks, courts of justice
and business houses generally suspend operations, and old and young
alike turn out to do homage to the monarch of the day.

Let us imagine for a moment we are privileged to see a Creole carnival.
Every inch of available space has been taken up. Every balcony
overlooking the royal route is crowded with pleasure parties, including
richly dressed ladies, all the flower and beauty of the Sunny South
being represented. The course is illuminated in the most attractive
manner, and every one is waiting anxiously for the procession. Bands of
music, playing sprightly tunes, finally reward the patience of the
watchers. Then come heralds, bodyguards and marshals, all gorgeously
arrayed for the occasion. Their horses, like themselves, are richly
adorned for the occasion, and the banners and flags are conspicuous for
the artistic blending of colors.

Then riding in state comes the Lord High Chamberlain, bearing the golden
key of the city, delivered over to him in state twenty-four hours
previously by the Mayor. Next comes the hero of the parade, the King
himself. All eyes are riveted upon him. Thoroughly disguised himself, he
is able to recognize on the balconies and among the crowds his personal
friends and most devoted admirers. To these he bows with great
solemnity. Mystified to a degree, and often disputing among themselves
as to the probable identity of the monarch, the richly dressed young
ladies and their cavaliers bow in return, and look as though they would
fain hold the monarch among them much longer than the necessity of
keeping order makes it possible. Following the King are the bodyguards
and crowds of holiday makers.

Rex generally makes a display now of some special theme, appearing this
year as a crusader, another year as the discoverer of America, and a
third year as some other mystic individual. But no matter what the
subject of the carnival may be, the underlying principle is the same.
Sometimes a great deal of instruction is imparted with the mirth-making,
but in every case the procession is but a signal for general rejoicing.
Directly the procession is disbanded, which always takes place in
military order, the entire city gives way to fun and mirth of every
character. Liberty abounds throughout the city without license. By
common consent every one is careful to prevent disturbance or trouble.
All are happy, and every one seems to appreciate the fact that the very
life of the comedy depends upon its respectability. There is nothing
vulgar or common about any of the proceedings, or about the countless
tableaux which pass along the private streets. Everything is what has
been described as orderly disorder. Everything is attractive and easy.

The ball, which is a prominent feature of a Creole carnival, is a
wonderful combination of Nineteenth Century aristocratic ideas and of
Oriental humor. The guests are in full dress, and represent the highest
elements of Southern society. Around the carpeted floor, those who have
taken part in the pageant march in their grotesque costumes. An
apparently blood-thirsty Indian, brandishing a club over his head, darts
for a second from the line to go through the motions of dashing out the
brains of perhaps a most intimate friend, who has no idea who has thus
honored him by a recognition.

Another man, who in everyday life is, perhaps, a sedate banker or a
prominent physician, is masquerading in some extraordinary attire with a
mask of extraordinary dimensions and significance. He sees in the throng
a young lady of his acquaintance, and proceeds to shake hands with her
with great effusion. So well is the secret kept, that she has no idea
that the apparently frolicsome youth is a middle-aged man of business,
and she spends perhaps half the night wondering which of her beaus this
fearfully and wonderfully disguised man was.

Of the balls which succeed carnivals in the cities which delight in
these temporary divorces from the cares of business and finance, pages
might be written. One ball only need be mentioned in any detail. This is
the ball given by the "Knights of Revelry," in connection with and at
the expense of the Mobile clubs. The entire theatre was rearranged in
illustration of the theme of the club's pageant for the year. All around
the halls were hung tapestries and banners, artistically decorated, and
arranged so as to convey the idea of forests and gardens. The very doors
were converted into mimic entrances to caves and parterres, and the
general effect was entrancing as well as sentimental. The band was
hidden from the guests in a most delightfully arranged little Swiss
chalet, and refreshments were served from miniature garden pavilions.
The very floors upon which the dancing was to take place were decorated
so as to present the appearance of a newly mown lawn.

The height of realism was attained by means of an imitation moat over
the orchestra well. Across this was a drawbridge, which was raised and
dropped at fitting intervals, and the drop curtain was made to represent
a massive castle door. There was a banquet chamber, with faultless
reproductions of mediaeval grandeur and wonder. Stained glass windows
represented well-known and attractive ladies, and there were other
marvelous and costly innovations which seemed practically impossible
within a theatre.

At this ball, as at all others, the revelry proceeded until midnight.
Just as Cinderella left the ball when the clock struck 12, so do the
holders of the Creole revels stop dancing immediately that Lent has
commenced. The next day all is over. Men who the night before were the
leaders in the masquerade, resume their commonplace existence, and are
seen at the ordinary seats of custom, buying and selling and conducting
themselves like Eastern rather than Southern men.

The carnival idea has not been confined to strictly Southern cities. St.
Louis has, for many years in succession, enjoyed the pageants and balls
of its Veiled Prophets, an organization as secret and mysterious as any
to be found in a Creole section. Instead of being a Mardi Gras
celebration, the St. Louis pageant is given during the Indian summer
days of the first week of October. The parade takes place after
night-fall, and consists of very costly pageants and displays. It is no
exaggeration to say that hundreds of thousands of dollars have been
spent in illuminating the streets through which the processions have
passed, the money for this purpose being freely subscribed by business
men and private citizens. But in St. Louis, as in New Orleans, no one
knows who finds the money to pay for the preparation of the pageant, the
rich and varied costumes, the exquisite invitations and souvenirs, and
the gorgeous balls. Readers of the "Pickwick Papers" will remember that
when certain members of the club proposed to make a tour of the country,
with a view to noting matters of special interest, it was unanimously
resolved not to limit the scope of the investigations, and to extend to
the investigators the privilege of paying their own expenses. Very much
the same rule prevails in regard to the Creole carnivals and balls, and
the adaptation of the idea in other cities. The utmost secrecy is
preserved, and it is considered bad form in the extreme to even hint at
belonging to any of the secret orders. The members subscribe all
expenses themselves without a moment's hesitation, and there has never
been such a thing seen as a list of the amounts donated.

There are not lacking people who say that these celebrations are
childish, and beneath the dignity of a business community. The answer to
criticisms of this kind is, that no one being asked to contribute to the
expense of the revelries, or being even asked or allowed to purchase a
ticket of admission to the balls, any criticisms are very much like
looking a gift horse in the mouth. If it be agreed that life is made up
of something more than one stern, continuous race for wealth, then it
must be conceded that these carnivals occupy a most important part in
the routine of life. The absolute unselfishness of the entire work
commends it to the approval of the most indifferent. Those who raise the
expense have to work so hard during the parades and balls that they get
comparatively little pleasure from them, while they are also prevented
by the absolute secrecy which prevails from securing so much as a word
of thanks or congratulation from the outside public. In this material
age, there is a danger of celebrations of this kind wearing themselves
out. When they do so, the world will be the poorer in consequence.

New Orleans, to which we have referred as the great home of the Creole
carnival, is a city known the world over by reputation. It is situated
at the very mouth of the great Mississippi River, and its history dates
back to the year 1542, when a gallant band of adventurers floated down
the river into the Gulf of Mexico. In 1682, La Salle sailed down the
