by both sexes are large blue or white beads, either pendant from their
ears, or round the neck, wrists, and arms; they have likewise bracelets
of brass, copper, and horn, and some trinkets of shells, fishbones, and
curious feathers.

"The houses of the Sokulks are made of large mats of rushes, and are
generally of a square or oblong form, varying in length from fifteen to
sixty feet, and supported in the inside by poles or forks about six feet
high. The top is covered with mats, leaving a space of twelve or fifteen
inches the whole length of the house, for the purpose of admitting the
light and suffering the smoke to escape. The roof is nearly flat, which
seems to indicate that rains are not common in this open country; and
the house is not divided into apartments, the fire being in the middle
of the enclosure, and immediately under the bole in the roof. The
interior is ornamented with their nets, gigs, and other fishing-tackle,
as well as the bow of each inmate, and a large quiver of arrows, which
are headed with flint.

"The Sokulks seem to be of a mild and peaceable disposition, and live in
a state of comparative happiness. The men, like those on the Kimooenim,
are said to content themselves with a single wife, with whom the
husband, we observe, shares the labors of procuring subsistence much
more than is common among savages. What may be considered an unequivocal
proof of their good disposition, is the great respect which is shown to
old age. Among other marks of it, we noticed in one of the houses an
old woman perfectly blind, and who, we were told, had lived more than
a hundred winters. In this state of decrepitude, she occupied the best
position in the house, seemed to be treated with great kindness, and
whatever she said was listened to with much attention. They are by no
means obtrusive; and as their fisheries supply them with a competent, if
not an abundant subsistence, although they receive thankfully whatever
we choose to give, they do not importune us by begging. Fish is, indeed,
their chief food, except roots and casual supplies of antelope, which
latter, to those who have only bows and arrows, must be very scanty.
This diet may be the direct or the remote cause of the chief disorder
which prevails among them, as well as among the Flatheads on the
Kooskooskee and Lewis' rivers. With all these Indians a bad soreness
of the eyes is a very common disorder, which is suffered to ripen by
neglect, till many are deprived of one of their eyes, and some have
totally lost the use of both. This dreadful calamity may reasonably, we
think, be imputed to the constant reflection of the sun on the waters,
where they are constantly fishing in the spring, summer, and fall, and
during the rest of the year on the snows of a country which affords no
object to relieve the sight.

"Among the Sokulks, indeed among all the tribes whose chief subsistence
is fish, we have observed that bad teeth are very general; some have the
teeth, particularly those of the upper jaw, worn down to the gums, and
many of both sexes, even of middle age, have lost them almost entirely.
This decay of the teeth is a circumstance very unusual among Indians,
either of the mountains or the plains, and seems peculiar to the
inhabitants of the Columbia. We cannot avoid regarding as one principal
cause of it the manner in which they eat their food. The roots are
swallowed as they are dug from the ground, frequently covered with a
gritty sand; so little idea have they that this is offensive that all
the roots they offer us for sale are in the same condition."

The explorers were now at the entrance of the mighty Columbia,--"The
Great River" of which they had heard so much from the Indians. We might
suppose that when they actually embarked upon the waters of the famous
stream, variously known as "The River of the North" and "The Oregon,"
the explorers would be touched with a little of the enthusiasm with
which they straddled the headwaters of the Missouri and gazed upon the
snow-covered peaks of the Rocky Mountains. But no such kindling of
the imagination seems to have been noted in their journal. In this
commonplace way, according to their own account, Captain Clark entered
upon the mighty Columbia:--

"In the course of the day (October 17, 1805), Captain Clark, in a small
canoe with two men, ascended the Columbia. At the distance of five miles
he passed an island in the middle of the river, at the head of which
was a small but not dangerous rapid. On the left bank, opposite to this
island, was a fishing-place consisting of three mat houses. Here were
great quantities of salmon drying on scaffolds; and, indeed, from the
mouth of the river upward, he saw immense numbers of dead salmon strewed
along the shore, or floating on the surface of the water, which is so
clear that the fish may be seen swimming at the depth of fifteen or
twenty feet. The Indians, who had collected on the banks to observe him,
now joined him in eighteen canoes, and accompanied him up the river. A
mile above the rapids he came to the lower point of an island, where the
course of the stream, which had been from its mouth north eighty-three
degrees west, now became due west. He proceeded in that direction,
until, observing three house's of mats at a short distance, he landed
to visit them. On entering one of these houses, he found it crowded with
men, women, and children, who immediately provided a mat for him to sit
on, and one of the party undertook to prepare something to eat. He began
by bringing in a piece of pine wood that had drifted down the river,
which he split into small pieces with a wedge made of elkhorn, by means
of a mallet of stone curiously carved. The pieces of wood were then
laid on the fire, and several round stones placed upon them. One of the
squaws now brought a bucket of water, in which was a large salmon about
half dried, and, as the stones became heated, they were put into the
bucket till the salmon was sufficiently boiled for use. It was then
taken out, put on a platter of rushes neatly made, and laid before
Captain Clark, while another was boiled for each of his men. During
these preparations he smoked with such about him as would accept of
tobacco, but very few were desirous of smoking, a custom which is
not general among them, and chiefly used as a matter of form in great
ceremonies.

"After eating the fish, which was of an excellent flavor, Captain Clark
set out and, at the distance of four miles from the last island, came to
the lower point of another near the left shore, where he halted at two
large mat-houses. Here, as at the three houses below, the inhabitants
were occupied in splitting and drying salmon. The multitudes of this
fish are almost inconceivable. The water is so clear that they can
readily be seen at the depth of fifteen or twenty feet; but at this
season they float in such quantities down the stream, and are drifted
ashore, that the Indians have only to collect, split, and dry them on
the scaffolds. Where they procure the timber of which these scaffolds
are composed he could not learn; but as there is nothing but
willow-bushes to be seen for a great distance from this place, it
rendered very probable what the Indians assured him by signs, that they
often used dried fish as fuel for the common occasions of cooking. From
this island they showed him the entrance of the western branch of the
Columbia, called the Tapteal, which, as far as could be seen, bears
nearly west and empties about eight miles above into the Columbia, the
general course of which is northwest."

The Tapteal, as the journal calls it, is now known as the Yakima,
a stream which has its source in the Cascade range of mountains,
Washington. The party tarried here long enough to secure from the
Indians a tolerably correct description of the river upon which they
were about to embark. One of the chiefs drew upon the skin-side of a
buffalo robe a sketch of the Columbia. And this was transferred to paper
and put into the journal. That volume adds here:--

"Having completed the purposes of our stay, we now began to lay in our
stores. Fish being out of season, we purchased forty dogs, for which we
gave small articles, such as bells, thimbles, knitting-needles, brass
wire, and a few beads, an exchange with which they all seemed perfectly
satisfied. These dogs, with six prairie-cocks killed this morning,
formed a plentiful supply for the present. We here left our guide
and the two young men who had accompanied him, two of the three being
unwilling to go any further, and the third being of no use, as he was
not acquainted with the river below. We therefore took no Indians but
our two chiefs, and resumed our journey in the presence of many of the
Sokulks, who came to witness our departure. The morning was cool and
fair, and the wind from the southeast."

They now began again to meet Indians who had never before seen white
men. On the nineteenth, says the journal:--

"The great chief, with two of his inferior chiefs and a third belonging
to a band on the river below, made us a visit at a very early hour. The
first of these was called Yelleppit,--a handsome, well-proportioned
man, about five feet eight inches high, and thirty-five years of age,
with a bold and dignified countenance; the rest were not distinguished
in their appearance. We smoked with them, and after making a speech,
gave a medal, a handkerchief, and a string of wampum to Yelleppit, but a
string of wampum only to the inferior chiefs. He requested us to remain
till the middle of the day, in order that all his nation might come and
see us; but we excused ourselves by telling him that on our return we
would spend two or three days with him. This conference detained us till
nine o'clock, by which time great numbers of the Indians had come down
to visit us. On leaving them we went on for eight miles, when we came to
an island near the left shore, which continued six miles in length.
At its lower extremity is a small island on which are five houses, at
present vacant, though the scaffolds of fish are as usual abundant. A
short distance below are two more islands, one of them near the middle
of the river. On this there were seven houses, but as soon as the
Indians, who were drying fish, saw us, they fled to their houses, and
not one of them appeared till we had passed; when they came out in
greater numbers than is usual for houses of that size, which induced us
to think that the inhabitants of the five lodges had been alarmed at our
approach and taken refuge with them. We were very desirous of landing in
order to relieve their apprehensions, but as there was a bad rapid along
the island all our care was necessary to prevent injury to the canoes.
At the foot of this rapid is a rock on the left shore, which is fourteen
miles from our camp of last night and resembles a hat in shape."

Later in the day, Captain Clark ascended a bluff on the river bank,
where he saw "a very high mountain covered with snow." This was Mount
St. Helen's, in Cowlitz County, Washington. The altitude of the peak is
nine thousand seven hundred and fifty feet. "Having arrived at the lower
ends of the rapids below the bluff before any of the rest of the party,
he sat down on a rock to wait for them, and, seeing a crane fly across
the river, shot it, and it fell near him. Several Indians had been
before this passing on the opposite side towards the rapids, and some
who were then nearly in front of him, being either alarmed at his
appearance or the report of the gun, fled to their houses. Captain Clark
was afraid that these people had not yet heard that the white men were
coming, and therefore, in order to allay their uneasiness before the
rest of the party should arrive, he got into the small canoe with three
men, rowed over towards the houses, and, while crossing, shot a duck,
which fell into the water. As he approached no person was to be seen
except three men in the plains, and they, too, fled as he came near the
shore. He landed in front of five houses close to each other, but no one
appeared, and the doors, which were of mat, were closed. He went towards
one of them with a pipe in his hand, and, pushing aside the mat, entered
the lodge, where he found thirty-two persons, chiefly men and women,
with a few children, all in the greatest consternation; some hanging
down their heads, others crying and wringing their hands. He went up
to them, and shook hands with each one in the most friendly manner; but
their apprehensions, which had for a moment subsided, revived on his
taking out a burning-glass, as there was no roof to the house, and
lighting his pipe: he then offered it to several of the men, and
distributed among the women and children some small trinkets which he
had with him, and gradually restored a degree of tranquillity among
them.

"Leaving this house, and directing each of his men to visit a house, he
entered a second. Here he found the inmates more terrified than those in
the first; but he succeeded in pacifying them, and afterward went into
the other houses, where the men had been equally successful. Retiring
from the houses, he seated himself on a rock, and beckoned to some of
the men to come and smoke with him; but none of them ventured to
join him till the canoes arrived with the two chiefs, who immediately
explained our pacific intention towards them. Soon after the
interpreter's wife (Sacajawea) landed, and her presence dissipated all
doubts of our being well-disposed, since in this country no woman
ever accompanies a war party: they therefore all came out, and seemed
perfectly reconciled; nor could we, indeed, blame them for their
terrors, which were perfectly natural. They told the two chiefs that
they knew we were not men, for they had seen us fall from the clouds. In
fact, unperceived by them, Captain Clark had shot the white crane, which
they had seen fall just before he appeared to their eyes: the duck which
he had killed also fell close by him; and as there were some clouds
flying over at the moment, they connected the fall of the birds with
his sudden appearance, and believed that he had himself actually dropped
from the clouds; considering the noise of the rifle, which they had
never heard before, the sound announcing so extraordinary an event. This
belief was strengthened, when, on entering the room, he brought down
fire from the heavens by means of his burning-glass. We soon convinced
them, however, that we were merely mortals; and after one of our chiefs
had explained our history and objects, we all smoked together in great
harmony."




Chapter XVI -- Down the Columbia to Tidewater

The voyagers were now drifting down the Columbia River, and they found
the way impeded by many rapids, some of them very dangerous. But their
skill in the handling of their canoes seems to have been equal to the
occasion, although they were sometimes compelled to go around the more
difficult rapids, making a short land portage. When they had travelled
about forty miles down the river, they landed opposite an island on
which were twenty-four houses of Indians; the people, known as the
Pishquitpahs, were engaged in drying fish. No sooner had the white men
landed than the Indians, to the number of one hundred, came across the
stream bringing with them some firewood, a most welcome present in that
treeless country. The visitors were entertained with presents and a long
smoke at the pipe of peace. So pleased were they with the music of two
violins played by Cruzatte and Gibson, of the exploring party, that they
remained by the fire of the white men all night. The news of the arrival
of the white strangers soon spread, and next morning about two hundred
more of the Indians assembled to gaze on them. Later in the day, having
gotten away from their numerous inquisitive visitors, the explorers
passed down-stream and landed on a small island to examine a curious
vault, in which were placed the remains of the dead of the tribe. The
journal says:--

"This place, in which the dead are deposited, is a building about sixty
feet long and twelve feet wide, formed by placing in the ground poles
or forks six feet high, across which a long pole is extended the whole
length of the structure; against this ridge-pole are placed broad boards
and pieces of canoes, in a slanting direction, so as to form a shed.
It stands cast and west, and neither of the extremities is closed.
On entering the western end we observed a number of bodies wrapped
carefully in leather robes, and arranged in rows on boards, which were
then covered with a mat. This was the part destined for those who had
recently died; a little further on, bones half decayed were scattered
about, and in the centre of the building was a large pile of them heaped
promiscuously on each other. At the eastern extremity was a mat, on
which twenty-one skulls were placed in a circular form; the mode of
interment being first to wrap the body in robes, then as it decays to
throw the bones into the heap, and place the skulls together. From
the different boards and pieces of canoes which form the vault were
suspended, on the inside, fishing-nets, baskets, wooden bowls, robes,
skins, trenchers, and trinkets of various kinds, obviously intended
as offerings of affection to deceased relatives. On the outside of the
vault were the skeletons of several horses, and great quantities of
their bones were in the neighborhood, which induced us to believe that
these animals were most probably sacrificed at the funeral rites of
their masters."

Just below this stand the party met Indians who traded with tribes
living near the great falls of the Columbia. That place they designated
as "Tum-tum," a word that signifies the throbbing of the heart. One of
these Indians had a sailor's jacket, and others had a blue blanket and
a scarlet blanket. These articles had found their way up the river from
white traders on the seashore.

On the twenty-first of October the explorers discovered a considerable
stream which appeared to rise in the southeast and empty into the
Columbia on the left. To this stream they gave the name of Lepage
for Bastien Lepage, one of the voyageurs accompanying the party. The
watercourse, however, is now known as John Day's River. John Day was
a mighty hunter and backwoodsman from Kentucky who went across the
continent, six years later, with a party bound for Astoria, on the
Columbia. From the rapids below the John Day River the Lewis and Clark
party caught their first sight of Mount Hood, a famous peak of the
Cascade range of mountains, looming up in the southwest, eleven thousand
two hundred and twenty-five feet high. Next day they passed the mouth
of another river entering the Columbia from the south and called by
the Indians the Towahnahiooks, but known to modern geography as the Des
Chutes, one of the largest southern tributaries of the Columbia. Five
miles below the mouth of this stream the party camped. Near them was a
party of Indians engaged in drying and packing salmon. Their method of
doing this is thus described:--

"The manner of doing this is by first opening the fish and exposing it
to the sun on scaffolds. When it is sufficiently dried it is pounded
between two stones till it is pulverized, and is then placed in a
basket about two feet long and one in diameter, neatly made of grass and
rushes, and lined with the skin of a salmon stretched and dried for the
purpose. Here the fish are pressed down as hard as possible, and the top
is covered with fish-skins, which are secured by cords through the holes
of the basket. These baskets are then placed in some dry situation, the
corded part upward, seven being usually placed as close as they can be
put together, and five on the top of these. The whole is then wrapped
up in mats, and made fast by cords, over which mats are again thrown.
Twelve of these baskets, each of which contains from ninety to one
hundred pounds, form a stack, which is left exposed till it is sent to
market. The fish thus preserved keep sound and sweet for several years,
and great quantities, they inform us, are sent to the Indians who live
below the falls, whence it finds its way to the whites who visit the
mouth of the Columbia. We observe, both near the lodges and on the rocks
in the river, great numbers of stacks of these pounded fish. Besides
fish, these people supplied us with filberts and berries, and we
purchased a dog for supper; but it was with much difficulty that we were
able to buy wood enough to cook it."

On the twenty-third the voyagers made the descent of the great falls
which had so long been an object of dread to them. The whole height of
the falls is thirty-seven feet, eight inches, in a distance of twelve
hundred yards. A portage of four hundred and fifty yards was made around
the first fall, which is twenty feet high, and perpendicular. By means
of lines the canoes were let down the rapids below. At the season of
high water the falls become mere rapids up which the salmon can pass. On
this point the journal says:--

"From the marks everywhere perceivable at the falls, it is obvious that
in high floods, which must be in the spring, the water below the falls
rises nearly to a level with that above them. Of this rise, which is
occasioned by some obstructions which we do not as yet know, the salmon
must avail themselves to pass up the river in such multitudes that this
fish is almost the only one caught in great abundance above the falls;
but below that place we observe the salmon-trout, and the heads of
a species of trout smaller than the salmon-trout, which is in great
quantities, and which they are now burying, to be used as their winter
food. A hole of any size being dug, the sides and bottom are lined with
straw, over which skins are laid; on these the fish, after being well
dried, are laid, covered with other skins, and the hole is closed with a
layer of earth twelve or fifteen inches deep. . . .

"We saw no game except a sea-otter, which was shot in the narrow channel
as we were coming down, but we could not get it. Having, therefore,
scarcely any provisions, we purchased eight small fat dogs: a food
to which we were compelled to have recourse, as the Indians were very
unwilling to sell us any of their good fish, which they reserved for the
market below. Fortunately, however, habit had completely overcome the
