apart.

But Lord Roos was too experienced a player to be defeated by this turn
in the game.

"Gillian has already been sufficiently annoyed," he cried; "and shall
not submit to this ordeal. Besides, she has relapsed into insensibility,
as you see."

"She does what your lordship wills her, it is clear," said Lady Lake,
contemptuously. "We know what construction to put upon your refusal."

"I care not what construction you put upon it," cried Lord Roos, losing
patience. "You and Lady Roos may think what you please, and act as you
please. Enough for me, you can prove nothing."

"Why, this is more like yourself, my lord," retorted Lady Lake,
derisively. "Having thrown aside the mask, you will be spared the
necessity of further subterfuge. The Countess, doubtless, will imitate
your example, lay aside her feigned insensibility, and defy us. She need
be under no apprehension; since she has your own warrant that we can
prove nothing."

"Your purpose, I perceive, is to irritate me, Madam," cried Lord Roos,
fiercely; "and so far you are likely to succeed, though you fail in all
else. I have no mask to throw off; but if you will have me declare
myself your enemy, I am ready to do so. Henceforth, let there be no
terms kept between us--let it be open warfare."

"Be it so, my lord. And you will soon find who will be worsted in the
struggle."

"Oh, do not proceed to these fearful extremities, dear mother, and
dearest husband!" cried Lady Roos, turning from one to the other
imploringly. "Cease these provocations, I pray of you. Be friends, and
not enemies."

"As you please--peace or war; it is the same to me," said Lord Roos.
"Meantime, I am wearied of this scene, and must put an end to it.
Diego!" And beckoning his servant to him, he whispered some directions
in his ear.

"My lord shall be obeyed," said Diego, as he received his commission.
"Gillian shall be conveyed with all care to her chamber."

"We must have some proof that she has been here," thought Lady Lake.
But how to obtain it? I have it. "Take these," she added in a whisper to
her daughter, and giving a pair of scissors; "and contrive, if possible,
to sever a lock of her hair before she be removed."

By a look Lady Roos promised compliance.

While this was passing, Diego had approached the couch; and fastening
the kerchief securely round the Countess's face, he raised her in his
arms, and moved towards the secret staircase, the tapestried covering of
which was held aside by Lord Roos to give him passage.

Rapidly as the Spaniard moved, he did not outstrip Lady Roos, whose
design being favoured by the escape from its confinement of one of the
Countess's long dark tresses, she had no difficulty of possessing,
herself of it in the manner prescribed by her mother. Lady Exeter was
aware of the loss she had sustained, and uttered a stifled cry; but this
was attributed to the fright natural to the occasion by Lord Roos, who
had not noticed what had taken place, and only caused him to hurry
Diego's departure. But before the latter had wholly disappeared with his
burthen, the perfumed and silken tress of hair was delivered to Lady
Lake, who muttered triumphantly as she received it--"This will convict
her. She cannot escape us now."

The prize was scarcely concealed when Lord Roos, sheathing the sword
which he had hitherto held drawn, advanced towards his mother-in-law.

"Now that the object of your disquietude is removed, Madam, it will not
be necessary to prolong this interview," he said.

"Have we then your lordship's permission to depart?" rejoined Lady Lake,
coldly. "We are not, I presume, to avail ourselves of the private means
of exit contrived for your amorous adventures, lest we should make other
discoveries."

"Your ladyship will leave by the way you entered," rejoined Lord Roos.
"I will attend you to the door--and unfasten it for you."

"Before we go, I would have a word with my husband--it may be my last,"
said Lady Roos to her mother. "I pray you withdraw a little, that we may
be alone."

"Better not," rejoined Lady Lake. But unable to resist her daughter's
imploring looks, she added, "Well, as you will. But it is useless."

With this she proceeded to the little passage, and remained there.

As Lady Roos turned to her husband, she saw, from the stern and
inflexible look he had assumed, that any appeal made to him would be
unavailing, and she attempted none. A moment elapsed before she could
utter a word, and then it was only a murmur to heaven for guidance and
support.

"What say you, Elizabeth?" demanded Lord Roos, thinking she had
addressed him.

"I asked for support from on High, William, and it has been accorded to
me," she replied in a low sweet voice. "I can now speak to you. It is
not to weary you with supplications or reproaches that I thus detain
you. I have something to impart to you, and I am sure you will eagerly
listen to it. Come nearer, that we may not be overheard."

Lord Roos, whose curiosity was aroused by her manner, obeyed her.

"I am all attention," he said.

"I feel I am in your way, William," she rejoined, in a deep whisper;
"and that you desire my death. Nay, interrupt me not; I am sure you
desire it; and I am equally sure that the desire will be gratified, and
that you will kill me."

"Kill you, Bess!" cried Lord Roos, startled. "How can you imagine aught
so frightful?"

"There is a power granted to those who love deeply as I do, of seeing
into the hearts of those they love, and reading their secrets. I have
read yours, William. Nay, be not alarmed. I have kept it to myself
hitherto, and will keep it to the end. You wish me dead, I say; and you
shall have your wish--but not in the way you propose. Having lost your
love, I am become indifferent to life--or, rather, life is grown
intolerable to me. But though death may be a release, it must not come
from your hand."

"You cannot mean to destroy yourself, Elizabeth?" cried Lord Roos,
appalled.

"I mean to trouble you no longer. I mean to make the last and greatest
sacrifice I can for you; and to save you from a crime--or, if you must
share the crime, at least to screen you from punishment. Look, here!"
she added, producing a small phial. "Bid me drink of this, and ere
to-morrow you are free, and I am at rest. Shall I do it?"

"No--no," rejoined Lord Roos, snatching the phial from her. "Live, Bess,
live!"

"Am I to live for you, William?" she cried, with inexpressible joy.

He made no answer, but averted his head.

"In mercy give me back the phial," she exclaimed, again plunged into the
depths of despair.

"I must refuse your request," he replied.

"Have you done, Elizabeth?" demanded Lady Lake, coming forth from the
passage.

"A moment more, mother," cried Lady Roos. "One word--one look!" she
added to her husband.

But he neither spoke to her, nor regarded her.

"I am ready to accompany you now, mother," said the poor lady faintly.

"Nerve yourself, weak-hearted girl," said Lady Lake, in a low tone.
"Revenge is ours."

"If I could only strike her without injuring him, I should not heed,"
thought Lady Roos. "But where he suffers, I must also suffer, and yet
more acutely."

And scarcely able to support herself, she followed her mother to the
door of the ante-chamber, which was unlocked, and thrown open for them
by her husband. He did not bid her farewell!

As Lady Lake passed forth, she paused for a moment, and said--

"To-morrow, my Lord, we will ascertain whether the tress of hair we have
obtained from the fair visitant to your chamber, matches with that of
Gillian Greenford or with the raven locks of the Countess of Exeter."

And satisfied with the effect produced by this menace, she departed with
her daughter, before Lord Roos could utter a reply.




CHAPTER XXIV.

The Fountain Court.


On the morning after the eventful passage in his life, previously
related, our newly-created knight was standing, in a pensive attitude,
beside the beautiful fountain, adorned with two fair statues,
representing the Queen of Love and her son, heretofore described as
placed in the centre of the great quadrangle of the Palace of Theobalds.
Sir Jocelyn was listening to the plashing of the sparkling jets of
water, as they rose into the air, and fell back into the broad marble
basin, and appeared to be soothed by the pleasant sound. His breast had
been agitated by various and conflicting emotions. In an incredibly
short space of time events had occurred, some of which seemed likely to
influence the whole of his future career; while one of them, though it
had advanced him far beyond what he could have anticipated, appeared
likely to mar altogether his prospects of happiness.

Though the difficulties, therefore, that surrounded him had been
unexpectedly overcome; though, by the exertions of the Conde de
Gondomar, who had followed up his first success with wonderful
promptitude and perseverance, and had dexterously contrived, by all the
insidious arts of which lie was so perfect a master, to ingratiate his
protege still further with the King, without the protege himself being
aware of the manner in which he was served; though James himself
appeared greatly pleased with him, at the banquet in the evening, to
which, owing to the skilful management of the Spanish ambassador, he was
invited, and bestowed such marked attention upon him, that the envy and
jealousy of most of the courtiers were excited by it; though he seemed
on the high-road to still greater favour, and was already looked upon as
a rising favourite, who might speedily supplant others above him in this
ever-changing sphere, if he did not receive a check; though his present
position was thus comparatively secure, and his prospects thus
brilliant, he felt ill at ease, and deeply dissatisfied with himself. He
could not acquit himself of blame for the part he had played, though
involuntarily, in the arrest of Hugh Calveley. It was inexpressibly
painful to him; and he felt it as a reproach from which he could not
free himself, to have risen, however unexpectedly on his own part, by
the unfortunate Puritan's fall. How could he ever face Aveline again!
She must regard him with horror and detestation, as the involuntary
cause of her father's destruction. A bar had been placed between them,
which nothing could ever remove. And though, on the one hand, he was
suddenly exalted far beyond his hopes; yet on the other he was as
suddenly cast down, and threatened to be for ever deprived of the bliss
he had in view, the possession of which he coveted far more than wealth
or grandeur. Additional complexity had been given to his position from
the circumstance that, at De Gondomar's secret instance, of which, like
all the rest, he was unaware, he had been appointed as officer in
custody of Hugh Calveley, until the latter, who was still detained a
close prisoner in the porter's lodge, should be removed to the Tower, or
the Fleet, as his Majesty might direct. This post he would have
declined, had there been a possibility of doing so. Any plan he might
have formed of aiding the prisoner's escape was thus effectually
prevented, as he could not violate his duty; and it was probably with
this view that the wily ambassador had obtained him the appointment. In
fact, he had unconsciously become little more than a puppet in the hands
of the plotting Spaniard, who pulled the strings that moved him at
pleasure, regardless of the consequences. What De Gondomar's ulterior
designs were with him had not yet become manifest.

These perplexing thoughts swept through Sir Jocelyn's breast, as he
stood by the marble fountain, and listened to the sound of its falling
waters.

While thus occupied, he perceived two persons issue from the arched
entrance fronting the gate (adjoining the porter's lodge, in which the
prisoner was still detained), and make their way slowly across the
quadrangle, in the direction of the cloister on its eastern side, above
which were apartments assigned to the Secretary of State, Sir Thomas
Lake.

The foremost of the two was merely a yeoman of the guard, and would not
for a moment have attracted Sir Jocelyn's attention, if it had not been
for a female who accompanied him, and whom he was evidently conducting
to Sir Thomas Lake's rooms, as Sir Jocelyn not only saw the man point
towards them, but heard him mention the Secretary of State's name.

Something whispered him that this closely-hooded female,--the lower part
of whose face was shrouded in a muffler, so that the eyes alone were
visible,--was Aveline. Little could be discerned of the features; but
the exquisitely-proportioned figure, so simply yet so tastefully
arrayed, could only be hers; and if he _could_ have doubted that it was
Aveline, the suddenness with which her looks were averted as she beheld
him, and the quickness with which she stepped forward, so as even to
outstrip her companion--these circumstances, coupled with the violent
throbbing of his own heart, convinced him he was right. He would have
flown after her, if he had dared; would have poured forth all his
passionate feelings to her, had he been permitted; would have offered
her his life, to deal with as she pleased; but his fears restrained him,
and he remained riveted to the spot, gazing after her until she entered
the great hall on the ground floor, beneath the Secretary of State's
apartments. Why she sought Sir Thomas Lake he could easily understand.
It was only from him that authority to visit her father could be
obtained.

After remaining irresolute for a few minutes, during which the
magnificent structure around him faded entirely from his view like a
vision melting into air, and he heard no more the pleasant plashing of
the fountain, he proceeded to the great hall near the cloister, resolved
to wait there till her return.




CHAPTER XXV.

Sir Thomas Lake.


A grave-looking man, of a melancholy and severe aspect, and attired in a
loose robe of black velvet, was seated alone in a chamber, the windows
of which opened upon the Fountain Court, which we have just quitted. He
wore a silken skull-cap, from beneath which a few gray hairs escaped;
his brow was furrowed with innumerable wrinkles, occasioned as much by
thought and care as by age; his pointed beard and moustaches were almost
white, contrasting strikingly with his dark, jaundiced complexion, the
result of an atrabilarious temperament; his person was extremely
attenuated, and his hands thin and bony. He had once been tall, but
latterly had lost much of his height, in consequence of a curvature of
the spine, which bowed down his head almost upon his breast, and fixed
it immoveably in that position. His features were good, but, as we have
stated, were stamped with melancholy, and sharpened by severity.

This person was Sir Thomas Lake, Secretary of State.

The table at which he sat was strewn over with official documents and
papers. He was not, however, examining any of them, but had just broken
the seal of a private packet which he had received from his wife, when
an usher entered, and intimated that a young maiden, who was without,
solicited a moment's audience. The request would have been refused, if
the man had not gone on to say that he believed the applicant was the
daughter of the crazy Puritan, who had threatened the King's life on the
previous day. On hearing this, Sir Thomas consented to see her, and she
was admitted accordingly.

As soon as the usher had retired, Aveline unmuffled herself, and, cold
and apathetic as he was, Sir Thomas could not help being struck by her
surpassing beauty, unimpaired even by the affliction under which she
laboured; and he consequently softened in some degree the customary
asperity of his tones in addressing her.

"Who are you, maiden, and what seek you?" he demanded, eyeing her with
curiosity.

"I am daughter to the unfortunate Hugh Calveley, now a prisoner in the
palace," she replied.

"I am sorry to hear it," rejoined Sir Thomas, resuming his habitually
severe expression; "for you are the daughter of a very heinous offender.
The enormity of Hugh Calveley's crime, which is worse than parricide,
deprives him of all human sympathy and compassion. In coming to me you
do not, I presume, intend to weary me with prayers for mercy; for none
is deserved, and none will be shown. For my own part, I shall not utter
a word in mitigation of the dreadful sentence certain to be pronounced
upon him; nor shall I advise the slightest clemency to be shown him on
the part of his Majesty. Such an offender cannot be too severely
punished. I do not say this," he continued, somewhat softening his
harshness, "to aggravate the distress and shame you naturally feel; but
I wish to check at once any hopes you may have formed. Yet though I have
no pity for him, I have much for you, since, doubtless, you are innocent
of all knowledge of your father's atrocious design--happily prevented.
And I would therefore say to you, shut out all feelings for him from
your heart. The man who raises his hand against his sovereign cuts off
by the act all ties of kindred and love. Affection is changed to
abhorrence; and such detestation does his horrible offence inspire, that
those of his own blood are bound to shun him, lest he derive comfort and
consolation from their presence. Thus considered, you are no longer his
daughter, for he has himself severed the links between you. You no
longer owe him filial duty and regard, for to such he is no more
entitled. Leave him to his fate; and, if possible, for ever obliterate
his memory from your breast."

"You counsel what I can never perform, honourable Sir," replied Aveline;
"and were he even branded like Cain, I could not shut my heart towards
him. Nothing can make me forget that I am his daughter. That his
offence will be dreadfully expiated, I do not doubt; but if I can
alleviate his sufferings in any way, I will do so; and I will never
cease to plead for mercy for him. And O, honourable Sir! you regard his
offence in a darker light than it deserves. You treat him as if he had
actually accomplished the direful purpose attributed to him; whereas,
nothing has been proven against him beyond the possession of a weapon,
which he might keep about his person for self-defence."

"The plea you urge is futile, maiden," rejoined Sir Thomas; "he is
judged out of his own mouth, for his own lips have avowed his criminal
intention."

"Still, it was but the intention, honourable Sir!"

"In such cases, the intention is equal to the crime--at least in the
eyes of law and justice. No plea will save Hugh Calveley. Of that rest
assured."

"One plea may be urged for him, which, whether it avail or not, is the
truth, and shall be made. It is painful to speak of my father as I must
now do; but there is no help for it. Of late years he has been subject
to strange mental hallucinations, which have bordered close upon
madness, if they have not reached that terrible point. Nocturnal vigils,
fastings, and prayers have affected his health. He has denied himself
sufficient rest, and has only partaken of food barely sufficient to
sustain nature, and no more. The consequence has been that strange
fancies have troubled his brain; that at dead of night, when alone in
his chamber, he has imagined that visions have appeared to him; that
voices have spoken--awful voices--talking of prophecies, lamentations,
and judgments, and charging him with a mighty and terrible mission. All
these things I have heard from his own lips, and I have heard and seen
much more, which has satisfied me that his intellects are disordered,
and that he cannot be held accountable for his actions."

"If such be the case, he should have been kept under restraint, and not
suffered to go abroad," said Sir Thomas. "Such madmen are highly
mischievous and dangerous. Much blame rests with you, maiden."

"The whole blame is mine!" she exclaimed. "I confess my error--my
crime--and will atone for it willingly with my life, provided he be
spared. If a sacrifice must be made, let me be the victim."

"There is no sacrifice, and no victim," returned Sir Thomas gravely,
though he was not unmoved by her filial devotion. "There is an offender,
and there will be justice; and justice must be satisfied. Inexorable as
fate, her dread sentences cannot be averted."

"O, honourable Sir! you may one day recall those words; for which of us
can hold himself free from offence? My father is not guilty in the eyes
of Heaven; or if he be, I am equally culpable, since I ought to have
