"And now 'tis your turn," said the coadjutor, turning to the last that
remained; "have you anything as good to offer me as the two gentlemen
who have left us?"

"Better, my lord."

"Diable! think what a solemn engagement you are making; one has offered
a wealthy shopkeeper, the other a count; you are going, then, to offer a
prince, are you?"

"I offer you a beggar, my lord."

"Ah! ah!" said Gondy, reflecting, "you are right, sir; some one who
could raise the legion of paupers who choke up the crossings of Paris;
some one who would know how to cry aloud to them, that all France might
hear it, that it is Mazarin who has reduced them to poverty."

"Exactly your man."

"Bravo! and the man?"

"A plain and simple beggar, as I have said, my lord, who asks for alms,
as he gives holy water; a practice he has carried on for six years on
the steps of St. Eustache."

"And you say that he has a great influence over his compeers?"

"Are you aware, my lord, that mendacity is an organized body, a kind of
association of those who have nothing against those who have everything;
an association in which every one takes his share; one that elects a
leader?"

"Yes, I have heard it said," replied the coadjutor.

"Well, the man whom I offer you is a general syndic."

"And what do you know of him?"

"Nothing, my lord, except that he is tormented with remorse."

"What makes you think so?"

"On the twenty-eighth of every month he makes me say a mass for the
repose of the soul of one who died a violent death; yesterday I said
this mass again."

"And his name?"

"Maillard; but I do not think it is his right one."

"And think you that we should find him at this hour at his post?"

"Certainly."

"Let us go and see your beggar, sir, and if he is such as you describe
him, you are right--it will be you who have discovered the true
treasure."

Gondy dressed himself as an officer, put on a felt cap with a red
feather, hung on a long sword, buckled spurs to his boots, wrapped
himself in an ample cloak and followed the curate.

The coadjutor and his companion passed through all the streets lying
between the archbishopric and the St. Eustache Church, watching
carefully to ascertain the popular feeling. The people were in an
excited mood, but, like a swarm of frightened bees, seemed not to know
at what point to concentrate; and it was very evident that if leaders of
the people were not provided all this agitation would pass off in idle
buzzing.

On arriving at the Rue des Prouvaires, the curate pointed toward the
square before the church.

"Stop!" he said, "there he is at his post."

Gondy looked at the spot indicated and perceived a beggar seated in a
chair and leaning against one of the moldings; a little basin was near
him and he held a holy water brush in his hand.

"Is it by permission that he remains there?" asked Gondy.

"No, my lord; these places are bought. I believe this man paid his
predecessor a hundred pistoles for his."

"The rascal is rich, then?"

"Some of those men sometimes die worth twenty thousand and twenty-five
and thirty thousand francs and sometimes more."

"Hum!" said Gondy, laughing; "I was not aware my alms were so well
invested."

In the meantime they were advancing toward the square, and the moment
the coadjutor and the curate put their feet on the first church step the
mendicant arose and proffered his brush.

He was a man between sixty-six and sixty-eight years of age, little,
rather stout, with gray hair and light eyes. His countenance denoted the
struggle between two opposite principles--a wicked nature, subdued by
determination, perhaps by repentance.

He started on seeing the cavalier with the curate. The latter and the
coadjutor touched the brush with the tips of their fingers and made the
sign of the cross; the coadjutor threw a piece of money into the hat,
which was on the ground.

"Maillard," began the curate, "this gentleman and I have come to talk
with you a little."

"With me!" said the mendicant; "it is a great honor for a poor
distributor of holy water."

There was an ironical tone in his voice which he could not quite
disguise and which astonished the coadjutor.

"Yes," continued the curate, apparently accustomed to this tone, "yes,
we wish to know your opinion of the events of to-day and what you have
heard said by people going in and out of the church."

The mendicant shook his head.

"These are melancholy doings, your reverence, which always fall again
upon the poor. As to what is said, everybody is discontented, everybody
complains, but 'everybody' means 'nobody.'"

"Explain yourself, my good friend," said the coadjutor.

"I mean that all these cries, all these complaints, these curses,
produce nothing but storms and flashes and that is all; but the
lightning will not strike until there is a hand to guide it."

"My friend," said Gondy, "you seem to be a clever and a thoughtful man;
are you disposed to take a part in a little civil war, should we have
one, and put at the command of the leader, should we find one, your
personal influence and the influence you have acquired over your
comrades?"

"Yes, sir, provided this war were approved of by the church and would
advance the end I wish to attain--I mean, the remission of my sins."

"The war will not only be approved of, but directed by the church. As
for the remission of your sins, we have the archbishop of Paris, who has
the very greatest power at the court of Rome, and even the coadjutor,
who possesses some plenary indulgences; we will recommend you to him."

"Consider, Maillard," said the curate, "that I have recommended you to
this gentleman, who is a powerful lord, and that I have made myself
responsible for you."

"I know, monsieur le cure," said the beggar, "that you have always been
very kind to me, and therefore I, in my turn, will be serviceable to
you."

"And do you think your power as great with the fraternity as monsieur le
cure told me it was just now?"

"I think they have some esteem for me," said the mendicant with pride,
"and that not only will they obey me, but wherever I go they will follow
me."

"And could you count on fifty resolute men, good, unemployed, but active
souls, brawlers, capable of bringing down the walls of the Palais Royal
by crying, 'Down with Mazarin,' as fell those at Jericho?"

"I think," said the beggar, "I can undertake things more difficult and
more important than that."

"Ah, ah," said Gondy, "you will undertake, then, some night, to throw up
some ten barricades?"

"I will undertake to throw up fifty, and when the day comes, to defend
them."

"I'faith!" exclaimed Gondy, "you speak with a certainty that gives me
pleasure; and since monsieur le cure can answer for you----"

"I answer for him," said the curate.

"Here is a bag containing five hundred pistoles in gold; make all your
arrangements, and tell me where I shall be able to find you this evening
at ten o'clock."

"It must be on some elevated place, whence a given signal may be seen in
every part of Paris."

"Shall I give you a line for the vicar of St. Jacques de la Boucherie?
he will let you into the rooms in his tower," said the curate.

"Capital," answered the mendicant.

"Then," said the coadjutor, "this evening, at ten o'clock, and if I am
pleased with you another bag of five hundred pistoles will be at your
disposal."

The eyes of the mendicant dashed with cupidity, but he quickly
suppressed his emotion.

"This evening, sir," he replied, "all will be ready."




46. The Tower of St. Jacques de la Boucherie.


At a quarter to six o'clock, Monsieur de Gondy, having finished his
business, returned to the archiepiscopal palace.

At six o'clock the curate of St. Merri was announced.

The coadjutor glanced rapidly behind and saw that he was followed by
another man. The curate then entered, followed by Planchet.

"Your holiness," said the curate, "here is the person of whom I had the
honor to speak to you."

Planchet saluted in the manner of one accustomed to fine houses.

"And you are disposed to serve the cause of the people?" asked Gondy.

"Most undoubtedly," said Planchet. "I am a Frondist from my heart. You
see in me, such as I am, a person sentenced to be hung."

"And on what account?"

"I rescued from the hands of Mazarin's police a noble lord whom they
were conducting back to the Bastile, where he had been for five years."

"Will you name him?"

"Oh, you know him well, my lord--it is Count de Rochefort."

"Ah! really, yes," said the coadjutor, "I have heard this affair
mentioned. You raised the whole district, so they told me!"

"Very nearly," replied Planchet, with a self-satisfied air.

"And your business is----"

"That of a confectioner, in the Rue des Lombards."

"Explain to me how it happens that, following so peaceful a business,
you had such warlike inclinations."

"Why does my lord, belonging to the church, now receive me in the dress
of an officer, with a sword at his side and spurs to his boots?"

"Not badly answered, i'faith," said Gondy, laughing; "but I have, you
must know, always had, in spite of my bands, warlike inclinations."

"Well, my lord, before I became a confectioner I myself was three years
sergeant in the Piedmontese regiment, and before I became sergeant I was
for eighteen months the servant of Monsieur d'Artagnan."

"The lieutenant of musketeers?" asked Gondy.

"Himself, my lord."

"But he is said to be a furious Mazarinist."

"Phew!" whistled Planchet.

"What do you mean by that?"

"Nothing, my lord; Monsieur d'Artagnan belongs to the service; Monsieur
d'Artagnan makes it his business to defend the cardinal, who pays him,
as much as we make it ours, we citizens, to attack him, whom he robs."

"You are an intelligent fellow, my friend; can we count upon you?"

"You may count upon me, my lord, provided you want to make a complete
upheaval of the city."

"'Tis that exactly. How many men, think you, you could collect together
to-night?"

"Two hundred muskets and five hundred halberds."

"Let there be only one man in every district who can do as much and by
to-morrow we shall have quite a powerful army. Are you disposed to obey
Count de Rochefort?"

"I would follow him to hell, and that is saying not a little, as I
believe him entirely capable of the descent."

"Bravo!"

"By what sign to-morrow shall we be able to distinguish friends from
foes?"

"Every Frondist must put a knot of straw in his hat."

"Good! Give the watchword."

"Do you want money?"

"Money never comes amiss at any time, my lord; if one has it not, one
must do without it; with it, matters go on much better and more
rapidly."

Gondy went to a box and drew forth a bag.

"Here are five hundred pistoles," he said; "and if the action goes off
well you may reckon upon a similar sum to-morrow."

"I will give a faithful account of the sum to your lordship," said
Planchet, putting the bag under his arm.

"That is right; I recommend the cardinal to your attention."

"Make your mind easy, he is in good hands."

Planchet went out, the curate remaining for a moment.

"Are you satisfied, my lord?" he asked.

"Yes; he appears to be a resolute fellow."

"Well, he will do more than he has promised."

"He will do wonders then."

The curate rejoined Planchet, who was waiting for him on the stairs. Ten
minutes later the curate of St. Sulpice was announced. As soon as the
door of Gondy's study was opened a man rushed in. It was the Count de
Rochefort.

"'Tis you, then, my dear count," cried Gondy, offering his hand.

"You have made up your mind at last, my lord?" said Rochefort.

"It has been made up a long time," said Gondy.

"Let us say no more on the subject; you tell me so, I believe you. Well,
we are going to give a ball to Mazarin."

"I hope so."

"And when will the dance begin?"

"The invitations are given for this evening," said the coadjutor, "but
the violins will not begin to play until to-morrow morning."

"You may reckon upon me and upon fifty soldiers which the Chevalier
d'Humieres has promised me whenever I need them."

"Upon fifty soldiers?"

"Yes, he is making recruits and he will lend them to me; if any are
missing when the fete is over, I shall replace them."

"Good, my dear Rochefort; but that is not all. What have you done with
Monsieur de Beaufort?"

"He is in Vendome, where he will wait until I write to him to return to
Paris."

"Write to him; now's the time."

"You are sure of your enterprise?"

"Yes, but he must make haste; for hardly will the people of Paris have
revolted before we shall have a score of princes begging to lead them.
If he defers he will find the place of honor taken."

"Shall I send word to him as coming from you?"

"Yes certainly."

"Shall I tell him that he can count on you?"

"To the end."

"And you will leave the command to him?"

"Of the war, yes, but in politics----"

"You must know it is not his element."

"He must leave me to negotiate for my cardinal's hat in my own fashion."

"You care about it, then, so much?"

"Since they force me to wear a hat of a form which does not become me,"
said Gondy, "I wish at least that the hat should be red."

"One must not dispute matters of taste and colors," said Rochefort,
laughing. "I answer for his consent."

"How soon can he be here?"

"In five days."

"Let him come and he will find a change, I will answer for it."

"Therefore, go and collect your fifty men and hold yourself in
readiness."

"For what?"

"For everything."

"Is there any signal for the general rally?"

"A knot of straw in the hat."

"Very good. Adieu, my lord."

"Adieu, my dear Rochefort."

"Ah, Monsieur Mazarin, Monsieur Mazarin," said Rochefort, leading off
his curate, who had not found an opportunity of uttering a single word
during the foregoing dialogue, "you will see whether I am too old to be
a man of action."

It was half-past nine o'clock and the coadjutor required half an hour to
go from the archbishop's palace to the tower of St. Jacques de la
Boucherie. He remarked that a light was burning in one of the highest
windows of the tower. "Good," said he, "our syndic is at his post."

He knocked and the door was opened. The vicar himself awaited him,
conducted him to the top of the tower, and when there pointed to a
little door, placed the light which he had brought with him in a corner
of the wall, that the coadjutor might be able to find it on his return,
and went down again. Although the key was in the door the coadjutor
knocked.

"Come in," said a voice which he recognized as that of the mendicant,
whom he found lying on a kind of truckle bed. He rose on the entrance of
the coadjutor, and at that moment ten o'clock struck.

"Well," said Gondy, "have you kept your word with me?"

"Not exactly," replied the mendicant.

"How is that?"

"You asked me for five hundred men, did you not? Well, I have ten
thousand for you."

"You are not boasting?"

"Do you wish for a proof?"

"Yes."

There were three candles alight, each of which burnt before a window,
one looking upon the city, the other upon the Palais Royal, and a third
upon the Rue Saint Denis.

The man went silently to each of the candles and blew them out one after
the other.

"What are you doing?" asked the coadjutor.

"I have given the signal."

"For what?"

"For the barricades. When you leave this you will behold my men at work.
Only take care you do not break your legs in stumbling over some chain
or your neck by falling in a hole."

"Good! there is your money, the same sum as that you have received
already. Now remember that you are a general and do not go and drink."

"For twenty years I have tasted nothing but water."

The man took the bag from the hands of the coadjutor, who heard the
sound of his fingers counting and handling the gold pieces.

"Ah! ah!" said the coadjutor, "you are avaricious, my good fellow."

The mendicant sighed and threw down the bag.

"Must I always be the same?" said he, "and shall I never succeed in
overcoming the old leaven? Oh, misery, oh, vanity!"

"You take it, however."

"Yes, but I make hereby a vow in your presence, to employ all that
remains to me in pious works."

His face was pale and drawn, like that of a man who had just undergone
some inward struggle.

"Singular man!" muttered Gondy, taking his hat to go away; but on
turning around he saw the beggar between him and the door. His first
idea was that this man intended to do him some harm, but on the contrary
he saw him fall on his knees before him with his hands clasped.

"Your blessing, your holiness, before you go, I beseech you!" he cried.

"Your holiness!" said Gondy; "my friend, you take me for some one else."

"No, your holiness, I take you for what you are, that is to say, the
coadjutor; I recognized you at the first glance."

Gondy smiled. "And you want my blessing?" he said.

"Yes, I have need of it."

The mendicant uttered these words in a tone of such humility, such
earnest repentance, that Gondy placed his hand upon him and gave him his
benediction with all the unction of which he was capable.

"Now," said Gondy, "there is a communion between us. I have blessed you
and you are sacred to me. Come, have you committed some crime, pursued
by human justice, from which I can protect you?"

The beggar shook his head. "The crime which I have committed, my lord,
has no call upon human justice, and you can only deliver me from it by
blessing me frequently, as you have just done."

"Come, be candid," said the coadjutor, "you have not all your life
followed the trade which you do now?"

"No, my lord. I have pursued it for six years only."

"And previously, where were you?"

"In the Bastile."

"And before you went to the Bastile?"

"I will tell you, my lord, on the day when you are willing to hear my
confession."

"Good! At whatsoever hour of the day or night you may present yourself,
remember that I shall be ready to give you absolution."

"Thank you, my lord," said the mendicant in a hoarse voice. "But I am
not yet ready to receive it."

"Very well. Adieu."

"Adieu, your holiness," said the mendicant, opening the door and bending
low before the prelate.




47. The Riot.


It was about eleven o'clock at night. Gondy had not walked a hundred
steps ere he perceived the strange change which had been made in the
streets of Paris.

The whole city seemed peopled with fantastic beings; silent shadows were
seen unpaving the streets and others dragging and upsetting great
wagons, whilst others again dug ditches large enough to ingulf whole
regiments of horsemen. These active beings flitted here and there like
so many demons completing some unknown labor; these were the beggars of
the Court of Miracles--the agents of the giver of holy water in the
Square of Saint Eustache, preparing barricades for the morrow.

Gondy gazed on these deeds of darkness, on these nocturnal laborers,
with a kind of fear; he asked himself, if, after having called forth
these foul creatures from their dens, he should have the power of making
them retire again. He felt almost inclined to cross himself when one of
these beings happened to approach him. He reached the Rue Saint Honore
and went up it toward the Rue de la Ferronnerie; there the aspect
changed; here it was the tradesmen who were running from shop to shop;
their doors seemed closed like their shutters, but they were only pushed
to in such a manner as to open and allow the men, who seemed fearful of
showing what they carried, to enter, closing immediately. These men were
shopkeepers, who had arms to lend to those who had none.

One individual went from door to door, bending under the weight of
swords, guns, muskets and every kind of weapon, which he deposited as
fast as he could. By the light of a lantern the coadjutor recognized
Planchet.

The coadjutor proceeded onward to the quay by way of the Rue de la
Monnaie; there he found groups of bourgeois clad in black cloaks or
gray, according as they belonged to the upper or lower bourgeoisie. They
were standing motionless, while single men passed from one group to
another. All these cloaks, gray or black, were raised behind by the
point of a sword, or before by the barrel of an arquebuse or a musket.

On reaching the Pont Neuf the coadjutor found it strictly guarded and a
man approached him.

"Who are you?" asked the man. "I do not know you for one of us."

"Then it is because you do not know your friends, my dear Monsieur
Louvieres," said the coadjutor, raising his hat.

Louvieres recognized him and bowed.

Gondy continued his way and went as far as the Tour de Nesle. There he
saw a lengthy chain of people gliding under the walls. They might be
said to be a procession of ghosts, for they were all wrapped in white
cloaks. When they reached a certain spot these men appeared to be
annihilated, one after the other, as if the earth had opened under their
feet. Gondy, edged into a corner, saw them vanish from the first until
the last but one. The last raised his eyes, to ascertain, doubtless,
that neither his companions nor himself had been watched, and, in spite
of the darkness, he perceived Gondy. He walked straight up to him and
placed a pistol to his throat.

"Halloo! Monsieur de Rochefort," said Gondy, laughing, "are you a boy to
play with firearms?"

Rochefort recognized the voice.

"Ah, it is you, my lord!" said he.

"The very same. What people are you leading thus into the bowels of the
earth?"

"My fifty recruits from the Chevalier d'Humieres, who are destined to
enter the light cavalry and who have only received as yet for their
equipment their white cloaks."

"And where are you going?"

"To the house of one of my friends, a sculptor, only we enter by the
trap through which he lets down his marble."

"Very good," said Gondy, shaking Rochefort by the hand, who descended in
his turn and closed the trap after him.

It was now one o'clock in the morning and the coadjutor returned home.
He opened a window and leaned out to listen. A strange,
incomprehensible, unearthly sound seemed to pervade the whole city; one
felt that something unusual and terrible was happening in all the
streets, now dark as ocean's most unfathomable caves. From time to time
a dull sound was heard, like that of a rising tempest or a billow of the
sea; but nothing clear, nothing distinct, nothing intelligible; it was
like those mysterious subterraneous noises that precede an earthquake.

The work of revolt continued the whole night thus. The next morning, on
awaking, Paris seemed to be startled at her own appearance. It was like
a besieged town. Armed men, shouldering muskets, watched over the
barricades with menacing looks; words of command, patrols, arrests,
executions, even, were encountered at every step. Those bearing plumed
hats and gold swords were stopped and made to cry, "Long live Broussel!"
"Down with Mazarin!" and whoever refused to comply with this ceremony
was hooted at, spat upon and even beaten. They had not yet begun to
slay, but it was well felt that the inclination to do so was not
wanting.

The barricades had been pushed as far as the Palais Royal. From the Rue
de Bons Enfants to that of the Ferronnerie, from the Rue Saint
Thomas-du-Louvre to the Pont Neuf, from the Rue Richelieu to the Porte
Saint Honore, there were more than ten thousand armed men; those who
were at the front hurled defiance at the impassive sentinels of the
regiment of guards posted around the Palais Royal, the gates of which
were closed behind them, a precaution which made their situation
precarious. Among these thousands moved, in bands numbering from one
hundred to two hundred, pale and haggard men, clothed in rags, who bore
a sort of standard on which was inscribed these words: "Behold the
misery of the people!" Wherever these men passed, frenzied cries were
heard; and there were so many of these bands that the cries were to be
heard in all directions.

The astonishment of Mazarin and of Anne of Austria was great when it was
announced to them that the city, which the previous evening they had
left entirely tranquil, had awakened to such feverish commotion; nor
would either the one or the other believe the reports that were brought
to them, declaring they would rather rely on the evidence of their own
eyes and ears. Then a window was opened and when they saw and heard they
were convinced.

Mazarin shrugged his shoulders and pretended to despise the populace;
but he turned visibly pale and ran to his closet, trembling all over,
locked up his gold and jewels in his caskets and put his finest diamonds
on his fingers. As for the queen, furious, and left to her own guidance,
she went for the Marechal de la Meilleraie and desired him to take as
many men as he pleased and to go and see what was the meaning of this
pleasantry.

The marshal was ordinarily very adventurous and was wont to hesitate at
nothing; and he had that lofty contempt for the populace which army
officers usually profess. He took a hundred and fifty men and attempted
to go out by the Pont du Louvre, but there he met Rochefort and his
fifty horsemen, attended by more than five hundred men. The marshal made
no attempt to force that barrier and returned up the quay. But at Pont
Neuf he found Louvieres and his bourgeois. This time the marshal
charged, but he was welcomed by musket shots, while stones fell like
hail from all the windows. He left there three men.

He beat a retreat toward the market, but there he met Planchet with his
halberdiers; their halberds were leveled at him threateningly. He
attempted to ride over those gray cloaks, but the gray cloaks held their
ground and the marshal retired toward the Rue Saint Honore, leaving four
of his guards dead on the field of battle.

The marshal then entered the Rue Saint Honore, but there he was opposed
by the barricades of the mendicant of Saint Eustache. They were guarded,
not only by armed men, but even by women and children. Master Friquet,
the owner of a pistol and of a sword which Louvieres had given him, had
organized a company of rogues like himself and was making a tremendous
racket.

The marshal thought this barrier not so well fortified as the others and
determined to break through it. He dismounted twenty men to make a
breach in the barricade, whilst he and others, remaining on their
horses, were to protect the assailants. The twenty men marched straight
toward the barrier, but from behind the beams, from among the
wagon-wheels and from the heights of the rocks a terrible fusillade
burst forth and at the same time Planchet's halberdiers appeared at the
corner of the Cemetery of the Innocents, and Louvieres's bourgeois at
the corner of the Rue de la Monnaie.

The Marechal de la Meilleraie was caught between two fires, but he was
brave and made up his mind to die where he was. He returned blow for
blow and cries of pain began to be heard in the crowd. The guards, more
skillful, did greater execution; but the bourgeois, more numerous,
overwhelmed them with a veritable hurricane of iron. Men fell around him
as they had fallen at Rocroy or at Lerida. Fontrailles, his
aide-de-camp, had an arm broken; his horse had received a bullet in his
neck and he had difficulty in controlling him, maddened by pain. In
short, he had reached that supreme moment when the bravest feel a
shudder in their veins, when suddenly, in the direction of the Rue de
l'Arbre-Sec, the crowd opened, crying: "Long live the coadjutor!" and
Gondy, in surplice and cloak, appeared, moving tranquilly in the midst
of the fusillade and bestowing his benedictions to the right and left,
as undisturbed as if he were leading a procession of the Fete Dieu.

All fell to their knees. The marshal recognized him and hastened to meet
him.

"Get me out of this, in Heaven's name!" he said, "or I shall leave my
carcass here and those of all my men."

A great tumult arose, in the midst of which even the noise of thunder
could not have been heard. Gondy raised his hand and demanded silence.
All were still.

"My children," he said, "this is the Marechal de la Meilleraie, as to
whose intentions you have been deceived and who pledges himself, on
returning to the Louvre, to demand of the queen, in your name, our
Broussel's release. You pledge yourself to that, marshal?" added Gondy,
turning to La Meilleraie.

"Morbleu!" cried the latter, "I should say that I do pledge myself to
it! I had no hope of getting off so easily."

"He gives you his word of honor," said Gondy.

The marshal raised his hand in token of assent.

"Long live the coadjutor!" cried the crowd. Some voices even added:
"Long live the marshal!" But all took up the cry in chorus: "Down with
Mazarin!"

The crowd gave place, the barricade was opened, and the marshal, with
the remnant of his company, retreated, preceded by Friquet and his
bandits, some of them making a presence of beating drums and others
imitating the sound of the trumpet. It was almost a triumphal
procession; only, behind the guards the barricades were closed again.
The marshal bit his fingers.

In the meantime, as we have said, Mazarin was in his closet, putting his
affairs in order. He called for D'Artagnan, but in the midst of such
tumult he little expected to see him, D'Artagnan not being on service.
In about ten minutes D'Artagnan appeared at the door, followed by the
inseparable Porthos.

"Ah, come in, come in, Monsieur d'Artagnan!" cried the cardinal, "and
welcome your friend too. But what is going on in this accursed Paris?"

"What is going on, my lord? nothing good," replied D'Artagnan, shaking
his head. "The town is in open revolt, and just now, as I was crossing
the Rue Montorgueil with Monsieur du Vallon, who is here, and is your
humble servant, they wanted in spite of my uniform, or perhaps because
of my uniform, to make us cry 'Long live Broussel!' and must I tell you,
my lord what they wished us to cry as well?"

"Speak, speak."

"'Down with Mazarin!' I'faith, the treasonable word is out."

Mazarin smiled, but became very pale.

"And you did cry?" he asked.

"I'faith, no," said D'Artagnan; "I was not in voice; Monsieur du Vallon
has a cold and did not cry either. Then, my lord----"

"Then what?" asked Mazarin.

"Look at my hat and cloak."

And D'Artagnan displayed four gunshot holes in his cloak and two in his
beaver. As for Porthos's coat, a blow from a halberd had cut it open on
the flank and a pistol shot had cut his feather in two.

"Diavolo!" said the cardinal, pensively gazing at the two friends with
lively admiration; "I should have cried, I should."

At this moment the tumult was heard nearer.

Mazarin wiped his forehead and looked around him. He had a great desire
to go to the window, but he dared not.

"See what is going on, Monsieur D'Artagnan," said he.

D'Artagnan went to the window with his habitual composure. "Oho!" said
he, "what is this? Marechal de la Meilleraie returning without a
hat--Fontrailles with his arm in a sling--wounded guards--horses
bleeding; eh, then, what are the sentinels about? They are aiming--they
are going to fire!"

"They have received orders to fire on the people if the people approach
the Palais Royal!" exclaimed Mazarin.

"But if they fire, all is lost!" cried D'Artagnan.

"We have the gates."

"The gates! to hold for five minutes--the gates, they will be torn down,
twisted into iron wire, ground to powder! God's death, don't fire!"
screamed D'Artagnan, throwing open the window.

In spite of this recommendation, which, owing to the noise, could
scarcely have been heard, two or three musket shots resounded, succeeded
by a terrible discharge. The balls might be heard peppering the facade
of the Palais Royal, and one of them, passing under D'Artagnan's arm,
entered and broke a mirror, in which Porthos was complacently admiring
himself.

"Alack! alack!" cried the cardinal, "a Venetian glass!"

"Oh, my lord," said D'Artagnan, quietly shutting the window, "it is not
worth while weeping yet, for probably an hour hence there will not be
one of your mirrors remaining in the Palais Royal, whether they be
Venetian or Parisian."

"But what do you advise, then?" asked Mazarin, trembling.

"Eh, egad, to give up Broussel as they demand! What the devil do you
want with a member of the parliament? He is of no earthly use to
anybody."

"And you, Monsieur du Vallon, is that your advice? What would you do?"

"I should give up Broussel," said Porthos.

"Come, come with me, gentlemen!" exclaimed Mazarin. "I will go and
discuss the matter with the queen."

He stopped at the end of the corridor and said:

"I can count upon you, gentlemen, can I not?"

"We do not give ourselves twice over," said D'Artagnan; "we have given
ourselves to you; command, we shall obey."

"Very well, then," said Mazarin; "enter this cabinet and wait till I
come back."

And turning off he entered the drawing-room by another door.




48. The Riot becomes a Revolution.


The closet into which D'Artagnan and Porthos had been ushered was
separated from the drawing-room where the queen was by tapestried
curtains only, and this thin partition enabled them to hear all that
passed in the adjoining room, whilst the aperture between the two
hangings, small as it was, permitted them to see.

The queen was standing in the room, pale with anger; her self-control,
however, was so great that it might have been imagined that she was
calm. Comminges, Villequier and Guitant were behind her and the women
again were behind the men. The Chancellor Sequier, who twenty years
previously had persecuted her so ruthlessly, stood before her, relating
how his carriage had been smashed, how he had been pursued and had
rushed into the Hotel d'O----, that the hotel was immediately invaded,
pillaged and devastated; happily he had time to reach a closet hidden
behind tapestry, in which he was secreted by an old woman, together with
his brother, the Bishop of Meaux. Then the danger was so imminent, the
rioters came so near, uttering such threats, that the chancellor thought
his last hour had come and confessed himself to his brother priest, so
as to be all ready to die in case he was discovered. Fortunately,
however, he had not been taken; the people, believing that he had
escaped by some back entrance, retired and left him at liberty to
retreat. Then, disguised in the clothes of the Marquis d'O----, he had
left the hotel, stumbling over the bodies of an officer and two guards
who had been killed whilst defending the street door.

During the recital Mazarin entered and glided noiselessly up to the
queen to listen.

"Well," said the queen, when the chancellor had finished speaking; "what
do you think of it all?"

"I think that matters look very gloomy, madame."

"But what step would you propose to me?"

"I could propose one to your majesty, but I dare not."

"You may, you may, sir," said the queen with a bitter smile; "you were
not so timid once."

The chancellor reddened and stammered some words.

"It is not a question of the past, but of the present," said the queen;
"you said you could give me advice--what is it?"

"Madame," said the chancellor, hesitating, "it would be to release
Broussel."

The queen, although already pale, became visibly paler and her face was
contracted.

"Release Broussel!" she cried, "never!"

At this moment steps were heard in the ante-room and without any
announcement the Marechal de la Meilleraie appeared at the door.

"Ah, there you are, marechal," cried Anne of Austria joyfully. "I trust
you have brought this rabble to reason."

"Madame," replied the marechal, "I have left three men on the Pont Neuf,
four at the Halle, six at the corner of the Rue de l'Arbre-Sec and two
at the door of your palace--fifteen in all. I have brought away ten or
twelve wounded. I know not where I have left my hat, and in all
probability I should have been left with my hat, had the coadjutor not
arrived in time to rescue me."

"Ah, indeed," said the queen, "it would have much astonished me if that
low cur, with his distorted legs, had not been mixed up with all this."

"Madame," said La Meilleraie, "do not say too much against him before
me, for the service he rendered me is still fresh."

"Very good," said the queen, "be as grateful as you like, it does not
implicate me; you are here safe and sound, that is all I wished for; you
are not only welcome, but welcome back."

"Yes, madame; but I only came back on one condition--that I would
transmit to your majesty the will of the people."

"The will!" exclaimed the queen, frowning. "Oh! oh! monsieur marechal,
you must indeed have found yourself in wondrous peril to have undertaken
so strange a commission!"

The irony with which these words were uttered did not escape the
marechal.

"Pardon, madame," he said, "I am not a lawyer, I am a mere soldier, and
probably, therefore, I do not quite comprehend the value of certain
words; I ought to have said the wishes, and not the will, of the people.
As for what you do me the honor to say, I presume you mean I was
afraid?"

The queen smiled.

"Well, then, madame, yes, I did feel fear; and though I have been
through twelve pitched battles and I cannot count how many charges and
skirmishes, I own for the third time in my life I was afraid. Yes, and I
would rather face your majesty, however threatening your smile, than
face those demons who accompanied me hither and who sprung from I know
not whence, unless from deepest hell."

("Bravo," said D'Artagnan in a whisper to Porthos; "well answered.")

"Well," said the queen, biting her lips, whilst her courtiers looked at
each other with surprise, "what is the desire of my people?"

"That Broussel shall be given up to them, madame."

"Never!" said the queen, "never!"

"Your majesty is mistress," said La Meilleraie, retreating a few steps.

"Where are you going, marechal?" asked the queen.

"To give your majesty's reply to those who await it."

"Stay, marechal; I will not appear to parley with rebels."

"Madame, I have pledged my word, and unless you order me to be arrested
I shall be forced to return."

Anne of Austria's eyes shot glances of fire.

"Oh! that is no impediment, sir," said she; "I have had greater men than
you arrested--Guitant!"

Mazarin sprang forward.

"Madame," said he, "if I dared in my turn advise----"

"Would it be to give up Broussel, sir? If so, you can spare yourself the
trouble."

"No," said Mazarin; "although, perhaps, that counsel is as good as any
other."

"Then what may it be?"

"To call for monsieur le coadjuteur."

"The coadjutor!" cried the queen, "that dreadful mischief maker! It is
he who has raised all this revolt."

"The more reason," said Mazarin; "if he has raised it he can put it
down."

"And hold, madame," suggested Comminges, who was near a window, out of
which he could see; "hold, the moment is a happy one, for there he is
now, giving his blessing in the square of the Palais Royal."

The queen sprang to the window.

"It is true," she said, "the arch hypocrite--see!"

"I see," said Mazarin, "that everybody kneels before him, although he be
but coadjutor, whilst I, were I in his place, though I am cardinal,
should be torn to pieces. I persist, then, madame, in my wish" (he laid
an emphasis on the word), "that your majesty should receive the
coadjutor."

"And wherefore do you not say, like the rest, your will?" replied the
queen, in a low voice.

Mazarin bowed.

"Monsieur le marechal," said the queen, after a moment's reflection, "go
and find the coadjutor and bring him to me."

"And what shall I say to the people?"

"That they must have patience," said Anne, "as I have."

The fiery Spanish woman spoke in a tone so imperative that the marechal
made no reply; he bowed and went out.

(D'Artagnan turned to Porthos. "How will this end?" he said.

"We shall soon see," said Porthos, in his tranquil way.)

In the meantime Anne of Austria approached Comminges and conversed with
him in a subdued tone, whilst Mazarin glanced uneasily at the corner
occupied by D'Artagnan and Porthos. Ere long the door opened and the
marechal entered, followed by the coadjutor.

"There, madame," he said, "is Monsieur Gondy, who hastens to obey your
majesty's summons."

The queen advanced a few steps to meet him, and then stopped, cold,
severe, unmoved, with her lower lip scornfully protruded.

Gondy bowed respectfully.

"Well, sir," said the queen, "what is your opinion of this riot?"

"That it is no longer a riot, madame," he replied, "but a revolt."

"The revolt is at the door of those who think my people can rebel,"
cried Anne, unable to dissimulate before the coadjutor, whom she looked
upon, and probably with reason, as the promoter of the tumult. "Revolt!
thus it is called by those who have wished for this demonstration and
who are, perhaps, the cause of it; but, wait, wait! the king's authority
will put all this to rights."

"Was it to tell me that, madame," coldly replied Gondy, "that your
majesty admitted me to the honor of entering your presence?"

"No, my dear coadjutor," said Mazarin; "it was to ask your advice in the
unhappy dilemma in which we find ourselves."

"Is it true," asked Gondy, feigning astonishment, "that her majesty
summoned me to ask for my opinion?"

"Yes," said the queen, "it is requested."

The coadjutor bowed.

"Your majesty wishes, then----"

"You to say what you would do in her place," Mazarin hastened to reply.

The coadjutor looked at the queen, who replied by a sign in the
affirmative.

"Were I in her majesty's place," said Gondy, coldly, "I should not
hesitate; I should release Broussel."

"And if I do not give him up, what think you will be the result?"
exclaimed the queen.

"I believe that not a stone in Paris will remain unturned," put in the
marechal.

"It was not your opinion that I asked," said the queen, sharply, without
even turning around.

"If it is I whom your majesty interrogates," replied the coadjutor in
the same calm manner, "I reply that I hold monsieur le marechal's
opinion in every respect."

The color mounted to the queen's face; her fine blue eyes seemed to
start out of her head and her carmine lips, compared by all the poets of
the day to a pomegranate in flower, were trembling with anger. Mazarin
himself, who was well accustomed to the domestic outbreaks of this
disturbed household, was alarmed.

"Give up Broussel!" she cried; "fine counsel, indeed. Upon my word! one
can easily see it comes from a priest."

Gondy remained firm, and the abuse of the day seemed to glide over his
head as the sarcasms of the evening before had done; but hatred and
revenge were accumulating in his heart silently and drop by drop. He
looked coldly at the queen, who nudged Mazarin to make him say something
in his turn.

Mazarin, according to his custom, was thinking much and saying little.

"Ho! ho!" said he, "good advice, advice of a friend. I, too, would give
up that good Monsieur Broussel, dead or alive, and all would be at an
end."

"If you yield him dead, all will indeed be at an end, my lord, but quite
otherwise than you mean."

"Did I say 'dead or alive?'" replied Mazarin. "It was only a way of
speaking. You know I am not familiar with the French language, which
you, monsieur le coadjuteur, both speak and write so well."

("This is a council of state," D'Artagnan remarked to Porthos; "but we
held better ones at La Rochelle, with Athos and Aramis."

"At the Saint Gervais bastion," said Porthos.

"There and elsewhere.")

The coadjutor let the storm pass over his head and resumed, still with
the same tranquillity:

"Madame, if the opinion I have submitted to you does not please you it
is doubtless because you have better counsels to follow. I know too well
the wisdom of the queen and that of her advisers to suppose that they
will leave the capital long in trouble that may lead to a revolution."

"Thus, then, it is your opinion," said Anne of Austria, with a sneer and
biting her lips with rage, "that yesterday's riot, which to-day is
already a rebellion, to-morrow may become a revolution?"

"Yes, madame," replied the coadjutor, gravely.

"But if I am to believe you, sir, the people seem to have thrown off all
restraint."

"It is a bad year for kings," said Gondy, shaking his head; "look at
England, madame."

"Yes; but fortunately we have no Oliver Cromwell in France," replied the
queen.

"Who knows?" said Gondy; "such men are like thunderbolts--one recognizes
them only when they have struck."

Every one shuddered and there was a moment of silence, during which the
queen pressed her hand to her side, evidently to still the beatings of
her heart.
