wonder that Eglaf let you have him."

Now Eglaf sat at the head of the nearest of the lower tables, and all in
hearing of the king were of course listening by this time. So he said,
"The man had his choice, and chose the heavier place, if you will
believe me, lord. It is terrible to see how Berthun loads him at times;
so that I may get him yet."

Then all laughed at the steward, whose face grew red; but he had to
laugh also, because the jest pleased the king. He went away quickly; and
one told Eglaf that he had better eat no more, else would he run risk of
somewhat deadly at the cook's hands. But those two were old friends, as
has been seen, and they were ever seeking jests at each other's expense.

Now the talk drifted away to other things, and I hoped that Havelok had
been forgotten, for no more than I would he like being stared at. The
feast went on, and twice I had to take new torches, but Berthun saw that
I had wine, if I could not eat as yet. Then had men finished eating, and
the tables were cleared, and the singing began, very pleasant to
hearken. Not only the gleemen sang, but the harp went round, and all who
could did so. Well do the Lindsey folk sing, after their own manner,
three men at a time, in a gladsome way, with well-matched voices, and
that for just long enough to be pleasant.

So the harp went its way down the hall, and the great folk fell to talk
again; and at last one said, so that Alsi heard him, "Why, we have not
seen the strong man yet. Strange that he is not feasting with the rest."

Whereat the king beckoned Berthun.

"Bring your new wonder here," he said. "Say that I have heard of his
deed, and would look on him."

Berthun bowed and went his way; and I wondered how my brother would bear
this, for the hall and its ordering was wont, as I have said, to bring
back his troubled thoughts of things half remembered.

Presently he came in at the door at the lower end of the hall, and at
first none noticed him, for there was singing going on, and through that
door came and went many with things for the feast from the kitchens.
Then some one turned to see who towered over them thus, and when he saw
Havelok he went on looking, so that others looked also. Then one of the
three singers looked, and his voice stayed, for he was a stranger, and
had heard nothing of this newcomer, and then Havelok followed Berthun up
the hall in a kind of hush that fell, and he was smiling a little, as if
it amused him. He had on the things that the steward had given him, and
they were good enough--as good as, if more sober than, my housecarl
finery. But I suppose that not one in all the gathering looked at what
he wore; for as he passed up the long tables, it seemed that there was
no man worth looking at but he, and even Ragnar seemed to be but a
common man when one turned to him with eyes that had seen Havelok.

Now Alsi the king sat staring at him, still as a carven image, with his
hand halfway to his mouth, as he raised his horn from the table; and
Ragnar looked wide-eyed, for he knew him again, and I saw a little smile
curl the corners of his lips and pass; and then Havelok was at the step
of the high place, and there he gave the salute of the courtmen of a
Danish king, heeding Berthun, who tried to make him do reverence, not at
all.

Now a spark from my torch drew my eyes from him, lest it should fall on
the princess's robe; and when it went out, I saw that the fair hand that
rested on the arm of the great chair was shaking like a leaf. When I
looked, her face was white and troubled, and she half rose from her seat
and then sank back in it gently, and the thane who sat next her spoke
anxiously to her in a low voice, and the lady by his side rose up and
came to her.

Then Alsi turned, and he too spoke, asking if aught was amiss.

"The princess faints with the heat of the hall," said the thane's wife.
"She yet feels the long journey. May she not go hence?"

Then Goldberga said bravely, "It is naught, and it will pass."

But they made her rise and leave the hall; and the guests stood up as
she went with her ladies round her, and many were the murmurs of pity
that I heard.

"As though she had seen a ghost, so white is she," one whispered.

But none knew how much the lady was to be pitied. She had seen the man
of her vision; and, lo! for all that she knew, he was a thrall who
toiled in the palace kitchens.

And after her, as she withdrew, looked Havelok with eyes in which there
was more than pity. I could see him well, but I did not know how he had
seen the fair princess tremble and grow white as she gazed on him. I
know that, as he saw her for this first time, it was with the wish that
he were in Ragnar's place. But I thought that if Havelok were king, here
was the queen for him.

Now Alsi bade the feast go on, and be spoke a few words only to Havelok,
letting him go at once, and I was glad. This sudden faintness of the
princess had put all out somewhat, and none cared to take up a jest
where it had stayed. Nevertheless, I saw the king's eyes follow my
brother down the hall, and in them was a new and strange look that was
not pleasant at all.

Then it seemed that one was staring at me, and as will happen, I must
look in a certain place; and there was Cadwal, the Welsh thane, halfway
down one of the long tables, glaring first at me, and then at Havelok,
as he went. It came into my mind that he would be wroth with Ragnar for
bringing a kitchen knave as his second, as it were, in derision of
Griffin. I thought that I would find a chance presently to tell him why
my fellow second chose to be serving thus, and so make things right with
him, for this seemed to be due to Ragnar, if not to all concerned.

Not long after Goldberga had gone, the king withdrew also, and then the
hall grew noisy enough, and I could leave my place. But by that time
Cadwal had left also; and next day, when I sought him, both he and
Griffin were no longer in Lincoln, none knowing whither they had gone.
So I troubled no more about them.

But had I known that these two had been among the Welshmen that Hodulf
led to Denmark when he slew Gunnar Kirkeban, and therefore knew all the
story of the loss of Havelok, and how Hodulf had sought for news of him,
I should have been in fear enough that we had not yet done with them.
Rightly, too, should I have feared that, as will be seen.

Now while I looked about the hall for Cadwal, Mord the chamberlain saw
me, and made me sit down by him while I ate. Hungry enough was I by that
time, as may be supposed, for one cannot make a meal off the sight of a
feast; and as I ate, the noise of the hall grew apace as the cups went
round. Then some of the older thanes left, and soon Mord and I had that
table to ourselves. It was plain that he was full of something that he
would say to me, and when I was ready to listen he bent near me and
said, "So that was the boy who fled with us."

"Ay. He has grown since you saw him last."

"That is not all," answered Mord. "Well I knew Gunnar, our king, and
tonight I thought he had come back to us from Valhalla, goodlier yet and
mightier than ever, as one who has feasted with the Asir might well be.
For if this boy of ours is not Gunnar's son, then he is Gunnar himself."

Now that was no new thought to me, as I have shown, and I was ready for
it, seeing that even I had seen the likeness to the king as I remembered
him.

"Keep that thought to yourself for a while, Mord," I said. "It is in my
mind that you are right, but the time has not yet come for me to know."

"That is wisdom, too," he answered; "for if once he gathers a following,
there is a bad time in store for Hodulf. And it will be better that we
fall on him unawares, before he knows that Havelok, son of Gunnar, lives."

"We fall on him?"

"Ay, you and I, mail on chest and weapon in hand, with Havelok to lead
us. What? think you that I would hold back when Gunnar's son is calling?"

"Steady, friend," I said, laughing; "men will be looking at us."

So he was silent again; and now I thought that the time of which my
father spoke had surely come, for it was plain that Havelok was a man
whom men would gladly follow as he went to win back his kingdom. And I
went and fetched Withelm from where he sat, and so we three talked long
and pleasantly, until it was time for us to go forth from the hall. And
we thought that it was good for Arngeir to come here, for the secret was
coming to light of itself, as it were, and we would have him speak with
Mord.


    CHAPTER XIV. THE CRAFT OF ALSI THE KING.

Now Alsi the king went from the feast with a new and cruel thought in
his mind under the smiling face that he wore, and long he sat in his own
chamber, chin on hand and eyes far off, thinking; and at last he called
Berthun.

"What is the name of this big knave of yours?" he asked, when the
steward stood before him.

"He calls himself Curan, lord."

"Calls himself. Well, it is likely that he knows his own name best. Is
he Welsh, therefore?"

"So I think, lord."

"You might have been certain by this time, surely. I like Welshmen about
the place, and I was giving you credit for finding me a good one. Whence
comes he?"

Now it was on Berthun's tongue to say that he thought that Curan came
from the marshland, yet clinging to his own thoughts of what he was. He
did not at all believe that he came from that refuge of thralls. But he
must seem certain unless he was to be laughed at again.

So he said, "He comes from the marsh-country."

"Does he speak Welsh?"

"I have heard him do so to the market people, if he happened to meet a
Briton there."

"Why, then, of course he is Welsh: and here have I found out in two
minutes what you have taken I do not know how long to think about. Go
to, Berthun; you grow slow of mind with good living."

The king chuckled, and Berthun bowed humbly; but now the steward was
determined to say no more than he was obliged in answer to more
questions. Also he began to hope that Alsi would ask nothing about the
clothes this man of his wore, else he would be well laughed at for
spending his money on a stranger.

But Alsi seemed pleased with himself, or else with what he had heard,
and went on.

"Has this Curan friends in the town?"

"None, lord, so far as I know."

"Let me tell you that you may know a man's friends by the company he
keeps. With whom does he talk?"

"None come to seek him, lord, except one of the housecarls--the big
man to whom you spoke tonight. Seldom does he go into the town, and then
only the porters seem to know him, for he was among them, as a stranger,
when I met him first."

"A big man will always make an acquaintance with another," Alsi said,
"and the porters are the lowest in the place. One may be sure that he
has left his friends in some starving village in the marsh, and has none
here. That will do, Berthun. Take care of him, for I may have use for
him. But next time you hire a man, use your wits to learn somewhat of
him, if it is too much trouble to ask."

So Berthun was dismissed, and went out in a bad temper with himself. Yet
he knew that he would have been laughed at for a fool if he had said
that he thought Curan more than he seemed.

Now Alsi was alone, and he fell to thought again. By-and-by it was plain
to be understood what his thoughts had been, and they were bad. And
after he had slept on them they were no better, seeing what came of
them. But I think that he was pleased to find that Havelok was, as he
thought, a Welsh marshman, and well-nigh friendless, for so he would be
the more ready to do what he was bidden; though, indeed, there seemed
little doubt that the plan Alsi made for himself would find no stumbling
block in Curan, if it might meet with a check elsewhere. That, however,
was to be seen.

Well pleased was Alsi the king with somewhat, men said in the morning.

But there was one who rose heavy and sorely troubled, and that was the
Lady Goldberga, for all the fancies that had been brought to her by the
vision had come to nothing, or worse than nothing, as she looked on
Havelok and saw in the cook's knave the very form of him of whom she had
dreamed, and whom she could not forget. Glad had she been to go to her
own chamber and away from the kindly ladies who could not know her real
trouble; but not even to her old nurse did she tell what that was. Her
one thought now was to seek someone who was skilful in the reading of
dreams, and so find some new hope from it all. But no one could tell her
of such a one here, unless it were to be a priest of Woden, and that she
would not hear of.

Then, early in the morning, Alsi sent for her, saying that he would
speak with her alone for a while. So she went to him, where he sat in
the chamber beyond the high place; and he greeted her kindly, asking
after her rest, and saying that he hoped that the sudden faintness had
hurt her not. Then he led her to a seat, and bade her rest while he
talked of state affairs.

"For it must be known to you, my niece, that the Witan thinks it time
that you should take your father's kingdom."

Now Goldberga knew that, and had long made up her mind that when the
time came she would not shrink from the burden of the crown.

It may well have been that Alsi thought that she would wish to wait for
a time yet, for he did not seem altogether pleased when she answered,
"If the Witan thinks right, I am ready."

"But," he said, "there is one thing to come before that. The Witan must
know who your husband shall be. And that is reasonable, for he will have
a share in ruling the kingdom."

Then said Goldberga, "They need have no fear in that matter, for I will
wed none but a king or the heir of a king."

"Well," said Alsi, dryly enough, "they are not so plentiful as are
blackberries, and there may be two words to that."

"I am not anxious to be wedded," answered the princess, "and I can wait.
It is, as you say, a matter that is much to the country."

Then Alsi tried another plan, seeing that Goldberga was not at all put
out by this. So he forced a cunning smile that was meant to be pleasant,
and said, "I had thought that your mind ran somewhat on Ragnar."

He looked to see the lady change colour, but she did not.

"Ragnar is my cousin," she said, "or a good brother to me, if you will.
Moreover, until the other day when he met me in London by some good
fortune, I had hardly seen him since my father died."

"What think you of Griffin?"

"Nothing at all, for nidring he is," answered Goldberga with curling lip.

Now that angered Alsi, for he had so much to do with that business; and
if Griffin was to be called thus by his fault, he was likely to lose a
friend.

"I would have you remember," he said, "that in all this choosing it
remains for me to give consent or withhold it."

"I shall only ask your consent to my wedding such a man as I have told
you of, uncle--a king or a king's son."

"So," said Alsi, "you would choose first, and ask me afterwards,
forsooth! That is not the way that things are to be between us. It is
for me to choose, and that according to the oath which I took when your
father made me guardian of you and his realm."

"Yet," said Goldberga very gently, "I think that my father would not
have meant that I should be the only one not to be asked."

"I can only go by what I swore, and that I will carry out. I promised to
see you married to the most goodly and mightiest man in the land."

"That can be none but a king, as I think."

Now Alsi grew impatient, for he meant to settle one matter before he
went much farther.

"I will say at once that I can have no king over the East Anglian
kingdom. It is not to be thought of that after all these years I should
have to take second place there. You will hold the kingdom from me, and
I shall be overlord there. I will send you some atheling who can keep
the land in order for you, but there shall be no king to bring that land
under the power of his own kingdom."

That was plain speaking, and it roused Goldberga.

"Never have you been overlord of my kingdom," she said. "Well have you
ruled it for me while I could not rule it myself, and for that I thank
you heartily. But it is not right that I should seem to hold it from you."

"That is to be seen," sneered Alsi, "for it lies with me to say what
marriage you make, and on that depends whether the Witan, in its wisdom,
sees fit to hail you as queen. Not until you are married will you take
the kingdom at all."

