of serpents are in my hand--I do not strangle them--they may sting me to
death, in return for my mercy--it is their instinct! No matter: it shall
not be said that the Roman Tribune bought with so many lives his own
safety: nor shall it be written upon my grave-stone, 'Here lies the
coward, who did not dare forgive.' What, ho! there, officers, unclose
the doors! My masters, let us acquaint the prisoners with their
sentence."

With that, Rienzi seated himself on the chair of state, at the head
of the table, and the sun, now risen, cast its rays over the blood-red
walls, in which the Barons, marshalled in order into the chamber,
thought to read their fate.

"My Lords," said the Tribune, "ye have offended the laws of God and man;
but God teaches man the quality of mercy. Learn at last, that I bear a
charmed life. Nor is he whom, for high purposes, Heaven hath raised from
the cottage to the popular throne, without invisible aid and spiritual
protection. If hereditary monarchs are deemed sacred, how much more one
in whose power the divine hand hath writ its witness! Yes, over him who
lives but for his country, whose greatness is his country's gift, whose
life is his country's liberty, watch the souls of the just, and the
unsleeping eyes of the sworded seraphim! Taught by your late failure and
your present peril, bid your anger against me cease; respect the laws,
revere the freedom of your city, and think that no state presents a
nobler spectacle than men born as ye are--a patrician and illustrious
order--using your power to protect your city, your wealth to nurture its
arts, your chivalry to protect its laws! Take back your swords--and the
first man who strikes against the liberties of Rome, let him be your
victim; even though that victim be the Tribune. Your cause has been
tried--your sentence is pronounced. Renew your oath to forbear all
hostility, private or public, against the government and the magistrates
of Rome, and ye are pardoned--ye are free!"

Amazed, bewildered, the Barons mechanically bent the knee: the friars
who had received their confessions, administered the appointed oath; and
while, with white lips, they muttered the solemn words, they heard below
the roar of the multitude for their blood.

This ceremony ended, the Tribune passed into the banquet-hall, which
conducted to a balcony, whence he was accustomed to address the people;
and never, perhaps, was his wonderful mastery over the passions of an
audience (ad persuadendum efficax dictator, quoque dulcis ac lepidus)
(Petrarch of Rienzi.) more greatly needed or more eminently shown, than
on that day; for the fury of the people was at its height, and it was
long ere he succeeded in turning it aside. Before he concluded, however,
every wave of the wild sea lay hushed.--The orator lived to stand on the
same spot, to plead for a life nobler than those he now saved,--and to
plead unheard and in vain!

As soon as the Tribune saw the favourable moment had arrived, the Barons
were admitted into the balcony:--in the presence of the breathless
thousands, they solemnly pledged themselves to protect the Good Estate.
And thus the morning which seemed to dawn upon their execution witnessed
their reconciliation with the people.

The crowd dispersed, the majority soothed and pleased;--the more
sagacious, vexed and dissatisfied.

"He has but increased the smoke and the flame which he was not able
to extinguish," growled Cecco del Vecchio; and the smith's appropriate
saying passed into a proverb and a prophecy.

Meanwhile, the Tribune, conscious at least that he had taken the more
generous course, broke up the Council, and retired to the chamber
where Nina and his sister waited him. These beautiful young women had
conceived for each other the tenderest affection. And their differing
characters, both of mind and feature, seemed by contrast to heighten the
charms of both; as in a skilful jewellery, the pearl and diamond borrow
beauty from each other.

And as Irene now turned her pale countenance and streaming eyes from
the bosom to which she had clung for support, the timid sister, anxious,
doubtful, wistful;--the proud wife, sanguine and assured, as if never
diffident of the intentions nor of the power of her Rienzi:--the
contrast would have furnished to a painter no unworthy incarnation of
the Love that hopeth, and the Love that feareth, all things.

"Be cheered, my sweet sister," said the Tribune, first caught by Irene's
imploring look; "not a hair on the heads of those who boast the name of
him thou lovest so well is injured.--Thank Heaven," as his sister,
with a low cry, rushed into his arms, "that it was against my life they
conspired! Had it been another Roman's, mercy might have been a crime!
Dearest, may Adrian love thee half as well as I; and yet, my sister and
my child, none can know thy soft soul like he who watched over it since
its first blossom expanded to the sun. My poor brother! had he lived,
your counsel had been his; and methinks his gentle spirit often whispers
away the sternness which, otherwise, would harden over mine. Nina, my
queen, my inspirer, my monitor--ever thus let thy heart, masculine in my
distress, be woman's in my power; and be to me, with Irene, upon earth,
what my brother is in heaven!"

The Tribune, exhausted by the trials of the night, retired for a few
hours to rest; and as Nina, encircling him within her arms, watched over
his noble countenance--care hushed, ambition laid at rest, its serenity
had something almost of sublime. And tears of that delicious pride,
which woman sheds for the hero of her dreams, stood heavy in the wife's
eyes, as she rejoiced more, in the deep stillness of her heart, at the
prerogative, alone hers, of sharing his solitary hours, than in all the
rank to which his destiny had raised her, and which her nature fitted
her at once to adorn and to enjoy. In that calm and lonely hour she
beguiled her heart by waking dreams, vainer than the sleeper's; and
pictured to herself the long career of glory, the august decline of
peace, which were to await her lord.

And while she thus watched and thus dreamed, the cloud, as yet no bigger
than a man's hand, darkened the horizon of a fate whose sunshine was
well-nigh past!



Chapter 5.II. The Flight.

Fretting his proud heart, as a steed frets on the bit, old Colonna
regained his palace. To him, innocent of the proposed crime of his kin
and compeers, the whole scene of the night and morning presented but one
feature of insult and degradation. Scarce was he in his palace, ere he
ordered couriers, in whom he knew he could confide, to be in preparation
for his summons. "This to Avignon," said he to himself, as he concluded
an epistle to the Pontiff.--"We will see whether the friendship of the
great house of the Colonna will outweigh the frantic support of the
rabble's puppet.--This to Palestrina,--the rock is inaccessible!--This
to John di Vico, he may be relied upon, traitor though he be!--This to
Naples; the Colonna will disown the Tribune's ambassador, if he throw
not up the trust and hasten hither, not a lover but a soldier!--and may
this find Walter de Montreal! Ah, a precious messenger he sent us, but
I will forgive all--all, for a thousand lances." And as with trembling
hands he twined the silk round his letters, he bade his pages invite to
his board, next day, all the signors who had been implicated with him on
the previous night.

The Barons came--far more enraged at the disgrace of pardon, than
grateful for the boon of mercy. Their fears combined with their pride;
and the shouts of the mob, the whine of the cordeliers, still ringing
in their ears, they deemed united resistance the only course left to
protect their lives, and avenge their affront.

To them the public pardon of the Tribune seemed only a disguise to
private revenge. All they believed was, that Rienzi did not dare to
destroy them in the face of day; forgetfulness and forgiveness appeared
to them as the means designed to lull their vigilance, while abasing
their pride: and the knowledge of crime detected forbade them all hope
of safety. The hand of their own assassin might be armed against
them, or they might be ruined singly, one by one, as was the common
tyrant-craft of that day. Singularly enough, Luca di Savelli was the
most urgent for immediate rebellion. The fear of death made the coward
brave.

Unable even to conceive the romantic generosity of the Tribune, the
Barons were yet more alarmed when, the next day, Rienzi, summoning them
one by one to a private audience, presented them with gifts, and bade
them forget the past: excused himself rather than them, and augmented
their offices and honours.

In the Quixotism of a heart to which royalty was natural, he thought
that there was no medium course; and that the enmity he would not
silence by death, he could crush by confidence and favours. Such conduct
from a born king to hereditary inferiors might have been successful; but
the generosity of one who has abruptly risen over his lords is but the
ostentation of insult. Rienzi in this, and, perhaps, in forgiveness
itself, committed a fatal error of policy, which the dark sagacity of a
Visconti, or, in later times, of a Borgia, would never have perpetrated.
But it was the error of a bright and a great mind.

Nina was seated in the grand saloon of the palace--it was the day of
reception for the Roman ladies.

The attendance was so much less numerous than usual that it startled
her, and she thought there was a coldness and restraint in the manner of
the visitors present, which somewhat stung her vanity.

"I trust we have not offended the Signora Colonna," she said to the Lady
of Gianni, Stephen's son. "She was wont to grace our halls, and we miss
much her stately presence."

"Madam, my Lord's mother is unwell!"

"Is she so? We will send for her more welcome news. Methinks we are
deserted today."

As she spoke, she carelessly dropped her handkerchief--the haughty dame
of the Colonna bent not--not a hand stirred; and the Tribunessa looked
for a moment surprised and disconcerted. Her eye roving over the throng,
she perceived several, whom she knew as the wives of Rienzi's foes,
whispering together with meaning glances, and more than one malicious
sneer at her mortification was apparent. She recovered herself
instantly, and said to the Signora Frangipani, with a smile, "May we be
a partaker of your mirth? You seem to have chanced on some gay thought,
which it were a sin not to share freely."

The lady she addressed coloured slightly, and replied, "We were
thinking, madam, that had the Tribune been present, his vow of
knighthood would have been called into requisition."

"And how, Signora?"

"It would have been his pleasing duty, madam, to succour the
distressed." And the Signora glanced significantly on the kerchief still
on the floor.

"You designed me, then, this slight, Signoras," said Nina, rising with
great majesty. "I know not whether your Lords are equally bold to the
Tribune; but this I know, that the Tribune's wife can in future forgive
your absence. Four centuries ago, a Frangipani might well have stooped
to a Raselli; today, the dame of a Roman Baron might acknowledge a
superior in the wife of the first magistrate of Rome. I compel not your
courtesy, nor seek it."

"We have gone too far," whispered one of the ladies to her neighbour.
"Perhaps the enterprise may not succeed; and then--"

Further remark was cut short by the sudden entrance of the Tribune. He
entered with great haste, and on his brow was that dark frown which none
ever saw unquailing.

"How, fair matrons!" said he, looking round the room with a rapid
glance, "ye have not deserted us yet? By the blessed cross, your Lords
pay a compliment to our honour, to leave us such lovely hostages, or
else, God's truth, they are ungrateful husbands. So, madam," turning
sharp round to the wife of Gianni Colonna, "your husband is fled to
Palestrina; yours, Signora Orsini, to Marino; yours with him, fair
bride of Frangipani,--ye came hither to--. But ye are sacred even from a
word!"

The Tribune paused a moment, evidently striving to suppress his emotion,
as he observed the terror he had excited--his eye fell upon Nina, who,
forgetting her previous vexation, regarded him with anxious amazement.
"Yes," said he to her, "you alone, perhaps, of this fair assemblage,
know not that the nobles whom I lately released from the headsman's
gripe are a second time forsworn. They have left home in the dead of the
night, and already the Heralds proclaim them traitors and rebels. Rienzi
forgives no more!"

"Tribune," exclaimed the Signora Frangipani, who had more bold blood in
her veins than her whole house, "were I of thine own sex, I would
cast the words, Traitor and Rebel, given to my Lord, in thine own
teeth!--Proud man, the Pontiff soon will fulfil that office!"

"Your Lord is blest with a dove, fair one," said the Tribune,
scornfully. "Ladies, fear not, while Rienzi lives, the wife even of his
worst foe is safe and honoured. The crowd will be here anon; our guards
shall attend ye home in safety, or this palace may be your shelter--for,
I warn ye, that your Lords have rushed into a great peril. And ere many
days be past, the streets of Rome may be as rivers of blood."

"We accept your offer, Tribune," said the Signora Frangipani, who was
touched, and, in spite of herself, awed by the Tribune's manner. And
as she spoke, she dropped on one knee, picked up the kerchief, and,
presenting it respectfully to Nina, said, "Madam, forgive me. I alone of
these present respect you more in danger than in pride."

"And I," returned Nina, as she leaned in graceful confidence on Rienzi's
arm, "I reply, that if there be danger, the more need of pride."

All that day and all that night rang the great bell of the Capitol. But
on the following daybreak, the assemblage was thin and scattered; there
was a great fear stricken into the hearts of the people, by the flight
of the Barons, and they bitterly and loudly upbraided Rienzi for sparing
them to this opportunity of mischief. That day the rumours continued;
the murmurers for the most part remained within their houses, or
assembled in listless and discontented troops. The next day dawned; the
same lethargy prevailed. The Tribune summoned his Council, (which was a
Representative assembly.)

"Shall we go forth as we are," said he, "with such few as will follow
the Roman standard!"

"No," replied Pandulfo, who, by nature timid, was yet well acquainted
with the disposition of the people, and therefore a sagacious
counsellor. "Let us hold back; let us wait till the rebels commit
themselves by some odious outrage, and then hatred will unite the
waverers, and resentment lead them."

This counsel prevailed; the event proved its wisdom. To give excuse and
dignity to the delay, messengers were sent to Marino, whither the chief
part of the Barons had fled, and which was strongly fortified, demanding
their immediate return.

On the day on which the haughty refusal of the insurgents was brought
to Rienzi, came fugitives from all parts of the Campagna. Houses
burned--convents and vineyards pillaged--cattle and horses
seized--attested the warfare practised by the Barons, and animated
the drooping Romans, by showing the mercies they might expect for
themselves. That evening, of their own accord, the Romans rushed into
the place of the Capitol:--Rinaldo Orsini had seized a fortress in the
immediate neighbourhood of Rome, and had set fire to a tower, the flames
of which were visible to the city. The tenant of the tower, a noble
lady, old and widowed, was burnt alive. Then rose the wild clamour--the
mighty wrath--the headlong fury. The hour for action had arrived.
("Ardea terre, arse la Castelluzza e case, e uomini. Non si schifo
di ardere una nobile donna Vedova, veterana, in una torre. Per tale
crudeltade li Romani furo piu irati," &c.--"Vita di Cola di Rienzi",
lib. i. cap. 20.)



Chapter 5.III. The Battle.

"I have dreamed a dream," cried Rienzi, leaping from his bed. "The
lion-hearted Boniface, foe and victim of the Colonna, hath appeared
to me, and promised victory. ("In questa notte mi e apparito Santo
Bonifacio Papa," &c.--"Vita di Cola di Rienzi" cap. 32.) Nina, prepare
the laurel-wreath: this day victory shall be ours!"

"O, Rienzi! today?"

"Yes! hearken to the bell--hearken to the trumpet. Nay, I hear even now
the impatient hoofs of my white warsteed! One kiss, Nina, ere I arm for
victory,--stay--comfort poor Irene; let me not see her--she weeps that
my foes are akin to her betrothed; I cannot brook her tears; I watched
her in her cradle. Today, I must have no weakness on my soul! Knaves,
twice perjured!--wolves, never to be tamed!--shall I meet ye at last
sword to sword? Away, sweet Nina, to Irene, quick! Adrian is at Naples,
and were he in Rome, her lover is sacred, though fifty times a Colonna."

With that, the Tribune passed into his wardrobe, where his pages and
gentlemen attended with his armour. "I hear, by our spies," said he,
"that they will be at our gates ere noon--four thousand foot, seven
hundred horsemen. We will give them a hearty welcome, my masters. How,
Angelo Villani, my pretty page, what do you out of your lady's service?"

"I would fain see a warrior arm for Rome," said the boy, with a boy's
energy.

"Bless thee, my child; there spoke one of Rome's true sons!"

"And the Signora has promised me that I shall go with her guard to the
gates, to hear the news--"

"And report the victory?--thou shalt. But they must not let thee come
within shaft-shot. What! my Pandulfo, thou in mail?"

"Rome requires every man," said the citizen, whose weak nerves were
strung by the contagion of the general enthusiasm.

"She doth--and once more I am proud to be a Roman. Now, gentles, the
Dalmaticum: (A robe or mantle of white, borne by Rienzi; at one time
belonging to the sacerdotal office, afterwards an emblem of empire.)
I would that every foe should know Rienzi; and, by the Lord of Hosts,
fighting at the head of the imperial people, I have a right to the
imperial robe. Are the friars prepared? Our march to the gates shall be
preceded by a solemn hymn--so fought our sires."

"Tribune, John di Vico is arrived with a hundred horse to support the
Good Estate."

"He hath!--The Lord has delivered us then of a foe, and given our
dungeons a traitor!--Bring hither yon casket, Angelo.--So--Hark thee!
Pandulfo, read this letter."

The citizens read, with surprise and consternation, the answer of the
wily Prefect to the Colonna's epistle.

"He promises the Baron to desert to him in the battle, with the
Prefect's banner," said Pandulfo. "What is to be done?"

"What!--take my signet--here--see him lodged forthwith in the prison
of the Capitol. Bid his train leave Rome, and if found acting with the
Barons, warn them that their Lord dies. Go--see to it without a moment's
delay. Meanwhile, to the chapel--we will hear mass."

Within an hour the Roman army--vast, miscellaneous--old men and boys,
mingled with the vigour of life, were on their march to the Gate of San
Lorenzo; of their number, which amounted to twenty thousand foot,
not one-sixth could be deemed men-at-arms; but the cavalry were well
equipped, and consisted of the lesser Barons and the more opulent
citizens. At the head of these rode the Tribune in complete armour,
and wearing on his casque a wreath of oak and olive leaves, wrought in
silver. Before him waved the great gonfalon of Rome, while in front of
this multitudinous array marched a procession of monks, of the order of
St. Francis, (for the ecclesiastical body of Rome went chiefly with
the popular spirit, and its enthusiastic leader,)--slowly chanting the
following hymn, which was made inexpressibly startling and imposing at
the close of each stanza, by the clash of arms, the blast of trumpets,
and the deep roll of the drum; which formed, as it were, a martial
chorus to the song:--

Roman War-song.

     1.

     March, march for your hearths and your altars!
     Cursed to all time be the dastard that falters,
     Never on earth may his sins be forgiven
     Death on his soul, shut the portals of heaven!
     A curse on his heart, and a curse on his brain!--
     Who strikes not for Rome, shall to Rome be her Cain!
     Breeze fill our banners, sun gild our spears,
     Spirito Santo, Cavaliers!

     (Rienzi's word of battle was "Spirito Santo Cavaliere", i.e.
     Cavalier in the singular number.  The plural number has been
     employed in the text, as somewhat more animated, and
     therefore better adapted to the kind of poetry into the
     service of which the watchword has been pressed.)

     Blow, trumpets, blow,
     Blow, trumpets, blow,
     Gaily to glory we come;
     Like a king in his pomp,
     To the blast of the tromp,
     And the roar of the mighty drum!
     Breeze fill our banners, sun gild our spears,
     Spirito Santo, Cavaliers!

     2.

     March, march for your Freedom and Laws!
     Earth is your witness--all Earth's is your cause!
     Seraph and saint from their glory shall heed ye,
     The angel that smote the Assyrian shall lead ye;
     To the Christ of the Cross man is never so holy
     As in braving the proud in defence of the lowly!
     Breeze fill our banners, sun gild our spears,
     Spirito Santo, Cavaliers!
     Blow, trumpets, blow,
     Blow, trumpets, blow,
     Gaily to glory we come;
     Like a king in his pomp,
     To the blast of the tromp,
     And the roar of the mighty drum!
     Breeze fill our banners, sun gild our spears,
     Spirito Santo, Cavaliers!

     3.

     March, march! ye are sons of the Roman,
     The sound of whose step was as fate to the foeman!
     Whose realm, save the air and the wave, had no wall,
     As he strode through the world like a lord in his hall;
     Though your fame hath sunk down to the night of the grave,
     It shall rise from the field like the sun from the wave.
     Breeze fill our banners, sun gild our spears,
     Spirito Santo, Cavaliers!
     Blow, trumpets, blow,
     Blow, trumpets, blow,
     Gaily to glory we come;
     Like a king in his pomp,
     To the blast of the tromp,
     And the roar of the mighty drum!
     Breeze fill our banners, sun gild our spears,
     Spirito Santo, Cavaliers!

In this order they reached the wide waste that ruin and devastation
left within the gates, and, marshalled in long lines on either side,
extending far down the vistaed streets, and leaving a broad space in the
centre, awaited the order of their leader.

"Throw open the gates, and admit the foe!" cried Rienzi, with a loud
voice; as the trumpets of the Barons, announced their approach.

Meanwhile the insurgent Patricians, who had marched that morning from a
place called the Monument, four miles distant, came gallantly and boldly
on.

With old Stephen, whose great height, gaunt frame, and lordly air,
shewed well in his gorgeous mail, rode his sons,--the Frangipani and the
Savelli, and Giordano Orsini, brother to Rinaldo.

"Today the tyrant shall perish!" said the proud Baron; "and the flag of
the Colonna shall wave from the Capitol."

"The flag of the Bear," said Giordano Orsini, angrily.--"The victory
will not be yours alone, my Lord!"

"Our house ever took precedence in Rome," replied the Colonna,
haughtily.

"Never, while one stone of the palaces of the Orsini stands upon
another."

"Hush!" said Luca di Savelli; "are ye dividing the skin while the lion
lives? We shall have fierce work today."

"Not so," said the old Colonna; "John di Vico will turn, with his
Romans, at the first onset, and some of the malcontents within have
promised to open the gates.--How, knave?" as a scout rode up breathless
to the Baron. "What tidings?"

"The gates are opened--not a spear gleams from the walls!"

"Did I not tell ye, Lords?" said the Colonna, turning round
triumphantly. "Methinks we shall win Rome without a single
blow.--Grandson, where now are thy silly forebodings?" This was said to
Pietro, one of his grandsons--the first-born of Gianni--a comely youth,
not two weeks wedded, who made no reply. "My little Pietro here,"
continued the Baron, speaking to his comrades, "is so new a bridegroom,
that last night he dreamed of his bride; and deems it, poor lad, a
portent."

"She was in deep mourning, and glided from my arms, uttering, 'Woe, woe,
to the Colonna!" said the young man, solemnly.

"I have lived nearly ninety years," replied the old man, "and I may have
dreamed, therefore, some forty thousand dreams; of which, two came true,
and the rest were false. Judge, then, what chances are in favour of the
science!"

Thus conversing, they approached within bow-shot of the gates, which
were still open. All was silent as death. The army, which was composed
chiefly of foreign mercenaries, halted in deliberation--when, lo!--a
torch was suddenly cast on high over the walls; it gleamed a moment--and
then hissed in the miry pool below.

"It is the signal of our friends within, as agreed on," cried old
Colonna. "Pietro, advance with your company!" The young nobleman closed
his visor, put himself at the head of the band under his command; and,
with his lance in his rest, rode in a half gallop to the gates. The
morning had been clouded and overcast, and the sun, appearing only at
intervals, now broke out in a bright stream of light--as it glittered
on the waving plume and shining mail of the young horseman, disappearing
under the gloomy arch, several paces in advance of his troop. On swept
his followers--forward went the cavalry headed by Gianni Colonna,
Pietro's father.--there was a minute's silence, broken only by the
clatter of the arms, and tramp of hoofs,--when from within the walls
rose the abrupt cry--"Rome, the Tribune, and the People! Spirito Santo,
Cavaliers!" The main body halted aghast. Suddenly Gianni Colonna was
seen flying backward from the gate at full speed.

"My son, my son!" he cried, "they have murdered him;"--he halted abrupt
and irresolute, then adding, "But I will avenge!" wheeled round, and
spurred again through the arch,--when a huge machine of iron, shaped as
a portcullis, suddenly descended upon the unhappy father, and crushed
man and horse to the ground--one blent, mangled, bloody mass.

The old Colonna saw, and scarce believed his eyes; and ere his troop
recovered its stupor, the machine rose, and over the corpse dashed
the Popular Armament. Thousands upon thousands, they came on; a wild,
clamorous, roaring stream. They poured on all sides upon their enemies,
who drawn up in steady discipline, and clad in complete mail, received
and broke their charge.

"Revenge, and the Colonna!"--"The Bear and the Orsini!"--"Charity and
the Frangipani!" (Who had taken their motto from some fabled ancestor
who had broke bread with a beggar in a time of famine.) "Strike for
the Snake (The Lion was, however, the animal usually arrogated by the
heraldic vanity of the Savelli.) and the Savelli!" were then heard on
high, mingled with the German and hoarse shout, "Full purses, and the
Three Kings of Cologne." The Romans, rather ferocious than disciplined,
fell butchered in crowds round the ranks of the mercenaries: but as one
fell, another succeeded; and still burst with undiminished fervour
the countercry of "Rome, the Tribune, and the People!--Spirito Santo,
Cavaliers!" Exposed to every shaft and every sword by his emblematic
diadem and his imperial robe, the fierce Rienzi led on each assault,
wielding an enormous battle-axe, for the use of which the Italians were
celebrated, and which he regarded as a national weapon. Inspired by
every darker and sterner instinct of his nature, his blood heated, his
passions aroused, fighting as a citizen for liberty, as a monarch
for his crown, his daring seemed to the astonished foe as that of one
frantic; his preservation that of one inspired: now here, now there;
wherever flagged his own, or failed the opposing, force, glittered his
white robe, and rose his bloody battle-axe; but his fury seemed rather
directed against the chiefs than the herd; and still where his charger
wheeled was heard his voice, "Where is a Colonna?"--"Defiance to the
Orsini!"--"Spirito Santo, Cavaliers!" Three times was the sally led from
the gate; three times were the Romans beaten back; and on the third, the
gonfalon, borne before the Tribune, was cloven to the ground. Then, for
the first time, he seemed amazed and alarmed, and, raising his eyes to
heaven, he exclaimed, "O Lord, hast thou then forsaken me?" With that,
taking heart, once more he waved his arm, and again led forward his wild
array.

At eve the battle ceased. Of the Barons who had been the main object of
the Tribune's assault, the pride and boast was broken. Of the princely
line of the Colonna, three lay dead. Giordano Orsini was mortally
wounded; the fierce Rinaldo had not shared the conflict. Of the
Frangipani, the haughtiest signors were no more; and Luca, the dastard
head of the Savelli, had long since saved himself by flight. On the
other hand, the slaughter of the citizens had been prodigious;--the
ground was swamped with blood--and over heaps of slain, (steeds and
riders,) the twilight star beheld Rienzi and the Romans returning
victors from the pursuit. Shouts of rejoicing followed the Tribune's
panting steed through the arch; and just as he entered the space within,
crowds of those whose infirmities, sex, or years, had not allowed them
to share the conflict,--women, and children, and drivelling age, mingled
with the bare feet and dark robes of monks and friars, apprised of the
victory, were prepared to hail his triumph.

Rienzi reined his steed by the corpse of the boy Colonna, which lay
half immersed in a pool of water, and close by it, removed from the arch
where he had fallen, lay that of Gianni Colonna,--(that Gianni Colonna
whose spear had dismissed his brother's gentle spirit.) He glanced over
the slain, as the melancholy Hesperus played upon the bloody pool and
the gory corselet, with a breast heaved with many emotions; and turning,
he saw the young Angelo, who, with some of Nina's guard, had repaired to
the spot, and had now approached the Tribune.

"Child," said Rienzi, pointing to the dead, "blessed art thou who hast
no blood of kindred to avenge!--to him who hath, sooner or later comes
the hour; and an awful hour it is!"

The words sank deep into Angelo's heart, and in after life became words
of fate to the speaker and the listener.

Ere Rienzi had well recovered himself, and as were heard around him
the shrieks of the widows and mothers of the slain--the groans of the
dying--the exhortations of the friars--mingled with sounds of joy
and triumph--a cry was raised by the women and stragglers on the
battle-field without, of "The foe!--the foe!"

"To your swords," cried the Tribune; "fall back in order;--yet they
cannot be so bold!"

The tramp of horses, the blast of a trumpet, were heard; and presently,
at full speed, some thirty horsemen dashed through the gate.

"Your bows," exclaimed the Tribune, advancing;--"yet hold--the leader
is unarmed--it is our own banner. By our Lady, it is our ambassador of
Naples, the Lord Adrian di Castello!"

Panting--breathless--covered with dust--Adrian halted at the pool red
with the blood of his kindred--and their pale faces, set in death,
glared upon him.

"Too late--alas! alas!--dread fate!--unhappy Rome!"

"They fell into the pit they themselves had digged," said the Tribune,
in a firm but hollow voice.--"Noble Adrian, would thy counsels had
prevented this!"

"Away, proud man--away!" said Adrian, impatiently waving his
hand,--"thou shouldst protect the lives of Romans, and--oh,
Gianni!--Pietro!--could not birth, renown, and thy green years, poor
boy--could not these save ye?"

"Pardon him, my friends," said the Tribune to the crowd,--"his grief is
natural, and he knows not all their guilt.--Back, I pray ye--leave him
to our ministering."

It might have fared ill for Adrian, but for the Tribune's brief speech.
And as the young Lord, dismounting, now bent over his kinsmen--the
Tribune also surrendering his charger to his squires, approached, and,
despite Adrian's reluctance and aversion, drew him aside,--

"Young friend," said he, mournfully, "my heart bleeds for you; yet
bethink thee, the wrath of the crowd is fresh upon them: be prudent."

"Prudent!"

"Hush--by my honour, these men were not worthy of your name. Twice
perjured--once assassins--twice rebels--listen to me!"

"Tribune, I ask no other construing of what I see--they might have died
justly, or been butchered foully. But there is no peace between the
executioner of my race and me."

"Will you, too, be forsworn? Thine oath!--Come, come, I hear not these
words. Be composed--retire--and if, three days hence, you impute any
other blame to me than that of unwise lenity, I absolve you from your
oath, and you are free to be my foe. The crowd gape and gaze upon us--a
minute more, and I may not avail to save you."

The feelings of the young patrician were such as utterly baffle
description. He had never been much amongst his house, nor ever received
more than common courtesy at their hands. But lineage is lineage still!
And there, in the fatal hazard of war, lay the tree and sapling, the
prime and hope of his race. He felt there was no answer to the Tribune,
the very place of their death proved they had fallen in an assault upon
their countrymen. He sympathised not with their cause, but their fate.
And rage, revenge alike forbidden--his heart was the more softened
to the shock and paralysis of grief. He did not therefore speak, but
continued to gaze upon the dead, while large and unheeded tears flowed
down his cheeks, and his attitude of dejection and sorrow was so moving,
that the crowd, at first indignant, now felt for his affliction.
At length his mind seemed made up. He turned to Rienzi, and said,
falteringly, "Tribune, I blame you not, nor accuse. If you have been
rash in this, God will have blood for blood. I wage no war with you--you
say right, my oath prevents me; and if you govern well, I can still
remember that I am Roman. But--but--look to that bleeding clay--we meet
no more!--your sister--God be with her!--between her and me flows a dark
gulf!" The young noble paused some moments, choked by his emotions,
and then continued, "These papers discharge me of my mission.
Standard-bearers, lay down the banner of the Republic. Tribune, speak
