
I hope the crisis is past, but he is still very weak. He has been
delirious nearly the whole time, and today has but a confused idea of
things around him.

All our inquiries about Alfgar have been fruitless, but there was one
circumstance which we learned, which seemed to me to bear some
reference to the matter.

The ferryman, whose hut is situate at the bend of the river below the
Synodune hills, where people cross for Wittenham, says that late on
the night in question a boat with four people passed down the river,
and that it struck him that one only rowed, while two of the rest
seemed guarding the fourth passenger. He did not know the boat, yet he
thought he knew every boat on the river.

This he has told to Herstan and others, but no further discovery has
ensued.

But another important matter has claimed our attention. The king left
on Monday without making any efforts to profit by the Etheling's
discovery at Carisbrooke; but we could not in conscience let the
matter rest. So Herstan and I went on to Dorchester on Wednesday, and
I obtained an audience of the bishop, while he sought the sheriff.

The bishop received me very kindly, and talked to me a great deal a
bout the happy days of Dunstan, when peace and plenty ruled
everywhere; but I led the conversation to the point I aimed at, and
told him frankly how alarmed we were at Abingdon about Edmund's
tidings.

"And so was I," said he, "and I have persuaded the king to place
guards and watchers all through the coasts opposite the Wight, and
with Edric's aid we elaborated a goodly plan."

"Indeed," said I, "but I wish Edric had nought to do with it."

"So did I at first, but I feel convinced that the young Dane who
vanished so suspiciously must have deceived the prince concerning the
presence of Edric in the Danish camp, and that we have no sufficient
reason for thinking him such a child of hell as he would be could he
betray his country thus cruelly. It would be Satanic wickedness. He
is, I believe, a bad and untrustworthy man, but not quite so bad as
all that."

I tried to explain my reasons for being of a contrary opinion, and
asked what was the plan.

"Advanced guards have been placed all along the coasts of Hampshire,
beacons prepared on every hill, with constant attendants, so that the
Danes would find their coming blazed over the country at once."

"But if so, what men have we to oppose to them?"

"The sheriff has promised that the levies shall appear in case of
need."

"Does he realise the danger?"

"I hardly think he believes in it; but the beacons will give
sufficient warning."

"Who has arranged the guards and chosen the sites for the beacons?"

"Edric, of course, as general of the forces under the king."

I could say no more--it was useless--but I felt very sick at heart.
After the noon meat I left the palace, and found my brother ready to
depart for home. His interview had been the counterpart of mine.
Neither had he succeeded in convincing the sheriff that there was any
danger to be apprehended.

Well, all we can do is to prepare ourselves for the worst. I find that
no tidings have been sent by any authority to the men of this estate
to hold themselves in readiness for sudden alarm. I wonder whether the
same remissness prevails elsewhere. No one expects danger. The Danes,
they say, never fight in winter.

Advent Sunday, 1006.--

My patient was able to sit up for a short time today, but his weakness
is very pitiable to behold, and he dares not leave his room. He
inquired very earnestly after Alfgar, and I found great difficulty in
persuading him to commit the matter to God, which is all that we can
do; for although the river has been dragged, the country searched, no
tidings have yet been obtained, and we can only believe that the poor
lad has been secretly murdered and buried, or that he has been sent
away out of the country.

"I had a strange dream about him," said Edmund. "I thought that it was
midnight of Christmas Eve, and that I was attending mass, when, just
as the words were sung by the choir, 'Pax in terra,' the scene
suddenly changed, and I stood in the dark on the chalk hills which
overlook the Solent; by my side was a beacon ready laid for firing. I
thought next I saw the Solent covered with the warships of the Danes,
who were advancing towards the English shore, and that I tried to fire
the beacon, but all in vain, for the wood was wet through, and would
not burn.

"Then I had a strange sense of woe and desolation, for my country was
in danger, and I could not even warn her. All at once I heard steps
rushing towards me, and Alfgar appeared bearing a lighted torch. He
thrust it into the pile, and it fired at once. Other beacon fires
answered it, and the country was aroused. Then I awoke."

Saturday, December 5th, 1006.--

The week has again been spent mainly at Clifton. The prince is better,
but only able to rise a few hours each day, and I fear a relapse would
be fatal.

On Wednesday I visited Abingdon, and had a long conference with the
abbot about the neglected warning Edmund had given; but he seemed to
think that the beacon fires and the guards placed near the sea coast
secure us sufficiently. Like all the world, he thinks that the
Etheling has exaggerated the danger.

I have written a full account of all things to my brother at
Aescendune. Father Adhelm is still there ministering to the flock.

Saturday, December 12th, 1006.--

The week has passed monotonously enough. The Etheling is now able to
leave his room, but the stormy weather, with its torrents of rain,
makes it impossible for him to leave the house. The river has
overflowed its banks; all the country around is like a lake. We
console him by telling him that all has been done which is possible,
both to warn the people and learn the fate of Alfgar. He tries to look
contented, but if he knew how little has really been done, and that
that little has been in Edric's hands, he would not be so contented.

Saturday, December 19th, 1006.--

A very severe frost has set in this week, and there has been much
snow; the whole country is decked in her winter braveries for
Christmas. O that it may pass in peace, as the birthday of the Prince
of Peace should pass!

I intend to spend it at Clifton, after which I shall return to my
flock at Aescendune.

Edmund has been out today, but the sharp air hurt his lungs, which
have been grievously inflamed, and he was forced to return early.

He has been so patient for one of his temperament, so grateful for
attention shown him, one would hardly think the lion could be such a
lamb. He intends to receive the Blessed Sacrament of the Body and
Blood of Christ on Christmas day in the little church of St. Michael
here, and then he will leave for London in the course of the week.

We have heard nothing of Alfgar--we fear there is no hope; but the
prince clings to it, and says his dream will come true, and that
Alfgar has yet a great work to do.

Christmas Eve, 1006.--

O happy happy Christmastide! All griefs seem hushed and all joys
sanctified by the blessed mystery of the Incarnation. O that Mary's
blessed Son, the Prince of Peace, may indeed bring us peace on earth,
and good will towards men!

The weather is beautiful. The stars shine as brightly tonight as if
they were the lights about His throne; the very earth has decked
herself in her clear and spotless robe of snow in His honour. As for
the dear ones who were with us last Christmas--Bertric, Alfgar (for I
fear he is gone where I hope he keeps a happier Christmas)--they have
left the heart less lonely, for if we miss them on earth they seem to
attract us to heaven, which is yet more like home when we think of the
loved and the lost who await us there.

We sing a midnight mass in an hour in the little church, another
tomorrow at dawn, a third in the full daylight. All the good people
here will communicate, and the evening will be given up to such
merrymaking as is befitting amongst Christians. All the ceorls and
serfs will be at the Hall, and the prince will share the
entertainment. Herstan and Bertha have been very busy preparing for
it, as also their children, Hermann, Ostryth, and Aelfleda.

But I must go and assist in decking the church for the midnight
festivity.



CHAPTER XVI. THE FEAST OF CHRISTMAS.


Alfgar had completely lost the reckoning of times and days since his
imprisonment, but he felt that weeks must have passed away, and that
the critical period foretold by Edmund must be near, so he listened
anxiously for any intelligence from the world without.

At last the weather became very cold, and being without a fire, his
sufferings were great, until his ferocious gaoler, finding him quite
stiffened, brought up a brazier of coals, which saved his prisoner's
life, while it filled the room with smoke, which could only escape by
the crevices in walls and roof, for to open a window would have been
as bad as to dispense with the fire, such was the state of the outer
air.

It was what we call an old-fashioned Christmas, in all its glory and
severity--a thing easy enough to bear, nay to enjoy, when men have
warm fires and plenty of food, but hard enough to endure where these
are absent.

At last Alfgar could but conclude it was Christmastide, for Higbald
was joined by two comrades, and they sang and rioted below in a way
which showed that they had got plenty of intoxicating drink, and were
making free with it.

In the evening of the day Higbald brought him up his supper,
staggering as he did so, and with it he brought in a bowl of hot mead.

"Drink," he said, "and drown care. It is Yuletide, and drink thou must
and shalt."

Alfgar drank moderately, for sooth to say it was invigorating and
welcome that cold day, but Higbald finished the bowl then and there,
and then staggering down, drew the outer bolt in such a way that it
missed the staple, which fact he was too drunk to perceive.

Alfgar watched the action with eager eyes. It was the first time there
had been even a chance of escape.

Meanwhile the evening sped by; and the noisy crew below quarrelled and
sang, drank and shouted, while the bright moonlight--brighter as it
was reflected from the snow of that December night--stole over the
scene.

Not till then did Alfgar pass silently through the open door, and
listen at the head of the staircase. Before him was the outer door,
the key in the lock. The question was--Could he reach it unobserved by
men or mastiff?

Liberty was worth the attempt. He descended the stairs softly. At the
bottom he looked around. The door was fastened which led into the
large hall where the gaolers were drinking. He advanced to the outer
portal, when he heard the growl of the dog from behind the inner door.

The moment was critical. Evidently his masters did not comprehend the
action of the too faithful brute, for they cursed and swore at it.
Even then it growled, and the drunken fools--drunken they must have
been indeed--threw some heavy missile at it, which caused it to yelp
and cease its growling.

Just then something flashed in the ray of moonlight which stole in
through an aperture over the door.

It was a sharp double-edged sword.

He grasped it with eagerness. It was now a case of liberty or death.
He knew how to wield it full well.

Stealthily he turned the key and the door stood open. Still his
captors sang, and he caught the words:

"When we cannot get blood we can drink the red wine,
The Sea King sang in his might;
For it maddens the brain, it gives strength to the arm,
And kindles the soul in the fight."

Now he was on the outer side of the door, and he shut it, and then
locked it and tossed the key into the snow.

But which way was he to go? He could not make out the locality, but it
was evident that the hill rose above him, and he knew that from its
summit he could discern the bearings of places, so he resolved to
ascend.

It was now about nine at night, an hour when our ancestors generally
retired to rest. All Alfgar's desire and hope--O how joyful a
hope!--was to see from the hill the bearings of Clifton, and to
descend, with all the speed in his power, towards it. He might arrive
before they had retired to rest. So he ran eagerly forward. The moon
was bright, and the snow reflected so much light that locomotion was
easy.

And now he became conscious that there was a strange gleam along the
snow on his left hand--a strange red gleam, which grew stronger and
stronger as he advanced. It seemed above and below--to redden the
skies, the frozen treetops with their glittering snow wreaths, and the
smooth surface beneath alike.

Redder and redder as he ascended, until he suddenly emerged upon the
open hill. Before him were earthworks, which had been thrown up in
olden wars, before Englishman or Dane had trodden these coasts. He
scrambled into a deep hollow filled with snow, then out again, and up
to the summit, when he saw the cause of the illumination.

Before him the whole country to the southeast seemed in flames.
Village after village gave forth its baleful light; and even while he
gazed the fiery flood burst forth in spots hitherto dark. He stood as
one transfixed, until the wind brought with it a strange and fearful
cry, as if the exultation of fiends were mingled with the despairing
cry of perishing human beings.

He knew whence it came by the red light slowly stealing beyond the
next hill, and the fiery tongues of flame which rose heavenward,
although the houses were hidden by the ground.

It was from Wallingford, a town three miles below Dorchester. He knew,
too, where he was himself; and the one impulse which rushed upon him
was to hasten to Clifton, where he trusted he might find Edmund, or,
at least, hear of him in this dread emergency. He saw the village
lying beneath in the distance, and turned to rush downward, entering
the wood in a different direction.

But what sound is that which makes him start and pause?

It is the bay of the mastiff. He is pursued. He clasps his sword with
desperate tenacity, in which a foe might read his doom, and rushes on,
crushing through the brushwood.

Again the bay of the hound.

Onward, onward, he tramples through bush and bramble, until he sees
his progress suddenly arrested by the dark-flowing river.

He coasts along its banks, keeping up stream. The bay of the dog seems
close at hand, and the trampling of human feet accompanies it.

All at once he comes upon a road descending to the brink, and sees a
ferry boat at the foot of the descent. He rushes towards it and
enters. The pole is in the boat. He unlooses the chain, but with
difficulty, and precious moments are lost. He hears the panting of the
ferocious beast just as he pushes the boat, with vigorous thrust, out
into the stream.

The dog, followed closely by the men, is on the bank. The men curse
and swear, but the dog plunges into the chilly stream, which, being
swollen, has too rapid a current to freeze. Alfgar sees the brute
