
"Now go back to your place, my sister," he said. "It is not well
for you to bide here just now."

"Why not? Let our friend tell me of Father also," she said
wilfully.

"Because I am going to do justice on Lodbrok's slayer," said
Ingvar, in a great voice, swinging an axe again.

Then the maiden turned pale, and wrung her hands, looking at
Ingvar, who would not meet her eyes; and then she went and laid her
hands on his mighty arm, crying:

"Not that, my brother; not that!"

"Why not?" he asked; but he did not shake off her little hands.

"Because Father would not have men so treated, however ill they had
done."

"Aye, brother; the girl is right," said Hubba. "Let him die; for
you gave him to Wulfric, and that is his word."

"Well then," said Ingvar, setting back the axe at last, "I will not
carve him into the eagle I meant to make of him. But slay him I
must and will, if the life is yet in him."

"Let Odin have him," said Hubba; and I knew that he meant that the
man should be hanged, for so, as Halfden's vikings told me, should
he be Odin's thrall, unhonoured.

Then the maiden fled from the hall, glad to have gained even that
for the man, instead of the terrible death that the Danes keep for
traitors and cowards.

Now Ingvar put back the axes he had kept, saying that the girl ever
stood in his way when he would punish as a man deserved. After that
he stood for a while as if in thought, and broke out at length:

"We will see if this man can sing a death song as did Ragnar our
forefather."

And with that he waited no more, but strode out into the courtyard,
we following. And I feared what I should see; until I looked on
Beorn, and though he was yet alive, I saw that he was past feeling
aught.

They bore him out of the village to a place just inside the
trenched enclosure, and there were old stone walls, such as were
none elsewhere in the place, but as it might have been part of
Burgh or Brancaster walls that the Romans made on our shores, so
ancient that they were crumbling to decay. There they set him down,
and raised a great flat stone, close to the greatest wall, which
covered the mouth of a deep pit.

"Look therein," said Ingvar to me.

I looked, and saw that the pit was stone walled and deep, and that
out of it was no way but this hole above. The walls and floor were
damp and slimy; and when I looked closer, the dim light showed me
bones in one corner, and also that over the floor crawled reptiles,
countless.

"An adder is a small thing to sting a man," said Ingvar in his grim
voice. "Nor will it always hurt him much. Yet if a man is so close
among many that he must needs tread on one, and it bites him, and
in fleeing that he must set foot on another, and again another, and
then more--how will that end?"

I shuddered and turned away.

"In such a place did Ella of Northumbria put my forebear, Ragnar
Lodbrok; and there he sang the song {xiii} we hold most
wondrous of all. There he was set because he was feared, and
Northumbria knows what I thought of that matter. But Beorn goes
here for reasons which you know. And East Anglia shall know what my
thoughts are of those reasons."

Then two men seized Beorn and cast him into that foul pit, stripped
of all things, and the stone fell.

But Beorn moved not nor cried out, and I think that even as
Ulfkytel had boded, stripped of life itself was he before the
bottom of the pit was reached.

So the justice of Ulfkytel the Earl came to pass. But the lies
spoken by Beorn were not yet paid for.



CHAPTER IX. JARL HALFDEN'S HOMECOMING.


From the time when Beorn was made to speak the truth, I was a
welcome guest in the hall that had been Lodbrok's, to Hubba at
least, and we were good friends. As for Ingvar, he was friendly
enough also, and would listen when I spoke with his more frank and
open brother of my days with Halfden and his father. But he took
little pleasure in my company, going silent and moody about the
place, for the snow that began on the day after I landed was the
first of a great storm, fiercer and colder than any we knew in
England, and beyond the courtyard of the great house men could
scarcely stir for a time.

This storm I had but just escaped, and it seemed to me, and still
seems, that the terror and pain thereof was held back while I was
on the sea, for those nights and days had had no winter sting in
them.

Hubba and I would wrestle and practise arms in the hall or
courtyard during that time, and he was even beyond his father, my
teacher, in the matter of weapon play; so that it is no wonder that
now, as all men know, he is held the most famous warrior of his
time.

These sports Ingvar watched, and took part in now and then when his
mood was lighter, but it was seldom. Yet he was skilful, though not
as his brother.

Then at night was the fire of pine logs high heaped, and we feasted
while the scalds, as they call their gleemen, sang the deeds of the
heroes of old. And some of those of whom they sang were men of the
Angles of the old country; and one was my own forefather, and for
that I gave the scald my gold bracelet, and thereafter he sang
lustily in my praise as Lodbrok's rescuer.

Very pleasant it was in Ingvar's hall while the wind howled over
the roof, and the roar of the sea was always in our ears. And these
Danes drank less than our people, if they ate more largely. But
Ingvar would sit and take pleasure in none of the sport, being ever
silent and thoughtful.

But to me, best of all were the times when I might see and speak
with Osritha, and soon the days seemed heavy to me if by chance I
had no word with her. And she was always glad to speak of her
father and Halfden; for she was the youngest of all Lodbrok's
children, and Halfden, her brother, was but a year older than
herself, so that she loved him best of all, and longed to see him
home again.

So longed I, grieving for the news he must hear when he came to
Reedham, but yet thinking that he would be glad to find me at least
living and waiting for him.

Now, as the snow grew deeper and the cold strengthened, the wolves
began to come at night into the village, and at last grew very
daring. So one night a man ran in to say that a pack was round a
cottage where a child would not cease crying, and must be driven
off, or they would surely tear the clay walls down.

Then Hubba and I would go; but Ingvar laughed at us, saying that a
few firebrands would settle the matter by fraying the beasts away.
However, the man was urgent, and we went out with Raud and his
brother, and some twenty men, armed with spears and axes.

The night was very dark, and the snow whirled every way, and the
end of it was that Raud and I and two more men, with the dog Vig,
lost the rest, and before we found them we had the pack on us, and
we must fight for our lives. And that fight was a hard fight, for
there must have been a score of gaunt wolves, half starved and
ravenous.

And I think we should have fared badly, for at last I was standing
over Raud, who was down, dragged to the earth by two wolves, of
which the dog slew one and I the other, while the other two men
were back to back with me, and the wolves bayed all round us. But
Hubba and his party heard our shouts in time and came up, and so
ended the matter.

Now Raud must have it that I had saved his life, though I thought
the good dog had a share in it, and both he and the dog were a
little hurt. However, my shoulder was badly torn by a wolf that
leapt at me while my spear was cumbered with another, and I for my
part never wished it had not been so.

For Osritha, who was very skilful in leech craft, tended my hurt;
and I saw much of her, for the hurts were a long time before they
healed, as wolf bites are apt to be, and we grew very friendly. So
that, day by day, I began to long to see the maiden who cared for
my wound so gently, before the time came.

Now Raud must needs make me a spear from a tough ashen sapling that
he had treasured for a long time, because that which I had used in
the wolf hunt was sprung by the weight of one of the beasts, and
while his hurts kept him away at his own house he wrought it, and
at last brought it up to the hall to give to me.

When I looked at it--and it was a very good one, and had carved
work where the hand grips the shaft, and a carved end--I saw that
the head was one of Jarl Ingvar's best spearheads, and asked Raud
where he got it.

"Why," he said, "a good ash shaft deserves a good head, and so I
asked the jarl for one. And when he knew for whom it was, he gave
me this, saying it was the best he had."

Now I was pleased with this gift, both because I liked the man
Raud, who was both brave and simple minded, and because it showed
that the surly jarl had some liking for me. Yet I would that he
showed this openly, and telling Osritha of the gift, I dared say
so.

Then she sighed and rose up, saying that she would show me another
spear on the further wall, so taking me out of hearing of her
maidens, who sat by the fire busied over their spinning and the
like.

There she spoke to me of Jarl Ingvar.

"Moody and silent beyond his wont has he been since we have heard
all about our father's death, and I fear that he plans some
terrible revenge for it, even as he took revenge on the
Northumbrian coasts for the long-ago slaying of Ragnar."

Then I remembered the story of the burnt town, Streoneshalch, and
knew what Ingvar's revenge was like. But as yet I could not think
that he would avenge Beorn's deed further than I had seen already.

"But he has no enmity with you, our friend," she went on; "though
he speaks little to you, he listens as you talk to us. But there
has grown up in his heart a hatred of all men in your land, save of
yourself alone. And once he said that he would that you were a
Dane, and his comrade as you had been Halfden's."

Then I told Osritha of how Halfden had let me go from him rather
than have me fight against my own land. I had said nothing of this
to the jarls, for there was no reason. And this was the first time
that I had had private speech with Osritha.

"That is Halfden's way," she said, "he is ever generous."

"I would that he were back," I answered, and so we ceased speaking.

Yet after this, many were the chances I found of the like talk
alone with Osritha before the weather broke, and we could once more
get into the woods, hunting, and the men began to work in the ship
garths on a great ship that was being built.

Now we had good hunting in the forests, and on the borders of the
great mosses of Ingvar's lands. But there were many more folk in
this land than in ours, and I thought that they were ill off in
many ways. In those days of hunting, Ingvar, seeing me ride with
the carven spear that was partly his gift, and with Lodbrok's hawk
on my wrist, would speak more often with me, though now and again
some chance word of mine spoken in the way of my own folk would
seem to turn him gloomy and sullen, so that he would spur his horse
and leave me. But Hubba was ever the same, and I liked him well,
though I could not have made a friend of him as of Halfden.

In March messengers began to come and go, and though I asked
nothing and was told nothing, I knew well that Ingvar was gathering
a mighty host to him that he might sail in the May time across the
seas for plunder--or for revenge. The hammers went all day long in
the ship garths, where the air was full of the wholesome scent of
tar; and in their houses the women spun busily, making rope and
weaving canvas that should carry the jarl's men "over the swan's
bath;" while in the hall the courtmen sat after dark and feathered
arrows and twined bowstrings, and mended mail. And now and then
some chief would ride into the town, feasting that night, and
riding away in the morning after long talk with the jarls. And
some, Bagsac and Guthrum, Sidrac and his son, and a tall man named
Osbern, came very often as the days lengthened.

I would ask nothing of this matter, even of Osritha, having my own
thoughts thereon, and not being willing to press her on things she
might have been bidden to keep from me. She would ask me of my
mother and Eadgyth, as they would ask the jarl of her, and I told
her all I could, though that was not much, for a man hardly notes
things as a woman will. Then she would laugh at me; until one day I
said that I would she could come over to Reedham and see for
herself.

At that I thought that I had offended her, for her face grew red,
and she left me. Nor could I find a chance of speaking to her again
for many days, which was strange to me, and grieved me sorely.

Now the southwest wind shifted at last to the west and north, and
that shift brought home him whom I most wished to see, my comrade,
Halfden. And it chanced that I was the first to see his sail from
the higher land along the coast, south of the haven, where I was
riding with my falcon and the great dog Vig, which Raud and his
brother would have me take for my own after the wolf hunt.

Gladly I rode hack with my news to find Ingvar in the ship garth,
and there I told him who came.

"A ship, maybe. How know you she is Halfden's?" he said carelessly.

"Why, how does any sailor know his own ship?" I asked in surprise.

Then he turned at once, and smiled at me fairly for the first time.

"I had forgotten," he said. "Come, let us look at her again."

And I was not mistaken, though the jarl was not so sure as I for
half an hour or more. When he was certain, he said:

"Come, let us make what welcome for Halfden that we may."

And we went back to the hall, and at once was the great horn blown
to assemble the men; and the news went round quickly, so that
everywhere men and women alike put aside their work, and hurried
down to the wharf side. And in Ingvar's house the thralls wrought
to prepare a great feast in honour of Jarl Halfden's homecoming.

Soon I stood with the jarls and Osritha at the landing place, and
behind us were the courtmen in their best array. And as we came to
the place where we would wait, Halfden's ship came past the bar
into the haven's mouth.

All men's faces were bright with the thought of welcome, but heavy
were my thoughts, and with reason. For Halfden's ship came from the
sea on no course that should have borne him from Reedham, and I
feared that it was I who must tell him all. Yet he might have been
drawn from his course by some passing vessel.

The long ship flew up the channel, and now we could see that all
her rail was hung with the red and yellow shields that they use for
show as well as to make the gunwale higher against the arrows, and
to hinder boarders in a fight. And she was gaily decked with flags,
and shone with new paint and gilding in all sea bravery. Not idle
had her crew been in the place where they had wintered, and one
might know that they had had a good voyage, which to a Dane means
plunder enough for all. But surely if Halfden had been to Reedham,
the long pennon had been half masted.

It were long to tell how the people cheered, and how they were
answered from the ship, and how I spied Halfden on the fore deck,
and Thormod at the helm, as ever. And when Osritha saw Halfden's
gay arms and cloak and all the bright trim of the ship and men, she
said to me, speaking low and quickly:

"They have not been to Reedham, or it would not have been thus."

And it was true, for there would have been no sign of joy among
