the crater clear, as a cup-shaped hollow, truncating the cone; and all
stones falling into it would be only thrown out again. It may at the
close of an eruption cool down so completely that a lake can form within
it, such as Lake Averno, near Naples; or it may long remain a seething
sea of lava, such as Kilauea; or the lava may find one or more outlets
from it, either by welling over its rim, which it will then generally
break down, as in many of the small extinct volcanoes ("puys") of
Auvergne, or more usually by bursting through the sides of the cone.


LAVA VARIES VERY MUCH IN LIQUIDITY


It is not generally until the volcano has exhausted its first explosive
force that lava begins to issue. Several streams may issue in different
directions. Their dimensions are sometimes enormous. Lava varies very
much in liquidity and in the rate at which it flows. This much depends,
however, upon the slope it has to traverse. A lava stream at Vesuvius
ran three miles in four minutes, but took three hours to flow the next
three miles, while a stream from Mauna Loa ran eighteen miles in two
hours. Glowing at first as a white-hot liquid, the lava soon cools at
the surface to red and then to black; cinder-like scoriaceous masses
form on its surface and in front of the slowly-advancing mass; clouds of
steam and other vapor rise from it, and little cones are thrown up
from its surface; but many years may elapse before the mass is cooled
through. Thus, while the surface is glassy, the interior becomes
crystalline.

As to what are the causes of the great convulsions of nature known as
the volcano and the earthquake we know very little. Various theories
have been advanced, but nothing by any means sure has been discovered,
and considerable difference of opinion exists. In truth we know so
little concerning the conditions existing in the earth's interior
that any views concerning the forces at work there must necessarily be
largely conjectural.

Sir Robert S. Ball says, in this connection: "Let us take, for instance,
that primary question in terrestrial physics, as to whether the interior
of the earth is liquid or solid. If we were to judge merely from the
temperatures reasonably believed to exist at a depth of some twenty
miles, and if we might overlook the question of pressure, we should
certainly say that the earth's interior must be in a fluid state. It
seems at least certain that the temperatures to be found at depths of
two score miles, and still more at greater depths, must be so high that
the most refractory solids, whether metals or minerals, would at once
yield if we could subject them to such temperatures in our laboratories.
But none of our laboratory experiments can tell us whether, under the
pressure of thousands of tons on the square inch, the application of
any heat whatever would be adequate to transform solids into liquids.
It may, indeed, be reasonably doubted whether the terms solid and
liquid are applicable, in the sense in which we understand them, to the
materials forming the interior of the earth.

"A principle, already well known in the arts, is that many, if not all,
solids may be made to flow like liquids if only adequate pressure be
applied. The making of lead tubes is a well-known practical illustration
of this principle, for these tubes are formed simply by forcing solid
lead by the hydraulic press through a mould which imparts the desired
shape.

"If then a solid can be made to behave like a liquid, even with such
pressures as are within our control, how are we to suppose that the
solids would behave with such pressures as those to which they are
subjected in the interior of the earth? The fact is that the terms solid
and liquid, at least as we understand them, appear to have no physical
meaning with regard to bodies subjected to these stupendous pressures,
and this must be carefully borne in mind when we are discussing the
nature of the interior of the earth."


THE VOLCANO A SAFETY VALVE


Whatever be the state of affairs in the depths of the earth's crust, we
may look upon the volcano as a sort of safety-valve, opening a passage
for the pent-up forces to the surface, and thus relieving the earth from
the terrible effects of the earthquake, through which these imprisoned
powers so often make themselves felt. Without the volcanic vent there
might be no safety for man on the earth's unquiet face.

Professor J. C. Russell, of Michigan University, presents the following
views concerning the status and action of volcanoes:--

"When reduced to its simplest terms, a volcano may be defined as a
tube, or conduit, in the earth's crust, through which the molten rock is
forced to the surface. The conduit penetrates the cool and rigid rocks
forming the superficial portion of the earth, and reaches its highly
heated interior.

"The length of volcanic conduits can only be conjectured, but, judging
from the approximately known rate of increase of heat with depth (on an
average one degree Fahrenheit for each sixty feet), and the temperature
at which volcanic rocks melt (from 2,300 to 2,700 degrees Fahrenheit,
when not under pressure), they must seemingly have a depth of at least
twenty miles. There are other factors to be considered, but in general
terms it is safe to assume that the conduits of volcanoes are irregular
openings, many miles in depth, which furnish passageways for molten
rock (lava) from the highly-heated sub-crust portion of the earth to its
surface. . . ."


ERUPTIONS OF QUIET TYPE


"During eruptions of the quiet type, the lava comes to the surface in a
highly liquid condition--that is, it is thoroughly fused, and flows with
almost the freedom of water. It spreads widely, even on a nearly level
plain, and may form a comparatively thin sheet several hundred square
miles in area, as has been observed in Iceland and Hawaii. On the Snake
River plains, in Southern Idaho, there are sheets of once molten rock
which were poured out in the manner just stated, some four hundred
square miles in area and not over seventy-five feet in average
thickness. When an eruption of highly liquid lava occurs in a
mountainous region, the molten rock may cascade down deep slopes and
flow through narrow valleys for fifty miles or more before becoming
chilled sufficiently to arrest its progress. Instances are abundant
where quiet eruptions have occurred in the midst of a plain, and
built up 'lava cones,' or low mounds, with immensely expanded bases.
Illustrations are furnished in Southern Idaho, in which the cones formed
are only three hundred or four hundred feet high, but have a breadth at
the base of eight or ten miles. In the class of eruption illustrated
by these examples, there is an absence of fragmental material, such as
explosive volcanoes hurl into the air, and a person may stand within
a few yards of a rushing stream of molten rock, or examine closely the
opening from which it is being poured out, without danger or serious
inconvenience.

"The quiet volcanic eruptions are attended by the escape of steam or
gases from the molten rock, but the lava being in a highly liquid
state, the steam and gases dissolved in it escape quietly and without
explosions. If, however, the molten rock is less completely fluid, or
in a viscous condition, the vapors and gases contained in it find
difficulty in escaping, and may be retained until, becoming concentrated
in large volume, they break their way to the surface, producing violent
explosions. Volcanoes in which the lava extruded is viscous, and the
escape of steam and gases is retarded until the pent-up energy bursts
all bounds, are of the explosive, type. One characteristic example is
Vesuvius.

"When steam escapes from the summit of a volcanic conduit--which, in
plain terms, is a tall vessel filled with intensely hot and more or less
viscous liquid--masses of the liquid rock are blown into the air, and on
falling build up a rim or crater about the place of discharge. Commonly
the lava in the summit portion of a conduit becomes chilled and perhaps
hardened, and when a steam explosion occurs this crust is shattered and
the fragments hurled into the air and contributed to the building of the
walls of the inclosing crater.

"The solid rock blown out by volcanoes consists usually of highly
vesicular material which hardened on the surface of the column of lava
within a conduit and was shattered by explosions beneath it. These
fragments vary in size from dust particles up to masses several feet in
diameter, and during violent eruptions are hurled miles high. The larger
fragments commonly fall near their place of origin, and usually furnish
the principal part of the material of which craters are built, but the
gravel-like kernels, lapilli, may be carried laterally several miles
if a wind is blowing, while the dust is frequently showered down on
thousands of square miles of land and sea. The solid and usually angular
fragments manufactured in this manner vary in temperature, and may still
be red hot on falling.

"Volcanoes of the explosive type not uncommonly discharge streams of
lava, which may flow many miles. In certain instances these outwellings
of liquid rock occur after severe earthquakes and violent explosions,
and may have all the characteristics of quiet eruptions. There is
thus no fundamental difference between the two types into which it is
convenient to divide volcanoes."


MOUNTAINS BLOW THEIR HEADS OFF


"In extreme examples of explosive volcanoes, the summit portion of a
crater, perhaps several miles in circumference and several thousand feet
high, is blown away. Such an occurrence is recorded in the case of
the volcano Coseguina, Nicaragua, in 1835. Or, an entire mountain may
disappear, being reduced to lapilli and dust and blown into the air, as
in the case of Krakatoa, in the Straits of Sunda, in 1883.

"The essential feature of a volcano, as stated above, is a tube or
conduit, leading from the highly heated sub-crust portion of the earth
to the crater and through which molten rock is forced upward to the
surface. The most marked variations in the process depend on the
quantity of molten rock extruded, and on the freedom of escape of the
steam and gases contained in the lava.

"The cause of the rise of the molten rock in a volcano is still a matter
for discussion. Certain geologists contend that steam is the sole motive
power; while others consider that the lava is forced to the surface
owing to pressure on the reservoir from which it comes. The view perhaps
most favorably entertained at present, in reference to the general
nature of volcanic eruptions, is that the rigid outer portion of the
earth becomes fractured, owing principally to movements resulting from
the shrinking of the cooling inner mass, and that the intensely hot
material reached by the fissures, previously solid owing to pressure,
becomes liquid when pressure is relieved, and is forced to the surface.
As the molten material rises it invades the water-charged rocks near
the surface and acquires steam, or the gases resulting from the
decomposition of water, and a new force is added which produces the
most conspicuous and at times the most terrible phenomena accompanying
eruptions."

The active agency of water is strongly maintained by many geologists,
and certainly gains support from the vast clouds of steam given off by
volcanoes in eruption and the steady and quiet emission of steam from
many in a state of rest. The quantities of water in the liquid state,
to which is due the frequent enormous outflows of mud, leads to the
same conclusion. Many scientists, indeed, while admitting the agency of
water, look upon this as the aqueous material originally pent up
within the rocks. For instance Professor Shaler, dean of the Lawrence
Scientific School, says:

"Volcanic outbreaks are merely the explosion of steam under high
pressure, steam which is bound in rocks buried underneath the surface
of the earth and there subjected to such tremendous heat that when the
conditions are right its pent-up energy breaks forth and it shatters
its stone prison walls into dust. The process by which the water becomes
buried in this manner is a long one. Some contend that it leaks down
from the surface of the earth through fissures in the outer crust, but
this theory is not generally accepted. The common belief is that water
enters the rocks during the crystalization period, and that these rocks
through the natural action of rivers and streams become deposited in the
bottom of the ocean. Here they lie for many ages, becoming buried deeper
and deeper under masses of like sediment, which are constantly being
washed down upon them from above. This process is called the blanketing
process.

"Each additional layer of sediment, while not raising the level of the
sea bottom, buries the first layers just so much the deeper and adds to
their temperature just as does the laying of extra blankets on a bed.
When the first layer has reached a depth of a few thousand feet the
rocks which contain the water of crystalization are subjected to a
terrific heat. This heat generates steam, which is held in a state of
frightful tension in its rocky prison. Wrinklings in the outer crust of
the earth's surface occur, caused by the constant shrinking of the earth
itself and by the contraction of the outer surface as it settles on the
plastic centers underneath. Fissures are caused by these foldings, and
as these fissures reach down into the earth the pressure is removed from
the rocks and the compressed steam in them, being released, explodes
with tremendous force."

This view is, very probably, applicable to many cases, and the
exceedingly fine dust which so often rises from volcanoes has,
doubtless, for one of its causes the sudden and explosive conversion of
water into steam in the interior of ejected lava, thus rending it into
innumerable fragments. But that this is the sole mode of action of water
in volcanic eruptions is very questionable. It certainly does not agree
with the immense volumes at times thrown out, while explosions of
such extreme intensity as that of Krakatoa very strongly lead to the
conclusion that a great mass of water has made its way through newly
opened fissures to the level of molten rock, and exploded into steam
with a suddenness which gave it the rending force of dynamite or the
other powerful chemical explosives.

As the earthquake is so intimately associated with the volcano the
causes of the latter are in great measure the causes of the former, and
the forces at work frequently produce a more or less violent quaking of
the earth's surface before they succeed in opening a channel of escape
through the mountain's heart. One agency of great potency, and one whose
work never ceases, has doubtless much to do with earthquake action.
In the description of this we cannot do better than to quote from "The
Earth's Beginning" of Sir Robert S. Ball.


CAUSE OF EARTHQUAKES


"As to the immediate cause of earthquakes there is no doubt considerable
difference of opinion. But I think it will not be doubted that an
earthquake is one of the consequences, though perhaps a remote one, of
the gradual loss of internal heat from the earth. As this terrestrial
heat is gradually declining, it follows from the law that we have
already so often had occasion to use that the bulk of the earth must be
shrinking. No doubt the diminution in the earth's diameter due to the
loss of heat must be exceedingly small, even in a long period of time.
The cause, however, is continually in operation, and, accordingly, the
crust of the earth has from time to time to be accommodated to the fact
that the whole globe is lessening. The circumference of our earth at
the equator must be gradually declining; a certain length in that
circumference is lost each year. We may admit that loss to be a quantity
far too small to be measured by any observations as yet obtainable, but,
nevertheless, it is productive of phenomena so important that it cannot
be overlooked.

"It follows from these considerations that the rocks which form the
earth's crust over the surface of the continents and the islands, or
beneath the bed of the ocean, must have a lessening acreage year
by year. These rocks must therefore submit to compression, either
continuously or from time to time, and the necessary yielding of the
rocks will in general take place in those regions where the materials
of the earth's crust happen to have comparatively small powers of
resistance. The acts of compression will often, and perhaps generally,
not proceed with uniformity, but rather with small successive shifts,
and even though the displacements of the rocks in these shifts be
actually very small, yet the pressures to which the rocks are subjected
are so vast that a very small shift may correspond to a very great
terrestrial disturbance.

"Suppose, for instance, that there is a slight shift in the rocks on
each side of a crack, or fault, at a depth of ten miles. It must be
remembered that the pressure ten miles down would be about thirty-five
tons to the square inch. Even a slight displacement of one extensive
surface over another, the sides being pressed together with a force of
thirty-five tons on the square inch, would be an operation necessarily
accompanied by violence greatly exceeding that which we might expect
from so small a displacement if the forces concerned had been of more
ordinary magnitude. On account of this great multiplication of the
intensity of the phenomenon, merely a small rearrangement of the
rocks in the crust of the earth, in pursuance of the necessary work of
accommodating its volume to the perpetual shrinkage, might produce an
excessively violent shock, extending far and wide. The effect of such a
shock would be propagated in the form of waves through the globe, just
as a violent blow given at one end of a bar of iron by a hammer is
propagated through the bar in the form of waves. When the effect of this
internal adjustment reaches the earth's surface it will sometimes be
great enough to be perceptible in the shaking it gives that surface. The
shaking may be so violent that buildings may not be able to withstand
it. Such is the phenomenon of an earthquake.

"When the earth is shaken by one of those occasional adjustments of the
crust which I have described, the wave that spreads like a pulsation
from the centre of agitation extends all over our globe and is
transmitted right through it. At the surface lying immediately over the
centre of disturbance there will be a violent shock. In the surrounding
country, and often over great distances, the earthquake may also be
powerful enough to produce destructive effects. The convulsion may also
be manifested over a far larger area of country in a way which makes the
shock to be felt, though the damage wrought may not be appreciable.
But beyond a limited distance from the centre of the agitation the
earthquake will produce no destructive effects upon buildings, and
will not even cause vibrations that would be appreciable to ordinary
observation."


THE RADIUS OF DISTURBANCE.


"In each locality in which earthquakes are chronic it would seem as if
there must be a particularly weak spot in the earth some miles below
the surface. A shrinkage of the earth, in the course of the incessant
adjustment between the interior and the exterior, will take place by
occasional little jumps at this particular centre. The fact that there
is this weak spot at which small adjustments are possible may provide,
as it were, a safety-valve for other places in the same part of
the world. Instead of a general shrinking, the materials would be
sufficiently elastic and flexible to allow the shrinking for a very
large area to be done at this particular locality. In this way we may
explain the fact that immense tracts on the earth are practically free
from earthquakes of a serious character, while in the less fortunate
regions the earthquakes are more or less perennial.

"Now, suppose an earthquake takes place in Japan, it originates a series
of vibrations through our globe. We must here distinguish between the
rocks--I might almost say the comparatively pliant rocks--which form
the earth's crust, and those which form the intensely rigid core of the
interior of our globe. The vibrations which carry the tidings of the
earthquake spread through the rocks on the surface, from the centre of
the disturbance, in gradually enlarging circles. We may liken the spread
of these vibrations to the ripples in a pool of water which diverge from
the spot where a raindrop has fallen. The vibrations transmitted by
the rocks on the surface, or on the floor of the ocean, will carry the
message all over the earth. As these rocks are flexible, at all
events by comparison with the earth's interior, the vibrations will be
correspondingly large, and will travel with vigor over land and under
sea. In due time they reach, say the Isle of Wight, where they set the
pencil of the seismometer at work. But there are different ways round
the earth from Japan to the Isle of Wight, the most direct route being
across Asia and Europe; the other route across the Pacific, America, and
the Atlantic. The vibrations will travel by both routes, and the former
is the shorter of the two."


TRANSMISSIONS OF VIBRATIONS


Some brief repetition may not here be amiss as to the products of
volcanic action, of which so much has been said in the preceding
pages, especially as many of the terms are to some extent technical in
character. The most abundant of these substances is steam or water-gas,
which, as we have seen, issues in prodigious quantities during every
eruption. But with the steam a great number of other volatile materials
frequently make their appearance. Though we have named a number of these
at the beginning of this chapter, it will not be out of order to
repeat them here. The chief among these are the acid gases known as
hydrochloric acid, sulphurous acid, sulphuretted hydrogen, carbonic
acid, and boracic acid; and with these acid gases there issue hydrogen,
nitrogen ammonia, the volatile metals arsenic, antimony, and mercury,
and some other substances. These volatile substances react upon one
another, and many new compounds are thus formed. By the action of
sulphurous acid and sulphuretted hydrogen on each other, the sulphur
so common in volcanic districts is separated and deposited. The
hydrochloric acid acts very energetically on the rocks around the vents,
uniting with the iron in them to form the yellow ferric-chloride, which
often coats the rocks round the vent and is usually mistaken by casual
observers for sulphur.

Some of the substances emitted by volcanic vents, such as hydrogen and
sulphuretted hydrogen, are inflammable, and when they issue at a high
temperature these gases burst into flame the moment that they come
into contact with the air. Hence, when volcanic fissures are watched at
night, faint lambent flames are frequently seen playing over them, and
sometimes these flames are brilliantly colored, through the presence
of small quantities of certain metallic oxides. Such volcanic flames,
however, are scarcely ever strongly luminous, and the red, glowing light
which is observed over volcanic mountains in eruption is due to quite
another cause. What is usually taken for flame during a volcanic
eruption is simply, as we have before stated, the glowing light of the
surface of a mass of red-hot lava reflected from the cloud of vapor and
dust in the air, much as the lights of a city are reflected from the
water vapor of the atmosphere during a night of fog.

Besides the volatile substances which issue from volcanic vents,
mingling with the atmosphere or condensing upon their sides, there
are many solid materials ejected, and these may accumulate around the
orifice's till they build up mountains of vast dimensions, like Etna,
Teneriffe, and Chimborazo. Some of these solid materials are evidently
fragments of the rock-masses, through which the volcanic fissure has
been rent; these fragments have been carried upwards by the force of
the steam-blast and scattered over the sides of the volcano. But the
principal portion of the solid materials ejected from volcanic orifices
consists of matter which has been extruded from sources far beneath the
surface, in highly-heated and fluid or semi-fluid condition.

It is to these materials that the name of "lavas" is properly applied.
Lavas present a general resemblance to the slags and clinkers which
are formed in our furnaces and brick-kilns, and consist, like them, of
various stony substances which have been more or less perfectly fused.
When we come to study the chemical composition and the microscopical
structure of lavas, however, we shall find that there are many respects
in which they differ entirely from these artificial products, they
consisting chiefly of felspar, or of this substance in association with
augite or hornblende. In texture they may be stony, glassy, resin-like,
vesicular or cellular and light in weight, as in the case of pumice or
scoria.


FLOATING PUMICE


The steam and other gases rising through liquid lava are apt to produce
bubbles, yielding a surface froth or foam. This froth varies greatly
in character according to the nature of the material from which it is
formed. In the majority of cases the lavas consist of a mass of crystals
floating in a liquid magma, and the distension of such a mass by the
escape of steam from its midst gives rise to the formation of the rough
cindery-looking material to which the name of "scoria" is applied. But
when the lava contains no ready-formed crystals, but consists entirely
of a glassy substance in a more or less perfect state of fusion,
the liberation of steam gives rise to the formation of the beautiful
material known as "pumice." Pumice consists of a mass of minute glass
