For it had been fully recognized upon all hands now that the
prince's father was absolutely incapable of more than the name of
king, and it was well known that the prince was to be the real
ruler, with the name of regent, and that it would be his hands or
his mother's that would sway the sceptre of power, should the
Lancastrian cause triumph in the struggle.

And no thought of aught but victory had as yet found place in young
Edward's heart. Was not the great invincible earl fighting on their
side? And had he not already placed Henry once more upon the
throne, not to be again deposed so long as he had a soldier left to
fight for him?

But Paul's heart was scarce so light, although the sight of the
prince awakened his loyal enthusiasm.

"O my lord, if you had but come sooner--had come before the proud
son of York had landed, and drawn to his standard a host of
powerful followers! I know not how it is, but his name is a magnet
that strangely stirs the hearts of men. Ere I left London I heard
that the rival armies were closely approaching each other, and that
the battle might not be much longer delayed. I knew not whether to
fly to welcome you, or to stay and draw the sword on your behalf,
and strive to be the one to bring to you the glorious news of
victory. I cannot think but what the great earl will again be
victorious; but the despatches he intrusted to me, with commands to
hasten westwards to try and meet you on your landing, will tell you
more of the chances of war than I can do. Men's mouths are full of
rumours. One knows not how to sift the false from the true. But the
men of London--ay, there is the peril--they all stand sullen when
we of the Red Rose pass by, and scarce a voice calls 'God save the
king.' If Edward of York were to succeed in reaching the city--"

"But he must not--he shall not--he cannot!" cried young Edward,
with flashing eyes. "What! shall the proud crest of my great
father-in-law stoop before the traitorous host of York? Fie on
thee, Paul! talk not to me of defeat. Nay, after we have heard the
holy mass of this glad Easter day, let us rather to horse and
away--you and I together, Paul, as we have done times before--and
let us not draw rein till we ride into the victorious camp of the
king my father, and hear the glad welcome we shall receive from his
brave host.

"O Paul, I have had my moments of doubt and desponding, but they
are all past now. I come to claim my kingdom, and to place a crown
upon the brow of my lovely bride. Ah, I must present you to her--my
gentle Lady Anne. I wot she will not be far off She will be seeking
for me, as is her fashion if we are long apart. She must thank you
herself for all that you have done and suffered for me. You will
feel yourself a thousandfold repaid when you have heard her sweet
words of recognition."

And in effect, as they turned once more toward the Abbey, Paul saw
approaching them the slight and graceful figure of a young girl, in
the first blush of maiden bloom and beauty, her face ethereally
lovely, yet tinged, as it seemed, with some haunting melancholy,
which gave a strange pathos to its rare beauty, and seemed almost
to speak of the doom of sorrow and loss already hanging over her,
little as she knew it then.

The solemn troth plight which had passed between her and young
Edward was almost equivalent to the marriage vow that would shortly
bind them indissolubly together, and their love for each other was
already that of man and wife. As the gentle lady listened to the
eager tale poured out by Paul, she stretched out her hand to him,
and when he would have bent the knee she raised him up with sweet
smiles, and told him how her dear lord had always praised him as a
very brother, and the type of all that was faithful and true in
comrade. Such words from such lips brought the boyish blush to
Paul's cheeks, and he stumbled bashfully over his undying
protestations of loyalty.

Then, as they reached the refectory, which had been allotted by the
monks to their noble guests, he stopped short and fell upon his
knees; for in a tall and stately figure advancing to meet them he
recognized the great queen he had not seen since he was a child,
and scarce dared to raise his eyes to note the ravages that sorrow
and care had made upon that princely visage, or the silver
whiteness of the locks, covered for the most part by the tall,
peaked headdress of the day.

The queen recognized Paul at once from the strange likeness to her
own son, and her welcome was kindly given. But she was anxious and
preoccupied, having but risen from the perusal of the despatches
Paul had brought; and although her natural courage and hopefulness
would not permit her to despond, she could not but admit that
danger menaced the cause of the Red Rose, whilst she realized, as
her young son could not do at his age, how utterly disastrous would
be a single victory of the enemy at such a juncture.

The fortunes of the rival houses were trembling in the balance. The
first decisive, advantage to either would give a prestige and
fillip to that cause which might be absolutely fatal to the hopes
of the other. If it were true that some battle were being fought or
about to be fought that very day, such a battle might be either the
death blow to all their hopes or the earnest of a final triumph
nigh at hand.

It was a strange Easter Day for the party at the Abbey. The mass
was quickly followed by the arrival of loyal adherents from the
surrounding country, who had heard of the landing of the
long-expected party from France, and flocked eagerly to pay their
homage to the queen and the prince, and look upon the fair face of
the Lady Anne, whose position as Warwick's daughter and Edward's
bride alike made her an object of the greatest interest and a
person of importance. Paul was deeply enamoured of the gentle and
lovely lady, and received many marks of favour from her hands. He
was given a post about the young prince, and kept close at his side
the whole day.

It was inspiriting indeed to hear the loyal protestations of the
friends who kept flocking all day to join their standard, and there
was no riding forth to London for prince or attendant so long as
the light lasted.

"But tomorrow morn we will sally forth ere it well be day," said
Edward, in low tones, as they parted for the night. "My heart tells
me that something of note has occurred this very day. We will be
the first to bring the news to my mother. Be ready with a couple of
horses and some few men-at-arms ere the sun be well risen over yon
ridge, and we will forth to meet the messengers of victory, and
bring them back with us to tell their welcome news."

Paul had forgotten his vague fears in the gladness of the present,
and scarce closed his eyes that night, thinking of the coming
triumph for the prince he loyally loved. He was up and in the
saddle with the first glimmering light of day, and by the time that
the rosy glow of dawn was transforming the fair world of nature and
clothing it with an indescribable radiance of gossamer beauty, he
and the prince were already a mile from the Abbey, galloping along
in the fresh morning air with a glad exultation of spirit that
seemed in itself like a herald of coming triumph.

"The very heavens have put on the livery of the Red Rose!" cried
Edward gaily, as he pointed to the vivid red of the east; and Paul
smiled, and tried to banish from his mind the old adage learned at
his nurse's knee, to the effect that a red morn was the herald of a
dark and dreary day.

They had ridden a matter of some five miles forth in the direction
of the great road to London--as it was then considered, though we
should scarce call the rude tracks of those days roads--when the
quick eye of Paul caught sight of a little moving cloud of dust,
and he drew rein to shade his eyes with his hand.

Edward followed his example, and together they stood gazing, their
hearts beating with sympathetic excitement. How much might the next
few moments contain for them of triumph or of despair! for from the
haste with which these horsemen rode, it was plain they were the
bearers of tidings, and if of tidings, most likely those of some
battle, in which the King Maker and the king he had first made and
then driven away would stand for the first time in hostile ranks.
Together they had been victorious; what would be the result when
they met as foes?

Nearer and nearer came the riders, looming through the uncertain
morning mist, and emerging thence two jaded, weary figures, their
horses flecked with foam, nostrils wide, chests heaving, showing
every sign of distress; and Paul, recognizing in one of the riders
a follower of the Earl of Warwick, called upon him by name, and bid
him speak his tidings.

"Lost--lost--all lost!" cried the man, addressing himself to Paul,
unconscious of the identity of his companion; "the battle is fought
and lost. The armies met on Barnet Heath. The Earl of Warwick, the
great earl, was there slain. His Majesty King Henry is again a
prisoner in the hands of Edward of York. Today he makes his
triumphant entry into London, which will open its gates to him with
joy and receive him as king."

Paul sat rigid and motionless as he heard these words. He did not
dare to look at young Edward, who sat beside him as if turned to
stone. The second messenger, who had had a moment to draw breath
whilst his fellow had been speaking, now broke in with his share of
the terrible news. He had seen the prodigies of valour performed by
the mighty earl. He had witnessed the death of that warrior--such a
death as was fitting for one of his warlike race. The testimony of
eyewitnesses could not be doubted. The fatal day had again been
hostile to the cause of the Red Rose, and the mournful cry of those
who had seen and shared in the fight, as they fled pellmell from
the field, had been, "Lost--all lost! the House of Lancaster is
utterly overthrown!"

Mournfully the little procession turned itself and rode back to the
Abbey. Edward had not spoken one word all this time, and the
messengers, who had now learned who he was, fell to the rear, and
observed an awed silence. But their tale had been told. They had
said enough. The worst was made known, and not even Paul dared
venture a word of consolation, or seek to know what was passing in
the mind of the prince, whose fair inheritance seemed thus to be
slipping away.

Excitement, uncertainty, and suspense seemed in the very air, and
even before the silent little troop reached the courtyard of the
Abbey eager forms were seen hurrying out, and the tall and stately
figure of the royal Margaret stood outlined in the doorway. Perhaps
something in the very silence and confused looks of the little
group told a tale of disaster, for the queen came hurrying down the
steps with whitening face, and her son sprang from his saddle and
put his arm about her, as if to support her in the shock which
could not but fall upon her now.

"Tell me all," she whispered hoarsely. "Do not keep me in suspense.
Speak, I command you, my son."

"A battle has been fought--and lost," answered Edward, speaking
mechanically. "Our ally and friend the Earl of Warwick was killed
in desperate fight. My father is a prisoner in the enemy's hands.
Edward of York is even now making his triumphant entry into London,
which will receive him with open arms."

Edward said no more; he had indeed told all his tale, and it had
been enough for the unhappy woman, who had landed on English soil
so confident of victory. She gave one short, low cry, a convulsive
shudder passed through her limbs, and she fell senseless to the
ground. That cry found its echo upon the pale lips of another--one
who had closely followed the queen to learn the tidings of the
travellers; and Edward turned to catch his bride in his arms,
whilst her tears rained down fast as she heard how her noble father
lay dead upon the fatal field that had lost her lord his crown, and
had dashed to the ground the warmest hopes of the Red Rose.

"Let us to ship again," said Margaret, as she recovered from her
long swoon. "The cause is lost without hope. Warwick is slain. Whom
have we now to trust to? Let us back to France, and hide our
dishonoured heads there. My father's court will receive us yet, and
perchance we may in time learn to forget that we were ever princes
and sovereigns."

Strange words, indeed, from the haughty and warlike Margaret; but
at that moment her proud spirit seemed crushed and broken, and it
was young Edward who answered her with words of hope and courage.

"Nay, mother," he said, "let it not be said of the House of
Plantagenet that they turned their backs upon the foe, and fled
disgracefully, leaving their followers to butchery and ruin. It
might have been well for us never to have disturbed again the peace
of this realm; but having summoned to our banner the loyal
adherents of the Red Rose, it is not for us to fly to safety, and
leave them to the wrath and cruelty of Edward. No; one battle--one
defeat--does not lose us our cause. My father lives; shall we leave
him to linger out his days in hopeless captivity? I live; have I
not the right to strike a blow for the crown to which I was born?

"Courage, sweet mother. You are a king's daughter. You have led men
to victory before. Say not--think not--that all is lost. Let us win
the crown of England by the power of the name and of the righteous
cause we own, and henceforth shall no man say that a subject crowns
and dethrones England's monarch at his will."

These words, seconded and echoed by those of many a gallant knight
and noble, raised Margaret's broken spirit, and she began once more
to hope. That day they journeyed by rapid stages to Beaulieu Abbey,
a very famous sanctuary in those days, the ruins of which may still
be seen in the New Forest; and there the party found the widowed
Countess of Warwick, who had landed at Portsmouth before the royal
party had reached Weymouth, and had just heard of her terrible
loss. To have her daughter with her once again, and to mingle their
tears together, was some consolation, both for the countess and the
Lady Anne; but others had sterner work before them than weeping
over past misfortunes, and as soon as the retreat of the royal
Lancastrian became generally known, many stanch adherents flocked
to tender their allegiance and promise fealty to the cause.

Foremost amongst these was the young Duke of Somerset, whose family
had ever been stanch to the Red Rose, as well it might. Some of the
unpopularity Margaret of Anjou had early won for herself at the
English court was due to her confidence in and affection for
Somerset, and his son might well be ardent in her cause.

Margaret herself was still sunk in unwonted depression, but the
representations of the fiery young duke did much to give her heart.
With him came Jasper Tudor, the king's half brother, and they drew
glowing pictures of the loyalty of the western counties; and of
Wales, where a large band of troops was mustering for her support;
and represented that if she could but effect a junction with them,
the whole country would soon be hers, and she would be able to
dictate terms to the enemy at the gates of London.

Margaret's elastic temper rose with the encouragement thus
received, and Edward's heart beat high with hope. The party began
their westward march, and through the bright days of April and May
they rode through the smiling land, receiving welcome and adulation
from all, and reinforcements to their little band from every town
through which they passed. Small wonder was it that they learned to
feel confident of ultimate success. The young prince, with Paul at
his side, would ride through the ranks of his followers day by day,
speaking bright, brave words to all he passed, and winning the
hearts of his troops as perhaps only the young and frank-hearted
and unspoiled can do. To him it seemed almost more like a triumphal
progress than a recruiting march.

But Margaret's brow was often dark with anxiety. She knew the
temper of the bold Edward of York, as she called him, whom the
world still spoke of as king; and she knew that he would be upon
their track. Any day they might see his banners threatening their
rear, and still the Welsh army was at some distance; and until a
junction could be effected, even their lives could scarce be called
safe.

Then at Gloucester a serious check met them. The place was held for
the king's brother, and the gates were resolutely closed against
her. It was here that she had reckoned upon crossing the deep and
treacherous waters of the Severn, and to be thus foiled might mean
the ruin of the enterprise. The sheltering mountains of Wales were
already in sight; but how was she to reach them if the passage of
the river were denied her?

Paul had gone forth alone that day, and had not been present when
the queen had ridden herself to the fortified gates to demand an
entrance, which had been firmly and respectfully declined her. But
he had learned tidings which disquieted him not a little, and it
was at full gallop that he dashed back into the ranks, and sought
the prince himself, who was looking with darkening brow upon the
frowning battlements of the unfriendly city.

"My liege, it brooks not this delay," he cried, reining up beside
Edward, and speaking in rapid whispers. "The army of York is scarce
a score of miles away, and in hot pursuit after us. They have had
certain news of our movements, and unless we can push on across the
river and meet our friends there, we shall be taken in the rear,
and at sore disadvantage. It behoves us to strain every nerve to
reach our friends before our foes are upon us."

