
'Who are ye?' said a hollow and ghostly voice.  'And what do ye here?'

The sound, terrible and deathlike as it was--suiting well the
countenance of the speaker, and seeming rather the voice of some
bodiless wanderer of the Styx than living mortal, would have made Ione
shrink back into the pitiless fury of the storm, but Glaucus, though not
without some misgiving, drew her into the cavern.

'We are storm-beaten wanderers from the neighboring city,' said he, 'and
decoyed hither by yon light; we crave shelter and the comfort of your
hearth.'

As he spoke, the fox rose from the ground, and advanced towards the
strangers, showing, from end to end, its white teeth, and deepening in
its menacing growl.

'Down, slave!' said the witch; and at the sound of her voice the beast
dropped at once, covering its face with its brush, and keeping only its
quick, vigilant eye fixed upon the invaders of its repose. 'Come to the
fire if ye will!' said she, turning to Glaucus and his companions.  'I
never welcome living thing--save the owl, the fox, the toad, and the
viper--so I cannot welcome ye; but come to the fire without welcome--why
stand upon form?'

The language in which the hag addressed them was a strange and barbarous
Latin, interlarded with many words of some more rude, and ancient
dialect. She did not stir from her seat, but gazed stonily upon them as
Glaucus now released Ione of her outer wrapping garments, and making her
place herself on a log of wood, which was the only other seat he
perceived at hand--fanned with his breath the embers into a more glowing
flame.  The slave, encouraged by the boldness of her superiors, divested
herself also of her long palla, and crept timorously to the opposite
corner of the hearth.

'We disturb you, I fear,' said the silver voice of Ione, in
conciliation.

The witch did not reply--she seemed like one who has awakened for a
moment from the dead, and has then relapsed once more into the eternal
slumber.

'Tell me,' said she, suddenly, and after a long pause, 'are ye brother
and sister?'

'No,' said Ione, blushing.

'Are ye married?'

'Not so,' replied Glaucus.

'Ho, lovers!--ha!--ha!--ha!' and the witch laughed so loud and so long
that the caverns rang again.

The heart of Ione stood still at that strange mirth.  Glaucus muttered a
rapid counterspell to the omen--and the slave turned as pale as the
cheek of the witch herself.

'Why dost thou laugh, old crone?' said Glaucus, somewhat sternly, as he
concluded his invocation.

'Did I laugh?' said the hag, absently.

'She is in her dotage,' whispered Glaucus: as he said this, he caught
the eye of the hag fixed upon him with a malignant and vivid glare.

'Thou liest!' said she, abruptly.

'Thou art an uncourteous welcomer,' returned Glaucus.

'Hush! provoke her not, dear Glaucus!' whispered Ione.

'I will tell thee why I laughed when I discovered ye were lovers,' said
the old woman.  'It was because it is a pleasure to the old and withered
to look upon young hearts like yours--and to know the time will come
when you will loathe each other--loathe--loathe--ha!--ha!--ha!'

It was now Ione's turn to pray against the unpleasing prophecy.

'The gods forbid!' said she.  'Yet, poor woman, thou knowest little of
love, or thou wouldst know that it never changes.'

'Was I young once, think ye?' returned the hag, quickly; 'and am I old,
and hideous, and deathly now?  Such as is the form, so is the heart.'
With these words she sank again into a stillness profound and fearful,
as if the cessation of life itself.

'Hast thou dwelt here long?' said Glaucus, after a pause, feeling
uncomfortably oppressed beneath a silence so appalling.

'Ah, long!--yes.'

'It is but a drear abode.'

'Ha! thou mayst well say that--Hell is beneath us!' replied the hag,
pointing her bony finger to the earth.  'And I will tell thee a
secret--the dim things below are preparing wrath for ye above--you, the
young, and the thoughtless, and the beautiful.'

'Thou utterest but evil words, ill becoming the hospitable,' said
Glaucus; 'and in future I will brave the tempest rather than thy
welcome.'

'Thou wilt do well.  None should ever seek me--save the wretched!'

'And why the wretched?' asked the Athenian.

'I am the witch of the mountain,' replied the sorceress, with a ghastly
grin; 'my trade is to give hope to the hopeless: for the crossed in love
I have philtres; for the avaricious, promises of treasure; for the
malicious, potions of revenge; for the happy and the good, I have only
what life has--curses!  Trouble me no more.

With this the grim tenant of the cave relapsed into a silence so
obstinate and sullen, that Glaucus in vain endeavored to draw her into
farther conversation.  She did not evince, by any alteration of her
locked and rigid features, that she even heard him.  Fortunately,
however, the storm, which was brief as violent, began now to relax; the
rain grew less and less fierce; and at last, as the clouds parted, the
moon burst forth in the purple opening of heaven, and streamed clear and
full into that desolate abode.  Never had she shone, perhaps, on a group
more worthy of the painter's art.  The young, the all-beautiful Ione,
seated by that rude fire--her lover already forgetful of the presence of
the hag, at her feet, gazing upward to her face, and whispering sweet
words--the pale and affrighted slave at a little distance--and the
ghastly hag resting her deadly eyes upon them; yet seemingly serene and
fearless (for the companionship of love hath such power) were these
beautiful beings, things of another sphere, in that dark and unholy
cavern, with its gloomy quaintness of appurtenance.  The fox regarded
them from his corner with his keen and fiery eye: and as Glaucus now
turned towards the witch, he perceived for the first time, just under
her seat, the bright gaze and crested head of a large snake: whether it
was that the vivid coloring of the Athenian's cloak, thrown over the
shoulders of Ione, attracted the reptile's anger--its crest began to
glow and rise, as if menacing and preparing itself to spring upon the
Neapolitan--Glaucus caught quickly at one of the half-burned logs upon
the hearth--and, as if enraged at the action, the snake came forth from
its shelter, and with a loud hiss raised itself on end till its height
nearly approached that of the Greek.

'Witch!' cried Glaucus, 'command thy creature, or thou wilt see it
dead.'

'It has been despoiled of its venom!' said the witch, aroused at his
threat; but ere the words had left her lip, the snake had sprung upon
Glaucus; quick and watchful, the agile Greek leaped lightly aside, and
struck so fell and dexterous a blow on the head of the snake, that it
fell prostrate and writhing among the embers of the fire.

The hag sprung up, and stood confronting Glaucus with a face which would
have befitted the fiercest of the Furies, so utterly dire and wrathful
was its expression--yet even in horror and ghastliness preserving the
outline and trace of beauty--and utterly free from that coarse grotesque
at which the imaginations of the North have sought the source of terror.
'Thou hast,' said she, in a slow and steady voice--which belied the
expression of her face, so much was it passionless and calm--'thou hast
had shelter under my roof, and warmth at my hearth; thou hast returned
evil for good; thou hast smitten and haply slain the thing that loved me
and was mine: nay, more, the creature, above all others, consecrated to
gods and deemed venerable by man,--now hear thy punishment.  By the
moon, who is the guardian of the sorceress--by Orcus, who is the
treasurer of wrath--I curse thee! and thou art cursed!  May thy love be
blasted--may thy name be blackened--may the infernals mark thee--may thy
heart wither and scorch--may thy last hour recall to thee the prophet
voice of the Saga of Vesuvius!  And thou,' she added, turning sharply
towards Ione, and raising her right arm, when Glaucus burst impetuously
on her speech:

'Hag!' cried he, 'forbear!  Me thou hast cursed, and I commit myself to
the gods--I defy and scorn thee! but breathe but one word against yon
maiden, and I will convert the oath on thy foul lips to thy dying groan.
Beware!'

'I have done,' replied the hag, laughing wildly; 'for in thy doom is she
who loves thee accursed.  And not the less, that I heard her lips
breathe thy name, and know by what word to commend thee to the demons.
Glaucus--thou art doomed!' So saying, the witch turned from the
Athenian, and kneeling down beside her wounded favorite, which she
dragged from the hearth, she turned to them her face no more.

'O Glaucus!' said Ione, greatly terrified, 'what have we done?--Let us
hasten from this place; the storm has ceased.  Good mistress, forgive
him--recall thy words--he meant but to defend himself--accept this
peace-offering to unsay the said': and Ione, stooping, placed her purse
on the hag's lap.

'Away!' said she, bitterly--'away!  The oath once woven the Fates only
can untie.  Away!'

'Come, dearest!' said Glaucus, impatiently.  'Thinkest thou that the
gods above us or below hear the impotent ravings of dotage?  Come!'

Long and loud rang the echoes of the cavern with the dread laugh of the
Saga--she deigned no further reply.

The lovers breathed more freely when they gained the open air: yet the
scene they had witnessed, the words and the laughter of the witch, still
fearfully dwelt with Ione; and even Glaucus could not thoroughly shake
off the impression they bequeathed.  The storm had subsided--save, now
and then, a low thunder muttered at the distance amidst the darker
clouds, or a momentary flash of lightning affronted the sovereignty of
the moon.  With some difficulty they regained the road, where they found
the vehicle already sufficiently repaired for their departure, and the
carrucarius calling loudly upon Hercules to tell him where his charge
had vanished.

Glaucus vainly endeavored to cheer the exhausted spirits of Ione; and
scarce less vainly to recover the elastic tone of his own natural
gaiety.  They soon arrived before the gate of the city: as it opened to
them, a litter borne by slaves impeded the way.

'It is too late for egress,' cried the sentinel to the inmate of the
litter.

'Not so,' said a voice, which the lovers started to hear; it was a voice
they well recognized.  'I am bound to the villa of Marcus Polybius.  I
shall return shortly.  I am Arbaces the Egyptian.'

The scruples of him at the gate were removed, and the litter passed
close beside the carriage that bore the lovers.

'Arbaces, at this hour!--scarce recovered too, methinks!--Whither and
for what can he leave the city?' said Glaucus.

'Alas!' replied Ione, bursting into tears, 'my soul feels still more and
more the omen of evil.  Preserve us, O ye Gods! or at least,' she
murmured inly, 'preserve my Glaucus!'



Chapter X

THE LORD OF THE BURNING BELT AND HIS MINION.  FATE WRITES HER PROPHECY
IN RED LETTERS, BUT WHO SHALL READ THEM?

ARBACES had tarried only till the cessation of the tempest allowed him,
under cover of night, to seek the Saga of Vesuvius.  Borne by those of
his trustier slaves in whom in all more secret expeditions he was
accustomed to confide, he lay extended along his litter, and resigning
his sanguine heart to the contemplation of vengeance gratified and love
possessed.  The slaves in so short a journey moved very little slower
than the ordinary pace of mules; and Arbaces soon arrived at the
commencement of a narrow path, which the lovers had not been fortunate
enough to discover; but which, skirting the thick vines, led at once to
the habitation of the witch.  Here he rested the litter; and bidding his
slaves conceal themselves and the vehicle among the vines from the
observation of any chance passenger, he mounted alone, with steps still
feeble but supported by a long staff, the drear and sharp ascent.

Not a drop of rain fell from the tranquil heaven; but the moisture
dripped mournfully from the laden boughs of the vine, and now and then
collected in tiny pools in the crevices and hollows of the rocky way.

'Strange passions these for a philosopher,' thought Arbaces, 'that lead
one like me just new from the bed of death, and lapped even in health
amidst the roses of luxury, across such nocturnal paths as this; but
Passion and Vengeance treading to their goal can make an Elysium of a
Tartarus.' High, clear, and melancholy shone the moon above the road of
that dark wayfarer, glossing herself in every pool that lay before him,
and sleeping in shadow along the sloping mount. He saw before him the
same light that had guided the steps of his intended victims, but, no
longer contrasted by the blackened clouds, it shone less redly clear.

He paused, as at length he approached the mouth of the cavern, to
recover breath; and then, with his wonted collected and stately mien, he
crossed the unhallowed threshold.

The fox sprang up at the ingress of this newcomer, and by a long howl
announced another visitor to his mistress.

The witch had resumed her seat, and her aspect of gravelike and grim
repose. By her feet, upon a bed of dry weeds which half covered it, lay
the wounded snake; but the quick eye of the Egyptian caught its scales
glittering in the reflected light of the opposite fire, as it
writhed--now contracting, now lengthening, its folds, in pain and
unsated anger.

'Down, slave!' said the witch, as before, to the fox; and, as before,
the animal dropped to the ground--mute, but vigilant.

'Rise, servant of Nox and Erebus!' said Arbaces, commandingly; 'a
superior in thine art salutes thee! rise, and welcome him.'

At these words the hag turned her gaze upon the Egyptian's towering form
and dark features.  She looked long and fixedly upon him, as he stood
before her in his Oriental robe, and folded arms, and steadfast and
haughty brow.  'Who art thou,' she said at last, 'that callest thyself
greater in art than the Saga of the Burning Fields, and the daughter of
the perished Etrurian race?'

'I am he,' answered Arbaces, 'from whom all cultivators of magic, from
north to south, from east to west, from the Ganges and the Nile to the
vales of Thessaly and the shores of the yellow Tiber, have stooped to
learn.'

'There is but one such man in these places,' answered the witch, 'whom
the men of the outer world, unknowing his loftier attributes and more
secret fame, call Arbaces the Egyptian: to us of a higher nature and
deeper knowledge, his rightful appellation is Hermes of the Burning
Girdle.'

'Look again, returned Arbaces: 'I am he.'

As he spoke he drew aside his robe, and revealed a cincture seemingly of
fire, that burned around his waist, clasped in the centre by a plate
whereon was engraven some sign apparently vague and unintelligible but
which was evidently not unknown to the Saga.  She rose hastily, and
threw herself at the feet of Arbaces.  'I have seen, then,' said she, in
a voice of deep humility, 'the Lord of the Mighty Girdle--vouchsafe my
homage.'

'Rise,' said the Egyptian; 'I have need of thee.'

So saying, he placed himself on the same log of wood on which Ione had
rested before, and motioned to the witch to resume her seat.

'Thou sayest,' said he, as she obeyed, 'that thou art a daughter of the
ancient Etrurian tribes; the mighty walls of whose rock-built cities yet
frown above the robber race that hath seized upon their ancient reign.
Partly came those tribes from Greece, partly were they exiles from a
more burning and primeval soil.  In either case art thou of Egyptian
lineage, for the Grecian masters of the aboriginal helot were among the
restless sons whom the Nile banished from her bosom.  Equally, then, O
Saga! thy descent is from ancestors that swore allegiance to mine own.
By birth as by knowledge, art thou the subject of Arbaces.  Hear me,
then, and obey!'

The witch bowed her head.

'Whatever art we possess in sorcery,' continued Arbaces, 'we are
sometimes driven to natural means to attain our object.  The ring and
the crystal, and the ashes and the herbs, do not give unerring
divinations; neither do the higher mysteries of the moon yield even the
possessor of the girdle a dispensation from the necessity of employing
ever and anon human measures for a human object.  Mark me, then: thou
art deeply skilled, methinks, in the secrets of the more deadly herbs;
thou knowest those which arrest life, which burn and scorch the soul
from out her citadel, or freeze the channels of young blood into that
ice which no sun can melt.  Do I overrate thy skill?  Speak, and truly!'

'Mighty Hermes, such lore is, indeed, mine own.  Deign to look at these
ghostly and corpse-like features; they have waned from the hues of life
merely by watching over the rank herbs which simmer night and day in yon
cauldron.'

The Egyptian moved his seat from so unblessed or so unhealthful a
vicinity as the witch spoke.

'It is well,' said he; 'thou hast learned that maxim of all the deeper
knowledge which saith, "Despise the body to make wise the mind." But to
thy task.  There cometh to thee by to-morrow's starlight a vain maiden,
seeking of thine art a love-charm to fascinate from another the eyes
that should utter but soft tales to her own: instead of thy philtres,
give the maiden one of thy most powerful poisons.  Let the lover breathe
his vows to the Shades.'

The witch trembled from head to foot.

'Oh pardon! pardon! dread master,' said she, falteringly, 'but this I
dare not.  The law in these cities is sharp and vigilant; they will
seize, they will slay me.'

'For what purpose, then, thy herbs and thy potions, vain Saga?' said
Arbaces, sneeringly.

The witch hid her loathsome face with her hands.

'Oh! years ago,' said she, in a voice unlike her usual tones, so
plaintive was it, and so soft, 'I was not the thing that I am now.  I
loved, I fancied myself beloved.'

'And what connection hath thy love, witch, with my commands?' said
Arbaces, impetuously.

'Patience,' resumed the witch; 'patience, I implore.  I loved! another
and less fair than I--yes, by Nemesis! less fair--allured from me my
chosen.  I was of that dark Etrurian tribe to whom most of all were
known the secrets of the gloomier magic.  My mother was herself a saga:
she shared the resentment of her child; from her hands I received the
potion that was to restore me his love; and from her, also, the poison
that was to destroy my rival.  Oh, crush me, dread walls! my trembling
hands mistook the phials, my lover fell indeed at my feet; but dead!
dead! dead!  Since then, what has been life to me I became suddenly old,
I devoted myself to the sorceries of my race; still by an irresistible
impulse I curse myself with an awful penance; still I seek the most
noxious herbs; still I concoct the poisons; still I imagine that I am to
give them to my hated rival; still I pour them into the phial; still I
fancy that they shall blast her beauty to the dust; still I wake and see
the quivering body, the foaming lips, the glazing eyes of my
Aulus--murdered, and by me!'

The skeleton frame of the witch shook beneath strong convulsions.

Arbaces gazed upon her with a curious though contemptuous eye.

'And this foul thing has yet human emotions!' thought he; 'still she
cowers over the ashes of the same fire that consumes Arbaces!--Such are
we all! Mystic is the tie of those mortal passions that unite the
greatest and the least.'

He did not reply till she had somewhat recovered herself, and now sat
rocking to and fro in her seat, with glassy eyes fixed on the opposite
flame, and large tears rolling down her livid cheeks.

'A grievous tale is thine, in truth,' said Arbaces.  'But these emotions
are fit only for our youth--age should harden our hearts to all things
but ourselves; as every year adds a scale to the shell-fish, so should
each year wall and incrust the heart.  Think of those frenzies no more!
And now, listen to me again!  By the revenge that was dear to thee, I
command thee to obey me! it is for vengeance that I seek thee!  This
youth whom I would sweep from my path has crossed me, despite my
spells:--this thing of purple and broidery, of smiles and glances,
soulless and mindless, with no charm but that of beauty--accursed be
it!--this insect--this Glaucus--I tell thee, by Orcus and by Nemesis, he
must die.'

And working himself up at every word, the Egyptian, forgetful of his
debility--of his strange companion--of everything but his own vindictive
rage, strode, with large and rapid steps, the gloomy cavern.

'Glaucus! saidst thou, mighty master!' said the witch, abruptly; and her
dim eye glared at the name with all that fierce resentment at the memory
of small affronts so common amongst the solitary and the shunned.

'Ay, so he is called; but what matters the name?  Let it not be heard as
that of a living man three days from this date!'

'Hear me!' said the witch, breaking from a short reverie into which she
was plunged after this last sentence of the Egyptian. 'Hear me! I am thy
thing and thy slave! spare me!  If I give to the maiden thou speakest of
that which would destroy the life of Glaucus, I shall be surely
detected--the dead ever find avengers.  Nay, dread man! if thy visit to
me be tracked, if thy hatred to Glaucus be known, thou mayest have need
of thy archest magic to protect thyself!'

'Ha!' said Arbaces, stopping suddenly short; and as a proof of that
blindness with which passion darkens the eyes even of the most acute,
this was the first time when the risk that he himself ran by this method
of vengeance had occurred to a mind ordinarily wary and circumspect.

'But,' continued the witch, 'if instead of that which shall arrest the
heart, I give that which shall sear and blast the brain--which shall
make him who quaffs it unfit for the uses and career of life--an abject,
raving, benighted thing--smiting sense to drivelling youth to
dotage--will not thy vengeance be equally sated--thy object equally
attained?'

'Oh, witch! no longer the servant, but the sister--the equal of
Arbaces--how much brighter is woman's wit, even in vengeance, than ours!
how much more exquisite than death is such a doom!'

'And,' continued the hag, gloating over her fell scheme, 'in this is but
little danger; for by ten thousand methods, which men forbear to seek,
can our victim become mad.  He may have been among the vines and seen a
nymph--or the vine itself may have had the same effect--ha, ha! they
never inquire too scrupulously into these matters in which the gods may
be agents. And let the worst arrive--let it be known that it is a
love-charm--why, madness is a common effect of philtres; and even the
fair she that gave it finds indulgence in the excuse. Mighty Hermes,
have I ministered to thee cunningly?'

'Thou shalt have twenty years' longer date for this,' returned Arbaces.
'I will write anew the epoch of thy fate on the face of the pale
stars--thou shalt not serve in vain the Master of the Flaming Belt.  And
here, Saga, carve thee out, by these golden tools, a warmer cell in this
dreary cavern--one service to me shall countervail a thousand
divinations by sieve and shears to the gaping rustics.' So saying, he
cast upon the floor a heavy purse, which clinked not unmusically to the
ear of the hag, who loved the consciousness of possessing the means to
purchase comforts she disdained. 'Farewell,' said Arbaces, 'fail
not--outwatch the stars in concocting thy beverage--thou shalt lord it
over thy sisters at the Walnut-tree,' when thou tellest them that thy
patron and thy friend is Hermes the Egyptian. To-morrow night we meet
again.'

He stayed not to hear the valediction or the thanks of the witch; with a
quick step he passed into the moonlit air, and hastened down the
mountain.

The witch, who followed his steps to the threshold, stood at the
entrance of the cavern, gazing fixedly on his receding form; and as the
sad moonlight streamed over her shadowy form and deathlike face,
emerging from the dismal rocks, it seemed as if one gifted, indeed, by
supernatural magic had escaped from the dreary Orcus; and, the foremost
of its ghostly throng, stood at its black portals--vainly summoning his
return, or vainly sighing to rejoin him. The hag, then slowly
re-entering the cave, groaningly picked up the heavy purse, took the
lamp from its stand, and, passing to the remotest depth of her cell, a
black and abrupt passage, which was not visible, save at a near
approach, closed round as it was with jutting and sharp crags, yawned
before her: she went several yards along this gloomy path, which sloped
gradually downwards, as if towards the bowels of the earth, and, lifting
a stone, deposited her treasure in a hole beneath, which, as the lamp
pierced its secrets, seemed already to contain coins of various value,
wrung from the credulity or gratitude of her visitors.

'I love to look at you,' said she, apostrophising the moneys; 'for when
I see you I feel that I am indeed of power.  And I am to have twenty
years' longer life to increase your store! O thou great Hermes!'

She replaced the stone, and continued her path onward for some paces,
when she stopped before a deep irregular fissure in the earth.  Here, as
she bent--strange, rumbling, hoarse, and distant sounds might be heard,
while ever and anon, with a loud and grating noise which, to use a
homely but faithful simile, seemed to resemble the grinding of steel
upon wheels, volumes of streaming and dark smoke issued forth, and
rushed spirally along the cavern.

'The Shades are noisier than their wont,' said the hag, shaking her grey
locks; and, looking into the cavity, she beheld, far down, glimpses of a
long streak of light, intensely but darkly red. 'Strange!' she said,
shrinking back; 'it is only within the last two days that dull, deep
light hath been visible--what can it portend?'

The fox, who had attended the steps of his fell mistress, uttered a
dismal howl, and ran cowering back to the inner cave; a cold shuddering
seized the hag herself at the cry of the animal, which, causeless as it
seemed, the superstitions of the time considered deeply ominous.  She
muttered her placatory charm, and tottered back into her cavern, where,
amidst her herbs and incantations, she prepared to execute the orders of
the Egyptian.

'He called me dotard,' said she, as the smoke curled from the hissing
cauldron: 'when the jaws drop, and the grinders fall, and the heart
scarce beats, it is a pitiable thing to dote; but when,' she added, with
a savage and exulting grin, 'the young, and the beautiful, and the
strong, are suddenly smitten into idiocy--ah, that is terrible!  Burn,
flame--simmer herb--swelter toad--I cursed him, and he shall be cursed!'

On that night, and at the same hour which witnessed the dark and unholy
interview between Arbaces and the Saga, Apaecides was baptized.


Chapter XI

PROGRESS OF EVENTS.  THE PLOT THICKENS.  THE WEB IS WOVEN, BUT THE NET
CHANGES HANDS.

'AND you have the courage then, Julia, to seek the Witch of Vesuvius
this evening; in company, too, with that fearful man?'

'Why, Nydia?' replied Julia, timidly; 'dost thou really think there is
anything to dread?  These old hags, with their enchanted mirrors, their
trembling sieves, and their moon-gathered herbs, are, I imagine, but
crafty impostors, who have learned, perhaps, nothing but the very charm
for which I apply to their skill, and which is drawn but from the
knowledge of the field's herbs and simples. Wherefore should I dread?'

'Dost thou not fear thy companion?'

'What, Arbaces?  By Dian, I never saw lover more courteous than that
same magician!  And were he not so dark, he would be even handsome.'

Blind as she was, Nydia had the penetration to perceive that Julia's
mind was not one that the gallantries of Arbaces were likely to terrify.
She therefore dissuaded her no more: but nursed in her excited heart the
wild and increasing desire to know if sorcery had indeed a spell to
fascinate love to love.

'Let me go with thee, noble Julia,' said she at length; 'my presence is
no protection, but I should like to be beside thee to the last.'

'Thine offer pleases me much,' replied the daughter of Diomed. 'Yet how
canst thou contrive it? we may not return until late, they will miss
thee.'

'Ione is indulgent,' replied Nydia.  'If thou wilt permit me to sleep
beneath thy roof, I will say that thou, an early patroness and friend,
hast invited me to pass the day with thee, and sing thee my Thessalian
songs; her courtesy will readily grant to thee so light a boon.'

'Nay, ask for thyself!' said the haughty Julia.  'I stoop to request no
favor from the Neapolitan!'

'Well, be it so.  I will take my leave now; make my request, which I
know will be readily granted, and return shortly.'

'Do so; and thy bed shall be prepared in my own chamber.' With that,
Nydia left the fair Pompeian.

On her way back to Ione she was met by the chariot of Glaucus, on whose
fiery and curveting steeds was riveted the gaze of the crowded street.

He kindly stopped for a moment to speak to the flower-girl.

