forest is in a sad state, reverend sir. It would seem as if the enemy of
mankind, by means of his abominable agents, were permitted to exercise
uncontrolled dominion over it. I must needs say, the forlorn condition
of the people reflects little credit on those who have them in charge.
The powers of darkness could never have prevailed to such an extent if
duly resisted."

"I lament to hear you say so, good Master Nowell," replied the rector.
"I have done my best, I assure you, to keep my small and
widely-scattered flock together, and to save them from the ravening
wolves and cunning foxes that infest the country; and if now and then
some sheep have gone astray, or a poor lamb, as in the instance of Mary
Baldwyn, hath fallen a victim, I am scarcely to blame for the mischance.
Rather let me say, sir, that you, as an active and zealous magistrate,
should take the matter in hand, and by severe dealing with the
offenders, arrest the progress of the evil. No defence, spiritual or
otherwise, as yet set up against them, has proved effectual."

"Justly remarked, reverend sir," observed Potts, looking up from the
memorandum book in which he was writing, "and I am sure your advice will
not be lost upon Master Roger Nowell. As regards the persons who may be
afflicted by witchcraft, hath not our sagacious monarch observed, that
'There are three kind of folks who may be tempted or troubled: the
wicked for their horrible sins, to punish them in the like measure; the
godly that are sleeping in any great sins or infirmities, and weakness
in faith, to waken them up the faster by such an uncouth form; and even
some of the best, that their patience may be tried before the world as
Job's was tried. For why may not God use any kind of extraordinary
punishment, when it pleases Him, as well as the ordinary rods of
sickness, or other adversities?'"

"Very true, sir," replied Holden. "And we are undergoing this severe
trial now. Fortunate are they who profit by it!"

"Hear what is said further, sir, by the king," pursued Potts. "'No
man,' declares that wise prince, 'ought to presume so far as to promise
any impunity to himself.' But further on he gives us courage, for he
adds, 'and yet we ought not to be afraid for that, of any thing that the
devil and his wicked instruments can do against us, for we daily fight
against him in a hundred other ways, and therefore as a valiant captain
affrays no more being at the combat, nor stays from his purpose for the
rummishing shot of a cannon, nor the small clack of a pistolet; not
being certain what may light on him; even so ought we boldly to go
forward in fighting against the devil without any greater terror, for
these his rarest weapons, than the ordinary, whereof we have daily the
proof.'"

"His majesty is quite right," observed Holden, "and I am glad to hear
his convincing words so judiciously cited. I myself have no fear of
these wicked instruments of Satan."

"In what manner, may I ask, have you proved your courage, sir?" inquired
Roger Nowell. "Have you preached against them, and denounced their
wickedness, menacing them with the thunders of the Church?"

"I cannot say I have," replied Holden, rather abashed, "but I shall
henceforth adopt a very different course.--Ah! here comes the ale!" he
added, taking the foaming tankard from Bess; "this is the best cordial
wherewith to sustain one's courage in these trying times."

"Some remedy must be found for this intolerable grievance," observed
Roger Nowell, after a few moments' reflection. "Till this morning I was
not aware of the extent of the evil, but supposed that the two malignant
hags, who seem to reign supreme here, confined their operations to
blighting corn, maiming cattle, turning milk sour; and even these
reports I fancied were greatly exaggerated; but I now find, from what I
have seen at Sabden and elsewhere, that they fall very far short of the
reality."

"It would be difficult to increase the darkness of the picture," said
the chirurgeon; "but what remedy will you apply?"

"The cautery, sir," replied Potts,--"the actual cautery--we will burn
out this plague-spot. The two old hags and their noxious brood shall be
brought to the stake. That will effect a radical cure."

"It may when it is accomplished, but I fear it will be long ere that
happens," replied the chirurgeon, shaking his head doubtfully. "Are you
acquainted with Mother Demdike's history, sir?" he added to Potts.

"In part," replied the attorney; "but I shall be glad to hear any thing
you may have to bring forward on the subject."

"The peculiarity in her case," observed Sudall, "and the circumstance
distinguishing her dark and dread career from that of all other witches
is, that it has been shaped out by destiny. When an infant, a
malediction was pronounced upon her head by the unfortunate Abbot
Paslew. She is also the offspring of a man reputed to have bartered his
soul to the Enemy of Mankind, while her mother was a witch. Both parents
perished lamentably, about the time of Paslew's execution at Whalley."

"It is a pity their miserable infant did not perish with them," observed
Holden. "How much crime and misery would have been spared!"

"It was otherwise ordained," replied Sudall. "Bereft of her parents in
this way, the infant was taken charge of and reared by Dame Croft, the
miller's wife of Whalley; but even in those early days she exhibited
such a malicious and vindictive disposition, and became so unmanageable,
that the good dame was glad to get rid of her, and sent her into the
forest, where she found a home at Rough Lee, then occupied by Miles
Nutter, the grandfather of the late Richard Nutter."

"Aha!" exclaimed Potts, "was Mother Demdike so early connected with that
family? I must make a note of that circumstance."

"She remained at Rough Lee for some years," returned Sudall, "and though
accounted of an ill disposition, there was nothing to be alleged against
her at the time; though afterwards, it was said, that some mishaps that
befell the neighbours were owing to her agency, and that she was always
attended by a familiar in the form of a rat or a mole. Whether this were
so or not, I cannot say; but it is certain that she helped Miles Nutter
to get rid of his wife, and procured him a second spouse, in return for
which services he bestowed upon her an old ruined tower on his domains."

"You mean Malkin Tower?" said Nicholas.

"Ay, Malkin Tower," replied the chirurgeon. "There is a legend connected
with that structure, which I will relate to you anon, if you desire it.
But to proceed. Scarcely had Bess Demdike taken up her abode in this
lone tower, than it began to be rumoured that she was a witch, and
attended sabbaths on the summit of Pendle Hill, and on Rimington Moor.
Few would consort with her, and ill-luck invariably attended those with
whom she quarrelled. Though of hideous and forbidding aspect, and with
one eye lower set than the other, she had subtlety enough to induce a
young man named Sothernes to marry her, and two children, a son and a
daughter, were the fruit of the union."

"The daughter I have seen at Whalley," observed Potts; "but I have never
encountered the son."

"Christopher Demdike still lives, I believe," replied the chirurgeon,
"though what has become of him I know not, for he has quitted these
parts. He is as ill-reputed as his mother, and has the same strange and
fearful look about the eyes."

"I shall recognise him if I see him," observed Potts.

"You are scarcely likely to meet him," returned Sudall, "for, as I have
said, he has left the forest. But to return to my story. The marriage
state was little suitable to Bess Demdike, and in five years she
contrived to free herself from her husband's restraint, and ruled alone
in the tower. Her malignant influence now began to be felt throughout
the whole district, and by dint of menaces and positive acts of
mischief, she extorted all she required. Whosoever refused her requests
speedily experienced her resentment. When she was in the fulness of her
power, a rival sprang up in the person of Anne Whittle, since known by
the name of Chattox, which she obtained in marriage, and this woman
disputed Bess Demdike's supremacy. Each strove to injure the adherents
of her rival--and terrible was the mischief they wrought. In the end,
however, Mother Demdike got the upper hand. Years have flown over the
old hag's head, and her guilty career has been hitherto attended with
impunity. Plans have been formed to bring her to justice, but they have
ever failed. And so in the case of old Chattox. Her career has been as
baneful and as successful as that of Mother Demdike."

"But their course is wellnigh run," said Potts, "and the time is come
for the extirpation of the old serpents."

"Ah! who is that at the window?" cried Sudall; "but that you are sitting
near me, I should declare you were looking in at us."

"It must be Master Potts's brother, the reeve of the forest," observed
Nicholas, with a laugh.

"Heed him not," cried the attorney, angrily, "but let us have the
promised legend of Malkin Tower."

"Willingly!" replied the chirurgeon. "But before I begin I must recruit
myself with a can of ale."

The flagon being set before him, Sudall commenced his story:

    The Legend of Malkin Tower.

    "On the brow of a high hill forming part of the range of
    Pendle, and commanding an extensive view over the forest, and
    the wild and mountainous region around it, stands a stern
    solitary tower. Old as the Anglo-Saxons, and built as a
    stronghold by Wulstan, a Northumbrian thane, in the time of
    Edmund or Edred, it is circular in form and very lofty, and
    serves as a landmark to the country round. Placed high up in
    the building the door was formerly reached by a steep flight
    of stone steps, but these were removed some fifty or sixty
    years ago by Mother Demdike, and a ladder capable of being
    raised or let down at pleasure substituted for them,
    affording the only apparent means of entrance. The tower is
    otherwise inaccessible, the walls being of immense thickness,
    with no window lower than five-and-twenty feet from the
    ground, though it is thought there must be a secret outlet;
    for the old witch, when she wants to come forth, does not
    wait for the ladder to be let down. But this may be otherwise
    explained. Internally there are three floors, the lowest
    being placed on a level with the door, and this is the
    apartment chiefly occupied by the hag. In the centre of this
    room is a trapdoor opening upon a deep vault, which forms the
    basement story of the structure, and which was once used as a
    dungeon, but is now tenanted, it is said, by a fiend, who can
    be summoned by the witch on stamping her foot. Round the room
    runs a gallery contrived in the thickness of the walls, while
    the upper chambers are gained by a secret staircase, and
    closed by movable stones, the machinery of which is only
    known to the inmate of the tower. All the rooms are lighted
    by narrow loopholes. Thus you will see that the fortress is
    still capable of sustaining a siege, and old Demdike has been
    heard to declare that she would hold it for a month against a
    hundred men. Hitherto it has proved impregnable.

    "On the Norman invasion, Malkin Tower was held by Ughtred, a
    descendant of Wulstan, who kept possession of Pendle Forest
    and the hills around it, and successfully resisted the
    aggressions of the conquerors. His enemies affirmed he was
    assisted by a demon, whom he had propitiated by some fearful
    sacrifice made in the tower, and the notion seemed borne out
    by the success uniformly attending his conflicts. Ughtred's
    prowess was stained by cruelty and rapine. Merciless in the
    treatment of his captives, putting them to death by horrible
    tortures, or immuring them in the dark and noisome dungeon of
    his tower, he would hold his revels over their heads, and
    deride their groans. Heaps of treasure, obtained by pillage,
    were secured by him in the tower. From his frequent acts of
    treachery, and the many foul murders he perpetrated, Ughtred
    was styled the 'Scourge of the Normans.' For a long period he
    enjoyed complete immunity from punishment; but after the
    siege of York, and the defeat of the insurgents, his
    destruction was vowed by Ilbert de Lacy, lord of
    Blackburnshire, and this fierce chieftain set fire to part of
    the forest in which the Saxon thane and his followers were
    concealed; drove them to Malkin Tower; took it after an
    obstinate and prolonged defence, and considerable loss to
    himself, and put them all to the sword, except the leader,
    whom he hanged from the top of his own fortress. In the
    dungeon were found many carcasses, and the greater part of
    Ughtred's treasure served to enrich the victor.

    "Once again, in the reign of Henry VI., Malkin Tower became a
    robber's stronghold, and gave protection to a freebooter
    named Blackburn, who, with a band of daring and desperate
    marauders, took advantage of the troubled state of the
    country, ravaged it far and wide, and committed unheard of
    atrocities, even levying contributions upon the Abbeys of
    Whalley and Salley, and the heads of these religious
    establishments were glad to make terms with him to save their
    herds and stores, the rather that all attempts to dislodge
    him from his mountain fastness, and destroy his band, had
    failed. Blackburn seemed to enjoy the same kind of protection
    as Ughtred, and practised the same atrocities, torturing and
    imprisoning his captives unless they were heavily ransomed.
    He also led a life of wildest licence, and, when not engaged
    in some predatory exploit, spent his time in carousing with
    his followers.

    "Upon one occasion it chanced that he made a visit in
    disguise to Whalley Abbey, and, passing the little hermitage
    near the church, beheld the votaress who tenanted it. This
    was Isole de Heton. Ravished by her wondrous beauty,
    Blackburn soon found an opportunity of making his passion
    known to her, and his handsome though fierce lineaments
    pleasing her, he did not long sigh in vain. He frequently
    visited her in the garb of a Cistertian monk, and, being
    taken for one of the brethren, his conduct brought great
    scandal upon the Abbey. The abandoned votaress bore him a
    daughter, and the infant was conveyed away by the lover, and
    placed under the care of a peasant's wife, at Barrowford.
    From that child sprung Bess Blackburn, the mother of old
    Demdike; so that the witch is a direct descendant of Isole de
    Heton.

    "Notwithstanding all precautions, Isole's dark offence became
    known, and she would have paid the penalty of it at the
    stake, if she had not fled. In scaling Whalley Nab, in the
    woody heights of which she was to remain concealed till her
    lover could come to her, she fell from a rock, shattering her
    limbs, and disfiguring her features. Some say she was lamed
    for life, and became as hideous as she had heretofore been
    lovely; but this is erroneous, for apprehensive of such a
    result, attended by the loss of her lover, she invoked the
    powers of darkness, and proffered her soul in return for five
    years of unimpaired beauty.

    "The compact was made, and when Blackburn came he found her
    more beautiful than ever. Enraptured, he conveyed her to
    Malkin Tower, and lived with her there in security, laughing
    to scorn the menaces of Abbot Eccles, by whom he was
    excommunicated.

    "Time went on, and as Isole's charms underwent no change, her
    lover's ardour continued unabated. Five years passed in
    guilty pleasures, and the last day of the allotted term
    arrived. No change was manifest in Isole's demeanour; neither
    remorse nor fear were exhibited by her. Never had she
    appeared more lovely, never in higher or more exuberant
    spirits. She besought her lover, who was still madly
    intoxicated by her infernal charms, to give a banquet that
    night to ten of his trustiest followers. He willingly
    assented, and bade them to the feast. They ate and drank
    merrily, and the gayest of the company was the lovely Isole.
    Her spirits seemed somewhat too wild even to Blackburn, but
    he did not check her, though surprised at the excessive
    liveliness and freedom of her sallies. Her eyes flashed like
    fire, and there was not a man present but was madly in love
    with her, and ready to dispute for her smiles with his
    captain.

    "The wine flowed freely, and song and jest went on till
    midnight. When the hour struck, Isole filled a cup to the
    brim, and called upon them to pledge her. All arose, and
    drained their goblets enthusiastically. 'It was a farewell
    cup,' she said; 'I am going away with one of you.' 'How!'
    exclaimed Blackburn, in angry surprise. 'Let any one but
    touch your hand, and I will strike him dead at my feet.' The
    rest of the company regarded each other with surprise, and it
    was then discovered that a stranger was amongst them; a tall
    dark man, whose looks were so terrible and demoniacal that no
    one dared lay hands upon him. 'I am come,' he said, with
    fearful significance, to Isole. 'And I am ready,' she
    answered boldly. 'I will go with you were it to the
    bottomless pit,' cried Blackburn catching hold of her. 'It is
    thither I am going,' she answered with a scream of laughter.
    'I shall be glad of a companion.'

    "When the paroxysm of laughter was over, she fell down on the
    floor. Her lover would have raised her, when what was his
    horror to find that he held in his arms an old woman, with
    frightfully disfigured features, and evidently in the agonies
    of death. She fixed one look upon him and expired.

    "Terrified by the occurrence the guests hurried away, and
    when they returned next day, they found Blackburn stretched
    on the floor, and quite dead. They cast his body, together
    with that of the wretched Isole, into the vault beneath the
    room where they were lying, and then, taking possession of
    his treasure, removed to some other retreat.

    "Thenceforth, Malkin Tower became haunted. Though wholly
    deserted, lights were constantly seen shining from it at
    night, and sounds of wild revelry, succeeded by shrieks and
    groans, issued from it. The figure of Isole was often seen to
    come forth, and flit across the wastes in the direction of
    Whalley Abbey. On stormy nights a huge black cat, with
    flaming eyes, was frequently descried on the summit of the
    structure, whence it obtained its name of Grimalkin, or
    Malkin Tower. The ill-omened pile ultimately came into the
    possession of the Nutter family, but it was never tenanted,
    until assigned, as I have already mentioned, to Mother
    Demdike."

       *       *       *       *       *

The chirurgeon's marvellous story was listened to with great attention
by his auditors. Most of them were familiar with different versions of
it; but to Master Potts it was altogether new, and he made rapid notes
of it, questioning the narrator as to one or two points which appeared
to him to require explanation. Nicholas, as may be supposed, was
particularly interested in that part of the legend which referred to
Isole de Heton. He now for the first time heard of her unhallowed
intercourse with the freebooter Blackburn, of her compact on Whalley Nab
with the fiend, of her mysterious connection with Malkin Tower, and of
her being the ancestress of Mother Demdike. The consideration of all
these points, coupled with a vivid recollection of his own strange
adventure with the impious votaress at the Abbey on the previous night,
plunged him into a deep train of thought, and he began seriously to
consider whether he might not have committed some heinous sin, and,
indeed, jeopardised his soul's welfare by dancing with her. "What if I
should share the same fate as the robber Blackburn," he ruminated, "and
be dragged to perdition by her? It is a very awful reflection. But
though my fate might operate as a warning to others, I am by no means
anxious to be held up as a moral scarecrow. Rather let me take warning
myself, amend my life, abandon intemperance, which leads to all manner
of wickedness, and suffer myself no more to be ensnared by the wiles and
delusions of the tempter in the form of a fair woman. No--no--I will
alter and amend my life."

I regret, however, to say that these praiseworthy resolutions were but
transient, and that the squire, quite forgetting that the work of
reform, if intended to be really accomplished, ought to commence at
once, and by no means be postponed till the morrow, yielded to the
seductions of a fresh pottle of sack, which was presented to him at the
moment by Bess, and in taking it could not help squeezing the hand of
the bouncing hostess, and gazing at her more tenderly than became a
married man. Oh! Nicholas--Nicholas--the work of reform, I am afraid,
proceeds very slowly and imperfectly with you. Your friend, Parson.
Dewhurst, would have told you that it is much easier to form good
resolutions than to keep them.

Leaving the squire, however, to his cogitations and his sack, the
attorney to his memorandum-book, in which he was still engaged in
writing, and the others to their talk, we shall proceed to the chamber
whither the poor miller had been led by Bess. When visited by the
rector, he had been apparently soothed by the worthy man's consolatory
advice, but when left alone he speedily relapsed into his former dark
and gloomy state of mind. He did not notice Bess, who, according to
Holden's directions, placed the aquavitae bottle before him, but, as long
as she stayed, remained with his face buried in his hands. As soon as
she was gone he arose, and began to pace the room to and fro. The window
was open, and he could hear the funeral bell tolling mournfully at
intervals. Each recurrence of the dismal sound added sharpness and
intensity to his grief. His sufferings became almost intolerable, and
drove him to the very verge of despair and madness. If a weapon had
been at hand, he might have seized it, and put a sudden period to his
existence. His breast was a chaos of fierce and troubled thoughts, in
which one black and terrible idea arose and overpowered all the rest. It
was the desire of vengeance, deep and complete, upon her whom he looked
upon as the murderess of his child. He cared not how it were
accomplished so it were done; but such was the opinion he entertained of
the old hag's power, that he doubted his ability to the task. Still, as
the bell tolled on, the furies at his heart lashed and goaded him on,
and yelled in his ear revenge--revenge! Now, indeed, he was crazed with
grief and rage; he tore off handfuls of hair, plunged his nails deeply
into his breast, and while committing these and other wild excesses,
with frantic imprecations he called down Heaven's judgments on his own
head. He was in that lost and helpless state when the enemy of mankind
has power over man. Nor was the opportunity neglected; for when the
wretched Baldwyn, who, exhausted by the violence of his motions, had
leaned for a moment against the wall, he perceived to his surprise that
there was a man in the room--a small personage attired in rusty black,
whom he thought had been one of the party in the adjoining chamber.

There was an expression of mockery about this person's countenance which
did not please the miller, and he asked him, sternly, what he wanted.

"Leave off grinnin, mon," he said, fiercely, "or ey may be tempted to
tay yo be t' throttle, an may yo laugh o't wrong side o' your mouth."

"No, no, you will not, Richard Baldwyn, when you know my errand,"
replied the man. "You are thirsting for vengeance upon Mother Demdike.
You shall have it."

"Eigh, eigh, you promised me vengeance efore," cried the
miller--"vengeance by the law. Boh ey mun wait lung for it. Ey wad ha'
it swift and sure--deep and deadly. Ey wad blast her wi' curses, os hoo
blasted my poor Meary. Ey wad strike her deeod at my feet. That's my
vengeance, mon."

"You shall have it," replied the other.

"Yo talk differently fro' what yo did just now, mon," said the miller,
regarding him narrowly and distrustfully. "An yo look differently too.
There's a queer glimmer abowt your een that ey didna notice efore, and
that ey mislike."

The man laughed bitterly.

"Leave off grinnin' or begone," cried Baldwyn, furiously. And he raised
his hand to strike the man, but he instantly dropped it, appalled by a
look which the other threw at him. "Who the dule are yo?"

"The dule must answer you, since you appeal to him," replied the other,
with the same mocking smile; "but you are mistaken in supposing that you
have spoken to me before. He with whom you conversed in the other room,
resembles me in more respects than one, but he does not possess power
equal to mine. The law will not aid you against Mother Demdike. She will
escape all the snares laid for her. But she will not escape _me_."

"Who are ye?" cried the miller, his hair erecting on his head, and cold
damps breaking out upon his brow. "Yo are nah mortal, an nah good, to
tawk i' this fashion."

"Heed not who and what I am," replied the other; "I am known here as a
reeve of the forest--that is enough. Would you have vengeance on the
murtheress of your child?"

"Yeigh," rejoined Baldwyn.

"And you are willing to pay for it at the price of your soul?" demanded
the other, advancing towards him.

Baldwyn reeled. He saw at once the fearful peril in which he was placed,
and averted his gaze from the scorching glance of the reeve.

At this moment the door was tried without, and the voice of Bess was
heard, saying, "Who ha' yo got wi' yo, Ruchot; and whoy ha' yo fastened
t' door?"

"Your answer?" demanded the reeve.

"Ey canna gi' it now," replied the miller. "Come in, Bess; come in."

"Ey conna," she replied. "Open t' door, mon."

"Your answer, I say?" said the reeve.

"Gi' me an hour to think on't," said the miller.

"Agreed," replied the other. "I will be with you after the funeral."

And he sprang through the window, and disappeared before Baldwyn could
open the door and admit Bess.




CHAPTER VII.--THE PERAMBULATION OF THE BOUNDARIES.


The lane along which Richard Assheton galloped in pursuit of Mother
Chattox, made so many turns, and was, moreover, so completely hemmed in
by high banks and hedges, that he could sec nothing on either side of
him, and very little in advance; but, guided by the clatter of hoofs, he
urged Merlin to his utmost speed, fancying he should soon come up with
the fugitives. In this, however, he was deceived. The sound that had led
him on became fainter and fainter, till at last it died away altogether;
and on quitting the lane and gaining the moor, where the view was wholly
uninterrupted, no traces either of witch or reeve could be discerned.

With a feeling of angry disappointment, Richard was about to turn back,
when a large black greyhound came from out an adjoining clough, and
made towards him. The singularity of the circumstance induced him to
halt and regard the dog with attention. On nearing him, the animal
looked wistfully in his face, and seemed to invite him to follow; and
the young man was so struck by the dog's manner, that he complied, and
had not gone far when a hare of unusual size and grey with age bounded
from beneath a gorse-bush and speeded away, the greyhound starting in
pursuit.

Aware of the prevailing notion, that a witch most commonly assumed such
a form when desirous of escaping, or performing some act of mischief,
such as drying the milk of kine, Richard at once came to the conclusion
that the hare could be no other than Mother Chattox; and without pausing
to inquire what the hound could be, or why it should appear at such a
singular and apparently fortunate juncture, he at once joined the run,
and cheered on the dog with whoop and holloa.

Old as it was, apparently, the hare ran with extraordinary swiftness,
clearing every stone wall and other impediment in the way, and more than
once cunningly doubling upon its pursuers. But every feint and stratagem
were defeated by the fleet and sagacious hound, and the hunted animal at
length took to the open waste, where the run became so rapid, that
Richard had enough to do to keep up with it, though Merlin, almost as
furiously excited as his master, strained every sinew to the task.

In this way the chasers and the chased scoured the dark and heathy
plain, skirting moss-pool and clearing dyke, till they almost reached
the but-end of Pendle Hill, which rose like an impassable barrier before
them. Hitherto the chances had seemed in favour of the hare; but they
now began to turn, and as it seemed certain she must fall into the
hound's jaws, Richard expected every moment to find her resume her
natural form. The run having brought him within, a quarter of a mile of
Barley, the rude hovels composing which little booth were clearly
discernible, the young man began to think the hag's dwelling must he
among them, and that she was hurrying thither as to a place of refuge.
But before this could be accomplished, he hoped to effect her capture,
and once more cheered on the hound, and plunged his spurs into Merlin's
sides. An obstacle, however, occurred which he had not counted on.
Directly in the course taken by the hare lay a deep, disused limestone
quarry, completely screened from view by a fringe of brushwood. When
within a few yards of this pit, the hound made a dash at the flying
hare, but eluding him, the latter sprang forward, and both went over the
edge of the quarry together. Richard had wellnigh followed, and in that
case would have been inevitably dashed in pieces; but, discovering the
danger ere it was too late, by a powerful effort, which threw Merlin
upon his haunches, he pulled him back on the very brink of the pit.

The young man shuddered as he gazed into the depths of the quarry, and
saw the jagged points and heaps of broken stone that would have received
him; but he looked in vain for the old witch, whose mangled body,
together with that of the hound, he expected to behold; and he then
asked himself whether the chase might not have been a snare set for him
by the hag and her familiar, with the intent of luring him to
destruction. If so, he had been providentially preserved.

Quitting the pit, his first idea was to proceed to Barley, which was now
only a few hundred yards off, to make inquiries respecting Mother
Chattox, and ascertain whether she really dwelt there; but, on further
consideration, he judged it best to return without further delay to
Goldshaw, lest his friends, ignorant as to what had befallen him, might
become alarmed on his account; but he resolved, as soon as he had
disposed of the business in hand, to prosecute his search after the hag.
Riding rapidly, he soon cleared the ground between the quarry and
Goldshaw Lane, and was about to enter the latter, when the sound of
voices singing a funeral hymn caught his ear, and, pausing to listen to
it, he beheld a little procession, the meaning of which he readily
comprehended, wending its slow and melancholy way in the same direction
as himself. It was headed by four men in deep mourning, bearing upon
their shoulders a small coffin, covered with a pall, and having a
garland of white flowers in front of it. Behind them followed about a
dozen young men and maidens, likewise in mourning, walking two and two,
with gait and aspect of unfeigned affliction. Many of the women, though
merely rustics, seemed to possess considerable personal attraction; but
their features were in a great measure concealed by their large white
kerchiefs, disposed in the form of hoods. All carried sprigs of rosemary
and bunches of flowers in their hands. Plaintive was the hymn they sang,
and their voices, though untaught, were sweet and touching, and went to
the heart of the listener.

Much moved, Richard suffered the funeral procession to precede him along
the deep and devious lane, and as it winded beneath the hedges, the
sight was inexpressibly affecting. Fastening his horse to a tree at the
end of the lane, Richard followed on foot. Notice of the approach of the
train having been given in the village, all the inhabitants flocked
forth to meet it, and there was scarcely a dry eye among them. Arrived
within a short distance of the church, the coffin was met by the
minister, attended by the clerk, behind whom came Roger Nowell,
Nicholas, and the rest of the company from the hostel. With great
difficulty poor Baldwyn could be brought to take his place as chief
mourner. These arrangements completed, the body of the ill-fated girl
was borne into the churchyard, the minister reading the solemn texts
appointed for the occasion, and leading the way to the grave, beside
which stood the sexton, together with the beadle of Goldshaw and
Sparshot. The coffin was then laid on trestles, and amidst profound
silence, broken only by the sobs of the mourners, the service was read,
and preparations made for lowering the body into the grave.

Then it was that poor Baldwyn, with a wild, heart-piercing cry, flung
himself upon the shell containing all that remained of his lost
treasure, and could with difficulty be removed from it by Bess and
Sudall, both of whom were in attendance. The bunches of flowers and
sprigs of rosemary having been laid upon the coffin by the maidens,
amidst loud sobbing and audibly expressed lamentations from the
bystanders, it was let down into the grave, and earth thrown over it.

Earth to earth; ashes to ashes; dust to dust.

The ceremony was over, the mourners betook themselves to the little
hostel, and the spectators slowly dispersed; but the bereaved father
still lingered, unable to tear himself away. Leaning for support against
the yew-tree, he fiercely bade Bess, who would have led him home with
her, begone. The kind-hearted hostess complied in appearance, but
remained nigh at hand though concealed from view.

Once more the dark cloud overshadowed the spirit of the wretched
man--once more the same infernal desire of vengeance possessed him--once
more he subjected himself to temptation. Striding to the foot of the
grave he raised his hand, and with terrible imprecations vowed to lay
the murtheress of his child as low as she herself was now laid. At that
moment he felt an eye like a burning-glass fixed upon him, and, looking
up, beheld the reeve of the forest standing on the further side of the
grave.

"Kneel down, and swear to be mine, and your wish shall be gratified,"
said the reeve.

Beside himself with grief and rage, Baldwyn would have complied, but he
was arrested by a powerful grasp. Fearing he was about to commit some
rash act, Bess rushed forward and caught hold of his doublet.

"Bethink thee whot theaw has just heerd fro' t' minister, Ruchot," she
cried in a voice of solemn warning. "'Blessed are the dead that dee i'
the Lord, for they rest fro their labours.' An again, 'Suffer us not at
our last hour, for onny pains o' death, to fa' fro thee.' Oh Ruchot,
dear! fo' the love theaw hadst fo' thy poor chilt, who is now delivert
fro' the burthen o' th' flesh, an' dwellin' i' joy an felicity wi' God
an his angels, dunna endanger thy precious sowl. Pray that theaw may'st
depart hence i' th' Lord, wi' whom are the sowls of the faithful, an
Meary's, ey trust, among the number. Pray that thy eend may be like
hers."

"Ey conna pray, Bess," replied the miller, striking his breast. "The
Lord has turned his feace fro' me."

"Becose thy heart is hardened, Ruchot," she replied. "Theaw 'rt
nourishin' nowt boh black an wicked thowts. Cast em off ye, I adjure
thee, an come whoam wi me."

Meanwhile, the reeve had sprung across the grave.

"Thy answer at once," he said, grasping the miller's arm, and breathing
the words in his ears. "Vengeance is in thy power. A word, and it is
thine."

The miller groaned bitterly. He was sorely tempted.

"What is that mon sayin' to thee, Ruchot?" inquired Bess.

"Dunna ax, boh tak me away," he answered. "Ey am lost else."

"Let him lay a finger on yo if he dare," said Bess, sturdily.

"Leave him alone--yo dunna knoa who he is," whispered the miller.

"Ey con partly guess," she rejoined; "boh ey care nother fo' mon nor
dule when ey'm acting reetly. Come along wi' me, Ruchot."

"Fool!" cried the reeve, in the same low tone as before; "you will lose
your revenge, but you will not escape me."

And he turned away, while Bess almost carried the trembling and
enfeebled miller towards the hostel.

Roger Nowell and his friends had only waited the conclusion of the
funeral to set forth, and their horses being in readiness, they mounted
them on leaving the churchyard, and rode slowly along the lane leading
towards Rough Lee. The melancholy scene they had witnessed, and the
afflicting circumstances connected with it, had painfully affected the
party, and little conversation occurred until they were overtaken by
Parson Holden, who, having been made acquainted with their errand by
Nicholas, was desirous of accompanying them. Soon after this, also, the
reeve of the forest joined them, and on seeing him, Richard sternly
demanded why he had aided Mother Chattox in her night from the
churchyard, and what had become of her.

"You are entirely mistaken, sir," replied the reeve, with affected
astonishment. "I have seen nothing whatever of the old hag, and would
rather lend a hand to her capture than abet her flight. I hold all
witches in abhorrence, and Mother Chattox especially so."

"Your horse looks fresh enough, certainly," said Richard, somewhat
shaken in his suspicions. "Where have you been during our stay at
Goldshaw? You did not put up at the hostel?"

"I went to Farmer Johnson's," replied the reeve, "and you will find upon
inquiry that my horse has not been out of his stables for the last hour.
I myself have been loitering about Bess's grange and farmyard, as your
grooms will testify, for they have seen me."

"Humph!" exclaimed Richard, "I suppose I must credit assertions made
with such confidence, but I could have sworn I saw you ride off with the
hag behind you."

"I hope I shall never be caught in such bad company, sir," replied the
reeve, with a laugh. "If I ride off with any one, it shall not be with
an old witch, depend upon it."

Though by no means satisfied with the explanation, Richard was forced to
be content with it; but he thought he would address a few more questions
to the reeve.

"Have you any knowledge," he said, "when the boundaries of Pendle Forest
were first settled and appointed?"

"The first perambulation was made by Henry de Lacy, about the middle of
the twelfth century," replied the reeve. "Pendle Forest, you may be
aware, sir, is one of the four divisions of the great forest of
Blackburnshire, of which the Lacys were lords, the three other divisions
being Accrington, Trawden, and Rossendale, and it comprehends an extent
of about twenty-five miles, part of which you have traversed to-day. At
a later period, namely in 1311, after the death of another Henry de
Lacy, Earl of Lincoln, the last of his line, and one of the bravest of
Edward the First's barons, an inquisition was held in the forest, and it
was subdivided into eleven vaccaries, one of which is the place to which
you are bound, Rough Lee."

"The learned Sir Edward Coke defines a vaccary to signify a dairy,"
observed Potts.

"Here it means the farm and land as well," replied the reeve; "and the
word 'booth,' which is in general use in this district, signifies the
mansion erected upon such vaccary: Mistress Nutter's residence, for
instance, being nothing more than the booth of Rough Lee: while a
'lawnd,' another local term, is a park inclosed within the forest for
the preservation of the deer, and the convenience of the chase, and of
such inclosures we have two, namely, the Old and New Lawnd. By a
commission in the reign of Henry VII., these vaccaries, originally
granted only to tenants at will, were converted into copyholds of
inheritance, but--and here is a legal point for your consideration,
Master Potts--as it seems very questionable whether titles obtained
under letters-patent are secure, not unreasonable fears are entertained
by the holders of the lands lest they should be seized, and appropriated
by the crown."

"Ah! ah! an excellent idea, Master Reeve," exclaimed Potts, his little
eyes twinkling with pleasure. "Our gracious and sagacious monarch would
grasp at the suggestion, ay, and grasp at the lands too--ha! ha! Many
thanks for the hint, good reeve. I will not fail to profit by it. If
their titles are uncertain, the landholders would be glad to compromise
the matter with the crown, even to the value of half their estates
rather than lose the whole."

"Most assuredly they would," replied the reeve; "and furthermore, they
would pay the lawyer well who could manage the matter adroitly for them.
This would answer your purpose better than hunting up witches, Master
Potts."

"One pursuit does not interfere with the other in the slightest degree,
worthy reeve," observed Potts. "I cannot consent to give up my quest of
the witches. My honour is concerned in their extermination. But to turn
to Pendle Forest--the greater part of it has been disafforested, I
presume?"

"It has," replied the other--"and we are now in one of the purlieus."

"Pourallee is the better word, most excellent reeve," said Potts. "I
tell you thus much, because you appear to be a man of learning. Manwood,
our great authority in such matters, declares a pourallee to be 'a
certain territory of ground adjoining unto the forest, mered and bounded
with immovable marks, meres, and boundaries, known by matter of record
only.' And as it applies to the perambulation we are about to make, I
may as well repeat what the same learned writer further saith touching
marks, meres, and boundaries, and how they may be known. 'For although,'
he saith, 'a forest doth lie open, and not inclosed with hedge, ditch,
pale, or stone-wall, which some other inclosures have; yet in the eye
and consideration of the law, the same hath as strong an inclosure by
those marks, meres, and boundaries, as if there were a brick wall to
encircle the same.' Marks, learned reeve, are deemed unremovable--
_primo, quia omnes metae forestae sunt integrae domino regi_--and those
who take them away are punishable for the trespass at the assizes of
the forest. _Secundo_, because the marks are things that cannot be
stirred, as rivers, highways, hills, and the like. Now, such
unremoveable marks, meres, and boundaries we have between the estate of
my excellent client, Master Roger Nowell, and that of Mistress Nutter,
so that the matter at issue will be easily decided."

A singular smile crossed the reeve's countenance, but he made no
observation.

"Unless the lady can turn aside streams, remove hills, and pluck up huge
trees, we shall win," pursued Potts, with a chuckle.

Again the reeve smiled, but he forebore to speak.

"You talk of marks, meres, and boundaries, Master Potts," remarked
Richard. "Are not the words synonymous?"

"Not precisely so, sir," replied the attorney; "there is a slight
difference in their signification, which I will explain to you. The
words of the statute are '_metas, meras, et bundas_,'--now _meta_, or
mark, is an object rising from the ground, as a church, a wall, or a
tree; _mera_, or mere, is the space or interval between the forest and
the land adjoining, whereupon the mark may chance to stand; and _bunda_
is the boundary, lying on a level with the forest, as a river, a
highway, a pool, or a bog."

"I comprehend the distinction," replied Richard. "And now, as we are on
this subject," he added to the reeve, "I would gladly know the precise
nature of your office?"

"My duty," replied the other, "is to range daily throughout all the
purlieus, or pourallees, as Master Potts more properly terms them, and
disafforested lands, and inquire into all trespasses and offences
against vert or venison, and present them at the king's next court of
attachment or swainmote. It is also my business to drive into the forest
such wild beasts as have strayed from it; to attend to the lawing and
expeditation of mastiffs; and to raise hue and cry against any
malefactors or trespassers within the forest."

"I will give you the exact words of the statute," said Potts--'_Si quis
viderit malefactores infra metas forestae, debet illos capere secundum
posse suum, et si non possit; debet levare hutesium et clamorem_.' And
the penalty for refusing to follow hue and cry is heavy fine."

"I would that that part of your duty relating to the hock-sinewing, and
lawing of mastiffs, could be discontinued," said Richard. "I grieve to
see a noble animal so mutilated."

"In Bowland Forest, as you are probably aware, sir," rejoined the reeve,
"only the larger mastiffs are lamed, a small stirrup or gauge being kept
by the master forester, Squire Robert Parker of Browsholme, and the dog
whose foot will pass through it escapes mutilation."

"The practice is a cruel one, and I would it were abolished with some of
our other barbarous forest laws," observed Richard.

While this conversation had been going on, the party had proceeded well
on their way. For some time the road, which consisted of little more
than tracts of wheels along the turf, led along a plain, thrown up into
heathy hillocks, and then passing through a thicket, evidently part of
the old forest, it brought them to the foot of a hill, which they
mounted, and descended into another valley. Here they came upon Pendle
Water, and while skirting its banks, could see at a great depth below,
the river rushing over its rocky bed like an Alpine torrent. The scenery
had now begun to assume a savage and sombre character. The deep rift
through which the river ran was evidently the result of some terrible
convulsion of the earth, and the rocky strata were strangely and
fantastically displayed. On the further side the banks rose up
precipitously, consisting for the most part of bare cliffs, though now
and then a tree would root itself in some crevice. Below this the stream
sank over a wide shelf of rock, in a broad full cascade, and boiled and
foamed in the stony basin that received it, after which, grown less
impetuous, it ran tranquilly on for a couple of hundred yards, and was
then artificially restrained by a dam, which, diverting it in part from
its course, caused it to turn the wheels of a mill. Here was the abode
of the unfortunate Richard Baldwyn, and here had blossomed forth the
fair flower so untimely gathered. An air of gloom hung over this once
cheerful spot: its very beauty contributing to this saddening effect.
The mill-race flowed swiftly and brightly on; but the wheel was
stopped, windows and doors were closed, and death kept his grim holiday
undisturbed. No one was to be seen about the premises, nor was any sound
heard except the bark of the lonely watch-dog. Many a sorrowing glance
was cast at this forlorn habitation as the party rode past it, and many
a sigh was heaved for the poor girl who had so lately been its pride and
ornament; but if any one had noticed the bitter sneer curling the
reeve's lip, or caught the malignant fire gleaming in his eye, it would
scarcely have been thought that he shared in the general regret.

After the cavalcade had passed the mill, one or two other cottages
appeared on the near side of the river, while the opposite banks began
to be clothed with timber. The glen became more and more contracted, and
a stone bridge crossed the stream, near which, and on the same side of
the river as the party, stood a cluster of cottages constituting the
little village of Rough Lee.

On reaching the bridge, Mistress Nutter's habitation came in view, and
it was pointed out by Nicholas to Potts, who contemplated it with much
curiosity. In his eyes it seemed exactly adapted to its owner, and
formed to hide dark and guilty deeds. It was a stern, sombre-looking
