Irish to destroy the liberties of the country.  No one knew better
than Charles how strong a case could be made out against his frivolous
and unprincipled consort.

Driven to extremities, Charles determined to seize the five members,
John Pym, John Hampden (SS432, 436), and three others, who headed the
opposition.[3] The King commanded the House of Commons to give them up
for trial.  The request was not complied with and the Queen urged
Charles to take them by force, saying, "Go along, you coward, and pull
those rascals out by the ears!"  Thus taunted, the King went on the
next day to the House of Parliament with a company of soldiers to
seize the members.  They had been forewarned, and had left the House,
taking refuse in the "city," which showed itself then, as always, on
the side of liberty (S34, note 1).  Leaving his soldiers at the door,
the King entered the House of Commons.  Seeing that the five members
were absent, the King turned to the Speaker and asked where they
were.  The Speaker, kneeling before the King, answered, "May it please
your Majesty, I have neither eyes to see nor tongue to speak in this
place but as this House is pleased to direct me."  Vexed that he could
learn nothing further, Charles left the hall amid ominous cries of
"Privilege! privilege!"[1]

[3] The full list was Hampden, Pym, Hollis, Haselrig, and Strode, to
which a sixth, Mandeville, was added later.  Copley's fine painting of
the "Attempted Arrest" is in the Boston Public Library.[1] Privilege:
the privilege of Parliament to debate all questions exempt from royal
interference.

441. The Great Civil War, 1642-1649, between the King and Parliament.

The King, baffled in his purpose, resolved to coerce Parliament by
military force.  He left London in 1642, never to return until he came
as a prisoner, and was delivered into the custody of that legislative
body that he had insulted and defied.  Parliament now attempted to
come to an understanding with the King.

There was then no standing army in England, but each county and large
town had a body of militia, formed of citizens who were occasionally
mustered for drill.  This militia was under the control of the King.
Parliament insisted on his resigning that control to them.  Charles
refused to give up his undoubted constitutional right in the matter,
and raised the royal flag at Nottingham, August, 1642.  Parliament
then organized an army of its own, and the war began.

442. Cavaliers and Roundheads.

It opened in the autumn of that year (1642) with the battle of
Edgehill, Warwickshire, and was at first favorable to the King.  On
his side were a majority of the nobility, the clergy and the country
gentlemen.  They were mainly members of the Church of England and were
known collectively as Cavaliers, from their dashing and daring
horsemanship.  Their leader was Prince Rupert, a nephew of Charles.[1]

[1] See "A charge with Prince Rupert," _Atlantic Monthly_, III, 725.

On the side of Parliament were the shopkeepers, small farmers and
landowners, with a considerable number of men of high rank; as a rule
they were Puritans (S378).  The King's party nicknamed them
"Roundheads," because, despising the long locks and effeminate
ringlets worn by the Cavaliers, they cut their hair short so that it
showed the shape of the head.[2]  Essex and Fairfax were the first
leaders of the "Roundheads"; later, Cromwell became their commander.

[2] "Those roundheaded dogs that bawled against bishops," said the
Cavaliers.

443. How the Country was divided; Rise of Political Newspapers.

Taking England as a whole, we may say that the southeastern half, that
is, what was then the richest part of England, with London and most of
the other large towns, was against the King, and that the southwestern
half, with most of the North, was for him.  (See map opposite.)  Each
side made great sacrifices in carrying on the war.  The Queen sold her
crown jewels, and the Cavaliers melted down their silver plate to
provide money to pay the King's troops.

On behalf of the People's army Parliament imposed heavy taxes, and
levied now for the first time a duty on domestic products, especially
on ales and liquors, known as the "Excise Tax."  Furthermore, it
required each household to fast once a week, and to give the price of
a dinner to support the soldiers who were fighting against the King.

Parliament also passed what was called the "Self-denying Ordinance"
(1644) (repeated in 1645).  It required all members who had any civil
or military office to resign, and, as Cromwell seaid, "deny themselves
and their private interests for the public good."  The real object of
this measure was to get rid of incompetent commanders, and give the
People's army (soon to be remodeled) the vigorous men that the times
demanded.

With the outbreak of the war great numbers of little local newspapers
sprang into short-lived existence in imitation of the first
publication of that sort, the _Weekly News_, which was issued not
quite twenty years before in the reign of James I (S422).  Each of the
rival armies, it is said, carried a printing press with it, and waged
furious battles in type against the other.  The whole country was
inundated with floods of pamphlets discussing every conceivable
religious and political question.

444. The "New Model"; Death of John Hampden; the Solemn League and
Covenant (1642-1645).

At the first battle fought, at Edgehill, Warwickshire (1642), Cromwell
saw that the Cavaliers (S442) had the advantage, and told John Hampden
(SS436, 440) that "a set of poor tapsters [drawers of liquor] and town
apprentices would never fight against men of honor."  He forthwith
proceeded to organize his regiment of "Ironsides," a "lovely company,"
he said, none of whom swore or gambled.

After the first Self-denying Ordinance was passed (S443), Cromwell and
Fairfax formed a new People's army of "God-fearing men" on the same
pattern, almost all of whom were Independents (S439).  This was called
the "New Model" (1645) and was placed under the joint command of the
men who organized it.  Very many of its officers were kinsmen of
Cromwell's, and it speedily became the most formidable body of
soldiers of its size in the world,--always ready to preach, pray,
exhort, or fight.[1]

[1] "The common soldiers, as well as the officers, did not only pray
and preach among themselves, but went up into the pulpits in all
churches and preached to the people."--Clarendon, "History of the
Rebellion," Book X, 79.

Meanwhile John Hampden (SS436, 440) had been mortally wounded in a
skirmish at Chalgrove Field, Oxfordshire.  His death was a terrible
blow to the parliamentary army fighting in behalf of the rights of the
people.[2]

[2] See Macaulay's "Essay on Hampden."  Clarendon says that Hampden's
death produced as great consternation in his party "as if their whole
army had been cut off."

Parliament endeavored to persuade the Scotch to give their aid in the
war against the King.  The latter finally agreed to do so (1643) on
condition that Parliament would sign the Solemn League and Covenant
(S438).  Parliament signed it, and so made the Scotch Presbyterian
worship the state religion of England and Ireland (1647).  In reality
only a small part of the English people accepted it; but the charge
forced a large number of Episcopal clergymen to leave their parishes.

445. Marston Moor and Naseby, 1644, 1645.

On the field of Marston Moor, Yorkshire, 1644, the north of England
was conquered by Cromwell with his invincible little army.  The
following year Cromwell's "Ironsides," who "trusted in God and kept
their powder dry," gained the decisive victory of Naseby, 1645, in the
Midlands.  (See map facing p. 252.)  After the fight papers belonging
to the King were picked up on the battlefield.  They proved that
Charles intended betraying those who were negotiating with him for
peace, and that he was planning to bring foreign troops to England.
The discovery of these papers, which were published by Parliament, was
more damaging to the royal cause than the defeat itself.

446. The King and Parliament.

Standing on the walls of the ancient city of Chester, Charles saw his
last army utterly routed (1645).  Shortly afterwards he fled to the
Scots.  Oxford, the King's chief city in the Midlands, surrendered to
Fairfax (1646).  The first civil war was now practically over.  The
Scots gave up the King (1647) to the parliamentary commissioners, and
he was taken to Holmby House, Northamptonshire.  There Cromwell and
the army made overtures to him, but without effect.  He was then
brought by the Parliamentary or People's army to Hampton Court, near
London.

Here, and elsewhere, the army again attempted to come to some definite
understanding with the King, but all to no purpose.  Politically
speaking, Charles was his own worst enemy.  He was false to the core,
and, as Carlyle has said: "A man whose word will not inform you at all
what he means, or will do, is not a man you can bargain with.  You
must get out of that man's way, or put him out of yours."

447. The Second Civil War (1648); Pride's Purge (1648); the "Rump
Parliament."

After two years spent in fruitless negotiations, Charles, who had fled
to Carisbrooke Castle in the Isle of Wight, made a secret treaty with
the Scots (1648), promising to sanction the establishment of the
Scotch Presbyterian Church in England (S444), if they would send an
army into the country to restore him to the throne.[1]

[1] When Cromwell found out that Charles had resolved to destroy him
and the Independent army, he apparently made up his mind to put the
King to death.   See Lord Broghill's story in S. R. Gardiner's
"History of the Great Civil War," III, 259.

The Scots marched into England, the Royalists rose to aid them, and
the second civil war began.  It speedily ended in the utter defeat of
the King's forces.  The People's army now vowed that they would bring
the King to justice.  To this neither the Presbyterians in the House
of Commons nor the members of the House of Lords would agree.

Colonel Pride then proceeded (1648), as he said, to purge the "Long
Parliament" (S439) by driving out all who were opposed to this
measure.  Cromwell had no part in Pride's expulsion of members, though
he afterwards expressed his approval of it.  Those who remained were a
small body of Independents only (SS422, 439).  They did not number
sixty; they became the mere tool of the Parliamentary or People's army
and were called in derision the "Rump Parliament."

448. Execution of King Charles, 1649.

This so-called "Rump Parliament" named one hundred and thiry-five
persons to constitute a high court of justice to try the King on a
charge of treason against the nation; the chief judge or presiding
officer was John Bradshaw.  Less than half of these judges were
present throughout the trial.  Of those who signed the death warrant
Oliver Cromwell was one.  Prince Charles, the King's son, then a
refugee in France, made every effort to save his father.  He sent a
blank paper, bearing his signature and seal, to the judges, offering
to bind himself to any conditions they might insert, provided they
would spare his father's life; but no answer was returned.

The King was brought into court in Westminster Hall, London; a week
later the trial was over.  The judges pronounced sentence of death on
"Charles Stuart, King of England," as a "tyrant, traitor, murderer,
and public enemy."

Throughout the trial Charles bore himself with dignity and
self-possession.  The crisis had brought out the best elements of his
nature.  He was beheaded January 30, 1649, in London in front of the
royal palace of Whitehall.  "A great shudder ran through the crowd
that saw the deed, then came a shriek, and all immediately dispersed."
Tradition declares that Cromwell went secretly that night to see the
beheaded corpse.  He looked steadfastly at it, shook his head, sighed
out the words "Cruel necessity!" and departed.[1]

[1] S. R. Gardiner's "Great Civil War," III, 604; and see in
Delaroche's works the picture of Cromwell looking at the King's
corpse.

449. Summary.

The whole of Charles I's reign must be regarded as a prolonged
struggle between the King and the nation.  Under the Tudors and James
I the royal power had been growing more and more despotic, while at
the same time the progress of the Protestant Reformation and of
Puritanism had encouraged freedom of thought.

Between these opposite forces a collision was inevitable, since
religious liberty always favors political liberty.  Had Charles known
how to yield in time, or been sincere in the concessions which he did
make, all might have gone well.  His duplicity was his ruin.  Though
his death did not absolutely destroy the theory of the Divine Right of
Kings, yet it gave it a blow from which it never recovered.


The Commonwealth and Protectorate--1649-1660

450. Establishment of the Commonwealth, or Republic, 1649.

While the crowd that had witnessed the execution of Charles I was
leaving the spot (S448), the remnant of the House of Commons met.
This "Rump Parliament" (S447), composed of only about fifty members,
claimed the right to act for the whole nation.  A few days later it
abolished the House of Lords as "useless and dangerous."  Next, for
similar reasons, it abolished the office of king, and declared that
"The People are, under God, the origin of all just power."

England was now a commonwealth or republic, governed, in name at
least, by a Council of State.  Of this Council John Bradshaw (S448)
was president, and the poet Milton was foreign secretary, while
General Fairfax with Oliver Cromwell had command of the army.  The
real power was in the army, and the true head of the army was
Cromwell.  Without him the so-called republic could not have stood a
day.

451. Radical Changes.

All members of the House of Commons, with those who held any civil or
military office, were required to swear allegiance to the Commonwealth
"without King, or House of Lords."  The use of the English church
service was forbidden, and the statues of Charles I in London were
pulled down and demolished.

The Great Seal of England (S145) had already been cast aside, and a
new one adopted, having on one side a map of England and Ireland, on
the other a representation of the House of Commons in session, with
the words, "In the first year of freedom, by God's blessing restored
1648."[1]

[1] 1648 Old Style would here correspond to 1649 New Style. (See S545,
note 2.)

452. Difficulties of the New Republic.

Shortly after the establishment of the Commonwealth, General Fairfax
(S442) resigned his command, and Cromwell became the sole leader of
the military forces of the country.  But the new government, even with
his aid, had no easy task before it.

It had enemies in the Royalists, who, since the King's execution, had
grown stronger; in the Presbyterians, who hated both the "Rump
Parliament" (S450) and the Parliamentary army; finally, it had enemies
in its own ranks, for there were half-crazy fanatics.  "Levelers,"[1]
"Come-outers,"[2] and other "cattle and creeping things," who would be
satisfied with nothing but destruction and confusion.

[1] "Levelers": a name given to certain radical republicans who wished
to reduce all ranks and classes to the same level with respect to
political power and privileges.
[2] "Come-outers": those who abandoned all established ways in
government and religion.

Among these there were socialists, or communists, who, like those of
the present day, wished to abolish private property, and establish "an
equal division of unequal earnings," while others declared and acted
out their belief in the coming end of the world.  Eventually Cromwell
had to deal with these crack-brained enthusiasts in a decided way,
especially as some of them threatened to assassinate him in order to
hasten the advent of the personal reign of Christ and his saints on
earth.

453. The Late King's Son proclaimed King in Ireland and Scotland;
Dunbar; Worcester (1649-1651).

An attempt of the English Puritan party (S378) to root out Catholicism
in Ireland (1641) had caused a horrible insurrection.  The Royalist
party in Ireland now proclaimed Prince Charles, son of the late
Charles I, King.  Parliament deputed Cromwell to reduce that country
to order, and to destroy the Royalists.  Nothing could have been more
congenial to his "Ironsides" (S445) than such a crusade.  They
descended upon the unhappy island (1649), and wiped out the rebellion
in such a whirlwind of fire and slaughter that the horror of the
visitation has never been forgotten.  To this day the direst
imprecation a southern Irishman can utter is, "The curse of Cromwell
on ye!"[3]

[3] At Drogheda and Wexford, Cromwell, acting in accordance with the
laws of war of that day, massacred the garrisons that refused to
surrender.

Several years later (1653-1654), Cromwell determined to put in
practice a still more drastic policy.  He resolved to repeople a very
large section of southern Ireland by driving out the Roman Catholic
inhabitants and giving their lands to English and Scotch Protestants.
It seemed to him the only effectual way of overcoming the resistance
which that island made to English rule.  By the use of military power,
backed up by an Act of Parliament, his generals forced the people to
leave their houses and emigrate to the province of Connaught on the
west coast.  Part of that district was so barren and desolate that it
was said, "it had not water enough to drown a man, trees enough to
hang him, or earth enough to bury him."  Thousands were compelled to
go into this dreary exile, and hundreds of families who refused were
shipped to the West Indies and sold to the planters as slaves for a
term of years,--a thing often done in that day with prisoners of war.

In Scotland also Prince Charles was looked upon as the legitimate
sovereign by a strong and influential party.  He found in the brave
Montrose,[1] who was hanged for treason at Edinburgh, and in other
loyal supporters far better friends than he deserved.  The Prince came
to Scotland (1650); while there, he was crowned and took the oath of
the Covenant (S438).  It must have been a bitter pill for a man of his
free and easy temperament.  But worse was to come, for the Scottish
Puritans made him sign a paper declaring that his father had been a
tyrant and that his mother was an idolater.  No wonder the caricatures
of the day represented the Scots as holding the Prince's nose to a
grindstone.  Later, Prince Charles rallied a small force to fight for
him, but it was utterly defeated at Dunbar (1650).

[1] See "The Execution of Montrose," in Aytoun's "Lays of the Scottish
Cavaliers." Prince Charles basely abandoned Montrose to his fate.

Twelve months afterward, on the anniversary of his defeat at Dunbar,
the Prince made a second attempt to obtain the crown.  At the battle
of Worcester Cromwell again routed his forces and brought the war to
an end.  Charles escaped in Shropshire, where he hid for a day in an
oak at Boscobel.  After many narrow escapes he at length succeeded in
getting out of the country.

454. Cromwell expels Parliament.

Cromwell now urged the necessity of dissolving the "Rump Parliament"
(S450) and of electing a Parliament which should really represent the
nation, reform the laws, and pass a general act of pardon.  In his
despatch to the House of Commons after the victory of Worcester, he
called the battle a "crowning mercy."  Some of the republicans in that
body took alarm at this phrase, and thought that Cromwell used it to
foreshadow a design to place the crown on his own head.  For this
reason, perhaps, they hesitated to dissolve.

But at last they could not withstand the pressure, and a bill was
introduced (1653) for summoning a new Parliament of four hundred
members, but with the provision that all members of the present House
were to keep their seats, and have the right to reject newly elected
members.

Cromwell, with the army, believed this provision a trick on the part
of the "Rump" (S450) to keep themselves in perpetual power.

Sir Harry Vane, who was a leading member of the House of Commons, and
who had been governor of the colony of Massachusetts, feared that the
country was in danger of falling into the hands of Cromwell as
military dictator.  He therefore urged the immediate passage of the
bill as it stood.  Cromwell heard that a vote was about to be taken.
Putting himself at the head of a squad of soldiers, he suddenly
entered the House (1653).  After listening to the debate for some
time, he rose from his seat and charged the Commons with injustice and
misgovernment.  A member remonstrated.  Cromwell grew excited, saying:
"You are no Parliament! I say you are no Parliament!"  Then he called
in the musketeers.  They dragged the Speaker from his chair, and drove
the members after him.

As they passed out, Cromwell shouted "drunkard," "glutton,"
"extortioner," with other opprobrious names.  When all were gone, he
locked the door and put the key in his pocket.  During the night some
Royalist wag nailed a placard on the door, bearing the inscription in
large letters, "The House to let, unfurnished!"

455. Cromwell becomes Protector; the "Instrument of Government"
(1653).

Cromwell summoned a new Parliament, which was practically of his own
choosing.  It consisted of one hundred and thirty-nine members, and
was known as the "Little Parliament."[1]  The Royalists nicknamed it
"Barebone's Parliament" from one of its members, a London leather
dealer named Praise-God Barebone.  Notwithstanding the irregularity of
its organization and the ridicule cast upon it, the "Barebone's
Parliament" proposed several reforms of great value, which the country
afterwards adopted.

[1] A regularly summoned Parliament, elected by the people, would have
been much larger.  This one was chosen from a list furnished by the
ministers of the various Independent churches (S422).  It was in no
true sense a representative body.

A council of Cromwell's leading men now secured the adoption of a
constitution entitled the "Instrument of Government."[1]  It made
Cromwell Lord Protector of England, Ireland, and Scotland.

[1] "Instrument of Government": The principal provisions of this
constitution were: (1) the government was vested in the Protector and
a council appointed for life; (2) Parliament, consisting of the House
of Commons only, was to be summoned every three years, and not to be
dissolved under five months; (3) a standing army of thirty thousand
was to be maintained; (4) all taxes were to be levied by Parliament;
(5) the system of representation was reformed, so that many large
places hitherto without representation in Parliament now obtained it;
(6) all Roman Catholics, and those concerned in the Irish rebellion,
were disfranchised forever.

Up to this time the Commonwealth had been a republic, nominally under
the control of the House of Commons, but as a matter of facct governed
by Cromwell and the army.  Now it became a republic under a Protector,
or President, whowas to hold his office for life.

A few years later (1657), Parliament offered the title of King to
Cromwell, and with it a new constitution called the "Humble Petition
and Advice."  The new constitution provided that Parliament should
consist of two houses, since the majority of influential men felt the
need of the restoration of the Lords (S450).  For, said a member of
"Barebone's Parliament," "the nation has been hopping on one leg"
altogether too long.  Cromwell had the same feeling, and endeavored to
put an end to the "hopping" by trying to restore the House of Lords,
but he could not get the Peers to meet.  He accepted the new
constitution, but the army objected to his wearing the crown, so he
simply remained Lord Protector.

456. Emigration of Royalists to America.

Under the tyranny of the Stuart Kings, John Winthrop and many other
noted Puritans had emigrated to Massachusetts and other parts of New
England.  During the Commonwealth the case was reversed, and numbers
of Royalists fled to Virginia.  Among them were John Washington, the
great-grandfather of George Washington, and the ancestors of
Jefferson, Patrick Henry, the Lees, Randolphs, and other prominent
families, destined in time to take part in founding a republic in the
New World much more democractic than anything the Old World had ever
seen.

457. Cromwell as a Ruler; Puritan Fanaticism.

When Cromwell's new Parliament (S455) ventured to criticize his
course, he dissolved it (1654) quite as peremptorily as the late King
had done (S431).  Soon afterwards, fear of a Royalist rebellion led
him to divide the country into eleven military districts (1655), each
governed by a major general, who ruled by martial law and with
despotic power.  All Royalist families were heavily taxed to support
Cromwell's standing army, all Catholic priests wre banished, and no
books or papers could be published without permission of the
government.

Cromwell, however, though compelled to resort to severe measures to
secure peace, was, in spirit, no oppressor.  On the contrary, he
proved himself the Protector not only of the realm but of the
Protestants of Europe.  When they were threatened with persecution,
his influence saved them.  He showed, too, that in an age of bigotry
he was no bigot.  Puritan fanaticism, exasperated by the persecution
it had endured under James and Charles, often went to the utmost
extremes, even as "Hudibras"[1] said, to "killing of a cat on Monday
for catching of a rat on Sunday."

[1] "Hudibras": a burlesque poem by Samuel Butler (1663).  It
satirized the leading persons and parties of the Commonwealth, but
especially the Puritans.

It treated the most innocent customs, if they were in any way
associated with Catholicism or Episcopacy, as serious offenses.  It
closed all places of amusement; it condemned mirth as ungodly; it made
it a sin to dance round a Maypole, or to eat mince pie at Christmas.
Fox-hunting and horse-racing were forbidden, and bear-baiting
prohibited, "not because it gave pain to the bear, but because it gave
pleasure to the spectators."

In such an age, when a man could hardly claim to be religious unless
he wore sad-colored raiment, talked through his nose, and quoted
Scripture with great frequency, Cromwell showed exceptional moderation
and good sense.

458. Cromwell's Religious Toleration.

He favored the toleration of all forms of worship not directly opposed
to the government as then constituted.  He befriended the Quakers, who
were looked upon as the enemies of every form of worship, and who were
treated with cruel severity both in England and America.  He was
instrumental in sending the first Protestant missionaries to
Massachusetts to convert the Indiands, then supposed by many to be a
remnant of the lost tribes of Israel; and after an exclusion of many
centuries (S222), he permitted the Jews to return to England, and even
to build a synagogue in London.

On the other hand, there are few of the cathedral or parish churches
of England which do not continue to testify to the Puritan army's
destructive hatred of everything savoring of the rule of either Pope
or bishop.[1] The empty niches, where some gracious image of the
Virgin or the figure of some saint once looked down; the patched
remnants of brilliant stained glass, once part of a picture telling
some Scripture story; the mutilated statues of noted men; the tombs,
hacked and hewed by pike and sword, because they bore some emblem or
expression of the old faith,--all these still bear witness to the fury
of the Puritan soldiers, who did not respect even the graves of their
ancestors, if those ancestors had once thought differently from
themselves.

[1] But part of this destruction occurred under Henry VIII and Edward
VI (SS352, 364)

459. Victories by Land and Sea; the Navigation Act (1651).

Yet during Cromwell's rule the country, notwithstanding all the
restrictions imposed by a stern military government, grew and
prospered.  The English forces gained victories by land and sea, and
made the name of the Protector respected as that of Charles I had
never been.

At this period the carrying trade of the world, by sea, had fallen
into the hands of the Dutch, and Amsterdam had become a more important
center of exchange than London.  The Commonwealth passed a measure
called the "Navigation Act"[2] (1651) to encourage British commerce.
It prohibited the importation or exportation of any goods into England
or its colonies in Dutch or other foreign vessels.

[2] The Navigation Act was renewed later.  Though aimed at the Dutch,
this measure damaged the export trade of the American colonies for a
time.

Later, war with the Dutch broke out partly on account of questions of
trade, and partly because Royalist plotters found protection in
Holland.  Then Cromwell created such a navy as the country had never
before possessed.  Under the command of Admiral Blake, "the sea king,"
and Admiral Monk, the Dutch were finally beaten so thoroughly (1653)
that they bound themselves to ever after salute the English flag
wherever they should meet it on the seas.  A war undertaken in
alliance with France against Spain was equally successful.  Jamaica
was taken as a permanent possession by the British fleet, and France,
in return for Cromwell's assistance, reluctantly gave the town of
Dunkirk to England (1658), and the flag of the English Commonwealth
was planted on the French coast.  But a few years later (1662), the
selfish and profligate Charles II sold Dunkirk back to Louis XIV in
order to get money to waste on his pleasures.

460. Cromwell's Death; his Character (1658).

After being King in everything but name for five years, Cromwell died
(September 3, 1658) on the anniversary of the victories of Dunbar and
Worcester (S453).  During the latter part of his career he had lived
in constant dread of assassination, and wore concealed armor.  At the
hour of his death one of the most fearful storms was raging hat had
ever swept over England.  To many it seemed a fit accompaniment to the
close of such a life.

In one sense, Cromwell was a usurper and a tyrant; but, at heart, his
object was his country's welfare.  In such cases the motive is all in
all.  He was a lonely man of rough exterior and hard manner.[1]  He
cared little for the smooth proprieties of life, yet he had that
dignity of bearing which high moral purpose gives.  In all that he did
he was eminently practical.  In an age of isms, theories, and
experiments, he was never confused and never faltered in his course.
To-day a colossal bronze statue of the great soldier and ruler stands
in the shadow of the Houses of Parliament, where the English people,
more than two hundred and forty years after his burial, voted to erect
it.

[1] Cromwell was always a lonely man, and had so few real friends that
Walter Scott may have expressed his true feeling when he makes him say
in his novel of "Woodstock": "I would _I_ had any creature, were it
but a dog, that followed me because it loved me, not for what it could
make of me."

461. The Times needed Such a Man.

There are emergencies when an ounce of decision is worth a pound of
deliberation.  When the ship is foundering or on fire, or when the
crew have mutinied, it will not avail to sit in the cabin and discuss
how it happened.  Something must be done, and that promptly.  Cromwell
was the man for such a juncture.  He saw clearly that if the country
was to be kept together, it must be by decided measures, which no
precedent, law, or constitution justified, but which stood justified
none the less by exigencies of the crisis, by his own conscious
rectitude of purpose, and by the result.

If there is any truth in Napoleon's maxim, that "The tools belong to
him that can use them," then Cromwell had a God-given right to rule;
for, first, he had the ability; and, next, though he used his power in
his campaign in Ireland (S453) with merciless severity, yet the great
purpose of his life was to establish order and justice on what seemed
to him the only practical basis.

462. Summary.

Cromwell's original object appears to have been to organize a
government representing the will of the nation more completely than it
had ever been represented before.  He strongly favored the restoration
of the House of Lords, he endeavored to reform the laws, and he sought
to secure religious toleration for the great body of Protestants.  One
who knew Cromwell intimately said, "A larger soul, I think, hath
seldom dwelt in a house of clay, than his was."

Circumstances, however, were often against him; he had many enemies,
and in order to secure peace he was obliged to resort to the exercise
of absolute power.  Yet the difference in this respect between
Cromwell and Charles I was immense: the latter was despotic on his own
account, the former for the advantage of those he governed.

RICHARD CROMWELL--September 3, 1658-April 22, 1659

463. Richard Cromwell's Incompetency.

Richard Cromwell, Oliver's eldest son, now succeeded to the
Protectorate (S455).  He was an amiable individual, as negative in
character as his father had been positive.  With the extreme Puritans
(S457), known as the "godly party," he had no sympathy whatever.
"Here," said he to one of them, pointing to a friend of his who stood
by, "is a man who can neither preach nor pray, yet I would trust him
before you all."  Such frankness was not likely to make the new ruler
popular with the army, made up of men who never lacked a Scripture
text to justify either a murder or a massacre.  Moreover, the times
were perilous, and called for a decided hand at the helm.  After a
brief reign of less than eight months the military leaders requested
Richard to resign, and soon afterwards recalled the "Rump Parliament"
(S447).

464. Richard retires.

The Protector retired not only without remonstrance, but apparently
with a sense of relief at being so soon eased of a burden too heavy
for his weak shoulders to carry.  To the people he was hereafter
familiarly known as "Tumbledown-Dick," and was caricatured as such on
tavern signboards.

The nation pensioned him off with a moderate allowance, and he lived
in obscurity to an advanced age, carrying about with him to the last a
trunk filled with the congratulatory addresses and oaths of allegiance
which he had received when he became Protector.

Years after his abdication it is reported that he visited Westminster,
and when the attendant, who did not recognize him, showed him the
throne, he said, "Yes; I have not seen that chair since I sat in it
myself in 1659."

465. The "Convention Parliament."

The year following Richard Cromwell's withdrawal was full of anxiety
and confusion.  The army of the Commonwealth had turned Parliament out
of doors (1659).  There was no longer any regularly organized
government, and the country drifted helplessly like a ship without a
pilot.

General Monk, then commander in chief in Scotland, now marched into
England (1660) with the determination of calling a new Parliament,
which should be full, free, and representative of the real political
feeling of the nation.  When he reached London with his army, the
members of the "Rump Parliament" (S447) had resumed their sessions.

At Monk's invitation the Presbyterian members, whom Colonel Pride had
driven from their seats eleven years before (S447), now went back.
This assembly issued writs for the summoning of a "Convention
Parliament" (so styled because called without royal authority), and
then dissolved by their own consent.  Thus ended that memorable "Long
Parliament" (S439), which had existed nearly twenty years.  About a
month later the Convention, including ten members of the House of
Lords, met, and at once invited Charles Stuart, then in Holland, to
return to his kingdom.  He had made certain promises, called the
"Declaration of Breda,"[1] which were intended to smooth the way for
his return.

[1] The Declaration of Breda, made by Charles in Holland (1660)
promised: (1) free pardon to all those not excepted by Parliament; (2)
liberty of conscience to all whose views did not disturb the peace of
the realm; (3) the settlement by Parliament of all claims to landed
property; (4) the payment of arrears to Monk's army.

466. Summary.

Richard Cromwell's government existed in name only, never in fact.
During his so-called Protectorate the country was under the control of
the army of the Commonwealth or of that "Rump Parliament" which
represented nothing but itself.

The period which elapsed after Oliver Cromwell's death was one of
waiting and preparation.  It ended in the meeting of the free national
Parliament, which put an end to the republic, and restored royalty in
the person of Charles II.

CHARLES II--1660-1685

467. The Restoration of Monarchy; Accession of Charles; a New Standing
Army, 1660.

The English army heard that Charles was coming, with sullen silence;
the ex-members of the "Rump Parliament" (S465), with sullen dread; the
rest of the nation, with a feeling of relief.  However much they had
hated the despotism of the two Stuart Kings, James I and Charles I,
four fifths of the people stood ready to welcome any change which
