'It is--that we start at eleven o'clock, Monsieur,' I answered, bowing
curtly. And I went out by the other door.

. . . . .

That I might not be present at their parting I remained in the garden
until the hour I had appointed was well past; and then, without entering
the house, I went to the stable entrance. Here I found all in readiness,
the two troopers whose company I had requisitioned as far as Auch,
already in the saddle, my own two knaves waiting with my sorrel and M.
de Cocheforet's chestnut. Another horse was being led up and down by
Louis, and, alas! my heart moved at the sight, for it bore a lady's
saddle. We were to have company then. Was it Madame who meant to come
with us, or Mademoiselle? And how far? To Auch?

I suppose that they had set some kind of a watch on me, for as I walked
up M. de Cocheforet and his sister came out of the house; he with a pale
face and bright eyes, and a twitching visible in his cheek--though he
still affected a jaunty bearing; she wearing a black mask.

'Mademoiselle accompanies us?' I said formally.

'With your permission, Monsieur,' he answered with bitter politeness.
But I saw that he was choking with emotion; he had just parted from his
wife, and I turned away.

When we were all mounted he looked at me.

'Perhaps--as you have my parole, you will permit me to ride alone?' he
said with a little hesitation. 'And--'

'Without me!' I rejoined keenly. 'Assuredly, so far as is possible.'

Accordingly I directed the troopers to ride before him, keeping out of
earshot, while my two men followed him at a little distance with their
carbines on their knees. Last of all, I rode myself with my eyes open
and a pistol loose in my holster. M. de Cocheforet muttered a sneer at
so many precautions and the mountain made of his request; but I had not
done so much and come so far, I had not faced scorn and insults to be
cheated of my prize at last; and aware that until we were beyond Auch
there must be hourly and pressing danger of a rescue, I was determined
that he who should wrest my prisoner from me should pay dearly for it.
Only pride, and, perhaps, in a degree also, appetite for a fight, had
prevented me borrowing ten troopers instead of two.

As was wont I looked with a lingering eye and many memories at the
little bridge, the narrow woodland path, the first roofs of the village;
all now familiar, all seen for the last time. Up the brook a party of
soldiers were dragging for the captain's body. A furlong farther on, a
cottage, burned by some carelessness in the night, lay a heap of black
ashes. Louis ran beside us weeping; the last brown leaves fluttered down
in showers. And between my eyes and all, the slow steady rain fell and
fell. And so I left Cocheforet.

Louis went with us to a point a mile beyond the village, and there stood
and saw us go, cursing me furiously as I passed. Looking back when we
had ridden on, I still saw him standing, and after a moment's hesitation
I rode back to him.

'Listen, fool!' I said, cutting him short in the midst of his mowing and
snarling, 'and give this message to your mistress. Tell her from me that
it will be with her husband as it was with M. de Regnier, when he fell
into the hands of his enemy--no better and no worse.'

'You want to kill her, too, I suppose?' he answered glowering at me.

'No, fool, I want to save her,' I retorted wrathfully. 'Tell her that,
just that and no more, and you will see the result.'

'I shall not,' he said sullenly. 'A message from you indeed!' And he
spat on the ground.

'Then on your head be it,' I answered solemnly, And I turned my horse's
head and galloped fast after the others. But I felt sure that he would
report what I had said, if it were only out of curiosity; and it would
be strange if Madame, a gentlewoman of the south, bred among old family
traditions, did not understand the reference.

And so we began our journey; sadly, under dripping trees and a leaden
sky. The country we had to traverse was the same I had trodden on the
last day of my march southwards, but the passage of a month had changed
the face of everything. Green dells, where springs welling out of the
chalk had once made of the leafy bottom a fairies' home, strewn with
delicate ferns and hung with mosses, were now swamps into which our
horses sank to the fetlock. Sunny brews, whence I had viewed the
champaign and traced my forward path, had become bare, wind-swept
ridges. The beech woods that had glowed with ruddy light were naked now;
mere black trunks and rigid arms pointing to heaven. An earthy smell
filled the air; a hundred paces away a wall of mist closed the view.
We plodded on sadly up hill and down hill, now fording brooks, already
stained with flood-water, now crossing barren heaths. But up hill or
down hill, whatever the outlook, I was never permitted to forget that
I was the jailor, the ogre, the villain; that I, riding behind in my
loneliness, was the blight on all--the death-spot. True, I was
behind the others--I escaped their eyes. But there was not a line of
Mademoiselle's figure that did not speak scorn to me; not a turn of head
that did not seem to say, 'Oh, God, that such a thing should breathe.'

I had only speech with her once during the day, and that was on the last
ridge before we went down into the valley to climb up again to Auch.
The rain had ceased; the sun, near its setting, shone faintly; for a few
moments we stood on the brow and looked southwards while we breathed the
horses. The mist lay like a pall on the country we had traversed; but
beyond and above it, gleaming pearl-like in the level rays, the line
of the mountains stood up like a land of enchantment, soft, radiant,
wonderful!--or like one of those castles on the Hill of Glass of which
the old romances tell us. I forgot for an instant how we were placed,
and I cried to my neighbour that it was the fairest pageant I had ever
seen.

She--it was Mademoiselle, and she had taken off her mask--cast one
look at me in answer; only one, but it conveyed disgust and loathing so
unspeakable that scorn beside them would have been a gift. I reined in
my horse as if she had struck me, and felt myself go first hot and then
cold under her eyes. Then she looked another way.

But I did not forget the lesson; and after that I avoided her more
sedulously than before. We lay that night at Auch, and I gave M. de
Cocheforet the utmost liberty, even permitting him to go out and return
at his will. In the morning, believing that on the farther side of Auch
we ran little risk of attack, I dismissed the two dragoons, and an hour
after sunrise we set out again. The day was dry and cold, the weather
more promising. I proposed to go by way of Lectoure, crossing the
Garonne at Agen; and I thought that, with roads continually improving
as we moved northwards, we should be able to make good progress before
night. My two men rode first, I came last by myself.

Our way lay down the valley of the Gers, under poplars and by long rows
of willows, and presently the sun came out and warmed us. Unfortunately
the rain of the day before had swollen the brooks which crossed our
path, and we more than once had a difficulty in fording them. Noon found
us little more than half way to Lectoure, and I was growing each minute
more impatient when our road, which had for a little while left the
river bank, dropped down to it again, and I saw before us another
crossing, half ford half slough. My men tried it gingerly and gave back
and tried it again in another place; and finally, just as Mademoiselle
and her brother came up to them, floundered through and sprang slantwise
up the farther bank.

The delay had been long enough to bring me, with no good will of my own,
close upon the Cocheforets. Mademoiselle's horse made a little business
of the place, and in the result we entered the water almost together;
and I crossed close on her heels. The bank on either side was steep;
while crossing we could see neither before nor behind. But at the moment
I thought nothing of this nor of her delay; and I was following her
quite at my leisure and picking my way, when the sudden report of a
carbine, a second report, and a yell of alarm in front thrilled me
through.

On the instant, while the sound was still in my ears, I saw it all. Like
a hot iron piercing my brain the truth flashed into my mind. We were
attacked! We were attacked, and I was here helpless in this pit, this
trap! The loss of a second while I fumbled here, Mademoiselle's horse
barring the way, might be fatal.

There was but one way. I turned my horse straight at the steep bank, and
he breasted it. One moment he hung as if he must fall back. Then, with
a snort of terror and a desperate bound, he topped it, and gained the
level, trembling and snorting.

Seventy paces away on the road lay one of my men. He had fallen, horse
and man, and lay still. Near him, with his back against a bank, stood
his fellow, on foot, pressed by four horsemen, and shouting. As my
eye lighted on the scene he let fly with a carbine, and dropped one.
I clutched a pistol from my holster and seized my horse by the head.
I might save the man yet, I shouted to him to encourage him, and was
driving in my spurs to second my voice, when a sudden vicious blow,
swift and unexpected, struck the pistol from my hand.

I made a snatch at it as it fell, but missed it, and before I could
recover myself, Mademoiselle thrust her horse furiously against mine,
and with her riding-whip lashed the sorrel across the ears. As the horse
reared up madly, I had a glimpse of her eyes flashing hate through her
mask; of her hand again uplifted; the next moment, I was down in the
road, ingloriously unhorsed, the sorrel was galloping away, and her
horse, scared in its turn, was plunging unmanageably a score of paces
from me.

But for that I think that she would have trampled on me. As it was, I
was free to rise, and draw, and in a twinkling was running towards the
fighters. All had happened in a few seconds. My man was still defending
himself, the smoke of the carbine had scarcely risen. I sprang across
a fallen tree that intervened, and at the same moment two of the men
detached themselves and rode to meet me. One, whom I took to be the
leader, was masked. He came furiously at me to ride me down, but I
leaped aside nimbly, and, evading him, rushed at the other, and scaring
his horse, so that he dropped his point, cut him across the shoulder,
before he could guard himself. He plunged away, cursing and trying to
hold in his horse, and I turned to meet the masked man.

'You villain!' he cried, riding at me again. This time he manoeuvred his
horse so skilfully that I was hard put to it to prevent him knocking
me down; while I could not with all my efforts reach him to hurt him.
'Surrender, will you?' he cried, 'you bloodhound!'

I wounded him slightly in the knee for answer; before I could do more
his companion came back, and the two set upon me, slashing at my head so
furiously and towering above me with so great an advantage that it was
all I could do to guard it. I was soon glad to fall back against the
bank. In this sort of conflict my rapier would have been of little
use, but fortunately I had armed myself before I left Paris with a
cut-and-thrust sword for the road; and though my mastery of the weapon
was not on a par with my rapier play, I was able to fend off their cuts,
and by an occasional prick keep the horses at a distance. Still, they
swore and cut at me; and it was trying work. A little delay might enable
the other man to come to their help, or Mademoiselle, for all I knew,
might shoot me with my own pistol. I was unfeignedly glad when a lucky
parade sent the masked man's sword flying across the road. On that he
pushed his horse recklessly at me, spurring it without mercy; but the
animal, which I had several times touched, reared up instead, and threw
him at the very moment that I wounded his companion a second time in the
arm, and made him give back.

The scene was now changed. The man in the mask staggered to his feet,
and felt stupidly for a pistol. But he could not find one, and he was
in no state to use it if he had. He reeled helplessly to the bank
and leaned against it. The man I had wounded was in scarcely better
condition. He retreated before me, but in a moment, losing courage,
let drop his sword, and, wheeling round, cantered off, clinging to his
pommel. There remained only the fellow engaged with my man, and I turned
to see how they were getting on. They were standing to take breath, so
I ran towards them; but on seeing me coming, this rascal, too, whipped
round his horse and disappeared in the wood, and left us victors.

The first thing I did--and I remember it to this day with pleasure--was
to plunge my hand into my pocket, take out half of all the money I had
in the world, and press it on the man who had fought for me so stoutly.
In my joy I could have kissed him! It was not only that I had escaped
defeat by the skin of my teeth--and his good sword; but I knew, and
felt, and thrilled with the knowledge, that the fight had, in a sense,
redeemed my character. He was wounded in two places, and I had a scratch
or two, and had lost my horse; and my other poor fellow was dead as a
herring. But, speaking for myself, I would have spent half the blood in
my body to purchase the feeling with which I turned back to speak to M.
de Cocheforet and his sister. Mademoiselle had dismounted, and with her
face averted and her mask pushed on one side, was openly weeping.
Her brother, who had faithfully kept his place by the ford from the
beginning of the fight to the end, met me with raised eyebrows and a
peculiar smile.

'Acknowledge my virtue,' he said airily. 'I am here, M. de Berault;
which is more than can be said of the two gentlemen who have just ridden
off.'

'Yes,' I answered with a touch of bitterness. 'I wish that they had not
shot my poor man before they went.'

He shrugged his shoulders.

'They were my friends,' he said. 'You must not expect me to blame them.
But that is not all, M. de Berault.'

'No,' I said, wiping my sword. 'There is this gentleman in the mask.'
And I turned to go towards him.

'M. de Berault!' Cocheforet called after me, his tone strained and
abrupt.

I stood. 'Pardon?' I said, turning.

'That gentleman?' he said, hesitating and looking at me doubtfully.
'Have you considered what will happen to him if you give him up to the
authorities?'

'Who is he?' I asked sharply.

'That is rather a delicate question,' he answered frowning.

'Not for me,' I replied brutally, 'since he is in my power. If he will
take off his mask I shall know better what I intend to do with him.'

The stranger had lost his hat in his fall, and his fair hair, stained
with dust, hung in curls on his shoulders. He was a tall man, of a
slender, handsome presence, and, though his dress was plain and almost
rough, I espied a splendid jewel on his hand, and fancied that I
detected other signs of high quality. He still lay against the bank in a
half-swooning condition, and seemed unconscious of my scrutiny.

'Should I know him if he unmasked?' I said suddenly, a new idea in my
head.

'You would,' M. de Cocheforet answered.

'And?'

'It would be bad for everyone.'

'Ho! ho!' I replied softly, looking hard first at my old prisoner, and
then at my new one. 'Then--what do you wish me to do?'

'Leave him here!' M. de Cocheforet answered, his face flushed, the pulse
in his cheek beating.

I had known him for a man of perfect honour before, and trusted him. But
this evident earnest anxiety on behalf of his friend touched me not a
little. Besides, I knew that I was treading on slippery ground: that it
behoved me to be careful.

'I will do it,' I said after a moment's reflection. 'He will play me no
tricks, I suppose? A letter of--'

'MON DIEU, no! He will understand,' Cocheforet answered eagerly. 'You
will not repent it. Let us be going.'

'Well, but my horse?' I said, somewhat taken aback by this extreme
haste. 'How am I to--'

'We shall overtake it,' he assured me. 'It will have kept the road.
Lectoure is no more than a league from here, and we can give orders
there to have these two fetched and buried.'

I had nothing to gain by demurring, and so, after another word or two,
it was arranged. We picked up what we had dropped, M. de Cocheforet
helped his sister to mount, and within five minutes we were gone.
Casting a glance back from the skirts of the wood I fancied that I saw
the masked man straighten himself and turn to look after us, but the
leaves were beginning to intervene, the distance may have cheated
me. And yet I was not indisposed to think the unknown a trifle more
observant, and a little less seriously hurt, than he seemed.



CHAPTER XIII. AT THE FINGER-POST

Through all, it will have been noticed, Mademoiselle had not spoken to
me, nor said one word, good or bad. She had played her part grimly,
had taken defeat in silence if with tears, had tried neither prayer nor
defence nor apology. And the fact that the fight was now over, and the
scene left behind, made no difference in her conduct. She kept her face
studiously turned from me, and affected to ignore my presence. I caught
my horse feeding by the roadside, a furlong forward, and mounted and
fell into place behind the two, as in the morning. And just as we had
plodded on then in silence we plodded on now; almost as if nothing
had happened; while I wondered at the unfathomable ways of women,
and marvelled that she could take part in such an incident and remain
unchanged.

Yet, though she strove to hide it, it had made a change in her. Though
her mask served her well it could not entirely hide her emotions; and
by-and-by I marked that her head drooped, that she rode listlessly, that
the lines of her figure were altered. I noticed that she had flung away,
or furtively dropped, her riding-whip; and I began to understand that,
far from the fight having set me in my former place, to the old hatred
of me were now added shame and vexation on her own account; shame that
she had so lowered herself, even to save her brother, vexation that
defeat had been her only reward.

Of this I saw a sign at Lectoure, where the inn had but one common room
and we must all dine in company. I secured for them a table by the fire,
and leaving them standing by it, retired myself to a smaller one near
the door. There were no other guests; which made the separation between
us more marked. M. de Cocheforet seemed to feel this. He shrugged his
shoulders and looked across the room at me with a smile half sad half
comical. But Mademoiselle was implacable. She had taken off her mask,
and her face was like stone. Once, only once during the meal, I saw a
change come over her. She coloured, I suppose at her thoughts, until her
face flamed from brow to chin. I watched the blush spread and spread;
and then she slowly and proudly turned her shoulder to me and looked
through the window at the shabby street.

I suppose that she and her brother had both built on this attempt, which
must have been arranged at Auch. For when we went on in the afternoon,
I marked a change in them. They rode like people resigned to the worst.
The grey realities of the position, the dreary future began to hang like
a mist before their eyes, began to tinge the landscape with sadness,
robbed even the sunset of its colours. With each hour Monsieur's spirits
flagged and his speech became less frequent; until presently when the
light was nearly gone and the dusk was round us the brother and sister
rode hand in hand, silent, gloomy, one at least of them weeping. The
cold shadow of the Cardinal, of Paris, of the scaffold fell on them, and
chilled them. As the mountains which they had known all their lives
sank and faded behind us, and we entered on the wide, low valley of
the Garonne, their hopes sank and faded also--sank to the dead level of
despair. Surrounded by guards, a mark for curious glances, with pride
