the dues which they were accustomed to receive from him annually.

[Sidenote: B.C. 247 (_a.u._ 507)] Next year the Romans officially
refrained from naval warfare because of their misfortunes and
expenses, but some private individuals asked for ships on condition of
restoring the vessels but appropriating any booty gained; and among
other injuries that they inflicted upon the enemy they sailed to
Hippo, a Libyan city, and there burned to ashes all the boats and many
of the buildings. The natives put chains across the mouth of their
harbor and the invaders found themselves encompassed but saved
themselves by cleverness and good fortune. They made a quick dash at
the chains, and just as the beaks of the ships were about to catch in
them the members of the crew went back to the stern, and so the prows
being lightened cleared the chains: and again, by their making a rush
into the prows, the sterns of the vessels were lifted high enough in
the air. Thus they effected their escape, and later near Panhormus
they conquered the Carthaginians with these ships.

Of the consuls Metellus Caecilius was in the vicinity of Lilybaeum, and
Numerius Fabius was investing Drepanum, with additional designs upon
the islet of Pelias. As this had been seized earlier by the
Carthaginians, he sent soldiers by night who killed the garrison and
took possession of the island. Learning this Hamilcar at dawn attacked
the party that had crossed to it. Fabius not being able to ward them
off led an assault upon Drepanum that he might either capture the city
while deserted or bring back Hamilcar from the island. One of these
objects was accomplished, for Hamilcar in fear retired within the
fortifications. So Fabius occupied Pelias, and by filling in the
strait (which happened to be shallow) between it and the mainland he
made a clear stretch of solid ground and thus conducted with greater
facility his hostile operations against the wall, which was rather
weak at that point. Incidentally the Carthaginians caused the Romans
excessive annoyance by undertaking circuitous voyages to Sicily and
making trips across into Italy.--They exchanged each other's captives
man for man; those left over (since the numbers were not equal) the
Carthaginians got back for money.

In the subsequent period various persons became consuls but effected
nothing worthy of record. The Romans owed the majority of their
reverses to the fact that they kept sending out from year to year
different and ever different leaders, and took away their office from
them when they were just learning the art of generalship. It looked as
if they were choosing them for practice and not for service.

The Gauls, who were acting in alliance with the Carthaginians and
hated them because their masters treated them ill, abandoned to the
Romans for money a position with the guarding of which they had been
entrusted. The Romans secured for mercenary service the Gauls and
other of the Carthaginian allies who had revolted from their service;
never before had they supported foreigners in their army. Elated at
this accession and furthermore by the ravaging of Libya on the part of
the private citizens who were managing the ships, they were no longer
willing to neglect the sea, and they again got together a fleet.

[Sidenote: B.C. 241 (_a.u._ 513)] VIII, 17.--And Lutatius Catulus was
chosen consul and with him was sent out Quintus Valerius Flaccus as
praetor urbanus. On coming to Sicily they assailed Drepanum both by
land and by sea and demolished a section of the wall. They would have
captured the town but for the fact that the consul was wounded and the
soldiers were wholly engrossed in caring for him. During the delay
which ensued they learned that a body of the enemy had come from home
with a huge fleet commanded by Hanno, and they turned their attention
to these new arrivals. When the forces had been marshaled in hostile
array, a meteor like a star appeared above the Romans and after rising
high to the left of the Carthaginians plunged into their ranks. The
naval combat was a vigorous one on the part of both nations, and for
several reasons; especially were the Carthaginians anxious to drive
the Romans into complete despair of naval success, and the Romans to
retrieve their former disasters. In spite of everything the Romans
carried off the victory, for the Carthaginian vessels were impeded by
the fact that they carried freight,--grain and money and other things.

Hanno escaped and hastened at once to Carthage. The Carthaginians,
seized with wrath and fear, crucified him and sent envoys to Catulus
regarding peace. And he was disposed to end the war since his office
was soon to expire and he could not hope to destroy Carthage in so
short a time; nor, again, did he care to leave his successors the
glory of his own efforts. Consequently they effected an armistice by
giving him money, grain, and hostages; these preliminaries secured
them the right of sending envoys to Rome and proposing as conditions
that they retire from Sicily entire, yielding it to the Romans, as
well as abandon all the surrounding islands, that they carry on no war
with Hiero, and pay an indemnity, a part at the time of making the
treaty and a part later, and that they return the Roman deserters and
captives free of cost, but ransom their own.

Such were the terms agreed upon. Hamilcar succeeded only in having the
disgrace of going under the yoke left out. After settling these
conditions he led his soldiers out of the fortifications and sailed
for home before the oaths were imposed. The people of Rome soon
learned of the victory and were greatly elated, feeling that their
superiority was indisputable. Upon the arrival of envoys they could no
longer restrain themselves and hoped to possess all of Libya.
Therefore they would not abide by the terms of the consul: instead,
they exacted from them a very much larger sum of money than had been
promised. They forbade them also to sail past Italy or allied
territory abroad in ships of war, or to employ mercenaries from such
districts.

The first war between the Carthaginians and the Romans, then, ended
this way in the twenty-fourth year. Catulus celebrated a triumph over
its conclusion. Quintus Lutatius became consul and departed for
Sicily, where with his brother Catulus he enforced order in all
communities; and he deprived the islanders of arms. Thus Sicily, with
the exception of Hiero's domain, was made a slave of Rome, and from
this time its people were on a friendly footing with the
Carthaginians.

Both soon were again involved in other wars outside. At Carthage the
remnant of their mercenary force and the slave population in the city
and a large proportion of their hostages (influenced by the disasters
of the State) joined in an attack upon it. The Romans did not heed the
invitations to aid the party that had assumed the offensive, but sent
envoys in turn for discussion; and when they found themselves unable
to reconcile the combatants, they released free of cost all the
Carthaginian captives they were holding, sent grain to the city and
permitted it to gather mercenaries from Roman allied territory. By
this action they were seeking to gain a reputation for fairness rather
than displaying a real interest in their own advantage, and this later
caused them trouble. For the great Hamilcar Barca, after he had
conquered his adversaries, did not dare to make a campaign against the
Romans, much as he hated them; but he started for Spain contrary to
the wishes of the magistrates at home.

VIII, 18.--This, however, took place later. At the time under
discussion the Romans entered upon war with the Falisci, and Manlius
Torquatus ravaged their country. In a battle with them his heavy
infantry was worsted but his cavalry conquered. In a second engagement
with them he was victorious and took possession of their arms, their
cavalry, their furniture, their slaves, and half their country. Later
on the original city, which was set upon a steep mountain, was torn
down and another one was built, easily reached by road. After this the
Romans again waged wars upon the Boii and upon the Gauls that were
neighbors of the latter, and upon some Ligurians. The Ligurians were
conquered in battle and otherwise injured by Sempronius Gracchus:
Publius Valerius in a conflict with the Gauls was at first defeated,
but soon, learning that troops had come from Rome to his assistance,
he renewed the struggle with the Gauls, determined either to conquer
by his own exertions or to die--he preferred that rather than to live
and bear the stigma of disgrace; and by some fortune or other he
managed to win the day.

[Sidenote: B.C. 238 (_a.u._ 516)] At this time these events befell the
Romans as described. They also secured Sardinia from the Carthaginians
and a new supply of money by charging them with harming Roman
shipping. The Carthaginians, not having yet recovered strength, feared
their threats.--Next year Lucius Lentulus and Quintus Flaccus made a
campaign against the Gauls; and as long as they remained together,
they were invincible, [Sidenote: B.C. 237 (_a.u._ 517)] but when they
began to pillage districts separately with the idea of getting greater
booty, the army of Flaccus fell into danger, being surrounded by
night. Temporarily the barbarians were beaten back, but having gained
accessions of allies they proceeded anew with a huge force against the
Romans. [Sidenote: B.C. 236 (_a.u._ 518)] When confronted by Publius
Lentulus and Licinius Varus, they hoped to overcome them by their
numbers and prevail without a battle. So they sent and demanded the
land surrounding Ariminum and commanded the Romans to remove from the
city since it belonged to them. The consuls on account of their small
numbers did not dare to risk a battle nor would they take the
responsibility of releasing any territory, and accordingly they
arranged a truce to confer with Rome. Gallic emissaries came before
the senate with the aforementioned representations. As none of their
demands was granted, the envoys returned to camp. There they found
their cause was ruined. Some of their allies had repented and
regarding the Romans with fear had turned upon the Boii, and many had
been killed on both sides. Then the remainder had gone home and the
Boii had obtained peace only at the price of a large portion of their
land.

The Gallic wars having now ceased, Lentulus conducted a campaign
against the Ligurians. He drove off the attacking parties and gained
possession of several fortresses.--Varus took Corsica as his objective
point, and inasmuch as he lacked the necessary ships to carry him
over, he sent a certain Claudius Clineas in advance with troops. The
latter terrified the Corsicans, held a conference with them, and made
peace as though he had full authority to do so. But Varus, paying no
attention to the covenant, fought against the Corsicans until he had
subjugated them. [Sidenote: FRAG. 44^2] THE ROMANS TO DIVERT THE BLAME
FOR BREAKING THE COMPACT FROM THEMSELVES SENT TO THE PEOPLE OFFERING
TO GIVE CLAUDIUS UP. WHEN HE WAS NOT RECEIVED, THEY DROVE HIM INTO
EXILE. [Sidenote: FRAG. 45^1] THEY WERE ON THE POINT OF LEADING AN
EXPEDITION AGAINST THE CARTHAGINIANS ALLEGING THAT THE LATTER WERE
COMMITTING OUTRAGES UPON THE MERCHANTS; BUT INSTEAD OF DOING THIS THEY
EXACTED MONEY AND RENEWED THE TRUCE. Yet the agreements were not
destined even so to be of long standing.--The case of the
Carthaginians was accordingly postponed and they made an expedition
against the Sardinians, who would not yield obedience, and conquered
them. Subsequently the Carthaginians persuaded the Sardinians to plan
a secret uprising against the Romans. Besides these the Corsicans also
revolted and the Ligurians did not remain at rest.

[Sidenote: B.C. 234 (_a.u._ 520)] The following year the Romans
divided their forces into three parts in order that all the rebels,
finding war waged upon them at once, might not render assistance to
one another; and they sent Postumius Albinus into Liguria, Spurius
Carvilius against the Corsicans, and Publius Cornelius, the praetor
urbanus, into Sardinia. And the consuls not without trouble, yet with
some speed, accomplished their missions. The Sardinians, animated by
an immoderate amount of spirit, were vanquished by Carvilius in a
fierce battle, for Cornelius and many of his soldiers had been
destroyed by disease. When the Romans left their country, the
Sardinians and the Ligurians revolted again. [Sidenote: B.C. 233
(_a.u._ 521)] Quintus Fabius Maximus was accordingly sent to Ligurian
territory and Pomponius Manius into Sardinia. The Carthaginians, as
the cause of the wars, were adjudged enemies, and they sent to them
and demanded money and ordained that they should remove their ships
from all the islands, since these ports were hostile to them. In
making known their attitude the Romans despatched to their rivals a
spear and a herald's staff, bidding them choose one, whichever they
pleased. But the Carthaginians without shrinking made a rather rough
answer and declared that they chose neither of the articles sent them,
but were ready to accept either that the challengers might leave
there. Henceforth the two nations hated each other but hesitated to
begin war.

[Sidenote: B.C. 232 (_a.u._ 522)] As there was again a hostile
movement of the Sardinians against the Romans, both the consuls took
the field, Marcus Malleolus and Marcus AEmilius. And they secured rich
spoils, which, however, were taken away from them by the Corsicans
when they touched at their island. Hence the Romans next turned their
attention to both. [Sidenote: B.C. 231 (_a.u._ 523)] Marcus Pomponius
harried Sardinia, but could not find most of the inhabitants, who, as
he learned, had slipped into caves of the forest, difficult to locate;
therefore he sent for keen-scented dogs from Italy and with their aid
he discovered the trail of both men and cattle and cut off many such
parties. Gaius Papirius drove the Corsicans from the plains, but in
attempting to force his way to the mountains he lost numerous men
through ambush and would have suffered loss of still more through lack
of water, had not water after a great while been found; then he
persuaded the Corsicans to come to terms.

VIII, 19.--About this time also Hamilcar the Carthaginian general was
defeated by the Spaniards and lost his life. For, on the occasion of
his being arrayed in battle against them, they led out in front of the
Carthaginian army wagons full of pine wood and pitch and as they drew
near they set fire to these vehicles, then hurried on with goads the
animals that were drawing them. Forthwith their opponents were thrown
into confusion, were disorganized and turned to flight, and the
Spaniards pursuing killed Hamilcar and a very great number of others.
He having reached the very highest pinnacle of fame thus met his end,
and at his death his brother-in-law Hasdrubal succeeded him. The
latter acquired a large portion of Spain and founded a city called
Carthage, after his native town.

As the Boii and the rest of the Gauls were continually offering for
sale many articles and an especially large number of captives, the
Romans became afraid that they might some day use the money against
them, and accordingly forbade everybody to give to a Gaul either
silver or gold coin.--[Sidenote: B.C. 230 (_a.u._ 524)] Soon after the
Carthaginians,[28] learning that the consuls Marcus AEmilius and Marcus
Junius had started for Liguria, made preparations to march upon Rome.
The consuls became aware of this and proceeded toward them in force,
whereupon the Carthaginians became frightened and met them with all
appearances of friendliness. The consuls likewise feigned that they
had not set out against them but were going through their country into
the Ligurian territory.

[Footnote 28: This is a mistake, due to the carelessness of Zonaras.
Some Gallic tribe is evidently meant.]

Now the Romans crossed the Ionian Gulf and laid hands upon the Greek
mainland. They found an excuse for the voyage in the following
circumstances. [Sidenote: FRAG. 47^1] ISSA IS AN ISLAND SITUATED IN
THE IONIAN GULF. ITS DWELLERS, KNOWN AS ISSAEANS, HAD OF THEIR OWN FREE
WILL SURRENDERED THEMSELVES TO THE ROMANS because they were angry with
their ruler Agro, king of the Ardiaeans and of Illyrian stock.
[Sidenote: FRAG. 47^2] TO HIM THE CONSULS SENT ENVOYS. But he had
died, leaving a son as his successor who was still a mere child,
[Sidenote: FRAG. 47^2] AND HIS WIFE, THE BOY'S STEPMOTHER, WAS
ADMINISTERING THE DOMAIN OF THE ARDIAEANS. HER DEALINGS WITH THE
AMBASSADORS WERE CHARACTERIZED BY A LACK OF MODERATION, AND WHEN THEY
SPOKE FRANKLY SHE CAST SOME OF THEM INTO PRISON AND KILLED OTHERS.
IMMEDIATELY THE ROMANS VOTED FOR WAR AGAINST HER, HOWEVER, SHE WAS
PANIC-STRICKEN, PROMISED TO RESTORE THE AMBASSADORS THAT WERE LEFT
ALIVE, AND DECLARED THAT THE DEAD HAD BEEN SLAIN BY ROBBERS. WHEN THE
ROMANS DEMANDED THE SURRENDER OF THE MURDERERS, SHE DECLARED THAT SHE
WOULD NOT GIVE THEM UP AND DESPATCHED AN ARMY AGAINST ISSA. THEN SHE
AGAIN GREW FEARFUL AND SENT A CERTAIN DEMETRIUS TO THE CONSULS,
ASSURING THEM OF HER READINESS TO HEED THEM IN EVERY DETAIL. A TRUCE
WAS MADE WITH HER EMISSARY UPON THE LATTER'S AGREEING TO GIVE THEM
CORCYRA. YET WHEN THE CONSULS HAD CROSSED OVER TO THE ISLAND, SHE,
POSSESSING WOMAN-LIKE A LIGHT AND FICKLE DISPOSITION, FELT IMBUED WITH
NEW COURAGE, AND SENT OUT AN ARMY TO EPIDAMNUS AND APOLLONIA. AT THE
NEWS THAT THE ROMANS HAD RESCUED THE CITIES, THAT THEY HAD DETAINED
SHIPS OF HERS LADEN WITH TREASURE WHICH WERE SAILING HOME FROM THE
PELOPONNESUS, THAT THEY HAD DEVASTATED THE COAST REGIONS, THAT
DEMETRIUS AS A RESULT OF HER CAPRICIOUSNESS HAD TRANSFERRED HIS
ALLEGIANCE TO THE ROMANS BESIDES PERSUADING SOME OTHERS TO DESERT, SHE
BECAME UTTERLY TERRIFIED AND WITHDREW FROM HER SOVEREIGNTY. Demetrius
as destined guardian of the child was given charge of the ex-queen
also. The Romans were thanked by the Corinthians for this action and
took part in the Isthmian contest, Plautus winning the stadium race in
it. Moreover they formed a friendship with the Athenians and took part
in their government and in the Mysteries.

The name Illyricum was anciently applied to various regions, but later
it was transferred to the upper mainland, that above Macedonia and
Thrace, located this side of Haemus and toward Rhodope: it lies between
these mountains and the Alps, also between the river AEnus and the
Ister, extending as far as the Euxine Sea,--indeed, its boundaries at
some points extend beyond the Ister.

[Sidenote: (FRAG. 48?)] AS AN ORACLE HAD ONCE COME TO THE ROMANS THAT
GREEKS AND GAULS SHOULD OCCUPY THE CITY, TWO GAULS AND A COUPLE OF
GREEKS, MALE AND FEMALE, WERE BURIED ALIVE IN THE FORUM, that in this
way destiny might seem to have fulfilled itself and they be properly
regarded, since buried alive, as possessing a part of the city.

After this the Sardinians, deeming it a calamity that a Roman praetor
was forever set over them, made an uprising. They were again enslaved,
however.

VIII, 20.--The Insubres, a Gallic tribe, having gained allies among
their kinsmen beyond the Alps turned their arms against the Romans,
and the latter accordingly made counter-preparations. The barbarians
plundered some towns, but at last a great storm occurred in the night
and they began to suspect that Heaven was against them. Consequently
they lost heart and falling into a panic attempted to entrust their
safety to flight. [Sidenote: B.C. 225 (_a.u._ 529)] Regulus pursued
them and brought on an engagement with the rear guards in which he was
defeated and lost his life. AEmilius occupied a hill and remained
quiet. The Gauls in turn occupied another one and for several days
were inactive; then the Romans through anger at what had taken place
and the barbarians from arrogance born of the victory charged down
from the heights and came to blows. For a long time the battle was
evenly contested, but finally the Romans surrounded them with their
horse, cut them down, seized their camp, and got back the spoils.
After this AEmilius wrought havoc among the possessions of the Boii and
