
"Upon what?"

"That you are no longer twenty years of age. Believe me, I speak
according to my own knowledge and experience. A prison is certain death
for men of our time of life. No, no; I will never allow you to languish
in prison in such a way. Why, the very thought of it makes my head turn
giddy."

"Dear D'Artagnan," Athos replied. "Heaven most fortunately made my body
as strong, powerful, and enduring as my mind; and, rely upon it, I shall
retain my strength up to the very last moment."

"But this is not strength of mind or character; it is sheer madness."

"No, D'Artagnan, it is the highest order of reasoning. Do not suppose
that I should in the slightest degree in the world discuss the question
with you, whether you would not be ruined in endeavoring to save me. I
should have done precisely as you are doing if flight had been part of
my plan of action; I should, therefore, have accepted from you what,
without any doubt, you would have accepted from me. No! I know you too
well even to breathe a word upon the subject."

"Ah! if you would only let me do it," said D'Artagnan, "how I would send
the king running after you."

"Still, he is the king; do not forget that, my dear friend."

"Oh! that is all the same to me; and king though he be, I would plainly
tell him, 'Sire! imprison, exile, kill every one in France and Europe;
order me to arrest and poniard even whom you like--even were it
Monsieur, your own brother; but do not touch one of the four musketeers,
or if so, _mordioux_!'"

"My dear friend," replied Athos, with perfect calmness, "I should like
to persuade you of one thing; namely, that I wish to be arrested; that I
desire above all things that my arrest should take place."

D'Artagnan made a slight movement of his shoulders.

"Nay; I wish it, I repeat, more than anything; if you were to let me
escape, it would be only to return of my own accord, and constitute
myself a prisoner. I wish to prove to this young man, who is dazzled by
the power and splendor of his crown, that he can be regarded as the
first and chiefest among men only on the one condition of his proving
himself to be the most generous and the wisest among them. He may punish
me, imprison or torture me, it matters not. He abuses his opportunities,
and I wish him to learn the bitterness of remorse, while Heaven teaches
him what a chastisement is."

"Well, well," replied D'Artagnan, "I know, only too well, that when you
have once said 'no,' you mean 'no.' I do not insist any longer; you wish
to go to the Bastille?"

"I do wish to go there."

"Let us go, then! To the Bastille!" cried D'Artagnan to the coachman.
And throwing himself back in the carriage, he gnawed the ends of his
mustache with a fury which, for Athos, who knew him well, signified a
resolution either already taken or in course of formation. A profound
silence ensued in the carriage, which continued to roll on, but neither
faster nor slower than before. Athos took the musketeer by the hand.

"You are not angry with me, D'Artagnan?" he said.

"I!--oh, no! certainly not; of course not. What you do from heroism, I
should have done from sheer obstinacy."

"But you are quite of opinion, are you not, that Heaven will avenge me,
D'Artagnan?"

"And I know some persons on earth who will lend a helping hand," said
the captain.




CHAPTER LXX.

THREE GUESTS ASTONISHED TO FIND THEMSELVES AT SUPPER TOGETHER.


The carriage arrived at the outside gate of the Bastille. A soldier on
guard stopped it, but D'Artagnan had only to utter a single word to
procure admittance, and the carriage passed on without further
difficulty. While they were proceeding along the covered way which led
to the courtyard of the governor's residence, D'Artagnan, whose lynx
eye saw everything, even through the walls, suddenly cried out, "What is
that out yonder?"

"Well," said Athos, quietly, "what is it?"

"Look yonder, Athos."

"In the courtyard?"

"Yes, yes; make haste!"

"Well, a carriage; very likely conveying a prisoner like myself."

"That would be too droll."

"I do not understand you."

"Make haste and look again, and look at the man who is just getting out
of that carriage."

At that very moment a second sentinel stopped D'Artagnan, and while the
formalities were being gone through, Athos could see at a hundred paces
from him the man whom his friend had pointed out to him. He was, in
fact, getting out of the carriage at the door of the governor's house.
"Well," inquired D'Artagnan, "do you see him?"

"Yes; he is a man in a gray suit."

"What do you say of him?"

"I cannot very well tell; he is, as I have just now told you, a man in a
gray suit, who is getting out, of a carriage; that is all."

"Athos, I will wager anything it is he."

"He--who?"

"Aramis."

"Aramis arrested? Impossible!"

"I do not say he is arrested, since we see him alone in his carriage."

"Well, then, what is he doing here?"

"Oh! he knows Baisemeaux, the governor," replied the musketeer, slyly;
"so we have arrived just in time."

"What for?"

"In order to see what we can see."

"I regret this meeting exceedingly. When Aramis sees me, he will be very
much annoyed, in the first place, at seeing me, and in the next at being
seen."

"Very well reasoned."

"Unfortunately there is no remedy for it; whenever any one meets another
in the Bastille, even if he wished to draw back to avoid him, it would
be impossible."

"Athos, I have an idea; the question is, to spare Aramis the annoyance
you were speaking of, is it not?"

"What is to be done?"

"I will tell you; or, in order to explain myself in the best possible
way, let me relate the affair in my own manner; I will not recommend you
to tell a falsehood, for that would be impossible for you to do; but I
will tell falsehoods enough for both; it is so easy to do that with the
nature and habits of a Gascon."

Athos smiled. The carriage stopped where the one we have just now
pointed out had stopped; namely, at the door of the governor's house.
"It is understood, then?" said D'Artagnan, in a low voice to his friend.
Athos consented by a gesture. They ascended the staircase. There will be
no occasion for surprise at the facility with which they had entered
into the Bastille, if it be remembered that, before passing the first
gate, in fact, the most difficult of all, D'Artagnan had announced that
he had brought a prisoner of state. At the third gate, on the contrary,
that is to say, when he had once fairly entered the prison, he merely
said to the sentinel, "To M. Baisemeaux;" and they both passed on. In a
few minutes they were in the governor's dining-room, and the first face
which attracted D'Artagnan's observation was that of Aramis, who was
seated side by side with Baisemeaux, and awaited the announcement of a
good meal, whose odor impregnated the whole apartment. If D'Artagnan
pretended surprise, Aramis did not pretend at all; he started when he
saw his two friends, and his emotion was very apparent. Athos and
D'Artagnan, however, complimented him as usual, and Baisemeaux, amazed,
completely stupefied by the presence of his three guests, began to
perform a few evolutions around them. "By what lucky accident--"

"We were just going to ask you," retorted D'Artagnan.

"Are we going to give ourselves up as prisoners?" cried Aramis, with an
affectation of hilarity.

"Ah! ah!" said D'Artagnan; "it is true the walls smell deucedly like a
prison. Monsieur de Baisemeaux, you know you invited me to sup with you
the other day."

"I?" cried Baisemeaux.

"Yes, of course you did, although you now seem so struck with amazement.
Don't you remember it?"

Baisemeaux turned pale and then red, looked at Aramis, who looked at
him, and finished by stammering out, "Certainly--I am delighted--but
upon my honor--I have not the slightest--Ah! I have such a wretched
memory."

"Well! I am wrong, I see," said D'Artagnan, as if he were offended.

"Wrong, what for?"

"Wrong to remember anything about it, it seems."

Baisemeaux hurried toward him. "Do not stand on ceremony, my dear
captain," he said; "I have the worst memory in the world. I no sooner
leave off thinking of my pigeons and their pigeon-house, than I am no
better than the rawest recruit."

"At all events, you remember it now," said D'Artagnan, boldly.

"Yes, yes," replied the governor, hesitating; "I think I remember."

"It was when you came to the palace to see me; you told me some story or
other about your accounts with M. de Louviere and M. de Tremblay."

"Oh, yes! perfectly."

"And about M. d'Herblay's kindness toward you."

"Ah!" exclaimed Aramis, looking the unhappy governor full in the face,
"and yet you just now said you had no memory, Monsieur de Baisemeaux."

Baisemeaux interrupted the musketeer in the midst of his revelations.
"Yes, yes; you're quite right; how could I have forgotten; I remember it
now as well as possible; I beg you a thousand pardons. But now, once for
all, my dear M. d'Artagnan, be sure that at this present time, as at any
other, whether invited or not, you are perfectly at home here, you and
M. d'Herblay, your friend," he said, turning toward Aramis; "and this
gentleman, too," he added, bowing to Athos.

"Well, I thought it would be sure to turn out so," replied D'Artagnan,
"and that is the reason I came. Having nothing to do this evening at the
Palais Royal, I wished to judge for myself what your ordinary style of
living was like, and as I was coming along, I met the Comte de la Fere."

Athos bowed. "The comte, who had just left his majesty, handed me an
order which required immediate attention. We were close by here; I
wished to call in, even if it were for no other object than that of
shaking hands with you and of presenting the comte to you, of whom you
spoke so highly that evening at the palace when--"

"Certainly, certainly--M. le Comte de la Fere."

"Precisely."

"The comte is welcome, I am sure."

"And he will sup with you two, I suppose, while I, unfortunate dog that
I am, must run off on a matter of duty. Oh! what happy beings you are,
compared to myself," he added, sighing as loud as Porthos might have
done.

"And so you are going away, then?" said Aramis and Baisemeaux together,
with the same expression of delighted surprise, the tone of which was
immediately noticed by D'Artagnan.

"I leave you in my place," he said, "a noble and excellent guest." And
he touched Athos gently on the shoulder, who, astonished also, could not
prevent exhibiting his surprise a little; a tone which was noticed by
Aramis only, for M. de Baisemeaux was not quite equal to the three
friends in point of intelligence.

"What! are you going to leave us?" resumed the governor.

"I shall only be about an hour, or an hour and a half. I will return in
time for dessert."

"Oh! we will wait for you," said Baisemeaux.

"No, no; that would be really disobliging me."

"You will be sure to return, though?" said Athos, with an expression of
doubt.

"Most certainly," he said, pressing his friend's hand confidentially;
and he added, in a low voice, "Wait for me, Athos; be cheerful and
lively as possible, and above all, don't allude even to business
affairs, for Heaven's sake."

And with a renewed pressure of the hand, he seemed to warn the comte of
the necessity of keeping perfectly discreet and impenetrable. Baisemeaux
led D'Artagnan to the gate. Aramis, with many friendly protestations of
delight, sat down by Athos, determined to make him speak; but Athos
possessed every virtue and quality to the very highest degree. If
necessity had required it, he would have been the finest orator in the
world, but on other occasions he would rather have died than have opened
his lips.

Ten minutes after D'Artagnan's departure, the three gentlemen sat down
to table, which was covered with the most substantial display of
gastronomic luxury. Large joints, exquisite dishes, preserves, the
greatest variety of wines, appeared successively upon the table, which
was served at the king's expense, and of which expense M. Colbert would
have found no difficulty in saving two-thirds, without any one in the
Bastille being the worse for it. Baisemeaux was the only one who ate and
drank resolutely. Aramis allowed nothing to pass by him, but merely
touched everything he took; Athos, after the soup and three hors
d'oeuvres, ate nothing more. The style of conversation was such as
could hardly be otherwise between three men so opposite in temper and
ideas. Aramis was incessantly asking himself by what extraordinary
chance Athos was at Baisemeaux's when D'Artagnan was no longer there,
and why D'Artagnan did not remain when Athos was there. Athos sounded
all the depths of the mind of Aramis, who lived in the midst of
subterfuge, evasion, and intrigue; he studied his man well and
thoroughly, and felt convinced that he was engaged upon some important
project. And then he too began to think of his own personal affair, and
to lose himself in conjectures as to D'Artagnan's reason for having left
the Bastille so abruptly, and for leaving behind him a prisoner so badly
introduced and so badly looked after by the prison authorities. But we
shall not pause to examine into the thoughts and feelings of these
personages, but will leave them to themselves, surrounded by the remains
of poultry, game, and fish, which Baisemeaux's generous knife and fork
had so mutilated. We are going to follow D'Artagnan instead, who,
getting into the carriage which had brought him, said to the coachman,
"Return to the palace, and as fast as you can possibly make the horses
go."




CHAPTER LXXI.

WHAT TOOK PLACE AT THE LOUVRE DURING THE SUPPER AT THE BASTILLE.


M. de Saint-Aignan had executed the commission with which the king had
intrusted him for La Valliere, as we have already seen in one of the
preceding chapters; but, whatever his eloquence might have been, he did
not succeed in persuading the young girl that she had in the king a
protector powerful enough for her under any combination of
circumstances, and that she had no need of any one else in the world
when the king was on her side. In point of fact, at the very first word
which the favorite mentioned of the discovery of the famous secret,
Louise, in a passion of tears, abandoned herself in utter despair to a
sorrow which would have been far from flattering for the king, if he had
been a witness of it from one of the corners of the room. Saint-Aignan,
in his character of ambassador, felt greatly offended at it, as his
master himself would have been, and returned to inform the king what he
had seen and heard; and it is there we shall now find him in a state of
great agitation, in the presence of the king, who was, if possible, in a
state of greater agitation than he.

"But," said the king to the courtier, when the latter had finished his
report, "what did she decide to do? Shall I at least see her presently
before supper? Will she come to me, or shall I be obliged to go to her
room?"

"I believe, sire, that if your majesty wishes to see her, you will not
only have to take the first step in advance, but will have to go the
whole way."

"That I do not mind. Do you think she has still a fancy for that
Bragelonne?" muttered the king between his teeth.

"Oh! sire, that is not possible; for it is you alone, I am convinced,
Mademoiselle de la Valliere loves, and that, too, with all her heart.
But you know that De Bragelonne belongs to that proud race who play the
part of Roman heroes."

The king smiled feebly; he knew how true the illustration was, for Athos
had just left him.

"As for Mademoiselle de la Valliere," Saint-Aignan continued, "she was
brought up under the care of the Dowager Madame; that is to say, in the
greatest austerity and formality. This young engaged couple coldly
exchanged their little vows in the presence of the moon and the stars,
and now, when they find they have to break those vows asunder, it plays
the very deuce with them."

Saint-Aignan thought he should have made the king laugh; but quite on
the contrary, from a mere smile Louis passed to the greatest seriousness
of manner. He already began to experience that remorse which the comte
had promised D'Artagnan he would inflict upon him. He reflected that, in
fact, these young persons had loved and sworn fidelity to each other;
that one of the two had kept his word, and that the other was too
conscientious not to feel her perjury most bitterly. And his remorse was
not unaccompanied; for bitter pangs of jealousy began to beset the
king's heart. He did not say another word, and instead of going to pay a
visit to his mother, or the queen, or Madame, in order to amuse himself
a little, and make the ladies laugh, as he himself used to say, he threw
himself into the huge armchair in which his august father, Louis XIII.,
had passed so many weary days and years in company with Baradas and
Cinq-Mars. Saint-Aignan perceived that the king was not to be amused at
that moment: he tried a last resource and pronounced Louise's name,
which made the king look up immediately. "What does your majesty intend
to do this evening? Shall Mademoiselle de la Valliere be informed of
your intention to see her?"

"It seems she is already aware of that," replied the king. "No, no,
Saint-Aignan," he continued, after a moment's pause, "we will both of us
pass our time in thinking, and musing, and dreaming; when Mademoiselle
de la Valliere shall have sufficiently regretted what she now regrets,
she will deign, perhaps, to give us some news of herself."

"Ah! sire, is it possible you can so misunderstand her heart, which is
so full of devotion?"

The king rose, flushed from vexation and annoyance; he was a prey to
jealousy as well as to remorse. Saint-Aignan was just beginning to feel
that his position was becoming awkward, when the curtain before the door
was raised. The king turned hastily round; his first idea was that a
letter from Louise had arrived; but, instead of a letter of love, he
only saw his captain of musketeers standing upright and perfectly silent
in the doorway. "M. d'Artagnan," he said, "ah! Well, monsieur?"

D'Artagnan looked at Saint-Aignan; the king's eyes took the same
direction as those of his captain; these looks would have been clear to
any one, and for a still greater reason they were so for Saint-Aignan.
The courtier bowed and quitted the room, leaving the king and D'Artagnan
alone.

"Is it done?" inquired the king.

"Yes, sire," replied the captain of the musketeers in a grave voice, "it
is done!"

The king was unable to say another word. Pride, however, obliged him not
to pause at what he had done; whenever a sovereign has adopted a
decisive course, even though it be unjust, he is compelled to prove to
all who were witnesses of his having adopted it, and particularly to
prove it to himself, that he was quite right in so adopting it. A good
means for effecting that--an almost infallible means, indeed--is to try
and prove his victim to be in the wrong. Louis, brought up by Mazarin
and Anne of Austria, knew better than any one else his vocation as a
monarch; he therefore endeavored to prove it on the present occasion.
After a few moments' pause, which he had employed in making silently to
himself the same reflections which we have just expressed aloud, he
said, in an indifferent tone: "What did the comte say?"

"Nothing at all, sire."

"Surely he did not allow himself to be arrested without saying
something?"

"He said he expected to be arrested, sire."

The king raised his head haughtily.

"I presume," he said, "that M. le Comte de la Fere has not continued to
play his obstinate and rebellious part?"

"In the first place, sire, what do you term rebellious?" quietly asked
the musketeer. "A rebel, in the eyes of the king, is a man who not only
allows himself to be shut up in the Bastille, but, still more, who
opposes those who do not wish to take him there."

"Who do not wish to take him there!" exclaimed the king. "What do you
say, captain! Are you mad?"

"I believe not, sire."

"You speak of persons who did not wish to arrest M. de la Fere. Who are
those persons, may I ask?"

"I should say those whom your majesty intrusted with that duty."

"But it was you whom I intrusted with it," exclaimed the king.

"Yes, sire; it was me."

"And yet you say that, despite my orders, you had the intention of not
arresting the man who had insulted me!"

"Yes, sire--that was really my intention. I even proposed to the comte
to mount a horse that I had had prepared for him at the Barriere de la
Conference."

"And what was your object in getting this horse ready?"

"Why, sire, in order that M. le Comte de la Fere might be able to reach
Havre, and from that place make his escape to England."

"You betrayed me, then, monsieur?" cried the king, kindling with a wild
pride.

"Exactly so."

There was nothing to say in answer to statements made in such a tone;
the king was astounded at such an obstinate and open resistance on the
part of D'Artagnan. "At least you had a reason, Monsieur d'Artagnan, for
acting as you did?" said the king, proudly.

"I have always a reason for everything, sire."

"Your reason cannot be your friendship for the comte, at all events--the
only one that can be of any avail, the only one that could possibly
excuse you--for I placed you perfectly at your ease in that respect."

"Me, sire?"

"Did I not give you the choice to arrest or not to arrest M. le Comte de
la Fere?"

"Yes, sire, but--"

"But what?" exclaimed the king, impatiently.

"But you warned me, sire, that if I did not arrest him, your captain of
the guards should do so."

"Was I not considerate enough toward you from the very moment I did not
compel you to obey me?"

"To me, sire, you were, but not to my friend; for my friend would be
arrested all the same, whether by myself or by the captain of the
guards."

"And this is your devotion, monsieur! a devotion which argues and
reasons. You are no soldier, monsieur!"

"I wait for your majesty to tell me what I am."

"Well, then--you are a Frondeur."

"And since there is no longer any Fronde, sire, in that case--"

"But if what you say is true--"

"What I say is always true, sire."

"What have you come to say to me, monsieur?"

"I have come to say to your majesty, 'Sire, M. de la Fere is in the
Bastille.'"

"That is not your fault, it would seem."

"That is true, sire; but at all events he is there; and since he is
there, it is important that your majesty should know it."

"Ah! Monsieur d'Artagnan, so you set your king at defiance."

"Sire--"

"Monsieur d'Artagnan! I warn you that you are abusing my patience."

"On the contrary, sire."

"What do you mean by 'on the contrary'?"

"I have come to get myself arrested too."

"To get yourself arrested--you!"

"Of course. My friend will get wearied to death in the Bastille by
himself; and I have come to propose to your majesty to permit me to bear
him company; if your majesty will but give the word, I will arrest
myself; I shall not need the captain of the guards for that, I assure
you."

The king darted toward the table and seized hold of a pen to write the
order for D'Artagnan's imprisonment. "Pay attention, monsieur, that this
is forever," cried the king in a tone of stern menace.

"I can quite believe that," returned the musketeer; "for when you have
once done such an act as that, you will never be able to look me in the
face again."

The king dashed down his pen violently. "Leave the room, monsieur!" he
said.

"Not so, if it please your majesty."

"How is that?"

"Sire, I came to speak gently and temperately to your majesty; your
majesty got into a passion with me; that is a misfortune; but I shall
not the less on that account say what I had to say to you."

"Your resignation, monsieur--your resignation!" cried the king.

"Sire, you know whether I care about my resignation or not, since at
Blois, on the very day when you refused King Charles the million which
my friend the Comte de la Fere gave him, I then tendered my resignation
to your majesty."

"Very well, monsieur--do it at once!"

"No, sire; for there is no question of my resignation at the present
moment. Your majesty took up your pen just now to send me to the
Bastille--why should you change your intention?"

"D'Artagnan! Gascon that you are! who is the king, allow me to ask--you
or myself?"

"You, sire, unfortunately."

"What do you mean by 'unfortunately'?"

"Yes, sire; for if it were I--"

"If it were you, you would approve of M. d'Artagnan's rebellious
conduct, I suppose?"

"Certainly."

"Really!" said the king, shrugging his shoulders.

"And I should tell my captain of the musketeers," continued D'Artagnan,
"I should tell him, looking at him all the while with human eyes, and
not with eyes like coals of fire, 'M. d'Artagnan, I had forgotten that I
was the king, for I descended from my throne in order to insult a
gentleman.'"

"Monsieur," said the king, "do you think you can excuse your friend by
exceeding him in insolence?"

"Oh, sire! I should go much farther than he did," said D'Artagnan; "and
it would be your own fault. I should tell you what he, a man full of the
finest sense of delicacy, did not tell you; I should say--'Sire, you
have sacrificed his son, and he defended his son--you sacrificed
himself; he addressed you in the name of honor, of religion, of
virtue--you repulsed, drove him away, imprisoned him.' I should be
harder than he was, for I should say to you--'Sire, it is for you to
choose. Do you wish to have friends or lackeys--soldiers or
slaves--great men or mere puppets? Do you wish men to serve you, or to
bend and crouch before you? Do you wish men to love you or to be afraid
of you? If you prefer baseness, intrigue, cowardice, say so at once,
sire, and we will leave you--we who are the only individuals who are
left--nay, I will say more, the only models of the valor of former
times; we who have done our duty, and have exceeded, perhaps, in courage
and in merit, the men already great for posterity. Choose, sire, and
that too without delay. Whatever remains to you of great nobles, guard
it with a jealous eye; you will never be deficient in courtiers. Delay
not--and send me to the Bastille with my friend; for, if you have not
known how to listen to the Comte de la Fere, whose voice is the sweetest
and noblest when honor is his theme; if you do not know how to listen to
D'Artagnan, the frankest and honestest voice of sincerity, you are a bad
king, and to-morrow will be a poor king. And learn from me, sire, that
bad kings are hated by their people, and poor kings are driven
ignominiously away.' That is what I had to say to you, sire; you are
wrong to have driven me to do it."

The king threw himself back in his chair, cold as death, and livid as a
corpse. Had a thunderbolt fallen at his feet, he could not have been
more astonished; he seemed as if his respiration had utterly ceased, and
that he was at the point of death. The honest voice of sincerity, as
D'Artagnan had called it, had pierced through his heart like a sword
blade.

D'Artagnan had said all he had to say. Comprehending the king's anger,
he drew his sword, and, approaching Louis XIV. respectfully, he placed
it on the table. But the king, with a furious gesture, thrust aside the
sword, which fell on the ground and rolled to D'Artagnan's feet.
Notwithstanding the perfect mastery which D'Artagnan exercised over
himself, he, too, in his turn, became pale, and, trembling with
indignation, said, "A king may disgrace a soldier--he may exile him, and
may even condemn him to death; but were he a hundred times a king, he
has no right to insult him by casting a dishonor upon his sword! Sire, a
king of France has never repulsed with contempt the sword of a man such
as I am! Stained with disgrace as this sword now is, it has henceforth
no other sheath than either your heart or my own; I choose my own, sire;
and you have to thank Heaven and my own patience that I do so." Then
snatching up his sword, he cried, "My blood be upon your head!" and with
a rapid gesture he placed the hilt upon the floor and directed the point
of the blade toward his breast. The king, however, with a movement far
more rapid than that of D'Artagnan, threw his right arm round the
musketeer's neck, and with his left hand seized hold of the blade by the
middle, and returned it silently to the scabbard. D'Artagnan, upright,
pale, and still trembling, let the king do all to the very end. Louis,
overcome and softened by gentler feelings, returned to the table, took a
pen in his hand, wrote a few lines, signed them, and then held it out to
D'Artagnan.

"What is this paper, sire?" inquired the captain.

"An order for M. d'Artagnan to set the Comte de la Fere at liberty
immediately."

D'Artagnan seized the king's hand and imprinted a kiss upon it; he then
folded the order, placed it in his belt, and quitted the room. Neither
the king nor the captain had said a syllable.

"Oh, human heart! the guide and director of kings," murmured Louis, when
alone, "when shall I learn to read in your inmost recesses, as in the
leaves of a book! No, I am not a bad king--nor am I a poor king; but I
am still a child, after all."




CHAPTER LXXII.

POLITICAL RIVALS.


D'Artagnan had promised M. de Baisemeaux to return in time for dessert,
and he kept his word. They had just reached the finer and more delicate
class of wines and liqueurs with which the governor's cellar had the
reputation of being most admirably stocked, when the spurs of the
captain resounded in the corridor, and he himself appeared at the
threshold. Athos and Aramis had played a close game; neither of the two
had been able to gain the slightest advantage over the other. They had
supped, talked a good deal about the Bastille, of the last journey to
Fontainebleau, of the intended fete that M. Fouquet was about to give at
Vaux; they had generalized on every possible subject; and no one,
excepting Baisemeaux, had in the slightest degree alluded to private
matters. D'Artagnan arrived in the very midst of the conversation,
still pale and much disturbed by his interview with the king. Baisemeaux
hastened to give him a chair; D'Artagnan accepted a glass of wine, and
set it down empty. Athos and Aramis both remarked his emotion; as for
Baisemeaux, he saw nothing more than the captain of the king's
musketeers, to whom he endeavored to show every possible attention. But,
although Aramis had remarked his emotion, he had not been able to guess
the cause of it. Athos alone believed he had detected it. For him,
D'Artagnan's return, and particularly the manner in which he, usually so
impassible, seemed overcome, signified, "I have just asked the king
something which the king has refused me." Thoroughly convinced that his
conjecture was correct, Athos smiled, rose from the table, and made a
sign to D'Artagnan, as if to remind him that they had something else to
do than to sup together. D'Artagnan immediately understood him, and
replied by another sign. Aramis and Baisemeaux watched this silent
dialogue, and looked inquiringly at each other. Athos felt that he was
called upon to give an explanation of what was passing.

"The truth is, my friends," said the Comte de la Fere, with a smile,
"that you, Aramis, have been supping with a state criminal, and you,
Monsieur de Baisemeaux, with your prisoner."

Baisemeaux uttered an exclamation of surprise, and almost of delight;
for he was exceedingly proud and vain of his fortress; and for his own
individual profit, the more prisoners he had, the happier he was; and
the higher the prisoners were in rank, the prouder he felt. Aramis
assumed an expression of countenance which he thought the position
justified, and said, "Well, dear Athos, forgive me; but I almost
suspected what has happened. Some prank of Raoul and La Valliere, I
suppose?"

"Alas!" said Baisemeaux.

"And," continued Aramis, "you, a high and powerful nobleman as you are,
forgetful that courtiers now exist--you have been to the king, I
suppose, and told him what you thought of his conduct?"

"Yes, you have guessed right."

"So that," said Baisemeaux, trembling at having supped so familiarly
with a man who had fallen into disgrace with the king; "so that,
Monsieur le Comte--"

"So that, my dear governor," said Athos, "my friend D'Artagnan will
communicate to you the contents of the paper which I perceive just
peeping out of his belt, and which assuredly can be nothing else than
the order for my incarceration."

Baisemeaux held out his hand with his accustomed eagerness. D'Artagnan
drew two papers from his belt, and presented one of them to the
governor, who unfolded it, and then read, in a low tone of voice,
looking at Athos over the paper, as he did so, and pausing from time to
time: "'Order to detain in my chateau of the Bastille. Monsieur le Comte
de la Fere.' Oh, monsieur! this is indeed a very melancholy honor for
me."

"You will have a patient prisoner, monsieur," said Athos, in his calm,
soft voice.

"A prisoner, too, who will not remain a month with you, my dear
governor," said Aramis; while Baisemeaux, still holding the order in his
hand, transcribed it upon the prison registry.

"Not a day, or rather not even a night," said D'Artagnan, displaying the
second order of the king, "for now, dear M. de Baisemeaux, you will have
the goodness to transcribe also this order for setting the comte
immediately at liberty."

"Ah!" said Aramis, "it is a labor that you have deprived me of,
D'Artagnan;" and he pressed the musketeer's hand in a significant
manner, at the same moment as that of Athos.

"What!" said the latter, in astonishment, "the king sets me at liberty!"

"Read, my dear friend," returned D'Artagnan.

Athos took the order and read it. "It is quite true," he said.

"Are you sorry for it?" asked D'Artagnan.

"Oh, no, on the contrary; I wish the king no harm; and the greatest evil
or misfortune that any one can wish kings, is that they should commit an
act of injustice. But you have had a difficult and painful task, I
know. Tell me, have you not, D'Artagnan?"

"I? not at all," said the musketeer, laughing; "the king does everything
I wish him to do."

Aramis looked fixedly at D'Artagnan, and saw that he was not speaking
the truth. But Baisemeaux had eyes for nothing but D'Artagnan, so great
was his admiration for a man who seemed to make the king do all he
wished. "And does the king exile Athos?" inquired Aramis.

"No, not precisely; the king did not explain himself upon that subject,"
replied D'Artagnan; "but I think the comte could not well do better,
unless, indeed, he wishes particularly to thank the king--"

"No, indeed," replied Athos, smiling.

"Well, then, I think," resumed D'Artagnan, "that the comte cannot do
better than to retire to his own chateau. However, my dear Athos, you
have only to speak, to tell me what you want. If any particular place of
residence is more agreeable to you than another, I am influential
enough, perhaps, to obtain it for you."

"No, thank you," said Athos; "nothing can be more agreeable to me, my
dear friend, than to return to my solitude beneath my noble trees, on
the banks of the Loire. If Heaven be the overruling physician of the
evils of the mind, nature is a sovereign remedy. And so, monsieur,"
continued Athos, turning again toward Baisemeaux, "I am now free, I
suppose?"

"Yes, Monsieur le Comte, I think so--at least, I hope so," said the
governor, turning over and over the two papers in question, "unless,
however, M. d'Artagnan has a third order to give me."

"No, my dear Monsieur Baisemeaux, no," said the musketeer; "the second
is quite enough; we can stop there."

"Ah! Monsieur le Comte," said Baisemeaux, addressing Athos, "you do not
know what you are losing. I should have placed you among the
thirty-franc prisoners, like the generals--what am I saying?--I mean
among the fifty-francs, like the princes; and you would have supped
every evening as you have done to-night."

"Allow me, monsieur," said Athos, "to prefer my own simpler fare." And
then, turning to D'Artagnan, he said, "Let us go, my dear friend. Shall
I have that greatest of all pleasures for me--that of having you as my
companion?"

"To the city gate only," replied D'Artagnan, "after which I will tell
you what I told the king: 'I am on duty.'"

"And you, my dear Aramis," said Athos, smiling; "will you accompany me?
La Fere is on the road to Vannes."

"Thank you, my dear friend," said Aramis, "but I have an appointment in
Paris this evening, and I cannot leave without very serious interests
suffering by my absence."

"In that case," said Athos, "I must say adieu, and take my leave of you.
My dear Monsieur de Baisemeaux, I have to thank you exceedingly for your
kind and friendly disposition toward me, and particularly for the
specimen you have given me of the usual fare of the Bastille." And,
having embraced Aramis, and shaken hands with M. de Baisemeaux, and
having received their wishes for an agreeable journey from them both,
Athos set off with D'Artagnan.

While the _denouement_ of the scene of the Palais Royal was taking place
at the Bastille, let us relate what was going on at the lodgings of
Athos and Bragelonne. Grimaud, as we have seen, had accompanied his
master to Paris; and, as we have said, he was present when Athos went
out; he had observed D'Artagnan gnaw the corners of his mustache; he had
seen his master get into the carriage; he had narrowly examined both
their countenances, and he had known them both for a sufficiently long
period to read and understand, through the mask of their impassibility,
that something serious was the matter. As soon as Athos had gone, he
began to reflect; he then, and then only, remembered the strange manner
in which Athos had taken leave of him, the embarrassment--imperceptible
for any one else but himself--of the master whose ideas were, to him, so
clear and defined, and the expression of whose wishes was so precise.
He knew that Athos had taken nothing with him but the clothes he had on
him at the time; and yet he seemed to fancy that Athos had not left for
an hour merely, or even for a day. A long absence was signified by the
manner in which he pronounced the word "Adieu." All these circumstances
recurred to his mind, with feelings of deep affection for Athos, with
that horror of isolation and solitude which invariably besets the minds
of those who love; and all these combined, rendered poor Grimaud very
melancholy, and particularly very uneasy. Without being able to account
to himself for what he did, since his master's departure he wandered
about the room, seeking, as it were, for some traces of him, like a
faithful dog, who is not exactly uneasy about his absent master, but at
least is restless. Only as, in addition to the instinct of the animal,
Grimaud subjoined the reasoning faculties of the man, Grimaud therefore
felt uneasy and restless too. Not having found any indication which
could serve as a guide, and having neither seen nor discovered anything
which could satisfy his doubts, Grimaud began to imagine what could
possibly have happened. Besides, the imagination is the resource, or
rather the punishment, of good and affectionate hearts. In fact, never
does a good heart represent its absent friend to itself as being happy
or cheerful. Never does the pigeon who travels in search of adventure
inspire anything but terror to the pigeon who remains at home.

Grimaud soon passed from uneasiness to terror; he carefully went over,
in his own mind, everything that had taken place: D'Artagnan's letter to
Athos, the letter which had seemed to distress Athos so much after he
had read it; then Raoul's visit to Athos, which resulted in Athos
desiring him (Grimaud) to get his various orders and his court dress
ready to put on; then his interview with the king, at the end of which
Athos had returned home so unusually gloomy; then the explanation
between the father and the son, at the termination of which Athos had
embraced Raoul with such sadness of expression, while Raoul himself
went away equally sad and melancholy; and, finally, D'Artagnan's
arrival, biting, as if he were vexed, the end of his mustache, and his
leaving again in the carriage, accompanied by the Comte de la Fere. All
this composed a drama in five acts very clearly, particularly for so
analytical an examiner as Grimaud.

The first step he took was to search in his master's coat for M.
d'Artagnan's letter; he found the letter still there, which contained
the following:

     "MY DEAR FRIEND--Raoul has been to ask me for some
     particulars about the conduct of Mademoiselle de la Valliere,
     during our young friend's residence in London. I am a poor captain
     of musketeers, and am sickened to death every day by hearing all
     the scandal of the barracks and bedside conversations. If I had
     told Raoul all I believe I know, the poor fellow would have died
     from it; but I am in the king's service, and cannot relate all I
     hear about the king's affairs. If your heart tells you to do it,
     set off at once; the matter concerns you more than myself, and
     almost as much as Raoul."

Grimaud tore, not a handful, but a finger-and-thumbful of hair out of
his head; he would have done more if his head of hair had been in more
flourishing circumstances.

"Yes," he said, "that is the key of the whole enigma. The young girl has
been playing her pranks; what people say about her and the king is true,
then; our young master has been deceived; he ought to know it. Monsieur
le Comte has been to see the king, and has told him a piece of his mind;
and then the king sent M. d'Artagnan to arrange the affair. Ah, gracious
goodness!" continued Grimaud, "Monsieur le Comte, I now remember,
returned without his sword."

This discovery made the perspiration break out all over poor Grimaud's
face. He did not waste any more time in useless conjecture, but clapped
his hat on his head, and ran to Raoul's lodgings.

Raoul, after Louise had left him, had mastered his grief, if not his
affection; and, compelled to look forward on that perilous road on which
madness and rebellion were hurrying him, he had seen, from the very
first glance, his father exposed to the royal obstinacy; since Athos had
himself been the first to oppose any resistance to the royal will. At
this moment, from a very natural sympathy of feeling, the unhappy young
man remembered the mysterious signs which Athos had made, and the
unexpected visit of D'Artagnan; the result of the conflict between a
sovereign and a subject revealed itself to his terrified vision. As
D'Artagnan was on duty, that is, fixed to his post without possibility
of leaving it, it was certainly not likely that he had come to pay Athos
a visit merely for the pleasure of seeing him. He must have come to say
something to him. This something, in such painful conjectures, was
either a misfortune or a danger. Raoul trembled at having been so
selfish as to have forgotten his father for his affection; at having, in
a word, passed his time in idle dreams, or in an indulgence of despair,
at a time when a necessity existed for repelling the imminent attack
directed against Athos. The very idea nearly drove him wild; he buckled
on his sword and ran toward his father's lodgings. On his way there he
encountered Grimaud, who, having set off from the opposite pole, was
running with equal eagerness in search of the truth. The two men
embraced each other most warmly.

"Grimaud," exclaimed Raoul, "is the comte well?"

"Have you seen him?"

"No; where is he?"

"I am trying to find out."

"And M. d'Artagnan?"

"Went out with him."

"When?"

"Ten minutes after you had left."

"In what way did they go out?"

"In a carriage."

"Where did they go to?"

"I have no idea at all."

"Did my father take any money with him?"

"No."

"Or his sword?"

"No."

"I have an idea, Grimaud, that M. d'Artagnan came in order to--"

"Arrest Monsieur le Comte, do you not think, monsieur?"

"Yes, Grimaud."

"I could have sworn it."

"What road did they take?"

"The way leading toward the quays."

"To the Bastille, then?"

"Yes, yes."

"Quick, quick; let us run."

"Yes, let us not lose a moment."

"But where are we to go to?" said Raoul, overwhelmed.

"We will go to M. d'Artagnan's first, we may perhaps learn something
there."

"No; if they keep me in ignorance at my father's, they will do the same
everywhere. Let us go to--Oh, good heavens! why I must be mad to-day,
Grimaud; I have forgotten M. de Valon, who is waiting for and expecting
me still."

"Where is he then?"

"At the Minimes of Vincennes."

"Thank goodness, that is on the same side as the Bastille. I will run
and saddle the horses, and we will go at once," said Grimaud.

"Do, my friend, do."




CHAPTER LXXIII.

IN WHICH PORTHOS IS CONVINCED WITHOUT HAVING UNDERSTOOD ANYTHING.


The good and worthy Porthos, faithful to all the laws of ancient
chivalry, had determined to wait for M. de Saint-Aignan until sunset;
and, as Saint-Aignan did not come, as Raoul had forgotten to communicate
with his second, and as he found that waiting so long was very
wearisome, Porthos had desired one of the gatekeepers to fetch him a few
bottles of good wine and a good joint of meat--so that he at least might
pass away the time with a glass of wine and a mouthful of something to
eat. He had just finished when Raoul arrived, escorted by Grimaud, both
of them riding at full speed. As soon as Porthos saw the two cavaliers
riding at such a pace along the road, he did not for a moment doubt but
that they were the men he was expecting, and he rose from the grass upon
which he had been indolently reclining and began to stretch his legs and
arms, saying, "See what it is to have good habits. The fellow has
finished by coming after all. If I had gone away he would have found no
one here, and would have taken an advantage from that." He then threw
himself into a martial attitude, and drew himself up to the full height
of his gigantic stature. But instead of Saint-Aignan, he only saw Raoul,
who, with the most despairing gestures, accosted him by crying out,
"Pray forgive me, my dear friend, I am most wretched."

"Raoul!" cried Porthos, surprised.

"You have been angry with me?" said Raoul, embracing Porthos.

"I? What for?"

"For having forgotten you. But I assure you my head seems utterly lost.
If you only knew!"

"You have killed him?"

"Who?"

"Saint-Aignan; or if that is not the case, what is the matter?"

"The matter is, that Monsieur le Comte de la Fere has by this time been
arrested."

Porthos gave a start that would have thrown down a wall.

"Arrested," he cried out; "by whom?"

"By D'Artagnan."

"It is impossible," said Porthos.

"My dear friend, it is perfectly true."

Porthos turned toward Grimaud, as if he needed a second confirmation of
the intelligence. Grimaud nodded his head. "And where have they taken
him to?"

"Probably to the Bastille."

"What makes you think that?"

"As we came along we questioned some persons, who saw the carriage pass;
and others who saw it enter the Bastille."

"Oh, oh!" muttered Porthos.

"What do you intend to do?" inquired Raoul.

"I? Nothing; only I will not have Athos remain at the Bastille."

"Do you know," said Raoul, advancing nearer to Porthos, "that the arrest
was made by order of the king?"

Porthos looked at the young man as if to say, "What does that matter to
me?" This dumb language seemed so eloquent of meaning to Raoul, that he
did not ask another question. He mounted his horse again; and Porthos,
assisted by Grimaud, had already done the same.

"Let us arrange our plan of action,"' said Raoul.

"Yes," returned Porthos, "that is the best thing we can do."

Raoul sighed deeply, and then paused suddenly.

"What is the matter?" asked Porthos; "are you faint?"

"No, only I feel how utterly helpless our position is. Can we three
pretend to go and take the Bastille?"

"Well, if D'Artagnan were only here," replied Porthos, "I don't know
about that."

Raoul could not resist a feeling of admiration at the sight of such a
perfect confidence, heroic in its simplicity. These were truly the
celebrated men who, by three or four, attacked armies and assaulted
castles! Those men who had terrified death itself, and who survived the
wrecks of an age, and were still stronger than the most robust of the
young.

"Monsieur," said he to Porthos, "you have just given me an idea; we
absolutely must see M. d'Artagnan."

"Undoubtedly."

"He ought by this time to have returned home, after having taken my
father to the Bastille. Let us go to his house."

"First, inquire at the Bastille," said Grimaud, who was in the habit of
speaking little, but that to the purpose.

Accordingly, they hastened toward the fortress, when one of those
chances which Heaven bestows on men of strong will, caused Grimaud
suddenly to perceive the carriage, which was entering by the great gate
of the drawbridge. This was at the moment that D'Artagnan was, as we
have seen, returning from his visit to the king. In vain was it that
Raoul urged on his horse in order to join the carriage, and to see whom
it contained. The horses had already gained the other side of the great
gate, which again closed, while one of the sentries struck the nose of
Raoul's horse with his musket; Raoul turned about, only too happy to
find he had ascertained something respecting the carriage which had
contained his father. "We have him," said Grimaud.

"If we wait a little it is certain he will leave; don't you think so, my
friend?"

"Unless, indeed, D'Artagnan also be a prisoner," replied Porthos, "in
which case everything is lost."

Raoul returned no answer, for any hypothesis was admissible. He
instructed Grimaud to lead the horses to the little street
Jean-Beausire, so as to give rise to less suspicion, and himself with
his piercing gaze watched for the exit either of D'Artagnan or the
carriage. Nor had he decided wrongly; for twenty minutes had not elapsed
before the gate reopened and the carriage reappeared. A dazzling of the
eyes prevented Raoul from distinguishing what figures occupied the
interior. Grimaud averred that he had seen two persons, and that one of
them was his master. Porthos kept looking at Raoul and Grimaud by turns,
in the hope of understanding their idea.

"It is clear," said Grimaud, "that if the comte is in the carriage,
either he is set at liberty or they are taking him to another prison."

"We shall soon see that by the road he takes," answered Porthos.

"If he is set at liberty," said Grimaud, "they will conduct him home."

"True," rejoined Porthos.

"The carriage does not take that way," cried Raoul; and indeed the
horses were just disappearing down the Faubourg St. Antoine.

"Let us hasten," said Porthos; "we will attack the carriage on the road,
and tell Athos to flee."

"Rebellion," murmured Raoul.

Porthos darted a second glance at Raoul, quite worthy of the first.
Raoul replied only by spurring the flanks of his steed. In a few
moments the three cavaliers had overtaken the carriage, and followed it
so closely that their horses' breath moistened the back of it.
D'Artagnan, whose senses were ever on the alert, heard the trot of the
horses, at the moment when Raoul was telling Porthos to pass the chariot
so as to see who was the person accompanying Athos. Porthos complied,
but could not see anything, for the blinds were lowered. Rage and
impatience were gaining mastery over Raoul. He had just noticed the
mystery preserved by Athos' companion, and determined on proceeding to
extremities. On his part, D'Artagnan had perfectly recognized Porthos,
and Raoul also, from under the blinds, and had communicated to the comte
the result of his observation. They were desirous only of seeing whether
Raoul and Porthos would push the affair to the uttermost. And this they
speedily did, for Raoul presenting his pistol threw himself on the
leader, commanding the coachman to stop. Porthos seized the coachman and
dragged him from his seat. Grimaud already had hold of the carriage
door. Raoul threw open his arms, exclaiming, "M. le Comte! M. le Comte!"

"Ah! is it you, Raoul?" said Athos, intoxicated with joy.

"Not bad, indeed!" added D'Artagnan, with a burst of laughter, and they
both embraced the young man and Porthos, who had taken possession of
them.

"My brave Porthos! best of friends," cried Athos, "it is still the same
with you."

"He is still only twenty," said D'Artagnan, "brave Porthos!"

"Confound it!" answered Porthos, slightly confused, "we thought that you
were being arrested."

"While," rejoined Athos, "the matter in question was nothing but my
taking a drive in M. d'Artagnan's carriage."

"But we followed you from the Bastille," returned Raoul, with a tone of
suspicion and reproach.

"Where we had been to take supper with our good friend M. Baisemeaux. Do
you recollect Baisemeaux, Porthos?"

"Very well, indeed."

"And there we saw Aramis."

"In the Bastille?"

"At supper."

"Ah!" said Porthos, again breathing freely.

"He gave us a thousand messages for you."

"And where is M. le Comte going?" asked Grimaud, already recompensed by
a smile from his master.

"We are going home to Blois."

"How can that be?"

"At once?" said Raoul.

"Yes; right forward."

"Without any luggage?"

"Oh! Raoul would have been instructed to forward me mine, or to bring it
with him on his return, _if_ he returns."

"If nothing detains him longer in Paris," said D'Artagnan, with a glance
firm and cutting as steel, and as painful (for it reopened the poor
young fellow's wounds), "he will do well to follow you, Athos."

"There is nothing to keep me any longer in Paris," said Raoul.

"Then we will go immediately," replied Athos.

"And M. d'Artagnan?"

"Oh! as for me, I was only accompanying Athos as far as the barrier, and
I return with Porthos."

"Very good," said the latter.

"Come, my son," added the comte, gently passing his arm round Raoul's
neck to draw him into the carriage, and again embracing him. "Grimaud,"
continued the comte, "you will return quietly to Paris with your horse
and M. de Valon's, for Raoul and I will mount here and give up the
carriage to these two gentlemen to return to Paris in; and then, as soon
as you arrive, you will take my clothes and letters and forward the
whole to me at home."

"But," observed Raoul, who was anxious to make the comte converse, "when
you return to Paris, there will not be a single thing there for
you--which will be very inconvenient."

"I think it will be a very long time, Raoul, ere I return to Paris. The
last sojourn we have made there has not been of a nature to encourage
me to repeat it."


[Illustration: RAOUL PRESENTING HIS PISTOL THREW HIMSELF ON THE
LEADER, COMMANDING THE COACHMAN TO STOP.--_Page 288._]


Raoul hung his head and said not a word more. Athos descended from the
carriage and mounted the horse which had brought Porthos, and which
seemed no little pleased at the exchange. Then they embraced, clasped
each other's hands, interchanged a thousand pledges of eternal
friendship. Porthos promised to spend a month with Athos at the first
opportunity. D'Artagnan engaged to take advantage of his first leave of
absence; and then, having embraced Raoul for the last time: "To you, my
boy," said he, "I will write." Coming from D'Artagnan, who he knew wrote
but very seldom, these words expressed everything. Raoul was moved even
to tears. He tore himself away from the musketeer and departed.

D'Artagnan rejoined Porthos in the carriage. "Well," said he, "my dear
friend, what a day we have had!"

"Indeed we have," answered Porthos.

"You must be quite worn out?"

"Not quite; however, I shall retire early to rest, so as to be ready
to-morrow."

"And wherefore?"

"Why, to complete what I have begun."

"You make me shudder, my friend, you seem to me quite angry. What the
devil _have_ you begun which is not finished?"

"Listen; Raoul has not fought, but _I_ must fight."

"With whom?--with the king?"

"How!" exclaimed Porthos, astounded, "with the king?"

"Yes, I say, you great baby, with the king!"

"I assure you it is with M. Saint-Aignan."

"Look now, this is what I mean: you draw your sword against the king in
fighting with this gentleman."

"Ah!" said Porthos, staring; "are you sure of it?"

"Indeed I am."

"What in the world are we to do, then?"

"We must try and make a good supper, Porthos. The captain of the
musketeers keeps a tolerable table. There you will see the handsome
Saint-Aignan, and will drink his health."

"I!" cried Porthos, horrified.

"What!" said D'Artagnan, "you refuse to drink the king's health?"

"But, body alive! I am not talking to you about the king at all; I am
speaking of M. de Saint-Aignan."

"But since I repeat that it is the same thing."

"Ah, well, well!" said Porthos, overcome.

"You understand, don't you?"

"No," answered Porthos, "but 'tis all the same."




CHAPTER LXXIV.

M. DE BAISEMEAUX'S "SOCIETY."


The reader has not forgotten that, on quitting the Bastille, D'Artagnan
and the Comte de la Fere had left Aramis in close confabulation with
Baisemeaux. When once these two guests had departed, Baisemeaux did not
in the least perceive that the conversation suffered by their absence.
He used to think that wine after supper, and that of the Bastille in
particular, was excellent; and that it was a stimulant quite sufficient
to make an honest man talk. But he little knew His Greatness, who was
never more impenetrable than at dessert. His Greatness, however,
perfectly understood M. de Baisemeaux, when he reckoned on making the
governor discourse on the means which the latter regarded as
efficacious. The conversation, therefore, without flagging in
appearance, flagged in reality; for Baisemeaux not only had it nearly
all to himself, but further, kept speaking only of that singular
event--the incarceration of Athos--followed by so prompt an order to set
him again at liberty. Nor, moreover, had Baisemeaux failed to observe
that the two orders of arrest and of liberation were both in the king's
hand. But, then, the king would not take the trouble to write similar
orders except under pressing circumstances. All this was very
interesting, and, above all, very puzzling to Baisemeaux; but as on the
other hand all this was very clear to Aramis, the latter did not attach
to the occurrence the same importance as did the worthy governor.
Besides, Aramis rarely put himself out of the way for anything, and he
had not yet told M. de Baisemeaux for what reason he had now done so.
And so, at the very climax of Baisemeaux's dissertation, Aramis suddenly
interrupted him.

"Tell me, my dear M. Baisemeaux," said he, "have you never any other
diversions at the Bastille than those at which I assisted during the two
or three visits I have had the honor to pay you?"

This address was so unexpected that the governor, like a vane which
suddenly receives an impulsion opposed to that of the wind, was quite
dumfounded at it. "Diversions," said he, "but I take them continually,
monseigneur."

"Oh, to be sure! And these diversions!"

"Are of every kind."

"Visits, no doubt?"

"No, not visits. Visits are not frequent at the Bastille."

"What, are visits rare, then?"

"Very much so."

"Even on the part of your society?"

"What do you term by my society--the prisoners?"

"Oh, no!--your prisoners, indeed! I know well it is you who visit them,
and not they you. By your society I mean, my dear M. Baisemeaux, the
society of which you are a member."

Baisemeaux looked fixedly at Aramis, and then, as if the idea which had
flashed across his mind were impossible, "Oh!" he said, "I have very
little society at present. If I must own it to you, my dear M.
d'Herblay, the fact is, to stay at the Bastille appears for the most
part distressing and distasteful to persons of the gay world. As for the
ladies, it is never without a dread, which costs me infinite trouble to
allay, that they succeed in reaching my quarters. And, indeed, how
should they avoid trembling a little, poor things, when they see those
gloomy dungeons, and reflect that they are inhabited by prisoners who--"
And in proportion as the eyes of Baisemeaux concentrated their gaze on
the face of Aramis, the worthy governor's tongue faltered more and more,
until it ended by stopping altogether.

"No, you don't understand me, my dear M. Baisemeaux; you don't
understand me. I do not at all mean to speak of society in general, but
of a particular society--of _the_ society, in a word--to which you are
affiliated."

Baisemeaux nearly dropped the glass of muscat which he was in the act of
raising to his lips. "Affiliated!" cried he, "affiliated!"

"Yes, affiliated, undoubtedly," repeated Aramis, with the greatest
self-possession. "Are you not a member of a secret society, my dear M.
Baisemeaux!"

"Secret?"

"Secret or mysterious."

"Oh, M. d'Herblay!"

"Consider now, don't deny it."

"But believe me."

"I believe what I know."

"I swear to you."

"Listen to me, my dear M. Baisemeaux; I say yes, you say no; one of us
two necessarily says what is true, and the other, it inevitably follows,
what is false."

"Well, and then?"

"Well, we shall come to an understanding presently."

"Let us see," said Baisemeaux; "let us see."

"Now drink your glass of muscat, dear M. de Baisemeaux," said Aramis.
"What the devil! you look quite scared."

"No, no; not the least in the world; no."

"Drink, then." Baisemeaux drank, but he swallowed the wrong way.

"Well," resumed Aramis, "if I say you are not a member of a secret or
mysterious society, which you like to call it, the epithet is of no
consequence; if I say you are not a member of a society similar to that
I wish to designate, well, then, you will not understand a word of what
I am going to say, that is all."

"Oh! be sure beforehand that I shall not understand anything."

"Well, well!"

"Try now, let us see."

"That is what I am going to do."

"If, on the contrary, you are one of the members of this society, you
will immediately answer me--yes, or no."

"Begin your questions," continued Baisemeaux, trembling.

"You will agree, dear Monsieur de Baisemeaux," continued Aramis, with
the same impassibility, "that it is evident a man cannot be a member of
a society, it is evident that he cannot enjoy the advantages it offers
to the affiliated, without being himself bound to certain little
services."

"In short," stammered Baisemeaux, "that would be intelligible if--"

"Well," resumed Aramis, "there is in the society of which I speak, and
of which, as it seems, you are not a member--"

"Allow me," said Baisemeaux, "I should not like to say absolutely."

"There is an engagement entered into by all the governors and captains
of fortresses affiliated to the order." Baisemeaux grew pale.

"Now the engagement," continued Aramis, firmly, "is of this nature."

Baisemeaux rose, manifesting unspeakable emotion, "Go on, dear M.
d'Herblay; go on," said he.

Aramis then spoke, or rather recited, the following paragraph, in the
same tone as if he had been reading it from a book: "The aforesaid
captain or governor of a fortress shall allow to enter when need shall
arise, and on demand of the prisoner, a confessor affiliated to the
order." He stopped. Baisemeaux was quite distressing to look at, being
so wretchedly pale and trembling. "Is not that the text of the
agreement?" quietly asked Aramis.

"Monseigneur!" began Baisemeaux.

"Ah! well, you begin to understand, I think."

"Monseigneur," cried Baisemeaux, "do not trifle so with my unhappy mind!
I find myself nothing in your hands, if you have the malignant desire to
draw from me the little secrets of my administration."

"Oh! by no means; pray undeceive yourself, dear M. Baisemeaux; it is not
the little secrets of your administration, but those of your conscience
that I aim at."

"Well, then, my conscience be it, my dear M. d'Herblay. But have some
consideration for the situation I am in, which is no ordinary one."

"It is no ordinary one, my dear monsieur," continued the inflexible
Aramis, "if you are a member of this society; but it is quite a natural
one if free from all engagements. You are answerable only to the king."

"Well, monsieur, well! I obey only the king, and whom else would you
have a French nobleman obey?"

Aramis did not yield an inch; but with that silvery voice of his
continued, "It is very pleasant," said he, "for a French nobleman, for a
prelate of France, to hear a man of your mark express himself so
loyally, dear De Baisemeaux, and having heard you to believe no more
than you do."

"Have you doubted, monsieur?"

"I? oh, no!"

"And so you doubt no longer?"

"I have no longer any doubt that such a man as you, monsieur," said
Aramis, gravely, "does not faithfully serve the masters whom he
voluntarily chose for himself."

"Masters!" cried Baisemeaux.

"Yes, masters, I said."

"Monsieur d'Herblay, you are still jesting, are you not?"

"Oh, yes! I understand that it is a more difficult position to have
several masters than one; but the embarrassment is owing to you, my dear
Baisemeaux, and I am not the cause of it."

"Certainly not," returned the unfortunate governor, more embarrassed
than ever; "but what are you doing? You are leaving the table?"

"Assuredly."

"Are you going?"

"Yes, I am going."

"But you are behaving very strangely toward me, monseigneur."

"I am behaving strangely--how do you make that out?"

"Have you sworn, then, to put me to the torture?"

"No, I should be sorry to do so."

"Remain, then."

"I cannot."

"And why?"

"Because I have no longer anything to do here; and, indeed, I have
duties to fulfill elsewhere."

"Duties, so late as this?"

"Yes; understand me now, my dear De Baisemeaux; they told me at the
place whence I came, 'The aforesaid governor or captain will allow to
enter, as need shall arise, on the prisoner's demand, a confessor
affiliated with the order.' I came; you do not know what I mean, and so
I shall return to tell them that they are mistaken, and that they must
send me elsewhere."

"What! you are--" cried Baisemeaux, looking at Aramis almost in terror.

"The confessor affiliated to the order," said Aramis, without changing
his voice.

But, gentle as the words were, they had the same effect on the unhappy
governor as a clap of thunder. Baisemeaux became livid, and it seemed to
him as if Aramis' beaming eyes were two forks of flame, piercing to the
very bottom of his soul. "The confessor!" murmured he; "you,
monseigneur, the confessor of the order!"

"Yes, I; but we have nothing to unravel together, seeing that you are
not one of the affiliated."
