"What is her name--did you hear?"

"The natives say she is called Malinche, but the white men call her
Marina."

"That is good news, indeed, Bathalda," Roger said; "for when I was
at Tabasco, I knew a Mexican slave girl of that name, and if it is
the same she will befriend us."

It was nearly three weeks before Roger again obtained news.
Bathalda had injured his leg in a fall down a precipice, while
stalking a deer; and was obliged to lie up in the hut for more than
a fortnight. As soon as he was well enough to get about again, he
joined Roger in a turkey hunt, and started the next day for the
city.

He returned with surprising news. The white men had marched from
the coast through Naulinco and the Pass of Obispo. They had been
everywhere well received by the natives, who all belonged to the
Totonac tribe. They had gone to Yxtacamaxtitlan, a great city,
where they had stayed three days. They had then marched on towards
Tlascala, the republic that had so long resisted the strength of
all Mexico.

They were said to number four hundred foot and fifteen strange
creatures, who were partly man and partly some fleet animal; and
they had seven great black tubes that made thunder. Thirteen
hundred Totonac fighting men accompanied them, and a thousand
porters to drag the tubes and carry their baggage. They had sent
embassies to the Tlascalans, but the latter had chosen war, and
there had been some terrible battles fought. But the white men were
invincible, and had defeated the Tlascalans with great slaughter;
and the news had arrived, only that morning, that they had captured
the city.

The sensation throughout the country was that of stupefaction. It
seemed absolutely incredible that a state which had successfully
defied the armies of Montezuma and his predecessors should, after
four or five days of fighting, be overthrown by this handful of
white strangers. There seemed but one comfort. It was said that
several of the Whites had been killed, and this showed, at least,
that they were not superhuman creatures, and that it might yet be
possible to destroy them.

No sooner did Roger hear the news than he determined to start, at
once, to join the Spaniards, who were already far to the west.
Accordingly, the next morning at daybreak, he started with
Bathalda, and late on the following afternoon arrived in sight of
Tlascala. They thought it better not to enter the city until the
following morning, and therefore passed the night in a clump of
bushes.

The next day they boldly entered the town. The city was a large
one, divided into four quarters separated by lofty walls, and each
ruled over by one of the four great chiefs of the republic. Its
population was very large, and the town was strongly and solidly
built.

At ordinary times the appearance of two seeming Aztecs in the
streets would have been the signal for their instant destruction,
but at the present time the people were solely occupied with the
presence of their white conquerors; with whom, as Roger soon
learned, they had made treaties of friendship, and whom they now
viewed as friends and allies.

The whole of the Spaniards were lodged in one of the palaces. The
crowd of people proceeding in that direction was a sufficient index
to its position; and Roger and his companion, joining the throng,
were soon in front of the palace. Some Spanish soldiers were
standing as sentries at its gate, but none came out or mixed with
the people--Cortez having given the strictest orders that they
should remain in their quarters, as he feared that, did they go
abroad, some brawl might arise between them and the inhabitants,
and so break the newly-formed alliance, which was of the most
extreme importance to them.

Presently some Spanish officers, and several richly dressed chiefs,
came out from the palace. The people raised a shout, and it was
evident to Roger that, in spite of the terrible losses suffered by
their troops in the attacks upon the white men, their admiration
for their visitors far outweighed any animosity for the defeats
inflicted upon them.

Near the officer, whom Roger judged to be the leader of the
expedition, were an elderly man and a young woman. The Spaniard
addressed the old man, who spoke to the girl, and she translated it
to the chiefs.

Roger recognized her at once--it was certainly his friend, the
slave girl of Tabasco. In the eight months since he had seen her,
she had grown to complete womanhood; and now--richly attired as she
was, and evidently regarded as a person of great importance, both
by the Spaniards and the native chiefs--carried herself with an air
of confidence and pride; and was, Roger thought, the most beautiful
woman he had seen in Mexico.

As the party moved down the steps of the palace, and along the
street, evidently discoursing on some important business, Roger
followed them closely. He waited until Malinche happened, for a
moment, to be at the outside of the party, then he pressed forward
and said to her:

"Malinche, do you remember your white friend?"

She looked up, and would have cried out with astonishment, had he
not touched his lips.

"I want to speak to you alone, first. Where can I meet you?"

"In an hour I shall be able to slip away from their meal," she
said; "be near the palace gate."

Roger at once fell back into the crowd, and soon took an
opportunity to extricate himself from it, and to go down a side
street. He and Bathalda then ascended to the top of the wall, where
they were likely to be undisturbed, and waited there for an hour.
They then went back to the palace.

The square in the front of it was almost deserted now; for the
Spaniards had retired, half an hour before, and were not likely to
appear again until the evening; especially as it was known that, at
noon, there was to be a great council held in the palace.

Ten minutes later Malinche appeared at the entrance. As soon as her
eyes fell on Roger she raised her hand and, leaving Bathalda, he at
once went up to her. The two sentinels looked with some surprise at
this tall native, but as they saw that he was known to Malinche,
they offered no opposition to his entering the palace with her.

She led him down some corridors and then out into a garden. As soon
as she saw that they were in a spot where they could not be
overlooked, she turned and seized his hands; and would have pressed
them to her forehead, had not Roger prevented her doing so, and put
her hands to his lips.

"Ah!" she exclaimed. "How happy you have made me, today! I have
wondered so much how it has fared with you, and have dreamed at
night, so often, that you were being sacrificed on the altars of
the gods."

"I have thought of you very often, also, Malinche; and I was
surprised, indeed, when I heard that you--for I felt sure that it
was you--were with the Spaniards, and were not only an interpreter,
but in high honor with them."

"But why do you not join them?" she asked. "Why do you come to me
first? What can I do for you? I will take you at once to Cortez,
and when I tell him that you were my friend, and were so kind and
good to the slave girl, he will welcome you most warmly."

"Yes, Malinche; but that is why I wanted to see you first alone.
You remember that I told you all about the Spaniards, and how they
owned the islands, and would some day surely come to Mexico; but
that I belong to another white people, who are forbidden by the
Spaniards, under pain of death, to come to these parts. They must
not know that I am not of their nation.

"You see, I cannot speak their tongue. I see that you have learned
it fast, for I saw Cortez speaking to you."

"What are we to do, then?" the girl asked, with a puzzled look.
"When they find that you cannot speak their language, they will, of
course, see that you are not of their people."

"Yes, Malinche; but they might think that I had forgotten it. That
is just where I want you to help me. If you take me to Cortez, and
tell him that, years ago, a ship was wrecked on the coast of
Tabasco, and that all were drowned except a little white boy; and
that he was brought up at Tabasco, and that you were great friends
with him, until he was sold to some Mexican traders--they will
think that I have altogether forgotten my native language. They are
not likely to ask you how many years ago it is, or how big I was
then, and will imagine that I was quite a child, and that I
belonged to a Spanish ship, for they will not dream of an English
vessel having been in these parts. When you introduce me to Cortez,
you must tell him that I have quite forgotten the language, save a
few words--for I picked up a few sentences when in their ports."

"They will easily believe that you may have been wrecked," said
Malinche; "for they rescued a man who had been living many years
among a tribe at Yucatan, to the west of Tabasco. There were other
white men living among them, though these they could not recover.
You saw him by me this morning--he is an old man, a priest; and he
translates from the Spanish into the Yucatan dialect, which is so
like that of Tabasco that I can understand it, and then I tell the
people in Mexican.

"There will be no difficulty at all. Cortez and the Spaniards know
that I love them, and they trust me altogether, and I am able to do
good to my country people, and to intercede with them sometimes
with Cortez. Now tell me what has happened since I last saw you."

Roger gave her a sketch of what had happened in Mexico, and how he
had escaped, by flight, from being sacrificed.

"It is terrible--these sacrifices," Malinche said, shuddering. "I
did not think so in the old days, but I have learned better from
the Spaniards and from their priests; and I rejoice that the white
men will destroy these horrible idols, and will teach the people to
worship the great God and His Son. They will suffer--my heart
bleeds to think how they will suffer--but it will be good for them
in the end, and put a stop to rivers of blood that flow, every
year, at their altars."

Although Roger was not imbued with the passion for conversion which
animated the Spaniards, and led them to believe that it was the
most glorious of all duties to force their religion upon the
natives, he had been so filled with horror at the wholesale
sacrifices of human victims, and the cannibal feasts that followed
them, that he was in no way disposed to question the methods which
the Spaniards adopted to put a stop to such abominations. But for
the friendship of Cacama he would himself, assuredly, have been a
victim to these sanguinary gods.

He and his father had--like the Beggs, and many other of his
friends at Plymouth--been secretly followers of Wycliffe, but they
were still Catholics. They believed that there were many and deep
abuses in the Church, but had no thought of abandoning it
altogether. The doings of the Inquisition in Spain were regarded by
all Englishmen with horror, but these excesses were as nothing to
the wholesale horrors of the Mexican religion.

He talked for some time with Malinche, and saw that she was
completely devoted to the Spaniards, and regarded Cortez as a hero,
almost more than mortal; and was in no slight degree relieved at
observing that, although ready to be friendly in every way, and
evidently still much attached to him, the warmer feeling which she
had testified at their parting no longer existed, but had been
transferred to her present friends and protectors.

"Come with me," she said at last. "The meal will be over, now. I
will take you to an apartment near the banqueting hall, and will
leave you there while I tell Cortez about you, and will then lead
you to him."

Seeing how confident Malinche was as to the reception she could
procure for him, Roger awaited her return, to the chamber where she
had placed him, with little anxiety. In a quarter of an hour she
returned, and beckoned him to follow.

"I have told him," she said. "It did not seem to him strange that
some vessel should have been driven by the storms and wrecked here.
He asked no questions as to how many years ago it was. I told him
you were a young boy at the time, and have forgotten all but a few
words of the language; and how, when you grew to be a man, you were
sold to some Mexican merchants, and would have been sacrificed to
the gods had you not made your escape. As I had told him, before,
that there had been a white man living at Tabasco, who had been
very good to me, he was not surprised at the story."

She took Roger to an apartment in which Cortez, and several of his
principal officers, were standing. As Malinche had told them that
he was painted, and disguised as a native, they were not surprised
at his appearance; although his height, which was far beyond that
attained by Spaniards, somewhat astonished them.

Roger approached the group, and at once fell on one knee before
Cortez, took his hand and kissed it. Cortez raised him, and
embraced him warmly.

"I am delighted to find another of my countrymen," he said; "and
all the more, since Marina tells me that she knows you well, and
that you were most kind and good to her."

"Senor," Roger said, in broken Spanish, "I do not understand. I
have forgotten."

"You will soon recover it," Cortez said.

"Tell him, Aquilar, that he will soon learn to speak his native
language again."

The interpreter repeated the words to Roger in the Yucatan dialect,
adding that he himself had been a prisoner for eight years among
the natives; and that, although a man when captured by them, had
with difficulty spoken Spanish when restored to his friends; but it
had now quite come back to him.

"You were but a boy when you were wrecked, Marina tells me?" Cortez
said.

"Only a boy," Roger repeated, when Marina translated this to him.

"Do you remember anything of Spain?" Cortez asked.

Roger shut his eyes, as if considering.

"I seem to have a remembrance," he said, "of a place with many
great ships. It was a city built on a rock rising from the sea. It
had high walls with great guns upon them, which fired sometimes,
with a terrible noise, when vessels came in and out."

When this was translated by Aquilar, Cortez said:

"It was Cadiz, of course. Doubtless the ship he was wrecked in
sailed from that port."

A murmur of assent passed round the other Spaniards.

"Show him a cross, Aquilar. See if he remembers his religion."

Aquilar took out a cross from under his doublet, and held it out
towards Roger, who, after looking at it for a moment, fell on his
knees and kissed it.

"He remembers much, you see," Cortez said. "Father Aquilar, you
will succeed soon in making a good Catholic of him, again.

"Well, gentlemen, I think we may congratulate ourselves upon this
new companion. Every arm is of assistance; and if he is as brave as
he is big and strong, he will prove a doughty comrade. Besides, he
will be able to tell us something of Mexico; although, as Marina
says, he was only once at the capital.

"Question him, Aquilar, and find out from him whether its
magnificence is as great as we hear."

Roger told all he knew of the capital, and said that, although he
himself could not say more than that it was a great city, he had
heard that its population was nearly three hundred thousand; and
that it certainly seemed to him fully three times as large as that
of Tezcuco, where he said there were one hundred thousand people.

"And it stands on an island in a lake?" Cortez asked.

"There are three causeways leading to the land, each wide enough
for six horsemen to ride abreast," Roger replied; "but it would be
a difficult thing to force an entrance, by these, in the face of
Montezuma's army."

"Well, gentlemen," Cortez said, "it is time for us to be going to
the council.

"Marina, do you take your friend to my private apartment, and bid
Juan furnish him with a suit of clothes; and with armor, from that
belonging to our friends who fell in the fights the other day. We
will soon make a true cavalier of him."

As soon as Roger was equipped, he went out to the steps of the
palace, and presently descried Bathalda in the crowd. He beckoned
to him and, taking him into the garden, had a long talk with him.
He would have rewarded him largely for his services, but Bathalda
refused to accept anything.

"I came at my lord's orders," he said; "and am rejoiced to have
been of service to one who is at once so kind, so strong, and so
valiant."

"As you will. We shall have further opportunities of meeting,
Bathalda. Do you now make your way back to Tezcuco. Tell your lord
all that has happened, and that I am with the Spaniards, and shall
accompany them if, as I believe, they go forward to Mexico; that I
hope to see all my friends again, before long; and that I always
think of their kindness to me."



Chapter 13: The Massacre Of Cholula.


The Tlascalans had, from the moment when they admitted themselves
beaten by the Spaniards, laid aside all hostility; and had, indeed,
accepted the alliance with enthusiasm. They had a right to be proud
of their own valor, for they had resisted all the attempts of the
great Aztec monarchy to conquer them, and had defeated, with
slaughter, greatly superior forces; and that a mere handful of
white men should be able to withstand their attacks, day after day,
and to defeat their best and hardiest troops, led by generals who
had hitherto been always successful, excited their surprise and
admiration in the highest degree. They were not gods, they knew,
for some had been killed in the conflict; but as men they seemed to
them infinitely superior, in strength and courage, to any that they
had before heard of; and they were proud to enter into an alliance
with such heroes. Moreover, they saw they would now have an
opportunity of turning the tables upon their enemies of the plains.

They did not believe, for a moment, that Montezuma would admit the
white men to his capital, and in that case there would be great
battles, and perhaps much plunder to be gained; and therefore, when
the Spaniards were again ready to advance, the whole fighting force
of Tlascala was placed at their disposal. Cortez, however, declined
to take with him so large an army. The appearance of such a force,
composed of the bitter foes of the Aztecs, would have combined
against him the whole strength of that empire, and would have
destroyed any hope that might remain of peaceful arrangements.
Moreover, the difficulty of feeding so large a body of men would be
great, indeed; and as his authority over them would be but feeble,
constant broils with the Aztecs would be the inevitable result. He
therefore, with many thanks, declined the offer; but said that he
would gladly take with him a force of six thousand volunteers.

The first march was to be to Cholula, whose people had sent a warm
invitation to Cortez to visit them; and Montezuma, by his last
envoys, also requested them to journey forward by way of that city.

The Tlascalans had strongly urged him to refuse the invitation. The
Cholulans were, they said, a treacherous people and not to be
trusted. They were bigoted beyond the people of other cities,
Cholula being the holy city of Anahuac. It was here the god
Quetzalcoatl had remained for twenty years on his way down to the
coast, instructing the people in the arts of civilization. Here was
the great temple of the god, a pyramid whose base covered
forty-four acres, and whose height was a hundred and eighty feet;
the platform on its summit, where the sacrifices took place, being
an acre in size.

Cortez, however, decided upon visiting Cholula. He deemed the
reports of the Tlascalans to be prejudiced, as there was a
long-standing animosity between the two peoples; and he thought
that, were he to avoid visiting this important town, which lay
almost on his road to Mexico, it might be set down by the Aztecs to
distrust or fear.

The departure from Tlascala was witnessed by the whole of the
population of the state, who assembled to bid the white men
farewell, and to wish them success upon their way. A day's march
took them to within a mile or two of Cholula. Here they were met by
many nobles from the city, who urged them to enter it that evening;
but Cortez, bearing in mind the warnings he had received, and
thinking it dangerous to enter the streets of an unknown and
possibly hostile city after dark, declined to move forward until
morning. Seeing the hostility and distrust excited in the minds of
his visitors at the sight of the Tlascalans in his camp, he ordered
his allies to remain in camp when he advanced in the morning, and
to join him only when he left the city on his way to Mexico.

The Spaniards, as they entered Cholula, were greatly struck with
the appearance of the city and its inhabitants, it being a very
much larger and more highly civilized place than any they had yet
met with. The buildings were large and handsome, the streets wide,
the population very large, and exhibiting in their dress every sign
of wealth and luxury. There was, too, a great variety among the
population; for, as it was the sacred city of the empire, people
from all other parts were in the habit of making pilgrimages there,
and most of the towns had their own temples and establishments. So
numerous were the temples that fully two hundred towers could be
counted, rising above the city, with the stupendous pyramid
towering above them all.

The Spaniards were quartered in the court of one of the temples,
and in the surrounding buildings. As soon as they were established
there, the principal nobles of the town paid them visits of
ceremony; and presents of everything necessary for their comfort
and accommodation, and stores of provisions of all kinds, poured
in.

Roger had, in the line of march, taken his place among the troops;
but Cortez directed that he should, at other times, be near at hand
to him, as he alone of those in the army had any personal knowledge
of the country they were to traverse, and could give information as
to the size of the towns, the nature of the roads, and the
advantages which these offered, respectively, in the supply of
provisions likely to be obtained, the facilities for getting water,
etc. Cortez therefore, Father Aquilar acting as interpreter,
enjoined him to ramble about the city, releasing him from all
guards and exercises.

"Now that you are dressed like the rest of us," he said, "none will
dream that you understand their language, and as you pass along
they will express freely before you the sentiments they may
entertain of us. I do not expect them to love us, and doubtless
though they may flatter us to our faces, they curse us heartily
behind our backs. But we care nothing for their curses, or for
their ill will, so long as they do not proceed to plots and
conspiracies against us.

"They seem courteous and friendly, and I think that the Tlascalans
have spoken far too strongly against them. Nevertheless we will be
on our guard. These men are not like our mountain friends, who were
rough fighters, but hearty and honest people. They are traders, or
nobles, or priests, accustomed to let their faces hide their
thoughts, but through you we may get nearer to them than we
otherwise should do.

"But go not alone. One man can easily be jostled into one of the
temples, and made away with, without any being the wiser. I will
choose two comrades for you; men of discretion, and courageous
without being quarrelsome. With them, too, you will, ere long,
begin to recover your mother tongue; which you will never do, so
long as you only talk these heathen languages with Marina and
Father Aquilar."

Cortez struck the table with his hand, and an attendant entered.

"Summon Juan Algones and Pedro de Gasconda."

In a minute two men entered. Juan was a weatherbeaten soldier,
whose face bore the marks of several deep scars, and who had fought
for Spain on most of the battlefields of Europe. Pedro was young
enough to be his son. Juan had saved his life in a fight with the
natives of Cuba, and since then they had been inseparable.

"Juan, I have sent for you to ask you and Pedro to take our new
comrade into your party. I know you are always together, and that
you are quiet and peaceable, and not given either to quarrel in
your cups or to spend your evenings in gambling and dicing. He has,
as you know, almost forgotten his own language; and it will be for
our advantage, as well as his own, that he should learn it as soon
as possible; for as he knows the country and people, it is well
that he should be able to communicate with the rest of us, without
having to hunt up an interpreter.

"But that is not the principal thing, just at the present moment.
We know not whether the people of this city mean treacherously
towards us, or not. They will not speak in the presence of Donna
Marina or of the good Father here, knowing that they are acquainted
with the language; but as they will not imagine that this tall
Spanish soldier can know aught of what they say, they will not mind
speaking out their thoughts before him. Therefore, while he is here
it will be his duty to wander about the streets, and learn what the
people are saying, and what they think of us. But here, as
elsewhere, I have ordered that not less than three men shall go out
together.

"I have chosen you to accompany him. You will be free from all
other duty."

"That we will do, right willingly," Juan said. "It is pleasanter to
walk about the streets, and look at these strange peoples, than it
is to be cooped up here. As to the other part of the business, we
will do what we can towards teaching him Spanish; but as to being
our comrade, that must depend upon himself. I like the young
fellow's looks much. He looks honest and straightforward, though
where he got that light wavy hair and that fair skin from I can't
guess--they are rare enough in Cadiz, where I heard one say that he
came from."

"We don't know that he came from there, Juan. He may have come from
the mountains of Biscaya, where fair skins are commoner than they
are in the south. It is only that he described to us a port, which
must have been Cadiz, as the last thing he recollected in Spain."

"Ah, well, his skin matters nothing!" the soldier said. "His face
