an end to our conversation for the time.  If you will wait below, the
necessary papers shall be brought to you.  Farewell, young man; and
when you embrace them, assure Captain Barker and Captain Runacles
that I have still some hope of their finding a better mind."

They bowed and withdrew, giving place to the newcomer, who entered at
that moment--an old gentleman in a suit of dark blue edged with
silver.  As he passed them in the doorway his eyes scanned Tristram
narrowly, and he appeared to hesitate for a moment as if desirous of
putting a question to the youth.

Unconscious of this look, Tristram followed his father down the
stairs of the auberge.  They had hardly reached the bottom, however,
when a voice called from the landing above, and the Earl of
Marlborough descended after them.

"Here are the papers," he said.  "But, young sir, would you mind
waiting here for a minute or two while I speak with your father in
private?"

With this he opened a door upon the left and led the way through a
dark passage to a covered skittle-alley at the back of the house.
It was a deserted and ramshackle arcade and offered the poorest cover
from the rain, which dripped through the roof and drifted under the
eaves.  The skittles lay here and there, as if the last player, weary
of the game, had been tossing them about at haphazard.  Here the Earl
paused, looked around him, and began in a low voice.

"My friend, I regret to perceive that you begin to act without
instructions."

"In what way?"

"You propose to return at once to Harwich with this son of yours."

"Certainly, my lord.  It appears to me that I have deserved a holiday
by this week's work."

"You shall take one; but not at Harwich just yet."

"And why not at Harwich?"

"For two reasons.  In the first place you do no good, but harm, in
returning thither at this moment.  Understand that I am only asking
you to defer the visit for a week or two.  At present I am awaiting
certain necessary information, without which you will hardly lay your
hands on the good fortune I intend for you."

"You are mysterious, my lord.  This boy of mine--"

"Will bring you wealth and dignity, I promise, if you allow me to
conduct the affair.  If not--"

"What is the other reason?"

"The other reason," replied the Earl, looking down and moving a
skittle gently with the toe of his boot--"the other reason is that I
require you to spend the first part of your holiday elsewhere."

"Where may that be?"

"At Saint Germains."

"My lord, you risk my neck with much composure!"

"There is no risk at all, unless--"

"Pray finish your sentence."

"--Unless you refuse," said the Earl significantly.

"Proceed, my lord." Captain Salt's face flushed scarlet; then a sweat
broke out on his temples, where an instant before the veins had
swelled with rage.

"There is nothing to prevent your starting at once.  You have altered
the fuses, I suppose?"

"Yes."

"And made all the arrangements?"

"Nothing is omitted.  The guns will be fired twenty minutes too soon,
at ten minutes after nine.  As William knows nothing about the
signal, and has made his dispositions for half-past nine, the poor
fellows will have some fun for their pains, after all."

"Excellent!" said the Earl smiling.  "It only remains for you to
start.  Here are the papers; I advise you to keep them carefully
sorted.  This, in cipher, is for James.  It is full of promises; and
in addition, to keep his spirits up, you can give him an account of
the mutiny, pointing out how near it came to success.  A boat shall
take you to Sevenbergen; after that you know the road--the usual one.
The word is _Modena_.  You will take your son with you, of course,
and persuade him (if you can) that he is travelling back to Harwich
by the shortest road."

"That will be difficult."

"From Paris return to Dunkirk, and there await a letter from me.
By that time I hope to be able to send you information, on the
strength of which you may at once sail for Harwich.  Meanwhile guard
that young man as the apple of your eye. . . ."

We will return to the subject of this amiable advice.  Tristram had
been kicking his heels for ten minutes or more in the draughty
passage, and wondering if he should ever know the taste of food
again, when the door opened on the landing above, and the old
gentleman in blue and silver descended the stairs from his audience.
He was clearly in something of a hurry, and strode past our hero as
if unaware of his presence, but turned on his heel at the end of the
passage and came swiftly back.

"I ask your pardon, young man," he began, in a quick, foreign voice,
"but I thought I heard his Majesty speaking to you of a Captain
Runacles as I entered the room.  Forgive me if I seem too
inquisitive, but do you happen to know Captain Jeremiah Runacles?"

"I know no reason, sir, against my answering.  I know him well, and
love him."

"Ha? Where does he live?"

"In Harwich."

"He keeps hale?"

"In excellent health for his age."

"Could he still answer for himself with a small-sword?--I mean not
with a young adversary, but, say, with a man of my age?"

"I have not the slightest doubt of it, sir." Tristram stared at the
old gentleman, who was of a tall unwieldy figure, short bull neck and
choleric complexion.

"You will see him again shortly?"

"With God's help I shall see him in three days' time."

"Then I'd be obliged by your taking him a message from me.  Tell him,
sir, that I, Captain Van Adrienssen, may be heard of at The Hague at
any time, and have not forgotten a certain promise of his (to cut my
comb) which he uttered at one time when our ships lay alongside off
the Texel.  Assure him that, though night parted us, I still retain
the boot which he flung at my head and into my ship.  Say that I have
been waiting ever since for the man who fits that boot, and warn him
that we are both well stricken in years and have little time left in
which to try conclusions.  You have that by heart?"

"Yes, sir."

"Repeat it."

Tristram did so.

"Very well; now be careful to deliver it."

And, nodding his head sharply, the old gentleman hurried away on his
business just as the Earl and Captain Salt returned from their
colloquy.



CHAPTER IX.


THE FOUR MEN AT THE "WHITE LAMB".

"Well, my son," began Captain Salt, as the Earl reascended the
stairs.  "Thanks be that we are alone together at last!  Do I not
keep my promises?"

"Indeed, father, you are kind.  There is only one thing--"

"What is that?"

"I should prefer to return to Harwich alive; and seeing that I have
eaten nothing for a day and a half--"

His father interrupted him by taking his arm and hurrying him off to
the kitchen of the auberge, where a fat woman was basting a couple of
ducks before a roaring fire.

"Pardon me, mistress," he began in Dutch; "but can you give this
young man a breakfast?"

The hostess seemed to be annoyed.

"What does he want?" she inquired sharply.

The question being interpreted to Tristram, he answered that he
wanted everything, but that in the meantime the ducks would serve to
break the edge of his fast.

"But these are for his Majesty."

"What have you besides?"

"Salt fish."

"I will begin with salt fish."

"Bacon."

"I see," said Tristram, nodding up at a regiment of hams that
depended from a rack overhead; "I will eat these also.  What else?"

"Cheese."

"On second thoughts, I will begin with cheese while the fish is being
prepared.  Is that all?"

"Mother of God!  Is it not enough?"

"How can I tell yet?  Let me see your bread and cheese."

The woman left her ducks, and in a minute had dumped down a loaf and
a huge round cheese of an orange colour before our hero.

"When do we start?" he asked, with his mouth full.

"Shortly after dark."

"Then I have plenty of time."

"I should hope so.  Hostess, bring a bottle of wine."

"Two bottles," Tristram interrupted.

"It will get into your head."

"I hope so, for my head is something light at present."

"You propose, then, to spend the day in eating and drinking?"

"Unless you know of some better amusement with which we can beguile
the time."

"None whatever.  And as I must leave you for some time while I make
arrangements for our return--"

"I shall not be lonely," said Tristram, with a glance at the ducks,
followed by an upward look of resignation directed at the rows of
hams.

It was dark when Captain Salt returned, and found his son on the
settle where he had left him.  Tristram was not sitting, however, but
stretched at length and breathing heavily.  At the farther end of the
table sat the host and hostess of the inn, engaged in making out the
bill.

"One--two--three--six bottles!" exclaimed his father, counting the
ruins on the board.  "Why, the boy is drunk!"

"No, father," Tristram interrupted, sitting up and rubbing his eyes;
"not so much drunk as asleep, and not so much asleep but that I could
see the landlord here add three empty bottles to the two I had
finished, without counting one that came full to the table and was
emptied by him for his supper."

Captain Salt shot a searching glance at the couple, who coloured and
seemed confused.

"What is this?" he cried, examining the reckoning.  "Two ducks!"

"Ah, I'm afraid it is true that I ate one of the ducks."

"But they were for his Majesty!"

"It appears they were cooked on the chance of pleasing his Majesty,
who left, however, without inquiring for them.  The landlord and his
wife have just eaten the other.  Is it time to start?"

"Yes."

Tristram jumped up and stretched himself, smiling amiably on the host
and hostess, who returned his look with no very good will.  Captain
Salt, having made the proper deductions calmly, paid the reckoning,
and they left the house.

Outside the weather was still dirty, and a wind, which had gradually
risen since the morning, blew in their faces charged with chilly
moisture.  The mist, however, had cleared a little, and Tristram, as
he rammed his hat tightly on his head before facing the night, could
see the lights of the squadron far out upon the black and broken
waters of the Maese.

"In what ship do we return?" he asked.

The wind apparently drowned his question; for Captain Salt started
off without replying and led the way down across the sandbanks.
It seemed to Tristram that their path lay to the left of that by
which they had approached the inn early in the morning.  He was
straining his eyes on the look out for the wooden landing-stage, when
suddenly, on climbing a ridge somewhat higher than the rest, he saw
the white fringe of the waves glimmering close under his feet and the
inky shadow of a boat, in which sat a couple of dark forms.  One of
them, hearing the low whistle uttered by Captain Salt, scrambled
forward to the bows and held out a hand.

Tristram looked at his father, who nodded.  They entered the boat in
silence, and within a minute were being rowed rapidly across the
