openly and in cold blood?  I did not think so. And yet--and yet--

Croisette interrupted the train of my thoughts.  I found that he was
not following me.  He had sprung away, and in a dozen strides reached
the Vidame's stirrup, and was clasping his knee when I turned.  I could
not hear at the distance at which I stood, what he said, and the
horseman to whom Bezers had committed us spurred between us.  But I
heard the Vidame's answer.

"No!  no!  no!"  he cried with a ring of restrained fury in his voice.
"Let my plans alone!  What do you know of them?  And if you speak to me
again, M. St. Croix--I think that is your name, boy--I will--no, I will
not kill you.  That might please you, you are stubborn, I can see.  But
I will have you stripped and lashed like the meanest of my scullions!
Now go, and take care!"

Impatience, hate and wild passion flamed in his face for the
moment--transfiguring it.  Croisette came back to us slowly,
white-lipped and quiet.  "Never mind," I said bitterly.  "The third
time may bring luck."

Not that I felt much indignation at the Vidame's insult, or any anger
with the lad for incurring it; as I had felt on that other occasion.
Life and death seemed to be everything on this morning.  Words had
ceased to please and annoy, for what are words to the sheep in the
shambles?  One man's life and one woman's happiness outside ourselves
we thought only of these now. And some day I reflected Croisette might
remember even with pleasure that he had, as a drowning man clutching at
straws, stooped to a last prayer for them.

We were placed in the middle of a knot of troopers who closed the line
to the right.  And presently Marie touched me.  He was gazing intently
at the sentry on the roof of the third house from us; the farthest but
one.  The man's back was to the parapet, and he was gesticulating
wildly.

"He sees him!"  Marie muttered.

I nodded almost in apathy.  But this passed away, and I started
involuntarily and shuddered, as a savage roar, breaking the silence,
rang along the front of the mob like a rolling volley of firearms.
What was it?  A man posted at a window on the upper gallery had dropped
his pike's point, and was levelling it at some one inside:  we could
see no more.

But those in front of the window could; they saw too much for the
Vidame's precautions, as a moment showed.  He had not laid his account
with the frenzy of a rabble, the passions of a mob which had tasted
blood.  I saw the line at its farther end waver suddenly and toss to
and fro.  Then a hundred hands went up, and confused angry cries rose
with them.  The troopers struck about them, giving back slowly as they
did so.  But their efforts were in vain.  With a scream of triumph a
wild torrent of people broke through between them, leaving them
stranded; and rushed in a headlong cataract towards the steps.  Bezers
was close to us at the time.  "S'death!"  he cried, swearing oaths
which even his sovereign could scarce have equalled.  "They will snatch
him from me yet, the hell-hounds!"

He whirled his horse round and spurred him in a dozen bounds to the
stairs at our end of the gallery.  There he leaped from him, dropping
the bridle recklessly; and bounding up three steps at a time, he ran
along the gallery.  Half-a-dozen of the troopers about us stayed only
to fling their reins to one of their number, and then followed, their
great boots clattering on the planks.

My breath came fast and short, for I felt it was a crisis.  It was a
race between the two parties, or rather between the Vidame and the
leaders of the mob.  The latter had the shorter way to go.  But on the
narrow steps they were carried off their feet by the press behind them,
and fell over and hampered one another and lost time.  The Vidame, free
from this drawback, was some way along the gallery before they had set
foot on it.

How I prayed--amid a scene of the wildest uproar and excitement--that
the mob might be first!  Let there be only a short conflict between
Bezers' men and the people, and in the confusion Pavannes might yet
escape.  Hope awoke in the turmoil.  Above the yells of the crowd a
score of deep voices about me thundered "a Wolf!  a Wolf!"  And I too,
lost my head, and drew my sword, and screamed at the top of my voice,
"a Caylus!  a Caylus!"  with the maddest.

Thousands of eyes besides mine were strained on the foremost figures on
either side.  They met as it chanced precisely at the door of the
house.  The mob leader was a slender man, I saw; a priest apparently,
though now he was girt with unpriestly weapons, his skirts were tucked
up, and his head was bare.  So much my first glance showed me.  It was
at the second look it was when I saw the blood forsake his pale
lowering face and leave it whiter than ever, when horror sprang along
with recognition to his eyes, when borne along by the crowd behind he
saw his position and who was before him--it was only then when his mean
figure shrank, and he quailed and would have turned but could not, that
I recognized the Coadjutor.

I was silent now, my mouth agape.  There are seconds which are minutes;
ay, and many minutes.  A man may die, a man may come into life in such
a second.  In one of these, it seemed to me, those two men paused, face
to face; though in fact a pause was for one of them impossible.  He was
between--and I think he knew it--the devil and the deep sea.  Yet he
seemed to pause, while all, even that yelling crowd below, held their
breath.  The next moment, glaring askance at one another like two dogs
unevenly coupled, he and Bezers shot shoulder to shoulder into the
doorway, and in another jot of time would have been out of sight. But
then, in that instant, I saw something happen.  The Vidame's hand
flashed up above the priest's head, and the cross-hilt of his sheathed
sword crashed down with awful force, and still more awful passion, on
the other's tonsure!  The wretch went down like a log, without a word,
without a cry!  Amid a roar of rage from a thousand throats, a roar
that might have shaken the stoutest heart, and blanched the swarthiest
cheek, Bezers disappeared within!

It was then I saw the power of discipline and custom.  Few as were the
troopers who had followed him--a mere handful--they fell without
hesitation on the foremost of the crowd, who were already in confusion,
stumbling and falling over their leader's body; and hurled them back
pell-mell along the gallery.  The throng below had no firearms, and
could give no aid at the moment; the stage was narrow; in two minutes
the Vidame's people had swept it clear of the crowd and were in
possession of it.  A tall fellow took up the priest's body, dead or
alive, I do not know which, and flung it as if it had been a sack of
corn over the rail.  It fell with a heavy thud on the ground.  I heard
a piercing scream that rose above that babel--one shrill scream!  and
the mob closed round and hid the thing.

If the rascals had had the wit to make at once for the right-hand
stairs, where we stood with two or three of Bezers' men who had kept
their saddles, I think they might easily have disposed of us,
encumbered as we were, by the horses; and then they could have attacked
the handful on the gallery on both flanks.  But the mob had no leaders,
and no plan of operations.  They seized indeed two or three of the
scattered troopers, and tearing them from their horses, wreaked their
passion upon them horribly.  But most of the Switzers escaped, thanks
to the attention the mob paid to the houses and what was going forward
on the galleries; and these, extricating themselves joined us one by
one, so that gradually a little ring of stern faces gathered about the
stair-foot.  A moment's hesitation, and seeing no help for it, we
ranged ourselves with them; and, unchecked as unbidden, sprang on three
of the led horses.

All this passed more quickly than I can relate it:  so that before our
feet were well in the stirrups a partial silence, then a mightier roar
of anger at once proclaimed and hailed the re-appearance of the Vidame.
Bigoted beyond belief were the mob of Paris of that day, cruel,
vengeful, and always athirst for blood; and this man had killed not
only their leader but a priest.  He had committed sacrilege!  What
would they do?  I could just, by stooping forward, command a side view
of the gallery, and the scene passing there was such that I forgot in
it our own peril.

For surely in all his reckless life Bezers had never been so
emphatically the man for the situation--had never shown to such
advantage as at this moment when he stood confronting the sea of faces,
the sneer on his lip, a smile in his eyes; and looked down unblenching,
a figure of scorn, on the men who were literally agape for his life.
The calm defiance of his steadfast look fascinated even me.  Wonder and
admiration for the time took the place of dislike.  I could scarcely
believe that there was not some atom of good in this man so fearless.
And no face but one no face I think in the world, but one--could have
drawn my eyes from him.  But that one face was beside him.  I clutched
Marie's arm, and pointed to the bareheaded figure at Bezers' right hand.

It was Louis himself:  our Louis de Pavannes, But he was changed indeed
from the gay cavalier I remembered, and whom I had last seen riding
down the street at Caylus, smiling back at us, and waving his adieux to
his mistress!  Beside the Vidame he had the air of being slight, even
short.  The face which I had known so bright and winning, was now white
and set.  His fair, curling hair--scarce darker than Croisette's--hung
dank, bedabbled with blood which flowed from a wound in his head.  His
sword was gone; his dress was torn and disordered and covered with
dust.  His lips moved.  But he held up his head, he bore himself
bravely with it all; so bravely, that I choked, and my heart seemed
bursting as I looked at him standing there forlorn and now unarmed.  I
knew that Kit seeing him thus would gladly have died with him; and I
thanked God she did not see him.  Yet there was a quietness in his
fortitude which made a great difference between his air and that of
Bezers.  He lacked, as became one looking unarmed on certain death, the
sneer and smile of the giant beside him.

What was the Vidame about to do?  I shuddered as I asked myself. Not
surrender him, not fling him bodily to the people?  No not that:  I
felt sure he would let no others share his vengeance that his pride
would not suffer that.  And even while I wondered the doubt was solved.
I saw Bezers raise his hand in a peculiar fashion.  Simultaneously a
cry rang sharply out above the tumult, and down in headlong charge
towards the farther steps came the band of horsemen, who had got clear
of the crowd on that side. They were but ten or twelve, but under his
eye they charged, as if they had been a thousand.  The rabble shrank
from the collision, and fled aside.  Quick as thought the riders
swerved; and changing their course, galloped through the looser part of
the throng, and in a trice drew rein side by side with us, a laugh and
a jeer on their reckless lips.

It was neatly done:  and while it was being done the Vidame and his
knot of men, with those who had been searching the building, hurried
down the gallery towards us, their rear cleared for the moment by the
troopers' feint.  The dismounted men came bundling down the steps,
their eyes aglow with the war-fire, and got horses as they could.
Among them I lost sight of Louis, but perceived him presently, pale and
bewildered, mounted behind a trooper.  A man sprang up before each of
us too, greeting our appearance merely by a grunt of surprise.  For it
was no time to ask or answer.  The mob was recovering itself, and each
moment brought it reinforcements, while its fury was augmented by the
trick we had played it, and the prospect of our escape.

We were under forty, all told; and some men were riding double. Bezers'
eye glanced hastily over his array, and lit on us three. He turned and
gave some order to his lieutenant.  The fellow spurred his horse, a
splendid grey, as powerful as his master's, alongside of Croisette,
threw his arm round the lad, and dragged him dexterously on to his own
crupper.  I did not understand the action, but I saw Croisette settle
himself behind Blaise Bure--for he it was--and supposed no harm was
intended.  The next moment we had surged forward, and were swaying to
and fro in the midst of the crowd.

What ensued I cannot tell.  The outlook, so far as I was concerned, was
limited to wildly plunging horses--we were in the centre of the band
and riders swaying in the saddle--with a glimpse here and there of a
fringe of white scowling faces and tossing arms.  Once, a lane opening,
I saw the Vidame's charger--he was in the van--stumble and fall among
the crowd and heard a great shout go up.  But Bezers by a mighty effort
lifted it to its legs again.  And once too, a minute later, those
riding on my right, swerved outwards, and I saw something I never
afterwards forgot.

It was the body of the Coadjutor, lying face upwards, the eyes open and
the teeth bared in a last spasm.  Prostrate on it lay a woman, a young
woman, with hair like red gold falling about her neck, and skin like
milk.  I did not know whether she was alive or dead; but I noticed that
one arm stuck out stiffly and the crowd flying before the sudden impact
of the horses must have passed over her, even if she had escaped the
iron hoofs which followed.  Still in the fleeting glance I had of her
as my horse bounded aside, I saw no wound or disfigurement.  Her one
arm was cast about the priest's breast; her face was hidden on it.  But
for all that, I knew her--knew her, shuddering for the woman whose
badges I was even now wearing, whose gift I bore at my side; and I
remembered the priest's vaunt of a few hours before, made in her
presence, "There is no man in Paris shall thwart me to-night!"

It had been a vain boast indeed!  No hand in all that host of thousands
was more feeble than his now:  for good or ill!  No brain more dull, no
voice less heeded.  A righteous retribution indeed had overtaken him.
He had died by the sword he had drawn--died, a priest, by violence!
The cross he had renounced had crushed him.  And all his schemes and
thoughts, and no doubt they had been many, had perished with him.  It
had come to this, only this, the sum of the whole matter, that there
was one wicked man the less in Paris--one lump of breathless clay the
more.

For her--the woman on his breast--what man can judge a woman, knowing
her?  And not knowing her, how much less?  For the present I put her
out of my mind, feeling for the moment faint and cold.

We were clear of the crowd, and clattering unmolested down a paved
street before I fully recovered from the shock which this sight had
caused me.  Wonder whither we were going took its place.  To Bezers'
house?  My heart sank at the prospect if that were so.  Before I
thought of an alternative, a gateway flanked by huge round towers
appeared before us, and we pulled up suddenly, a confused jostling mass
in the narrow way; while some words passed between the Vidame and the
Captain of the Guard.  A pause of several minutes followed; and then
the gates rolled slowly open, and two by two we passed under the arch.
Those gates might have belonged to a fortress or a prison, a dungeon or
a palace, for all I knew.

They led, however, to none of these, but to an open space, dirty and
littered with rubbish, marked by a hundred ruts and tracks, and fringed
with disorderly cabins and make-shift booths.  And beyond this--oh, ye
gods!  the joy of it--beyond this, which we crossed at a rapid trot,
lay the open country!

The transition and relief were so wonderful that I shall never forget
them.  I gazed on the wide landscape before me, lying quiet and
peaceful in the sunlight, and could scarce believe in my happiness.  I
drew the fresh air into my lungs, I threw up my sheathed sword and
caught it again in a frenzy of delight, while the gloomy men about me
smiled at my enthusiasm.  I felt the horse beneath me move once more
like a thing of life.  No enchanter with his wand, not Merlin nor
Virgil, could have made a greater change in my world, than had the
captain of the gate with his simple key!  Or so it seemed to me in the
first moments of freedom, and escape--of removal from those loathsome
streets.

I looked back at Paris--at the cloud of smoke which hung over the
towers and roofs; and it seemed to me the canopy of hell itself. I
fancied that my head still rang with the cries and screams and curses,
the sounds of death.  In very fact, I could hear the dull reports of
firearms near the Louvre, and the jangle of the bells. Country-folk
were congregated at the cross-roads, and in the villages, listening and
gazing; asking timid questions of the more good-natured among us, and
showing that the rumour of the dreadful work doing in the town had
somehow spread abroad.  And this though I learned afterwards that the
keys of the city had been taken the night before to the king, and that,
except a party with the Duke of Guise, who had left at eight in pursuit
of Montgomery and some of the Protestants--lodgers, happily for
themselves, in the Faubourg St. Germain--no one had left the town
before ourselves.

While I am speaking of our departure from Paris, I may say what I have
to say of the dreadful excesses of those days, ay, and of the following
days; excesses of which France is now ashamed, and for which she
blushed even before the accession of his late Majesty.  I am sometimes
asked, as one who witnessed them, what I think, and I answer that it
was not our country which was to blame.  A something besides Queen
Catharine de' Medici had been brought from Italy forty years before, a
something invisible but very powerful; a spirit of cruelty and
treachery.  In Italy it had done small harm.  But grafted on French
daring and recklessness, and the rougher and more soldierly manners of
the north, this spirit of intrigue proved capable of very dreadful
things.  For a time, until it wore itself out, it was the curse of
France.  Two Dukes of Guise, Francis and Henry, a cardinal of Guise,
the Prince of Conde, Admiral Coligny, King Henry the Third all these
the foremost men of their day--died by assassination within little more
