

The next day the Governor himself came off to the brig, and was
received with the usual honours.

"The council are quite of my opinion," he said to Harry, "as to the
extreme difficulty and cost that an effort to put down piracy among
the islands would involve. Our ships on the station would not be at
all sufficient for such work and, at any rate, it is a step that we
should not venture to engage in, without the assent of the home
government. We shall, of course, write home fully upon the matter,
and shall leave the final decision to them; at the same time
expressing our own views, and giving some idea as to the force that
would have to be employed, the expenditure involved, and the time
required for the operation.

"This letter contains a reply, as far as we can give it, to the
Governor General's proposals."

"His lordship will, I am sure, be sorry to hear your views, sir;
but I imagine that he will not hesitate to undertake the work of
punishing, at least, the people of some of the islands where
outrages have taken place, as soon as affairs are sufficiently
settled in India for him to dispense, for a time, with the services
of some of the Company's ships of war."

As Harry expected, the face of the Dutch Governor showed that this
statement, when translated, was evidently most unpalatable to him.
After a moment's hesitation, however, he said:

"If Lord Mornington waits until everything is quiet in India, it
will probably be a very long time before he will be able to carry
out the operation you speak of."

"That may be, sir. I do not know whether you have heard that
Seringapatam has been captured, and that Tippoo, himself, fell in
its defence?"

A look of amazement, and even of consternation, on the part of the
Dutch officials showed that the news was as unwelcome as it was
unexpected. The loss of their hold in India, by the wonderful
spread of the British power, was an extremely sore point with them.
Nothing would have pleased them better than to have heard that the
power of the latter had been shattered.

"It is certainly news to us," the Governor said, shortly. "But
there are still other powers in India, that are likely to give at
least as much trouble as Mysore has done."

"I quite admit that," Harry said, "but have no doubt that we shall
be able to deal with them, as satisfactorily as we have done with
Tippoo; and possibly as quickly."

"That remains to be seen," the Governor said.

"Quite so, sir. I have a considerable knowledge of India, and of
its native armies; and I doubt whether any of them are as good
fighters as Tippoo's men were."

"Was Mysore taken by storm, or by famine?"

"By storm, after our batteries had opened fire, for a few days."

[Illustration: 'Well, sir, I will now return to shore,' the Governor]
said.

"Well, sir, I will now return to shore," the Governor said,
abruptly. "You will please to give the assurances of my high esteem
to Lord Mornington."

Harry bowed and, without another word, the Dutch officials
descended the accommodation ladder, and returned to shore. When
they were out of hearing, Fairclough burst into a hearty laugh.

"That was a severe broadside you poured into him, Lindsay. I could
see that they were absolutely flabbergasted, when you told them
about Mysore. Their manner, before that, had been almost insolent.
But you cut their comb finely."

"I knew that it would be a heavy blow for them. Of course, they
view with intense disgust the spread of our power in India. Not
only has it destroyed their dream of empire there but, in case of
war with them, their islands here will be absolutely at our mercy.
If we are strong enough to win kingdom after kingdom in India,
there should be no difficulty in turning out the small bodies of
troops they have, in their various possessions."

"Yes, I see that; and the time may come very shortly, for the
French are likely to lay hands on Holland, before long and, as soon
as they do so, we shall be ready to pop down upon them, here. The
days of Van Tromp are long passed, and the Dutch navy has become
absolutely insignificant.

"Well, I am glad that this is over. The sooner we are off, the
better."

Half an hour after the Dutch Governor had left, orders were given
to get up the anchor and loosen the sails, and the brig was shortly
on her way north.

"Now, what is your next move?" Fairclough asked, as the bustle of
getting under way subsided.

"The Malay tells me that there is a small town on the east coast,
and that this would be the most handy for landing, as from there to
Johore's town is not more than some twenty miles. Whether the road
is open, he cannot say. The news he learned, from the tumangong's
people, was that there was a great deal of fighting going on
between Johore and some of the petty rajahs. What the position is,
at the present, moment he could not discover.

"I should propose that we drop anchor off the place; and that, if
we find the natives well disposed, the interpreter should make an
arrangement, with a couple of natives, to carry up a letter from me
to the rajah, saying that I have come on a matter of business from
the Governor of India; and asking if he is willing to receive me,
and to guarantee my safety. If he says no, there is an end to it.
If he says yes, I shall start as soon as the answer comes."

"Would you take some blue jackets with you?"

"No. If we were attacked by a force of Malays, we should probably
be annihilated even if I took half your ship's company. Therefore,
the smaller the escort I travel with, the better. I shall, of
course, take the Malay, my man Abdool, and the four men of the
escort. That is quite enough, if we get up without trouble; whereas
if there is trouble, the fewer the better."

"Well, I hope no harm will come of it, Lindsay. Of course, if you
consider it your duty to go, go you must."

"Yes, I think it my duty. I consider the cession of this island to
be of extreme importance. If we only obtain it from the tumangong,
some day the Rajah of Johore might get the upper hand, and
repudiate the treaty made without his approval and, narrow as the
strait is, he might cross with forty or fifty canoes, make his way
through the woods, and annihilate the settlement at one blow."

"No doubt that is so," the other agreed. "Well, if you get detained
you will, of course, try and make your way down to the coast. I
will remain at anchor off the town for a month, after you start. If
there is no news of you, then, I shall conclude that it is hopeless
to wait longer, and shall sail for Calcutta with your despatches.
As I was present at both your interviews, I shall be able to
report, from my own knowledge, as to the disposition shown both by
the tumangong and the Dutch."

Ten days later, they cast anchor off the village. Some canoes soon
came off to them with fruit and other products and, shortly
afterwards, a war canoe came out with the chief man of the town. At
first he was very reticent; but a bottle of champagne opened his
lips, and he and the interpreter conversed for some time together.

"What does he say?" Harry asked, when there was a pause in the
conversation.

"He says, sir, that the country is very unsettled, and that it is
unsafe to travel. The town acknowledges the rajah as its master,
and the territory through which the road runs is nominally his; but
it is infested by bands owing allegiance to a neighbouring rajah,
who is at war with him."

"Have you asked him if it is possible to send a messenger through?"

"He said that there are plenty of men who would venture to go
through, if well paid. He thinks that two men would be better than
ten, for they could hide themselves more easily in the forest."

"Well, ask him what he would send two messengers through for."

The Malay answered that he could not say, until he had spoken to
some of them; but he thought that for ten dollars they would be
willing to undertake it.

"Tell him that I would pay that, and will give them as much more
if, on their return, they will guide me and my party to the
residence of the rajah."

The Malay shook his head.

"They would want more for that," he said. "Two natives could pass
without much danger for, if they were caught, they could say that
they belonged to one of the other bands, but had lost their party.
It would be quite different if they were to have Europeans with
them.

"How many would go?"

"Seven of us, altogether."

"I will see about it," the chief said; "but if I succeed, you will
give me three bottles of that drink."

"I have very little of it," Harry said, "but I will agree to give
him the three bottles, if he finds messengers to take up my
letters; and arranges with them, or others, to guide us up."

The Malay nodded, when the answer was translated to him; drank half
a tumbler of ship's rum, with great satisfaction; and then went
off.

"This is going to be a more dangerous business than our expedition
to Nagpore," Harry said to Abdool, when he told him what the Malay
had said about the dangers, and the state of affairs on shore.

"My lord will manage it, somehow," Abdool said; "he was born under
a fortunate star, and will assuredly do what is best."

"I shall do what I hope is best, Abdool; but one cannot answer how
it will turn out. One thing is certain: that if we fall into the
hands of the Malays, we shall meet with little mercy."

"We should have had no mercy, if we had fallen into the hands of
the people of Nagpore, master," Abdool said.

"That is true enough, Abdool; and I don't think we should have been
much better off, if Scindia had laid hands on us after we had
bearded him in his tent. I cannot say that this expedition is one
that I should have chosen, were I not convinced that it is my duty.
However, we must hope that all will go well with us, as it has done
before."

The next day the Malay came off again.

"I have arranged with two men," he said, "to take your message, for
ten dollars; but if they go back with you, they will require
twenty, because the rajah might detain them."

"That I will pay," Harry said.

"But supposing you should not come back," the Malay said, "they
might lose their reward. Will you pay them in advance?"

"No. I will leave the money in Captain Fairclough's hands, and
whether I return or not he will, before he leaves, pay it to the
men themselves, if they come back, or to their families."

"That is a fair proposal," the Malay said. "When do you wish the
messengers to start?"

"The letter will be ready for them, in an hour's time. I will come
on shore with it, see the men, and give it to them, with
instructions. Will they travel by night, or day?"

"They will start at daybreak," the chief said. "The road is but a
track, and could not be followed at night; for a forest extends
almost the whole distance, and they would find it too dark to keep
to the road. I told them that it would be safer to travel at night,
but they said it could not be done. They would not be likely to be
surprised in the day, as they would travel noiselessly, and would
be sure to hear any movement of a party of men coming along the
road, and could hide in the forest until they had passed. Moreover,
our people do not like travelling in the dark. Evil creatures are
about, and even the bravest fear them."

"Very well, chief; then I will come ashore in an hour, and give
them this letter."

As soon as they had left, Harry went down to the interpreter, and
gave him the exact purport of the message to the rajah; leaving it
to him to put it in the usual form in which communications were
addressed to persons in authority, but saying that it was necessary
that he should impress him with his importance, as the commissioner
of the great Governor of India. When this was transcribed, on some
parchment which had been brought for the purpose, Harry went ashore
with Lieutenant Hardy and a strong party of seamen for, although
the local chief had apparently been most friendly, the treacherous
nature of the Malays was well known, and Fairclough thought it as
well to order them to take their cutlasses with them, and each man
to carry a brace of pistols hidden beneath his jacket.

A number of natives assembled on the shore as the boat approached,
but they seemed to be attracted by curiosity, only. Just as the
boat touched the beach, the chief came down to meet them, attended
by a dozen armed followers. He invited Harry to follow him to his
own house, where the two messengers were awaiting him. They were
both men in the prime of life--strong, active-looking fellows.
Harry, through his interpreter, explained exactly what he wished
done.

"If you carry out your mission well, and quickly," he said, "I
shall make you a present, in addition to what has been agreed upon.
You will notice the rajah's manner, when he reads the letter; and
tell me, when you return, whether he appeared to be pleased or not,
whether he hesitates as to giving me a guarantee, and whether, in
your opinion, he means to observe it. I shall rely much upon your
report."

Three days passed, and then a boat brought the messengers off to
the ship.

"So you have made your journey safely?" Harry said, through the
interpreter.

"We met with no trouble by the way. This is the answer that the
rajah has sent."

The letter was a satisfactory one. The rajah expressed willingness
to receive the officer whom the English lord had sent to him, and
to guarantee his safety while at his town; but said that, owing to
the troubled state of the country, he could not guarantee his
safety on the road, but would send down an escort of twenty men to
guard him on his way up, and the same on his return to the coast.

"And now," Harry said, when the interpreter had read the document,
"tell me what passed."

"When we said that we were messengers from an English lord, on
board a ship with great guns, we were taken to the rajah's house.
He took the letter from us, and read it. Then he asked some of
those with him what they thought of the matter. They answered that
they could see no harm in it, and perhaps you might bring presents.
He then asked us how many would come up with you; and we told him
four soldiers, as escort, and an interpreter. He nodded, and then
talked in a low voice to those around him, and told us to come
again, that afternoon, when a letter would be given us to take to
you."

"Do you think that he means treachery?" Harry asked.

"That we cannot say, my lord. We have talked as we came down. It
seems to us that he could have nothing to gain by hindering you;
but that perhaps he might detain you, in order to obtain a ransom
for you from the lord of India."

Harry had already enquired, from the chief of the town, as to the
character of the rajah.

"He is feared, but not liked," the chief said. "He knows that there
are those who would prefer that the old family should reign again,
and he has put many to death whom he has suspected as being
favourable to this. This is the reason why the tumangong, and other
chiefs, have revolted against him. The loss of so much territory
has not improved him and, in his fits of passion, he spares none."

"What has become of the family of the former rajah?" Harry asked.

"His wife and child are prisoners in the palace," he said. "Their
friends are surprised that their lives should have been spared; but
the rajah is crafty, and it is thought that he holds them so that
he could, if his position became desperate, place the young prince
on the throne and declare for him; in which case some, who are now
his enemies, might come over to his side. I am told that, except
that they are kept prisoners, the late rajah's wife and boy are
well treated."

The account was not satisfactory, but it did not shake Harry's
determination. Questioning the Malays further, he found that they
had heard, at Johore, rumours that one of the chiefs on the border
of Pahang was collecting a large force, with the intention of
attacking the rajah; that the people of Johore were erecting strong
palisades round the town; and that the fighting men of the villages
round had all been called in for its defence.

"When is this escort to come down?" he asked.

"They started at the same time as we did, my lord, and will be here
by this evening."

"Very well. In that case I will land, tomorrow morning at daybreak,
and start at once; so that we shall reach Johore tomorrow. Will you
hire four men, to act as carriers for us?"

At the time appointed, Harry went on shore with the Malay, Abdool,
and four troopers. They had put on full uniform, and Harry had
brought with him, to shore, an assortment of presents similar to
those he had given to the tumangong. The two messengers and the
four natives, as carriers, were awaiting him and, as he went up the
beach, he was joined by twenty Malays with an officer of the rajah,
who saluted him profoundly. The chief of the village was also
there, and accompanied the party until beyond its boundary.

After passing a few plantations, they entered a dense forest. The
road was a mere footway, apparently but little used. The ground
ascended rapidly and, when they had gone a short distance, some of
the Malay soldiers went scouting ahead; the rest following in
absolute silence, stopping frequently to listen.

"It is quite evident, Abdool," Harry said, in a whisper, "that what
they said at the village is true, and these people from Johore
consider the journey to be a very dangerous one. They are evidently
expecting a surprise; and I am afraid that, if we are attacked, we
shall not be able to place much reliance on them."

Abdool shook his head.

"What are we to do, sahib, if we are attacked?"

"It depends on what these Malays do. If they make a good fight for
it, we will fight, too; if not, and we see that resistance is
useless, we will remain quiet. It would be of no use for six men to
fight fifty, on such ground as this. They would creep up and hurl
their spears at us and, though we might kill some of them, they
would very soon overpower us.

"Drop back, and tell the four troopers that on no account are they
to fire, unless I give them the order."

Presently the Malays came to a stop, and the officer hurried back
to Harry.

"We have heard the sound of footsteps in the wood, and one of my
men says he saw a man running among the trees."

"It may have been some wild beast," Harry said. "There are plenty
of them in the wood, I hear, and your man may have been mistaken in
thinking that he saw a human figure. And even if it was so, it
might be some villager who, on hearing us, has left the path,
thinking us to be enemies."

"It may be that," the officer said, when the words were translated
to him. "But it is more likely that he was posted there to watch
the path, and that he has gone to tell his band that a party is
approaching."

"Even if it were so," Harry said, "the band may be only a small
one."

The officer moved forward, and joined his men. Half an hour later,
without the slightest warning, a shower of spears flew from among
the trees; followed immediately afterwards by a rush of dark
figures. Several of the Malay escort were at once cut down. The
rest fled, at full speed.

Harry saw that resistance would be hopeless, and would only ensure
their destruction. He therefore called to his followers to remain
quiet. The four bearers, however, threw down their burdens, and
fled at full speed down the path, just as a number of Malays poured
out on either side.

They were evidently struck with the appearance of Harry and his
followers; but were about to rush upon them, when a chief ran
forward and shouted, to them, to abstain from attacking the
strangers. Then he walked up to Harry, who was evidently the chief
of the party.

"Who are you, white man?" he asked, "and where are you going?"

The interpreter replied that they were going on a visit of ceremony
to the Rajah of Johore.

"We are his enemies," the chief said, "and now you must come with
us."

"This lord--" the interpreter began, but the chief waved his hand
for him to be silent.

He waited for a quarter of an hour, by which time he was joined by
that portion of his followers which had pursued the Malays. Many of
them carried human heads in their hands and, by the number of
these, Harry saw that very few of his native escort could have
escaped. The chief ordered his men to pick up the packages that had
been thrown down by the bearers, and then turned off into the
forest.

After a quarter of an hour's walk, they arrived at the spot where a
still-smoking fire showed that the band had halted. No pause was
made, however, and the party kept on their way and, in two hours'
time, reached the foot of a high range of mountains that had been
visible from the coast. The climb was a severe one but, in another
hour, they came out upon a flat plateau. Here, in a small village,
a considerable body of men were gathered; who hailed the arrival of
their comrades, with their ghastly triumphs of victory, with loud
shouts.

The chief of the band led his captives to a hut, somewhat superior
in appearance to the others, in front of which stood a man whose
bright attire and ornaments showed him to be a chief of importance.

"Who is this white man," he asked, "and these soldiers who are with
him?"

The officer repeated the description that he had received from the
interpreter, whom he pointed out.

"Why was this white man going to Johore?" he asked.

"He was sent by the white lord of India, my lord."

"Ask him why he was sent?"

"I was sent to Johore to ask the rajah if he would grant a trading
station to the English."

"We want no English on our coast," the chief said. "There are the
Dutch, at Malacca--some day we will turn them out.

"So he was bringing presents to Johore, was he?"

"Yes, my lord; these are the parcels," and he beckoned up the men
who carried them.

These approached, and humbly laid them at the rajah's feet.

"I have to report, my lord, that there were twenty of Johore's men
with him. These we killed."

"Did the white man and his soldiers aid them?"

"No, my lord. They stood quiet, and offered no resistance,
therefore I brought them to you."

"You did well. You are sure that none of the Johore men escaped, to
carry off the news that we were here?"

"Quite certain. We have the heads of twenty men, and their
officer."

"Good! I will examine these things. Put the white man and this
Malay into a hut, and the four soldiers into another.

"Who is this other man, who is dressed differently?"

"He is the white officer's servant," the interpreter said.

"Well, he can go with his master, then."

The four troopers were led off in one direction, and Harry and the
