upon the swift ships. Nor indeed will mighty Telamonian Ajax yield to
any man who may be a mortal, and who may eat the fruit of Ceres, who is
vulnerable by brass and by large stones. Not even to warlike Achilles
would he give way, at least in standing fight; but in speed he is by no
means able to contend with him. Guide us, therefore, to the left of the
army that we may quickly know whether we shall afford glory to any one,
or any one to us."

Thus he spoke. But Meriones, equal to rapid Mars, began to proceed,
until he came to [that part of] the army whither he had ordered him. But
they, when they beheld Idomeneus, like unto a flame in might, both him
and his attendant, in variously-wrought armour, they all, exhorting one
another along the crowd, advanced against him, and an equal contest
arose at the sterns of their ships. And as when storms sweep along,
[driven] by the shrill winds, on a day when the dust around the roads
[is] very abundant, and they at the same time raise up a large cloud of
dust; so came on the battle of these together, and they were eager in
their minds to slaughter one another throughout the throng with the
sharp brass. And the mortal-destroying combat bristles with the long
spears which they held, flesh-rending; and the brazen splendour from the
gleaming helmets, the newly-burnished corslets, and the shining shields,
coming together, dazzled their eyes. Very brave-hearted would he be who,
when beholding their toil, could have rejoiced, and would not be
disturbed.

But the two powerful sons of Saturn, favouring different sides, planned
grievous toils for the heroes. On the one hand, Jove willed victory to
the Trojans and to Hector, glorifying swift-footed Achilles; yet he
desired not entirely to destroy the Grecian people before Ilium, but was
honouring Thetis and her magnanimous son. On the other hand, Neptune,
coming amongst them, encouraged the Greeks, having secretly emerged from
the hoary deep; for he grieved that they should be subdued by the
Trojans, and he was greatly indignant with Jove. The same race indeed
was to both, and the same lineage, but Jove was born first,[422] and
knew more. For this reason [Neptune] avoided aiding them openly, but
always kept privately inciting them through the army, assimilated to a
man. They indeed alternately stretched over both the cord of vehement
contest and equally destructive war, irrefragable and indissoluble,
which relaxed the knees of many. Then, although half-hoary Idomeneus,
encouraging the Greeks, rushing upon the Trojans, created night; for he
slew Othryoneus, who had come from Cabesus, staying within [Priam's
house].[423] He had lately come after the rumour of the war, and
demanded Cassandra, the most beautiful in form of the daughters of
Priam, without a dowry; and he had promised a mighty deed, to repulse in
spite of themselves the sons of the Greeks from Troy. But to him aged
Priam had promised her, and pledged himself[424] to give her; therefore
he fought, trusting in these promises. But Idomeneus took aim at him
with his shining spear, and hurling it, struck him, strutting proudly;
nor did the brazen corslet which he wore resist it, but he fixed it in
the middle of his stomach. And falling, he gave a crash, and [the
other] boasted and said:

"Othryoneus! above all men indeed do I praise thee, if thou wilt now in
truth accomplish all which thou hast undertaken for Dardanian Priam: but
he also promised thee his daughter. We likewise, promising these things,
will accomplish them to thee. We will give thee the most beautiful in
form of the daughters of the son of Atreus to wed, bringing her from
Argos, if along with us thou wilt destroy the well-inhabited city of
Ilium. But follow, that we may treat with thee respecting the marriage
of the sea-traversing ships; since we are by no means bad
brothers-in-law."

   [Footnote 422: Heyne compares xiv. 204. The Erinnys were supposed
   to avenge any disrespect offered to an elder brother by a
   younger.]

   [Footnote 423: Literally, "being within from Cabesus."]

   [Footnote 424: Lit. "bowed assent."]

So saying, the hero Idomeneus dragged him by the foot through the brisk
battle. But to him Asius came as an avenger, on foot, before his steeds;
which his attendant charioteer always kept breathing over his
shoulders;[425] and in his mind he longed to strike Idomeneus, but he
(Idomeneus) anticipating him, smote him with his spear in the throat,
below the chin, and drove the brass quite through. And he fell, as when
some oak falls, or white poplar,[426] or towering[427] pine, which
timber-workers have cut down upon the mountains with lately-whetted
axes, to become ship timber. So he lay, stretched out before his horses
and chariot, gnashing his teeth, grasping the bloody dust. But the
charioteer was deprived of the senses which he previously had, nor dared
he turn back the horses that he might escape from the hands of the
enemy: but him warlike Antilochus, striking, transfixed in the middle
with his spear; nor did the brazen corslet which he wore resist, but he
fixed it in the centre of his stomach. Then, panting, he fell from the
well-made chariot-seat, and Antilochus, the son of magnanimous Nestor,
drove away the horses from the Trojans to the well-armed Greeks. But
Deiphobus, enraged on account of Asius, drew very near to Idomeneus, and
hurled with his shining spear. Idomeneus, however, having perceived it
opposite, avoided the brazen spear, for he was concealed behind his
shield equal on all sides, which he bore, constructed of the hides of
bulls, and glittering brass, fitted with two handles. Behind this he
collected himself entirely, and the brazen spear flew over him. But the
shield returned a dry[428] sound, the spear grazing it obliquely. Yet he
(Deiphobus) sent it not in vain from his heavy hand, but he struck
Hypsenor, son of Hippasus. the shepherd of the people, upon the liver,
below the breast, and straightway relaxed his knees under him. But
Deiphobus vainly boasted over him, loudly exclaiming:

   [Footnote 425: _I.e._ close by Asius [Greek: (kat' omon)], he
   having descended for the purpose of rescuing the body of
   Othryoneus.--Kennedy.]

   [Footnote 426: [Greek: "E leuken], populus alba."--Heyne.]

   [Footnote 427: [Greek: Blothros] is connected with [Greek:
   blosko], as [Greek: blechros] with [Greek: blitto]. See Buttm.
   Lexil. p. 194. Hesych.: [Greek: Blothre' eyauxes, e prasainousa
   lao kai ano throskousa]. Schol. on Apoll. Rhod. i. 322: [Greek:
   Pityn blothren Omeros, ten achri tou aitheros poliskousan].]

   [Footnote 428: So v. 441: [Greek: ayon auste]. So "aridus sonus,"
   in Lucret. vi, 113; "aridus fragor," Virg. Georg. I. 357, noticed
   by Quintil. I.O. viii. 3. A dry, grating, half-crackling sound is
   meant.]

"Surely not unavenged lies Asius; I rather think that he will rejoice in
his mind, though going into the strong-gated, massy [dwelling] of Hades,
since I have given him a guide."

Thus he spoke; but grief came upon the Greeks at his boasting, and it
particularly agitated the mind of warlike Antilochus. Yet, grieved as he
was, he neglected not his companion, but running, he protected him, and
covered him over with his shield. Him then his two dear companions,
Mecisteus, son of Echius, and noble Alastor, supporting, bore to the
hollow ships, deeply groaning. In the meantime Idomeneus ceased not his
mighty valour; but always burned either to cover some of the Trojans
with pitchy night,[429] or himself to fall with a crash, repelling
destruction from the Greeks. Then the hero Alcathous, the beloved son of
AEsyetas (and he was the son-in-law of Anchises, for he had married
Hippodamia, the eldest of his daughters, whom her father and venerable
mother loved from their hearts, whilst in their home, because she
excelled all of her age in beauty, in accomplishments, and prudence,
for which reason also the most distinguished man in wide Troy had wedded
her), him Neptune subdued under Idomeneus, having dimmed his shining
eyes, and fettered his fair limbs. For he was able neither to fly back
nor to turn aside, but him, standing motionless, like a pillar or
lofty-branching tree, the hero Idomeneus wounded with his spear in the
middle of the breast, and burst the brazen coat around him, which
formerly warded off destruction from his body: but then it sent forth a
dry sound, severed by the spear. Falling, he gave a crash, and the spear
was fixed in his heart, which, palpitating, shook even the extremity of
the spear; and there at length the impetuous Mars[430] spent its force.
But Idomeneus boasted prodigiously over him, loudly exclaiming:

   [Footnote 429: _I.e._ death.]

   [Footnote 430: Here put for the weapon.]

"Deiphobus! do we judge rightly that it is a fair return, that three
should be slain for one, since thus thou boastest? But do thou thyself
also, wretch, stand against me, that thou mayest know of what nature I
am, who have come hither the offspring of Jove, who first begat Minos,
the guardian of Crete. Minos again begat Deucalion, his blameless son,
and Deucalion begat me, king over many men in wide Crete. But now the
ships have brought me hither, an evil both to thee and to thy father,
and the other Trojans."

Thus he spoke, but Deiphobus hesitated between two opinions, whether,
falling back, he should join to himself some one of the magnanimous
Trojans, or make trial although alone. But to him, thus deliberating, it
appeared preferable to go in search of AEneas; whom he found standing at
the rear of the army, for he was ever indignant with noble Priam,
because he by no means honoured him, though being valiant among heroes.
And, standing near, he addressed to him winged words:

"AEneas, thou counsellor of the Trojans, now does it greatly behove thee
to aid thy brother-in-law, if indeed any regard reaches thee. But
follow, let us bring aid to Alcathous, who, being thy brother-in-law,
nourished thee whilst very young, in his palace, and whom spear-famed
Idomeneus hath slain."

Thus he spoke, and roused the courage in his breast, and he, greatly
desirous of battle, went to meet Idomeneus. Yet fear seized not
Idomeneus like a tender boy, but he stood still, like a boar in the
mountains, confident in his prowess, and who abides the mighty din of
men advancing against him, in a desert place,[431] and bristles up his
back; his eyes, too, gleam with fire, and he whets his teeth, eager to
keep at bay both dogs and men. So spear-renowned Idomeneus awaited
AEneas, swift in the battle-din, coming against him, nor retired; but he
shouted to his companions, looking to Ascalaphus, and Aphareus, and
Deipyrus, and Meriones, and Antilochus, skilful in fight. Exhorting
these, he addressed to them winged words:

   [Footnote 431: Or, "in the sheep-pasture."]

"Hither, my friends, and aid me alone, for I greatly dread swift-footed
AEneas, rushing on, who is coming upon me; who is very powerful to slay
men in battle, and possesses the bloom of youth, which is the greatest
strength. For if we were of the same age, with the spirit that I now
possess, quickly would either he bear off great glory, or I would."

Thus he spoke; but they all, having one determination in their minds,
stood near him, inclining their shields upon their shoulders. AEneas, on
the other hand, animated his companions, looking towards Deiphobus,
Paris, and noble Agenor, who, together with himself, were leaders of the
Trojans. These also the people followed, as sheep follow from their
pasture after the ram in order to drink; and the shepherd then is
rejoiced in his mind. So was the soul of AEneas gladdened in his breast,
when he beheld a body of troops following himself. These therefore
engaged in close fight round Alcathous with long spears, whilst the
brass resounded horribly on the breasts of them, aiming at each other
through the crowd. But two warlike men, conspicuous among the rest,
AEneas and Idomeneus, equal to Mars, longed to lacerate each other's
flesh with the ruthless brass. But AEneas first hurled his javelin at
Idomeneus; but he, perceiving it opposite, avoided the brazen spear; and
the spear of AEneas sank quivering into the earth; for it fled in vain
from his sturdy hand. Idomeneus next smote oenomaus in the middle of the
stomach, and the spear burst the cavity of his corslet, and penetrating,
drank his entrails through; but falling amid the dust, he grasped the
earth with the hollow of his hand. Then Idomeneus plucked out the long
spear from his body, but was unable to tear off the other rich armour
from his shoulders, for he was pressed hard by weapons. For no longer
were the sinews of his feet firm as he rushed, either to hasten on after
his own dart,[432] or avoid [that of another]. Wherefore also in
standing fight, he warded off the fatal day, nor did his feet any longer
bear him with ease in retreating from the battle. But against him,
gradually retiring, Deiphobus took aim with his glittering spear, for he
ever had a rooted hatred towards him. But then too he missed, and struck
with his javelin Ascalaphus, the son of Mars, and drove the stout spear
through his shoulder; and tailing amid the dust, he grasped the earth
with his hand.

   [Footnote 432: So as to recover it.]

Not yet, however, had loudly-roaring,[433] impetuous Mars heard that his
son had fallen in the violent fight; but he sat upon the summit of
Olympus, beneath golden clouds, excluded [from the battle] by the will
of Jove, where also the other immortal gods were restrained from the
war. In the meantime they engaged in close fight round Ascalaphus.
Deiphobus indeed tore the shining helmet from Ascalaphus; and Meriones,
equal to swift Mars, springing [upon him], smote [him] with his spear in
the arm, and the crested[434] casque, falling from his hand, rang upon
the earth. Immediately Meriones, leaping upon him like a vulture,
plucked out the tough spear from the lower part of his arm, and retired
back again into the crowd of his comrades. But him Polites, his own
brother, throwing his hands round his waist, carried out of the
dread-sounding battle, till he reached his fleet steeds, which awaited
him in the rear of the combat and the war, having both a charioteer and
a variegated car; which then carried him towards the city, groaning
heavily [and] afflicted; and the blood flowed from his recently-wounded
hand: but the others kept fighting, and an unquenchable clamour arose.
Then AEneas rushing upon Aphareus, the son of Caletor, smote him with his
sharp spear upon the throat, when turned towards him. And his head was
bent to one side, then his shield clung to him, and his helmet; and
around him life-destroying death was spread. Antilochus, however,
observing Thoas turning around, attacking, wounded him; and cut away all
the vein, which, running quite along the back, reaches to the neck. All
this he cut off; but he fell on his back in the dust, stretching out
both hands to his beloved companions. Then Antilochus sprang upon him,
and stripped the armour from his shoulders, looking around; for the
Trojans surrounding him, struck his wide and ornamented shield with
their darts, nor were they able to graze with the dire brass the tender
body of Antilochus within it; because earth-shaking Neptune protected
the son of Nestor all round, even amongst many weapons. For never indeed
was he apart from the enemy, but he turned himself about among them: nor
did he hold his spear without motion, but continually moving, it was
whirled about; and he prepared within his mind, either to hurl it at
some one afar off, or to rush upon some one close at hand. But
meditating these things amid the throng, he escaped not the notice of
Adamas, the son of Asias, who smote him in the middle of his shield with
the sharp brass, attacking him in close combat; but azure-haired Neptune
weakened the spear, grudging[435] him the life [of Antilochus]. Part of
it remained there, like a stake burned in the fire,[436] in the shield
of Antilochus, and the other half lay upon the ground; whilst he gave
backwards into the crowd of his companions, shunning death. Meriones,
however, following him departing, smote him with his spear between the
private parts and the navel, where a wound[437] is particularly painful
to miserable mortals. There he fixed the spear in him; and he falling,
struggled panting around the spear, as an ox, when cowherds in the
mountains, forcibly binding him with twisted cords, lead [him] away
unwilling. So he, wounded, throbbed, though but for a short time, and
not very long, until the hero Meriones coming near, plucked the spear
from his body; and darkness veiled his eyes. But Helenas, close at hand,
struck Deipyrus upon the temple with his huge Thracian sword, and cut
away the three-coned helmet; which, being dashed off, fell upon the
ground; and some one of the combating Greeks lifted it up, having rolled
between his feet; whilst dim night enveloped his eyes. Then grief seized
the son of Atreus, Menelaus, brave in the din of battle, and he
advanced, threatening the hero, king Helenus; brandishing his sharp
spear, whilst the other drew the horn of his bow. Together then they
darted, the one eager to launch his fir-tree spear, and the other an
arrow from the string. Then indeed the son of Priam smote him in the
breast with an arrow, on the cavity of the corslet, but the bitter shaft
rebounded. As when from the broad winnowing-fan in a large
threshing-floor, the black-coated beans or vetches leap at the shrill
blast, and the force of the winnower; so, strongly repulsed by the
corslet of glorious Menelaus, the bitter arrow flew afar. But Menelaus,
the son of Atreus, brave in the din of battle, smote him upon the hand
which held his well-polished bow; and in the bow the brazen spear was
fixed from the opposite side, through his hand. Then he retired back
into the crowd of his companions, avoiding death, hanging down his hand
at his side, but the ashen spear was trailed along with him. And then
magnanimous Agenor extracted it from his hand, and bound [the hand]
itself sling-ways in well-twisted sheep's wool, which his attendant
carried for the shepherd of the people.

   [Footnote 433: [Greek: Briepyos=erigdoupos]. The Schol. on Apoll.
   Rh. iii. 860, observes: [Greek: Eri, epitaseos estin, os to
   Briepuos].]

   [Footnote 434: The meaning of [Greek: aulopis] is rather uncertain.
   According to the Schol. and Hesychius, it means a helmet that has
   the openings for the eyes oblong [Greek: (paramekeis echousa tas ton
   ophthalmon opas)], or a helmet with a long crest [Greek: ektetamenon
   lophon].]

   [Footnote 435: [Greek: phthonesas adamanti, me bion Antilochou
   aphelytai].]

   [Footnote 436: The "praeustae sudes" of Caesar, B.G. n. 40. These
   were among the rustic weapons of antiquity, as may be seen from
   Virg. AEn. vii. 523.

                          "Non jam certamine agresti
         Stipitibus duris agitur, sudibusve praeustis;
         Sed ferro ancipiti decernunt."]

   [Footnote 437: Cf. vs. 444.]

But Pisander went direct against glorious Menelaus, because evil Fate
led him towards the end of death, to be subdued by thee, O Menelaus, in
the dire battle. When therefore they were near, advancing against each
other, the son of Atreus indeed missed, and his spear was turned aside
from him; but Pisander smote the shield of glorious Menelaus, nor could
he drive the spear quite through; because the broad shield kept it off,
and the spear was broken at the extremity: still he rejoiced in his
mind, and hoped for victory. The son of Atreus, however, drawing his
silver-studded sword, sprang upon Pisander; but he drew from beneath his
shield a handsome battle-axe of well-wrought brass, fixed upon either
side of an olive handle, long, well-polished; and at once they struck
each other. Then he (Pisander) cut away the cone of the helmet, thick
with horse-hair, under the very crest, but (Menelaus smote) him,
approaching, upon the forehead, above the root of the nose. And the
bones crashed, and his blood-stained eyes fell at his feet upon the
ground in the dust: and falling, he writhed. Then he (Menelaus) placing
his heel upon his breast, despoiled him of his armour, and boasting,
spoke [this] speech:

"Thus,[438] then, shall ye abandon the ships of the Greeks, who possess
swift steeds, ye treaty-breaking Trojans, insatiate of dire battle. Of
other injury and disgrace ye indeed lack nothing with which ye have
injured me, vile dogs, nor have ye at all dreaded in your minds the
heavy wrath of high-thundering, hospitable Jove, who will yet destroy
for you your lofty city; ye who unprovoked departed, carrying off my
virgin spouse, and much wealth, after ye had been hospitably received by
her. Now again do ye eagerly desire to hurl destructive fire upon the
sea-traversing ships, and to slay the Grecian heroes. But ye shall yet
be restrained, impetuous as ye be, from war. O father Jove, assuredly
they say that thou excellest all others, men and gods, in prudence, yet
from thee do all these things proceed. How much dost thou gratify these
insolent Trojan men, whose violence is ever pernicious, and who cannot
be satisfied with war, equally destructive to all! Of all things is
there satiety,--of sleep, of love, of sweet singing, and of faultless
dancing, with which one would much more readily satisfy his desire, than
with war; but the Trojans are insatiate of battle."

   [Footnote 438: _I.e._ by being slain one after another.]

So saying, having stripped the bloody armour from the body, illustrious
Menelaus gave it to his companions, whilst he, advancing, was again
mixed with the foremost combatants. Then Harpalion, the son of king
Pylaemenes, who had then followed his dear father to wage war at Troy,
leaped upon him; nor returned he back to his native land. [He it was]
who then, close at hand, struck the middle of Atrides' shield with his
lance, nor was he able to drive quite through the brass; but he retired
back into the crowd of his companions, avoiding death, looking around on
all sides, lest any one should touch his body[439] with a spear.
Meriones, however, shot a brazen-pointed arrow at him retreating, and
struck him upon the right hip, and the arrow penetrated to the other
side, through the bladder, below the bone. Sinking down, therefore, in
the same place, breathing out his life in the arms of his beloved
companions, like a worm, he lay stretched upon the ground, whilst his
black blood flowed, and moistened the earth. Around him the magnanimous
Paphlagonians were employed, and, lifting him upon a chariot, they bore
him to sacred Ilium, grieving; and with them went his father, shedding
tears: but no vengeance was taken for his dead son.

   [Footnote 439: As the usual construction of [Greek: epanrein] is
   with a genitive, Heyne would supply [Greek: me tis epaure autou
   kata chroa].]

But Paris was greatly enraged in his soul on account of his being slain,
for he had been his guest among many Paphlagonians; wherefore, enraged
on his account, he sent forth a brazen arrow. Now there was one
Euchenor, son of the diviner Polyidus, wealthy and brave, inhabiting a
dwelling at Corinth, who, well knowing his fatal destiny, had arrived in
a ship. For often had Polyidus, good old man, told him, that he would
perish in his halls of a grievous disease, or be subdued by the Trojans
among the ships of the Greeks; wherefore he avoided at once the severe
mulct[440] of the Achaeans, and odious disease, that he might not suffer
sorrows in his mind. Him he (Paris) smote below the jaw and the ear; and
his spirit quickly departed from his members, and hateful darkness
seized him.

Thus indeed they fought like[441] unto a burning fire. But Hector, dear
to Jove, had not learned, nor knew at all, how at the left of the ships
his people were being slaughtered by the Greeks, for the victory was on
the point of being the Grecians'; so much did earth-shaking Neptune
encourage the Greeks, and moreover himself assisted with his strength;
but he (Hector) pressed on where first he had sprung within the gates
and wall, breaking the thick ranks of the shielded Greeks. There were
the ships of Ajax and Protesilaus, drawn up upon the shore of the hoary
sea; but above[442] them the wall was built very low; there themselves
and their horses were most impetuous in the combat. There[443] the
Boeotians and long-robed Iaonians, the Locrians, the Phthians, and the
illustrious Epeans, restrained him from the ships, fiercely rushing on;
but were unable to drive away from them noble Hector, like unto a flame.
The chosen men of the Athenians stood in the van; among whom
Menestheus, son of Peteus, had the command; and with him followed
Phidas, Stichius, and brave Bias, Meges, the son of Phyieus, Amphion,
and Dracius, led the Epeans, and over the Phthians were Medon and
Podarces, steady in fight (Medon indeed was the spurious offspring of
godlike Oileus, and the brother of Ajax; but he dwelt at Phylace, away
from his native country,[444] having slain a man, the brother of his
stepmother Eriopis, whom Oileus had married. But the other was the son
of Iphiclus, of Phylace). These in arms before the magnanimous Phthians,
fought among the Boeotians, defending the ships.

   [Footnote 440: As Corinth was under the authority of Agamemnon,
   he would have been compelled to pay a fine for refusing the
   service. Compare the [Greek: atimia tes astraeias] at Athens. See
   Potter, Antiq. i. 23.]

   [Footnote 441: Cf. xi. 595, with the note.]

   [Footnote 442: _I.e._ before them.]

   [Footnote 443: _I.e._ where Hector broke in]

   [Footnote 444: See my note on ii. p. 42, n. 2.]

But Ajax, the swift son of Oileus, never separated from Telamonian Ajax,
not even for a little time; but as in a fallow field two black bullocks
possessing equal spirit, draw a well-joined plough,--but meanwhile
copious sweat breaks forth around the roots of their horns; and them the
well-polished yoke alone separates on either side, advancing along the
furrows, and [the plough] cuts[445] up the bottom of the soil; so they
twain, joined together, stood very near to each other. And then many and
brave troops followed the son of Telamon as companions, who received
from him his shield, whenever fatigue and sweat came upon his limbs. But
the Locrians followed not the great-souled son of Oileus, for their
heart remained not firm to them in the standing fight, because they had
not brazen helmets crested with horse-hair, nor had they well-orbed
shields and ashen spears; but they followed along with him to Ilium,
trusting in the bows and the well-twisted sheep's wool, with which,
frequently hurling, they broke the phalanxes of the Trojans. At that
time indeed these (the Ajaces) in the van, with their variously-wrought
armour, fought against the Trojans and brazen-armed Hector, whilst (the
Locrians) shooting from the rear, lay concealed; nor were the Trojans
any longer mindful of combat, for the arrows put them in confusion.

Then surely would the Trojans have retreated with loss from the ships
and tents to lofty Ilium, had not Polydamas, standing near, addressed
bold Hector:

"Hector, thou art impossible to be persuaded by advice.[446] Because
indeed a god hath given thee, above others, warlike deeds, for this
reason dost thou also desire to be more skilled than others in counsel?
But by no means canst thou thyself obtain all things at once.[447] To
one indeed hath the deity given warlike deeds; to another dancing; and
to another the harp and singing. To another again far-sounding Jove
implants a prudent mind in his bosom, of which many men reap the
advantage, as it (prudence) even preserves cities; and he himself (who
possesses it) especially knows (its value). Yet will I speak as appears
to me best; because the encircling host[448] of war burns round thee on
all sides, and the magnanimous Trojans, since they have crossed the
walls, some indeed stand apart with their arms, and others fight, the
fewer against the greater number, scattered amongst the ships. But
retiring back, summon hither all the chiefs. And then we can better
discuss the whole plan; whether we shall enter upon the many-benched
ships, if indeed the deity will give us victory; or depart uninjured
from the barks; because of a truth I fear lest the Greeks repay their
debt of yesterday, since a man, insatiate in war, still remains at the
ships, who I conceive will no longer abstain entirely from battle." Thus
spoke Polydamas, but the faultless advice pleased Hector; and
immediately he leaped with his armour from his chariot to the ground,
and, addressing him, spoke winged words:

   [Footnote 445: [Greek: Temie] refers to [Greek: arotron] in v.
   703, not to [Greek: zugon].]

   [Footnote 446: Put for [Greek: amechanov esti peithin se].]

   [Footnote 447: A favourite proverb. Cf. Duport, Gnom. p. 81.]

   [Footnote 448: So "corona," in Latin.]

"Polydamas, do thou retain here all the bravest, whilst I will come back
again immediately after I have given proper orders to the [troops]." He
said, and shouting, he rushed on, like unto a snowy mountain, and flew
through the Trojans and the allies. But they all crowded round
valour-loving Polydamas, the son of Panthous, as soon as they heard the
voice of Hector. He, however, ranged through the foremost combatants,
seeking if he could anywhere find Deiphobus, the might of king Helenus,
and Adamas, the son of Asias, and Asius, the son of Hyrtacus. Some he
found no longer quite unhurt, nor yet destroyed, whilst others again lay
at the sterns of the ships of the Greeks, having lost their lives by the
hands of the Greeks; and others were stricken or wounded within the
wall. But he quickly found noble Alexander, the husband of fair-haired
Helen, on the left of the lamentable battle, cheering of his companions,
and encouraging them to fight; and, standing near, he addressed him with
reproachful words:

"Accursed Paris, fine only in person, woman-mad, seducer, where are
Deiphobus and the might of king Helenus, and Adamas, the son of Asias,
and Asius, the son of Hyrtacus? Where also is Othryoneus? Now lofty
Ilium all perishes from its summit,[449] now is its final destruction
certain."

   [Footnote 449: The Latin "a culmine," as in Virg. AEn. ii. 290,
   603. So AEsch.]

But him godlike Alexander in turn addressed: "Hector, since it is thy
intention to find fault with me when innocent, at some other time
perhaps, I may be more neglectful of the fight; [but not now], since
neither did my mother bear me altogether unwarlike. For from the time
when thou didst stir up the battle of thy companions at the ships, from
that time, remaining here, have we engaged incessantly with the Greeks;
and those comrades are dead for whom thou inquirest. Deiphobus and the
might of king Helenus alone have withdrawn, both wounded in the hand
with long spears; but the son of Saturn hath warded off death [from
them]. But now lead on, wheresoever thy heart and soul urge thee; and we
will follow with determined minds, nor do I think that thou wilt be at
all in want of valour, as much strength as is in us. It is not possible
even for one, although keenly desirous, to fight beyond his strength."

So saying, the hero persuaded the mind of his brother, and they hastened
to advance towards that place where especially was the battle and
contest; round Cebriones and excellent Polydamas, Phalces and Orthaeus,
and godlike Polyphoetes, and Palmys, and Ascanius and Morys, the sons of
Hippotion, who the day before had come as a relief guard[450] from
fertile Ascania: and Jove then urged them to fight. But they marched
like unto the blast of boisterous winds, which rushes down to the plain,
urged by the thunder of father Jove, and with a dreadful tumult[451] is
mingled with the ocean; and in it [rise] many boiling billows of the
much-resounding sea, swollen, whitened with foam, first indeed some and
then others following.

   [Footnote 450: See Buttm. Lexil. p. 358. Choeph. 679: [Greek:
   Kat' akras enthad' os porthoumetha]. Soph. Ant. 206: [Greek:
   Ethelese men puri presai kat' akras]. Eurip. Phoen. 1192: [Greek:
   Kat' acron pregamon elein polin].]

   [Footnote 451: [Greek: Polemou diadochoi, tois proterois
   isoi].--Eustathius.]

So the Trojans, first indeed some in battle array, and then others
glittering in brass, followed along with their leaders. But Hector, the
son of Priam, equal to man-slaughtering Mars, led the van, and held
before him his shield, equal on all sides, thick with skins; and much
brass was laid over it: and round his temples his gleaming helmet was
shaken. Stepping forward, he tried the phalanxes around on every side,
if perchance they would give way to him, advancing under cover of his
shield. Yet he disturbed not the courage of the Greeks in their breasts:
but Ajax, far-striding, first challenged him:

"O noble Sir, draw nearer: why dost thou thus frighten the Greeks? We
Greeks are by no means unskilful in battle, although we are subdued by
the evil scourge[452] of Jove. Thy soul, forsooth, hopes, I suppose, to
plunder the ships; but we also have hands ready to repulse thee
immediately. Assuredly, long before shall thy well-inhabited city be
taken and destroyed by our hands. But to thee thyself, I say, the time
draws near, when, flying, thou shalt pray to father Jove and the other
immortals, that thy fair-maned steeds, which shall bear thee to the
city, raising dust over the plain, may become swifter than hawks."

   [Footnote 452: See note on xii. 37.]

Whilst he was thus speaking, a bird flew over him on the right--a
lofty-flying eagle; upon which the people of the Greeks shouted,
encouraged by the omen; but illustrious Hector replied:

"O babbling and vain-boasting Ajax, what hast thou said? Would that I
were as sure of becoming for ever the child of aegis-bearing Jove, that
the venerable Juno had borne me, and that I were honoured as Minerva and
Apollo are honoured, as that this day now certainly brings destruction
upon all the Greeks; and among others thou shalt be slain, if thou wilt
dare to abide my long spear, which shall tear for thee thy dainty
person, and thou shalt satiate the dogs and birds of the Trojans with
thy fat and flesh, falling at the ships of the Greeks."

Thus then having spoken, he led on; and they followed along with him
with a mighty shout, and the troops likewise shouted in the rear. The
Greeks, on the other side, raised a shout, nor were they forgetful of
their valour, but they awaited the bravest of the Trojans, assaulting.
But the clamour of both reached to the aether and the shining
splendour[453] of Jove.

   [Footnote 453: Cf. Pind. Ol. iii. 43: [Greek: Augais aliou]. So
   "auras aetherias," Virg. Georg. ii. 291. Lucret. i. 208,
   "Dias-luminis auras."--Kennedy.]




                         BOOK THE FOURTEENTH.


                              ARGUMENT.

Agamemnon and the other wounded chiefs visit the battle with Nestor.
Juno, having borrowed the cestus of Venus, first obtains the assistance
of Sleep, and then hastens to Ida to inveigle Jove. She prevails, Jove
sleeps, and Neptune seizes the opportunity to aid the Trojans.


But the shouting did not entirely escape the notice of Nestor, although
drinking, but he addressed winged words to the son of AEsculapius:
"Consider, noble Machaon, how these things will be; greater, certainly,
[grows] the shouting of the blooming youths at the ships. But sitting
here at present, drink indeed the dark wine, until fair-haired Hecamede
has warmed the tepid baths, and washed away the bloody gore; whilst I,
going with speed to a watchtower, will gain information."

So saying, he took the well-made shield of his own son, horse-breaking
Thrasymedes, [which was] lying in the tent, all shining with brass (for
he had the shield of his sire); and seized a strong spear, pointed with
sharp brass; and stood without the tent, and soon beheld an unseemly
deed,--these [the Greeks] in confusion, and those, the haughty Trojans,
routing them in the rear; but the wall of the Greeks had fallen. And as
when the vast deep blackens with the noiseless[454] wave, foreboding
with no effect, the rapid courses of the shrill blasts, nor yet is it
rolled forwards or backwards, before some decisive blast comes down from
Jove: so meditated the old man, distracted in his mind between two
opinions: whether he should go amongst the throng of fleet-horsed
Greeks, or to Agamemnon, the son of Atreus, shepherd of the people. But
to him thus reflecting, it appeared better to go in quest of the son of
Atreus. Meanwhile they kept slaughtering each other, contending, and the
solid brass around their bodies rang, as they were stricken with the
swords and two-edged spears.

   [Footnote 454: Literally, "deaf." So "surdi fluctus," Ovid,
   Epist. xviii. 211; "Omnia surda tacent," Propert. iv. 3, 53;
   "Surdaque vota condidit Ionio," Pers. Sat. vi. 28.]

But the Jove-cherished kings, coming up from the vessels, met Nestor, as
many as had been wounded with the brass,--Tydides, and Ulysses, and
Agamemnon, the son of Atreus. Their ships indeed were drawn up upon the
shore of the hoary deep, very far away from the battle; for they had
