proud of her years of constancy to her high purpose; and she looked just
so far abashed that the uncle saw his advantage, and discoursed on the
danger of attempting to be better than other people, and of trying to
vapour in spiritual heights, to all of which she attempted no reply; till
at last he broke up the interview by saying, 'There, then, child; all
will be well.  I see you are coming to a better mind.'

'I hope I am, Monseigneur,' she replied, with lofty meekness; 'but
scarcely such as you mean.'

Alice Montagu's indignation knew no bounds.  What! was this noble
votaress to be forced, not only to resign the glory of being the
foundress of a new order of beneficence, but to be married, just like
everybody else, and to that wretched little coward?  Boemond of Burgundy
was better than that, for he at least was a man!

'No, no, Alice,' said Esclairmonde, with a shudder; 'any one rather than
the Burgundian!  It is shame even to compare the Scot!'

'He may not be so evil in himself,' said Alice; 'but with a brave man you
have only his own sins, while a coward has all those other people may
frighten him into.'

'He bore himself manfully in battle,' said the fair Fleming in reproof.

But Alice answered with the scorn that sits so quaintly on the gentle
daughter of a bold race: 'Ay, where he would have been more afraid to run
than to stand.'

'You are hard on the Scot,' said Esclairmonde.  'Maybe it is because the
Nevils of Raby are Borderers,' she added, smiling; and, as Alice likewise
smiled and blushed, 'Now, if it were not for this madness, I could like
the youth.  I would fain have had him for a brother that I could take
care of.'

'But what will you do, Esclairmonde?'

'Trust,' said she, sighing.  'Maybe, my pride ought to be broken; and I
may have to lay aside all my hopes and plans, and become a mere serving
sister, to learn true humility.  Anyhow, I verily trust to my Heavenly
Spouse to guard me for himself.  If the Duke of Burgundy still maintains
Boemond's suit, then in the dissension I see an escape.

'And my father will defend you; and so will Sir Richard,' said Alice,
with complacent certainty in their full efficiency.  'And King Harry will
interfere; and we _will_ have your hospital; ay, we _will_.  How can you
talk so lightly of abandoning it?'

'I only would know what is human pride, and what God's will,' sighed
Esclairmonde.

The Duke arrived with his two sisters, his wife being left at home in bad
health, and took up his abode at the Hotel de Bourgogne, whence he came
at once to pay his respects to the King of England; the poor King of
France, at the Hotel de St. Pol, being quite neglected.

Esclairmonde and Alice stood at a window, and watched the arrival of the
magnificent cavalcade, attended by a multitude, ecstatically shouting,
'Noel Noel!  Long live Philippe le Bon!  Blessings on the mighty Duke!'
While seated on a tall charger, whose great dappled head, jewelled and
beplumed, could alone be seen amid his sweeping housings, bowing right
and left, waving his embroidered gloved hand in courtesy, was seen the
stately Duke, in the prime of life, handsome-faced, brilliantly coloured,
dazzlingly arrayed in gemmed robes, so that Alice drew a long breath of
wonder and exclaimed, 'This Duke is a goodly man; he looks like the
emperor of us all!'

But when he had entered the hall, conducted by John of Bedford and Edmund
of March, had made his obeisance to Henry, and had been presented by him
to King James, Alice, standing close behind her queen, recollected that
she had once heard Esclairmonde say, 'Till I came to England I deemed
chivalry a mere gaudy illusion.'

Duke Philippe would not bear close inspection; the striking features and
full red lips, that had made so effective an appearance in the gay
procession seen from a distance, seemed harsh, haughty, and sensual near
at hand, and when brought into close contact with the strange bright
stern purity, now refined into hectic transparency, of King Henry's face,
the grand and melancholy majesty of the royal Stewart's, or even the
spare, keen, irregular visage of John of Bedford.  And while his robes
were infinitely more costly than--and his ornaments tenfold
outnumbered--all that the three island princes wore, yet no critical eye
could take him for their superior, even though his tone in addressing an
inferior was elaborately affable and condescending, and theirs was always
the frankness of an equal.  Where they gave the sense of pure gold, he
seemed like some ruder metal gilt and decorated; as if theirs were
reality, his the imitation; theirs the truth, his the display.

But in reality his birth was as princely as theirs; and no monarch in
Europe, not even Henry, equalled him in material resources; he was
idolized by the Parisians; and Henry was aware that France had been made
over to England more by his revenge for his father's murder at Montereau
than by the victory at Agincourt.  Therefore the King endured his grand
talk about _our_ arms and _our_ intentions; and for Malcolm's sake, James
submitted to a sort of patronage, as if meant to imply that if Philippe
the Magnificent chose to espouse the cause of a captive king, his ransom
would be the merest trifle.

When Henry bade him to the Pentecostal banquet, 'when kings keep state,'
he graciously accepted the invitation for himself and his two sisters,
Marguerite, widow of the second short-lived Dauphin, and Anne, still
unmarried; but when Henry further explained his plan of feasting merely
with the orderly, and apportioning the food in real alms, the Duke by no
means approved.

'Feed those miserables!' he said.  'One gains nothing thereby!  They make
no noise; whereas if you affront the others, who know how to cry out,
they will revile you like dogs!

'I will not be a slave to the rascaille,' said Henry.

'Ah, my fair lord, you, a victor, may dispense with these cares; but for
a poor little prince like me, it is better to reign in men's hearts than
on their necks.'

'In the hearts of honest men--on the necks of knaves,' said Henry.

Philippe shrugged his shoulders.  He was wise in his own generation; for
he had all the audible voices in Paris on his side, while the cavils at
Henry's economy have descended to the present time.

'Do you see your rival, Sir?' said the voice of the Bishop of Therouenne
in Malcolm's ear, just as the Duke had begun to rise to take leave; and
he pointed out a knight of some thirty years, glittering with gay devices
from head to foot, and showing a bold proud visage, exaggerating the
harshness of the Burgundian lineaments.

Malcolm shuddered, and murmured, 'Such a pearl to such a hog!'

And meanwhile, King James, stepping forward, intimated to the Duke that
he would be glad of an interview with him.

Philippe made some ostentation of his numerous engagements with men of
Church and State; but ended by inviting the King of Scotland to sup with
him that evening, if his Grace would forgive travellers' fare and a
simple reception.

Thither accordingly James repaired on foot, attended only by Sir Nigel
and Malcolm, with a few archers of the royal guard, in case torches
should be wanted on the way home.

How magnificent were the surroundings of the great Duke, it would be
wearisome to tell.  The retainers in the court of the hotel looked, as
James said, as if honest steel and good cloth were reckoned as churls,
and as if this were the very land of Cockaigne, as Sir Richard
Whittington had dreamt it.  Neither he nor St. Andrew himself would know
their own saltire made in cloth of silver, 'the very metal to tarnish!'

Sir Nigel had to tell their rank, ere the porters admitted the small
company: but the seneschal marshalled them forward in full state.  And
James never looked more the king than when, in simple crimson robe, the
pure white cross on his breast, his auburn hair parted back from his
noble brow, he stood towering above all heads, passively receiving the
Duke of Burgundy's elaborate courtesies and greetings, nor seeming to
note the lavish display of gold and silver, meant to amaze the poorest
king in Europe.

Exceeding was the politeness shown to him--even to the omission of the
seneschal's tasting each dish presented to the Duke, a recognition of the
presence of a sovereign that the two Scots scarcely understood enough for
gratitude.

Malcolm was the best off of the two at the supper; for James had of
course to be cavalier to the sickly fretful-looking Dauphiness, while
Malcolm fell to the lot of the Lady Anne, who, though not beautiful, had
a kindly hearty countenance and manner, and won his heart by asking
whether the Demoiselle de Luxemburg were still in the suite of Madame of
Hainault; and then it appeared that she had been her convent mate and
warmest friend and admirer in their girlish days at Dijon, and was now
longing to see her.  Was she as much set as ever on being a nun?

Meantime, the Duke was pompously making way for the King of Scots to
enter his cabinet, where--with a gold cup before each, a dish of comfits
and a stoup of wine between them--their interview was to take place.

'These dainties accord with a matter of ladies' love,' said James, as the
Duke handed him a sugar heart transfixed by an arrow.

'Good, good,' said Philippe.  'The alliance is noble and our crowns and
influence might be a good check in the north to your mighty neighbour;
nor would I be hard as to her dowry.  Send me five score yearly of such
knaves as came with Buchan, and I could fight the devil himself.  A
morning gift might be specified for the name of the thing--but we
understand one another.'

'I am not certain of that, Sir,' said James, smiling; 'though I see you
mean me kindly.'

'Nay, now,' continued Philippe, 'I know how to honour royalty, even in
durance; nor will I even press Madame la Dauphine on you instead of Anne,
though it were better for us all if she could have her wish and become a
queen, and you would have her jointure--if you or any one else can get
it.'

'Stay, my Lord Duke,' said James, with dignity, 'I spake not of myself,
deeming that it was well known that my troth is plighted.'

'How?' said Burgundy, amazed, but not offended.  'Methought the House of
Somerset was a mere bastard slip, with which even King Henry with all his
insolence could not expect you to wed in earnest.  However, we may keep
our intentions secret awhile; and then, with your lances and my
resources, English displeasure need concern you little.'

James, who had learned self-control in captivity, began politely to
express himself highly honoured and obliged.

'Do not mention it.  Royal blood, thus shamefully oppressed, must command
the aid of all that is chivalrous.  Speak, and your ransom is at your
service.'

The hot blood rushed into James's cheek at this tone of condescension;
but he answered, with courteous haughtiness: 'Of myself, Sir Duke, there
is no question.  My ransom waits England's willingness to accept it; and
my hand is not free, even for the prize you have the goodness to offer.  I
came not to speak of myself.'

'Not to make suit for my sister, nor my intercession!' exclaimed
Philippe.

'I make suit to no man,' said James; then, recollecting himself, 'if I
did so, no readier friend than the Duke of Burgundy could be found.  I
did in effect come to propose an alliance between one of my own house and
a fair vassal of yours.'

'Ha! the runaway jade of Luxemburg!' cried Burgundy; 'the most headstrong
girl who lives!  She dared to plead her foolish vows against my brother
Boemond, fled with that other hoyden of Hainault, and now defies me by
coming here.  I'll have her, and make her over to Boemond to tame her
pride, were she in the great Satan's camp instead of King Henry's.'

And this is the mirror of chivalry! thought James.  But he persevered in
his explanation of his arrangement for permitting the estates of
Esclairmonde de Luxemburg to be purchased from her and her husband,
should that husband be Malcolm Stewart of Glenuskie; and he soon found
that these terms would be as acceptable to the Duke as they had already
proved to her guardian, Monseigneur de Therouenne.  Money was nothing to
Philippe; but his policy was to absorb the little seignoralties that lay
so thick in these border lands of the Empire; and what he desired above
all, was to keep them from either passing into the hands of the Church,
or from consolidating into some powerful principality, as would have been
the case had Esclairmonde either entered a convent or married young
Waleran de Luxemburg, her cousin.  Therefore he had striven to force on
her his half-brother, who would certainly never unite any inheritance to
hers; but he much preferred the purchase of her Hainault lands; and had
no compunction in throwing over Boemond, except for a certain lurking
desire that the lady's contumacy should be chastised by a lord who would
beat her well into subjection.  He would willingly have made a great show
of generosity, and have laid James under an obligation; and yet by the
King's dignified tone of courtesy he was always reduced to the air of one
soliciting rather than conferring a favour.

Finally, Malcolm was called in, and presented to the Duke, making his own
promise on his word of honour as a prince, and giving a written bond,
that so soon as he obtained the hand of the Demoiselle de Luxemburg he
would resign her Hainault estates to the Duke of Burgundy for a sum of
money, to be fixed by persons chosen for the purpose.

This was more like earnest than anything Malcolm had yet obtained; and he
went home exulting and exalted, his doubts as to Esclairmonde's consent
almost silenced, when he counted up the forces that were about to bear
upon her.

And they did descend upon her.  Countess Jaqueline had been joined by
other and more congenial Flemish dames, and was weary of her grave
monitress; and she continually scolded at Esclairmonde for perverseness
and obstinacy in not accepting the only male thing she had ever favoured.
The Bishop of Therouenne threatened and argued; and the Duke of Burgundy
himself came to enforce his commands to his refractory vassal, and on
finding her still unsubmissive, flew into a rage, and rated her as few
_could_ have done, save Philippe, called the Good.

All she attempted to answer was, that they were welcome to her lands, so
they would leave her person free; her vows were not to man, but to God,
and God would protect her.

It was an answer that seemed specially to enrage her persecutors, who
retorted by telling her that such protection was only extended to those
who obeyed lawful authority; and hints were thrown out that, if she did
not submit willingly, she might find herself married forcibly, for a
bishop could afford to disregard the resistance of a bride.

Would Malcolm--would his king--consent to her being thus treated?

As to Malcolm, he seemed to her too munch changed for her to reckon on
what remnant of good feeling there might be to appeal to in him.  And
James, though he was certain not to permit palpable coercion in his
presence, or even if he were aware that it was contemplated, seemed to
have left the whole management of the affair to Esclairmonde's own
guardians; and they would probably avoid driving matters to extremities
that would revolt him, while he was near enough for an appeal.  And
Esclairmonde was too uncertain whether her guardians would resort to such
lengths, or whether it were not a vain threat of the giddy Countess, to
compromise her dignity by crying out before she was hurt; and she had no
security, save that she was certain that in the English household of King
Henry such violence would not be attempted; and out of reach of that
protection she never ventured.

Once she said to Henry, 'My only hope is in God and in you, my lord.'

And Henry bent his head, saying, 'Noble lady, I cannot interfere; but
while you are in my house, nothing can be done with you against your
will.'

Yet even Henry was scarcely what he had been in all-pervading vigilance
and readiness.  Like all real kings of men, he had been his own prime
minister, commander-in-chief, and private secretary, transacting a
marvellous amount of business with prompt completeness; and when, in the
midst of shattered health which he would not avow, the cares of two
kingdoms, and the generalship of an army, with all its garrisons, rested
on him, his work would hardly have been accomplished but for his
brother's aid.  It was never acknowledged, often angrily disdained.  But
when John of Bedford had watched the terrible lassitude and lethargy that
weighed on the King at times in the midst of his cabinet work, he was
constantly on the watch to relieve him; and his hand and style so closely
resembled Henry's that the difference could scarce be detected, and he
could do what none other durst attempt.  Many a time would Henry, whose
temper had grown most uncertain, fiercely rate him for intermeddling; but
John knew and loved him too well to heed; and his tact and
unobtrusiveness made Henry rely on him more and more.

If the illness had only been confessed, those who watched the King
anxiously would have had more hope; but he was hotly angered at any hint
of his needing care; and though he sometimes relieved oppression by
causing himself to be bled by a servant, he never allowed that anything
ailed him; it was always the hot weather, the anxious tidings, the long
pageant that wearied him--things that were wont to be like gnats on a
lion's mane.

Those solemn banquets and festivals--lasting from forenoon till eventide,
with their endless relays of allegorical subtleties, their long-winded
harangues, noisy music, interludes of giants, sylvan men, distressed
damsels, knights-errant on horseback, ships and forests coming in upon
wheels, and fulsome compliments that must be answered--had been always
his aversion, and were now so heavy an oppression that Bedford would have
persuaded the Queen to curtail them.  But to the fair Catherine this
appeared an unkind endeavour of her disagreeable brother-in-law, to
prevent her from shining in her native city, and eclipsing the Burgundian
pomp; and she opened her soft brown eyes in dignified displeasure,
answering that she saw nothing amiss with the King; and she likewise
complained to her husband of his brother's jealousy of her welcome from
her own people, bringing on him one of Henry's most bitter sentences.

Henry would only have had her abate somewhat of the splendour that
gratified her, because he did not think it becoming to outshine her
parents; but Catherine scorned the notion.  Her old father would know
nothing, or would smile in his foolish way to see her so brave; and for
her mother, she recked not so long as she had a larded capon before her:
nor was it possible to make the young queen understand that this fatuity
and feebleness were the very reasons for deferring to them.

The ordering of the feast fell to Catherine and her train; and its
splendours on successive days had their full development, greatly to the
constraint and weariness, among others, of Esclairmonde, who was always
assigned to Malcolm Stewart, and throughout these long days had to be
constantly repressing him; not that he often durst make her any direct
compliment, for he was usually quelled into anxious wistful silence, and
merely eyed her earnestly, paying her every attention in his power.  And
such a silent tedious meal was sure to be remarked, either with laughing
rudeness by Countess Jaqueline, or with severe reproof by the Bishop of
Therouenne, both of whom assured her that she had better lay aside her
airs, and resign herself in good part, for there was no escape for her.

One day, however, when the feast was at the Hotel de Bourgogne, and there
were some slight differences in the order of the guests, the Duke of
Bedford put himself forward as the Lady Esclairmonde's cavalier, so much
to her relief, that her countenance, usually so guarded, relaxed into the
bright, sweet smile of cheerfulness that was most natural to her.
Isolated as the pairs at the table were, and with music braying in a
gallery just above, there was plenty of scope for conversation; and once
again Esclairmonde was talking freely of the matters regarding the
distress in Paris, that Bedford had consulted her upon before he became
so engrossed with his brother's affairs, or she so beset by her
persecutors.

Towards the evening, when the feast had still some mortal hours to last,
there fell a silence on the Duke; and at length, when the music was at
the loudest, he said 'Lady, I have watched for this moment.  You are
persecuted.  Look not on me as one of your persecutors; but if no other
refuge be open to you, here is one who might know better how to esteem
you than that malapert young Scot.'

'How, Sir?' exclaimed Esclairmonde, amazed at these words from the woman-
hating Bedford.

'Make no sudden reply,' said John.  'I had never thought of you save as
one consecrate, till, when I see you like to be hunted down into the
hands of yon silly lad, I cannot but thrust between.  My brother would
