fortune, that the very men whom he notoriously cheated of their pay, the
chiefs whom he used and injured--(for he used all men, great and small,
that came near him, as his instruments alike, and took something of
theirs, either some quality or some property)--the blood of a soldier, it
might be, or a jewelled hat, or a hundred thousand crowns from a king,
or a portion out of a starving sentinel's three-farthings; or (when he
was young) a kiss from a woman, and the gold chain off her neck, taking
all he could from woman or man, and having, as I have said, this of the
godlike in him, that he could see a hero perish or a sparrow fall, with
the same amount of sympathy for either. Not that he had no tears; he
could always order up this reserve at the proper moment to battle; he
could draw upon tears or smiles alike, and whenever need was for using
this cheap coin. He would cringe to a shoeblack, as he would flatter a
minister or a monarch; be haughty, be humble, threaten, repent, weep,
grasp your hand, (or stab you whenever he saw occasion)--but yet those
of the army, who knew him best and had suffered most from him, admired
him most of all: and as he rode along the lines to battle or galloped
up in the nick of time to a battalion reeling from before the enemy's
charge or shot, the fainting men and officers got new courage as they
saw the splendid calm of his face, and felt that his will made them
irresistible.

After the great victory of Blenheim the enthusiasm of the army for the
Duke, even of his bitterest personal enemies in it, amounted to a sort
of rage--nay, the very officers who cursed him in their hearts were
among the most frantic to cheer him. Who could refuse his meed of
admiration to such a victory and such a victor? Not he who writes: a man
may profess to be ever so much a philosopher; but he who fought on that
day must feel a thrill of pride as he recalls it.

The French right was posted near to the village of Blenheim, on the
Danube, where the Marshal Tallard's quarters were; their line extending
through, it may be a league and a half, before Lutzingen and up to a
woody hill, round the base of which, and acting against the Prince of
Savoy, were forty of his squadrons.

Here was a village that the Frenchmen had burned, the wood being, in
fact, a better shelter and easier of guard than any village.

Before these two villages and the French lines ran a little stream, not
more than two foot broad, through a marsh (that was mostly dried up
from the heats of the weather), and this stream was the only separation
between the two armies--ours coming up and ranging themselves in line
of battle before the French, at six o'clock in the morning; so that our
line was quite visible to theirs; and the whole of this great plain was
black and swarming with troops for hours before the cannonading began.

On one side and the other this cannonading lasted many hours. The French
guns being in position in front of their line, and doing severe damage
among our horse especially, and on our right wing of Imperialists under
the Prince of Savoy, who could neither advance his artillery nor his
lines, the ground before him being cut up by ditches, morasses, and very
difficult of passage for the guns.

It was past mid-day when the attack began on our left, where Lord Cutts
commanded, the bravest and most beloved officer in the English army.
And now, as if to make his experience in war complete, our young
aide-de-camp having seen two great armies facing each other in line of
battle, and had the honor of riding with orders from one end to other
of the line, came in for a not uncommon accompaniment of military glory,
and was knocked on the head, along with many hundred of brave fellows,
almost at the very commencement of this famous day of Blenheim. A little
after noon, the disposition for attack being completed with much delay
and difficulty, and under a severe fire from the enemy's guns, that
were better posted and more numerous than ours, a body of English and
Hessians, with Major-General Wilkes commanding at the extreme left of
our line, marched upon Blenheim, advancing with great gallantry, the
Major-General on foot, with his officers, at the head of the column, and
marching, with his hat off, intrepidly in the face of the enemy, who was
pouring in a tremendous fire from his guns and musketry, to which our
people were instructed not to reply, except with pike and bayonet when
they reached the French palisades. To these Wilkes walked intrepidly,
and struck the woodwork with his sword before our people charged it.
He was shot down at the instant, with his colonel, major, and several
officers; and our troops cheering and huzzaing, and coming on, as they
did, with immense resolution and gallantry, were nevertheless stopped by
the murderous fire from behind the enemy's defences, and then attacked
in flank by a furious charge of French horse which swept out of
Blenheim, and cut down our men in great numbers. Three fierce and
desperate assaults of our foot were made and repulsed by the enemy; so
that our columns of foot were quite shattered, and fell back, scrambling
over the little rivulet, which we had crossed so resolutely an hour
before, and pursued by the French cavalry, slaughtering us and cutting
us down.

And now the conquerors were met by a furious charge of English horse
under Esmond's general, General Lumley, behind whose squadrons the
flying foot found refuge, and formed again, whilst Lumley drove back the
French horse, charging up to the village of Blenheim and the palisades
where Wilkes, and many hundred more gallant Englishmen, lay in
slaughtered heaps. Beyond this moment, and of this famous victory, Mr.
Esmond knows nothing; for a shot brought down his horse and our young
gentleman on it, who fell crushed and stunned under the animal, and came
to his senses he knows not how long after, only to lose them again from
pain and loss of blood. A dim sense, as of people groaning round about
him, a wild incoherent thought or two for her who occupied so much of
his heart now, and that here his career, and his hopes, and misfortunes
were ended, he remembers in the course of these hours. When he woke up,
it was with a pang of extreme pain, his breastplate was taken off, his
servant was holding his head up, the good and faithful lad of Hampshire*
was blubbering over his master, whom he found and had thought dead, and
a surgeon was probing a wound in the shoulder, which he must have got
at the same moment when his horse was shot and fell over him. The battle
was over at this end of the field, by this time: the village was in
possession of the English, its brave defenders prisoners, or fled,
or drowned, many of them, in the neighboring waters of Donau. But for
honest Lockwood's faithful search after his master, there had no doubt
been an end of Esmond here, and of this his story. The marauders were
out riffling the bodies as they lay on the field, and Jack had brained
one of these gentry with the club-end of his musket, who had eased
Esmond of his hat and periwig, his purse, and fine silver-mounted
pistols which the Dowager gave him, and was fumbling in his pockets
for further treasure, when Jack Lockwood came up and put an end to the
scoundrel's triumph.

     * My mistress, before I went this campaign, sent me John
     Lockwood out of Walcote, who hath ever since remained with
     me.--H. E.

Hospitals for our wounded were established at Blenheim, and here for
several weeks Esmond lay in very great danger of his life; the wound
was not very great from which he suffered, and the ball extracted by the
surgeon on the spot where our young gentleman received it; but a fever
set in next day, as he was lying in hospital, and that almost carried
him away. Jack Lockwood said he talked in the wildest manner during his
delirium; that he called himself the Marquis of Esmond, and seizing one
of the surgeon's assistants who came to dress his wounds, swore that he
was Madam Beatrix, and that he would make her a duchess if she would
but say yes. He was passing the days in these crazy fancies, and vana
somnia, whilst the army was singing "Te Deum" for the victory, and
those famous festivities were taking place at which our Duke, now made a
Prince of the Empire, was entertained by the King of the Romans and his
nobility. His Grace went home by Berlin and Hanover, and Esmond lost
the festivities which took place at those cities, and which his general
shared in company of the other general officers who travelled with our
great captain. When he could move, it was by the Duke of Wurtemberg's
city of Stuttgard that he made his way homewards, revisiting Heidelberg
again, whence he went to Manheim, and hence had a tedious but easy water
journey down the river of Rhine, which he had thought a delightful and
beautiful voyage indeed, but that his heart was longing for home, and
something far more beautiful and delightful.

As bright and welcome as the eyes almost of his mistress shone the
lights of Harwich, as the packet came in from Holland. It was not
many hours ere he, Esmond, was in London, of that you may be sure, and
received with open arms by the old Dowager of Chelsey, who vowed, in her
jargon of French and English, that he had the air noble, that his pallor
embellished him, that he was an Amadis and deserved a Gloriana; and oh!
flames and darts! what was his joy at hearing that his mistress was come
into waiting, and was now with her Majesty at Kensington! Although Mr.
Esmond had told Jack Lockwood to get horses and they would ride for
Winchester that night, when he heard this news he countermanded the
horses at once; his business lay no longer in Hants; all his hope and
desire lay within a couple of miles of him in Kensington Park wall. Poor
Harry had never looked in the glass before so eagerly to see whether he
had the bel air, and his paleness really did become him; he never
took such pains about the curl of his periwig, and the taste of his
embroidery and point-lace, as now, before Mr. Amadis presented himself
to Madam Gloriana. Was the fire of the French lines half so murderous
as the killing glances from her ladyship's eyes? Oh! darts and raptures,
how beautiful were they!

And as, before the blazing sun of morning, the moon fades away in the
sky almost invisible, Esmond thought, with a blush perhaps, of another
sweet pale face, sad and faint, and fading out of sight, with its sweet
fond gaze of affection; such a last look it seemed to cast as Eurydice
might have given, yearning after her lover, when Fate and Pluto summoned
her, and she passed away into the shades.




CHAPTER X.

AN OLD STORY ABOUT A FOOL AND A WOMAN.


Any taste for pleasure which Esmond had (and he liked to desipere in
loco, neither more nor less than most young men of his age) he could
now gratify to the utmost extent, and in the best company which the town
afforded. When the army went into winter quarters abroad, those of the
officers who had interest or money easily got leave of absence, and
found it much pleasanter to spend their time in Pall Mall and Hyde Park,
than to pass the winter away behind the fortifications of the dreary
old Flanders towns, where the English troops were gathered. Yachts and
packets passed daily between the Dutch and Flemish ports and Harwich;
the roads thence to London and the great inns were crowded with
army gentlemen; the taverns and ordinaries of the town swarmed with
red-coats; and our great Duke's levees at St. James's were as thronged
as they had been at Ghent and Brussels, where we treated him, and he us,
with the grandeur and ceremony of a sovereign. Though Esmond had been
appointed to a lieutenancy in the Fusileer regiment, of which that
celebrated officer, Brigadier John Richmond Webb, was colonel, he
had never joined the regiment, nor been introduced to its excellent
commander, though they had made the same campaign together, and been
engaged in the same battle. But being aide-de-camp to General Lumley,
who commanded the division of horse, and the army marching to its point
of destination on the Danube by different routes, Esmond had not fallen
in, as yet, with his commander and future comrades of the fort; and it
was in London, in Golden Square, where Major-General Webb lodged, that
Captain Esmond had the honor of first paying his respects to his friend,
patron, and commander of after days.

Those who remember this brilliant and accomplished gentleman may
recollect his character, upon which he prided himself, I think, not a
little, of being the handsomest man in the army; a poet who writ a
dull copy of verses upon the battle of Oudenarde three years after,
describing Webb, says:--

     "To noble danger Webb conducts the way,
     His great example all his troops obey;
     Before the front the general sternly rides,
     With such an air as Mars to battle strides:
     Propitious heaven must sure a hero save,
     Like Paris handsome, and like Hector brave."

Mr. Webb thought these verses quite as fine as Mr. Addison's on the
Blenheim Campaign, and, indeed, to be Hector a la mode de Paris, was
part of this gallant gentleman's ambition. It would have been difficult
to find an officer in the whole army, or amongst the splendid courtiers
and cavaliers of the Maison du Roy, that fought under Vendosme and
Villeroy in the army opposed to ours, who was a more accomplished
soldier and perfect gentleman, and either braver or better-looking.
And if Mr. Webb believed of himself what the world said of him, and was
deeply convinced of his own indisputable genius, beauty, and valor, who
has a right to quarrel with him very much? This self-content of his kept
him in general good-humor, of which his friends and dependants got the
benefit.

He came of a very ancient Wiltshire family, which he respected above all
families in the world: he could prove a lineal descent from King Edward
the First, and his first ancestor, Roaldus de Richmond, rode by William
the Conqueror's side on Hastings field. "We were gentlemen, Esmond," he
used to say, "when the Churchills were horse-boys." He was a very
tall man, standing in his pumps six feet three inches (in his great
jack-boots, with his tall fair periwig, and hat and feather, he could
not have been less than eight feet high). "I am taller than Churchill,"
he would say, surveying himself in the glass, "and I am a better made
man; and if the women won't like a man that hasn't a wart on his nose,
faith, I can't help myself, and Churchill has the better of me there."
Indeed, he was always measuring himself with the Duke, and always asking
his friends to measure them. And talking in this frank way, as he would
do, over his cups, wags would laugh and encourage him; friends would
be sorry for him; schemers and flatterers would egg him on, and
tale-bearers carry the stories to headquarters, and widen the difference
which already existed there, between the great captain and one of the
ablest and bravest lieutenants he ever had.

His rancor against the Duke was so apparent, that one saw it in the
first half-hour's conversation with General Webb; and his lady, who
adored her General, and thought him a hundred times taller, handsomer,
and braver than a prodigal nature had made him, hated the great Duke
with such an intensity as it becomes faithful wives to feel against
their husbands' enemies. Not that my Lord Duke was so yet; Mr. Webb had
said a thousand things against him, which his superior had pardoned; and
his Grace, whose spies were everywhere, had heard a thousand things more
that Webb had never said. But it cost this great man no pains to pardon;
and he passed over an injury or a benefit alike easily.

Should any child of mine take the pains to read these his ancestor's
memoirs, I would not have him judge of the great Duke* by what a
contemporary has written of him. No man hath been so immensely lauded
and decried as this great statesman and warrior; as, indeed, no man ever
deserved better the very greatest praise and the strongest censure. If
the present writer joins with the latter faction, very likely a private
pique of his own may be the cause of his ill-feeling.

     * This passage in the Memoirs of Esmond is written on a leaf
     inserted into the MS. book, and dated 1744, probably after
     he had heard of the Duchess's death.

On presenting himself at the Commander-in-Chief's levee, his Grace had
not the least remembrance of General Lumley's aide-de-camp, and though
he knew Esmond's family perfectly well, having served with both lords
(my Lord Francis and the Viscount Esmond's father) in Flanders, and in
the Duke of York's Guard, the Duke of Marlborough, who was friendly
and serviceable to the (so-styled) legitimate representatives of the
Viscount Castlewood, took no sort of notice of the poor lieutenant
who bore their name. A word of kindness or acknowledgment, or a single
glance of approbation, might have changed Esmond's opinion of the great
man; and instead of a satire, which his pen cannot help writing, who
knows but that the humble historian might have taken the other side of
panegyric? We have but to change the point of view, and the greatest
action looks mean; as we turn the perspective-glass, and a giant appears
a pigmy. You may describe, but who can tell whether your sight is clear
or not, or your means of information accurate? Had the great man said
but a word of kindness to the small one (as he would have stepped out
of his gilt chariot to shake hands with Lazarus in rags and sores, if he
thought Lazarus could have been of any service to him), no doubt Esmond
would have fought for him with pen and sword to the utmost of his might;
but my lord the lion did not want master mouse at this moment, and so
Muscipulus went off and nibbled in opposition.

So it was, however, that a young gentleman, who, in the eyes of his
family, and in his own, doubtless, was looked upon as a consummate hero,
found that the great hero of the day took no more notice of him than
of the smallest drummer in his Grace's army. The Dowager at Chelsey was
furious against this neglect of her family, and had a great battle with
Lady Marlborough (as Lady Castlewood insisted on calling the Duchess).
Her Grace was now Mistress of the Robes to her Majesty, and one of the
greatest personages in this kingdom, as her husband was in all Europe,
and the battle between the two ladies took place in the Queen's
drawing-room.

The Duchess, in reply to my aunt's eager clamor, said haughtily, that
she had done her best for the legitimate branch of the Esmonds, and
could not be expected to provide for the bastard brats of the family.

"Bastards!" says the Viscountess, in a fury. "There are bastards among
the Churchills, as your Grace knows, and the Duke of Berwick is provided
for well enough."

"Madam," says the Duchess, "you know whose fault it is that there are
no such dukes in the Esmond family too, and how that little scheme of a
certain lady miscarried."

Esmond's friend, Dick Steele, who was in waiting on the Prince, heard
the controversy between the ladies at court. "And faith," says Dick, "I
think, Harry, thy kinswoman had the worst of it."

He could not keep the story quiet; 'twas all over the coffee-houses ere
night; it was printed in a News Letter before a month was over, and "The
reply of her Grace the Duchess of M-rlb-r-gh to a Popish Lady of the
Court, once a favorite of the late K--- J-m-s," was printed in half a
dozen places, with a note stating that "this duchess, when the head
of this lady's family came by his death lately in a fatal duel, never
rested until she got a pension for the orphan heir, and widow, from her
Majesty's bounty." The squabble did not advance poor Esmond's promotion
much, and indeed made him so ashamed of himself that he dared not show
his face at the Commander-in-Chief's levees again.

During those eighteen months which had passed since Esmond saw his dear
mistress, her good father, the old Dean, quitted this life, firm in his
principles to the very last, and enjoining his family always to remember
that the Queen's brother, King James the Third, was their rightful
sovereign. He made a very edifying end, as his daughter told Esmond, and
not a little to her surprise, after his death (for he had lived always
very poorly) my lady found that her father had left no less a sum than
3,000L. behind him, which he bequeathed to her.

With this little fortune Lady Castlewood was enabled, when her
daughter's turn at Court came, to come to London, where she took a small
genteel house at Kensington, in the neighborhood of the Court, bringing
her children with her, and here it was that Esmond found his friends.

As for the young lord, his university career had ended rather abruptly.
Honest Tusher, his governor, had found my young gentleman quite
ungovernable. My lord worried his life away with tricks; and broke out,
as home-bred lads will, into a hundred youthful extravagances, so that
Dr. Bentley, the new master of Trinity, thought fit to write to the
Viscountess Castlewood, my lord's mother, and beg her to remove the
young nobleman from a college where he declined to learn, and where he
only did harm by his riotous example. Indeed, I believe he nearly set
fire to Nevil's Court, that beautiful new quadrangle of our college,
which Sir Christopher Wren had lately built. He knocked down a
proctor's man that wanted to arrest him in a midnight prank; he gave
a dinner-party on the Prince of Wales's birthday, which was within
a fortnight of his own, and the twenty young gentlemen then present
sallied out after their wine, having toasted King James's health with
open windows, and sung cavalier songs, and shouted "God save the
King!" in the great court, so that the master came out of his lodge at
midnight, and dissipated the riotous assembly.

This was my lord's crowning freak, and the Rev. Thomas Tusher, domestic
chaplain to the Right Honorable the Lord Viscount Castlewood, finding
his prayers and sermons of no earthly avail to his lordship, gave up his
duties of governor; went and married his brewer's widow at Southampton,
and took her and her money to his parsonage house at Castlewood.

My lady could not be angry with her son for drinking King James's
health, being herself a loyal Tory, as all the Castlewood family were,
and acquiesced with a sigh, knowing, perhaps, that her refusal would be
of no avail to the young lord's desire for a military life. She would
have liked him to be in Mr. Esmond's regiment, hoping that Harry might
act as a guardian and adviser to his wayward young kinsman; but my young
lord would hear of nothing but the Guards, and a commission was got for
him in the Duke of Ormond's regiment; so Esmond found my lord, ensign
and lieutenant, when he returned from Germany after the Blenheim
campaign.

The effect produced by both Lady Castlewood's children when they
appeared in public was extraordinary, and the whole town speedily rang
with their fame: such a beautiful couple, it was declared, never had
been seen; the young maid of honor was toasted at every table and
tavern, and as for my young lord, his good looks were even more admired
than his sister's. A hundred songs were written about the pair, and
as the fashion of that day was, my young lord was praised in these
Anacreontics as warmly as Bathyllus. You may be sure that he accepted
very complacently the town's opinion of him, and acquiesced with that
frankness and charming good-humor he always showed in the idea that he
was the prettiest fellow in all London.

The old Dowager at Chelsey, though she could never be got to acknowledge
that Mistress Beatrix was any beauty at all, (in which opinion, as it
may be imagined, a vast number of the ladies agreed with her), yet, on
the very first sight of young Castlewood, she owned she fell in love
with him: and Henry Esmond, on his return to Chelsey, found himself
quite superseded in her favor by her younger kinsman. The feat of
drinking the King's health at Cambridge would have won her heart, she
said, if nothing else did. "How had the dear young fellow got such
beauty?" she asked. "Not from his father--certainly not from his mother.
How had he come by such noble manners, and the perfect bel air? That
countrified Walcote widow could never have taught him." Esmond had his
own opinion about the countrified Walcote widow, who had a quiet grace
and serene kindness, that had always seemed to him the perfection of
good breeding, though he did not try to argue this point with his aunt.
But he could agree in most of the praises which the enraptured old
dowager bestowed on my Lord Viscount, than whom he never beheld a more
fascinating and charming gentleman. Castlewood had not wit so much as
enjoyment. "The lad looks good things," Mr. Steele used to say; "and
his laugh lights up a conversation as much as ten repartees from
Mr. Congreve. I would as soon sit over a bottle with him as with Mr.
Addison; and rather listen to his talk than hear Nicolini. Was ever
man so gracefully drunk as my Lord Castlewood? I would give anything to
carry my wine" (though, indeed, Dick bore his very kindly, and plenty
of it, too), "like this incomparable young man. When he is sober he is
delightful; and when tipsy, perfectly irresistible." And referring to
his favorite, Shakspeare (who was quite out of fashion until Steele
brought him back into the mode), Dick compared Lord Castlewood to Prince
Hal, and was pleased to dub Esmond as ancient Pistol.

The Mistress of the Robes, the greatest lady in England after the Queen,
or even before her Majesty, as the world said, though she never could be
got to say a civil word to Beatrix, whom she had promoted to her place
as maid of honor, took her brother into instant favor. When young
Castlewood, in his new uniform, and looking like a prince out of a fairy
tale, went to pay his duty to her Grace, she looked at him for a minute
in silence, the young man blushing and in confusion before her, then
fairly burst out a-crying, and kissed him before her daughters and
company. "He was my boy's friend," she said, through her sobs. "My
Blandford might have been like him." And everybody saw, after this mark
of the Duchess's favor, that my young lord's promotion was secure, and
people crowded round the favorite's favorite, who became vainer and
gayer, and more good-humored than ever.

Meanwhile Madam Beatrix was making her conquests on her own side, and
amongst them was one poor gentleman, who had been shot by her young eyes
two years before, and had never been quite cured of that wound; he knew,
to be sure, how hopeless any passion might be, directed in that quarter,
and had taken that best, though ignoble, remedium amoris, a speedy
retreat from before the charmer, and a long absence from her; and not
being dangerously smitten in the first instance, Esmond pretty soon got
the better of his complaint, and if he had it still, did not know he had
it, and bore it easily. But when he returned after Blenheim, the young
lady of sixteen, who had appeared the most beautiful object his eyes had
ever looked on two years back, was now advanced to a perfect ripeness
and perfection of beauty, such as instantly enthralled the poor devil,
who had already been a fugitive from her charms. Then he had seen her
but for two days, and fled; now he beheld her day after day, and when
she was at Court watched after her; when she was at home, made one of
the family party; when she went abroad, rode after her mother's chariot;
when she appeared in public places, was in the box near her, or in the
pit looking at her; when she went to church was sure to be there, though
he might not listen to the sermon, and be ready to hand her to her chair
if she deigned to accept of his services, and select him from a score of
young men who were always hanging round about her. When she went away,
accompanying her Majesty to Hampton Court, a darkness fell over London.
Gods, what nights has Esmond passed, thinking of her, rhyming about her,
talking about her! His friend Dick Steele was at this time courting
the young lady, Mrs. Scurlock, whom he married; she had a lodging in
Kensington Square, hard by my Lady Castlewood's house there. Dick and
Harry, being on the same errand, used to meet constantly at Kensington.
They were always prowling about that place, or dismally walking thence,
or eagerly running thither. They emptied scores of bottles at the
"King's Arms," each man prating of his love, and allowing the other to
talk on condition that he might have his own turn as a listener. Hence
arose an intimacy between them, though to all the rest of their friends
they must have been insufferable. Esmond's verses to "Gloriana at the
Harpsichord," to "Gloriana's Nosegay," to "Gloriana at Court," appeared
this year in the Observator.--Have you never read them? They were
thought pretty poems, and attributed by some to Mr. Prior.

This passion did not escape--how should it?--the clear eyes of Esmond's
mistress: he told her all; what will a man not do when frantic with
love? To what baseness will he not demean himself? What pangs will he
not make others suffer, so that he may ease his selfish heart of a part
of its own pain? Day after day he would seek his dear mistress, pour
insane hopes, supplications, rhapsodies, raptures, into her ear. She
listened, smiled, consoled, with untiring pity and sweetness. Esmond was
the eldest of her children, so she was pleased to say; and as for her
kindness, who ever had or would look for aught else from one who was
an angel of goodness and pity? After what has been said, 'tis needless
almost to add that poor Esmond's suit was unsuccessful. What was a
nameless, penniless lieutenant to do, when some of the greatest in
the land were in the field? Esmond never so much as thought of asking
permission to hope so far above his reach as he knew this prize was
and passed his foolish, useless life in mere abject sighs and impotent
longing. What nights of rage, what days of torment, of passionate
unfulfilled desire, of sickening jealousy can he recall! Beatrix
thought no more of him than of the lackey that followed her chair. His
complaints did not touch her in the least; his raptures rather fatigued
her; she cared for his verses no more than for Dan Chaucer's, who's
dead these ever so many hundred years; she did not hate him; she rather
despised him, and just suffered him.

One day, after talking to Beatrix's mother, his dear, fond, constant
mistress--for hours--for all day long--pouring out his flame and his
passion, his despair and rage, returning again and again to the theme,
pacing the room, tearing up the flowers on the table, twisting and
breaking into bits the wax out of the stand-dish, and performing a
hundred mad freaks of passionate folly; seeing his mistress at last
quite pale and tired out with sheer weariness of compassion, and
watching over his fever for the hundredth time, Esmond seized up his
hat, and took his leave. As he got into Kensington Square, a sense of
remorse came over him for the wearisome pain he had been inflicting upon
the dearest and kindest friend ever man had. He went back to the house,
where the servant still stood at the open door, ran up the stairs, and
found his mistress where he had left her in the embrasure of the window,
looking over the fields towards Chelsey. She laughed, wiping away at the
same time the tears which were in her kind eyes; he flung himself down
on his knees, and buried his head in her lap. She had in her hand the
stalk of one of the flowers, a pink, that he had torn to pieces. "Oh,
pardon me, pardon me, my dearest and kindest," he said; "I am in hell,
and you are the angel that brings me a drop of water."

"I am your mother, you are my son, and I love you always," she said,
holding her hands over him: and he went away comforted and humbled in
mind, as he thought of that amazing and constant love and tenderness
with which this sweet lady ever blessed and pursued him.




CHAPTER XI.

THE FAMOUS MR. JOSEPH ADDISON.


The gentlemen ushers had a table at Kensington, and the Guard a very
splendid dinner daily at St. James's, at either of which ordinaries
Esmond was free to dine. Dick Steele liked the Guard-table better than
his own at the gentlemen ushers', where there was less wine and more
ceremony; and Esmond had many a jolly afternoon in company of his
friend, and a hundred times at least saw Dick into his chair. If there
is verity in wine, according to the old adage, what an amiable-natured
character Dick's must have been! In proportion as he took in wine he
overflowed with kindness. His talk was not witty so much as charming.
He never said a word that could anger anybody, and only became the more
benevolent the more tipsy he grew. Many of the wags derided the poor
fellow in his cups, and chose him as a butt for their satire: but there
was a kindness about him, and a sweet playful fancy, that seemed to
Esmond far more charming than the pointed talk of the brightest wits,
with their elaborate repartees and affected severities. I think
Steele shone rather than sparkled. Those famous beaux-esprits of the
coffee-houses (Mr. William Congreve, for instance, when his gout and
his grandeur permitted him to come among us) would make many brilliant
hits--half a dozen in a night sometimes--but, like sharp-shooters, when
they had fired their shot, they were obliged to retire under cover till
their pieces were loaded again, and wait till they got another chance at
their enemy; whereas Dick never thought that his bottle companion was a
butt to aim at--only a friend to shake by the hand. The poor fellow had
half the town in his confidence; everybody knew everything about his
loves and his debts, his creditors or his mistress's obduracy. When
Esmond first came on to the town, honest Dick was all flames and
raptures for a young lady, a West India fortune, whom he married. In a
couple of years the lady was dead, the fortune was all but spent, and
the honest widower was as eager in pursuit of a new paragon of beauty,
as if he had never courted and married and buried the last one.

Quitting the Guard-table one Sunday afternoon, when by chance Dick had a
sober fit upon him, he and his friend were making their way down Germain
Street, and Dick all of a sudden left his companion's arm, and ran after
a gentleman who was poring over a folio volume at the book-shop near to
St. James's Church. He was a fair, tall man, in a snuff-colored suit,
with a plain sword, very sober, and almost shabby in appearance--at
least when compared to Captain Steele, who loved to adorn his jolly
round person with the finest of clothes, and shone in scarlet and gold
lace. The Captain rushed up, then, to the student of the book-stall,
took him in his arms, hugged him, and would have kissed him--for Dick
was always hugging and bussing his friends--but the other stepped
back with a flush on his pale face, seeming to decline this public
manifestation of Steele's regard.

"My dearest Joe, where hast thou hidden thyself this age?" cries the
Captain, still holding both his friend's hands; "I have been languishing
for thee this fortnight."

"A fortnight is not an age, Dick," says the other, very good-humoredly.
(He had light blue eyes, extraordinary bright, and a face perfectly
regular and handsome, like a tinted statue.) "And I have been hiding
myself--where do you think?"

"What! not across the water, my dear Joe?" says Steele, with a look of
great alarm: "thou knowest I have always--"

"No," says his friend, interrupting him with a smile: "we are not come
to such straits as that, Dick. I have been hiding, sir, at a place where
people never think of finding you--at my own lodgings, whither I am
going to smoke a pipe now and drink a glass of sack: will your honor
come?"

"Harry Esmond, come hither," cries out Dick. "Thou hast heard me talk
over and over again of my dearest Joe, my guardian angel?"

"Indeed," says Mr. Esmond, with a bow, "it is not from you only that I
have learnt to admire Mr. Addison. We loved good poetry at Cambridge as
well as at Oxford; and I have some of yours by heart, though I have put
on a red coat. . . . 'O qui canoro blandius Orpheo vocale ducis carmen;'
shall I go on, sir?" says Mr. Esmond, who, indeed, had read and loved
the charming Latin poems of Mr. Addison, as every scholar of that time
knew and admired them.

"This is Captain Esmond who was at Blenheim," says Steele.

"Lieutenant Esmond," says the other, with a low bow, "at Mr. Addison's
service.

"I have heard of you," says Mr. Addison, with a smile; as, indeed,
everybody about town had heard that unlucky story about Esmond's dowager
aunt and the Duchess.

"We were going to the 'George' to take a bottle before the play," says
Steele: "wilt thou be one, Joe?"
