Houston, with suggesting the name of Frankland, after he had opened
the Convention with prayer. It is not surprising to learn that this
glorified 236 constitution was presently put aside in favor of one
modeled on that of North Carolina.

Sevier persuaded the more radical members of the community to abandon
their extreme views and to adopt the laws of North Carolina. However
lawless his acts as Governor of a bolting colony may appear, Sevier was
essentially a constructive force. His purposes were right, and small
motives are not discernible in his record. He might reasonably urge that
the Franklanders had only followed the example of North Carolina and the
other American States in seceding from the parent body, and for similar
causes, for the State's system of taxation had long borne heavily on the
overhill men.

The whole transmontane populace welcomed Frankland with enthusiasm.
Major Arthur Campbell, of the Virginian settlements, on the Holston,
was eager to join. Sevier and his Assembly took the necessary steps
to receive the overhill Virginians, provided that the transfer of
allegiance could be made with Virginia's consent. Meanwhile he replied
in a dignified manner to the pained and menacing expostulations of North
Carolina's Governor. North Carolina was bidden to remember the epithets
her assemblymen had hurled at the Westerners, which they themselves had
by 237 no means forgotten. And was it any wonder that they now doubted
the love the parent State professed to feel for them? As for the puerile
threat of blood, had their quality really so soon become obliterated
from the memory of North Carolina? At this sort of writing, Sevier, who
always pulsed hot with emotion and who had a pretty knack in turning a
phrase, was more than a match for the Governor of North Carolina, whose
prerogatives he had usurped.

The overmountain men no longer needed to complain bitterly of the lack
of legal machinery to keep them the best members of society. They
now had courts to spare. Frankland had its courts, its judges, its
legislative body, its land office--in fact, a full governmental
equipment. North Carolina also performed all the natural functions of
political organism, within the western territory. Sevier appointed one
David Campbell a judge. Campbell held court in Jonesborough. Ten miles
away, in Buffalo, Colonel John Tipton presided for North Carolina. It
happened frequently that officers and attendants of the rival law courts
met, as they pursued their duties, and whenever they met they fought.
The post of sheriff--or sheriffs, for of course there were two--was
filled by the 238 biggest and heaviest man and the hardest hitter in the
ranks of the warring factions. A favorite game was raiding each other's
courts and carrying off the records. Frankland sent William Cocke, later
the first senator from Tennessee, to Congress with a memorial, asking
Congress to accept the territory North Carolina had offered and to
receive it into the Union as a separate State. Congress ignored the
plea. It began to appear that North Carolina would be victor in the end;
and so there were defections among the Franklanders. Sevier wrote
to Benjamin Franklin asking his aid in establishing the status of
Frankland; and, with a graceful flourish of his ready pen, changed the
new State's name to Franklin by way of reinforcing his arguments. But
the old philosopher, more expert than Sevier in diplomatic calligraphy,
only acknowledged the compliment and advised the State of Franklin to
make peace with North Carolina.

Sevier then appealed for aid and recognition to the Governor of Georgia,
who had previously appointed him Brigadier General of militia. But
the Governor of Georgia also avoided giving the recognition requested,
though he earnestly besought Sevier to come down and settle the Creeks
for him. There were others who sent pleas to Sevier, the 239 warrior, to
save them from the savages. One of the writers who addressed him did
not fear to say Your Excellency, nor to accord Nolichucky Jack the whole
dignity of the purple in appealing to him as the only man possessing the
will and the power to prevent the isolated settlements on the Cumberland
from being wiped out. That writer was his old friend, James Robertson.

In 1787, while Sevier was on the frontier of Greene County, defending
it from Indians, the legal forces of North Carolina swooped down on his
estate and took possession of his negroes. It was Tipton who represented
the law; and Tipton carried off the Governor's slaves to his own estate.
When Nolichucky Jack came home and found that his enemy had stripped
him, he was in a towering rage. With a body of his troops and one small
cannon, he marched to Tipton's house and besieged it, threatening a
bombardment. He did not, however, fire into the dwelling, though he
placed some shots about it and in the extreme corners. This _opéra
bouffe_ siege endured for several days, until Tipton was reinforced
by some of his own clique. Then Tipton sallied forth and attacked the
besiegers, who hastily scattered rather than engage in a sanguinary
fight with their neighbors. Tipton 240 captured Sevier's two elder sons
and was only strained from hanging them on being informed that two of
his own sons were at that moment in Sevier's hands.

In March, 1788, the State of Franklin went into eclipse. Sevier was
overthrown by the authorities of North Carolina. Most of the officials
who had served under him were soothed by being reappointed to their old
positions. Tipton's star was now in the ascendant, for his enemy was
to be made the vicarious sacrifice for the sins of all whom he had led
astray. Presently David Campbell, still graciously permitted to preside
over the Superior Court, received from the Governor of North Carolina
the following letter:

Sir: It has been represented to the Executive that John Sevier, who
style's himself Captain-General of the State of Franklin, has been
guilty of high treason in levying troops to oppose the laws and
government of the State.… You will issue your warrant to apprehend the
said John Sevier, and in case he cannot be sufficiently secured for
trial in the District of Washington, order him to be committed to the
public gaol.

The judge's authority was to be exercised after he had examined the
affidavits of credible persons. Campbell's judicial opinion seems to
have been that any affidavit against the said John 241 Sevier could not
be made by a credible person. He refused to issue the warrant. Tipton's
friend, Spencer, who had been North Carolina's judge of the Superior
Court in the West and who was sharing that honor now with Campbell,
issued the warrant and sent Tipton to make the arrest.

Sevier was at the Widow Brown's inn with some of his men when Tipton at
last came up with him. It was early morning. Tipton and his posse were
about to enter when the portly and dauntless widow, surmising their
errand, drew her chair into the doorway, plumped herself down in it, and
refused to budge for all the writs in North Carolina. Tipton blustered
and the widow rocked. The altercation awakened Sevier. He dressed
hurriedly and came down. As soon as he presented himself on the porch,
Tipton thrust his pistol against his body, evidently with intent to fire
if Sevier made signs of resistance. Sevier's furious followers were not
disposed to let him be taken without a fight, but he admonished them to
respect the law, and requested that they would inform Bonnie Kate of his
predicament. Then, debonair as ever, with perhaps a tinge of contempt at
the corners of his mouth, he held out his wrists for the manacles which
Tipton insisted on fastening upon them.

242 It was not likely that any jail in the western country could hold
Nolichucky Jack overnight. Tipton feared a riot; and it was decided to
send the prisoner for incarceration and trial to Morgantown in North
Carolina, just over the hills.

Tipton did not accompany the guards he sent with Sevier. It was stated
and commonly believed that he had given instructions of which the
honorable men among his friends were ignorant. When the party entered
the mountains, two of the guards were to lag behind with the prisoner,
till the others were out of sight on the twisting trail. Then one of the
two was to kill Sevier and assert that he had done it because Sevier
had attempted to escape. It fell out almost as planned, except that the
other guard warned Sevier of the fate in store for him and gave him
a chance to flee. In plunging down the mountain, Sevier's horse was
entangled in a thicket. The would-be murderer overtook him and fired;
but here again fate had interposed for her favorite. The ball had
dropped out of the assassin's pistol. So Sevier reached Morgantown
in safety and was deposited in care of the sheriff, who was doubtless
cautioned to take a good look at the prisoner and know him for a
dangerous and a daring man.

243 There is a story to the effect that, when Sevier was arraigned in
the courthouse at Morgantown and presently dashed through the door and
away on a racer that had been brought up by some of his friends, among
those who witnessed the proceedings was a young Ulster Scot named Andrew
Jackson; and that on this occasion these two men, later to become foes,
first saw each other. Jackson may have been in Morgantown at the
time, though this is disputed; but the rest of the tale is pure legend
invented by some one whose love of the spectacular led him far from the
facts. The facts are less theatrical but much more dramatic. Sevier
was not arraigned at all, for no court was sitting in Morgantown at the
time.¹ The sheriff to whom he was delivered did not need to look twice
at him to know him for a daring man. He had served with him at King's
Mountain. He struck off his handcuffs and set him at liberty at once.
Perhaps he also notified General Charles McDowell at his home in Quaker
Meadows of the presence of a distinguished guest in Burke County, for
McDowell and his brother Joseph, another officer of militia, quickly
appeared and went on Sevier's bond. Nolichucky Jack was 244 presently
holding a court of his own in the tavern, with North Carolina's men at
arms--as many as were within call--drinking his health. So his sons and
a company of his Wataugans found him, when they rode into Morgantown to
give evidence in his behalf--with their rifles. Since none now disputed
the way with him, Sevier turned homeward with his cavalcade, McDowell
and his men accompanying him as far as the pass in the hills.

¹ Statement by John Sevier, Junior, in the Draper MSS., quoted by
Turner, _Life of General John Sevier,_ p. 182. No further attempt
was made to try John Sevier for treason, either west or east of the
mountains. In November, however, the Assembly passed the Pardon Act, and
thereby granted absolution to every one who had been associated with
the State of Franklin, except John Sevier. In a clause said to have been
introduced by Tipton, now a senator, or suggested by him, John Sevier
was debarred forever from the enjoyment of any office of profit or honor
or trust in the State of North Carolina.

The overhill men in Greene County took due note of the Assembly's fiat
and at the next election sent Sevier to the North Carolina Senate.
Nolichucky Jack, whose demeanor was never so decorous as when the
ill-considered actions of those in authority had made him appear to have
circumvented the law, considerately waited outside until 245 the House
had lifted the ban--which it did perforce and by a large majority,
despite Tipton's opposition--and then took his seat on the senatorial
bench beside his enemy. The records show that he was reinstated as
Brigadier General of the Western Counties and also appointed at the head
of the Committee on Indian Affairs.

Not only in the region about Watauga did the pioneers of Tennessee
endure the throes of danger and strife during these years. The little
settlements on the Cumberland, which were scattered over a short
distance of about twenty-five or thirty miles and had a frontier line
of two hundred miles, were terribly afflicted. Their nearest white
neighbors among the Kentucky settlers were one hundred and fifty miles
away; and through the cruelest years these could render no aid--could
not, indeed, hold their own stations. The Kentuckians, as we have
seen, were bottled up in Harrodsburg and Boonesborough; and, while the
northern Indians led by Girty and Dequindre darkened the Bloody Ground
anew, the Cumberlanders were making a desperate stand against the
Chickasaws and the Creeks. So terrible was their situation that panic
took hold on them, and they would have 246 fled but for the influence of
Robertson. He may have put the question to them in the biblical words,
Whither shall I flee? For they were surrounded, and those who did
attempt to escape were weighed on the path and made light. Robertson
knew that their only chance of survival was to stand their ground. The
greater risks he was willing to take in person, for it was he who made
trips to Boonesborough and Harrodsburg for a share of the powder and
lead which John Sevier was sending into Kentucky from time to time. In
the stress of conflict Robertson bore his full share of grief, for his
two elder sons and his brother fell. He himself was often near to death.
One day he was cut off in the fields and was shot in the foot as he ran,
yet he managed to reach shelter. There is a story that, in an attack
during one of his absences, the Indians forced the outer gate of the
fort and Mrs. Robertson went out of her cabin, firing, and let loose a
band of the savage dogs which the settlers kept for their protection,
and so drove out the invaders.

The Chickasaws were loyal to the treaty they had made with the British
in the early days of James Adair's association with them. They were
friends to England's friends and foes to her foes. 247 While they
resented the new settlements made on land they considered theirs,
they signed a peace with Robertson at the conclusion of the War of
Independence. They kept their word with him as they had kept it with the
British. Furthermore, their chief, Opimingo or the Mountain Leader, gave
Robertson his assistance against the Creeks and the Choctaws and, in so
far as he understood its workings, informed him of the new Spanish and
French conspiracy, which we now come to consider. So once again the
Chickasaws were servants of destiny to the English-speaking race, for
again they drove the wedge of their honor into an Indian solidarity
welded with European gold.

Since it was generally believed at that date that the tribes were
instigated to war by the British and supplied by them with their
ammunition, savage inroads were expected to cease with the signing of
peace. But Indian warfare not only continued; it increased. In the last
two years of the Revolution, when the British were driven from the
Back Country of the Carolinas and could no longer reach the tribes with
consignments of firearms and powder, it should have been evident that
the Indians had other sources of supply and other allies, for they
lacked nothing which could aid 248 them in their efforts to exterminate
the settlers of Tennessee.

Neither France nor Spain wished to see an English-speaking republic
based on ideals of democracy successfully established in America. Though
in the Revolutionary War, France was a close ally of the Americans and
Spain something more than a nominal one, the secret diplomacy of the
courts of the Bourbon cousins ill matched with their open professions.
Both cousins hated England. The American colonies, smarting under
injustice, had offered a field for their revenge. But hatred of England
was not the only reason why activities had been set afoot to increase
the discord which should finally separate the colonies from Great
Britain and leave the destiny of the colonies to be decided by the House
of Bourbon. Spain saw in the Americans, with their English modes of
thought, a menace to her authority in her own colonies on both the
northern and southern continents. This menace would not be stilled but
augmented if the colonies should be established as a republic. Such an
example might be too readily followed. Though France had, by a secret
treaty in 1762, made over to Spain the province of Louisiana, she was
not unmindful of the Bourbon motto, He who attacks 249 the Crown of one
attacks the other. And she saw her chance to deal a crippling blow at
England's prestige and commerce.

In 1764, the French Minister, Choiseul, had sent a secret agent, named
Pontleroy, to America to assist in making trouble and to watch for any
signs that might be turned to the advantage of _les duex couronnes_.
Evidently Pontleroy's reports were encouraging for, in 1768, Johann
Kalb--the same Kalb who fell at Camden in 1780--arrived in Philadelphia
to enlarge the good work. He was not only, like several of the foreign
officers in the War of Independence, a spy for his Government, but he
was also the special emissary of one Comte de Broglie who, after the
colonies had broken with the mother country, was to put himself at the
head of American affairs. This Broglie had been for years one of
Louis XV's chief agents in subterranean diplomacy, and it is not to be
supposed that he was going to attempt the stupendous task of controlling
America's destiny without substantial backing. Spain had been advised
meanwhile to rule her new Louisiana territory with great liberality--in
fact, to let it shine as a republic before the yearning eyes of the
oppressed Americans, so that the English colonists would arise and
cast off 250 their fetters. Once the colonies had freed themselves from
England's protecting arm, it would be a simple matter for the Bourbons
to gather them in like so many little lost chicks from a rainy yard. The
intrigants of autocratic systems have never been able to understand that
the urge of the spirit of independence in men is not primarily to break
shackles but to stand alone and that the breaking of bonds is incidental
to the true demonstration of freedom. The Bourbons and their agents were
no more nor less blind to the great principle stirring the hearts of men
in their day than were the Prussianized hosts over a hundred years later
who, having themselves no acquaintance with the law of liberty, could
not foresee that half a world would rise in arms to maintain that law.

When the War of Independence had ended, the French Minister, Vergennes,
and the Spanish Minister, Floridablanca, secretly worked in unison to
prevent England's recognition of the new republic; and Floridablanca in
1782 even offered to assist England if she would make further efforts
to subdue her rebel subjects. Both Latin powers had their own axes
to grind, and America was to tend the grindstone. France looked for
recovery of her old prestige in Europe and expected to supersede 251
England in commerce. She would do this, in the beginning, chiefly
through control of America and of America's commerce. Vergennes
therefore sought not only to dictate the final terms of peace but also
to say what the American commissioners should and should not demand.
Of the latter gentlemen he said that they possessed _caractères
peu maniables!_ In writing to Luzerne, the French Ambassador in
Philadelphia, on October 14, 1782, Vergennes said: it behooves us
to leave them [the American commissioners] to their illusions, to do
everything that can make them fancy that we share them, and undertake
only to defeat any attempts to which those illusions might carry them
if our coöperation is required. Among these illusions were America's
desires in regard to the fisheries and to the western territory.
Concerning the West, Vergennes had written to Luzerne, as early as July
18, 1780: At the moment when the revolution broke out, the limits of the
Thirteen States did not reach the River [Mississippi] and it would be
absurd for them to claim the rights of England, a power whose rule they
had abjured. By the secret treaty with Spain, furthermore, France had
