leaving the great lakes he collected a quantity of furs.  Then he
sent back the Griffin and half his men, with orders to sell these
furs, and return with supplies for the expedition as quickly as
possible.  With the rest of his men La Salle journeyed on to the
head of Lake Michigan in canoes.

It was no easy journey, for storms swept the lake.  The waves tossed
their frail canoes hither and thither so that they were often in
danger of drowning.  They were harassed, too, by unfriendly Indians.
At length, worn out by fatigue, starving with cold and hunger, they
reached the appointed place to await the return of the Griffin.

But the Griffin never came.  In vain La Salle scanned the grey
waters.  Day after day passed, and no white sail flecked the dreary
expanse.  The Griffin was never heard of more.

With a heavy heart La Salle at length gave up the weary watch, and
decided to go on with such men and supplies as he had.  But with
every step fresh difficulties arose.  La Salle had many enemies,
and they did their best to hinder and hamper him.  His own men were
discontented and mutinous.  They had no love for their leader, no
enthusiasm for the expedition, and the hardships and dangers of
the way made them sullen.

They were half starved and worn out with fatigue; all they wanted
was to get back to a comfortable life.  They were sick of the
wilderness and its hardships.  Added to this the Indians told them
bloodcurdling tales of the terrors of the "Father of Waters." It
was a raging torrent of whirlpools, they said, full of poisonous
serpents and loathly monsters.  Those who ventured on it would never
return.

This was more than the men could face.  They chose rather the
possibility of death among the Indians and the wilderness to its
certainty among such horrors, and some of them ran away.

Depressed by this desertion La Salle resolved to camp for the rest
of the winter.  So on the banks of the river Illinois he built a
fort which he called Creve-Coeur, or Heart-break.

But La Salle's brave heart was not yet broken.  And here he began
to build a new ship in which to sail down the Mississippi.  There
was wood in plenty around, and the work was begun.  But many things,
such as sails and rigging, which were necessary for the ship, the
wilderness could not supply.  And, seeing no other way, La Salle
resolved to go back to Fort Frontenac to get them, leaving Tonty
meanwhile to look after the building of the ship.

It was March when La Salle set out on his tremendous walk of a
thousand miles.  With him he took a faithful Indians guide and four
Frenchmen.  And seldom have men endured a journey more terrible.

The spring sun was just beginning to thaw the ice and snow
of winter, so that the prairies were turned to marshes into which
the travelers sank knee deep.  The forests were pathless thickets
through which they had to force a way with axe and hatchet.  As a
pathway the rivers were useless to them, for the ice was so thin
that it would not bear their weight.  And later when it thawed and
broke up they still could not use their canoes lest they should be
shattered by the floating masses of ice.

All day long they toiled knee deep in mud and half-melted snow,
laden with baggage, guns and ammunition.  At night they lay down
without shelter of any kind.  They were often hungry, they suffered
constantly both from cold and heat.  For at noon the sun beat down
upon them fiercely, and at night the frost was so bitter that the
blankets in which they lay wrapped were frozen stiff.

The hardships of the journey were so tremendous that the marvel
is that any one lived to tell of them.  Indeed, one by one the men
fell ill, and when at length after three months of pain and peril
they arrived at their journey's end only La Salle had strength or
courage left.

Here more bad news greeted La Salle, for he now heard that a ship
sent out from France laden with supplies for him had been wrecked.
But even this cruel stroke of fortune could not break his spirit.
Once more he set about gathering supplies, and made ready to return
to Fort Heart-break.

But worse was yet to come.  La Salle was about to start when he received
a letter from Tonty.  From this he learned that soon after he had
left nearly all his men had mutinied.  They had rifled the stores
and demolished the fort; then, throwing into the river everything
they could not carry, had made off.  Only three or four had remained
faithful.  With these Tony was now alone in the wilderness.

This staggering news only made La Salle more eager to set out, for
he could not leave his brave friend thus helpless.  So once more
the toilsome journey was begun.  But when Heart-break was reached,
La Salle found no friend to welcome him.  All around there was
nothing but silence and desolation, and ghastly ash-strewn ruins.
The unfinished ship, like some vast skeleton, huge and gaunt, alone
bore witness that white men had once been there.

Still La Salle would not despair.  He spent the winter making friends
with the Indians and searching earnestly for some trace of Tonty.
The winter was unusually severe, the whole land was covered with
snow and both La Salle and some of his men became snow-blind for
days.  But at last with the melting of the snows light and joy came
to him.  The blindness passed, Tonty was found.

Once again the friends met.  Each had a tale to tell, a tale of
bitter disappointments and defeats.  Yet in spite of all the blows
of fortune Le Salle would not give in.  Once more he set about making
preparations for the expedition.  But now he gave up the idea of
building a ship, and decided to trust to canoes alone.

It was mid-winter when all was ready.  The rivers were frozen hard.
So, placing their canoes on sledges, the men dragged them over the
ice.  As they went southward and spring came on, the ice melted and
would no longer bear them.  The stream was soon filled with floating
masses of broken ice, so they were obliged to land and wait until
it had melted.

Then once more they set out.  Every day now they drifted farther
and farther into the heat of summer.  The sun shone softly through
the overhanging trees, the river banks were gay with flowers,
and bright plumaged birds flashed through the sunlight.  After the
tortures of the past winters this green and fertile land seemed a
very paradise.  So on the adventurers passed where never white man
had passed before; and at length they reached the mouth of the
mighty river and stood upon the shore of the Gulf of Mexico.

And here, in 1682, while wondering savages looked on, this
mere handful of white men claimed all the land through which they
had passed for their King.  The long silence of the wilderness was
awakened for the first time by the sound of Latin chants.  Guns were
fired, and to the shouts of "God save the King," a pillar was set
up.

__________





Chapter 46 - King William's War and Queen Anne's War




At this time in Europe France and Britain were at war.  When King
William came to take possession of Britain, James II ran away to
France.  The King of France received him kindly, and soon declared
war upon William.  The war was fought not only in Europe but in
America also, and it is known in America as King William's War,
because William was King of Great Britain at the time.  It was
the beginning of a fierce struggle between British and French for
possession of the vast continent of America - a struggle which was
to last for seventy years; a struggle in which not only the white
people but the Indians also took part, some fighting for the British,
some for the French.

King William's War, 1690-1697 At this time Frontenac was Governor
of Canada.  He was one of the greatest nobles of France and lived
surrounded with state and splendour.  Proud and haughty and of a
fiery temper, with white men he quarreled often, but he knew better
than any other how to manage the Indians, and they feared him as
they feared no white ruler who came before or after him.  He would
not allow the chiefs to call him brother as other governors had
done.  They were his children; to them he was the Great Father.  Yet
if need be he would paint his face, dress himself in Indian clothes,
and, tomahawk in his hand, lead the war dance, yelling and leaping
with the best of them.

King Louis now gave Frontenac orders to seize New York so that the
French might have access to the Hudson River, and a port open all
the year round and not frozen up for months at a time like Quebec.

So Frontenac made ready his forces.  He gathered three armies and
sent them by different ways to attack the British.  But few of these
forces were regular soldiers.  Many of them were Indians, still more
were coureurs de bois, wild bush-rangers who dressed and lived more
like Indians than white men, and were as fearless, and lawless,
and learned in the secrets of the forest as the Indians.

These armies set out in the depth of winter.  French and Indian
alike were smeared with war-paint and decked with feathers.  Shod
with snow shoes they sped over the snow, dragging light sledges
behind them laden with food.  For twenty-two days they journeyed
over plains, through forest, across rivers, but at length one of
the armies reached the village of Schenectady, the very farthest
outpost of New York.

The people had been warned of their danger, but they paid no heed.
They did not believe that the danger was real.  So secure indeed did
they feel that the gates were left wide open, and on either side
for sentinels stood two snow men.

In all the village there was no sound, no light.  Every one was
sleeping peacefully.  Then suddenly through the stillness there rang
the awful Indian war whoop.

In terror the villagers leaped from their beds, but before they
could seize their weapons they were struck down.  Neither man, woman
nor child was spared, and before the sun was high Schenectady was
a smoking, blood-stained ruin.

The other parties which Frontenac had sent out also caused terrible
havoc.  They surprised and burned many villages and farms, slaughtering
and carrying prisoner the inhabitants.  Thus all New England was
filled with bloodshed and terror.

But these horrors instead of making the British give in made them
determined to attack Canada.  New York and the colonies of New
England joined together and decided to make an attack by land and
by sea.  The British determined to attack Canada

But what, with mismanagement, sickness, and bickerings among the
various colonies, the land attack came to nothing.  It was left for
the fleet to conquer Canada.

The little New England fleet was commanded by Sir William Phips,
a bluff, short-tempered sailor.  He sailed up the St.  Lawrence and
anchored a little below Quebec.

Then the watching Frenchmen saw a small boat put off, flying a white
flag.  As it neared the shore some canoes went out to meet it and
found that it was bringing a young British officer with a letter
for Count Frontenac.

The officer was allowed to land, but first his eyes were blindfolded.
Then as he stepped on shore a sailor seized each arm, and thus he
was led through the streets.

Quebec is built on a height, and the streets are steep and narrow,
sometimes being nothing more than flights of steps.  And now,
instead of being taken directly to the Governor, the young officer
was dragged up and down these steep and stony streets.  Now here,
now there, he was led, stumbling blindly over stones and steps, and
followed by a laughing, jeering crowd, who told him it was a game
of blind man's bluff.

At last, thoroughly bewildered and exhausted, he was led into the
castle, and the bandage was suddenly taken from his eyes.  Confused
and dazzled by the bright light he stood for a moment gazing stupidly
about him.

Before him, haughty and defiant, stood Frontenac surrounded by his
officers.  Their splendid uniforms glittered with gold and silver
lace, their wigs were curled and powdered, their hats were decked
with feathers, as if for a ball rather than for war.

For a moment the young Englishman stood abashed before them.  Then,
recovering himself, he handed his commander's letters to Frontenac.

The letter was written in English, but an interpreter read it
aloud, translating it into French.  In haughty language it demanded
the surrender of Quebec, in the name of William and Mary, within
an hour.

When the reading was finished the officer pulled his watch out of
his pocket, and held it towards Frontenac.

"I cannot see the time," said he.

"It is ten o'clock," replied the Englishman. "By eleven I must have
your answer."

Frontenac's brow grew dark with anger.  Hitherto he had held himself
in check, but now his wrath burst forth.

"By heaven," he cried, "I will not keep you waiting so long.  Tell
your General that I do not acknowledge King William.  The Prince
of Orange who calls himself so is a usurper.  I know of no king of
England save King James."

The Englishman was quite taken aback by Frontenac's vehemence.  He
felt he could not go back to his leader with such an answer.

"Will you give me your answer in writing?" he said.

"No," thundered Frontenac, "I will answer your general with the
mouths of my cannon only.  Let him do his best, and I will do mine."

And with this answer the Englishman was forced to be content.
Once more his eyes were blindfolded, and again he was jostled and
hustled through the streets until he reached his boat.

When Phips received Frontenac's proud answer he prepared to attack.
But he was no match for the fierce old lion of a Frenchman.  The
New Englanders were brave enough, but they had little discipline,
and, worse still, they had no leader worthy of the name.  They spent
shot and shell uselessly battering the solid rock upon which Quebec
is built.  Their aim was bad, and their guns so small that even when
the balls hit the mark they did little damage.

At length, having wasted most of their ammunition in a useless
cannonade, the British sailed away.  The men were dejected and gloomy
at their failure.  Many of their ships had been sorely disabled by
the French guns, and on the way home several were wrecked.  As the
others struggled homeward with their tale of disaster, New England
was filled with sadness and dismay.

The attack on Canada had been an utter failure.  Yet, had Phips but
known it, Quebec was almost in his grasp.  For although there were
men enough within the fortress there was little food.  And even
before he sailed away the pangs of hunger had made themselves felt.

For seven years more the war lingered on, but now it chiefly
consisted of border raids and skirmishes, and the New Englanders
formed no more designs of conquering Canada.  And at length in 1697,
with the Treaty of Ryswick, King William's War came to an end.

In 1701 James, the exiled King of Britain, died; and Louis of
France recognised his son James as the rightful King of Britain.
This made King William angry.  Louis also placed his grandson, the
Duke of Anjou, on the throne of Spain.  This made King William and
the British people still more angry.  For with a French King on the
throne of Spain they thought it very likely that France and Spain
might one day be joined together and become too powerful.  So King
William again declared war on France, but before the war began he
died.

Queen Mary's sister Anne now became Queen; she carried on the war
already declared.  This war brought fighting in America as well as
in Europe.  In America it is called Queen Anne's War, and in Europe
the War of the Spanish Succession.

Queen Anne's War, 1702-1713 This war was carried on in much the same
manner as the last.  There were Indian massacres, sudden sallies,
attacks by land and sea.  But this time the British were more
determined.  And although another attack on Quebec failed, just as
the attack made by Phips had failed, one on Nova Scotia succeeded.

In the South, too, the Spaniards were defeated at Charleston.  Taken
altogether the British had the best of the fighting.  And when at
length peace was made by the Treaty of Utrect in 1713 Nova Scotia,
Newfoundland, and the Hudson Bay Territory were given up to the
British.  Thus both in west and north the British enclosed the French
possessions.

__________





Chapter 47 - The Mississippi Bubble




Being thus encroached upon by the British the French became more
determined to shut them out from the south.  Already twelve years
after La Salle's death another attempt had been made to found
a town at the mouth of the Mississippi, and this time the attempt
was successful.

This time the expedition was led by Pierre Le Moyne, Sieur d'Iberville.
In 1698 with two ships he sailed out from France and, after some
trouble, found the mouth of the Mississippi.  He did not, however,
build his fort here, but on the coast of what is now the State of
Mississippi.  Then, leaving one of his officers and his brother in
command, he sailed home again to France.

While d'Iberville was away, his brother Bienville started on an
expedition to explore the Mississippi.  And he soon discovered that
the French had taken possession none too soon, for not far from
where New Orleans now stands, he fell in with a British ship.  On
board were a lot of French Huguenot families who had come to found
a settlement on the Mississippi.  Bienville talked to the captain,
who told him that this was one of three ships sent out from England
by a company formed of Huguenots and Englishmen who intended to
found a colony on the Mississippi.  They were not sure, however,
whether they were on the Mississippi or not.

Bienville at once assured them that they were not, but were instead
on a river which belonged to Louis of France, where already the
French had several settlements.  The British captain believed what
he was told and, much to the Frenchmen's delight, turned back.
Just at the spot where this took place the river makes a bed, and
because of this it was given the name of English Bend, by which
name it is known to this day.

D'Iberville only stayed long enough in France to gather more
colonists and returned at once to Louisiana, where he founded two
more towns along the coast.  But the colonists sent out by Louis
were of the lowest.  Many of them were little more than rogues and
vagabonds.  The mere off-scourings of the towns, they were idle and
extravagant, and the colony did not prosper.

Instead of putting gold into Louis' pockets, as he had hoped, he
had constantly to pour it out to maintain the colony.  Of that Louis
soon grew tired.  Besides this he wanted all the money he could
gather to carry on the war (Queen Anne's War), which was still
raging.  So, in 1712, he handed Louisiana over to a wealthy merchant
named Crozat to make what he could out of it.

Such great power was given to this merchant that he was little less
than a king.  He had every monopoly.  Nobody in the colony could buy
or sell the smallest thing without his permission, and every one
had to work for him and not for themselves.  But the people were
by no means willing workers.  They were, said one of their priests,
"nearly all drunkards, gamblers, blasphemers and foes of everything
that was good," and when they found that they are expected to work
merely to put money into the proprietor's pocket they would not
work at all.

So very soon Crozat found he could make nothing out of the colony.
And after some vain efforts to make it pay he gave up his charter,
and Louisiana once more became a royal possession.

Meanwhile France itself was in sore straits for money.  Louis XIV,
that magnificent and extravagant monarch, had died and left his
country beggared and in want.  The Duke of Orleans now ruled as
Regent for little Louis XV.  He was at his wit's end to know where
to find money, when a clever Scots adventurer names John Law came
to him with a new and splendid idea. this was to use paper money
instead of gold and silver.  The Regent was greatly taken with the
idea, and he gave Law leave to issue the paper money.  It was quite
a good idea had it been kept within bounds.  But it was not kept
within bounds.  All France went mad with eagerness to get some of
the paper money which was, they thought, going to make them rich
forever.

Besides issuing paper money, Law started what was known as the
Mississippi Scheme or Company of the Indies in 1717.  Louisiana,
which had been received back from Crozat, was handed over to John
Law, who undertook to settle the country, and work the gold and
silver mines which were supposed to be there.

Law began at once to fill all France with stories of Louisiana and
its delights.  Gold and silver mines, he said, had been discovered
there which were so rich that they could never be used up.  Lumps of
gold lay about everywhere, and one might have them for the picking
up.  As for silver, it was so common that it had little value except
to be used for paving the streets.  In proof of these stories lumps
of gold said to have come from Louisiana were shown in the shops
of Paris.

As to the climate, it was the most perfect on earth.  It was never
too hot, and never too cold, but always warm and sunny.  The soil
was so fertile that one had but to scratch it to produce the finest
crops.  Delicious fruits grew everywhere, and might be gathered all
the year round.  The meadows were made beautiful, and the air scented,
with the loveliest of flowers.  In fact Louisiana was painted as an
earthly paradise, where nothing the heart could desire was lacking.

People believed these stories.  And, believing them, it was not
wonderful that they desired to possess for themselves some of these
delights.  So, rich and poor, high and low, rushed to buy shares in
the Company.  The street in Paris where the offices of the Company
were was choked from end to end with a struggling crowd.  The rich
brought their hundreds, the poor their scanty savings.  Great lords
and ladies sold their lands and houses in order to have money to
buy more shares.  The poor went ragged and hungry in order to scrape
together a few pence.  Peers and merchants, soldiers, priests, fine
ladies, servants, statesmen, labourers, all jostled together, and
fought to buy the magic paper which would make them rich and happy
beyond belief.  Fortunes were made and lost in a day.  Some who had
been rich found themselves penniless; others who had always lived
in poverty found themselves suddenly rolling in wealth which they
did not know how to use.  And John Law was the wizard whose magic
wand had created all these riches.  He was flattered and courted
by every one.  The greatest princes in the land came to beg favours
of him.  They came to him to beg, and he treated them haughtily as
beggars, and bade them wait.

Day by day, and month by month, the madness increased, and the
gigantic bubble grew larger and larger.  Bienville, meanwhile, who
had been deprived of his governorship, was once more made Governor
of Louisiana.  With a company of settlers, he returned again to the
colony in 1718, and he at once set about building a capital, which,
in honour of the Regent, he called New Orleans.  The place he chose
for a capital was covered with forest.  So before any building could
be done fifty men were set to fell the trees and clear a space.
And then the first foundations of the new great city of New Orleans
were laid.

But still the colony did not prosper.  For the colonists were for
the most part rogues and vagabonds, sent there by force, and kept
there equally by force.  They looked upon Louisiana as a prison,
and tried constantly to escape from it.

Meanwhile no ships laden with gold and gems reached France, for no
gold mines had ever been discovered.  Then people began to grow tired
of waiting.  Some of them began to suspect that all the stories of
the splendours of Louisiana were not true, and they tried to sell
their paper money and paper shares, and get back the gold which
they had given for them.  Soon every one wanted to sell, and no one
wanted to buy.  The value of the paper money fell and fell, until
it was worth less than nothing.  People who had thought themselves
millionaires found themselves beggars.  Law, who had been flattered
and courted, was now hated and cursed.  And in terror of his life
he fled from France in 1790 to die miserably in Italy a few years
later.

As to Louisiana, a new set of stories were told of it.  Now it was
no longer described as a sort of earthly paradise, but as a place
of horror and misery.  It was a land of noisome marsh and gloomy
forest, where prowled every imaginable evil beast.  At certain times
of the year the river flooded the whole land, so that the people
were obliged to take refuge in the trees.  There they lived more
like monkeys than men, springing from tree to tree in search of
food.  The sun was so hot that it could strike a man dead as if with
a pistol.  This was called sunstroke.  Luscious fruits indeed grew
around, but they were all poisonous and those who ate of them died
in agonies.  In fact Louisiana was now pictured as a place to be
shunned, as a place of punishment. "Be good or I will send you to
the Mississippi" was a threat terrible enough to make the naughtiest
child obedient.

The Mississippi bubble burst, - but still France clung to Louisiana.
Once again it became a royal province, and at length after long
years of struggle it began to prosper.  The French had thus two
great centres of power in America, one at Quebec amid the pine
trees and snows of the North, and one at New Orleans amid the palm
trees and sunshine of the South.  And between the two fort after
fort was built, until gradually north and south were united.  Thus
La Salle's dream came true.

It was during the time of peace after the end of Queen Anne's War
that the French had thus strengthened their hold on America and
joined Canada and Louisiana.  They had also built a strong fortress
on the Island of Cape Breton which commanded the mouth of the St.
Lawrence.  This fortress was called Louisburg in honour of King
Louis, and it was the strongest and best fortified in the whole of
New France.  The walls were solid and high, and bristled with more
than a hundred cannon.  The moat was both wide and deep.  Indeed the
French believe that this fort was so strong that no power on earth
could take it.

But the days of peace sped fast.  Soon once more Europe was ablaze
with war, France and Britain again taking opposite sides.  In Europe
this war is called the War of the Austrian Succession, because it
was brought on by a quarrel among the nations of Europe as to who
should succeed to the throne of Austria.  In America it is called
King George's War, as King George II was King of Britain at the
time.

Like the other wars before it, it was fought in America as well as
in Europe.  The chief event in America was the capture of Louisburg
in 1745.  That redoubtable fortress which it was thought would hold
off any attack, yielded after six weeks to an army chiefly composed
of New England farmers and fishermen, and led by Maine merchant
who had no knowledge of war.

When the news that Louisburg was taken reached New England the
people rejoiced.  Bells were rung, cannons were fired and bonfires
blazed in all the chief towns.  In England itself the news was received
with surprise and delight, and Pepperell, the merchant-soldier,
was made a baronet and could henceforth call himself Sir William
Pepperell.

But when the French heard that they had lost their splendid American
fortress they were filled with dismay.  One after another, three
expeditions were sent to recapture it, but one after another they
miscarried.  And when at length, in 1748, peace was agreed upon,
Louisburg was still in the hands of the New Englanders.  The peace
which was now signed is called the Peace of Aix-la-Chapelle.  By it,
it was agreed that each side should give back all its conquests,
so that after all the terrible loss and bloodshed neither side was
one whit the better.

The New Englanders had been greatly delighted at their conquest
of Louisburg.  The French, on the other hand, were greatly grieved,
and when terms of peace were discussed Louis XV insisted that
Louisburg should be restored. "That cannot be," said King George.
"It is not mine to give, for it was taken by the people of Boston."

The French, however, were firm.  So King George gave way, and Louisburg
was restored to France, and Madras in India, which the French had
taken, was in exchange restored to Britain.  When the New Englanders
heard of it, they were very angry.  Madras was nothing to them; it
was but a "petty factory" on the other side of the globe; while
Louisburg was at their very doors, and of vast importance to their
security.  They had to obey and give it back.  But they did so with
bitterness in their hearts against a King who cared so little for
their welfare.

__________





Chapter 48 - How a Terrible Disaster Befell the British Army




We have now seen something of the great struggle between French
and British for the continent of America.  War after war broke out,
peace after peace was signed.  But each peace was no more than a
truce, and even when the noise of cannon ceased there was nearly
always war with the Redman, for he took sides and fought for French
or British.  And as years went past the struggle grew ever more and
more bitter.  If the French had their way, the British would have
been hemmed in between the Alleghenies and the sea.  If the British
had had their way the French would have been confined to a little
strip of land north of the St.  Lawrence.  It became plain at length
to every one that in all the wide continent there was no room for
both.  One must go.  But which?

The Peace at Aix-la-Chapelle was not a year old before the last,
great struggle began.  Both French and British had now cast their
eyes on the valley of the Ohio, and the spot where Pittsburgh now
stands became known as the Gateway of the West.  The British determined
to possess that gateway, but the French were just as determined to
prevent them ever getting through it.  So the French began to build
a line of forts from Lake Erie southward to the gate of the west.
Now, Virginia claimed all this land, and when two French forts had
been built the Governor of Virginia began to be both alarmed and
angry.  He decided, therefore, to send a messenger to the French
to tell them that they were on British ground, and bid them to be
gone.

It was not an easy task, and one which had to be done with courtesy
and firmness.  Therefore Dinwiddie resolved to send a "person of
distinction." So as his messenger he chose a young man named George
Washington.  He was a straightforward, tall young man, well used to
a woodland life, but withal a gentleman, the descendant of one of
the old Royalist families who had come to Virginia in the time of
Cromwell, and just the very man for the Governor's purpose.

It was a long and toilsome journey through pathless forest, over
hills, deep snows and frozen rivers, a journey which none but one
skilled in forest lore could endure.

But at length after weeks of weary marching Washington arrived at Fort
le Boeuf.  The Frenchmen greeted him courteously, and entertained
him in the most friendly fashion during the three days which
the commander took to make up his answer.  The answer was not very
satisfactory.  The commander promised to send Dinwiddie's letter
to the Governor of Canada. "But meanwhile," he added, "my men and
I will stay where we are.  I have been commanded to take possession
of the country, and I mean to do it to the best of my ability."

With this answer Washington set out again, and after many adventures
and dangers arrived safely once more at Williamsburg.

In the spring the Frenchmen marched south to the Gateway of the
West.  Here they found a party of British, who had begun to build a
fort.  The French, who were in far greater numbers, surrounded them
and bade them surrender.  This the British did, being utterly unable
to defend themselves.  The French then seized the fort, leveled
it to the ground, and began to build one of their own, which they
called Fort Duquesne.

Upon this, Dinwiddie resolved to dislodge the French, and he sent
a small force and when its leader died he took command.  But he
was not able to dislodge the French.  So after some fighting he was
obliged to make terms with the enemy and march home discomfited.

Up to this time the war was purely an American one.  France and
Britain were at peace, and neither country sent soldiers to help
their colonies.  It was the settlers, the farmers, fishermen and
fur traders of New England and New France who fought each other.

And in this the French had one great advantage over the British.
The French were united, the British were not.  New France was like
one great colony in which every man was ready to answer the call
to battle.

The British were divided into thirteen colonies.  Each one of the
thirteen colonies was jealous of all the others; each was selfishly
concerned with its own welfare and quite careless of the welfare of
the others.  But already the feelings of patriotism had been born.
Among the many who cared nothing for union there were a few who
did.  There were some who were neither Virginians nor New Englanders,
neither Georgians nor Carolinians, but Americans.  These now felt
that if they were not to become the vassals of France they must
stand shoulder to shoulder.

A Congress of all the Northern Colonies was now called at Albany
to discuss some means of defense.  And at this Congress Benjamin
Franklin proposed a plan of union.  But the colonies would have nothing
to say to it.  Some took no notice of it at all, others treated it
with scorn, or said it put too much power into the hands of the
King.  As to the King, when he heard of it he rejected it also, for,
said he, it gave too much power to the colonies.  So for the time
being nothing came of it.  Meanwhile the Governors of the various
colonies wrote home to England, and, seeing how serious the matter
was becoming, the British Government sent out two regiments of
soldiers to help the colonies.  They were about a thousand men in
all, and were under the leadership of Major-General Edward Braddock.

As so as the French heard this they, too, sent soldiers to Canada.
It was just like a game of "Catch who catch can." For as soon as
the British knew that French troops were sailing to America they
sent a squadron to stop them.  But the French had got a start, and
most of them got away.  The British ships, however, overtook some
which had lagged behind the others.

