foamed beneath. Down sank the horse and his riders till the Red Water
closed over their heads, then they rose again and heard the shout of
wonder of their enemies, who by now had almost reached the bank. With
a yell of rage Black Piet rode his horse at the river, for to do him
justice he was a brave man, but do what he might it would not face it,
so with the others he sat still and watched.

Now the _schimmel_ struck out bravely, heading for the other bank, but
in the fierce current it was not possible that any horse should reach it
swimming in a straight line, for the weight of the stream was too great.
Sihamba had noted, however, that from the further shore, but two
or three hundred paces lower down the river, a little point of land
projected into it, and this the horse had seen also, or perhaps she told
him of it, at least for that point he swam steadily. In five minutes
they were in the centre of the torrent, and here it ran with a roar
and mighty force so that its waves began to break over the _schimmel's_
head, and they feared that he would drown. So much did Sihamba fear it,
indeed, that she slipped from his back, and leaving Suzanne to cling
to the saddle, caught hold of his mane, floating alongside of him
and protected by his neck from the whirl of the water. Lying thus she
continued to call to the horse and to urge him forward, and ever he
answered to her words, so that although twice he nearly sank, in the
end he set his feet upon a sandbank and, having rested there a while,
plunged forward, half wading and half swimming, to the projecting point
of land, up which he scrambled, still carrying Suzanne and dragging
Sihamba with him, until once more they found themselves safe upon the
solid earth, where he stood shaking himself and snorting.

Suzanne slipped from the saddle and lay flat upon the ground, looking at
the awful water they had passed, and by her lay Sihamba. Presently the
little doctoress spoke.

"It is well to have lived," she said, "if only to have dared that deed,
for no others have ever made the passage across the Red Water in flood,
two of them on one tired horse," and she caught in her arms the muzzle
of the _schimmel_ that hung above her, pressing it to her breast as
though it had been a child, whereon the brute whinnied faintly, knowing
well that she was thanking him for his toil and courage.

"I pray God that I may never be called upon to make it again," answered
Suzanne, staggering to her feet, the water running from her dripping
dress as she turned to look across the river.

Now, when Van Vooren's horse refused to face the stream, he had ridden
up and down shouting like a madman; once even he lifted his gun and
pointed it, then let it fall again, remembering that he could not make
sure of hitting the horse, and that if he did so Suzanne must certainly
be drowned. When they were quite beyond his reach in the middle of the
stream, he stood still and watched until he saw them come to the further
shore in safety. Then he called his men about him and consulted with
them, and the end of it was that they rode off in a body up the bank of
the river.

"They go to seek a ford," said Suzanne.

"Yes, Swallow, but now we shall have the start of them. Come, let us
mount."

So they climbed upon the back of the _schimmel_, and once more he went
on with them, not fast, for now he could not even canter, but ambling
or walking, according to the nature of the ground, at a rate perhaps of
seven miles the hour. Soon they had left the river and were toiling
up the slopes of the peak, until presently they struck a well-worn
footpath.

"I think that this must lead to the town of Sigwe," said Sihamba.

"I pray that it does," answered Suzanne, "and that it is not far, for I
feel as though Death were near to me."

"Keep a great heart," said Sihamba, "for we have met Death face to face
and conquered him."

So still they toiled on till at length the path took a turn, and there,
in a fold of the hill, they beheld the great kraal of Sigwe, a very
large Kaffir town. Before the kraal was a wide open space, and on that
space armed men were assembled, several full regiments of them. In front
of this impi was gathered a company of chiefs.

"Now we have no choice," said Sihamba, and turned the _schimmel_ towards
them, while all that army stared at this strange sight of two women,
one tall and fair, one black and little, riding towards them mounted
together upon a great blood horse which was so weary that he could
scarcely set one foot before the other.

When they reached the captains Sihamba slipped to the ground, but
Suzanne remained seated upon the _schimmel_.

"Who are you?" asked a broad man in a leopard-skin cloak, of Sihamba;
but although she was small and dishevelled, her hair and garments being
wet with water, he did not laugh at her, for he saw that this stranger
had the air of one who is of the blood of chiefs.

"I am Sihamba Ngenyanga, the doctoress, of whom you may have heard," she
answered; and some of the people said, "We have heard of her; she is a
great doctoress."

"To what people do you belong, Sihamba?" asked the captain again.

"I belong to the people of Zwide, whom Chaka drove from Zululand, and
by birth I am a chieftainess of the Umpondwana, who live in the mountain
Umpondwana, and who were the Children of Zwide, but are now the Children
of Chaka."

"Why then do you wander so far from home, Sihamba?"

"For this reason. When Zwide and his people, the Endwandwe, were driven
back, my people, the Umpondwana, who were subject to Zwide, made peace
with Chaka against my will. Therefore, because I would not live as a
Zulu dog, I left them."

"Although your body is small you have a large heart," said the captain,
and one of his people cried out: "The story of Sihamba is true, for
when you sent me as messenger to the Endwandwe, I heard it--it is a tale
there."

Then the captain asked, "And who is the beautiful white woman who sits
upon the great horse?"

"She is my mother and my sister and my mistress, whom I serve till
death, for she saved me from death, and her name is Swallow."

Now at this word _Swallow_, most of those present started, and some
uttered exclamations of wonder, especially a little band of people, men
and women, who stood to the left, and who from their dress and other
tokens it was easy to see were witch-doctors and diviners. Sihamba noted
the movements and words of wonder, but pretending to see nothing she
went on:

"The lady Swallow and I have fled hither from far, hoping to find the
chief Sigwe, for we need his counsel and protection, but he is away,
making war to the north, is it not so?"

"Nay," answered the captain. "I am the chief Sigwe, and I have not yet
begun my war."

"I am glad," said Sihamba. "Chief, listen to my tale and suffer us to
creep into the shadow of your strength----" and in a few words she told
them the story of the capture of Suzanne by Swart Piet and of their
flight from him. Now when she spoke of Van Vooren, or of Bull-Head
rather, for she called him by his native name, she saw that Sigwe and
the captains looked at each other, and when she told how they had swum
the Red Water in flood, the two of them upon one horse, she was sure
that they did not believe her, for such a deed they thought to be
impossible. But still Sihamba went on and ended--"Chief, we seek this
from you; protection from Bull-Head, who doubtless will be here ere
long, and an escort of spears to lead us down the coast to the home
of the Swallow, a hundred miles away, where they and you will be well
rewarded for the service. Answer us quick, chief, I pray you, for our
need is great and we are weary."



CHAPTER XX

THE OMEN OF THE WHITE SWALLOW

Now Sigwe and two of his captains walked to where the diviners stood and
took counsel with them, speaking low and earnestly. Then he returned and
said:

"Sihamba, Walker-by-Moonlight, and you, Lady Swallow, listen to me. A
wonderful thing has come to pass in the kraal of Sigwe this day, such
a thing as our fathers have not known. You see that my host is gathered
yonder: well, to-morrow they start to make war upon these very Endwandwe
of whom you have spoken because of a deadly insult which they have put
upon me and my house. Therefore, according to custom, this morning the
soldiers were assembled at dawn to be doctored and that the diviners
might search out the omens of the war. So the diviners searched, and she
who was chosen among them ate the medicine and sank into the witch sleep
here before us all. Yes, this one," and he pointed to a tall woman with
dreamy eyes who was bedizened with bones and snakeskins.

"Now in her sleep she spoke, and we hung upon her words, for we knew
that they would be the words of omen. Sihamba, these were the words, as
all can testify:

"'Thus say the spirits of your fathers, and thus speaks the Snake of
your tribe. Unless a _White Swallow_ guide your footsteps in the war
with the Men of the Mountains you shall perish and your impis shall be
scattered, but if a _White Swallow_ flies before your spears than but
little of your blood shall be shed, and you shall return with honour and
with one whom you seek. Only the Swallow shall not return with you, for
if she set her face southward, then, Sigwe, woe to you and your armies.'

"Sihamba, these were the words of the dreamer. Scarcely was she awake
again, while we wondered at their strangeness, and asked her questions
of their meaning, which she could not answer, for here the wisdom of
the wisest was at fault, lo! you rode over the hill, and with you a
beautiful white woman whose name you say is Swallow. Yes, this is the
White Swallow who shall fly in front of my regiments, bringing me honour
and good fortune in the war, and therefore, Sihamba, your prayer is
granted, though not all of it, for you shall go northward and not
southward, and among your own people I will leave you and the Swallow
with you, and for her sake I will spare your people, the people of
Umpondwana, although they are subject to my foe, the Endwandwe, and of
the same blood. Moreover, while you are among us all honour shall be
done to you and the Swallow, and of the cattle we capture a tenth part
shall be the Swallow's. Still, I tell you this, that had it not been for
the omen of the diviner I would have refused your prayer and delivered
you and the Swallow over to Bull-Head, for with him I have sworn
friendship long ago. But now the face of things is changed, and should
he come with a hundred men armed with guns yet I will protect you from
him, and the Swallow also; yes, though oaths must be broken to do it."

When they heard this saying, Suzanne and Sihamba looked at each other in
dismay.

"Alas!" said Suzanne, "it seems that we do but change one prison for
another, for now we must be borne away to the far north to do battle
with this Kaffir chief, and there be left among your people, so that
none will know what has become of us, and the heart of Ralph will break
with doubt and sorrow; yes, and those of my parents also."

"It is bad," answered Sihamba, "but had not yonder diviner dreamed that
dream of a swallow, it would have been worse. Better is it to travel in
all honour with the impis of Sigwe than to be dragged back by Bull-Head
to his secret kraal--I to be done to death there and you to the choice
of which you know. For the rest we must take our chance and escape when
the time comes, and meanwhile we will send a message to the stead."

Now Suzanne heard her, and sat upon the horse thinking, for her trouble
was sore; still, she could see no way out of the net which had meshed
her. As she thought, a man who was herding cattle on the mountains
ran up to the chief and saluted him, saying that five men, one of them
white, rode towards his kraal. When Suzanne heard this she hesitated no
more, but cried out to the chief Sigwe, speaking in the Kaffir tongue,
which she knew well:

"Chief Sigwe, swear to me that you will not suffer Bull-Head so much as
to touch me or my sister Sihamba, and that while we dwell with you you
will treat us with all honour, and I, who am named Swallow, yes, I,
the White Swallow of the diviner's dream, will lead your armies to the
northern land, bringing you the good fortune which is mine to give to
others, though myself I know it not."

"I swear by the spirits of my fathers, lady," answered Sigwe, "and these
my counsellors and headmen swear it also."

"Yes," echoed the counsellors, "we swear it, all of it, and while one
of us is left alive the oath shall be fulfilled, O White Bird of good
omen."

Then Sigwe gave an order, and at his bidding five hundred soldiers,
the half of a regiment, ran up and formed a circle about Sihamba and
Suzanne, who still sat upon the _schimmel_, white faced and wearied, her
hair hanging down her back. Scarcely was the circle made when from
round the shoulder of the hill appeared Swart Piet and with him his four
after-riders.

Seeing all the great array, he halted for a moment astonished, then
catching sight of Suzanne set up above the heads of the ring of
soldiers, he rode straight to Sigwe, who, with his counsellors and
guards, was standing outside the circle.

"Chief Sigwe," he said, "a wife of mine with her servant has escaped
from me, and as I suspected taken refuge in your kraal, for I see her
sitting yonder surrounded by your soldiers. Now, in the name of our
friendship, I pray you hand them over to me that I may lead them back to
their duty."

"I give you greeting, Bull-Head," answered Sigwe courteously, "and I
thank you for your visit to my town; presently an ox shall be sent for
you to eat. As for this matter of the white lady and her companion it is
one that we can inquire into at leisure. I hear that she is the daughter
of the big Boer whom the natives of the coast name Thick-Arm; also that
you murdered the lady's husband and carried her off by force to be your
wife instead of his. Now here, as you know, I am chief paramount, for
having of our blood in your veins, you understand our customs, and,
therefore, I must see justice done, especially as I do not wish to bring
a quarrel with the white people upon our heads. So off-saddle a while,
and to-morrow before I start upon a certain journey, I will summon my
counsellors and we will try the case."

Now by this time Swart Piet, who, as Sigwe had said, understood the
customs of the Kaffirs, knew very well that the chief was making
excuses, and would not surrender Suzanne to him. For a while he kept
himself calm, but when this knowledge came home to his mind his
reason left him, and he grew more than commonly mad with rage and
disappointment, for after all his crimes and toil Suzanne was now as far
from him as ever. Springing from his horse, but still keeping the gun in
his hand, he ran up to the triple ring of soldiers, pausing only at the
hedge of assegais which shone about it.

"Open," he said, "open, you red dogs!" but not a spear moved. Twice he
ran round the circle, then he stopped and cried, "Sihamba. Is Sihamba
here?"

"Surely, Bull-Head," answered the little woman, walking forward from
where she stood behind the _schimmel_. "Where else should I be? I
pray you, soldiers, draw a little way but not far apart, that yonder
half-breed may satisfy his eyes with the sight of me. So, a little
way, but not far, for I who know him like him best at a distance. Now,
Bull-Head," she went on, "what is it that you wish to talk about--the
Englishman, Ralph Kenzie, the husband of Swallow yonder? You thought you
killed him. Well, it was not so; I lifted him living from the water,
and I, who am a doctoress, tell you that his wound is of no account,
and that soon he will be strong again and seeking a word with you,
Half-breed. No, not of him? Then perhaps it is of your hidden krantz and
the new hut you built in it. Bah! I knew its secret long ago and--that
hut has too wide a smoke-hole. Go back and ask him who guarded it if
this is not true. What! Not of that either? Then would you speak of the
ride which we have taken? Ah! man, I thought at least that you were no
coward, and yet even when you had us in your hand, you did not dare to
face the Red Water which two women swam on one tired horse. Look at
him, soldiers, look at the brave cross-bred chief who dared not swim his
horse across one little stream."

Now while the soldiers laughed Swart Piet stamped upon the ground,
foaming with rage, for Sihamba's bitter words stuck in him like barbed
assegais.

"Snake's wife, witch!" he screamed, "I will catch you yet, and then you
shall learn how slowly a woman may die, yes, and her also, and she shall
learn other things, for if that husband of hers is not dead I will
kill him before her eyes. I tell you I will follow you both through
all Africa and across the sea if needful; yes, whenever you lie down to
sleep, you may be sure that Piet van Vooren is not far from you."

"Do you say so?" mocked Sihamba. "Well, now I think of it you have no
luck face to face with me, Half-breed, and were I you, I should look the
other way when you saw me coming, for I who have the Sight tell you that
when you behold the Walker-by-Moonlight for the last time, you will very
soon become a walker in the darkness for ever. Bah!" she went on, her
clear voice rising to a cry. "Bastard, dog, thief, murderer that you
are! I, Sihamba, who have met and beaten you in every pool of the
stream, will beat you for the last time where the stream falls into the
sea. Be not deceived, yonder Swallow never shall be yours; for many and
many a year after you are dead, your rival shall fold her close, and
when men name your name they shall spit upon the ground. Nothing,
nothing shall be yours, but shame and empty longing and black death, and
after it the woe of the wicked. Get you back to your secret krantz and
your Kaffir wives, Half-breed, and tell them the tale of your ride, and
of how you did not dare to face the foam of the Red Water."

Now Van Vooren went mad indeed; so mad that, forgetting he was not on
the lonely veldt, he lifted his gun and fired straight at Sihamba. But
her eye was quick, and seeing the muzzle rise, she threw herself upon
the ground, so that the ball passed over her.

"Why, Half-breed, have you even forgotten how to shoot?" she called,
springing to her feet again and mocking him. Then the voice of Sigwe
broke in, for his anger was deep.

"One thing you have certainly forgotten, Bull-Head," he said, "that
these two are my guests and wrapped in my kaross, and therefore from
this hour we are enemies. Ho! men," he cried to his guard, "I spare
Bull-Head's life because once we were friends, therefore do not take his
life, but beat him and those with him out of my town with the shafts of
your assegais, and if ever he sets foot within it again then use their
blades upon him."

At their chief's bidding the soldiers of the guard sprang forward,
and, falling upon Van Vooren and those with him, they flogged them with
sticks and the shafts of their spears until from head to foot they were
nothing but blood and bruises, and thus they drove them out of the town
of Sigwe back to the ford of the Red River.

When they were gone, Suzanne, who through it all had sat upon the horse
watching in silence, now urged him forward to where Sigwe stood, and
said:

"Chief, I thank you for that deed, and now, I pray you, give us food
and a hut to rest in, for we are wet and hungry and worn out with long
travel."

So the guest masters led them into the fence of the town and gave them
the guest hut, the largest in the kraal, and the best food that they
had--milk and meal and beef and eggs, as much as they would of it. The
_schimmel_ also was fastened to a post in the little courtyard of the
