by loud cries, took possession of the masses of people, who stood round
the scribes in the palace court.

Many men and women were streaming together towards one spot, and even the
most impassive of the Thebans present turned their attention to an
incident so unusual in this place.

A detachment of constabulary made a way through the crushing and yelling
mob, and another division of Lybian police led a prisoner towards a side
gate of the court.  Before they could reach it, a messenger came up with
them, from the Regent, who desired to be informed as to what happened.

The head of the officers of public safety followed him, and with eager
excitement informed Ani, who was waiting for him, that a tiny man, the
dwarf of the Lady Katuti, had for several hours been going about in the
court, and endeavoring to poison the minds of the citizens with seditious
speeches.

Ani ordered that the misguided man should be thrown into the dungeon; but
so soon as the chief officer had left him, he commanded his secretary to
have the dwarf brought into his presence before sundown.

While he was giving this order an excitement of another kind seized the
assembled multitude.

As the sea parted and stood on the right hand and on the left of the
Hebrews, so that no wave wetted the foot of the pursued fugitives, so the
crowd of people of their own free will, but as if in reverent submission
to some high command, parted and formed a broad way, through which walked
the high-priest of the House of Seti, as, full robed and accompanied by
some of the "holy fathers," he now entered the court.

The Regent went to meet him, bowed before him, and then withdrew to the
back of the hall with him alone.  It is nevertheless incredible," said
Ameni, "that our serfs are to follow the militia!"

"Rameses requires soldiers--to conquer," replied the Regent.

"And we bread--to live," exclaimed the priest.

"Nevertheless I am commanded, at once, before the seed-time, to levy the
temple-serfs.  I regret the order, but the king is the will, and I am
only the hand."

"The hand, which he makes use of to sequester ancient rights, and to open
a way to the desert over the fruitful land."

     ["With good management," said the first Napoleon, "the Nile
     encroaches upon the desert, with bad management the desert
     encroaches upon the Nile."]

"Your acres will not long remain unprovided for.  Rameses will win new
victories with the increased army, and the help of the Gods."

"The Gods! whom he insults!"

"After the conclusion of peace he will reconcile the Gods by doubly rich
gifts.  He hopes confidently for an early end to the war, and writes to
me that after the next battle he wins he intends to offer terms to the
Cheta.  A plan of the king's is also spoken of--to marry again, and,
indeed, the daughter of the Cheta King Chetasar."

Up to this moment the Regent had kept his eyes cast down.  Now he raised
them, smiling, as if he would fain enjoy Ameni's satisfaction, and asked:

"What dost thou say to this project?"

"I say," returned Ameni, and his voice, usually so stern, took a tone of
amusement, "I say that Rameses seems to think that the blood of thy
cousin and of his mother, which gives him his right to the throne, is
incapable of pollution."

"It is the blood of the Sun-god!"

"Which runs but half pure in his veins, but wholly pure in thine."

The Regent made a deprecatory gesture, and said softly, with a smile
which resembled that of a dead man:

"We are not alone."

No one is here," said Ameni, "who can hear us; and what I say is known to
every child."

"But if it came to the king's ears--" whispered Ani, "he--"

"He would perceive how unwise it is to derogate from the ancient rights
of those on whom it is incumbent to prove the purity of blood of the
sovereign of this land.  However, Rameses sits on the throne; may life
bloom for him, with health and strength!"--[A formula which even in
private letters constantly follows the name of the Pharaoh.]

The Regent bowed, and then asked:

"Do you propose to obey the demand of the Pharaoh without delay?"

"He is the king.  Our council, which will meet in a few days, can only
determine how, and not whether we shall fulfil his command."

"You will retard the departure of the serfs, and Rameses requires them at
once.  The bloody labor of the war demands new tools."

"And the peace will perhaps demand a new master, who understands how to
employ the sons of the land to its greatest advantage--a genuine son of
Ra."

The Regent stood opposite the high-priest, motionless as an image cast in
bronze, and remained silent; but Ameni lowered his staff before him as
before a god, and then went into the fore part of the hall.

When Ani followed him, a soft smile played as usual upon his countenance,
and full of dignity he took his seat on the throne.

"Art thou at an end of thy communications?"  he asked the high-priest.

"It remains for me to inform you all," replied Ameni with a louder voice,
to be heard by all the assembled dignitaries, "that the princess Bent-
Anat yesterday morning committed a heavy sin, and that in all the temples
in the land the Gods shall be entreated with offerings to take her
uncleanness from her."

Again a shadow passed over the smile on the Regent's countenance.  He
looked meditatively on the ground, and then said:

"To-morrow I will visit the House of Seti; till then I beg that this
affair may be left to rest."

Ameni bowed, and the Regent left the hall to withdraw to a wing of the
king's palace, in which he dwelt.

On his writing-table lay sealed papers.  He knew that they contained
important news for him; but he loved to do violence to his curiosity, to
test his resolution, and like an epicure to reserve the best dish till
the last.

He now glanced first at some unimportant letters.  A dumb negro, who
squatted at his feet, burned the papyrus rolls which his master gave him
in a brazier.  A secretary made notes of the short facts which Ani called
out to him, and the ground work was laid of the answers to the different
letters.

At a sign from his master this functionary quitted the room, and Ani then
slowly opened a letter from the king, whose address: "To my brother
Ani," showed that it contained, not public, but private information.

On these lines, as he well knew, hung his future life, and the road it
should follow.

With a smile, that was meant to conceal even from himself his deep inward
agitation, he broke the wax which sealed the short manuscript in the
royal hand.

"What relates to Egypt, and my concern for my country, and the happy
issue of the war," wrote the Pharaoh, "I have written to you by the hand
of my secretary; but these words are for the brother, who desires to be
my son, and I write to him myself.  The lordly essence of the Divinity
which dwells in me, readily brings a quick 'Yes' or 'No' to my lips, and
it decides for the best.  Now you demand my daughter Bent-Anat to wife,
and I should not be Rameses if I did not freely confess that before I had
read the last words of your letter, a vehement 'No' rushed to my lips.
I caused the stars to be consulted, and the entrails of the victims to be
examined, and they were adverse to your request; and yet I could not
refuse you, for you are dear to me, and your blood is royal as my own.
Even more royal, an old friend said, and warned me against your ambition
and your exaltation.  Then my heart changed, for I were not Seti's son
if I allow myself to injure a friend through idle apprehensions; and he
who stands so high that men fear that he may try to rise above Rameses,
seems to me to be worthy of Bent-Anat.  Woo her, and, should she consent
freely, the marriage may be celebrated on the day when I return home.
You are young enough to make a wife happy, and your mature wisdom will
guard my child from misfortune.  Bent-Anat shall know that her father,
and king, encourages your suit; but pray too to the Hathors, that they
may influence Bent-Anat's heart in your favor, for to her decision we
must both submit."

The Regent had changed color several times while reading this letter.
Now he laid it on the table with a shrug of his shoulders, stood up,
clasped his hand behind him, and, with his eyes cast meditatively on the
floor, leaned against one of the pillars which supported the beams of the
roof.

The longer he thought, the less amiable his expression became.  "A pill
sweetened with honey,

     [Two recipes for pills are found in the papyri, one with honey for
     women, and one without for men.]

such as they give to women," he muttered to himself.  Then he went back
to the table, read the king's letter through once more, and said: "One
may learn from it how to deny by granting, and at the same time not to
forget to give it a brilliant show of magnanimity.  Rameses knows his
daughter.  She is a girl like any other, and will take good care not to
choose a man twice as old as herself, and who might be her father.
Rameses will 'submit'--I am to I submit!'   And to what? to the judgment
and the choice of a wilful child!"

With these words he threw the letter so vehemently on to the table, that
it slipped off on to the floor.

The mute slave picked it up, and laid it carefully on the table again,
while his master threw a ball into a silver bason.

Several attendants rushed into the room, and Ani ordered them to bring to
him the captive dwarf of the Lady Katuti.  His soul rose in indignation
against the king, who in his remote camp-tent could fancy he had made him
happy by a proof of his highest favor.  When we are plotting against a
man we are inclined to regard him as an enemy, and if he offers us a rose
we believe it to be for the sake, not of the perfume, but of the thorns.

The dwarf Nemu was brought before the Regent and threw himself on the
ground at his feet.

Ani ordered the attendants to leave him, and said to the little man

"You compelled me to put you in prison.  Stand up!"  The dwarf rose and
said, "Be thanked--for my arrest too."

The Regent looked at him in astonishment; but Nemu went on half humbly,
half in fun, "I feared for my life, but thou hast not only not shortened
it, but hast prolonged it; for in the solitude of the dungeon time seemed
long, and the minutes grown to hours."

"Keep your wit for the ladies," replied the Regent.  "Did I not know that
you meant well, and acted in accordance with the Lady Katuti's fancy, I
would send you to the quarries."

"My hands," mumbled the dwarf, "could only break stones for a game of
draughts; but my tongue is like the water, which makes one peasant rich,
and carries away the fields of another."

"We shall know how to dam it up."

"For my lady and for thee it will always flow the right way," said the
dwarf.  "I showed the complaining citizens who it is that slaughters
their flesh and blood, and from whom to look for peace and content.  I
poured caustic into their wounds, and praised the physician."

"But unasked and recklessly," interrupted Ani; "otherwise you have shown
yourself capable, and I am willing to spare you for a future time.  But
overbusy friends are more damaging than intelligent enemies.  When I need
your services I will call for you.  Till then avoid speech.  Now go to
your mistress, and carry to Katuti this letter which has arrived for
her."

"Hail to Ani, the son of the Sun!"  cried the dwarf kissing the Regent's
foot.  "Have I no letter to carry to my mistress Nefert?"

"Greet her from me," replied the Regent.  "Tell Katuti I will visit her
after the next meal.  The king's charioteer has not written, yet I hear
that he is well.  Go now, and be silent and discreet."

The dwarf quitted the room, and Ani went into an airy hall, in which his
luxurious meal was laid out, consisting of many dishes prepared with
special care.  His appetite was gone, but he tasted of every dish, and
gave the steward, who attended on him, his opinion of each.

Meanwhile he thought of the king's letter, of Bent-Anat, and whether it
would be advisable to expose himself to a rejection on her part.

After the meal he gave himself up to his body-servant, who carefully
shaved, painted, dressed, and decorated him, and then held the mirror
before him.

He considered the reflection with anxious observation, and when he seated
himself in his litter to be borne to the house of his friend Katuti, he
said to himself that he still might claim to be called a handsome man.

If he paid his court to Bent-Anat--if she listened to his suit--what
then?

He would refer it to Katuti, who always knew how to say a decisive word
when he, entangled in a hundred pros and cons, feared to venture on a
final step.

By her advice he had sought to wed the princess, as a fresh mark of
honor--as an addition to his revenues--as a pledge for his personal
safety.  His heart had never been more or less attached to her than to
