nay I could have declared that I smelt its perfume, but the interpreter
assured me that we never smell in our dreams.  I went up to the beautiful
tree in admiration.  Then suddenly a hundred axes appeared in the air,
wielded by unseen hands, and struck the poor tree with such violence that
the branches one by one fell to the ground, and at last the trunk itself
was felled.  If you think it grieved me you are mistaken.  On the
contrary, I was delighted with the flashing hatchets and the flying
splinters.  When at last nothing was left but the roots in the tub of
earth, I perceived that the tree was rising to new life.  Suddenly my
arms became strong, my feet active, and I fetched quantities of water
from the tank, poured it over the roots, and when, at last, I could exert
myself no longer, a tender green shoot showed itself on the wounded root,
a bud appeared, a green leaf unfolded itself, a juicy stem sprouted
quickly, it became a firm trunk, sent out branches and twigs, and these
became covered with leaves and flowers, white, red and blue; then various
birds came and settled on the top of the tree, and sang.  Ah! my heart
sang louder than the birds at that moment, and I said to myself that
without me the tree would have been dead, and that it owed its life to
me."

"A beautiful dream," said Katuti; "that reminds me of your girlhood, when
you would he awake half the night inventing all sorts of tales.  What
interpretation did the priest give you?"

"He promised me many things," said Nefert, "and he gave me the assurance
that the happiness to which I am predestined shall revive in fresh beauty
after many interruptions."

"And Paaker's father gave you the Neha-tree?"  asked Katuti, leaving the
veranda as she spoke and walking out into the garden.

"My father brought it to Thebes from the far cast," said Paaker, in
confirmation of the widow's parting words.

"And that is exactly what makes me so happy," said Nefert.  "For your
father was as kind, and as dear to me as if he had been my own.  Do you
remember when we were sailing round the pond, and the boat upset, and you
pulled me senseless out of the water?  Never shall I forget the
expression with which the great man looked at me when I woke up in its
arms; such wise true eyes no one ever had but he."

"He was good, and he loved you very much," said Paaker, recalling, for
his part, the moment when he had dared to press a kiss on the lips of the
sweet unconscious child.

"And I am so glad," Nefert went on, "that the day has come at last when
we can talk of him together again, and when the old grudge that lay so
heavy in my heart is all forgotten.  How good you are to us, I have
already learned; my heart overflows with gratitude to you, when I
remember my childhood, and I can never forget that I was indebted to you
for all that was bright and happy in it.  Only look at the big dog--poor
Descher!--how he rubs against me, and shows that he has not forgotten me!
Whatever comes from your house fills my mind with pleasant memories."

"We all love you dearly," said Paaker looking at her tenderly.

"And how sweet it was in your garden!"  cried Nefert.  "The nosegay here
that you have brought me shall be placed in water, and preserved a long
time, as greeting from the place in which once I could play carelessly,
and dream so happily."

With these words she pressed the flowers to her lips; Paaker sprang
forward, seized her hand, and covered it with burning kisses.

Nefert started and drew away her hand, but he put out his arm to clasp
her to him.  He had touched her with his trembling hand, when loud voices
were heard in the garden, and Nemu hurried in to announce he arrival of
the princess Bent-Anat.

At the same moment Katuti appeared, and in a few minutes the princess
herself.

Paaker retreated, and quitted the room before Nefert had time to express
her indignation.  He staggered to his chariot like a drunken man.  He
supposed himself beloved by Mena's wife, his heart was full of triumph,
he proposed rewarding Hekt with gold, and went to the palace without
delay to crave of Ani a mission to Syria.  There it should be brought to
the test--he or Mena.




CHAPTER XXV.

While Nefert, frozen with horror, could not find a word of greeting for
her royal friend, Bent-Anat with native dignity laid before the widow her
choice of Nefert to fill the place of her lost companion, and desired
that Mena's wife should go to the palace that very day.

She had never before spoken thus to Katuti, and Katuti could not overlook
the fact that Bent-Anat had intentionally given up her old confidential
tone.

"Nefert has complained of me to her," thought she to herself, "and she
considers me no longer worthy of her former friendly kindness."

She was vexed and hurt, and though she understood the danger which
threatened her, now her daughter's eyes were opened, still the thought of
losing her child inflicted a painful wound.  It was this which filled her
eyes with tears, and sincere sorrow trembled in her voice as she replied:

"Thou hast required the better half of my life at my hand; but thou hast
but to command, and I to obey."  Bent-Anat waved her hand proudly, as if
to confirm the widow's statement; but Nefert went up to her mother, threw
her arms round her neck, and wept upon her shoulder.

Tears glistened even in the princess's eyes when Katuti at last led her
daughter towards her, and pressed yet one more kiss on her forehead.

Bent-Anat took Nefert's hand, and did not release it, while she requested
the widow to give her daughter's dresses and ornaments into the charge of
the slaves and waiting-women whom she would send for them.

"And do not forget the case with the dried flowers, and my amulets, and
the images of the Gods," said Nefert.  "And I should like to have the
Neha tree which my uncle gave me."

Her white cat was playing at her feet with Paaker's flowers, which she
had dropped on the floor, and when she saw her she took her up and kissed
her.

"Bring the little creature with you," said Bent-Anat.  "It was your
favorite plaything."

"No," replied Nefert coloring.

The princess understood her, pressed her hand, and said while she pointed
to Nemu:

"The dwarf is your own too: shall he come with you?"

"I will give him to my mother," said Nefert.  She let the little man kiss
her robe and her feet, once more embraced Katuti, and quitted the garden
with her royal friend.

As soon as Katuti was alone, she hastened into the little chapel in which
the figures of her ancestors stood, apart from those of Mena.  She threw
herself down before the statue of her husband, half weeping, half
thankful.

This parting had indeed fallen heavily on her soul, but at the same time
it released her from a mountain of anxiety that had oppressed her breast.
Since yesterday she had felt like one who walks along the edge of a
precipice, and whose enemy is close at his heels; and the sense of
freedom from the ever threatening danger, soon got the upperhand of her
maternal grief.  The abyss in front of her had suddenly closed; the road
to the goal of her efforts lay before her smooth and firm beneath her
feet.

The widow, usually so dignified, hastily and eagerly walked down the
garden path, and for the first time since that luckless letter from the
camp had reached her, she could look calmly and clearly at the position
of affairs, and reflect on the measures which Ani must take in the
immediate future.  She told herself that all was well, and that the time
for prompt and rapid action was now come.

When the messengers came from the princess she superintended the packing
of the various objects which Nefert wished to have, with calm
deliberation, and then sent her dwarf to Ani, to beg that he would visit
her.  But before Nemu had left Mena's grounds he saw the out-runners of
the Regent, his chariot, and the troop of guards following him.

Very soon Katuti and her noble friend were walking up and down in the
garden, while she related to him how Bent-Anat had taken Nefert from her,
and repeated to him all that she had planned and considered during the
last hour.

"You have the genius of a man," said Ani; "and this time you do not urge
me in vain.  Ameni is ready to act, Paaker is to-day collecting his
troops, to-morrow he will assist at the feast of the Valley, and the next
day he goes to Syria."

"He has been with you?"  Katuti asked.

"He came to the palace on leaving your house," replied Ani, "with glowing
cheeks, and resolved to the utmost; though he does not dream that I hold
him in my hand."

Thus speaking they entered the veranda, in which Nemu had remained, and
he now hid himself as usual behind the ornamental shrubs to overhear
them.  They sat down near each other, by Nefert's breakfast table, and
Ani asked Katuti whether the dwarf had told her his mother's secret.
Katuti feigned ignorance, listened to the story of the love-philter, and
played the part of the alarmed mother very cleverly.  The Regent was of
opinion, while he tried to soothe her, that there was no real love-potion
in the case; but the widow exclaimed:

"Now I understand, now for the first time I comprehend my daughter.
Paaker must have poured the drink into her wine, for she had no sooner
drunk it this morning than she was quite altered her words to Paaker had
quite a tender ring in them; and if he placed himself so cheerfully at
your disposal it is because he believes himself certainly to be beloved
by my daughter.  The old witch's potion was effectual."

"There certainly are such drinks--" said Ani thoughtfully.  "But will
they only win hearts to young men!  If that is the case, the old woman's
trade is a bad one, for youth is in itself a charm to attract love.  If I
were only as young as Paaker!  You laugh at the sighs of a man--say at
once of an old man!  Well, yes, I am old, for the prime of life lies
behind me.  And yet Katuti, my friend, wisest of women--explain to me one
thing.  When I was young I was loved by many and admired many women, but
not one of them--not even my wife, who died young, was more to me than a
toy, a plaything; and now when I stretch out my hand for a girl, whose
father I might very well be--not for her own sake, but simply to serve my
purpose--and she refuses me, I feel as much disturbed, as much a fool as-
as that dealer in love-philters, Paaker."

"Have you spoken to Bent-Anat?"  asked Katuti.

"And heard again from her own lips the refusal she had sent me through
you.  You see my spirit has suffered!"

"And on what pretext did she reject your suit?"  asked the widow.

"Pretext!"  cried Ani.  "Bent-Anat and pretext!  It must be owned that
she has kingly pride, and not Ma--[The Goddess of Truth]--herself is more
truthful than she.  That I should have to confess it!  When I think of
her, our plots seem to me unutterably pitiful.  My veins contain, indeed,
many drops of the blood of Thotmes, and though the experience of life has
taught me to stoop low, still the stooping hurts me.  I have never known
the happy feeling of satisfaction with my lot and my work; for I have
always had a greater position than I could fill, and constantly done less
than I ought to have done.  In order not to look always resentful, I
always wear a smile.  I have nothing left of the face I was born with but
the mere skin, and always wear a mask.  I serve him whose master I
believe I ought to be by birth; I hate Rameses, who, sincerely or no,
calls me his brother; and while I stand as if I were the bulwark of his
authority I am diligently undermining it.  My whole existence is a lie."

"But it will be truth," cried Katuti, "as soon as the Gods allow you to
be--as you are--the real king of this country."

"Strange!"  said Ani smiling, Ameni,  this  very day, used almost exactly
the same words.  The wisdom of priests, and that of women, have much in
common, and they fight with the same weapons.  You use words instead of
swords, traps instead of lances, and you cast not our bodies, but our
souls, into irons."

"Do you blame or praise us for it?"  said the widow.  "We are in any case
not impotent allies, and therefore, it seems to me, desirable ones."

Indeed you are," said Ani smiling.  "Not a tear is shed in the land,
whether it is shed for joy or for sorrow, for which in the first instance
a priest or a woman is not responsible.  Seriously, Katuti--in nine great
events out of ten you women have a hand in the game.  You gave the first
impulse to all that is plotting here, and I will confess to you that,
regardless of all consequences, I should in a few hours have given up my
pretensions to the throne, if that woman Bent-Anat had said 'yes' instead
of 'no.'"

"You make me believe," said  Katuti, "that the weaker sex are gifted with
stronger wills than the nobler.  In marrying us you style us, 'the
mistress of the house,' and if the elders of the citizens grow infirm,
in this country it is not the sons but the daughters that must be their
mainstay.  But we women have our weaknesses, and chief of these is
curiosity.--May I ask on what ground Bent-Anat dismissed you?"

"You know so much that you may know all," replied Ani.  "She admitted me
to speak to her alone.  It was yet early, and she had come from the
temple, where the weak old prophet had absolved her from uncleanness; she
met me, bright, beautiful and proud, strong and radiant as a Goddess, and
a princess.  My heart throbbed as if I were a boy, and while she was
showing me her flowers I said to myself:  'You are come to obtain through
her another claim to the throne.'  And yet I felt that, if she consented
to be mine, I would remain the true brother, the faithful Regent of
Rameses, and enjoy happiness and peace by her side before it was too
late.  If she refused me then I resolved that fate must take its way,
and, instead of peace and love, it must be war for the crown snatched
from my fathers.  I tried to woo her, but she cut my words short, said I
was a noble man, and a worthy suitor but--"

"There came the but."

