"Now that you are leaving, I shall be really indispensable to our friends
here.  Amasis is old; when Psamtik comes to the throne we shall have
infinitely greater difficulties to contend with than heretofore.  I must
remain and fight on in the fore-front of our battle for the freedom and
welfare of the Hellenic race.  Let them call my efforts unwomanly if they
will.  This is, and shall be, the purpose of my life, a purpose to which
I will remain all the more faithful, because it is one of those to which
a woman rarely dares devote her life.  During this last night of tears I
have felt that much, very much of that womanly weakness still lingers in
me which forms at once the happiness and misery of our sex.  To preserve
this feminine weakness in my granddaughter, united with perfect womanly
delicacy, has been my first duty; my second to free myself entirely from
it.  But a war against one's own nature cannot be carried on without
occasional defeat, even if ultimately successful.  When grief and pain
are gaining the upperhand and I am well nigh in despair, my only help
lies in remembering my friend Pythagoras, that noblest among men, and his
words: 'Observe a due proportion in all things, avoid excessive joy as
well as complaining grief, and seek to keep thy soul in tune and harmony
like a well-toned harp.'"

     [There is no question that Pythagoras visited Egypt during the reign
     of Amasis, probably towards the middle of the 6th century (according
     to our reckoning, about 536 B. C.) Herod. II. 81-123.  Diod. I. 98.
     Rich information about Pythagoras is to be found in the works of the
     very learned scholar Roeth, who is however occasionally much too
     bold in his conjectures. Pythagoras was the first among Greek
     thinkers (speculators).  He would not take the name of a wise man or
     "sage," but called himself "Philosophos," or a "friend of wisdom."]

"This Pythagorean inward peace, this deep, untroubled calm, I see daily
before me in my Sappho; and struggle to attain it myself, though many a
stroke of fate untunes the chords of my poor heart.  I am calm now!  You
would hardly believe what power the mere thought of that first of all
thinkers, that calm, deliberate man, whose life acted on mine like sweet,
soft music, has over me.  You knew him, you can understand what I mean.
Now, mention your wish; my heart is as calmly quiet as the Nile waters
which are flowing by so quietly, and I am ready to hear it, be it good or
evil."

"I am glad to see you thus," said the Athenian.  "If you had remembered
the noble friend of wisdom, as Pythagoras was wont to call himself a
little sooner, your soul would have regained its balance yesterday.  The
master enjoins us to look back every evening on the events, feelings and
actions of the day just past.

"Now had you done this, you would have felt that the unfeigned admiration
of all your guests, among whom were men of distinguished merit,
outweighed a thousandfold the injurious words of a drunken libertine;
you would have felt too that you were a friend of the gods, for was it
not in your house that the immortals gave that noble old man at last,
after his long years of misfortune, the greatest joy that can fall to the
lot of any human being? and did they not take from you one friend only in
order to replace him in the same moment, by another and a better?  Come,
I will hear no contradiction.  Now for my request.

"You know that people sometimes call me an Athenian, sometimes a
Halikarnassian.  Now, as the Ionian, AEolian and Dorian mercenaries have
never been on good terms with the Karians, my almost triple descent (if I
may call it so) has proved very useful to me as commander of both these
divisions.  Well qualified as Aristomachus may be for the command, yet
in this one point Amasis will miss me; for I found it an easy matter to
settle the differences among the troops and keep them at peace, while he,
as a Spartan, will find it very difficult to keep right with the Karian
soldiers.

"This double nationality of mine arises from the fact that my father
married a Halikarnassian wife out of a noble Dorian family, and, at the
time of my birth, was staying with her in Halikarnassus, having come
thither in order to take possession of her parental inheritance.  So,
though I was taken back to Athens before I was three months old, I must
still be called a Karian, as a man's native land is decided by his
birthplace.

"In Athens, as a young nobleman, belonging to that most aristocratic and
ancient family, the Philaidae, I was reared and educated in all the pride
of an Attic noble.  Pisistratus, brave and clever, and though of equal,
yet by no means of higher birth, than ourselves, for there exists no
family more aristocratic than my father's, gained possession of the
supreme authority.  Twice, the nobles, by uniting all their strength,
succeeded in overthrowing him, and when, the third time, assisted by
Lygdamis of Naxos, the Argives and Eretrians, he attempted to return, we
opposed him again.  We had encamped by the temple of Minerva at Pallene,
and were engaged in sacrificing to the goddess, early, before our first
meal, when we were suddenly surprised by the clever tyrant, who gained an
easy, bloodless victory over our unarmed troops.  As half of the entire
army opposed to the tyrant was under my command, I determined rather to
die than yield, fought with my whole strength, implored the soldiers to
remain steadfast, resisted without yielding a point, but fell at last
with a spear in my shoulder.

"The Pisistratidae became lords of Athens.  I fled to Halikarnassus, my
second home, accompanied by my wife and children.  There, my name being
known through some daring military exploits, and, through my having once
conquered in the Pythian games, I was appointed to a command in the
mercenary troops of the King of Egypt; accompanied the expedition to
Cyprus, shared with Aristomachus the renown of having conquered the
birthplace of Aphrodite for Amasis, and finally was named commander-in-
chief of all the mercenaries in Egypt.

"Last summer my wife died; our children, a boy of eleven and a girl of
ten years, remained with an aunt in Halikarnassus.  But she too has
followed to the inexorable Hades, and so, only a few days ago I sent for
the little ones here.  They cannot, however, possibly reach Naukratis in
less than three weeks, and yet they will already have set out on their
journey before a letter to countermand my first order could reach them.

"I must leave Egypt in fourteen days, and cannot therefore receive them
myself.

"My own intentions are to go to the Thracian Chersonese, where my uncle,
as you know, has been called to fill a high office among the Dolonki.
The children shall follow me thither; my faithful old slave Korax will
remain in Naukratis on purpose to bring them to me.

"Now, if you will show to me that you are in deed and truth my friend,
will you receive the little ones and take care of them till the next ship
sails for Thrace?  But above all, will you carefully conceal them from
the eyes of the crown-prince's spies?  You know that Psamtik hates me
mortally, and he could easily revenge himself on the father through the
children.  I ask you for this great favor, first, because I know your
kindness by experience; and secondly, because your house has been made
secure by the king's letter of guarantee, and they will therefore be safe
here from the inquiries of the police; notwithstanding that, by the laws
of this most formal country, all strangers, children not excepted, must
give up their names to the officer of the district.

"You can now judge of the depth of my esteem, Rhodopis; I am committing
into your hands all that makes life precious to me; for even my native
land has ceased to be dear while she submits so ignominiously to her
tyrants.  Will you then restore tranquillity to an anxious father's
heart, will you--?"

"I will, Phanes, I will!"  cried the aged woman in undisguised delight.
"You are not asking me for any thing, you are presenting me with a gift.
Oh, how I look forward already to their arrival!  And how glad Sappho
will be, when the little creatures come and enliven her solitude!  But
this I can assure you, Phanes, I shall not let my little guests depart
with the first Thracian ship.  You can surely afford to be separated from
them one short half-year longer, and I promise you they shall receive the
best lessons, and be guided to all that is good and beautiful."

"On that head I have no fear," answered Phanes, with a thankful smile.
"But still you must send off the two little plagues by the first ship; my
anxiety as to Psamtik's revenge is only too well grounded.  Take my most
heartfelt thanks beforehand for all the love and kindness which you will
show to my children.  I too hope and believe, that the merry little
creatures will be an amusement and pleasure to Sappho in her lonely
life."

"And more," interrupted Rhodopis looking down; "this proof of confidence
repays a thousand-fold the disgrace inflicted on me last night in a
moment of intoxication.--But here comes Sappho!"




CHAPTER IV.

Five days after the evening we have just described at Rhodopis' house, an
immense multitude was to be seen assembled at the harbor of Sais.

Egyptians of both sexes, and of every age and class were thronging to the
water's edge.

Soldiers and merchants, whose various ranks in society were betokened by
the length of their white garments, bordered with colored fringes, were
interspersed among the crowd of half-naked, sinewy men, whose only
clothing consisted of an apron, the costume of the lower classes.  Naked
children crowded, pushed and fought to get the best places.  Mothers in
short cloaks were holding their little ones up to see the sight, which by
this means they entirely lost themselves; and a troop of dogs and cats
were playing and fighting at the feet of these eager sight-seers, who
took the greatest pains not to tread on, or in any way injure the sacred
animals.

     [According to various pictures on the Egyptian monuments.  The
     mothers are from Wilkinson III.  363.  Isis and Hathor, with the
     child Horus in her lap or at her breast, are found in a thousand
     representations, dating both from more modern times and in the Greek
     style.  The latter seem to have served as a model for the earliest
     pictures of the Madonna holding the infant Christ.]

The police kept order among this huge crowd with long staves, on the
metal heads of which the king's name was inscribed.  Their care was
especially needed to prevent any of the people from being pushed into the
swollen Nile, an arm of which, in the season of the inundations, washes
the walls of Sais.

On the broad flight of steps which led between two rows of sphinxes down
to the landing-place of the royal boats, was a very different kind of
assembly.

The priests of the highest rank were seated there on stone benches.  Many
wore long, white robes, others were clad in aprons, broad jewelled
collars, and garments of panther skins.  Some had fillets adorned with
plumes that waved around brows, temples, and the stiff structures of
false curls that floated over their shoulders; others displayed the
glistening bareness of their smoothly-shaven skulls.  The supreme judge
was distinguished by the possession of the longest and handsomest plume
in his head-dress, and a costly sapphire amulet, which, suspended by a
gold chain, hung on his breast.

The highest officers of the Egyptian army wore uniforms of gay colors,97
