
"What is the matter, sister?"  cried Atossa, before her brother had
finished speaking.  Nitetis had fainted, and Atossa was sprinkling her
forehead with wine as she lay in her arms.

"What was it?"  asked the blind Kassandane, when Nitetis had awakened to
consciousness a few moments later.

"The joy--the happiness--Tachot," faltered Nitetis.  Cambyses, as well as
his sister, had sprung to the fainting girl's help.  When she had
recovered consciousness, he asked her to take some wine to revive her
completely, gave her the cup with his own hand, and then went on at the
point at which he had left off in his account: "Bartja is going to your
own country, my wife--to Naukratis on the Nile--to fetch thence the
granddaughter of a certain Rhodopis, and daughter of a noble warrior, a
native of the brave town of Phocaea, as his wife."

"What was that?"  cried the blind queen-mother.

"What is the matter with you?"  exclaimed Atossa again, in an anxious,
almost reproachful tone.

"Nitetis!"  cried Croesus admonishingly.  But the warning came too late;
the cup which her royal lover had given her slipped from her hands and
fell ringing on the floor.  All eyes were fixed on the king's features in
anxious suspense.  He had sprung from his seat pale as death; his lips
trembled and his fist was clenched.  Nitetis looked up at her lover
imploringly, but he was afraid of meeting those wonderful, fascinating
eyes, and turned his head away, saying in a hoarse voice: "Take the women
back to their apartments, Boges.  I have seen enough of them--let us
begin our drinking-bout--good-night, my mother; take care how you nourish
vipers with your heart's blood.  Sleep well, Egyptian, and pray to the
gods to give you a more equal power of dissembling your feelings.  To-
morrow, my friends, we will go out hunting.  Here, cup-bearer, give me
some wine! fill the large goblet, but taste it well--yes, well--for to-
day I am afraid of poison; to-day for the first time.  Do you hear,
Egyptian?  I am afraid of poison!  and every child knows--ah-ha--that all
the poison, as well as the medicine comes from Egypt."

Nitetis left the hall,--she hardly knew how,--more staggering than
walking.  Boges accompanied her, telling the bearers to make haste.

When they reached the hanging-gardens he gave her up to the care of the
eunuch in attendance, and took his leave, not respectfully as usual, but
chuckling, rubbing his hands, and speaking in an intimate and
confidential tone: "Dream about the handsome Bartja and his Egyptian
lady-love, my white Nile-kitten!  Haven't you any message for the
beautiful boy, whose love-story frightened you so terribly?  Think a
little.  Poor Boges will very gladly play the go-between; the poor
despised Boges wishes you so well--the humble Boges will be so sorry when
he sees the proud palm-tree from Sais cut down.  Boges is a prophet; he
foretells you a speedy return home to Egypt, or a quiet bed in the black
earth in Babylon, and the kind Boges wishes you a peaceful sleep.
Farewell, my broken flower, my gay, bright viper, wounded by its own
sting, my pretty fir-cone, fallen from the tall pine-tree!"

"How dare you speak in this impudent manner?" said the indignant
princess.

"Thank you," answered the wretch, smiling.

"I shall complain of your conduct," threatened Nitetis.

"You are very amiable," answered Boges.  "Go out of my sight," she cried.

"I will obey your kind and gentle hints;" he answered softly, as if
whispering words of love into her ear.  She started back in disgust and
fear at these scornful words; she saw how full of terror they were for
her, turned her back on him and went quickly into the house, but his
voice rang after her: "Don't forget my lovely queen, think of me now and
then; for everything that happens in the next few days will be a keepsake
from the poor despised Boges."

As soon as she had disappeared he changed his tone, and commanded the
sentries in the severest and most tyrannical manner, to keep a strict
watch over the hanging-gardens.  "Certain death," said he, "to whichever
of you allows any one but myself to enter these gardens.  No one,
remember--no one--and least of all messengers from the queen-mother,
Atossa or any of the great people, may venture to set foot on these
steps.  If Croesus or Oropastes should wish to speak to the Egyptian
Princess, refuse them decidedly.  Do you understand?  I repeat it,
whoever is begged or bribed into disobedience will not see the light of
to-morrow's sun.  Nobody may enter these gardens without express
permission from my own mouth.  I think you know me.  Here, take these
gold staters, your work will be heavier now; but remember, I swear by
Plithras not to spare one of you who is careless or disobedient."

The men made a due obeisance and determined to obey; they knew that
Boges' threats were never meant in joke, and fancied something great must
be coming to pass, as the stingy eunuch never spent his staters without
good reason.

Boges was carried back to the banqueting-hall in the same litter, which
had brought Nitetis away.

The king's wives had left, but the concubines were all standing in their
appointed place, singing their monotonous songs, though quite unheard by
the uproarious men.

The drinkers had already long forgotten the fainting woman.  The uproar
and confusion rose with every fresh wine-cup.  They forgot the dignity of
the place where they were assembled, and the presence of their mighty
ruler.

They shouted in their drunken joy; warriors embraced one another with a
tenderness only excited by wine, here and there a novice was carried away
in the arms of a pair of sturdy attendants, while an old hand at the work
would seize a wine-jug instead of a goblet, and drain it at a draught
amid the cheers of the lookers-on.

The king sat on at the head of the table, pale as death, staring into the
wine-cup as if unconscious of what was going on around hint.  But at the
sight of his brother his fist clenched.

He would neither speak to him, nor answer his questions.  The longer he
sat there gazing into vacancy, the firmer became his conviction that
Nitetis had deceived him,--that she had pretended to love him while her
heart really belonged to Bartja.  How shamefully they had made sport of
him!  How deeply rooted must have been the faithlessness of this clever
hypocrite, if the mere news that his brother loved some one else could
not only destroy all her powers of dissimulation, but actually deprive
her of consciousness!

When Nitetis left the hall, Otanes, the father of Phaedime had called
out: "The Egyptian women seem to take great interest in the love-affairs
of their brothers-in-law.  The Persian women are not so generous with
their feelings; they keep them for their husbands."

Cambyses was too proud to let it be seen that he had heard these words;
like the ostrich, he feigned deafness and blindness in order not to seem
aware of the looks and murmurs of his guests, which all went to prove
that he had been deceived.

Bartja could have had no share in her perfidy; she had loved this
handsome youth, and perhaps all the more because she had not been able to
hope for a return of her love.  If he had had the slightest suspicion of
his brother, he would have killed him on the spot.  Bartja was certainly
innocent of any share in the deception and in his brother's misery, but
still he was the cause of all; so the old grudge, which had only just
been allowed to slumber, woke again; and, as a relapse is always more
dangerous than the original illness, the newly-roused anger was more
violent than what he had formerly felt.

He thought and thought, but he could not devise a fitting punishment for
this false woman.  Her death would not content his vengeance, she must
suffer something worse than mere death!

Should he send her back to Egypt, disgraced and shamed?  Oh, no!  she
loved her country, and she would be received by her parents with open
arms.  Should he, after she had confessed her guilt, (for he was
determined to force a confession from her) shut her up in a solitary
dungeon?  or should he deliver her over to Boges, to be the servant of
his concubines?  Yes! now he had hit upon the right punishment.  Thus the
faithless creature should be disciplined, and the hypocrite, who had
dared to make sport of him--the All-powerful--forced to atone for her
crimes.

Then he said to himself: "Bartja must not stay here; fire and water have
more in common than we two--he always fortunate and happy, and I so
miserable.  Some day or other his descendants will divide my treasures,
and wear my crown; but as yet I am king, and I will show that I am."

The thought of his proud, powerful position flashed through him like
lightning.  He woke from his dreams into new life, flung his golden
goblet far into the hall, so that the wine flew round like rain, and
cried: "We have had enough of this idle talk and useless noise.  Let us
hold a council of war, drunken as we are, and consider what answer we
ought to give the Massagetae.  Hystaspes, you are the eldest, give us
your opinion first."

     [Herod. I. 134.  The Persians deliberated and resolved when they
     were intoxicated, and when they were sober reconsidered their
     determinations.  Tacitus tells the same of the old Germans.  Germ,
     c. 22.]

Hystaspes, the father of Darius, was an old man.  He answered: "It seems
to me, that the messengers of this wandering tribe have left us no
choice.  We cannot go to war against desert wastes; but as our host is
already under arms and our swords have lain long in their scabbards, war
we must have.  We only want a few good enemies, and I know no easier work
than to make them."

At these words the Persians broke into loud shouts of delight; but
Croesus only waited till the noise had ceased to say: "Hystaspes, you and
I are both old men; but you are a thorough Persian and fancy you can only
be happy in battle and bloodshed.  You are now obliged to lean for
support on the staff, which used to be the badge of your rank as
commander, and yet you speak like a hot-blooded boy.  I agree with you
that enemies are easy enough to find, but only fools go out to look for
them.  The man who tries to make enemies is like a wretch who mutilates
his own body.  If the enemies are there, let us go out to meet them like
wise men who wish to look misfortune boldly in the face; but let us never
try to begin an unjust war, hateful to the gods.  We will wait until
wrong has been done us, and then go to victory or death, conscious that
we have right on our side."

The old man was interrupted by a low murmur of applause, drowned however
quickly by cries of "Hystaspes is right!  let us look for an enemy!"

It was now the turn of the envoy Prexaspes to speak, and he answered
laughing: "Let us follow the advice of both these noble old men.  We will
do as Croesus bids us and not go out to seek an enemy, but at the same
time we will follow Hystaspes' advice by raising our claims and
pronouncing every one our enemy, who does not cheerfully consent to
become a member of the kingdom founded by our great father Cyrus.  For
instance, we will ask the Indians if they would feel proud to obey your
sceptre, Cambyses.  If they answer no, it is a sign that they do not love
us, and whoever does not love us, must be our enemy."

"That won't do," cried Zopyrus.  "We must have war at any price."

"I vote for Croesus," said Gobryas.  "And I too," said the noble
Artabazus.

"We are for Hystaspes," shouted the warrior Araspes, the old Intaphernes,
and some more of Cyrus's old companions-in-arms.

"War we must have at any price," roared the general Megabyzus, the father
of Zopyrus, striking the table so sharply with his heavy fist, that the
golden vessels rang again, and some goblets even fell; "but not with the
Massagetac--not with a flying foe."

"There must be no war with the Massagetae," said the high-priest
Oropastes.  "The gods themselves have avenged Cyrus's death upon them."

Cambyses sat for some moments, quietly and coldly watching the
unrestrained enthusiasm of his warriors, and then, rising from his seat,
thundered out the words: "Silence, and listen to your king!"

The words worked like magic on this multitude of drunken men.  Even those
who were most under the influence of wine, listened to their king in a
kind of unconscious obedience.  He lowered his voice and went on: "I did
not ask whether you wished for peace or war--I know that every Persian
prefers the labor of war to an inglorious idleness--but I wished to know
what answer you would give the Massagetan warriors.  Do you consider that
the soul of my father--of the man to whom you owe all your greatness--has
been sufficiently avenged?"

A dull murmur in the affirmative, interrupted by some violent voices in
the negative, was the answer.  The king then asked a second question:
"Shall we accept the conditions proposed by their envoys, and grant peace
to this nation, already so scourged and desolated by the gods?"  To this
they all agreed eagerly.

"That is what I wished to know," continued Cambyses.  "To-morrow, when we
are sober, we will follow the old custom and reconsider what has been
resolved on during our intoxication.  Drink on, all of you, as long as
the night lasts.  To-morrow, at the last crow of the sacred bird Parodar,
I shall expect you to meet me for the chase, at the gate of the temple of
Bel."

So saying, the king left the hall, followed by a thundering "Victory to
the king!"  Boges had slipped out quietly before him.  In the forecourt
he found one of the gardener's boys from the hanging-gardens.

"What do you want here?"  asked Boges.  "I have something for the prince
Bartja."

"For Bartja?  Has he asked your master to send him some seeds or slips?"
