"I cannot sleep," sighed Stephanus; "if you love me go on with your
story."

"But do not interrupt me again then," said Paulus, and he went on:
"With all this gay life I was not happy--by no means.  When I was alone
sometimes, and no longer sitting in the crowd of merry boon-companions
and complaisant wenches, emptying the wine cup and crowned with poplar,
I often felt as if I were walking on the brink of a dark abyss as if
every thing in myself and around me were utterly hollow and empty.  I
could stand gazing for hours at the sea, and as the waves rose only to
sink again and vanish, I often reflected that I was like them, and that
the future of my frivolous present must be a mere empty nothing.  Our
gods were of little account with us.  My mother sacrificed now in one
temple, and now in another, according to the needs of the moment; my
father took part in the high festivals, but he laughed at the belief of
the multitude, and my brother talked of the 'Primaeval Unity,' and dealt
with all sorts of demons, and magic formulas.  He accepted the doctrine
of Iamblichus, Ablavius, and the other Neoplatonic philosophers, which to
my poor understanding seemed either superhumanly profound or else
debasingly foolish; nevertheless my memory retains many of his sayings,
which I have learned to understand here in my loneliness.  It is vain to
seek reason outside ourselves; the highest to which we can attain is for
reason to behold itself in us!  As often as the world sinks into
nothingness in my soul, and I live in God only, and have Him, and
comprehend Him, and feel Him only--then that doctrine recurs to me.  How
all these fools sought and listened everywhere for the truth which was
being proclaimed in their very ears!  There were Christians everywhere
about me, and at that time they had no need to conceal themselves, but I
had nothing to do with them.  Twice only did they cross my path; once I
was not a little annoyed when, on the Hippodrome, a Christian's horses
which had been blessed by a Nazarite, beat mine; and on another occasion
it seemed strange to me when I myself received the blessing of an old
Christian dock-laborer, having pulled his son out of the water.

"Years went on; my parents died.  My mother's last glance was directed at
me, for I had always been her favorite child.  They said too that I was
like her, I and my sister Arsinoe, who, soon after my father's death,
married the Prefect Pompey.  At the division of the property I gave up to
my brother the manufactories and the management of the business, nay even
the house in the city, though, as the elder brother, I had a right to it,
and I took in exchange the land near the Kanopic gate, and filled the
stables there with splendid horses, and the lofts with not less noble
wine.  This I needed, because I gave up the days to baths and contests in
the arena, and the nights to feasting, sometimes at my own house,
sometimes at a friend's, and sometimes in the taverns of Kanopus, where
the fairest Greek girls seasoned the feasts with singing and dancing.

"What have these details of the vainest worldly pleasure to do with my
conversion, you will ask.  But listen a while.  When Saul went forth to
seek his father's asses he found a crown.

"One day we had gone out in our gilded boats, and the Lesbian girl
Archidike had made ready a feast for us in her house, a feast such as
could scarcely be offered even in Rome.

"Since the taking of our city by Diocletian, after the insurrection of
Achilleus, the Imperial troops who came to Alexandria behaved insolently
enough.  Between some of my friends, and certain of the young officers of
Roman patrician families, there had been a good deal of rough banter for
some months past, as to their horses, women--I know not what; and it
happened that we met these very gentry at the house of Archidike.

"Sharp speeches were made, which the soldiers replied to after their
fashion, and at last they came to insulting words, and as the wine heated
us and them, to loud threats.

"The Romans left the house of entertainment before we did.  Crowned with
garlands, singing, and utterly careless, we followed soon after them, and
had almost reached the quay, when a noisy troop rushed out of a side
street, and fell upon us with naked weapons.  The moon was high in the
heavens, and I could recognize some of our adversaries.  I threw myself
on a tall tribune, throttled him, and, as he fell, I fell with him in the
dust.  I am but dimly conscious of what followed, for sword-strokes were
showered upon me, and all grew black before my eyes.  I only know what I
thought then, face to face with death."

"Well--?" asked Stephanus.

"I thought," said Paulus reddening, "of my fighting-quails at
Alexandria, and whether they had had any water.  Then my dull heavy
unconsciousness increased; for weeks I lay in that state, for I was
hacked like sausage-meat; I had twelve wounds, not counting the slighter
ones, and any one else would have died of any one of them.  You have
often wondered at my scars."

"And whom did the Lord choose then to be the means of your salvation?"

"When I recovered my senses," continued Paulus, "I was lying in a large,
clean room behind a curtain of light material; I could not raise myself,
but just as if I had been sleeping so many minutes instead of days, I
thought again directly of my quails.  In their last fight my best cock
had severely handled handsome Nikander's, and yet he wanted to dispute
the stakes with me, but I would assert my rights!  At least the quails
should fight again, and if Nikander should refuse I would force him to
fight me with his fists in the Palaestra, and give him a blue reminder of
his debt on the eye.  My hands were still weak, and yet I clenched them
as I thought of the vexatious affair.  'I will punish him,' I muttered to
myself.

"Then I heard the door of the room open, and I saw three men respectfully
approaching a fourth.  He greeted them with dignity, but yet with
friendliness, and rolled up a scroll which he had been reading, I would
have called out, but I could not open my parched lips, and yet I saw and
heard all that was going on around me in the room.

"It all seemed strange enough to me then; even the man's mode of greeting
was unusual.  I soon perceived that he who sat in the chair was a judge,
and that the others had come as complainants; they were all three old and
poor, but some good men had left them the use and interest of a piece of
land.  During seed-time one of them, a fine old man with long white hair,
had been ill, and he had not been able to help in the harvest either;
'and now they want to withhold his portion of the corn,' thought I; but
it was quite otherwise.  The two men who were in health had taken a third
part of the produce to the house of the sick man, and he obstinately
refused to accept the corn because he had helped neither to sow nor to
reap it, and he demanded of the judge that he should signify to the other
two that he had no right to receive goods which he had not earned.

"The judge had so far kept silence.  But he now raised his sagacious and
kindly face and asked the old man, 'Did you pray for your companions and
for the increase of their labors?'

"'I did,' replied the other.

"'Then by your intercession you helped them,' the judge decided, 'and the
third part of the produce is yours and you must keep it.'

"The old man bowed, the three men shook hands, and in a few minutes the
judge was alone in the room again.

"I did not know what had come over me; the complaint of the men and the
decision of the judge seemed to me senseless, and yet both the one and
the other touched my heart.  I went to sleep again, and when I awoke
refreshed the next morning the judge came up to me and gave me medicine,
not only for my body but also for my soul, which certainly was not less
in need of it than my poor wounded limbs."

"Who was the judge?" asked Stephanus.

"Eusebius, the Presbyter of Kanopus.  Some Christians had found me half
dead on the road, and had carried me into his house, for the widow
Theodora, his sister, was the deaconess of the town.  The two had nursed
me as if I were their dearest brother.  It was not till I grew stronger
that they showed me the cross and the crown of thorns of Him who for my
sake also had taken upon Him such far more cruel suffering than mine, and
they taught me to love His wounds, and to bear my own with submission.
In the dry wood of despair soon budded green shoots of hope, and instead
of annihilation at the end of this life they showed me Heaven and all its
joys.

"I became a new man, and before me there lay in the future an eternal and
blessed existence; after this life I now learned to look forward to
eternity.  The gates of Heaven were wide open before me, and I was
baptized at Kanopus.

"In Alexandria they had mourned for me as dead, and my sister Arsinoe, as
heiress to my property, had already moved into my country-house with her
husband, the prefect.  I willingly left her there, and now lived again in
the city, in order to support the brethren, as the persecutions had begun
again.

"This was easy for me, as through my brother-in-law I could visit all the
prisons; at last I was obliged to confess the faith, and I suffered much
on the rack and in the porphyry quarries; but every pain was dear to me,
for it seemed to bring me nearer to the goal of my longings, and if I
find ought to complain of up here on the Holy Mountain, it is only that
the Lord deems me unworthy to suffer harder things, when his beloved and
only Son took such bitter torments on himself for me and for every
wretched sinner."

"Ah! saintly man!" murmured Stephanus, devoutly kissing Paulus' sheep-
skin; but Paulus pulled it from him, exclaiming hastily:

"Cease, pray cease--he who approaches me with honors now in this life
throws a rock in my way to the life of the blessed.  Now I will go to the
spring and fetch you some fresh water."

When Paulus returned with the water-jar he found Hermas, who had come to
wish his father good-morning before he went down to the oasis to fetch
some new medicine from the senator.




CHAPTER VI.

Sirona was sitting at the open window of her bedroom, having her hair
arranged by a black woman that her husband had bought in Rome.  She
sighed, while the slave lightly touched the shining tresses here and
there with perfumed oil which she had poured into the palm of her hand;
then she firmly grasped the long thick waving mass of golden hair and was
parting it to make a plait, when Sirona stopped her, saying, "Give me the
mirror."

For some minutes she looked with a melancholy gaze at the image in the
polished metal, then she sighed again; she picked up the little greyhound
that lay at her feet, and placing it in her lap, showed the animal its
image in the mirror.

"There, poor Iambe," she said, "if we two, inside these four walls, want
to see anything like a pleasing sight we must look at ourselves."

Then she went on, turning to the slave.  "How the poor little beast
trembles!  I believe it longs to be back again at Arelas, and is afraid
we shall linger too long under this burning sky.  Give me my sandals."

The black woman reached her mistress two little slippers with gilt
ornaments on the slight straps, but Sirona flung her hair off her face
with the back of her hand, exclaiming, "The old ones, not these.  Wooden
shoes even would do here."

And with these words she pointed to the court-yard under the window,
which was in fact as ill contrived, as though gilt sandals had never yet
trodden it.  It was surrounded by buildings; on one side was a wall with
a gateway, and on the others buildings which formed a sharply bent
horseshoe.

Opposite the wing in which Sirona and her husband had found a home stood
the much higher house of Petrus, and both had attached to them, in the
background of the court-yard, sheds constructed of rough reddish brown
stones, and covered with a thatch of palm-branches; in these the
agricultural implements were stored, and the senator's slaves lived.  In
front lay a heap of black charcoal, which was made on the spot by burning
the wood of the thorny sajala species of acacia; and there too lay a
goodly row of well smoothed mill-stones, which were shaped in the quarry,
and exported to Egypt.  At this early hour the whole unlovely domain lay
in deep shadow, and was crowded with fowls and pigeons.  Sirona's window
alone was touched by the morning sun.  If she could have known what a
charm the golden light shed over her figure, on her rose and white face,
and her shining hair, she would have welcomed the day-star, instead of
complaining that it had too early waked her from sleep--her best comfort
in her solitude.

Besides a few adjoining rooms she was mistress of a larger room, the
