idol on the stone pillar.  Half a cow and half a man!  Why, what rational
being, I ask you, could pray to such a mongrel thing?  We Jacobites or
Monophysites or whatever they choose to call us will not yield a jot or
tittle of the divine nature of our Lord and Saviour; and if the old faith
must die out, I will turn Moslem and be converted to your One Omnipotent
God; for before I confess the heresies of the Melchites I will be hewn in
pieces, and my wife and children with me.  Who knows what may be coming
to pass?  And there are many advantages in going over to your side: for
the power is in your hands, and long may you keep it!  We have got to be
ruled by strangers; and who would not rather pay small tribute to the
wise and healthy Khalif at Medina than a heavy one to the sickly imperial
brood of Melchites at Constantinople.  The Mukaukas George, to be sure,
is not a bad sort of man, and as he so soon gave up all idea of resisting
you he was no doubt of my opinion.  Regarding you as just and pious
folks, as our next neighbors, and perhaps even of our own race and blood,
he preferred you--my brother told me so--to those Byzantine heretics,
flayers of men and thirsting for blood, but yet, the Mukaukas is as good
a Christian as breathes."

The Arab had listened attentively and with a subtle smile to the
Memphite, whose duties as guide now compelled him to break off.  The
Egyptian made the whole caravan turn down an alley that led into a street
running parallel to the river, where a few fine houses still stood in the
midst of their gardens.  When men and beasts were making their way along
a better pavement the merchant observed: "I knew the father of the man
you were speaking of, very well.  He was wealthy and virtuous; of his son
too I hear nothing but good.  But is he still allowed to bear the title
of governor, or, what did you call him?--Mukaukas?"

"Certainly, Master," said the guide.  "There is no older family than his
in all Egypt, and if old Menas was rich the Mukaukas is richer, both by
inheritance and by his wife's dower.  Nor could we wish for a more
sensible or a juster governor!  He keeps his eye on his underlings too;
still, business is not done now as briskly as formerly, for though he is
not much older than I am--and I am not yet sixty--he is always ailing and
has not been seen out of the house for months.  Even when your chief
wants to see him he comes over to this side of the river.  It is a pity
with such a man as he; and who was it that broke down his stalwart
strength?  Why, those Melchite dogs; you may ask all along the Nile, long
as it is, who was at the bottom of any misfortune, and you will always
get the same answer: Wherever the Melchite or the Greek sets foot the
grass refuses to grow."

"But the Mukaukas, the emperor's representative....  the Arab began.  The
Egyptian broke in however:

"He, you think, must be safe from them?  They did not certainly injure
his person; but they did worse, for when the Melchites rose up against
our party--it was at Alexandria, and the late Greek patriarch Cyrus had a
finger in that pie--they killed his two sons, two fine, splendid men--
killed them like dogs; and it crushed him completely."

"Poor man!" sighed the Arab.  "And has he no child left?"

"Oh, yes.  One son, and the widow of his eldest.  She went into a convent
after her husband's death, but she left her child, her little Mary--she
must be ten years old now--to live with her grandparents."

"That is well," said the old man, "that will bring some sunshine into the
house."

"No doubt, Master.  And just lately they have had some cause for
rejoicing.  The only surviving son--Orion is his name--came home only
the day before yesterday from Constantinople where he has been for a long
time.  There was a to-do!  Half the city went crazy.  Thousands went out
to meet him, as though he were the Saviour; they erected triumphal
arches, even folks of my creed--no one thought of hanging back.  One and
all wanted to see the son of the great Mukaukas, and the women of course
were first and foremost!"

"You speak, however," said the Arab, "as though the returning hero were
not worthy of so much honor."

"That is as folks think,"  replied the Egyptian shrugging his shoulders.
"At any rate he is the only son of the greatest man in the land."

"But he does not promise to be like the old man?"

"Oh, yes, indeed," said the guide.  "My brother, a priest, and the head
of one of our great schools, was his tutor, and he never met such a
clever head as Orion's, he tells me.  He learnt everything without any
trouble and at the same time worked as hard as a poor man's son.  We may
expect him to win fame and honor--so Marcus says--for his parents and for
the city of Memphis: but for my part, I can see the shady side, and I
tell you the women will turn his head and bring him to a bad end.  He is
handsome, taller even than the old man in his best days, and he knows how
to make the most of himself when he meets a pretty face--and pretty faces
are always to be met in his path .  .  ."

"And the young rascal takes what he finds!"  said the Moslem laughing.
"If that is all you are alarmed at I am glad for the youth.  He is young
and such things are allowable."

"Nay, Sir, even my brother--he lives now in Alexandria, and is blind and
foolish enough still in all that concerns his former pupil--and even he
thinks this is a dangerous rock ahead.  If he does not change in this
respect he will wander further and further from the law of the Lord, and
imperil his soul, for dangers surround him on all sides like roaring
lions.  The noble gifts of a handsome and engaging person will lead him
to his ruin; and though I do not desire it, I suspect.  .  .  ."

"You look on the dark side and judge hardly," replied the old man.  "The
young.  .  .  ."

"Even the young, or at least the Christian young, ought to control
themselves, though I, if any one, am inclined to make the utmost
allowance for the handsome lad--nay, and I may confess: when he smiles at
me I feel at once as if I had met with some good-luck; and there are a
thousand other men in Memphis who feel the same, and still more the women
you may be sure--but many a one has shed bitter tears on his account for
all that.--But, by all the saints!--Talk of the wolf and you see his
tail!  Look, there he is!--Halt!  Stop a minute, you men; it is worth
while, Sir, to tarry a moment."

"Is that his fine quadriga in front of the high garden gate yonder?"

"Those are the Pannonian horses he brought with him, as swift as
lightning and as....  But look!  Ah, now they have disappeared behind
the hedge; but you, high up on your dromedary, must be able to see them.
The little maid by his side is the widow Susannah's daughter.  This
garden and the beautiful mansion behind the trees belong to her."

"A very handsome property!"  said the Arab.

"I should think so indeed!"  replied the Memphite.  "The garden goes down
to the Nile, and then, what care is taken of it!"

"Was it not here that Philommon the corn-merchant lived formerly?"  asked
the old man, as though some memories were coming back to him.

"To be sure.  He was Susannah's husband and must have been a man of fifty
when he first wooed her.  The little girl is their only child and the
richest heiress in the whole province; but she is not altogether grown up
though she is sixteen years old--an old man's child, you understand, but
a pretty, merry creature, a laughing dove in human form, and so quick and
lively.  Her own people call her the little water-wagtail."

"Good!--Good and very appropriate," said the merchant well pleased.
"She is small too, a child rather than a maiden; but the graceful,
gladsome creature takes my fancy.  And the governor's son--what is his
name?"

"Orion, Sir," replied the guide.

"And by my beard," said the old man smiling.  "You have not over-praised
him, man!  Such a youth as this Orion is not to be seen every day.  What
a tall fellow, and how becoming are those brown curls.  Such as he are
spoilt to begin with by their mothers, and then all the other women
follow suit.  And he has a frank, shrewd face with something behind it.
If only he had left his purple coat and gold frippery in Constantinople!
Such finery is out of place in this dismal ruinous city."

While he was yet speaking the Memphite urged his ass forward, but the
Arab held him back, for his attention was riveted by what was taking
place within the enclosure.  He saw handsome Orion place a small white
dog, a silky creature of great beauty that evidently belonged to him--in
the little maiden's arms saw her kiss it and then put a blade of grass
round its neck as if to measure its size.  The old man watched them as,
both laughing gaily, they looked into each other's eyes and presently bid
each other farewell.  The girl stood on tiptoe in front of some rare
shrub to reach two exquisite purple flowers that blossomed at the top,
hastily plucked them and offered them to him with a deep blush; she
pushed away the hand he had put out to support her as she stretched up
for the flowers with a saucy slap; and a bright glance of happiness
lighted up her sweet face as the young man kissed the place her fingers
had hit, and then pressed the flowers to his lips.  The old man looked on
with sympathetic pleasure, as though it roused the sweetest memories in
his mind; and his kind eyes shone as Orion, no less mischievously happy
than the young girl, whispered something in her ear; she drew the long
stem of grass out of her waist-belt to administer immediate and condign
punishment withal, struck it across his face, and then fled over grass-
plot and flower-bed, as swift as a roe, without heeding his repeated
shouts of "Katharina! bewitching, big damsel, Katharina!"  till she
reached the house.

It was a charming little interlude.  Old Haschim was still pondering it
in his memory with much satisfaction when he and his caravan had gone
some distance further.  He felt obliged to Orion for this pretty scene,
and when he heard the young man's quadriga approaching at an easy trot
behind him, he turned round to gaze.  But the Arab's face had lost its
contentment by the time the four Pannonians and the chariot, overlaid
with silver ornamentation and forming, with its driver, a picture of rare
beauty and in perfect taste, had slowly driven past, to fly on like the
wind as soon as the road was clear, and to vanish presently in clouds of
dust.  There was something of melancholy in his voice as he desired his
young camel-driver to pick up the flowers, which now lay in the dust of
the road, and to bring them to him.  He himself had observed the handsome
youth as, with a glance and a gesture of annoyance with himself, he flung
the innocent gift on the hot, sandy highway.

"Your brother is right," cried the old man to the Memphite.  "Women are
indeed the rock ahead in this young fellow's life--and he in theirs, I
fear!  Poor little girl!"

"The little water-wagtail do you mean?  Oh! with her it may perhaps turn
to real earnest.  The two mothers have settled the matter already.  They
are both rolling in gold, and where doves nest doves resort.--Thank God,
the sun is low down over the Pyramids!  Let your people rest at the large
inn yonder; the host is an honest man and lacks nothing, not even shade!"

"So far as the beasts and drivers are concerned," said the merchant,
"they may stop here.  But I, and the leader of the caravan, and some of
my men will only take some refreshment, and then you must guide us to the
governor; I have to speak with him.  It is growing late.  .  ."

"That does not matter," said the Egyptian.  "The Mukaukas prefers to see
strangers after sundown on such a scorching day.  If you have any
dealings with him I am the very man for you.  You have only to make play
with a gold piece and I can obtain you an audience at once through Sebek,
the house-steward he is my cousin.  While you are resting here I will
