he still gazed at the face as though to devour it with his eyes, and
without a sound.

"I did not disturb him; for, thought I, he too is bewitched by the
exquisite beauty of those virgin features. So we were both silent, till
he asked, in a choked voice: 'And did you paint that? Is that, do you
say, the daughter that Seleukus has just lost?'

"Of course I said 'Yes'; but then he turned on me in a rage, and
reproached me bitterly for deceiving and cheating him, and jesting with
things that to him were sacred, though I might think them a subject for
sport.

"I assured him that my answer was as earnest as it was accurate, and
that every word of my story was true.

"This only made him more furious. I, too, began to get angry, and as
he, evidently deeply agitated, still persisted in saying that my picture
could not have been painted from the dead Korinna, I swore to him
solemnly, with the most sacred oath I could think of, that it was really
so.

"On this he declared to me in words so tender and touching as I never
before heard from his lips, that if I were deceiving him his peace of
mind would be forever destroyed-nay, that he feared for his reason; and
when I had repeatedly assured him, by the memory of our departed mother,
that I had never dreamed of playing a trick upon him, he shook his head,
grasped his brow, and turned to leave the room without another word."

"And you let him go?" cried Melissa, in anxious alarm.

"Certainly not," replied the painter. "On the contrary, I stood in his
way, and asked him whether he had known Korinna, and what all this might
mean. But he would make no reply, and tried to pass me and get away. It
must have been a strange scene, for we two big men struggled as if
we were at a wrestling-match. I got him down with one hand behind his
knees, and so he had to remain; and when I had promised to let him go,
he confessed that he had seen Korinna at the house of her uncle, the
high-priest, without knowing who she was or even speaking a word to her.
And he, who usually flees from every creature wearing a woman's robe,
had never forgotten that maiden and her noble beauty; and, though he did
not say so, it was obvious, from every word, that he was madly in love.
Her eyes had followed him wherever he went, and this he deemed a great
misfortune, for it had disturbed his power of thought. A month since he
went across Lake Mareotis to Polybius to visit Andreas, and while, on
his return, he was standing on the shore, he saw her again, with an old
man in white robes. But the last time he saw her was on the morning of
the very day when all this happened; and if he is to be believed, he not
only saw her but touched her hand. That, again, was by the lake; she was
just stepping out of the ferry-boat. The obolus she had ready to pay the
oarsman dropped on the ground, and Philip picked it up and returned
it to her. Then his fingers touched hers. He could feel it still, he
declared, and yet she had then ceased to walk among the living.

"Then it was my turn to doubt his word; but he maintained that his story
was true in every detail; he would hear nothing said about some one
resembling her, or anything of the kind, and spoke of daimons showing
him false visions, to cheat him and hinder him from working out his
investigations of the real nature of things to a successful issue. But
this is in direct antagonism to his views of daimons; and when at
last he rushed out of the house, he looked like one possessed of evil
spirits.

"I hurried after him, but he disappeared down a dark alley. Then I
had enough to do to finish my copy, and yesterday I carried it home to
Seleukus.

"Then I had time to look for Philip, but I could hear nothing of him,
either in his own lodgings or at the Museum. To-day I have been hunting
for him since early in the morning. I even forgot to lay any flowers
on my mother's grave, as usual on the day of the Nekysia, because I was
thinking only of him. But he no doubt is gone to the city of the dead;
for, on my way hither, as I was ordering a garland in the flower-market,
pretty little Doxion showed me two beauties which she had woven for him,
and which he is presently to fetch. So he must now be in the Nekropolis;
and I know for whom he intends the second; for the door-keeper at
Seleukus's house told me that a man, who said he was my brother, had
twice called, and had eagerly inquired whether my picture had yet been
attached to Korinna's sarcophagus. The old man told him it had not,
because, of course, the embalming could not be complete as yet. But the
picture was to be displayed to-day, as being the feast of the dead, in
the hall of the embalmers. That was the plan, I know. So, now, child,
set your wise little woman's head to work, and devise something by
which he may be brought to his senses, and released from these crazy
imaginings."

"The first thing to be done," Melissa exclaimed, "is to follow him
and talk to him.-Wait a moment; I must speak a word to the slaves. My
father's night-draught can be mixed in a minute. He might perhaps return
home before us, and I must leave his couch--I will be with you in a
minute."




CHAPTER III.

The brother and sister had walked some distance. The roads were full of
people, and the nearer they came to the Nekropolis the denser was the
throng.

As they skirted the town walls they took counsel together.

Being perfectly agreed that the girl who had touched Philip's hand
could certainly be no daimon who had assumed Korinna's form, they were
inclined to accept the view that a strong resemblance had deceived their
brother. They finally decided that Alexander should try to discover the
maiden who so strangely resembled the dead; and the artist was ready for
the task, for he could only work when his heart was light, and had
never felt such a weight on it before. The hope of meeting with a living
creature who resembled that fair dead maiden, combined with his wish to
rescue his brother from the disorder of mind which threatened him; and
Melissa perceived with glad surprise how quickly this new object in life
restored the youth's happy temper.

It was she who spoke most, and Alexander, whom nothing escaped that had
any form of beauty, feasted his ear on the pearly ring of her voice.

"And her face is to match," thought he as they went on in the darkness;
"and may the Charites who have endowed her with every charm, forgive my
father for burying her as he does his gold."

It was not in his nature to keep anything that stirred him deeply to
himself, when he was in the society of another, so he murmured to his
sister: "It is just as well that the Macedonian youths of this
city should not be able to see what a jewel our old man's house
contains.--Look how brightly Selene shines on us, and how gloriously the
stars burn! Nowhere do the heavens blaze more brilliantly than here. As
soon as we come out of the shadow that the great walls cast on the road
we shall be in broad light. There is the Serapeum rising out of the
darkness. They are rehearsing the great illumination which is to dazzle
the eyes of Caesar when he comes. But they must show too, that to-night,
at least, the gods of the nether world and death are all awake. You can
never have been in the Nekropolis at so late an hour before."

"How should I?" replied the girl. And he expressed the pleasure that it
gave him to be able to show her for the first time the wonderful night
scene of such a festival. And when he heard the deep-drawn "Ah!" with
which she hailed the sight of the greatest temple of all, blazing in the
midst of the darkness with tar-pans, torches, and lamps innumerable,
he replied with as much pride and satisfaction as though she owed the
display to him, "Ay, what do you think of that?"

Above the huge stone edifice which was thus lighted up, the dome of the
Serapeum rose high into the air, its summit appearing to touch the sky.
Never had the gigantic structure seemed so beautiful to the girl, who
had only seen it by daylight; for under the illumination, arranged by a
master-hand, every line stood out more clearly than in the sunlight; and
in the presence of this wonderful sight Melissa's impressionable young
soul forgot the trouble that had weighed on it, and her heart beat
higher.

Her lonely life with her father had hitherto fully satisfied her, and
she had, never yet dreamed of anything better in the future than a
quiet and modest existence, caring for him and her brothers; but now she
thankfully experienced the pleasure of seeing for once something really
grand and fine, and rejoiced at having escaped for a while from the
monotony of each day and hour.

Once, too, she had been with her brothers and Diodoros, Alexander's
greatest friend, to see a wild-beast fight, followed by a combat of
gladiators; but she had come home frightened and sorrowful, for what
she had seen had horrified more than it had interested her. Some of the
killed and tortured beings haunted her mind; and, besides, sitting in
the lowest and best seats belonging to Diodoros's wealthy father, she
had been stared at so boldly and defiantly whenever she raised her eyes,
by a young gallant opposite, that she had felt vexed and insulted; nay,
had wished above all things to get home as soon as possible. And yet
she had loved Diodoros from her childhood, and she would have enjoyed
sitting quietly by his side more than looking on at the show.

But on this occasion her curiosity was gratified, and the hope of being
able to help one who was dear to her filled her with quiet gladness.
It was a comfort to her, too, to find herself once more by her mother's
grave with Alexander, who was her especial friend. She could never come
here often enough, and the blessing which emanated from it--of that she
was convinced--must surely fall on her brother also, and avert from him
all that grieved his heart.

As they walked on between the Serapeum on one hand, towering high above
all else, and the Stadium on the other, the throng was dense; on the
bridge over the canal it was difficult to make any progress. Now, as
the full moon rose, the sacrifices and games in honor of the gods of
the under world were beginning, and now the workshops and factories had
emptied themselves into the streets already astir for the festival of
the dead, so every moment the road became more crowded.

Such a tumult was generally odious to her retiring nature; but to-night
she felt herself merely one drop in the great, flowing river, of which
every other drop felt the same impulse which was carrying her forward
to her destination. The desire to show the dead that they were not
forgotten, that their favor was courted and hoped for, animated men and
women, old and young alike.

There were few indeed who had not a wreath or a posy in their hands, or
carried behind them by a slave. In front of the brother and sister was
a large family of children. A black nurse carried the youngest on her
shoulder, and an ass bore a basket in which were flowers for the tomb,
with a wineflask and eatables. A memorial banquet was to be held at the
grave of their ancestors; and the little one, whose golden head rose
above the black, woolly poll of the negress, nodded gayly in response to
Melissa's smiles. The children were enchanted at the prospect of a meal
at such an unusual hour, and their parents rejoiced in them and in the
solemn pleasure they anticipated.

Many a one in this night of remembrance only cared to recall the happy
hours spent in the society of the beloved dead; others hoped to leave
their grief and pain behind them, and find fresh courage and contentment
in the City of the Dead; for tonight the gates of the nether world stood
open, and now, if ever, the gods that reigned there would accept the
offerings and hear the prayers of the devout.

Those lean Egyptians, who pushed past in silence and haranging
their heads, were no doubt bent on carrying offerings to Osiris and
Anubis--for the festival of the gods of death and resurrection coincided
with the Nekysia--and on winning their favors by magical formulas and
spells.

Everything was plainly visible, for the desert tract of the Nekropolis,
where at this hour utter darkness and silence usually reigned, was
brightly lighted up. Still, the blaze failed to banish entirely the
thrill of fear which pervaded the spot at night; for the unwonted glare
dazzled and bewildered the bats and night-birds, and they fluttered
about over the heads of the intruders in dark, ghostly flight. Many a
one believed them to be the unresting souls of condemned sinners, and
looked up at them with awe.

Melissa drew her veil closer and clung more tightly to her brother, for
a sound of singing and wild cries, which she had heard behind her for
some time, was now coming closer. They were no longer treading the paved
street, but the hard-beaten soil of the desert. The crush was over, for
here the crowd could spread abroad; but the uproarious troop, which she
did not even dare to look at, came rushing past quite close to them.
They were Greeks, of all ages and of both sexes. The men flourished
torches, and were shouting a song with unbridled vehemence; the women,
wearing garlands, kept up with them. What they carried in the baskets
on their heads could not be seen, nor did Alexander know; for so many
religious brotherhoods and mystic societies existed here that it was
impossible to guess to which this noisy troop might belong.

The pair had presently overtaken a little train of white-robed men
moving forward at a solemn pace, whom the painter recognized as the
philosophical and religious fraternity of the Neo-Pythagoreans, when a
small knot of men and women in the greatest excitement came rushing past
as if they were mad. The men wore the loose red caps of their Phrygian
land; the women carried bowls full of fruits. Some beat small drums,
others clanged cymbals, and each hauled his neighbor along with
deafening cries, faster and faster, till the dust hid them from sight
and a new din drowned the last, for the votaries of Dionysus were
already close upon them, and vied with the Phrygians in uproariousness.
But this wild troop remained behind; for one of the light-colored oxen,
covered with decorations, which was being driven in the procession by
a party of men and boys, to be presently sacrificed, had broken away,
maddened by the lights and the shouting, and had to be caught and led
again.

At last they reached the graveyard. But even now they could not make
their way to the long row of houses where the embalmers dwelt, for an
impenetrable mass of human beings stood pent up in front of them, and
Melissa begged her brother to give her a moment's breathing space.

All she had seen and heard on the way had excited her greatly; but she
had scarcely for a moment forgotten what it was that had brought her out
so late, who it was that she sought, or that it would need her utmost
endeavor to free him from the delusion that had fooled him. In this
dense throng and deafening tumult it was scarcely possible to recover
that collected calm which she had found in the morning at her mother's
tomb. In that, doubt had had no part, and the delightful feeling of
freedom which had shone on her soul, now shrank deep into the shade
before a growing curiosity and the longing for her usual repose.

If her father were to find her here! When she saw a tall figure
resembling his cross the torchlight, all clouded as it was by the dust,
she drew her brother away behind the stall of a seller of drinks and
other refreshments. The father, at any rate, must be spared the distress
she felt about Philip, who was his favorite. Besides, she knew full well
that, if he met her here, he would at once take her home.

The question now was where Philip might be found.

They were standing close to the booths where itinerant dealers sold
food and liquors of every description, flowers and wreaths, amulets and
papyrus-leaves, with strange charms written on them to secure health for
the living and salvation for the souls of the dead. An astrologer, who
foretold the course of a man's life from the position of the planets,
had erected a high platform with large tables displayed to view, and the
instrument wherewith he aimed at the stars as it were with a bow;
and his Syrian slave, accompanying himself on a gayly-painted drum,
proclaimed his master's powers. There were closed tents in which magical
remedies were to be obtained, though their open sale was forbidden by
the authorities, from love-philters to the wondrous fluid which, if
rightly applied, would turn lead, copper, or silver to gold. Here, old
women invited the passer-by to try Thracian and other spells; there,
magicians stalked to and fro in painted caps and flowing, gaudy robes,
most of them calling themselves priests of some god of the abyss. Men
of every race and tongue that dwelt in the north of Africa, or on the
shores of the Mediterranean, were packed in a noisy throng.

The greatest press was behind the houses of the men who buried the dead.
Here sacrifices were offered on the altars of Serapis, Isis, and Anubis;
here the sacred sistrum of Isis might be kissed; here hundreds of
priests performed solemn ceremonies, and half of those who came hither
for the festival of the dead collected about them. The mysteries
were also performed here, beginning before midnight; and a dramatic
representation might be seen of the woes of Isis, and the resurrection
of her husband Osiris. But neither here, nor at the stalls, nor among
the graves, where many families were feasting by torchlight and pouring
libations in the sand for the souls of the dead, did Alexander expect
to find his brother. Nor would Philip be attending the mysterious
solemnities of any of the fraternities. He had witnessed them often
enough with his friend Diodoros, who never missed the procession to
Eleusis, because, as he declared, the mysteries of Demeter alone could
assure a man of the immortality of the soul. The wild ceremonies of the
Syrians, who maimed themselves in their mad ecstasy, repelled him as
being coarse and barbarous.

As she made her way through this medley of cults, this worship of gods
so different that they were in some cases hostile, but more often merged
into each other, Melissa wondered to which she ought to turn in her
present need. Her mother had best loved to sacrifice to Serapis and
Isis. But since, in her last sickness, Melissa had offered everything
she possessed to these divinities of healing, and all in vain, and since
she had heard things in the Serapeum itself which even now brought
a blush to her cheek, she had turned away from the great god of the
Alexandrians. Though he who had offended her by such base proposals was
but a priest of the lower grade--and indeed, though she knew it not, was
since dead--she feared meeting him again, and had avoided the sanctuary
where he officiated.

She was a thorough Alexandrian, and had been accustomed from childhood
to listen to the philosophical disputations of the men about her. So she
perfectly understood her brother Philip, the skeptic, when he said that
he by no means denied the existence of the immortals, but that, on the
other hand, he could not believe in it; that thought brought him no
conviction; that man, in short, could be sure of nothing, and so could
know nothing whatever of the divinity. He had even denied, on logical
grounds, the goodness and omnipotence of the gods, the wisdom and
fitness of the ordering of the universe, and Melissa was proud of her
brother's acumen; but what appeals to the brain only, and not to
the heart, can not move a woman to anything great--least of all to a
decisive change of life or feeling. So the girl had remained constant to
her mother's faith in some mighty powers outside herself, which guided
the life of Nature and of human beings. Only she did not feel that she
had found the true god, either in Serapis or Isis, and so she had sought
others. Thus she had formulated a worship of ancestors, which, as she
had learned from the slave-woman of her friend Ino, was not unfamiliar
to the Egyptians.

In Alexandria there were altars to every god, and worship in every form.
Hers, however, was not among them, for the genius of her creed was the
enfranchised soul of her mother, who had cast off the burden of this
perishable body. Nothing had ever come from her that was not good and
lovely; and she knew that if her mother were permitted, even in some
other than human form, she would never cease to watch over her with
tender care.

And those initiated into the Eleusinian mysteries, as Diodoros had told
her, desired the immortality of the soul, to the end that they might
continue to participate in the life of those whom they had left behind.
What was it that brought such multitudes at this time out to the
Nekropolis, with their hands full of offerings, but the consciousness
of their nearness to the dead, and of being cared for by them so long as
they were not forgotten? And even if the glorified spirit of her mother
were not permitted to hear her prayers, she need not therefore cease to
turn to her; for it comforted her unspeakably to be with her in spirit,
and to confide to her all that moved her soul. And so her mother's tomb
had become her favorite place of rest. Here, if anywhere, she now hoped
once more to find comfort, some happy suggestion, and perhaps some
definite assistance.

She begged Alexander to take her thither, and he consented, though he
was of opinion that Philip would be found in the mortuary chamber, in
the presence of Korinna's portrait.

It was not easy to force their way through the thousands who had come
out to the great show this night; however, most of the visitors were
attracted by the mysteries far away from the Macedonian burial-ground,
and there was little to disturb the silence near the fine marble
monument which Alexander, to gratify his father, had erected with his
first large earnings. It was hung with various garlands, and Melissa,
before she prayed and anointed the stone, examined them with eye and
hand.

Those which she and her father had placed there she recognized at once.
That humble garland of reeds with two lotus-flowers was the gift of
their old slave Argutis and his wife Dido. This beautiful wreath of
choice flowers had come from the garden of a neighbor who had loved her
mother well; and that splendid basketful of lovely roses, which had not
been there this morning, had been placed here by Andreas, steward to the
father of her young friend Diodoros, although he was of the Christian
sect. And these were all. Philip had not been here then, though it was
now past midnight.

For the first time in his life he had let this day pass by without a
thought for their dead. How bitterly this grieved Melissa, and even
added to her anxiety for him!

It was with a heavy heart that she and Alexander anointed the tombstone;
and while Melissa uplifted her hands in prayer, the painter stood in
silence, his eyes fixed on the ground. But no sooner had she let them
fall, than he exclaimed:

"He is here, I am sure, and in the house of the embalmers. That he
ordered two wreaths is perfectly certain; and if he meant one for
Korinna's picture, he surely intended the other for our mother. If he
has offered both to the young girl--"

"No, no!" Melissa put in. "He will bring his gift. Let us wait here a
little while, and do you, too, pray to the manes of our mother. Do it to
please me."

But her brother interrupted her eagerly: "I think of her wherever I may
be; for those we truly love always live for us. Not a day passes, nor
if I come in sober, not a night, when I do not see her dear face, either
waking or dreaming. Of all things sacred, the thought of her is the
highest; and if she had been raised to divine honors like the dead
Caesars who have brought so many curses on the world--"

"Hush--don't speak so loud!" said Melissa, seriously, for men were
moving to and fro among the tombs, and Roman guards kept watch over the
populace.

But the rash youth went on in the same tone:

"I would worship her gladly, though I have forgotten how to pray. For
who can tell here--unless he follows the herd and worships Serapis--who
can tell to which god of them all he shall turn when he happens to be at
his wits' end? While my mother lived, I, like you, could gladly worship
and sacrifice to the immortals; but Philip has spoiled me for all that.
As to the divine Caesars, every one thinks as I do. My mother would
sooner have entered a pesthouse than the banqueting-hall where they
feast, on Olympus. Caracalla among the gods! Why, Father Zeus cast his
son Hephaistos on earth from the height of Olympus, and only broke his
leg; but our Caesar accomplished a more powerful throw, for he cast his
brother through the earth into the nether world--an imperial thrust--and
not merely lamed him but killed him."

"Well done!" said a deep voice, interrupting the young artist. "Is that
you, Alexander? Hear what new titles to fame Heron's son can find for
the imperial guest who is to arrive to-morrow."

"Pray hush!" Melissa besought him, looking up at the bearded man who had
laid his arm on Alexander's shoulder. It was Glaukias the sculptor, her
father's tenant; for his work-room stood on the plot of ground by
the garden of Hermes, which the gem-cutter had inherited from his
father-in-law.

The man's bold, manly features were flushed with wine and revelry; his
twinkling eyes sparkled, and the ivy-leaves still clinging to his curly
hair showed that he had been one in the Dionysiac revellers; but
the Greek blood which ran in his veins preserved his grace even in
drunkenness. He bowed gayly to the young girl, and exclaimed to his
companions:

"The youngest pearl in Alexandria's crown of beauties!" while Bion,
Alexander's now gray-haired master, clapped the youth on the arm,
and added: "Yes, indeed, see what the little thing has grown! Do
you remember, pretty one, how you once--how many years ago, I
wonder?--spotted your little white garments all over with red dots! I
can see you now, your tiny finger plunged into the pot of paint, and
then carefully printing off the round pattern all over the white linen.
Why, the little painter has become a Hebe, a Charis, or, better still, a
sweetly dreaming Psyche."

"Ay, ay!" said Glaukias again. "My worthy landlord has a charming model.
He has not far to seek for a head for his best gems. His son, a Helios,
or the great Macedonian whose name he bears; his daughter--you are
right, Bion--the maid beloved of Eros. Now, if you can make verses, my
young friend of the Muses, give us an epigram in a line or two which we
may bear in mind as a compliment to our imperial visitor."

"But not here--not in the burial-ground," Melissa urged once more.

Among Glaukias's companions was Argeios, a vain and handsome young poet,
with scented locks betraying him from afar, who was fain to display the
promptness of his poetical powers; and, even while the elder artist
was speaking, he had run Alexander's satirical remarks into the mold
of rhythm. Not to save his life could he have suppressed the hastily
conceived distich, or have let slip such a justifiable claim to
applause. So, without heeding Melissa's remonstrance, he flung his
sky-blue mantle about him in fresh folds, and declaimed with comical
emphasis:

  "Down to earth did the god cast his son: but with mightier hand
   Through it, to Hades, Caesar flung his brother the dwarf."

The versifier was rewarded by a shout of laughter, and, spurred by the
approval of his friends, he declared he had hit on the mode to which to
sing his lines, as he did in a fine, full voice.

But there was another poet, Mentor, also of the party, and as he
could not be happy under his rival's triumph, he exclaimed: "The great
dyer--for you know he uses blood instead of the Tyrian shell--has
nothing of Father Zeus about him that I can see, but far more of the
great Alexander, whose mausoleum he is to visit to-morrow. And if you
would like to know wherein the son of Severus resembles the giant of
Macedon, you shall hear."

He thrummed his thyrsus as though he struck the strings of a lyre, and,
having ended the dumb prelude, he sang:

     "Wherein hath the knave Caracalla outdone Alexander?
     He killed a brother, the hero a friend, in his rage."

These lines, however, met with no applause; for they were not so lightly
improvised as the former distich, and it was clumsy and tasteless, as
well as dangerous thus to name, in connection with such a jest, the
potentate at whom it was aimed. And the fears of the jovial party were
only too well founded, for a tall, lean Egyptian suddenly stood among
the Greeks as if he had sprung from the earth. They were sobered at
once, and, like a swarm of pigeons on which a hawk swoops down, they
dispersed in all directions.

Melissa beckoned to her brother to follow her; but the Egyptian intruder
snatched the mantle, quick as lightning, from Alexander's shoulders, and
ran off with it to the nearest pine-torch. The young man hurried after
the thief, as he supposed him to be, but there the spy flung the cloak
back to him, saying, in a tone of command, though not loud, for there
were still many persons among the graves:

"Hands off, son of Heron, unless you want me to call the watch! I have
seen your face by the light, and that is enough for this time. Now we
know each other, and we shall meet again in another place!"

With these words he vanished in the darkness, and Melissa asked, in
great alarm:

"In the name of all the gods, who was that?"

"Some rascally carpenter, or scribe, probably, who is in the service of
the night-watch as a spy. At least those sort of folks are often built
askew, as that scoundrel was," replied Alexander, lightly. But he knew
the man only too well. It was Zminis, the chief of the spies to the
night patrol; a man who was particularly inimical to Heron, and whose
hatred included the son, by whom he had been befooled and misled in more
than one wild ploy with his boon companions. This spy, whose cruelty and
cunning were universally feared, might do him a serious mischief, and he
therefore did not tell his sister, to whom the name of Zminis was well
known, who the listener was.

He cut short all further questioning by desiring her to come at once to
the mortuary hall.

"And if we do not find him there," she said, "let us go home at once; I
am so frightened."

"Yes, yes," said her brother, vaguely. "If only we could meet some one
you could join."

"No, we will keep together," replied Melissa, decisively; and simply
assenting, with a brief "All right," the painter drew her arm through
his, and they made their way through the now thinning crowd.




CHAPTER IV.

The houses of the embalmers, which earlier in the evening had shone
brightly out of the darkness, now made a less splendid display. The dust
kicked up by the crowd dimmed the few lamps and torches which had not by
this time burned out or been extinguished, and an oppressive atmosphere
of balsamic resin and spices met the brother and sister on the very
threshold. The vast hall which they now entered was one of a long row
of buildings of unburned bricks; but the Greeks insisted on some
ornamentation of the simplest structure, if it served a public purpose,
and the embalming-houses had a colonnade along their front, and their
walls were covered with stucco, painted in gaudy colors, here in the
Egyptian and there in the Greek taste. There were scenes from the
Egyptian realm of the dead, and others from the Hellenic myths; for
the painters had been enjoined to satisfy the requirements and views of
visitors of every race. The chief attraction, however, this night
was within; for the men whose duties were exercised on the dead had
displayed the finest and best of what they had to offer to their
customers.

The ancient Greek practice of burning the dead had died out under the
Antonines. Of old, the objects used to deck the pyre had also been
on show here; now there was nothing to be seen but what related to
interment or entombment.

Side by side with the marble sarcophagus, or those of coarser stone,
were wooden coffins and mummy-cases, with a place at the head for the
portrait of the deceased. Vases and jars of every kind, amulets of
various forms, spices and balsams in vials and boxes, little images in
burned clay of the gods and of men, of which none but the Egyptians knew
the allegorical meaning, stood in long rows on low wooden shelves. On
the higher shelves were mummy bands and shrouds, some coarse, others of
the very finest texture, wigs for the bald heads of shaven corpses, or
woolen fillets, and simply or elaborately embroidered ribbons for the
Greek dead.

Nothing was lacking of the various things in use for decking the corpse
of an Alexandrian, whatever his race or faith.

Some mummy-cases, too, were there, ready to be packed off to other
towns. The most costly were covered with fine red linen, wound about
with strings of beads and gold ornaments, and with the name of the
dead painted on the upper side. In a long, narrow room apart hung the
portraits, waiting to be attached to the upper end of the mummy-cases of
those lately deceased, and still in the hands of embalmers. Here, too,
most of the lamps were out, and the upper end of the room was already
dark. Only in the middle, where the best pictures were on show, the
lights had been renewed.

The portraits were painted on thin panels of sycamore or of cypress,
and in most of them the execution betrayed that their destiny was to be
hidden in the gloom of a tomb.

Alexander's portrait of Korinna was in the middle of the gallery, in
a good light, and stood out from the paintings on each side of it as
a genuine emerald amid green glass. It was constantly surrounded by a
crowd of the curious and connoisseurs. They pointed out the beautiful
work to each other; but, though most of them acknowledged the skill
of the master who had painted it, many ascribed its superiority to
the magical charm of the model. One could see in those wonderfully
harmonious features that Aristotle was right when he discerned beauty
in order and proportion; while another declared that he found there
the evidence of Plato's doctrine of the identity of the good and the
beautiful--for this face was so lovely because it was the mirror of a
soul which had been disembodied in the plenitude of maiden purity
and virtue, unjarred by any discord; and this gave rise to a vehement
discussion as to the essential nature of beauty and of virtue.

Others longed to know more about the early-dead original of this
enchanting portrait. Korinna's wealthy father and his brothers were
among the best-known men of the city. The elder, Timotheus, was
high-priest of the Temple of Serapis; and Zeno, the younger, had set
the whole world talking when he, who in his youth had been notoriously
dissipated, had retired from any concern in the corn-trade carried on
by his family, the greatest business of the kind in the world, perhaps,
and--for this was an open secret--had been baptized.

The body of the maiden, when embalmed and graced with her portrait, was
to be transported to the family tomb in the district of Arsinoe, where
they had large possessions, and the gossip of the embalmer was eagerly
swallowed as he expatiated on the splendor with which her liberal father
proposed to escort her thither.

Alexander and Melissa had entered the portrait-gallery before the
beginning of this narrative, and listened to it, standing behind several
rows of gazers who were between them and the portrait.

As the speaker ceased, the little crowd broke up, and when Melissa could
at last see her brother's work at her ease, she stood speechless for
some time; and then she turned to the artist, and exclaimed, from the
depths of her heart, "Beauty is perhaps the noblest thing in the world!"

"It is," replied Alexander, with perfect assurance. And he, bewitched
once more by the spell which had held him by Korinna's couch, gazed into
the dark eyes in his own picture, whose living glance his had never met,
and which he nevertheless had faithfully reproduced, giving them a look
of the longing of a pure soul for all that is lovely and worthy.

Melissa, an artist's daughter, as she looked at this portrait,
understood what it was that had so deeply stirred her brother while he
painted it; but this was not the place to tell him so. She soon tore
herself away, to look about for Philip once more and then to be taken
home.

Alexander, too, was seeking Philip; but, sharp as the artist's eyes
were, Melissa's seemed to be keener, for, just as they were giving it up
and turning to go, she pointed to a dark corner and said softly, "There
he is."

And there, in fact, her brother was, sitting with two men, one very tall
and the other a little man, his brow resting on his hand in the deep
shadow of a sarcophagus, between the wall and a mummy-case set on end,
which till now had hidden him from Alexander and Melissa.

Who could the man be who had kept the young philosopher, somewhat
inaccessible in his pride of learning, so long in talk in that half-dark
corner? He was not one of the learned society at the Museum; Alexander
knew them all. Besides, he was not dressed like them, in the Greek
fashion, but in the flowing robe of a Magian. And the stranger was a man
of consequence, for he wore his splendid garment with a superior air,
and as Alexander approached him he remembered having somewhere seen this
tall, bearded figure, with the powerful head garnished with flowing and
carefully oiled black curls. Such handsome and well-chiseled features,
such fine eyes, and such a lordly, waving beard were not easily
forgotten; his memory suddenly awoke and threw a light on the man as he
sat in the gloom, and on the surroundings in which he had met him for
the first time.

It was at the feast of Dionysus. Among a drunken crowd, which was
rushing wildly along the streets, and which Alexander had joined,
himself one of the wildest, this man had marched, sober and dignified
as he was at this moment, in the same flowing raiment. This had provoked
the feasters, who, being full of wine and of the god, would have nothing
that could remind them of the serious side of life. Such sullen reserve
on a day of rejoicing was an insult to the jolly giver of the fruits
of the earth, and to wine itself, the care-killer; and the mad troop of
artists, disguised as Silenus, satyrs, and fauns, had crowded round the
stranger to compel him to join their rout and empty the wine-jar which a
burly Silenus was carrying before him on his ass.

At first the man had paid no heed to the youths' light mockery; but as
they grew bolder, he suddenly stood still, seized the tall faun, who
was trying to force the wine-jar on him, by both arms, and, holding him
firmly, fixed his grave, dark eyes on those of the youth. Alexander had
not forgotten the half-comical, half-threatening incident, but what he
remembered most clearly was the strange scene that followed: for, after
the Magian had released his enemy, he bade him take the jar back to
Silenus, and proceed on his way, like the ass, on all-fours. And the
tall faun, a headstrong, irascible Lesbian, had actually obeyed the
stately despot, and crept along on his hands and feet by the side of the
donkey. No threats nor mockery of his companions could persuade him to
rise. The high spirits of the boisterous crew were quite broken, and
before they could turn on the magician he had vanished.

Alexander had afterward learned that he was Serapion, the star-gazer and
thaumaturgist, whom all the spirits of heaven and earth obeyed.

When, at the time, the painter had told the story to Philip, the
philosopher had laughed at him, though Alexander had reminded him that
Plato even had spoken of the daimons as being the guardian spirits of
men; that in Alexandria, great and small alike believed in them as a
fact to be reckoned with; and that he--Philip himself--had told him that
they played a prominent part in the newest systems of philosophy.

But to the skeptic nothing was sure: and if he would deny the existence
of the Divinity, he naturally must disbelieve that of any beings in a
sphere between the supersensual immortals and sentient human creatures.
That a man, the weaker nature, could have any power over daimons, who,
as having a nearer affinity to the gods, must, if they existed, be the
stronger, he could refute with convincing arguments; and when he saw
others nibbling whitethorn-leaves, or daubing their thresholds with
pitch to preserve themselves and the house from evil spirits, he
shrugged his shoulders contemptuously, though his father often did such
things.

